==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Master Thesis in Pharmaceutical Design & Engineering, 30 ECTS points
Bridging Allergy Characterization and
mRNA-Vaccine Development: Recombinant
Allergens as Tools for Cross-Reactivity Profiling and
Broad-Neutralization Strategies
Author: Helena Højsted Eriksen (s194551)
Supervisors: Assistant Prof. Esperanza Rivera de Torre
& Dr. Josefine Kofoed Corneliussen
& Prof. Andreas Hougaard Laustsen-Kiel
Helena Højsted Eriksen
Date: 20th of June 2024
DTU Bioengineering
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to everyone who has contributed to my journey and
the creation of this thesis.
First, I would like to thank my supervisor Esperanza Rivera de Torre for being a massive inspiration
in so many ways, a fearless scientist and a fantastic leader. Thank you for the incredible mentorship
and guidance, challenging me and encouraging me to pursue great opportunities.
I would like to thank the members of the Immunological Biochemistry Lab, for the wonderful
company and entertainment during the long lab days, as well as for valuable feedback when things
did not go according to plan. Extending an extra appreciation to Mark von Bülow Møiniche for the
help and advice, and to Jorge Parrón Ballesteros for the great conversations and guidance. Thank
you to Josefine Kofoed Corneliussen for teaching me the ropes of our mammalian cell lab, and for
the patience, support and mentorship.
Moreover, I would like to thank the center leader of the Center for Antibody Technology (CAT),
Andreas Hougaard Laustsen-Kiel, for initially inviting me to CAT back when it was the Tropi-
cal Pharmacology Lab and for gathering so many great people. Thank you for also fostering an
entrepreneurial mentality and opening up for a different way to use the scientist mindset.
Finally, I would like to thank all the members of CAT for fostering an environment that inspires
people to spend their free time together. My time in CAT has truly been a treasured experience.
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Allergic disease is a severe hypersensitivity disease, which affects the health and quality of life
of patients of up to 30% of the population in industrialised countries. Insufficiently treated pa-
tients pose a substantial economic burden on society due to healthcare costs and lost productivity.
Allergy treatments include allergen-specific immunotherapy (AIT), which aims to re-establish al-
lergenic tolerance; however, current treatments yield limited protection due to inefficiency and
lack of treatment compliance of the patients. Patients with cross-reactivity to multiple allergens
are experiencing limited treatment options with current AIT methods, as they are focused only on
treatment with one allergen. It can fail to eliminate or alleviate allergic symptoms, as this does not
address the entire sensitivity profile of the patients.
Current methods for understanding allergic responses often lack comprehensive data about patient-
specific sensitivities and cross-reactivity patterns, leading to suboptimal vaccine efficacy. To de-
sign and enable the use of superior vaccines, it is therefore essential to explore the specificities of
allergic responses, including the unique immune response of each patient.
This project aimed to investigate how recombinant non-specific lipid transfer proteins (nsLTPs)
could facilitate allergy characterisation and cross-reactivity profiling to enable the development of
a broadly neutralising mRNA vaccine for AIT. A recombinant nsLTP panel including fruit, pollen,
nut, and legume allergens was designed and expressed. Structural and functional characterisation
using immunoassays and Far-UV circular dichroism spectroscopy indicated the importance of the
3D structure in antibody recognition. An assay was designed to provide an evaluation of poten-
tial shared IgE binding epitopes between the allergens in the panel, revealing that patient profiles
exhibit significant variability in epitope recognition. To address the need for better treatments for
this group of patients, an mRNA vaccine based on a consensus allergen was investigated. Results
indicated a promising ability to generate broadly binding antibodies against multiple nsLTPs and
a favourable IgG1/IgG2a ratio, suggesting the potential to induce a Th1-biased immune response.
These findings demonstrate how cross-reactivity in patients can be investigated and argue that con-
sensus allergens have the potential to be applied in AIT for more effective treatment of patients.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Resumé
Allergi er en alvorlig overfølsomhedssygdom, der påvirker patienters sundhed og livskvalitet og
rammer op til 30% af befolkningen i industrialiserede lande. Utilstrækkeligt behandlede patien-
ter har en væsentlig økonomisk indvirkning på samfundet på grund af sundhedsomkostninger og
tab af produktivitet. Behandlinger mod allergi omfatter allergen immunterapi, som har til for-
mål at genetablere tolerance overfor allergenet. Nuværende behandlingsmuligheder giver dog
begrænset beskyttelse på grund af ineffektivitet og manglende behandlingscompliance hos pa-
tienterne. Patienter med krydsreaktivitet over for flere allergener oplever derudover begrænsede
behandlingsmuligheder med nuværende behandlingsmetoder, da de primært er fokuseret på be-
handling med kun ét allergen. Da dette ikke behandler hele patientens overfølsomhedsprofil, kan
behandling mislykkes i at eliminere eller lindre de allergiske symptomer.
Nuværende metoder til at forstå allergiske reaktioner mangler ofte omfattende data om patientspeci-
fikke overfølsomheder og krydsreaktivitetsmønstre, hvilket fører til suboptimal vaccineeffektivitet.
For at designe og muliggøre brugen af bedre vacciner, er det derfor vigtigt at udforske speci-
ficiteterne af allergiske reaktioner herunder hver patients unikke immunrespons.
Dette projekt havde til formål at undersøge, hvordan rekombinante non-specifik lipid transfer
proteiner (nsLTP’er) kunne facilitere allergikarakterisering og krydsreaktivitetsprofilering samt
muliggøre udviklingen af en bredt neutraliserende mRNA-vaccine til allergen immunterapi. Et
rekombinant nsLTP-panel blev designet og produceret. Panelet inkluderede frugt-, pollen-, nødde-
og bælgplanteallergener. Strukturel og funktionel karakterisering ved hjælp af immunoassays og
Far-UV cirkulær dikroisme-spektroskopi indikerede vigtigheden af 3D-strukturen i antistofgenk-
endelse. Et assay blev designet til at evaluere potentielle delte IgE epitoper mellem allergenerne
i panelet, hvilket afslørede, at patienterne udviste betydelig variation i epitopgenkendelse. For at
imødekomme behovet for bedre behandlinger for denne gruppe af patienter, blev en mRNA-vaccine
baseret på et konsensusallergen undersøgt. Resultater indikerede en lovende evne til at generere
antistoffer, der var i stand til at genkende flere nsLTP’er og et gunstigt IgG1/IgG2a-forhold, hvilket
indikerede et potentiale for, at vaccinen inducererede et Th1-biased immunrespons. Disse resul-
tater viser, hvordan krydsreaktivitet hos patienter kan undersøges og argumenterer for, at konsen-
susallergener har potentiale til at blive anvendt i allergen immunterapi til mere effektiv behandling
af patienter.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abbreviations
AIT
Allergen-specific immunotherapy
APC
Antigen-presenting cell
AIT
Allergen-specific immunotherapy
CD
Circular dichroism
CnsLTP1
Consensus nsLTP 1
CRD
Component-resolved diagnostics
CTLA-4
Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4
DC
Dendritic cell
DELFIA
Dissociation-enhanced lanthanide fluorescence immunoassay
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic Acid
DTT
Dithiothreitol
E. coli
Escherichia coli
EoE
Eosinophilic esophagitis
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
EPIT
Epicutaneous immunotherapy
Fc
Fragment crystallisable
FcϵRI
Fc epsilon Receptor I
GCS
Glucocorticosteroids
Ig
Immunoglobin
IFN
Interferon
IL
Interleukin
ILIT
Intralymphatic immunotherapy
MHC-II
Major histocompatibility complex class II
mRNA
Messenger ribonucleic acid
OIT
Oral immunotherapy
PD-1
Programmed cell death protein 1
P. pastoris
Pichia pastoris
PR
Pathogenesis-related
RLU
Relative light units
RMSD
Root mean square deviation
SCIT
Subcutaneous immunotherapy
SDS-PAGE
Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis
sIgE
Serum IgE
SLIT
Sublingual immunotherapy
SPT
Skin prick test
TGF-β
Transforming growth factor beta
Th1
T-helper type 1
Th2
T-helper type 2
TLR
Toll-like receptor
TNF-α
Tumor necrosis factor alpha
Treg
Regulatory T cell
nsLTP
Nonspecific Lipid Transfer Protein
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Aknowledgements
i
Abstract
ii
Resumé
iii
Abbreviations
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Navigating the global allergy crisis: Impact and challenges . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Pathogenesis: The origin of allergy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
Initial sensitisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.2
Elicitation/effector phase: An allergic response . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Current approaches to allergy management: Protein-based AIT . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.1
Symptomatic treatments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3.2
Curative treatments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Nucleic acid-based vaccines for AIT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Cross-reactivity between allergens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.6
Diagnosis and epitope characterisation in patients with cross-allergies . . . . . .
12
1.7
Project aim and description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Materials and Methods
15
3
Results
20
3.1
NsLTP panel design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Recombinant expression and purification of nsLTPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Structural characterisation of nsLTPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Functional characterisation of nsLTPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.5
Evaluation of shared epitopes between the nsLTPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.6
Evaluation of antibody response following immunisation of mice with mRNA- or
protein vaccine
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4
Discussion
35
5
Conclusion and future perspectives
40
6
References
41
7
Appendix
47
7.1
Plasmid maps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.2
Multiple sequence alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.3
Quantification of expression results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.4
Patient Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Navigating the global allergy crisis: Impact and challenges
In a world where allergies are rising, their impact on healthcare costs, productivity, and over-
all health is becoming increasingly evident. This rise in cases of allergic diseases is recognised
as a significant global health challenge by the World Allergy Organisation [1] and the European
Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology [2]. Allergy affects the quality of life for patients in
many ways: by morbidity or, in the worst case, mortality, yet also indirectly through psychological
effects like anxiety, depression, motivation and ability to concentrate as well as social isolation
[1]. Therefore, not only is the physical health affected, but also the mental health of patients [3].
While the exact reasons for this substantial increase in cases remain uncertain, new data suggests
a significant influence of genetic and environmental factors [4].
Globally, allergies affect a significant portion of the population, with approximately 8-10% of
people suffering from one or more allergies [4], even so, some studies indicate up to 30% of the
global population might suffer from allergic rhinitis[4]. In general, allergies manifest in various
forms and it is estimated that asthma, a respiratory condition, affects 3-9% of the global population
while food allergies have an 8% prevalence worldwide [4].
Allergy symptoms include a range of manifestations, including but not limited to: a runny or
congested nose, itchy and watery eyes, sneezing, facial swelling, skin rashes, hives, headaches,
shortness of breath, wheezing, and, most critically, anaphylaxis, which poses a life-threatening
risk [1] [4].
The consumption of ultra-processed foods, especially in the Western diet [5], makes it difficult for
patients with food allergies to live a normal life and they therefore have to modify their diets and
lifestyles as a result of their disease. Ultra-processed foods often contain traces of allergens, which
are the substances that trigger an allergic reaction. This is due to the complexity of the food and/or
cross-contamination in the production [6], which makes it more difficult for patients to identify
products that might contain allergens. This comes with a substantial psychological burden [7],
and a study on 87 families highlighted that 49% or more who experienced food allergy reported
that it affects the family’s social activities. At the same time, 41% of the parents also reported a
significant impact on their stress levels [7].
Regional variations of childhood food allergies are prevalent across the globe, with common al-
lergens including cow’s milk, eggs, peanuts, and seafood affecting children under 5 years old [8].
The allergic patterns vary and there is for instance a higher prevalence of egg allergies in some
Asian regions, while the United States and the Middle Eastern population have more milk allergies.
Allergies diversify as the children grow older, with fruit allergies being noticeable in Europe and
parts of Central and South America, and peanut allergies being prevalent in western Europe, Aus-
tralia, and the United States. Sesame allergies are common in the Middle East, and beef allergies
are more frequent in Turkey [8]. These regional variations are also seen with airborne allergies,
1
==PAGE:8==
underlining the complex contribution to allergies from environmental, genetic, and dietary factors.
Furthermore, a visible trend in rapidly developing countries, like China [8], suggests a correlation
between progressive economic development and increased allergic diseases - an evolution linked
to westernisation and evolving lifestyles [9] [10].
Apart from affecting individuals’ health and quality of life, this rise in allergic conditions addi-
tionally constitutes a substantial economic burden. The economic consequences of insufficiently
treated allergy patients, in Europe alone, are considerable. Costs range from 55 to 151 billion
euros each year, accounting for lost productivity and absences, which translates to 2405 euros per
untreated patient per year [11]. Conspicuously, only 10% of individuals receive optimal treat-
ment [11], underscoring the pressing need for more widespread access to effective treatment. This
treatment gap can be addressed with more cost-effective therapies, potentially leading to significant
savings and improved economic outcomes.
1.2
Pathogenesis: The origin of allergy
Allergy is a disease that develops when a harmless antigen is mistakenly perceived as harmful by
the immune system, leading to an immune response. Allergy is classified as a type 1 hypersensi-
tivity response and is commonly triggered by allergens that enter the body through the mucosa of
the digestive or respiratory tract [12]. These allergens are typically highly water-soluble and have
low molecular weight [12]. The development of allergies is influenced by a combination of genetic
and environmental factors, from which several elements can influence an individual’s probability
of becoming allergic.
Allergy development is a complex process with limited understanding as to why an individual
develops allergies. However, some theories indicate the effects of heredity factors [13][4], gut
microbiota [4], and viral influences[4]. The identification of mechanisms affecting the develop-
ment of allergic diseases has been influenced by complicity and limited understanding, however,
researchers have now identified some key processes.
A critical path is the initial sensitisation phase where professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs)
capture and process the antigens for presentation to T cells. The fate of these T cells is what
determines whether an allergic reaction is promoted or whether tolerance is promoted.
1.2.1
Initial sensitisation
APCs are a group of immune cells that are located at mucosal surfaces like the respiratory tract
and gastrointestinal mucosa. When an APC, like a dendritic cell (DC), encounters an antigen, it
travels to the nearest lymph node. Here, the antigen is digested into peptides and presented on
major histocompatibility complex class II molecules (MHC-II) (Figure 1)[14]. These peptides are
presented to naïve CD4+ T cells in the lymph nodes and the outcome, whether it leads to tolerance
or inflammation, is heavily influenced by the surrounding microenvironment.
2
==PAGE:9==
The presence of suppressive cytokines like interleukin (IL) 2 and transforming growth factor beta
(TGF-β), as well as molecules that activate toll-like receptors (TLRs) 2, 7 and 9, leads to the
conversion of immature DCs into tolerogenic DCs. These tolerogenic DCs have a downregulated
expression of transmembrane glycoproteins CD80, CD86 and MCH-II [14]. The absence of these
co-stimulations prompts naïve CD4+ T cells to differentiate into T regulatory cells (T reg), which
generate cytokines and express surface molecules contributing to immune suppression of allergic
responses, thereby promoting tolerance.
Oppositely, if there is an abundant production of IL-4, the signal causes naïve CD4+ T cells to
differentiate into T-helper type 2 (Th2) cells [14]. Th2 cells secrete cytokines IL-4, IL-5, IL-9 and
IL-13 that, together with the upregulated surface molecule CD40 ligand, lead to stimulation of B
cell. These B cells produce antigen-specific IgE antibodies and sensitisation occurs if these IgEs
bind to the surface of mast cells and basophils (effector cells) via the fragment crystallisable (Fc)
region to the high-affinity FcϵRI [12].
1.2.2
Elicitation/effector phase: An allergic response
When the IgE receptor on the effector cells encounters the antigen again, crosslinking between
IgE FcϵRI complexes can occur, leading to activation of the effector cell and degranulation. Im-
mediate release of histamines and proteoglycans leads to smooth muscle contraction in the lungs
and intestine, along with increased vessel permeability. In addition, secretion of cytokines TNF-α,
IL-4 and IL-5 also occur, contributing to the formation of cellular infiltrate containing primarily
Th2 cells and eosinophilic granulocytes. These granulocytes can contribute to tissue damage as
they release toxic granules and reactive oxygen species along with prostaglandins and cytokines
that can intensify the inflammation. Cytokines from the Th2 cells furthermore mediate allergic
inflammation as IL-4 and IL-13 activate more B-cells, and eosinophils are recruited, activated and
sustained by IL-5. IL-13 additionally plays a role in promoting epithelial development, stimulating
mucus production, facilitating the formation of extracellular matrix, and inducing the contraction
of smooth muscles [14]. If the allergen exposure persists, this can lead to chronic illnesses like
chronic bronchial asthma in the case of respiratory allergies[12] or abdominal pain and diarrhoea
in the case of food allergies. For severe cases of food allergy, global symptoms affecting the skin
and organs can occur as well as anaphylaxis [15].
The fundamental concept of sensitisation and the initiation of the allergic response is depicted in
Figure 1.
3
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1: Sensitisation and elicitation of an allergic immune response. An APC encounters an
allergen that is taken up by the cell and digested. The allergen-peptides are presented on MHC-II
to naïve T cells that differentiate into Th2 cells in the presence of IL-4. Th2 cell stimulates B
cells to produce antigen-specific IgE. IgE binds to mast cells or basophils and upon encountering
the allergen again, activation of the effector cells occurs leading to degranulation and histamine
release. This figure was made using Biorender.com.
1.3
Current approaches to allergy management: Protein-based AIT
In allergy treatment, a distinction is made between anti-inflammatory symptomatic treatments and
curative treatments. While it in many cases is recommended to manage the allergy by avoiding
exposure, this is only feasible for food allergies as airborne allergies naturally are difficult to avoid.
Pharmacotherapy can also aid in relieving the symptoms when exposure is unavoidable, and an-
tihistamines, as well as steroids, are commonly used to block the action of allergic mediators [4].
For chronic or acute allergic diseases, mast cell stabilisers and eosinophil chemotoxins are also
commonly used [4].
1.3.1
Symptomatic treatments
For mild allergic reactions, antihistamines are used [16]. Histamine exerts its effects through
multiple receptors, including the H1 receptor, and impacts the immune modulation in both acute
and chronic allergic inflammation. Through the H1 receptor, histamine enhances the capacity of
antigen-presenting cells and promotes the release of histamine and other mediators from basophils
and mast cells [17]. Antihistamines function as inverse receptor agonists by stabilising the inac-
4
==PAGE:11==
tive conformation of H1 histamine receptors to downregulate allergic inflammation[17]. They are
frequently employed in the management and prevention of symptoms associated with urticaria, al-
lergic rhinitis, and allergic conjunctivitis, due to their affordability and widespread availability as
over-the-counter medications [17]. Antihistamines may, however, not provide complete symptom
relief, as other molecules released from basophils and mast cells, such as leukotrienes, contribute
to allergic inflammation [17] and they therefore only work for a subset of symptoms. In addition,
they are known to cause drowsiness, decreased attention and reaction times [18] and patients can
build tolerance [19].
Another pharmacotherapeutic option includes steroids, specifically glucocorticosteroids (GCS),
which are the oldest anti-inflammatory therapy used for treating chronic inflammation of the air-
ways. GCS are mainly used to prevent late-phase reactions [16] and function by activating the glu-
cocorticoid receptor. They also have a dual role in regulating the immune response, as they both
inhibit the activation and survival of inflammatory cells while modulating the activity of structural
cells [20]. The anti-inflammatory effects are achieved by reducing the synthesis of multiple cy-
tokines and interleukins, which result in consequent inhibition of protein synthesis, recruitment,
localisation, and survival of inflammatory cells [20]. Although GCS are a key player in managing
inflammatory disorders, an extensive list of potential adverse effects exists and the likelihood of
developing these effects seems to increase with a longer duration of treatment and a higher dose
[20]. As allergies tend to be a recurring condition with longer periods of symptoms, the total du-
ration time for treatment might be long and therefore increase the risk of adverse effects. Some of
the most severe adverse effects reported are increased risk of hyperglycemia and diabetes later in
life, osteoporosis, gastrointestinal disturbances, and cardiovascular adverse effects [20].
Despite the widespread utilisation of antihistamines and GCS for symptomatic relief, they fall
short in effectively managing acute allergic events, such as anaphylaxis [21] [16]. In such instances,
adrenaline is the preferred treatment [16]. Adrenaline is a hormone produced in the adrenal glands
and normally secreted in situations of stress. The anti-anaphylactic effects of adrenaline stem from
its capacity to elevate blood pressure, reduce tissue oedema, and dilate the bronchi and vasculature
[16].
1.3.2
Curative treatments
Immunotherapy has been developed as an attempt for a curative treatment for several years. Allergen-
specific immunotherapy (AIT) aims to reestablish peripheral immune tolerance to allergens by
exposing the patient to small doses of allergen over a long period of time [14]. In healthy indi-
viduals, the immune response to allergens is characterised by a mixture of T-helper type 1 (Th1)
cells and regulatory T cells (Treg) and not solely Treg-dominated [22]. Successful AIT is in early
clinical studies linked to a switch from Th2 to Th1 cells, however, studies have demonstrated that
early-phase immunotherapy is associated with induced Treg cells whereas late-phase therapy is
associated with a shift from Th2 to Th1 [22]. The success of allergen immunotherapy is there-
fore attributed to the orchestrated interplay of these mechanisms, addressing various facets of the
5
==PAGE:12==
allergic response and promoting immune tolerance.
Successful allergen immunotherapy encompasses several key mechanisms:
• Establishment of immune deviation with Th1 bias: Induction of a Th1 bias creates a cytokine
environment that hinders the recruitment of Th2 cells and prevents class switching to IgE in
B cells [22].
• Recruitment of Treg cells and induction of immune tolerance: When Treg cells are recruited,
immune tolerance is induced through an immunomodulatory process that mitigates allergic
responses [22].
• Induction of IgG-blocking antibodies: IgG-blocking antibodies play a dual role by inter-
fering with allergen uptake and/or cross-linking, thereby reducing immediate allergy symp-
toms. Moreover, they can potentially induce prolonged immunomodulation. This occurs by
disrupting both the IgE-dependent release of cytokines from mast cells and the IgE-mediated
presentation of allergens in T cells [22].
The desensitisation process is done by inducing regulatory allergen-specific cell subsets and sup-
pressor molecules, such as programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-
associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) [14]. The induction of allergen-specific CD4+ Treg cells can result
from either effective AIT or repeated substantial exposure to high allergen doses (Figure 2). Cy-
tokines produced by the Treg cells (IL-10, IL-35 and TGF-β) contribute to immune suppression
of an allergic reaction. IL-10 suppresses IgE production via Treg cell interacting with B cells
and simultaneously induces the production of allergen-specific IgG4. IgG4 competes with IgE for
binding to basophils and mast cells, thereby preventing IgE from sensitising effector cells. Surface
molecules on the Treg cells like CTLA4 and PD-1 also contribute to immune tolerance [14].
6
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2: Main mechanisms of allergen-specific immunotherapy. High-dose allergen exposure
or allergen-specific immunotherapy favours Treg and Th1 cells resulting in the inhibition of Th2
cells and IgE production. Th1 cells additionally activate B cells resulting in IgG4 class switching.
This figure was made using Biorender.com.
Routes for allergen-specific immunotherapy using proteins:
Subcutaneous immunotherapy (SCIT) is a commonly used approach for AIT where the chosen
allergen is injected subcutaneously for a defined period of time with increasing doses. This method
has proven to reduce short-term symptoms as well as a proven efficacy and safety profile [14].
The drawback, nevertheless, includes that building tolerance takes a long time, there is a risk of
hypersensitivity reactions [14], and repeated injections can be uncomfortable. Additionally, there
is a reliance on healthcare facilities.
An alternative immunotherapy that also uses injections is intralymphatic immunotherapy (ILIT).
Treatment with this type of therapy only requires three injections, one month apart with a low
dose of allergen. This reduced number of injections also establishes tolerance faster than SCIT
[14] and is more comfortable for the patients due to the lower number of injections. Nevertheless,
patients still depend on a health care unit with experienced staff as the injections require ultrasound
guidance and there is a risk of leakage from the lymph node where the allergen is injected, risking
adverse effects [14].
Sublingual immunotherapy (SLIT) represents a form of AIT that markedly diverges from the use
of injections as this therapy uses a tablet or droplets of the allergen that is administered under
7
==PAGE:14==
the tongue. SLIT therapy has predominantly focused on milk-, peanut-, and tree nut allergies
but also on other IgE-mediated food allergy like allergy against fresh fruits [23]. It is considered
a safer option where home application is made possible, yet this comes with the risk of patient
incompliance. It has a proven safety and efficacy profile due to its many years of use and is applied
among others as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy in respiratory allergies. One drawback of SLIT is
the potential risk of eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE), and it tends to be less effective when compared
to SCIT [14].
Similarly to SLIT, oral immunotherapy (OIT) is a therapeutic approach that entails the integration
of the allergen into a carrier substance that is ingested. The method involves administering an initial
dose of the allergen that is below the threshold capable of eliciting a reaction in allergic individuals
[24]. Subsequently, the dosage of the allergen is gradually increased over a specified period of time.
OIT has been studied comprehensively for single-allergen treatment with primarily milk, egg, and
peanut, however, multi-allergen therapy is still being investigated [23]. Compared to SLIT, OIT has
improved efficacy yet research indicates that OIT has the potential to significantly increase allergic
and anaphylactic reactions when compared to avoidance or placebo, despite successfully inducing
desensitisation [14] [23]. Moreover, there are increased chances of experiencing adverse reactions,
as well as the risk of developing EoE during the up-dosing phase, which requires frequent visits
to the doctor [14].
An immunotherapy not including injections or digestions, is epicutaneous immunotherapy (EPIT).
In EPIT, the allergen is applied to the skin via patches or after abrasion [14]. There is a risk of
EPIT triggering an allergic reaction, however, no systemic allergic reactions have been reported
[23], rendering the safety profile generally good and it can be used for both food- and aeroallergens.
EPIT is investigated for the treatment of peanut and milk allergy and involves daily application of
an allergen patch to the arm or back [23].
In general, these approaches all have the same goal of decreasing medication requirements for
people with allergies, as well as decreasing allergen reactivity and symptoms, which eventually
increase life quality.
1.4
Nucleic acid-based vaccines for AIT
Throughout time, many allergy vaccines have used protein extracts from natural sources of the
allergen to prepare the vaccine [25], nevertheless, this is being recognised as a major bottleneck in
several different ways. The quality of the allergen extract may be poor due to unpredictable compo-
sitions, variation, lack of the important allergens or presence of irrelevant proteins [25] [26]. With
the development of DNA and mRNA vaccines, genetic vaccines now offer high-purity allergens,
avoiding the release of native allergens into the circulation [27]. Following the identification of
the DNA sequence for the allergens, genetic vaccines also enable vaccination using only coding
sequences for the relevant part of the allergen. If the vaccine is designed with a targeting sequence
for the lysosome, this will enable loading onto MHC-II and the induction of CD4+ T cells for the
8
==PAGE:15==
activation of a Th1 cell response [27] (Figure 3). Through this route, exposure to whole aller-
gens is circumvented, consequently mitigating the IgE-mediated response that might occur in the
presence of preexisting allergen-specific IgE [27].
Figure 3: Targeting the MHC-II pathway. 1) Antigen uptake. The mRNA encapsulated in a
lipid nanoparticle enters the cytosol via endocytosis and is released. 2) Peptide translation and
translocation. 3) The synthesised protein is directed to the lysosome due to the lysosome targeting
sequence [28]. 4) Peptide-MHC association. MHC-II chains, α and β, are synthesised in the en-
doplasmic reticulum and assembled with the chaperone molecule, invariant chain (Ii), for stability
[29]. The heterotrimer is matured in the Golgi apparatus and delivered to the MHC-II compart-
ment. 5) Peptide-MHC association. Proteases degrade the protein and the invariant chain, and
antigenic peptides bind to the MHC-II molecule. 6) Expression on the cell surface. The MHC-
antigen complex moves to the cell membrane for presentation to CD4+ T cells [29]. This figure
was made using Biorender.com.
It has been shown that nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccines can generate potent allergen-specific
antibodies capable of inhibiting the binding of IgEs to major house dust mite allergens [30]. mRNA
vaccines have also been proven to reduce inflammatory signatures such as eosinophil count and
IL-5 and IL-4 levels, as well as induce anti-inflammatory phenotypes like IFN-γ-producing cells
with immunomodulatory capacities [31]. In addition, research has also demonstrated that mRNA
vaccines have the potential to generate long-term memory responses in immunised mice, as the
mice exhibited robust anti-inflammatory responses upon subsequent re-exposure to the allergen
[31]. Other studies done on prophylactic mRNA vaccination suggest that only mild priming may
be enough for lasting protection due to the natural boosting of allergen-specific Th1 immunity that
for example happens during the pollen season [22]. While promising outcomes have been demon-
strated in these rodent studies, it is noteworthy that humans typically exhibit a weaker antibody
9
==PAGE:16==
response to genetic vaccines [27], and the induction of a Th1-biased response may therefore pose
a challenge worthy of more investigation.
1.5
Cross-reactivity between allergens
Allergen-specific IgE can exhibit cross-reactivity by recognising epitopes on other allergen sources,
leading to allergic symptoms even in the absence of prior exposure [32]. This occurs with allergens
originating from either closely related species or highly conserved allergenic molecules belonging
to the same protein family although not necessarily from related species [33].
Common allergen families associated with cross-reactivity include nonspecific Lipid Transfer Pro-
teins (nsLTP) [33], serum albumins [32], profilins [15], pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins [33],
and tropomyosins [33].
Clinical conditions arising from IgE sensitisation to cross-reactive components are documented
across various sources, encompassing plants, fungi, invertebrates, mammals, and avians [33]. Re-
search shows that the route of exposure is critical for sensitisation and when sensitisation has
occurred, subsequent exposure to the allergen can result in either local or systemic manifesta-
tions [10]. The respiratory route can be responsible for triggering sensitisation and notably up to
80% of food allergies in adults are preceded by sensitisation to aeroallergens [33]. Examples of
pollen-food syndromes and associations include birch-apple, mugwort-peach, cypress-peach and
mugwort-mustard. The connection between sensitisation to aeroallergens and subsequent food al-
lergy explains why some individuals may have previously tolerated foods such as peaches but now
experience allergic reactions due to sensitisation to cypress pollen through the respiratory path-
way. This is because the IgE antibodies generated against the cypress pollen can also recognise
allergens present in peaches.
In cypress-peach allergy, Pru p 3 nsLTP originating from the peach (Figure 4) is the relevant aller-
gen component, while Art v 3 is relevant for both the mugwort-peach association and mugwort-
mustard syndrome. Notably, Art v 3 and Pru p 3 serve as cross-reactive allergen components
in the mugwort-peach association, with Art v 3 acting as the primary sensitising allergen [33].
The exploration of the intricate dynamics of pollen-food syndromes reveals the important role of
allergen components like nsLTPs, highlighting their significance in refining targeted therapeutic
approaches.
NsLTPs are compact, well-preserved molecules that belong to the PR-14 protein family and are
prevalent in the skin of Rosaceae fruits, vegetables, seeds, tree nuts, legumes, and pollens, where
they play a role in plant defence mechanisms against fungi and bacteria [34]. As described,
a marked cross-reactivity among individual nsLTPs is observed, even from botanically distant
sources, due to their structural similarities. NsLTPs exhibit a compact and stable secondary struc-
ture which yields notable resistance to various environmental challenges, including gastrointestinal
proteolysis, pH fluctuations, and elevated temperatures [34]. The resistance to elevated tempera-
tures and digestion is attributed to the presence of numerous disulfide bonds [35]. Consequently,
10
==PAGE:17==
even after cooking, nsLTPs can retain the allergic potential and still induce allergic reactions [35].
An example of an archetypical nsLTP is Pru p 3 (Figure 4) with the four right-handed helices.
NsLTPs have either four or five helices and this structural right-handed superhelix fold is conserved
across nsLTPs [36], making the 3D structure of the proteins exhibit a high degree of similarity. The
structure of this fold remains intact, even when the sequence identity observed among all nsLTPs
is low [36].
Figure 4: Protein structure of Pru p 3. Structure retrieved from RCSB.org (Pru p 3: 2B5S) and
visualised with ChimeraX.
Sensitisation to nsLTPs exhibits a noteworthy prevalence in the Mediterranean basin, although
emerging reports indicate its detection beyond this geographical area, with documented cases in
regions such as China and the United States [34] (Figure 5). Nevertheless, there is considerable
variation in the prevalence of allergies and specific sensitisation patterns across different geograph-
ical areas and populations.
11
==PAGE:18==
Figure 5: Countries with reported nsLTP allergy. NsLTP allergy is reported in the Mediter-
ranean basin (light blue) as well as Belgium [37], Austria [38], United Kingdom [39], China [40],
Switzerland [41], Poland [42], Germany [43], the Netherlands [44], Denmark [45], Sweden [46],
Iceland [47], Japan [48], Taiwan [49], Thailand [50], Canada [51] and the United States [52] (dark
blue).
1.6
Diagnosis and epitope characterisation in patients with cross-allergies
When diagnosing nsLTP allergies, a combination of skin prick tests (SPT), clinical history, oral
food challenges and specific IgE testing is involved [53]. However, diagnostics can be a compli-
cated task due to cross-reactivity between clinically irrelevant IgE, often leading to false positive
results in SPTs or in vitro tests [53] and in some cases contradictory results [10]. For this reason,
extensive knowledge of the patient’s medical history is important before conducting these tests to
rule out false positives. In SPTs, cutaneous administration of allergen extracts is performed and
the local allergic response indicates a negative or positive result [54]. Although SPTs are reliable
for testing respiratory allergies and have shown high sensitivity for identifying sensitisation in in-
dividuals who tested positive in food challenges, the study is limited by the availability of allergens
as well as the biological variation between patients [54]. The allergen panels can in addition vary
significantly and are restricted as they use allergenic extracts that contain a mix of proteins and
other molecules. When a positive immune response is detected, this only identifies the source and
not the specific protein responsible for eliciting the IgE response [54].
Oral food challenges remain the golden standard of food allergy diagnosis [53] and are conducted
by consumption of small amounts of the suspected food under medical supervision. Nonetheless,
there is currently no standardised protocol for nsLTP-specific food challenges [53] and this may
also pose an ethical challenge as there is a risk of anaphylaxis [55].
12
==PAGE:19==
The problem with diagnostics is the continued need for a better definition of phenotypes and disease
heterogeneity [1]. A diagnostic method demonstrated to increase accuracy in allergy diagnosis is
component-resolved diagnostics (CRD) [55]. Opposite to older in vitro methods that use whole
allergen extracts to detect allergen-specific IgEs, CRD uses purified or recombinant allergens for
the identification of molecules causing sensitisation [54]. It is therefore useful in identifying sensi-
tisation to specific nsLTPs as well as assessing cross-reactivity patterns and it can be performed in
different formats, either as a single test or in a microarray testing a large range of allergens simul-
taneously [55]. This holds great promise for advancing the field of allergy diagnostics, whereby
the potential to pave the way for personalised treatments is created [54]. A significant challenge
of CRD, conversely, is the limited availability of allergenic molecules on the commercial mar-
ket, often characterised by variable levels of purity [10] [54]. This imposes a limitation on the
applicability and efficacy of CRD.
1.7
Project aim and description
Current limitations in allergy research hinder vaccine development by providing insufficient data
on patient-specific sensitivities and cross-reactivity patterns. To enhance vaccine efficacy, it is
crucial to explore and understand individualised immune responses in the context of allergies,
allowing for the formulation of vaccines tailored to address unique sensitivities and potential cross-
reactivity.
This master thesis project seeks to integrate allergy characterisation and mRNA vaccine develop-
ment through a focused investigation into recombinant allergens from the nsLTP family. By under-
taking a multifaceted approach, the aim is to elucidate the structural, functional, and immunolog-
ical aspects of these allergens, ultimately contributing to the development of broad-neutralisation
strategies against pollen-food-associated cross-allergies.
The project aims to do a structural characterisation of nsLTPs in an allergen panel consisting of
Art v 3, Ara h 9, Cor a 8, Par j 2 and Pru p 3. This is done after recombinant production, us-
ing Far-UV circular dichroism spectroscopy and Western blotting. The goal of this is to achieve
an understanding of the 3D structure and the importance of the structure in relation to antibody
recognition. Here, polyclonal commercial IgG against Mal d 3 was used for detection and simul-
taneously elucidating the shortcomings of antibodies produced in this manner.
The project also pursues to do a functional characterisation of the allergen panel using immunoas-
says like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and Western blotting. In these experi-
ments, serum from allergic patients, already sensitised to allergens in the nsLTP panel, is used
to characterise the ability of the allergens to be recognised by serum antibodies and determine if
this is dependent on the structure of the allergens. As a part of the functional characterisation,
a dissociation-enhanced lanthanide fluorescence immunoassay (DELFIA) is also employed to at-
tempt to evaluate if patients recognise shared epitopes between the nsLTPs of the panel.
Lastly, the project seeks to evaluate the use of a consensus nsLTP (cnsLTP1) in AIT, comparing
13
==PAGE:20==
two vaccine formulations: a nucleotide-based vaccine and a traditional protein-based vaccine.
Comparison between vaccine formulations is done using ELISA and the elucidation of specific
binding properties between serum antibodies and allergens is evaluated in a Western blot using
serum from the mRNA vaccinated mice for detection.
These important elucidations together can be utilised to generate a better understanding of cross-
reactivity in allergic patients, which may lead to more effective and personalised allergy treatments
in the future.
14
==PAGE:21==
2
Materials and Methods
DNA Cloning
NsLTP cDNA fragments bought from GenScript and vector XY-001 (pPICZαA) were amplified
with PCR using Q5® High-Fidelity 2X Master Mix (New England Biolabs) or Pfu DNA Poly-
merase (Promega, #M774A) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Product purity and yield
were verified by gel electrophoresis. Gibson assembly using NEBuilder HiFi DNA Assembly
(New England Biolabs) were performed to join DNA fragments and vectors with an insert:vector
ratio of 1:5. The samples were incubated for 15 minutes at 50 °C to allow assembly. The reaction
mixtures were then transformed into super competent E. coli DH5α cells (Invitrogen, #11583117)
using heat shock. Transformants were cultured on low-salt LB agar plates with Zeocin (Thermo
Fisher, #R25005) (100 µg/mL) and picked for colony PCR performed using Q5® High-Fidelity
2X Master Mix (New England Biolabs). Product size was verified by gel electrophoresis.
Transformants were inoculated in 5 mL LB low salt media including Zeocin overnight (O/N) and
a glycerol stock was taken followed by a mini-prep using GeneJET Plasmid Miniprep Kit (Thermo
Scientific, #K0503) performed according to the manufacturer’s descriptions to isolate the plasmids
for Sanger sequencing.
DNA plasmid preparation and electroporation
10 µg of plasmids were linearised using 2 µL SacI. The DNA was precipitated using Chloro-
form:Phenol:isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1) in a 1:1 ratio, vortexed for 1 min and centrifuged at max
speed for 15 min at 4 °C. The aqueous phase was extracted and 4 M LiCl, 0.1 M, MgCl2 was
added equal to 1/10 of the volume followed by the addition of -20 °C 725 uL 96% (v/v) EtOH. The
sample was incubated for 1 hour at -20 °C and centrifuged at max speed for 15 min at 4 °C. 1 mL 4
°C 70% (v/v) ethanol was added to the pellet and centrifuged at max speed for 5 min at 4 °C. The
pellet was dried, followed by the addition of 10 µL sterile deionised H20 at 65 °C. The linearised
DNA was then electroporated into Pichia pastoris KM71H electrocompetent cells (Invitrogen) and
plated on YPDS plates with Zeocin (100 µg/mL and 1000 µg/mL) and grown at 30 °C. Colonies
were picked and purified on fresh YPDS plates with Zeocin (100 µg/mL) for four days.
Protein expression and purification
One colony for each clone was picked and precultured in 5 mL YPD media at 30 °C 220 rpm O/N.
2.5 mL of saturated preculture was then added to 1 L BMGY and incubated O/N at 30 °C 200 rpm
followed by centrifugation at 5000 xg for 10 min at 19-21 °C. The pellet was resuspended in 100
mL BMMY and incubated for 3 days at 30 °C 200 rpm with methanol induction. A 1mL culture
was saved before methanol induction and followed by each methanol induction. The cultures were
centrifuged at 4000 xg for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was centrifuged at 10.000 xg for 15 min
at 4 °C and filtered with a LABSOLUTE® filtration unit followed by dialysis against Bis-Tris buffer
20 mM pH 6.0 using a nitrocellulose (3.5K MWCO) membrane to equilibrium. The recombinant
proteins were hereafter purified from the culture supernatant by ion exchange chromatography
15
==PAGE:22==
using a cation exchange prepacked column (UNOSphereS– Bio-Rad, #732-4750) or size exclusion
chromatography using column Superdex G75 10/300, and an NGC Quest 10 Chromatography
System (Bio-Rad). Purified samples were dialysed against NH4HCO5 50 mM pH 7.0 using a
nitrocellulose (3.5K MWCO) membrane to equilibrium and lyophilised using a ScanVac Freeze
dryer CoolSafe.
Prior to lyophilisation, the protein purity was tested with sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). 20 µL sample from the dialysis was mixed with 10 µL 3x SDS
loading dye and boiled for 5 min at 95 °C. Samples were loaded on a NuPage 4-12% Bis-Tris Gel
(Invitrogen) along with the size marker PageRuler Prestained Protein (Thermo Scientific, #26616)
or Spectra Multicolor Low Range Protein Ladder (Thermo Scientific, #26628) and placed in a
Criterion cell with TrisTricine running buffer (Bio-Rad) followed by separation at 200 V for 30 min.
Subsequently, the gel was stained for 30 min with a solution of 0.1% (w/v) Coomassie Brilliant
Blue R250 in 50% (v/v) ethanol and 10% (v/v) acetic acid, whereafter it was destained with the
same solution without Coomasie Brilliant Blue R250.
The aliquots taken during expression, as well as purified protein, were assessed in a Dot blot using
a Bio-Rad Bio-Dot Microfiltration Apparatus. A nitrocellulose membrane was pre-wetted in Tris
Buffered Saline (TBS) and fixed in the Bio-Rad Bio-Dot Microfiltration Apparatus under vacuum.
The membrane was rehydrated with 100 µL TBS and the vacuum was turned off, allowing the
vacuum chamber to be open for air. 100 µL supernatant from the cultures and 20 µL pure protein
was added to each well and incubated for 45 min. Vacuum was applied until the solution was
drained and the membrane was removed from the apparatus. Blocking solution containing 5%
(w/v) milk in a solution of TBS with 0.1% (v/v) Tween 20 (TBST) was added to the membrane and
incubated for 1 hour with shaking. The membrane was next rinsed in TBST and washed in TBST
for 10 min on a shaker twice. Rabbit polyclonal IgG anti-Mal d 3 antibody (abbexa, #abx300086)
was diluted in blocking solution to a concentration of 1:1000. The antibody solution was added
to the membrane for incubation 30 min on 19-21 °C with shaking, followed by two washing steps
with TBST. Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG HRP (Cayman chemical, #10004301) was then diluted 1:1000
in blocking solution and added to the membrane followed by incubation for 30 min at 19-21 °C
with shaking. The membrane was hereafter washed twice in TBST and twice in TBS, followed
by the addition of chemiluminescent substrate SuperSignal™West Femto Maximum Sensitivity
Substrate (Thermo Scientific, #34094) and imaged after 60 seconds in a ChemiDoc imaging system
(Bio-Rad).
Patient cohort description
Plasma from 15 nsLTP-allergic patients (age range 5- 71 years) was harvested after collection and
stored at –80 °C. NsLTP allergy was defined by clinical symptoms following the ingestion of differ-
ent food sources and by peach-specific IgE, which was measured using the ImmunoCAP system.
The diagnosis and ImmunoCAP analysis were performed by the Department of Allergy and Im-
munology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, UAM, Madrid, Spain. Not all patients were tested for
16
==PAGE:23==
every nsLTP included in the panel of this thesis, and each patient’s profile is not equally elaborate.
Specific sIgE for Pru p 3, Cor a 8 and Ara h 9 were tested by the hospital. Patient data can be found
in the Appendix (Table 4).
ELISA
ELISA was performed in order to do a functional characterisation of nsLTPs and their binding to
allergic patient serum IgE as well as to evaluate the antibody response of immunised mice. A 96-
well high binding plate was coated with nsLTP in PBS and incubated O/N at 4 °C. The plate was
hereafter washed three times in PBS 0.1% (v/v) Tween (PBST) followed by three washes in PBS.
Wells were blocked in 5% (w/v) milk-PBST (mPBST) for 2 hours at 19-21 °C followed by washing
in PBST and PBS. Serum was diluted to the desired concentration in assay buffer and added to
the plate followed by 1 hour incubation at 19-21 °C and washing. Isotype-specific antibody was
diluted to the desired concentration in blocking buffer and added to the plate with 1 hour incubation
at 19-21 °C. The plate was washed and detection antibody was added at the desired concentration
followed by 1 hour of incubation and washing. Detection was carried out using TMB substrate
followed by the addition of 1 M H2SO4 to stop the reaction. The plates were imaged at 450 nm in
a Victor Nivo plate reader (Perkin Elmer).
Western blot
Wet transfer
An SDS-PAGE using a NuPAGE™4-12%, Bis-Tris (Thermo Fisher, #10247002) loaded with
nsLTP is first performed. To prepare for the transfer, the PVDF membrane Filter Paper Sandwich
(Novex) was pre-wetted in 96% ethanol for 30 seconds, rinsed in deionised water and placed in
NuPAGE Transfer Buffer (Invitrogen) for 2 minutes. The sandwich was assembled in a Surelock
MiniCell with Transfer Buffer and the transfer was performed at 30 V for 1 hour. The membrane
was hereafter blocked in a solution of 5% (w/v) milk in TBST for 1 hour at 19-21 °C with shaking
followed by two washing steps in TBST for 10 min. The membrane was next incubated for 1 hour
at 19-21 °C with shaking with either sample or antibody diluted in blocking solution. The mem-
brane was washed and incubated with isotype-specific antibody for 1 hour at 19-21 °C followed
by washing. In some cases, this antibody was not HRP-conjugated, and a second HRP-conjugated
antibody was therefore added for incubation 1 hour. The blots were developed by adding chemilu-
minescent substrate Pierce™ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Thermo Scientific, #32109). The
membrane was subsequently imaged in a ChemiDoc imaging system (Bio-Rad).
Semi-dry transfer
An SDS-PAGE using a NuPAGE™10%, Bis-Tris (Thermo Fisher, #NP0304BOX) uni-well was
loaded with a total of 700 µL of 7.62 ng/µL allergen and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane
using a pre-assembled Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer Pack (Bio-Rad, #1704158) with a Trans-Blot
Turbo Transfer System for a semi-dry Western blot. The membrane was cut into 15 stripes followed
by blocking, washing, incubation, development and imaging according to the above.
17
==PAGE:24==
Circular Dichroism spectroscopy
To inspect the secondary structure of the recombinant allergens, Far-UV circular dichroism (CD)
spectroscopy was carried out. The lyophilised allergen was dissolved in 10 mM potassium phos-
phate pH 7.0 to a final concentration of 0.2 mg/mL and analysed with Far-UV circular dichroism
spectroscopy using a JASCO J-1500 Circular Dichroism Spectrophotometer with a 0.1 cm path
length quartz cuvette (Hellma). CD spectra were recorded with ellipticity changes registered at a
range between 190 and 260 nm.
Biotinylation and MALDI-TOF
To prepare for the DELFIA, nsLTPs were biotinylated. No-Weigh NHS-PEG4-Biotin was heated
for 30 seconds and diluted in mili-Q water to a final 20 mM stock solution. NHS-PEG4-Biotin
and nsLTP were mixed at a 1:3 molar ratio of allergen:biotin and incubated at 25 °C for 1 hour.
The mixture was transferred to a 0.5 mL Amicon tube (Merck, #10212584) and washed with 1x
PBS by adding PBS and spinning it at 4,000 xg at 8 °C for 5 minutes 3 times. The biotinylation
was confirmed with matrix-assisted laser desorption ionisation-time of flight mass spectrometry
(MALDI-TOF MS).
DELFIA for patient sIgE
Patient serum samples were evaluated in a DELFIA assay. A 96-well DELFIA plate was coated
with 2.5 µg/mL anti-human IgE (BD Biosciences, #555894) in PBS and incubated at 4 °C O/N.
The plates were washed five times in PBS and the wells were blocked with 3% (w/v) milk PBS.
Patient serum was diluted 1:10 in DELFIA assay buffer (Revvity, #4002-0010) and mixed with an
equal amount of 100 nM to 10 µM non-biotinylated nsLTP in PBS or diluted further to 1:20 in
assay buffer. The patient serum was incubated for 2 hours at 19-21 °C, alongside the blocking of the
wells. The plate was hereafter washed in PBS and the preincubated serum was added to the plate
followed by 1 hour incubation at 19-21 °C. The plate was washed and 100 nM biotinylated nsLTP
in assay buffer was added to the plate for incubation 1 hour at 19-21 °C. The plate was washed
five times in PBST and three times in PBS whereupon europium labelled streptavidin (Revvity,
#1244-360) was added to the plate at a 1:500 dilution in assay buffer for incubation at 19-21 °C
for 30 minutes. The plate was again washed in PBST and PBS, following the addition of DELFIA
enhancement solution (Revvity, #4001-0010) for 5 minutes. The plates were read by recording the
Time-Resolved Fluorescence (TRF) at 615 nm upon at excitation at 340 nm in a Victor Nivo plate
reader (Perkin Elmer).
The percentage of shared epitopes between nsLTPs for each patient was calculated using the fol-
lowing equation:
% shared epitopes = Py −Px
P0 −Px
∗100
Where Py is the absorbance measurement of the patient serum preincubated with allergen y, Px is
18
==PAGE:25==
the measurement of the patient serum preincubated with allergen x and P0 is the measurement for
patient serum that has not been preincubated with allergen. Biotinylated allergen x was added to
the wells to evaluate the percentage of shared epitopes between allergen y and x.
19
==PAGE:26==
3
Results
3.1
NsLTP panel design
The recombinant allergen panel of this thesis includes nsLTPs from both food and pollen sources,
with allergens from peach, hazelnut, peanut, pellitory, and mugwort. The included allergens are
summarised in Table 2 and an amino acid identity matrix is constructed in Figure 6 from the multi-
ple sequence alignment in Appendix Figure 22 to visualise the sequence identity of the allergens in
relation to each other. A consensus allergen (cnsLTP1) had previously been constructed to resem-
ble a broader panel of nsLTPs with the purpose of using it in immunisation to obtain tolerance for
a broad spectrum of nsLTPs. CnsLTP1 was designed with a signal peptide and a version without,
cnsLTP1 ∆SP, was designed as well to investigate if this was of particular importance to the immu-
nisation strategy. CnsLTP1 did not resemble any specific natural sequence but shared the highest
sequence identity with Mald d 3 (81%) and the lowest sequence identity with Par j 2 (29%). Mal
d 3 was included for comparison as it is used to generate polyclonal commercial antibodies in
industry today. The allergens in the panel were chosen based on their significance in amino acid
sequence compared to cnsLTP1. In general, cnsLTP1 exhibited the highest sequence identity with
food allergens and the least with pollen allergens.
Table 2: NsLTP panel summary.
Allergen
Uniprot accession
Common name
Scientific name
Source
Isoelectric point
Pru p 3
P81402
Peach
Prunus persica
Fruit
9.25
Cor a 8
Q9ATH2
Hazelnut
Corylus avellana
Nut
9.30
Ara h 9
B6CG41
Peanut
Arachis hypogaea
Legume
9.25
Par j 2
P55958
Pellitory
Parietaria judaica
Pollen
8.14
Art v 3
C4MGG9
Mugwort
Artemisia vulgaris
Pollen
8.81
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 6: Amino acid identity matrix of nsLTP panel. The percentage identity is determined
through the Clustal Omega Multiple Sequence Alignment method and each sequence is referred
to by its accession ID and allergen name as listed on UniProt. Mal d 3 (Apple) was included for
comparison as it is used to generate polyclonal commercial antibodies. PARJU: Par j 2, ARTVU:
Art v 3, CORAV: Cor a 8, ARAHY: Ara h 9, PRUPE: Pru p 3, MALDO: Mal d 3.
3.2
Recombinant expression and purification of nsLTPs
All nsLTP genes were amplified, cloned, and transformed into E. coli DH5α cells for recombi-
nant expression. Expression was facilitated using P. pastoris KM71H as the host and induced with
methanol, as described in the Materials and Methods section. Direct purification from the yeast
culture was possible as the allergens were secreted extracellularly due to an α-leader sequence.
This streamlined the recovery process and minimised the presence of host proteins. Cation ex-
change chromatography and/or size exclusion chromatography was employed for purification.
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 7: Cation exchange chromatography curves for purified nsLTPs. Elutions were made
at isocratic flow of NaCl (Solution B %). Peaks are overlaid and indicate protein presence with
signal intensity indicating protein amounts. The x-axis describes the column volume at which the
proteins were eluted, the first y-axis describes absorbance measured at 280 nm, indicating protein
eluent, and the second y-axis describes the percentage of solution B passed through the column.
Protein elutions, measured at 280 nm to capture tryptophan and tyrosine residues’ absorption,
revealed promising outcomes for the presence of protein. Specifically, fractions from cation ex-
change chromatography (Figure 7) corresponding to the predominant peak were selectively col-
lected for further analysis in SDS-PAGE (Figure 8). For Par j 2, fractions were collected from the
purification and pooled into two fractions, aligning with the two peaks (Figure 7), with notice-
ably the biggest amount of protein in fraction 2. For Ara h 9, fractions were also here collected
and pooled into two fractions, aligning with the peaks, from which the biggest amount of protein
was observed in fraction 1 (Figure 8b), with only a small amount left in fraction 2 and the flow
through. CnsLTP1 ∆SP did not purify very well using cation exchange chromatography (Figure
8g), alternatively, using size exclusion chromatography it was possible to isolate the protein (Fig-
ure 9). From the size exclusion chromatography, four fractions were collected, in which the protein
was present in fractions 4-6 and these were therefore pooled. The remaining allergens, Cor a 8,
Pru p 3, and Art v 3, were only collected in one fraction. CnsLTP1 did not express a lot of pro-
tein compared to the other nsLTPs, evident by the low peak in Figure 7 and faint bands in Figure
8f, however, protein was obtained from the cation exchange chromatography in low concentration.
The purity and identity of the fractions were analysed. SDS-PAGE analysis (Figure 8) underscored
the high relative protein concentration within the anticipated molecular weight range across col-
lected fractions and the high purity of protein obtained. Quantification of the protein expression
results from the SDS-PAGEs was attempted using the software Image J (Appendix Figure 23-29)
and an estimation of the required expression time could be made from this analysis. It could be
22
==PAGE:29==
concluded that for nsLTPs Ara h 9, Cor a 8, and Pru p 3, the time of expression with methanol
induction could be shortened substantially as the protein production seems to hit a plateau around
time 24-48 hours.
(a) Par j 2
(b) Ara h 9
(c) Cor a 8
(d) Pru p 3
23
==PAGE:30==
(e) Art v 3
(f) cnsLTP1
(g) cnsLTP1 ∆SP
Figure 8: SDS-PAGE of expression aliquots. Expression aliquots were taken during expres-
sion with methanol induction from timepoint 0 to 96 h. Protein samples from purification with
cation exchange chromatography were also included in some gels. The proteins were stained us-
ing Coomassie staining. t0 = the day of methanol induction, t24 = 24 hours following the first
methanol induction, t48 = 48 hours following the first methanol induction, t72 = 72 hours follow-
ing the first methanol induction, t96 = 96 hours following the first methanol induction. P(F1) =
first protein fraction collected following purification. P(F2) = second protein fraction collected
following purification. Std = standard.
24
==PAGE:31==
Figure 9: SDS-PAGE of purified protein fractions after size exclusion chromatography. Input
= protein sample before purification. F3 = third protein fraction collected after purification, F4
= fourth protein fraction collected after purification, F5 = fifth protein fraction collected after
purification, F6= sixth protein fraction collected after purification. Std = standard.
3.3
Structural characterisation of nsLTPs
The expression of allergen, as well as allergen identity, was analysed in a Dot blot (Figure 10)
using a polyclonal commercial IgG anti-Mal d 3 antibody for identification of the nsLTPs. This
antibody has specificity for apple allergenic nsLTP, however, due to cross-reactivity, it could be
used for the identification of the nsLTPs in this panel as well.
Figure 10: Dot blot of expression aliquots. Aliquots were taken during expression with methanol
induction from timepoint 0 to 96 h. Protein samples from purification with ion exchange chro-
matography were also included. P(F1) = first protein fraction collected following purification.
P(F2) = second protein fraction collected following purification.
25
==PAGE:32==
From the Dot blot, a strong recognition of cnsLTP1 is observed. Additionally, Cor a 8 and Pru p
3 are also being recognised by anti-Mal d 3 antibodies, however, there is no recognition of Par j
2 and Ara h 9. CnsLTP1 ∆SP is also only being recognised at time 48 hours but not at any other
time points. Based on these results, cnsLTP1 ∆SP was not included in the further experiments.
The Dot blot did not include Art v 3 as this protein was not produced at the time of the experiment.
To further investigate this binding of anti-Mal d 3, an SDS-PAGE and Western blot were per-
formed (Figure 11). The SDS-PAGE was loaded with 2 µg/µL of each allergen both with and
without dithiothreitol (DTT). The Western blot was made using a 1:1000 diluted anti-Mal d 3 an-
tibody followed by a 1:4000 diluted Cayman goat anti-rabbit HRP antibody (Cayman chemical,
#10004301) for detection. From the Western blot, it is clear that the commercial anti-Mal d 3 IgG
is only able to recognise the allergens when DTT is added, meaning that it can recognise the linear
version of the allergens and not the native conformation.
Figure 11: Detection of nsLTPs using commercial anti-Mald d 3. SDS-PAGE (right) with
Coomassie staining of proteins and Western Blot (left) of nsLTPs and cnsLTP1 using anti-Mal d
3 commercial IgG for detection.
Far-UV circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy was thereafter used to assess the secondary structure
of the allergens. The Far-UV CD spectrum of the nsLTPs Ara h 9, Cor a 8, Par j 2 and Pru
p 3 exhibited two minima at around 208 nm and 222 nm, and a maximum at around 195 nm
(Figure 12), indicative of a predominantly α-helical structure. This spectral profile aligns with
previously documented CD spectra of nsLTPs [56] [57], demonstrating the characteristic α-helical
conformation of this protein family. Art v 3 did not exhibit a CD spectra aligning with the trend
of nsLTPs but rather that demonstrating a random coil compatible with an unfolded protein. Art v
3 was therefore not included in the remaining project experiments.
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 12: Structural analysis using CD. Far-UV CD spectrum recorded in 10 mM phosphate
buffer, pH 7 at a protein concentration of 0.2 mg/mL.
3.4
Functional characterisation of nsLTPs
Functional characterisation of nsLTPs was conducted to elucidate their potential to induce allergic
immune responses and evaluate their binding to patient serum IgEs from a cohort of nsLTP-allergic
patients. To assess the ability of nsLTPs to bind human serum IgE and evaluate the nsLTP-allergic
patient cohort, an ELISA was performed (Figure 14) using serum samples from individuals with
known nsLTP allergies previously assessed by ImmunoCAP. The ELISA plates were coated with
10 µg/µL nsLTP and a patient serum dilution of 1:20 was used. Anti-human IgE, HRP antibodies
(Invitrogen, #A18793) diluted to 1:500 was used as detection antibody. Results were evaluated
in a score matrix (Figure 13) where the data is visualised using a colour gradient to indicate the
relative magnitude of values across patients and allergens.
The score matrix offers a comparative assessment across patients, revealing significant variability
in the detection of nsLTP-specific serum IgE levels among individuals. Comparing Figure 13 and
Figure 14, patients 4, 13, and 14 exhibit pronounced sensitivity to the nsLTP panel compared to the
rest of the patient cohort. Patient 4 additionally exceeds the scale in Figure 14 for Ara h 9, aligning
with the symptoms of anaphylaxis with nuts (Figure 4 in Appendix). Conversely, individuals such
as 1, 7, 11, 12, and 15 appear to have limited recognition of the nsLTPs within this panel. Little
discernible trend or correlation in sensitivity is observed among individual nsLTPs within the
allergen panel; variations appear not to follow a specific pattern. Despite this, a small indication
between patients recognising Pru p 3 and Ara h 9 can be observed, as no patient in the cohort
sensitive to Pru p 3, according to Figures 13 and 14, are also not recognising Ara h 9.
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 13: Score matrix evaluation of patient IgE nsLTP recognition. 15 patients with proven
nsLTP allergy were analysed in an ELISA using Pru p 3, Par j 2, Cor 8, and Ara h 9. The intensity
of blue indicates the value magnitude with a cut-off value of 1.
Figure 14: ELISA of patient sIgE binding to nsLTP panel. Indirect ELISA using 15 patient
serum samples from nsLTP allergic patients. NsLTP Pru p 3, Par j 2, Cor a 8 and Ara h 9 were
analysed. Two positive controls were included where wells were coated directly with patient serum.
Fluorescence was measured in relative light units (RLU). An upper limit of 1.5 RLU is preset on all
graphs. Patient 4 exhibits a signal of 1.59 RLU for Ara h 9, surpassing this predefined threshold.
28
==PAGE:35==
Western blots were performed to evaluate if patients recognised allergens in their natural confor-
mation and/or reduced form. A semi-dry Western blot was performed according to protocol, with
an SDS-PAGE using a NuPAGE™10%, Bis-Tris uni-well, cut into 15 stripes. Patient serums were
added to each stripe at a 1:20 dilution and anti-human IgE, HRP antibodies (Invitrogen, #A18793)
diluted to 1:500 were used as detection antibodies. It is observed in Figure 15 that the majority of
patients who recognise the nsLTPs only recognise the allergen when DTT is omitted, preserving
the disulfide bonds and keeping the protein close to the natural conformation. Patterns observed
in the ELISA (Figure 14) are also observed in the Western blot, with highly sensitive patients like
patients 4, 13, and 14 also giving a strong signal. Interestingly, patient 13 appears to recognise
Ara h 9, Par j 2, and Pru p 3 also when the proteins are linearised, although this is mainly specific
to this patient and not a pattern correlated to one specific nsLTP. For signals at the lower end in the
ELISA, this correspondence does not extend to the Western blot. Specifically, a low signal in the
ELISA for a particular nsLTP does not necessarily yield a signal in the Western blot for the same
nsLTP due to the sensitivity limitations of the assay.
Figure 15: Western blot of patient sIgE binding to nsLTP panel. The Western blots were
developed with serum from patients 1 to 15 to evaluate the binding of patient IgE to Ara h 9, Cor
a 8, Pru p 3, and Par j 2. All nsLTP samples were run under reducing and non-reducing conditions
(with and without DTT respectively) and anti-human IgE was used for detection.
29
==PAGE:36==
3.5
Evaluation of shared epitopes between the nsLTPs
To evaluate if the patients are recognising any potential shared epitopes between the nsLTPs, a
DELFIA blocking experiment was set up. In this assay, wells were coated with anti-human IgE,
and patient serum was preincubated with allergens before adding to the wells. The anti-human IgE
would bind the human serum IgE, and a second biotinylated allergen was added to the sandwich.
If the allergen preincubated with serum shared any epitopes with the biotinylated allergen, a signal
increase could be observed. Results from this assay can be observed in Table 3. Patients 3, 4, 13,
and 14 were included in this assay based on the results of the ELISA, where these patients yielded
the highest signals. The patient sIgEs were evaluated for Pru p 3 versus Par j 2, Pru p 3 versus
Ara h 9, and Par j 2 versus Ara h 9. The complexity of this assay was evident in the results, mak-
ing it challenging to establish an assay suitable for all patients. Consequently, only partial results
were obtained for half of the patients, with complete data available only for patients 4 and 14. The
DELFIA results reveal that patient 4 recognises 40% shared epitopes between Pru p 3 and Par j 2
and patient 14 recognises 43%. This is despite Pru p 3 and Par j 2 being the most distantly related
in the sequence identity matrix (Figure 6) with only 25% shared sequence. Comparing Pru p 3
and Ara h 9, patients 3 and 4 recognise 21% shared epitopes whereas patient 13 recognises 43%
and patient 14 recognises as much as 51%. Comparing Par j 2 and Ara h 9 in the sequence identity
matrix (Figure 6) these nsLTPs share 29% of sequence identity, however, patient 14 is recognising
up to 84% shared epitopes between the two. Patient 13 is recognising 39% shared epitopes and
patient 4 is recognising 61%. According to these results, patient 14 is therefore recognising twice
as high a percentage of shared epitopes between Par j 2 and Ara h 9 compared to patient 13.
Table 3: Percentage shared epitopes recognised by patient sIgEs.
Percentage shared epitopes between:
Patient number:
Pru p 3 and Par j 2
Pru p 3 and Ara h 9
Par j 2 and Ara h 9
3
-
21%
-
4
40%
21%
61%
13
-
43%
39%
14
43%
51%
84%
A root mean square deviation (RMSD) calculation was performed (Figure 16) to evaluate the
surface similarity between the nsLTPs, using Pru p 3 as the reference conformation. This was per-
formed to evaluate if any trends in recognition by sIgE could be explained by the surface similarity
of the proteins. Lower RMSD values indicate greater structural similarity, revealing that Ara h 9
shares the highest structural similarity with Pru p 3 and Par j 2 shares the lowest (Figure 16).
30
==PAGE:37==
Figure 16: RMSD values for nsLTPs. The RMSD value is calculated for Par j 2, Art v 3, Cor
a 8, and Ara h 9 using Pru p 3 as reference protein. Values are determined using crystal structure
for Pru p 3, Cor a 8, and Art v 3 obtained from RCSB.org (Pru p 3: 2B5S, Cor a 8: 4XUW, Art v
3: 6FRR). Structures for Ara h 9 and Par j 2 are obtained using AlphaFold DB and the sequences
are obtained from Uniprot (Ara h 9: B6CG41, Par j 2: P55958). RMSD is calculated in Angstrom
(Å).
3.6
Evaluation of antibody response following immunisation of mice with
mRNA- or protein vaccine
An in vivo experiment was carried out prior to this thesis on naive female BALB/cAnNRj mice
with the cnsLTP1 allergen using two vaccine formulations; mRNA-lipid nanoparticle and protein.
High, medium or low doses of the vaccine were tested. A control group of mice injected with PBS
in the same vaccine schedule was included. The injections were administered on day 0, day 21 and
day 42 and blood was collected before each injection as well as on day 63.
An indirect ELISA was conducted with specific serum samples to evaluate the generation of
allergen-specific antibodies post-vaccination. To facilitate analysis and preserve serum for future
studies, triplicates of mice immunised with the highest dosage of cnsLTP1 were combined. The
first ELISA was performed to confirm that antibodies against the immunising agent were being
produced in the mice. For the first ELISA, 96-well half-area high binding plates were coated with
50 µL/well of 500 ng/mL cnsLTP1 and serum samples from days 0, 21, (diluted 1:1000) 42 and 63
(diluted 1:5000) were tested for antibodies of isotype IgG1 and IgG2a using (1:500) anti-mouse
specific antibodies, from the Ig Isotyping Mouse Uncoated ELISA Kit (Invitrogen,#88-50630-
88) and (1:2000) goat anti-Rat HRP IgG (Invitrogen, #A10549) for detection (Figure 17). These
findings indicate a progressive rise in the levels of both isotypes of antibodies over the course
of vaccination, with the highest signal for antibodies directed against cnsLTP1 in the mice that
received the mRNA formulation.
31
==PAGE:38==
Figure 17: ELISA antibody responses following vaccination with three doses cnsLTP1 for-
mulation. Indirect ELISA of combined serum samples from high-dose mice immunised with
mRNA vaccine and protein vaccine formulation. Mice immunised with PBS were included as a
control and the plate was coated with cnsLTP1. Fluorescence was measured in relative light units
(RLU).
For the second ELISA, 96-well half-area high binding plates were coated with 500 ng/mL of either
Par j 2, Cor a 8, Ara h 9, Pru p 3 or cnsLTP1 and the serum samples obtained on day 63, 21 days after
administering the final (3rd) vaccine dose, were pooled. Testing for allergen-specific isotype IgG1
and IgG2a was performed again, as described above, on the serum samples from mice vaccinated
with the mRNA- and protein formulation, as well as on the control group of mice immunised with
PBS (Figure 18). The IgG1 and IgG2 ratio was calculated for cnsLTP1, Par j 2, Cor a 8, Ara h 9
and Pru p 3, and visualised in a box plot (Figure 19).
32
==PAGE:39==
Figure 18: ELISA antibody responses to nsLTP panel following the last dose of vaccination
with cnsLTP1 formulation. Indirect ELISA of combined serum samples from day 63 for mice
immunised with mRNA vaccine and protein vaccine. PBS served as a negative control. Fluores-
cence was measured in relative light units (RLU).
Figure 19: IgG1/IgG2a ratios after vaccination. Serum samples from day 63 for mice immu-
nised with mRNA and protein formulation were evaluated for the difference in IgG1 and IgG2a
antibody responses. PBS served as a negative control.
The results depicted in Figure 18 demonstrate that the mRNA vaccine has proven effective in
stimulating the production of IgG2a antibodies, which bind to all nsLTPs. Furthermore, the mRNA
vaccine demonstrated proficiency in generating IgG1 antibodies against all nsLTPs except Par j 2.
In contrast, the protein vaccine generated lower levels of IgG2a compared to the mRNA vaccine.
Conversely, the protein vaccine resulted in higher levels of IgG1 against Cor a 8, Ara h 9, and
Pru p 3 compared with the mRNA vaccine. The IgG1/IgG2a ratio was evaluated for both vaccine
formulations (Figure 19). The median of the results for the protein formulation was calculated
to be just below 1, indicating an IgG1/IgG2a ratio showing no preference for IgG2a over IgG1.
Conversely, the mRNA formulation had a median significantly lower at around 0.2, indicating a
more apparent difference in IgG2a levels against IgG1, with a clearer preference for IgG2a over
33
==PAGE:40==
IgG1. Strikingly, both vaccines produced antibodies that exhibited enhanced recognition of certain
nsLTPs compared to the consensus allergen used as the immunising agent.
To further evaluate the interaction between antibodies from the serum samples of the mice and
nsLTPs, and to confirm the identity of the proteins, a Western blot analysis was conducted (Figure
20). The SDS-PAGE was loaded with samples with 2 µg/µL of nsLTP with and without DTT to
confirm even coating is obtained in the ELISA. A 1:5000 dilution of mouse serum was used, and
the membrane was incubated first with 1:250 IgG2a isotype antibody (Southern Biotech, #5300-
01) and at last with 1:1000 Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG HRP (Cayman chemical, #10004301).
The results obtained from the SDS-PAGE confirmed the uniform coating, indicated by consistent
intensity across samples treated with DTT. However, a loading error is apparent in the SDS-PAGE
analysis of Ara h 9 without DTT.
In the Western blot analysis, mouse serum from mice immunised with the mRNA formulation was
used for the detection of allergens. It is evident that mouse antibodies are unable to recognise the
linear allergen; recognition is restricted to the natural conformation with unbroken disulfide bonds
as only samples without DTT are recognised. Furthermore, it is observed that Ara h 9 appears to
assume a multimeric structure in its native conformation as the molecular weight of the protein is
conveyed much higher in the Western blot compared to the SDS-PAGE.
Figure 20: Detection of nsLTPs using mouse serum. Western blot (left) and SDS-PAGE with
Coomassie staining of proteins (right). The original image of the Western blot has been inverted
to help visualisation. All samples are run both with and without DTT. Anti IgG2a and goat anti-
rabbit IgG HRP were used for detection.
34
==PAGE:41==
4
Discussion
Allergies present a significant challenge in healthcare worldwide, highlighting the urgent need for
more effective treatment. Accurate and effective diagnostic methods are crucial for enabling more
effective treatment. The unique immune responses of individual patients are often overlooked with
current diagnostic methods as they are prone to generalisation and oversimplification. This limits
the ability to customise treatments or even identify the correct treatment, resulting in suboptimal
therapeutic efficacy, with some patients not experiencing any treatment effects [58]. Combined
with the high cost associated with personalised treatment, fewer people can access these therapies
and benefit from this tailored approach.
It is known that patients with cross-allergies have different sensitisation profiles, as they exhibit
unique immune responses that differ from those of patients with single allergen sensitivities. How-
ever, current methods have limited tools to investigate diverse sensitisation profiles; therefore, it
remains unclear how the outcome of immunotherapy is impacted. This study aimed to investigate
the potential of recombinant allergens to enhance the characterisation of allergies and to facilitate
the development of mRNA vaccines. Specifically, the research sought to utilise recombinant al-
lergens to profile cross-reactivity and develop broad-neutralisation strategies, thereby bridging the
gap between allergy characterisation and mRNA vaccine development using a consensus allergen.
In the experiments conducted in this thesis, we found that even though the tertiary structure of
nsLTPs is highly conserved, commercial polyclonal IgG obtained from one manufacturer did not
recognise all nsLTPs (Figure 10). The polyclonal anti-Mal d 3 IgG in the Dot blot was utilised for
the detection of nsLTPs, enabling the evaluation of nsLTP expression levels based on the hypothesis
that cross-reactivity would allow for the recognition of nsLTPs other than Mal d 3. Furthermore,
this allowed for the assessment of commercial polyclonal IgGs’ performance and testing of this
hypothesis, as the immunising agent used for these commercial IgGs shares varying sequence
identity with the nsLTPs Pru p 3, Par j 2, Ara h 9, Cor a 8, and cnsLTP1. Interestingly, the Dot blot
indicated some recognition of Cor a 8, Pru p 3, but not Ara h 9, despite Ara h 9 having a higher
sequence identity to Mal d 3 than to Cor a 8. From the Western blot analysis (Figure 18) with mouse
serum, it was observed that Ara h 9 assumes a multimeric structure in its natural conformation,
which commercial IgG does not seem to recognise, despite the sequence similarity.
A deeper investigation of these commercial polyclonal IgGs revealed that recognition of nsLTPs
was dependent on maintaining the disulfide bonds of the nsLTPs and, hence, the partial tertiary
structure of the proteins, with commercial polyclonal anti-Mal d 3 IgG only recognising linear
epitopes (Figure 11). This is particularly interesting, as the opposite is observed with patient serum
samples. Here, sIgE can recognise nsLTPs in non-reducing conditions, where the disulfide bonds
of the proteins remain intact (Figure 15). The sIgEs were generally unable to recognise nsLTPs
under reducing conditions. This indicates that the conformational integrity of nsLTPs is crucial
for antibody recognition, as important epitopes necessary for binding appear to be lost when the
proteins are denatured.
35
==PAGE:42==
As it was established that patient’s sIgE recognise structural epitopes, an evaluation of the struc-
tural similarities between nsLTPs was carried out (Figure 16) to determine whether any trends in
recognition could be attributed to structural features. This analysis revealed that Pru p 3 shares the
highest structural similarity with Ara h 9. Comparing these findings with the sensitisation profiles
of the patient cohort (Figure 13), there appears to be an indication for correlation between Pru p
3 and Ara h 9, as all patients sensitive to Pru p 3 also demonstrated sensitivity to Ara h 9. This
correlation suggests that structural similarities between Pru p 3 and Ara h 9 may play a significant
role in the cross-reactivity observed in patients, suggesting that patients who are sensitive to Pru
p 3 are likely to show cross-reactivity to Ara h 9 as well and vice-versa.
In the context of epitopes, this thesis attempted to evaluate whether patient IgEs were able to recog-
nise shared epitopes between the nsLTPs of the whole panel (Figure 3). This was evaluated using
a DELFIA assay, in which patient serum was preincubated with a non-biotinylated allergen, fol-
lowed by the addition of a biotinylated allergen. It was hypothesised that a shift in the readout signal
would occur if the patient recognised shared epitopes between non-biotinylated and biotinylated
allergens. The biotinylated allergen would replace the non-biotinylated allergen bound to sIgE,
thereby increasing the readout signal. However, several challenges were encountered during the
development of the assay. Achieving IgE saturation with preincubated non-biotinylated allergens
was difficult due to the varying amounts of allergen-specific sIgE among patients and allergens.
The signal could moreover be misleading, as the amount of sIgE specific to the preincubated aller-
gen was unknown. Additionally, other sIgE specific to the biotinylated allergen could still be in the
sample, available for binding to the biotinylated allergen, thereby complicating the interpretation
of the assay.
The results of the assay provide preliminary evidence that patient profiles within nsLTP allergies
can vary significantly from one another. Patient 14 recognised twice as high a percentage of shared
epitopes between Par j 2 and Ara h 9 as patient 13. If patient 13 was treated according to the profile
of patient 14, the efficacy of the treatment might be significantly lower. This is also not explained
by the sequence similarity, since Ara h 9 and Par j 2, which share only 29% sequence similarity
(Figure 6), are recognised by one patient with up to 84% shared epitopes (Table 3). The results
of this assay further describe the challenges in characterising and generalising allergic patients as
they exhibit significant variability in their profiles. As current immunotherapies are based on only
one allergen, predominantly the main sensitiser, which in LTP syndrome is often Pru p 3 from
peach, this variability explains why patients do not respond as expected to the treatment [59][60];
the therapy was never tailored to their specific allergic profiles.
This thesis moreover investigated the use of a designed consensus allergen in an mRNA vaccine
formulation to improve the efficacy of allergen-specific immunotherapy aimed at individuals sen-
sitised to multiple related allergens. A protein formulation was included for comparison, as this
resembles traditional AIT approaches.
The desired outcome of immunisation is the establishment of a Th1 response. This was hypothe-
36
==PAGE:43==
sised to be achieved via a targeting sequence for the lysosome to enable loading onto MHC class
II molecules and induction of CD4+ T cells [27]. This would also circumvent the exposure of
the whole allergen outside the cell, mitigating the possibility of preexisting allergen-specific IgE
initiating an IgE-mediated response, thereby limiting the side effects of the vaccine.
In humans, the IgE/IgG4 ratio is commonly used to assess the efficacy of AIT [61], as IgE is
associated with a Th2-biased immune response, and IgG4 is associated with a Th1-biased immune
response. This in vivo study was, previous to this thesis, conducted in mice. In mice, a Th1-
biased immune response has been linked to elevated synthesis of IgG2a, and a Th2-biased immune
response has been linked to elevated levels of IgG1 and IgE [62]. Therefore, the desired outcome of
the in vivo experiment is a low IgG1/IgG2a ratio to obtain a Th1-biased response. The experiments
in this thesis demonstrate that the mRNA vaccine formulation appears to be more biased towards
the IgG2a isotype (Figures 17, 18, and 19), whereas the same can not be concluded for the protein
formulation. In addition, the mRNA formulation induces IgG2a antibodies specific for cnsLTP1
that also cross-react with all the other allergens in the panel (Figure 18). This suggests that the
mRNA vaccine may induce a Th1-biased immune response, highlighting its potential in future
therapies. Previous work has revealed a strong binding of antibodies to the consensus allergen
[63] in an IgE inhibition assay. The results of this thesis show binding of IgG2a to Par j 2 at almost
the same level as the consensus allergen and binding at even higher levels to Cor a 8, Ara h 9
and Pru p 3 (Figure 18). This indicates that strong broad protection is achieved, regardless of low
sequence similarity between the allergens and cnsLTP1. Results, however, are driven by only one
mouse and would therefore need repeating in a larger group to evaluate further. The IgG1/IgG2a
ratio is additionally considered an indirect measurement of the immune response type as it does not
directly measure the specific immune cells and involved cytokines. A more direct measurement
could have been obtained by isolating cells of the spleen to evaluate the population of Th1 and Th2
cells by surface markers as well as measure the levels of different cytokines expressed by the cells.
Our findings in the in vivo experiments additionally reaffirm that conformal integrity and protein
folding are critical in antibody recognition, as mRNA vaccine-derived antibodies only recognised
the nsLTPs under non-reducing conditions (Figure 20), mirroring the pattern observed in allergic
patients.
The findings of this thesis strongly suggest that the protein folding of nsLTPs influences epitope
formation and recognition by patient serum IgEs, as well as vaccine-induced antibodies. This
observation could have implications for general allergen-specific immunotherapy, vaccine design,
cross-reactivity profiling, predicting patient responses and shaping the design of diagnostics tools.
In the context of AIT, inducing a Th1 response with antibodies capable of binding to fully assem-
bled nsLTPs is essential, as this is often how the proteins are presented to the cells of the immune
system. Notably, IgEs from allergic patients bind to structural epitopes according to the findings of
this thesis. If IgG4s induced by AIT are unable to do this, they will likely be incapable of blocking
IgE binding to epitopes, which could explain the low efficacy of therapy. Furthermore, these find-
ings are relevant for improving diagnostic tools by considering the conformational state of nsLTPs.
37
==PAGE:44==
This potentially allows for a more accurate assessment of allergen-specific IgE levels in patients,
which thereby enables a more correct profiling of the patient and better guidance towards effective
therapy.
Comparing with existing literature, previous studies have focused on linear epitopes [64] [65].
Our findings are consistent with Gonzalez-Klein et al. (2021), who showed that a panel of five
selected allergenic nsLTPs (Par j 2, Art v 3, Ole e 7 and Pru p 3) demonstrates a higher structural
similarity than sequence similarity [66]. This indicates conservation across allergens associated
with structural epitopes and not linear epitopes. Research into several respiratory allergens has
proven that allergic patient’s IgEs recognise conformational epitopes on folded allergens, contrary
to allergen-derived peptides without folds that show a lack of IgE reactivity [67] [68] [69]. This
was additionally proved with the major birch allergen Bet v 1 [70] [71], which, like nsLTPs, is a
type of allergen associated with cross-allergic reactions [72].
The predominance of conformational IgE epitopes in allergens complicates the process of epitope
mapping and thereby also the cross-reactivity profiling in patients. Current diagnostic methods
rely on a combination of SPT, clinical history, oral food challenge and specific IgE testing [53].
Conversely, with cross-reactive allergies like pollen-food-associated syndrome patients, diagnos-
ing becomes complicated as phenotypes and heterogeneity can vary greatly. The results of this
thesis suggest that practitioners should consider a diagnostic approach focusing more on the true
allergenic molecules, as opposed to extracts that also contain irrelevant proteins. A broad panel of
nsLTPs should be included to identify the correct allergens that the patient might react to. This al-
lows for better risk management, as patients can better identify foods and environments that might
cause an allergic reaction, eventually improving quality of life and safety. This also allows for the
customisation of AIT.
The consensus allergen vaccine tested in this thesis has the potential to improve therapy, as it fo-
cuses only on clinically relevant proteins for nsLTP patients. Such an approach focuses on inducing
broadly binding antibodies, thereby possibly combining multiple treatments in one.
A limitation of this study is the patient cohort used for IgE testing. The size of the patient cohort
used notably limited the ability to find a pattern between the sensitised patients. A significantly
larger patient cohort is therefore needed to attempt to group patient profiles. The IgE levels are
evaluated from serum samples, nevertheless, IgE is predominantly found in tissues [73], with low
serum concentrations compared to other antibody isotypes [64]. In addition, an Immunocap (Ther-
moFisher) assay was used at the hospital for diagnosing the patients. Here the reported IgE values
depend on the last time the patient had contact with the allergen; for example, a high value could
be due to the patient being recently exposed to the allergen, rather than indicating severe allergy.
IgE levels reported by Immunocap do consequently not necessarily correlate with strong clinical
symptomatology. This is therefore a snapshot of time and, thus, not fully describing the dynamics
of the allergic disease of each patient. An example of this is patient 12. This patient is diagnosed
with Pru p 3 allergy by Immunocap assay but is in all tests performed in this thesis yielding very
38
==PAGE:45==
low values. In comparison, the patient is described as having a systemic reaction to peach, indicat-
ing that the patient could be seriously allergic. Conversely, some results are very well correlating
with the patient data from the hospital; an example is patient 4 showing to be very allergic to all
nsTLP in the panel. According to the hospital tests, the patient experiences oral allergic syndrome
when in contact with peaches and anaphylaxis when in contact with what is described as tree nuts.
Some patients, like patients 1, 7, 11, 12 and 15, did not seem to recognise the nsLTPs in this panel
very well from the ELISA. They might recognise other nsLTPs that have not been included in the
allergen panel of this thesis. Additionally, the allergen panel only included nsLTP1 proteins, how-
ever, nsLTP2 proteins like Ole e 7 moreover play an important role in LTP syndrome patients [74]
and could be interesting to include as well. The major differences between nsLTP1 and nsLTP2
are molecular weight and the size of the hydrophobic cavity, with nsLTP1 usually having a larger
cavity than that of nsLTP2 [75]. In addition, nsLTP2 is more common in pollen than in food.
Another limitation of this study was the mouse model used for testing the consensus allergen vac-
cine. The desired outcome of AIT is the conversion of an established Th2 response towards a Th1,
nevertheless, this mouse model is not an allergic model, and this has therefore yet to be estab-
lished with certainty. Future studies should explore immunisation using an allergic model to help
establish whether the consensus allergen can protect against allergic reactions.
Furthermore, future research could explore epitope mapping, both linear and structural, potentially
allowing for enhanced design strategies for new consensus allergens. Epitope mapping would
additionally advance the field of allergy by enabling better predictions of cross-reactivity between
allergens. Moreover, it would allow superior allergen engineering to design hypoallergenic variants
of allergens and enhance the understanding of the immune responses to help identify what makes
an allergen allergenic.
The findings from this thesis underscore the importance of considering structural integrity in
allergen-specific immunotherapy and diagnostics, providing a solid foundation for future research
and the development of more effective, individualised treatments.
39
==PAGE:46==
5
Conclusion and future perspectives
This thesis aimed to connect mRNA vaccine development and allergy characterisation by inves-
tigating allergens from the nsLTP family. Cross-reactivity profiling of patients was accomplished
with recombinant allergens and the potential for broad-neutralisation strategies using a recombi-
nant consensus allergen was explored.
Structural and functional characterisation of nsLTPs was studied, indicating the presence of im-
portant conformational epitopes which could be responsible for cross-reactivity between allergens.
Functional assays illustrated possible IgE binding patterns in allergic patients, where a significant
cross-reactivity between nsLTPs of different origins across fruits, nuts, legumes, and pollen, was
exhibited. These findings provide preliminary evidence that can contribute to the advancement of
the field as well as highlight the need for personalised approaches in both allergy diagnostics and
treatment.
In vivo experiments tested protein- and mRNA-based vaccines using a consensus allergen, which
showed promising results in inducing allergen-specific antibodies against all nsLTPs included in
this thesis. The mRNA vaccine elicited a promising IgG response, showing a favourable IgG1/IgG2a
ratio, suggesting its potential for establishing protection and broad neutralisation against multiple
nsLTPs. This additionally supports the feasibility of nucleic acid-based vaccines for AIT.
Reflecting on the research, some limitations were encountered during the study such as the size
of the patient cohort and further validation requirements. This ultimately could influence how
widely applicable these findings are. Consequently, future research should significantly expand
the patient cohort, explore the efficacy of the mRNA vaccine further and assess the safety, long-
term effectiveness and overall clinical utility of the mRNA vaccine. In addition, future explorations
should investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying allergen cross-reactivity.
In conclusion, this thesis successfully integrated allergy characterisation and vaccine development,
effectively addressing research gaps in the field, paving the way for innovative solutions in allergy
diagnosis and treatment. The integration of detailed allergen profiling holds great promise for
enhancing the utility and development of advanced vaccine technologies, improving the quality of
life for people with allergic diseases worldwide.
40
==PAGE:47==
6
References
[1]
Ruby Pawankar et al. The WAO White Book on Allergy. World Allergy Organization, 2011.
isbn: 100615461824.
[2]
Nikolaos G. Papadopoulos et al. “Research needs in allergy: an EAACI position paper, in
collaboration with EFA”. In: Clinical and Translational Allergy 2.1 (2012), p. 21. issn:
20457022. doi: 10.1186/2045-7022-2-21.
[3]
A. Linneberg et al. “Burden of allergic respiratory disease: A systematic review”. In: Clin-
ical and Molecular Allergy 14.1 (Sept. 2016), pp. 1–14. issn: 14767961. doi: 10.1186/
s12948-016-0049-9.
[4]
Fahad M. Aldakheel. “Allergic Diseases: A Comprehensive Review on Risk Factors, Im-
munological Mechanisms, Link with COVID-19, Potential Treatments, and Role of Allergen
Bioinformatics”. In: International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health
18.22 (Nov. 2021). issn: 16604601. doi: 10.3390/IJERPH182212105.
[5]
Anca HANCU, Florin MIHALTAN, and Gabriela RADULIAN. “Asthma and Ultra- Pro-
cessed Food”. In: Mædica 14.4 (Dec. 2019), p. 402. issn: 1841-9038. doi: 10 . 26574 /
MAEDICA.2019.14.4.402.
[6]
Alexandra Katidi et al. “Food Allergens in Ultra-Processed Foods According to the NOVA
Classification System: A Greek Branded Food Level Analysis”. In: Nutrients 15.12 (June
2023). issn: 20726643. doi: 10.3390/NU15122767/S1.
[7]
Mary E. Bollinger et al. “The impact of food allergy on the daily activities of children and
their families”. In: Annals of allergy, asthma & immunology : official publication of the
American College of Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology 96.3 (2006), pp. 415–421. issn: 1081-
1206. doi: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60908-8.
[8]
Susan L. Prescott et al. “A global survey of changing patterns of food allergy burden in
children”. In: World Allergy Organization Journal 6.1 (Jan. 2013), p. 21. issn: 19394551.
doi: 10.1186/1939-4551-6-21.
[9]
Ruby Pawankar. “Allergic diseases and asthma: A global public health concern and a call to
action”. In: World Allergy Organization Journal 7.1 (May 2014), pp. 1–3. issn: 19394551.
doi: 10.1186/1939-4551-7-12.
[10]
Mauro Calvani et al. “Food allergy: an updated review on pathogenesis, diagnosis, preven-
tion and management”. In: Acta Bio Medica : Atenei Parmensis 91.Suppl 11 (2020), pp. 1–
17. issn: 25316745. doi: 10.23750/ABM.V91I11-S.10316.
[11]
T. Zuberbier et al. “Economic burden of inadequate management of allergic diseases in
the European Union: A GA2LEN review”. In: Allergy: European Journal of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology 69.10 (2014), pp. 1275–1279. issn: 13989995. doi: 10.1111/ALL.
12470.
[12]
Marco Averbeck et al. “Immunologic Principles of Allergic Disease”. In: JDDG: Journal
der Deutschen Dermatologischen Gesellschaft 5.11 (Oct. 2007), pp. 1015–1027. doi: 10.
1111/j.1610-0387.2007.06538.x.
41
==PAGE:48==
[13]
Mahboobeh Mahdavinia et al. “Racial Differences in Food Allergy Phenotype and Health
Care Utilization among US Children”. In: Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology: In
Practice 5.2 (Apr. 2017), pp. 352–357. issn: 22132198. doi: 10.1016/J.JAIP.2016.10.006.
[14]
Umut C Kucuksezer et al. “Mechanisms of allergen-specific immunotherapy and allergen
tolerance”. In: Allergology International 69.4 (Oct. 2020), pp. 549–560. doi: 10.1016/j.
alit.2020.08.002.
[15]
Robert K. Bush. “Approach to Patients with Symptoms of Food Allergy”. In: The American
Journal of Medicine 121.5 (May 2008), pp. 376–378. issn: 0002-9343. doi: 10.1016/J.
AMJMED.2007.07.036.
[16]
Johannes Ring, Ludger Klimek, and Margitta Worm. “Adrenaline in the Acute Treatment of
Anaphylaxis”. In: Deutsches Ärzteblatt International 115.31-32 (Aug. 2018), p. 528. issn:
18660452. doi: 10.3238/ARZTEBL.2018.0528.
[17]
F. Estelle R. Simon and Keith J. Simons. “H1 Antihistamines: Current Status and Future
Directions”. In: World Allergy Organization Journal 1.9 (Jan. 2008), pp. 145–155. issn:
1939-4551. doi: 10.1186/1939-4551-1-9-145.
[18]
G. F. Parisi et al. “Antihistamines in children and adolescents: A practical update”. In:
Allergologia et Immunopathologia 48.6 (Nov. 2020), pp. 753–762. issn: 0301-0546. doi:
10.1016/J.ALLER.2020.02.005.
[19]
Thurman B. Dannenberg and Samuel M. Feinberg. “The development of tolerance to anti-
histamines. A study of the quantitative inhibiting capacity of antihistamines on the skin and
mucous membrane reaction to histamine and antigens”. In: Journal of Allergy 22.4 (July
1951), pp. 330–339. issn: 00218707. doi: 10.1016/0021-8707(51)90033-0.
[20]
Valerie Hox et al. “Benefits and harm of systemic steroids for short- and long-term use in
rhinitis and rhinosinusitis: an EAACI position paper”. In: Clinical and Translational Allergy
2020 10:1 10.1 (Jan. 2020), pp. 1–27. issn: 2045-7022. doi: 10.1186/S13601-019-0303-6.
[21]
Izabela Tarczon et al. “The 2020 update on anaphylaxis in paediatric population”. In: Ad-
vances in Dermatology and Allergology/Postpy Dermatologii i Alergologii 39.1 (2022),
p. 13. issn: 22990046. doi: 10.5114/ADA.2021.103327.
[22]
Richard Weiss et al. “mRNA vaccination as a safe approach for specific protection from
type I allergy”. In: Expert Review of Vaccines 11.1 (Jan. 2012), pp. 55–67. issn: 14760584.
doi: 10.1586/ERV.11.168.
[23]
Amy M. Scurlock and Stacie M. Jones. “Advances in the approach to the patient with food
allergy”. In: Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 141.6 (June 2018), pp. 2002–
2014. issn: 0091-6749. doi: 10.1016/J.JACI.2017.12.1008.
[24]
Robert A. Wood. “Oral Immunotherapy for Food Allergy”. In: Journal of investigational
allergology & clinical immunology 27.3 (2017), pp. 151–159. issn: 1018-9068. doi: 10.
18176/JIACI.0143.
[25]
Birgit Linhart and Rudolf Valenta. “Vaccines for allergy”. In: Current Opinion in Immunol-
ogy 24.3 (June 2012), p. 354. issn: 09527915. doi: 10.1016/J.COI.2012.03.006.
42
==PAGE:49==
[26]
B. Brunetto et al. “Characterization and comparison of commercially available mite extracts
for in vivo diagnosis”. In: Allergy: European Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
65.2 (Feb. 2010), pp. 184–190. issn: 01054538. doi: 10.1111/J.1398-9995.2009.02150.X.
[27]
Sandra Scheiblhofer, Josef Thalhamer, and Richard Weiss. “DNA and mRNA vaccination
against allergies”. In: Pediatric Allergy and Immunology 29.7 (Nov. 2018), p. 679. issn:
13993038. doi: 10.1111/PAI.12964.
[28]
Tzyy Choou Wu et al. “Engineering an intracellular pathway for major histocompatibility
complex class II presentation of antigens”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 92.25 (Dec. 1995), pp. 11671–11675. issn: 0027-
8424. doi: 10.1073/PNAS.92.25.11671.
[29]
Alexandre Couture et al. “HLA-class II artificial antigen presenting cells in CD4+ T cell-
based immunotherapy”. In: Frontiers in Immunology 10.MAY (2019). issn: 16643224. doi:
10.3389/FIMMU.2019.01081.
[30]
Sirikarn Jitthamstaporn et al. “Nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccines yield robust blocking
antibody responses against major house dust mite allergens”. In: Allergy 78.1 (Jan. 2023),
pp. 315–318. issn: 1398-9995. doi: 10.1111/ALL.15527.
[31]
E. Hattinger et al. “Prophylactic mRNA Vaccination against Allergy Confers Long-Term
Memory Responses and Persistent Protection in Mice”. In: Journal of Immunology Research
2015 (2015). issn: 23147156. doi: 10.1155/2015/797421.
[32]
Sandip D. Kamath et al. “Cross-reactive epitopes and their role in food allergy”. In: Journal
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 151.5 (May 2023), pp. 1178–1190. issn: 0091-6749.
doi: 10.1016/J.JACI.2022.12.827.
[33]
Florin-Dan Popescu. “Cross-reactivity between aeroallergens and food allergens”. In: World
Journal of Methodology 5.2 (June 2015), p. 31. issn: 2222-0682. doi: 10.5662/WJM.V5.
I2.31.
[34]
Enrico Scala et al. “Tree-Pollen-Related Food Allergies: Birch Pollen and More”. In: Cur-
rent Treatment Options in Allergy (Nov. 2023), pp. 1–12. issn: 21963053. doi: 10.1007/
S40521-023-00352-7.
[35]
Erminia Ridolo et al. “Factors and co-factors influencing clinical manifestations in nsLTPs
allergy: between the good and the bad”. In: Frontiers in Allergy 4 (Sept. 2023), p. 1253304.
issn: 26736101. doi: 10.3389/FALGY.2023.1253304.
[36]
Cécile Fleury et al. “Comprehensive classification of the plant non-specific lipid trans-
fer protein superfamily towards its sequence-structure-function analysis”. In: PeerJ 2019.8
(Aug. 2019), e7504. issn: 21678359. doi: 10.7717/PEERJ.7504.
[37]
Margaretha A. Faber et al. “IgE-reactivity profiles to nonspecific lipid transfer proteins in
a northwestern European country”. In: Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 139.2
(Feb. 2017), pp. 679–682. issn: 10976825. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.06.016.
[38]
N. Mothes-Luksch et al. “Pru p 3, a marker allergen for lipid transfer protein sensitization
also in Central Europe”. In: Allergy 72.9 (Sept. 2017), pp. 1415–1418. issn: 1398-9995.
doi: 10.1111/ALL.13151.
43
==PAGE:50==
[39]
Isabel J. Skypala et al. “Lipid Transfer Protein allergy in the United Kingdom: Characteriza-
tion and comparison with a matched Italian cohort”. In: Allergy 74.7 (July 2019), pp. 1340–
1351. issn: 1398-9995. doi: 10.1111/ALL.13747.
[40]
Shan Deng and Jia Yin. “Mugwort Pollen-Related Food Allergy: Lipid Transfer Protein
Sensitization and Correlation With the Severity of Allergic Reactions in a Chinese Popu-
lation”. In: Allergy, Asthma & Immunology Research 11.1 (Jan. 2019), pp. 116–128. issn:
2092-7355. doi: 10.4168/AAIR.2019.11.1.116.
[41]
A. Reuter et al. “A critical assessment of allergen component-based in vitro diagnosis in
cherry allergy across Europe”. In: Clinical & Experimental Allergy 36.6 (June 2006), pp. 815–
823. issn: 1365-2222. doi: 10.1111/J.1365-2222.2006.2492.X.
[42]
Natalia Ukleja-Sokołowska et al. “Recurrent anaphylaxis in patient allergic to eggplant - a
Lipid transfer protein (LTP) syndrome”. In: Asian Pacific journal of allergy and immunology
36.2 (June 2018), pp. 109–112. issn: 0125-877X. doi: 10.12932/AP0846.
[43]
C. Gebhardt et al. “10kDa lipid transfer protein: the main allergenic structure in a German
patient with anaphylaxis to blueberry”. In: Allergy 64.3 (Mar. 2009), pp. 498–499. issn:
1398-9995. doi: 10.1111/J.1398-9995.2008.01923.X.
[44]
Montserrat Fernández-Rivas et al. “Apple allergy across Europe: How allergen sensitization
profiles determine the clinical expression of allergies to plant foods”. In: Journal of Allergy
and Clinical Immunology 118.2 (Aug. 2006), pp. 481–488. issn: 00916749. doi: 10.1016/
j.jaci.2006.05.012.
[45]
Kirsten Skamstrup Hansen et al. “Component-resolved in vitro diagnosis of hazelnut allergy
in Europe”. In: Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 123.5 (May 2009), pp. 1134–
1141. issn: 00916749. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2009.02.005.
[46]
S. Glaumann et al. “Basophil allergen threshold sensitivity, CD-sens, IgE-sensitization and
DBPCFC in peanut-sensitized children”. In: Allergy 67.2 (Feb. 2012), pp. 242–247. issn:
1398-9995. doi: 10.1111/J.1398-9995.2011.02754.X.
[47]
Thuy My Le et al. “Kiwifruit allergy across Europe: clinical manifestation and IgE recog-
nition patterns to kiwifruit allergens”. In: The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology
131.1 (Jan. 2013), pp. 164–171. issn: 1097-6825. doi: 10.1016/J.JACI.2012.09.009.
[48]
Motohiro Ebisawa et al. “Measurement of Ara h 1-, 2-, and 3-specific IgE antibodies is
useful in diagnosis of peanut allergy in Japanese children”. In: Pediatric Allergy and Im-
munology 23.6 (Sept. 2012), pp. 573–581. issn: 1399-3038. doi: 10.1111/J.1399-3038.
2012.01332.X.
[49]
Yang Te Lin et al. “Patterns of sensitization to peanut allergen components in Taiwanese
Preschool children”. In: Journal of microbiology, immunology, and infection 45.2 (Apr.
2012), pp. 90–95. issn: 1995-9133. doi: 10.1016/J.JMII.2011.11.001.
[50]
Narissara Suratannon et al. “Component-resolved diagnostics for the evaluation of peanut
allergy in a low-prevalence area”. In: Pediatric Allergy and Immunology 24.7 (Nov. 2013),
pp. 665–670. issn: 1399-3038. doi: 10.1111/PAI.12125.
44
==PAGE:51==
[51]
G. Gadermaier et al. “Array-based profiling of ragweed and mugwort pollen allergens”.
In: Allergy 63.11 (Nov. 2008), pp. 1543–1549. issn: 1398-9995. doi: 10.1111/ J.1398-
9995.2008.01780.X.
[52]
Christina M. Kronfel et al. “IgE epitopes of Ara h 9, Jug r 3, and Pru p 3 in peanut-allergic
individuals from Spain and the US”. In: Frontiers in allergy 3 (2023). issn: 2673-6101. doi:
10.3389/FALGY.2022.1090114.
[53]
Isabel J. Skypala et al. “The diagnosis and management of allergic reactions in patients
sensitized to non-specific lipid transfer proteins”. In: Allergy 76.8 (Aug. 2021), pp. 2433–
2446. issn: 1398-9995. doi: 10.1111/ALL.14797.
[54]
Emma L. Callery et al. “Component-resolved diagnostics in the clinical and laboratory in-
vestigation of allergy”. In: Annals of Clinical Biochemistry 57.1 (Jan. 2020), pp. 26–35.
issn: 17581001. doi: 10.1177/0004563219877434.
[55]
Mauro Calvani et al. “Oral Food Challenge”. In: Medicina 55.10 (Oct. 2019). issn: 1010660X.
doi: 10.3390/MEDICINA55100651.
[56]
Nunzio D’agostino et al. “Identification of non-specific Lipid Transfer Protein gene family
members in Solanum lycopersicum and insights into the features of Sola l 3 protein”. In:
Scientific Reports 2019 9:1 9.1 (Feb. 2019), pp. 1–16. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10 . 1038 /
s41598-018-38301-z.
[57]
Masako Toda et al. “Protein unfolding strongly modulates the allergenicity and immuno-
genicity of Pru p 3, the major peach allergen”. In: Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunol-
ogy 128.5 (Nov. 2011), pp. 1022–1030. issn: 10976825. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.04.020.
[58]
Nor Rahimah Aini et al. “Efficacy and safety of intralymphatic immunotherapy in allergic
rhinitis: A systematic review and meta-analysis”. In: Clinical and Translational Allergy 11.6
(Aug. 2021), e12055. issn: 2045-7022. doi: 10.1002/CLT2.12055.
[59]
Kirsten Skamstrup Hansen et al. “Food allergy to apple and specific immunotherapy with
birch pollen”. In: Molecular Nutrition & Food Research 48.6 (Nov. 2004), pp. 441–448.
issn: 1613-4133. doi: 10.1002/MNFR.200400037.
[60]
Gandhi F. Pavón-Romero et al. “Allergen Immunotherapy: Current and Future Trends”. In:
Cells 11.2 (Jan. 2022), p. 212. issn: 20734409. doi: 10.3390/cells11020212.
[61]
Georgi Nikolov et al. “Allergen-Specific IgE and IgG4 as Biomarkers for Immunologic
Changes during Subcutaneous Allergen Immunotherapy”. In: Antibodies 10.4 (Dec. 2021).
issn: 20734468. doi: 10.3390/ANTIB10040049.
[62]
Romana Hochreiter et al. “Basic and clinical immunology T H 1-promoting DNA immu-
nization against allergens modulates the ratio of IgG1/IgG2a but does not affect the anaphy-
lactic potential of IgG1 antibodies: No evidence for the synthesis of nonanaphylactic IgG1”.
In: Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology (2003). doi: 10.1067/mai.2003.1652.
[63]
Mark von Bülow Møiniche. New allergy immunotherapy and diagnostics based on designed
allergens. 2023. url: https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/64efda3b62d99f20523b1367.
45
==PAGE:52==
[64]
Scott A. Smith et al. “Human Monoclonal IgE Antibodies—a Major Milestone in Allergy”.
In: Current Allergy and Asthma Reports 23.1 (Jan. 2023), pp. 53–65. issn: 15346315. doi:
10.1007/s11882-022-01055-w.
[65]
L. Sánchez-Ruano et al. “Differences in Linear Epitopes of Ara h 9 Recognition in Peanut
Allergic and Tolerant, Peach Allergic Patients”. In: Frontiers in Allergy 3 (July 2022),
p. 896617. doi: 10.3389/FALGY.2022.896617.
[66]
Zulema Gonzalez-Klein et al. “The key to the allergenicity of lipid transfer protein (LTP)
ligands: A structural characterization”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - Molecular
and Cell Biology of Lipids 1866.7 (July 2021), p. 158928. issn: 1388-1981. doi: 10.1016/
J.BBALIP.2021.158928.
[67]
Mirela Curin et al. “Clustering of conformational IgE epitopes on the major dog allergen
Can f 1”. In: Scientific Reports 2017 7:1 7.1 (Sept. 2017), pp. 1–11. issn: 2045-2322. doi:
10.1038/s41598-017-11672-5.
[68]
Ruth Arnon and M. H. V. Van Regenmortel. “Structural basis of antigenic specificity and
design of new vaccines”. In: The FASEB Journal 6.14 (Nov. 1992), pp. 3265–3274. issn:
1530-6860. doi: 10.1096/FASEBJ.6.14.1385242.
[69]
Rudolf Valenta et al. “From allergen genes to allergy vaccines”. In: Annual Review of Im-
munology 28.Volume 28, 2010 (Apr. 2010), pp. 211–241. issn: 07320582. doi: 10.1146/
annurev-immunol-030409-101218.
[70]
Susanne Vrtala et al. “Conversion of the major birch pollen allergen, Bet v 1, into two
nonanaphylactic T cell epitope-containing fragments: candidates for a novel form of spe-
cific immunotherapy.” In: Journal of Clinical Investigation 99.7 (Apr. 1997), p. 1673. issn:
00219738. doi: 10.1172/JCI119330.
[71]
Georgii Brazhnikov et al. “Natural human Bet v 1-specific IgG antibodies recognize non-
conformational epitopes whereas IgE reacts with conformational epitopes”. In: Allergy 78.12
(Dec. 2023), pp. 3136–3153. issn: 1398-9995. doi: 10.1111/ALL.15865.
[72]
Marjolein Wensing et al. “IgE to Bet v 1 and profilin: Cross-reactivity patterns and clinical
relevance”. In: Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 110.3 (Sept. 2002), pp. 435–
442. issn: 00916749. doi: 10.1067/mai.2002.126380.
[73]
Robert W. Hostoffer and Nancy I. Joseph. “Immunoglobulin E”. In: StatPearls (Aug. 2023).
[74]
Carmen Oeo-Santos et al. “New insights into the sensitization to nonspecific lipid transfer
proteins from pollen and food: New role of allergen Ole e 7”. In: Allergy 75.4 (Apr. 2020),
pp. 798–807. issn: 1398-9995. doi: 10.1111/ALL.14086.
[75]
Nai Jyuan Wang et al. “Construction and analysis of a plant non-specific lipid transfer pro-
tein database (nsLTPDB)”. In: BMC Genomics 13.Suppl 1 (2012), S9. issn: 17516404. doi:
10.1186/1471-2164-13-S1-S9.
[76]
Zappo Colour Scheme. url: https://www.jalview.org/help/html/colourSchemes/zappo.
html.
46
==PAGE:53==
7
Appendix
7.1
Plasmid maps
(a) Ara h 9
(b) Art v 3
(c) cnsLTP1
(d) Cor a 8
(e) Par j 2
(f) Pru p 3
Figure 21: Plasmid maps. Plasmid maps were generated using SnapGene.
7.2
Multiple sequence alignment
Figure 22: Multiple sequence alignment of nsLTPs included in allergen panel. Clustal Omega
Multiple Sequence Alignment was carried out at visualised using Jalview. A Zappo color scheme
[76] was used to mark the physicochemical properties of the residues. Pink: aliphatic/hydrophobic,
orange: aromatic, blue: positive, red: negative, green: hydrophilic, magenta: conformationally
special, yellow: cysteine. Each sequence is referred to by its accession ID and allergen name as
listed on UniProt.
47
==PAGE:54==
7.3
Quantification of expression results
Quantification of the protein expression results was attempted using the software Image J. The
software quantifies the band from the SDS-PAGE through analysis of the pixels. From these results,
an estimation of the required expression time can be made.
Figure 23: Quantification of expression for Par j 2.
Figure 24: Quantification of expression for Ara h 9.
48
==PAGE:55==
Figure 25: Quantification of expression for Cor a 8.
Figure 26: Quantification of expression for Pru p 3.
Figure 27: Quantification of expression for cnsLTP1 ∆SP.
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure 28: Quantification of expression for cnsLTP1.
Figure 29: Quantification of expression for Art v 3.
7.4
Patient Data
50
==PAGE:57==
Table 4: Patient cohort data. NS= not specified, N= no, Y= yes, F= female, M= male, OAS= oral allergic syndrome.
Patient
no.
Age
Gender
NsLTP
specific
sIgE
Symptoms with
peach/rosacea
Symptoms with
other fruits
Symptoms
with nuts
Symptoms
with vegetables
Rhinitis
Asthma
Pollen
sensitization
1
30
F
Pru p 3
Y (OAS and
pharyngeal
foreign body
sensitisation)
Y
Y (OAS)
Y (OAS)
Y
Y
Y
2
NS
NS
Cor a 8
NS
NS
Y
NS
NS
NS
NS
3
23
M
Pru p 3
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
4
27
M
Pru p 3,
Ara h 9
Y (OAS)
N
Y (anaphylaxis)
N
N
N
NS
5
37
F
Pru p 3,
Cor a 8
Y (systemic to
peach)
N
Y (systemic)
Y
Y
N
Y
6
24
F
Pru p 3
Y (systemic to
peach)
Y (systemic to
apple)
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
7
24
F
Pru p 3
N
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Y
8
71
F
Pru p 3,
Cor a 8
NS
Y (OAS with
apple)
Y (systemic)
NS
N
N
NS
9
48
M
Pru p 3,
Cor a 8
Y (systemic to
peach)
Y (systemic to
apple)
Y (systemic)
N
N
N
N
10
5
F
Pru p 3
Y (OAS)
Y (OAS with
apple)
N
N
N
N
N
11
45
F
Pru p 3
Y (OAS)
N
N
N
Y
N
Y
12
53
F
Pru p 3
Y (systemic to
peach)
N
N
N
N
N
N
13
11
F
Pru p 3,
Cor a 8,
Ara h 9
N
N
Y (systemic)
N
Y
Y
Y
14
32
M
Pru p 3,
Cor a 8,
Ara h 9
N
N
Y (systemic)
N
Y
Y
Y
15
11
F
Pru p 3,
Cor a 8,
Ara h 9
Y (systemic to
peach)
N
Y
N
Y
N
Y
51
