==PAGE:1==
Reference-based compression
techniques for large string
databases
Master’s Thesis Presented for the Degree of Master of Sciences in
Computer Science and Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Jacob Hellum - s194021
Supervised by:
Inge Li Gørtz
Philip Bille
12/6/2024
==PAGE:2==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
Abstract
The following report deals with reference-based compression techniques for large
string databases. On the basis of existing work on hierarchical reference com-
pression [1] [2], new approaches to the problem will be explored. The goal is
to find a better balance in compression time and compression quality, striv-
ing to improve either. The work is mainly experimental where ideas for new
techniques will be explained, discussed, and implemented, and hereafter tested,
compared, and discussed. All testing has been performed on the E. coli dataset,
and subsets hereof, containing 219 files each containing a DNA sequence.
The report contains four new modifications to the HRLZ algorithm, pre-
compression, approximated Jaccard distance, and fingerprint distances each
showing varying results.
The best result is seen when using fingerprint dis-
tances, where a speedup of up to 8.3 is seen while generating only 6% more
phrases. These findings can help develop techniques for genome database com-
pression further, and the techniques used have the potential to be implemented
as additions to existing compression algorithms.
==PAGE:3==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
Contents
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Scope of this report
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Literature review
4
2.1
Lempel Ziv based compressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Algorithmic techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Compression Algorithms
9
3.1
Steps of the algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Pre-compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Jacc/Mash distance measure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.4
Fingerprint Distances
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.5
Iterative Bucket Hierachy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Experimental evaluation
17
4.1
Baseline Algorithms: Optimal HRLZ & APRX HRLZ
. . . . . .
18
4.1.1
Tuning k for fingerprints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.2
Baseline algorithms: Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Pre-compression Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.1
Pre-compression: Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2.2
Pre-compression: Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3
Jacc/Mash distance Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.3.1
Jacc/Mash distance: Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.3.2
Jacc/Mash distance: Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.4
Fingerprint Distances Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.4.1
Fingerprint Distances: Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4.2
Fingerprint Distances: Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.5
Iterative Bucket Hierarchy Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5.1
Iterative Bucket Hierarchy: Results . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.5.2
Iterative Bucket Hierarchy: Discussion . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Discussion
40
6
Conclusion
42
References
42
A Supporting tables
44
A.1 Section 4.1. Baseline Algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
A.2 Section 4.2. Pre-compression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.3 Section 4.3 Jacc/Mash distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
A.4 Section 4.4. Fingerprint distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
A.5 Section 4.5. Iterative Bucket Hierarchy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
==PAGE:4==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
B Problem definiton
52
C Timetable
53
List of Figures
1
Average over 5 files of both fraction of possible k-mers occuring
and fraction of the occuring k-mers being unique . . . . . . . . .
19
2
Time in seconds taken to compute the the sparse graph and the
edge weights (left) and number of phrases used to compress the
sequences using different size k-mers on datasets of different sizes
20
3
Time in seconds it takes to connect the graph and compute the
edge weights on the full dataset of 219 files using the approximate
HRLZ at differnt k-values and the optimal HRLZ . . . . . . . . .
21
4
Final compression time (left) and decompression time (right) of
the two baseline algortihm. Blue is the sparse graph at k = 16
and red is the fully connected graph. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Time taken to compress all files wrt a single reference files and
subsequently computing the corresponding suffix arrays
. . . . .
22
6
Amount of characters in a file before and after being RLZ com-
pressed with a reference file from the dataset. . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7
Time taken to construct the cost graph using finger prints of
size 4 and k=16.
Blue being the baseline approximate HRLZ
algorithm run on the original dataset and red being run on the
RLZ compressed files.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
8
Edge weight times of computing the RLZ distances in the sparse
graph, basing the distance on either the original or compressed
files. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
9
Total number of phrases generated (left) and time to compress
to outputfile (right).
Blue is the baseline Approximate HRLZ
algorithm applied to the original files. Red is the same algorithm
applied to the compressed files. Yellow is the optimal algorithm
on the fully connected graph with the original files as input. . . .
25
10
Number of phrses generated based on different algorithms. Jacc
and Mash refers to using the approximate jaccrd distance or Mash
distance as distance measure for weights. Sparse and full refers
to the type of cost graph the algorithm is run on. . . . . . . . . .
26
11
Number of phrases generated by 4 different algorithms. Random
star has a single sequence as reference to all other sequences and
Random weight full is the fully connected cost graph with random
edge weights between 1 and 1000. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
12
The distance between one file to all other files using either the nor-
malized approximated Jaccard distance or the normalized Mash
distance. Notice how, when the two distances are normalized,
they become close to identical.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:5==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
13
Number of phrases generated on different datasets with different
fingerprint sizes in the distance measure. The left graph shows al-
gorithms run on the sparse graph and the right shows algorithms
run on the full cost graph. The Jaccard distance and baseline
algorithms are included as well. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
14
How long it takes in seconds to compute the required fingerprints,
at different fingerprint and dataset sizes. Longer fingerprints are
not included in the larger dataset due to immense time usage
surpassing the optimal algorithm. The blue bars represents the
time to compute all edge weights in a fully connected graph using
the RLZ-distances, included for comparison. . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
15
Phrases generated on different size datasets when using different
size fingerprints when computing fingerprint distance. Figure to
the left only the x min value is varied and to the right only q is
varied. Both baseline algorithms are included as comparisons. . .
31
16
The two figures show the time it takes to construct the hierarchy
when using a sparse graph and different size fingerprints for the
fingerprint distances. Left figure only varies x min and right only
varies q. The vertical axis has been cut at s=2000 to focus on
the faster times.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
17
Time taken to compute distance measures (left) and phrases gen-
erated (right) on the fully connected cost graph on different sub-
sets of the dataset with edge weights computed from fingerprint
distances at different fingerprint lengths. Left vertical axis has
been cut at s=2000, to better show the faster algorithms. Both
baseline algorithms are included for comparison purposes. . . . .
33
18
Time it takes to compress different sized subsets to the outputfile.
Blue is the optimal HRLZ and red is the fully connected graph
using fingerprint distances.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
19
Figure shows the result of the full dataset using different combi-
nations of q and x min when computing the fingerprint distances
on the fully connected graph. The Left shows the time perfor-
mance and the right the compression performance. . . . . . . . .
34
20
Number of phrases generated (left) and time taken to construct
the hierarchy tree (right) on the full dataset, using the top-down
algorithm at different x min and threshold values.
. . . . . . . .
35
21
The graph shows the number of unique fingerprints that’s ex-
pected to be found in the full dataset when each sequence has
one fingerprint, as function of the length of the fingerprint which
is determined by x min, the number of minimum values saved
from the hash function.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
==PAGE:6==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
22
Time in seconds to generate the bucket tree by iteratively split-
ting large buckets into smaller child buckets (left) and time it
takes to connect the sequences in the tree starting at the bottom
leading to the hierarchy used in the final compression (right).
The test has been run on the full dataset at various fingerprint
size (x min) and bucket size threshold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
23
Number of phrases generated from the full dataset when using
the bottom-up hierarchy algorithm at various parameter values,
to compute the tree for the final compression. . . . . . . . . . . .
37
24
Distance to the adjacent fingerprints of length 100 when stored
in an array.
Blue denotes the unsorted fingerprints, stored in
the same order as the sequence files.
Red denotes the sorted
fingerprints. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
25
Phrases generated (left) and time it takes (right) when generating
the hierarchy with the bottom-up bucket tree approach where
splitting sequences into buckets is done when the distance to the
previous sequence is above a threshold value.
. . . . . . . . . . .
40
Page 1 of 53
==PAGE:7==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
1
Introduction
DNA sequencing is becoming cheaper and genome banks are rapidly growing.
With such huge quantities of data, it is more important than ever to consider
and improve compression techniques, to efficiently store and work with the data.
Recent work [1] [2] on hierarchical and relative compression schemes has shown
promising results on multiple large datasets.
The efficiency, and hence the measure for improvement, can be divided into
three factors: computation time, compression quality, and space usage during
computation. Computation time can further be divided into compression time
and decompression time. Advanced compression algorithms consist of several
steps, each of which can potentially be improved.
The compression quality refers to the final compressed output of the com-
pression algorithm, where the space usage of the compressed dataset, the com-
pression ratio, is the main concern.
In Lempel-Ziv-based compressions, the
number of phrases needed to express the compressed dataset is used to mea-
sure the size of the compressed output and hence the overall quality of the
compression. Generally speaking, compressions can be either lossy or lossless.
However, for compression used for genome databases (as this report exclusively
deals with) it is crucial that the original sequence can be obtained when de-
compressing, hence only lossless compression techniques are considered in this
report.
Another factor to consider concerning both computation time and compres-
sion quality, is randomness and determinism since randomisation (hashes in
general) can be used in several ways and techniques, to improve the overall
algorithm, at the cost of both time usage and compression quality becoming
nondeterministic. Improving one of the mentioned aspects can have the unde-
sired effect of worsening another aspect. Hence, this report aims to create a
compression scheme with a favourable time and compression ratio trade-off.
In the remainder of this section basics, syntax, and notation will be ex-
plained. Afterwards, an overview of the current cutting-edge compression tech-
niques as well as algorithmic techniques used throughout this report will be
disclosed in the literature review. The following section will review the design
and analysis of new approaches and methods for compressions. In the results,
the algorithms will be tested and bench marked against baseline algorithms.
The results hereof will be discussed in the discussion section and finally, the
report will be rounded off with a conclusion.
1.1
Scope of this report
The scope of this report will be to improve upon existing reference based com-
pression techniques, drawing inspiration from recent advancements in the topic.
New approaches will be discussed and analysed and subsequently be imple-
mented and experimentally evaluated against baseline algorithms.
Page 2 of 53
==PAGE:8==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
1.2
Basics
Terminology and performance measure In the remaining sections of the
report following terminology and problem instances will be used.
The com-
pressions will be performed on sets of sequences, where each sequence in a
set is a unique individual DNA sequence from the same species.
Hence, let
S = {S1, S2, ..., Sm} be the set of m sequences of total length Pm
i=1 |Si| = n.
Furthermore, let σ be the alphabet of the set. From each sequence a k-mer set
can be constructed. The k-mer set KSi consists of all unique subsequences in
the sequence Si.
Throughout the report different distance measures will be used. RLZ dis-
tance between two sequences will refer to the number of phrases generated when
compressing one sequence wrt. to the other. Approximate Jaccard distance
refers to the distance measure given in [3], where the Jaccard distance between
two sequences are approximated using bottom sketches. Furthermore, in later
sections, fingerprint distance will be introduced. When the fingerprint measure
is referred to, it is the distance between the fingerprint(s) of sequences, where
how this distance is calculated, will be explored and defined in later sections.
Performance measures The performance of the various compression tech-
niques explored in this report will be measured in compression time, compres-
sion ratio, and space usage.
Since all approaches are based on Lempel Ziv
compression, the compression ratio will be measured in the total number of
phrases needed to express the entire sequence set. A formal definition of this
will be given in the literature review.
Furthermore, each performance measure will be measured against the base-
line algorithms. For time measures, we are looking at speedup as a measure for
performance, which will be calculated in the following way: Speedup =
Told
Tnew ,
with Told being the time usage of the baseline algorithms and Tnew is the time
usage of the new algorithms explored throughout this report. For the compres-
sion ratio will be measured in how many more or fewer phrases an algorithm
generates, compared to the baseline in percentage.
The experimental evaluations are performed on different-sized subsets of a
full dataset [4], where the full dataset contains 219 files, each containing an E.
coli DNA sequence of average length of 5.170.215 characters. During testing, the
subset sizes will be increased linearly to conclude how the algorithm performs
as a function of input size. The subset sizes chosen are: 50, 100, 150, 200 and
the full dataset of 219 files. When multiple parameters can be tuned, the full
dataset of 219 sequences will be used.
All time testing is performed on a Dell XPS with a Intel Core 1.10GHz 10th
gen i7 processor running ubuntu.
Page 3 of 53
==PAGE:9==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
2
Literature review
2.1
Lempel Ziv based compressions
Many popular compression techniques, including the Hierarchical Relative Lem-
pel Ziv compression introduced later in this section, are based on the simple
Lempel Ziv, compression technique or LZ77 for short[5]. LZ77 is a lossless com-
pression technique that first parses a string or sequence into substrings of itself
and then represents these substrings as prefixes of earlier encountered substrings
plus a suffix.
Lempel Ziv (LZ) The input string is parsed from left to right into phrases,
where a phrase is stored as an encoding representing a substring of the input
string, already seen before. For each index in the input string, the longest sub-
string before the index, is greedily matched with the longest substring starting
at said index. The encoding is the an integer describing the distance to the be-
ginning of longest substring seen before, the length of the substring and the first
character that breaks the matching. Since each phrase takes constant space, the
total space usage of a compressed string is linear in the number of encodings
created.
The LZ algorithm also comes in other variations such as the LZ78, where
instead of storing phrases as previously seen substrings, it is stored as previously
sen phrases. However, the basis of the algorithm is still to express a string as
compact representations of substring encountered in the same string.
Relative Lempel Ziv (RLZ) The relative Lempel Ziv algorithm, as intro-
duced in [6], works similarly to the base LZ77 algorithm in the sense it aims to
express a string as compact encodings of substrings encountered before. Where
the LZ77 algorithm, compresses a string relative to itself, the RLZ uses a single
reference string, R, which all other strings are compressed with respect to. A
string, S, is then represented as a series of substrings found in the reference
string, R, where concatenating these substrings would form the original string,
S. The substrings are chosen greedily, as the longest possible from the current
starting index, starting at the beginning of S and scanning through once. Each
substring can then be represented as 2 numbers, creating a phrase, the starting
index of the substring in R, and the length of the substring. Compressing a
string, S, w.r.t the reference string, R, is done with a suffix tree of R, that gets
traversed to find the longest substring in R, which matches a substring starting
at the current position in S. Creating a suffix tree is linear in the size of the
string and traversing the tree is done linearly in S, the total time is O(|R|+|S|).
When using the RLZ on a large dataset, eg.
the E. coli dataset S =
S1, S2...Sm consisting of m files and a combined length of n, a single file, Si = R,
is used as a reference the remaining files are compressed wrt. The total running
time becomes O(n), since it takes O(|R|) to compute the suffix tree of the ref-
erence string R, and O(|S \ R|) to compress the remaining files wrt. R.
Page 4 of 53
==PAGE:10==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
Hierarchical Relative Lempel Ziv (HRLZ) Many reference based com-
pressions, such as the RLZ and the remaining algorithm in this section, only
uses a single sequence as the reference for all target sequences, where it is not
always possible to pick a sequence that is a good reference for all target se-
quences.
The Hierarchical Relative Lempel Ziv is an extension to the RLZ,
which aims to solve this problem. Instead of having a single reference sequence,
a rooted tree is computed where each node is a sequence and all sequences are
compressed wrt.
to their parent, leaving only the root stored as plain text.
The root can however be further compressed with other reference techniques,
such as the self-referencing LZ77 algorithm discussed earlier. HRLZ was in-
troduced in [1], where two approaches to constructing this hierarchy tree are
introduced. The first approach is deterministic and optimal. Optimal in the
sense it constructs the tree such that the total amount of phrases generated is
as small as possible. To do this, a fully connected weighted directed graph is
constructed. The edge weight from node i to node j is the number of phrases
generated when parsing sequence Sj wrt.
Si.
As this is an RLZ compres-
sion, given a suffix tree of the reference, computing the compression takes time
O(|Sj|). Computing all RLZ distances in the fully connected graph is done by
letting each sequence be the reference to all other sequences once, making the
running time become O((m −1) P
j |Sj|) = O(nm). The space usage of a fully
connected graph is O(m2). When all edge weights have been computed in the
fully connected graph, a Minimum Weight Spanning Arborescence (MWSA) is
constructed with the algorithm proposed in [1], which is an improvement of the
algorithm by Tarjan [7], which runs in general runs in O(e log m + m log2 m),
with e being the number of edges in the graph, making the running time for
this graph O(m2 log m + m log2 m). This MWSA acts as the final hierarchy,
consisting of m −1 edges, where for each edge an RLZ compression of a node
wrt. its parent is computed. Computing the O(m) suffix trees and perform-
ing the O(m) RLZ compressions brings the total running time of the HRLZ
compression to O(n m + m2 log m).
A main bottleneck in this first approach is the computation of all O(m2)
RLZ distances for the edge weights, where each computation time is linear in
the size of the sequence of the child node. To speed up the process, [1], instead of
computing the entire fully connected weighted graph, the graph is approximated
with locality-sensitive hashing in rounds, leading to a sparser graph.
The sparse sub graph, ¯G, initially contains m nodes, one for each sequence,
and no edges, and the set of strings still in consideration, R is the full set. For
each sequence, a fingerprint, which will be discussed further later in this section,
is generated. Identical fingerprints are then added to the same bucket, and for
each pair (i,j) in each bucket, the corresponding edge is added to ¯G. While ¯G,
is not fully connected, this repeats in rounds, where after c rounds the set R
is trimmed by removing the strings with the most amount of collision, with c
being a tuneable parameter.
When the sparse graph has been constructed, the edge weights will be com-
puted as before with the RLZ distance. Afterwards the MWSA algorithm is run
Page 5 of 53
==PAGE:11==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
on the sparse graph, and the compression is performed.
Essentially this creates two algorithms, the optimal HRLZ and the approxi-
mate HRLZ, where the approximate HRLZ algorithm is significantly faster, at
the expense of slightly worse compression performance.
Sketch-based compression (ECC) Another relative compression technique,
which was proposed in [2], is the Efficient Clustering-based Compression (ECC).
The approach here uses the sketch distance method, Mash[3], to compute all
pairwise distances between the sequences. These distances differ from the RLZ
distance since they RLZ compression performance of two sequences cannot be
entirely based on the Mash distance, instead it acts as a measure to how similar
two sequences are. Based on these distances, unsupervised learning is used to
cluster the sequences, such that sequences with small Mash distances to each
other end up in the same cluster. A centroid sequence is picked from each clus-
ter, which is used as a reference to the remaining sequences in the cluster when
compressing. Finally, a final reference sequence is picked as a reference to the
centroid sequences. This essentially creates a two layer hierarchy of compres-
sion, much like the multi-layer hierarchy in HRLZ algorithm. Also similarly to
the approximate HRLZ algorithm, sequences are grouped based on their simi-
larity or distance to each other.
RLZ-OPT As an extension to the RLZ algorthim, the Optimized Relative
Lempel Ziv algorithm was proposed in [8]. According to this paper, the RLZ
algorithm suffers from being greedy, and does not take into account the possi-
bility that taking a shorter than necessary parsing at times, may lead to fewer
overall phrases. To optimize the RLZ, [8] suggests a non-greedy version along
with several other techniques for improvements. Firstly a matching statistic
can be found between the reference string and the strings to compress, which
represents the longest matches that can be found between the reference string
and the input. From this matching statistic, it is known where the long matches
occur, hence it can be more efficient to encode a section before a long factor as
a series of small factors. To encode this non-greedy approach efficiently, very
short phrases should be encoded as the binary representation of the phrase,
instead of an index-length pair as you otherwise would in the RLZ algorithm.
Finally, they propose a way to reduce the number of bits necessary to represent
the positional value a phrase starts at. Since a phrase can start at any index
in the reference string, the positional value takes O(log |R|), bits pr phrase,
with R being the reference string. Here they noticed it can be more efficient to
encode each position component by encoding differences rather than encoding
absolute index values.
iDoComp Another reference-based compression algorithm is the iDoComp al-
gorithm proposed in [9]. This algorithm, like the RLZ, takes a single reference
sequence which the remaining target sequences are compressed wrt. iDoComp
consists of three steps: Step 1: mapping generation aiming to express the target
sequences in terms of the reference sequence. Step 2: post-processing the map-
Page 6 of 53
==PAGE:12==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
ping aiming to reduce its size. Step 3: Further entropy encode the mapping.
The mapping of iDoComp is similar to the greedy mapping of RLZ, where a
phrase consists of a positional index and a length, describing the substring in
the reference sequence.
In iDoComp, the phrases are triplets which also in-
cludes the mismatched letter at the end of the substring. This leads to better
performance since the most common variation in sequences of the same species
are single-letter substitutions. This means by including the mismatched letter
in a phrase, the phrase starting after the mismatched letter would again share
high similarity with substrings in the reference. The second step looks for con-
secutive matches that can be merged together to form an approximate match.
Storing this merged match plus the information of where it differs from an exact
match requires fewer integers to store. The final step entropy encodes the final
matches and approximate matches.
GDC2 Genome Differential Compressor 2, or GDC2 for short, is yet another
reference-based LZ compression algorithm, using a single reference string to
compress the target sequences, which was introduced in [10] and based on the
former GDC algorithm introduced in [11]. GDC2 differs from the RLZ algo-
rithm by consisting of two layers. The first layer compresses each sequence with
the RLZ algorithm, which creates a first level factoring of phrases indicating
the start position and length in the reference string. Each target string is now
a sequence of phrases. The second level serves to express consecutive phrases
more compactly. If target strings share subsequences of phrases, such that if a
subsequence of x phrases occurs in the first target string and the second target
string. The second target string can instead refer to the subsequence in the
first target string, instead of saving the subsequence of phrases explicitly. This
completes the two-layer architecture, where RLZ phrase sequences get further
compressed if they are present in multiple RLZ-compressed target sequences.
ERGC The efficient referential genome compression, ERGC, algorithm as in-
troduced in [12], compresses target strings wrt. a reference string. The approach
is to split each target sequence and the reference into blocks of equal length.
Compressing a target sequence wrt to the reference sequence is then done itera-
tively over the blocks, such that blocks with the same index from the reference
and the target are processed at the same time. All k-mers from the reference
block are hashed into a hashtable. One at a time, a k-mer is generated from
the target sequence block and hashed to the hash table and if it collides, the
two blocks are aligned with the colliding k-mer used as an anchor point, and
the alignment is extended beyond the k-mer until there is a mismatch. The
matching length and the starting position in the reference sequence, much like
the RLZ algorithm does. The remaining unaligned sequence is either stored raw
or as an alignment encoding, depending on the length of the encoding. The final
encodings are then delta-encoded and PPMD-compressed.
Page 7 of 53
==PAGE:13==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
2.2
Algorithmic techniques
This section aims to explain the algorithmic techniques used in the compression
algorithms discussed throughout this report.
Locality Sensitive Hashing (LSH) Throughout this report locality sensi-
tive hashing is used in multiple steps of several of the proposed algorithms.
LSH is a technique that can be used to group elements by maximising hash
collisions, such that similar or nearby elements will be hashed to the same
bucket.
Depending on the type of input, the specific implementation of the
LSH scheme may differ. For the purpose of this report, we are dealing with
sequences of DNA strings as our input, hence it is natural when using LSH
for such inputs, similar sequences should be hashed to the same ”buckets”.
The schemes used throughout the report are based on k-mers and min-hashing.
The sequences are represented as a set of its k-mers, where this set will be
hashed to a dimension-reduced representation of the original sequence, depend-
ing on the LSH scheme. The scheme used in [1] is based on min-hashing, where
each k-mer is hashed with q hash-functions and the minimum value from each
hash-function is stored such that a sequence can be represented as a vector of
length q, fingerprint(S, q) = [min(h1(S)), min(h2(s)), ..., min(hq(s))]. Where
min(hi(S)) is the minimum value obtained when hashing all k-mers in the
sequence S, with hash-function hi. The vector is called a fingerprint and is
a dimension-reduced representation of the sequence, where highly similar se-
quences, should share highly similar fingerprints.
The hashing used in this
scheme is the multiply-shift hashing scheme introduced in [13]. Here, a k-mer is
mapped to an integer, by summing pairs of multiplications in the k-mer. Where
each multiplication is between two adjacent elements in a k-mer, each first be-
ing modified with a multiplier. The integer is then bitshifted to compute the
hash-value.
Similarity/Distance measures Closely related to locality-sensitive hashing
are distance measures. In locality-sensitive hashing, pairwise comparisons are
unnecessary to group sequences in the same bucket, since the hashing scheme
groups them. Another way to determine the similarity or closeness of sequences
is to use a similarity/distance measure. With such measures, it is also possible
to group sequences that are similar and share a short distance. In the ECC
algorithm, this is done similarly by using a hashing scheme to dimension reduce
the sequence and then approximate the Jaccard index of the sequences k-mer
sets, to find the Mash distance.
Similarly to the fingerprints generated for the sequences in [1], the ECC
algorithm refers to their dimension-reduced representation as a sketch, or a
bottom-sketch, and can be represented in the following way Sk(H(S), q), which
produces a vector of length q, consisting of the q minimum values obtained when
hashing the k-mers from S with the hash-function H. These sketches are then
used to estimate the Jaccard index. The Jaccard index of two sets, eg. the k-
mer sets of two sequences, is defined as J(A, B) = |A∩B|
|A∪B|. The Jaccard distance
Page 8 of 53
==PAGE:14==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
between two k-mer-hash sets is then the number of shared hashes divided by the
number of distinct hashes among the two sets. Computing this becomes linear
in the total size of the sets, which the approximation can make much faster.
The approximate Jaccard distance is given b
J′(A, B) = |Sk(A ∪B, q) ∩Sk(A, q) ∩Sk(B, q)|
|Sk(A ∪B, q)|
(1)
Now the representation can be understood as taking a sample from A and B
of size q, being the q smallest elements. When stored in sorted order, these
elements can then be merged to find the q smallest elements in the intersection
of the sets, which results in Sk(A ∪B, q). The number of elements that are
present in all three sketches ( Sk(A∪B, q), Sk(A, q) and Sk(B, q) ) can then be
divided by the total elements in the intersection to get the final approximated
Jaccard index.
With the approximate Jaccard index, the approximate Jaccard distance and
the Mash distance can be computed.
The approximate Jaccard distance is
simply found as J′
D(A, B) = 1 −J′(A, B), whereas the Mash distance is a little
more involved. The mash distance is computed as follows, with k being the size
of a k-mer:
D = −1
k ln 2J′
D
1 + J′
D
(2)
The mash distance was introduced in [3] as an attempt to approximate the
divergence of real genomes and carries many assumptions. The mash distance
was then further used in the ECC algortihm[2], when clustering sequences. The
essence of the approximate Jaccard distance and Mash distance, is their ability
to quickly do pairwise distance measures between sequences, once the sketches
of the sequences have been computed.
3
Compression Algorithms
This section introduces the different hierarchical compression algorithms that
are based on the HRLZ algorithms developed in [1], which was explained in
further detail in section 2.1. The two HRLZ Algorithms introduced there will
serve as baseline algorithms, which the new algorithms will be measured against.
The new algorithms aim to improve upon the baselines by changing one or
more elements in the baseline algorithms. If an algorithmic element shows good
results, it will potentially be used further in the other approaches. However, it
will be clearly stated which algorithmic techniques are included and excluded
in each of the following algorithms.
3.1
Steps of the algorithm
The upcoming algorithms are all based on the HRLZ algorithm, so to make
an overview of what and where changes to the HRLZ will be be made in each
Page 9 of 53
==PAGE:15==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
algorithm, the flow of the algorithms will be explained here in a step-by-step
manner. The details of each step will be given in the coming sections where
relevant steps are being modified to gain performance improvement.
Step 1:
Dataset preprocessing First, the sequences are available as un-
compressed fasta files. This step appears before running the actual compression
algorithm, where the sequence files can be preprocessed to improve the efficiency
of the algorithm. One preprocessing technique that will be explored, is to create
a compressed dataset with a fast compression algorithm such as RLZ, using a
single reference sequence for all other sequences. This compressed dataset can
then be used as the input to the advanced hierarchical compression algorithms.
The algorithm can then work purely on a compressed data set, the original
dataset, or a combination of the two, when the compressed data set is used
for creating the hierarchy and the original dataset is used for the final com-
pression. Furthermore, this step also creates the necessary suffix arrays used
for efficient RLZ compressions, which are used in the final step of the algorithm.
Step 2:
Cost Graph Creation In the second step of the algorithm, the
cost graph is created where nodes represent a sequence and the edges represent
distances between sequences, which in later steps will be used to compute the
tree determining the hierarchy. The graph can be constructed in several ways,
where the two overall choices are between a full graph and a sparse graph. If a
full graph is chosen, all nodes become fully connected, leading to a graph with
O(m) nodes and O(m2) edges. The graph can also be constructed to become
sparse, heavily reducing the amount of edges in the graph. To create the sparse
graph, the clustering algorithm proposed in [1], is used as a baseline. In this
report, alternative methods are tested or this step is skipped entirely when com-
puting the hierarchy tree directly instead of first creating a cost graph.
Step 3: Edge Weight Computation The third step of the algorithm com-
putes the edge weights in the graph constructed in the previous step. Let edge
e = (i, j) denote the directed edge going from i to j, then the baseline weight
measure used for e is the number of phrases the RLZ algorithm generates when
compressing the sequence at j using the sequence at i as reference This distance
will be referred to as the RLZ distance. This gives the exact distance that is
used to measure the quality of the compression. Other approximating distance
measures will be considered and tested, such as approximate Jaccard distance
and distances based on the sequence’s fingerprints.
If in step 1 of the algorithm, the initial dataset is pre-compressed, the dis-
tance measures can either be based on the original sequences or the compressed
sequences.
Step 4: Minimum Weight Spanning Arborescence From the weighted
directed graph, computed in the previous step, a minimum weight spanning
algorithm is constructed.
Using the improved algorithm from [1], this takes
O(e log m + m log2 m), with e being number of edges and m being the number
Page 10 of 53
==PAGE:16==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
of nodes. An aborescence can also be computed without the MWSA algorithm,
by computing it directly and not from an already computed cost graph.
Step 5: Hierarchical Compression Finally, the HRLZ compression can be
performed based on the hierarchy given in the final arborescence. If in step 1
of the algorithm, the initial dataset is pre-compressed, the HRLZ compression
can either be performed on the original dataset or the compressed sequences of
the original dataset.
3.2
Pre-compression
Taking inspiration from the GDC2 algorithm, which compresses sequences of
phrases that are compressed representations of the original dataset, a similar
approach is tested. This approach is to perform either of the baseline algorithms
on an RLZ compressed version of the dataset. The compression technique used
for this purpose is the simple single-reference RLZ algorithm, where a sequence
is picked as the reference for all other sequences. Since the pre-compression has
to be fast, the first file is picked as the reference. A suffix tree for the reference
file, R, will be computed in time O(|R|), and the remaining set, S \ {R}, will
be RLZ compressed in time O(|S \ {R}|) = O(n). This new compressed set, ¯S,
will have m −1 files and a total length of O(¯n) which should be smaller than
n. The HRLZ algorithms will then be performed on ¯S and the final number of
phrases can be computed. If |¯n| < |n|, there should be a speedup in the HRLZ
algorithm, where computing the suffix trees, computing the cost graph edge
weights, and performing the final compression is faster. However, performing
the pre-compression takes additional time compared to running the algorithms
on the raw dataset.
Through experimental analysis, it will be measured if
the speedup of the HRLZ algorithm, gained from working with a compressed
dataset outweighs the time it takes to pre-compress the files.
Furthermore,
it is expected the final number of phrases generated will be smaller from the
compressed dataset.
Keeping both the original and compressed version of the sequence files on
disk when the algorithm is running, both datasets could be used at different
parts of the algorithm. It is theorised that computing the final arborescence used
for the hierarchy, could be done fast with ¯S, but applying the final compression
(according to this hierarchy), on S, would make it faster to decompress since
it can be decompressed directly to the original files, and not first to the pre-
compressed files.
3.3
Jacc/Mash distance measure
When computing the edge weights of the cost graph, the baseline HRLZ algo-
rithms both use the RLZ distance, the number of phrases an RLZ compression
generates, compressing the sequence node at one end of the edge wrt. the se-
quence node at the other. As disclosed in section 2.1, this is linear in the size of
the sequence being compressed. A significant portion of the time spent in both
Page 11 of 53
==PAGE:17==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
HRLZ algorithms is used for these edge weight computations, hence reducing
the time it takes to compute these, would improve the overall running time of
the algorithm.
This proposed algorithm will explore a new measure for the edge weights,
namely approximate Jaccard and Mash distance as mentioned in section 2.2.
The Jaccard and Mash distances were used as a distance measure in the ECC
algorithm, which provided good results, leading to the approach used in this
proposed algorithm. The algorithm replaces the exact but slow RLZ distance
measures used for edge weights and replaces them by the fast but approximate
distance measures the approximate Jaccard and Mash distances provide. This
could theoretically speed up the approximate and optimal HRLZ while still
providing good compression performance, leading to a better time-quality trade-
off overall. It is theorized that the approximate distance measures will result in
a worse final compression. Still, if there is a relation between the RLZ distance
and the approximate distance, the performance will not be far from the optimal.
However, having experimented with a prototype version in section 4.3, the
compression performance was too poor to be considered a serious compression
technique no matter what the speed-up of the fully implemented version would
have provided. Hence, this idea was abandoned early in the search for better
approaches, leading to the algorithms in the next sections.
3.4
Fingerprint Distances
The clustering technique to create the sparse graph in the HRLZ algorithm uti-
lizes fingerprints. Here sequences with identical fingerprints would be connected,
which provided a good overall compression quality. The basis for this observa-
tion is the locality-sensitive hashing technique described in section 2.2. This
implies that sequences that are similar share similar fingerprints. Based on this,
it is theorized that the distance between the fingerprints of two sequences could
approximate the actual RLZ-distance between the two sequences. However, it
is not immediately clear how to measure the distance between two fingerprints.
Furthemore, it is possible to create multiple fingerprints for a single sequence
or change the way a fingerprint is computed, both by tuning parameters and
including new methods which will be discussed further in this section.
In the original work of [1], the fingerprint of a sequence is found by taking
q hash functions, and for each hash function, hash all k-mers in the sequence
and save the minimum hash for each hash function, resulting in a vector of q
integers. Hashing one k-mer is linear in k, hence the running time of generating
one fingerprint for a sequence Si is O(|Si| k q), and generating a fingerprint for
all m sequences takes time O(n k q).
Multiple fingerprints The first approach is to generate multiple fingerprints
for each sequence and let the distance be based on how many fingerprints are
shared between two sequences. The aim is to find a good tradeoff between run-
ning time and compression quality depending on the choice of parameters in the
algorithm.
Page 12 of 53
==PAGE:18==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
As theoretically analyzed, generating f fingerprints, each from q hash func-
tions using k for the k-mer size on a sequence Si takes time O(f q k |Si|). Com-
puting, if two fingerprints are equal, is linear in the length of the fingerprints,
q since each integer in the fingerprint will be compared only to the integers
coming from the same hash-function, which are the integers sharing the same
index. Computing the fingerprint distance between two sequences each with f
fingerprints then becomes O(f q), making it independent of the length of the
sequences. In the computations, f and q are constants that are shared among
all sequences since the same amount of fingerprints of the same length will be
generated for each sequence.
Now generating all edge weights in a fully connected graph becomes O(n k q f+
m2 q f) instead of O(nm). Where the first part comes from generating all fin-
gerprints and the second comes from performing all fingerprint comparisons.
Furthermore, this expression can be generalized to a graph with e, edges as
O(n k q f + e q f). Likewise, can the time it takes the base algorithms to
compute all edges be generalized to the following O(e n
m). It is clear that gen-
erating the fingerprints is independent of the number of edges in the graph and
performing the fingerprint comparisons is independent of the total length of
the dataset. If k, q, and f are kept small and constant, the expression can be
reduced to O(n + e) which is better than the baseline at larger e and larger n.
Picking especially q and f can however be challenging and will be done
experimentally. It is hard to determine how the length of a fingerprint affects
the compression, since if it gets too small it carries little information about the
sequence it came from, and if it becomes too large it is unlikely to be identical to
other fingerprints hence a good middle ground should be found. However, the
number of fingerprints each sequence gets should only affect the compression
positively, since the more fingerprints a sequence has the better represented it is
and the amount of shared fingerprints is a better estimate. For both variables,
however, picking higher values should also negatively affect the computation
time which should also be considered.
Despite showing promising compression performance in section 4.4 on both
the fully connected and a sparse cost graph, the time it takes to generate multi-
ple fingerprints per sequence is not feasible for this dataset, even surpassing the
time it takes to compute the optimal HRLZ on the fully connected graph. This
observation led to the following approach instead, keeping to one fingerprint pr
sequence.
Long fingerprints - multiple hash function In an attempt to maintain
the high compression quality while decreasing the running time, a new distance
measure was developed, in the following manner. Instead of generating multi-
ple short fingerprints for each sequence, a single, but longer, fingerprint would
be generated. Much like the approximate Jaccard and Mash distance, the dis-
tance measure is now the similarity between two samples of hash-values, from
the number of distinct hash-values between two k-mer-hash sets. The distance
Page 13 of 53
==PAGE:19==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
measure used in this section can be computed as follows:
Dfingerprint(S1,q),fingerprint(s2,q) = q −|fingerprint(S1, q) ∩fingerprint(s2, q)|
(3)
Here the intersection between two fingerprints is defined as the number of inte-
gers that are index-wise shared between the two fingerprints. Since this distance
measure can take values between 0 and q, it can be normalized by dividing with
q.
For the multiple fingerprints approach, O(n q f) k-mers are hashed to gener-
ate the m·f fingerprints. Generating a single long fingerprint for each sequence,
such that the total number of hashes remains the same would make a long finger-
print q times longer than one of the q fingerprints used in the multiple fingerprint
approach. This would not reduce the time complexity. However, it might be
possible to reduce the length to have the same distance resolution. The distance
resolution refers to how many different values the distance measure can take.
When using multiple fingerprints, the smallest value a distance can have is 0,
and the largest value is f, when none of the f fingerprints are equal. Hence
the distance measure can take on f + 1 different values and the resolution be-
comes f +1. Having higher resolution means the distances should be able to be
approximated better, and there is a lower probability that distances are equal,
where distances of equal value would be up to chance which is picked in the
MWSA algorithm, which could lead to worse compression performance.
When using a long fingerprint, the resolution becomes the length of the
fingerprint, hence we can get the same resolution as the multiple fingerprint
approach by letting the length of the fingerprint be f from the multiple finger-
prints. This leads to a factor of q less hash values needed to compute, a measure
with the same resolution.
It is theorized that good performance is achievable at fingerprint sizes smaller
than f · q, which would reduce the required amount of hashing.
Long fingerprints - single hash functions To speed up the algorithm fur-
ther, it is theorized that instead of making the fingerprint consist of the smallest
value from each q hash functions, it could instead be represented by the x min
smallest from a single hash function. This reduces the number of hash values
that need to be calculated per sequence from O(q |S|) to O(|S|). This time
reduction comes at the cost of maintaining a priority queue of the x min small-
est integers from the single hash function. The priority queue is maintained by
first hashing the k-mers starting at each index in the sequence one at a time,
essentially scanning through the sequence. All O(|S|) hash values are then in-
serted into the priority queue of x min elements when it is computed. For each
element inserted, the largest element is removed to maintain a size of x min.
Hence, obtaining the x min smallest hash values using k-mers of size k, from a
sequence, Si takes time O(|Si| k log x min).
Comparing two fingerprints computed from the x min minimum values from
a single hash function is no longer done index-wise of each integer. Since the
priority queues are retrieved in sorted order, two fingerprints, f1 and f2 of each
Page 14 of 53
==PAGE:20==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
length x min could share x min−2 integers, but if compared index-wise, could
have 0 matches. This is the case when f1[1..x min −1] = f2[2..x min] and
f1[1] ̸= f2[1]. This indicates that it is necessary to compare two fingerprints in
a merging manner. This is done by maintaining a pointer in each fingerprint and
increasing the index of the pointer of the smaller value every time a comparison
between the pointers is performed. This uses time O(x min).
3.5
Iterative Bucket Hierachy
In the original HRLZ algorithm, two methods for connecting the cost graph are
proposed. The simple and fast approach to fully connect the graph, creating
O(m2) edges, or the clustering based on fingerprints, resulting in a significant
reduction in edges, at the cost of time spent generating fingerprints and adding
the edges as well as slightly worse compression performance.
In this section a third method is approached, to keep the number of edges
present low but speed up the connection process. As described in 3.1, an itera-
tive sequence splitting approach is considered, where the sequences are assigned
to buckets based on their fingerprints. This is done on the basis that a finger-
print of a sequence could reflect the structure of a sequence, both when used in
the cost graph creation in the baseline approximate HRLZ algorithm, and when
used in finger print distances in the edge weights.
If a bucket contains too many sequences (above a tuneable threshold), the
sequences within are split into smaller buckets. Which bucket a sequence is
assigned to is based on the fingerprint created during the splitting of a larger
bucket. If two sequences evaluate to identical fingerprints, they are sent to the
same bucket. This also means when the bucket is split further, it is necessary to
generate new fingerprints for the sequence in the bucket, where these fingerprints
decide which new bucket the sequence belongs to.
Keeping track of which
buckets each sequence has been in, and in which order, essentially creates a
rooted tree of buckets, which will be referred to as a bucket tree.
When all leaves in the bucket tree contain fewer sequences than the thresh-
old value allows, the sequences have been divided and must be connected into
a rooted tree, which will be used as the RLZ compression hierarchy. This can
be realized in two ways: top-down while building the bucket tree or bottom-up,
starting at the leaves when the bucket tree has been fully built. First, we will
look at the top-down approach followed by the bottom-up approach.
Top down bucket hierarchy The top-down approach is simple and relies
heavily on randomness. During the creation of the bucket tree, when the se-
quences of a bucket are about to be divided into new buckets, a random sequence
is picked to stay in the bucket and not be further divided. The basis for picking
a random sequence could be a good idea, is based on the fact that all finger-
prints in the bucket are equal. Hence if the fingerprint is good at capturing the
structure of the sequence, then it would not matter which of the sequences with
identical fingerprints is chosen.
Similarly, when the dataset is split into buckets for the first time, a random
Page 15 of 53
==PAGE:21==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
sequence is picked as the parent to these newly created buckets, which then
becomes the root of the bucket tree. When a bucket has less sequences than
the threshold allows, the bucket is not split further and becomes a leaf node.
Furthermore, the sequences in a leaf node are connected to the sequence in the
parent bucket, becoming its children. This concludes the tree of sequences and
can now directly be used as the RLZ compression hierarchy.
Constructing the final arborescence in this manner has the obvious benefit
that it is not required to compute the sparse cost graph nor computing any edge
distances. The edges should in theory however be placed between sequences
that are similar eg have short distances between them since edges are almost
exclusively placed between sequences that have been in the same bucket. The
only exception is the edges connected directly to the root since the root has
never been in a bucket. The tree is therefor expected to have good compression
performance.
The drawback however is that it is necessary to generate new fingerprints at
every level of the bucket tree and that it relies on a high degree of randomness
since every parent node is picked randomly among the sequences in a bucket,
which is not guaranteed to be a good pick and have a small RLZ distance to its
children.
Furthermore, the algorithm includes two tuneable parameters, the thresh-
old, and the fingerprint size. The longer the fingerprints become, the less likely
it becomes that sequences share a fingerprint. This means that using large fin-
gerprint sizes will create a tree that’s shallower with a higher branching factor.
A shallow tree has fewer levels and fewer chances for fingerprints to end up in
the same bucket. Hence a shallow tree becomes faster to compute at the cost
of compression performance. However, if the fingerprints become too small and
the chance of falling into the same bucket increases, the tree becomes deeper and
more time has to be spent at computing new fingerprints. Both approaches are
evaluated in the experimental sections. Furthermore, having higher threshold
values, stops the splitting earlier, again making the tree shallower and having
to compute fewer fingerprints.
Bottom up bucket hierarchy To improve the compression performance of
the hierarchy, the algorithm is altered slightly, such that the sequence node con-
nections are made after the bucket tree has been constructed, instead of during.
Constructing the bucket tree is done exactly as before, but instead of choosing
one sequence to stay when dividing a bucket, every sequence is split into a new
bucket. This bucket tree, when fully constructed, can be seen as a rooted tree
of buckets, where all non-leaf buckets are empty and all leaf buckets contain
fewer than the threshold amount of sequences, such that the sum of elements in
all leaf nodes becomes m.
The compression hierarchy is constructed from the bucket tree in the fol-
lowing way. Iteratively, one sequence from each bucket is pushed to its parent
bucket, and once a bucket has received a sequence from each of its children, it
connects them in a tree and sends the root to its parent.
The order in which each bucket should be processed can be found efficiently,
Page 16 of 53
==PAGE:22==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
by adding each bucket to a stack once they are created when creating the bucket
tree. The order is then simply following the stack order. A bucket will always
be pushed to the stack before its children, hence by following this order a bucket
can never be processed before all its children have been processed.
The challenge is to choose which sequence is sent to the parent bucket and
how to connect the remaining sequences in relation to that node. The approach
explored in this section is to fully connect all sequences in a bucket, compute all
edge weights, and run the MWSA algorithm on the cost graph. This creates a
rooted tree, where the root is the sequence selected to be pushed to the parent
bucket while keeping its edges to its children in said tree. When computing
the edge weights, either the actual RLZ distance can be used, which might be
feasible since the graph will be small and despite being fully connected, have
few edges, or the approximate distance measure from former sections can be
used.
The number of children a bucket has in the bucket is determined by two
factors.
How many elements are present in the bucket before splitting, and
the size of the fingerprints used. When fingerprints are small there is a higher
chance fingerprints are shared among the sequences, hence at small fingerprints,
the number of children become fewer. Similarly, if a bucket contain more se-
quences, the number of children would also increase, since the number of unique
fingerprints would increase. Furthermore, if the size of fingerprints at each layer
stays the same, its expected that deeper layers, containing fewer sequences per
bucket, also has fewer children.
This relates to the way the final hierarchy is formed, since the size of the
fully connected graphs generated for a bucket in the bucket tree, is equal to the
number of children the bucket has.
4
Experimental evaluation
This section will test and evaluate the algorithms introduced in the previous
section against the baselines and compare the experimental results with the
theoretical analysis. All testing will be performed on the E. coli dataset and
subsets hereof. The total size of subsets of the data set can be seen in figure 1.
m
n
n/m
50
256087037
5121740.7
100
514159532
5141595.3
150
773615870
5157439.1
200
1032016660
5160083.3
219
1130365197
5161484.9
Table 1: Number of sequences in subsets of the E. coli dataset represented by m,
total length of the m sequences denoted by n and the average sequence length
n/m.
Page 17 of 53
==PAGE:23==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
Firstly the HRLZ algorithms (both the simple optimal HRLZ and the approxi-
mate HRLZ) will be analysed and tested, to have a baseline the future algorithms
can be compared against.
4.1
Baseline Algorithms: Optimal HRLZ & APRX HRLZ
As discussed in section 2, the HRLZ algorithm has two versions: an optimal
HRLZ and an approximate HRLZ. The optimal HRLZ fully connects the cost
graph, where the resulting hierarchy after computing the edge weights and run-
ning the MWSA algorithm, uses as few RLZ phrases as possible, resulting in
optimal compression. The approximate HRLZ, on the other hand, is based on
a sparse graph created with clustering in rounds, resulting in fewer edges in the
cost graph at the cost of the compression becoming suboptimal.
In this section, both the optimal HRLZ and the approximate HRLZ algo-
rithm will be benchmarked and serve as a baseline for the subsequent algorithms
introduced in section 3. The approximate HRLZ algorithm, as well as the sub-
sequent algorithms, aim to rival the compression performance of the optimal
HRLZ, while significantly improving the running time.
The full description and analysis of both HRLZ algorithms were given in
section 2, hence the remainder of this section will be dedicated to tuning pa-
rameters for the approximate HRLZ algorithm experimentally and performing
benchmarks of the two algorithms.
4.1.1
Tuning k for fingerprints
K-mers and fingerprints are used when constructing the sparse cost graph of the
approximate HRLZ algorithm. To have a fair baseline to compare subsequent
algorithms with, it is necessary to pick an appropriate value for the k used for
the k-mers. If k is too small, the intersection of unique k-mers contained in
the sequences approaches the union of unique k-mers, meaning it becomes hard
to distinguish sequences based on the k-mers they contain. Furthermore, the
larger k becomes, the longer it takes to compute the fingerprint since computing
the hash-value of a k-mer is linear in k.
An appropriate k should hence be as small as possible while having as many
unique k-mers in the sequence as possible. This would minimize the computation
time while retaining as much information about the sequence as possible.
The number of possible unique k-mers is determined by the k and the size
of the alphabet σ. When dealing with DNA sequences, which is the case for the
E. coli dataset used in this section, σ is constant, hence the number of unique
k-mers is given in the following way: #unique k-mers = |σ|k = 4k. Here it
is easy to see, that if k is too small, all possible combinations are contained in
all sequences, making their sets of contained k-mers identical and making the
sequences indistinguishable.
Determining k is done experimentally on the e-coli dataset. A sample size of
5 is chosen, and the average number of unique k-mers in the 5 files is computed.
Using a relatively small number like 5 is sufficient since the sequences are all
Page 18 of 53
==PAGE:24==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
of similar lengths and structure. The average length of the files is 5170215,
meaning the files should contain on average is 5170215 −k + 1 k-mers.
By
determining how many of these k-mers are unique, as a function of k, a good
k can be determined.
The experimental results can be seen in 1.
Here the
blue line represents the fraction of how many of the possible k-mers exist in the
file, and the red line represents how many of the occurring k-mers in a file are
unique.
k
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
5
10
15
20
25
30
Fraction of possible k-mers occuring.
Fraction of occuring k-mers being unique
Figure 1: Average over 5 files of both fraction of possible k-mers occuring and
fraction of the occuring k-mers being unique
The smallest k with a fraction of unique k-mers being larger than 0.99 is k = 16,
with a value of 0.9910. 16 is hence used for k moving forward unless otherwise
stated.
To see the effect of the value of k, experimentally several runs of the approx-
imating HRLZ algorithm are run on the E. coli dataset with different values of
k, with a constant fingerprint length, by setting the value of q, number of hash
functions, to 4. The results can be seen in figure 2 and figure ??. Here the com-
putation time follows the theory, linear in k, as the computation time increases
with the size of k. Furthermore, the total amount of phrases generated is not
notably affected by k, while k is greater than or equal to 16. The optimal HRLZ
is included as it gives an upper limit to the time usage an algorithm should use
and a lower limit to the amount of phrases an algorithm can expect to generate.
Page 19 of 53
==PAGE:25==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
#Sequences
Time[s]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
50
100
150
200
219
k=16
k=32
k=64
k=128
k=256
Optimal HRLZ
Sparse graph total computation time at different k
#Sequences
#Phrases
0
10000000
20000000
30000000
40000000
50
100
150
200
219
k=16
k=32
k=64
k=128
k=256
Optimal HRLZ
Phrases generated with sparse graph at different k
Figure 2: Time in seconds taken to compute the the sparse graph and the
edge weights (left) and number of phrases used to compress the sequences using
different size k-mers on datasets of different sizes
Creating the weighted cost graph has two steps. Step one is to connect the
nodes of the graph, and the second step is to compute the weights of the cor-
responding edges. For optimal HRLZ, connecting the graph is very fast since it
fully connects all nodes in the form of a full adjacency matrix, where no further
calculations have to be made to divide if an edge is included or not. However,
computing the O(m2) edge weights becomes expensive. Contrary, by spending
time computing which edges should be included when building the sparse graph,
the amount of edges is heavily reduced. This results in an overall speedup, by
shifting the computational load from the edge weight computation to the graph
creation. Furthermore, it is worth noting that the smaller datasets, running
the algorithm on the fully connected graph is faster than on the sparse graph.
As the dataset grows, and so does the number of edges in the fully connected
graph exponentially, the time saved by using the sparse graph becomes bigger.
Whereas on the full dataset the speed-up is 3.8.
The time usage of each step in each algorithm can be seen in figure 3. Here
it can be seen that at k = 16 40% of the time spent on the cost graph is
computing edge weights, and for the optimal HRLZ using the full graph the
time spent connecting the graph is below 1 second. The MWSA algorithm has
not been included since it took less than 1 second for all experiments.
Page 20 of 53
==PAGE:26==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
Graph construction algoritms
Time[s]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
k=16
k=32
k=64
k=128
k=256
Optimal HRLZ
Weight computation
Graph connecting
Graph connecting and Weight computation times of full dataset
Figure 3: Time in seconds it takes to connect the graph and compute the edge
weights on the full dataset of 219 files using the approximate HRLZ at differnt
k-values and the optimal HRLZ
When the hierarchy has been constructed, the final compression wrt. the hier-
archy can be performed. From the compressed files, decompression can also be
performed. The time usage of the final compression and the decompression can
be seen in figure 4. Here it is clear that the compression time is linear in the
size of the dataset, and the choice of the algorithm used when constructing the
hierarchy does not have much influence.
#Sequences
Compression time [s]
0
200
400
600
50
100
150
200
219
APRX HRLZ
Optimal HRLZ
Final compression time of the two baseline algorithms
#Sequences
Decompression Time [s]
0
2
4
6
8
10
50
100
150
200
219
APRX HRLZ
Optimal HRLZ
Decompression time of the two baseline algorithms
Figure 4: Final compression time (left) and decompression time (right) of the
two baseline algortihm. Blue is the sparse graph at k = 16 and red is the fully
connected graph.
4.1.2
Baseline algorithms: Discussion
As stated in [1] the approximate HRLZ rivals the optimal HRLZ in compression
performance and greatly outperforms it in computation time. This is also shown
in the benchmarks above where the compression performance of the approximate
HRLZ with k = 16 is close to the optimal by only generating 8%-10% more
phrases. Furthermore, the time performance improvement of the approximate
HRLZ with k = 16 compared to the optimal HRLZ, becomes larger as the size
Page 21 of 53
==PAGE:27==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
of the dataset grows, where the speedup at the full dataset becomes 3.8. The
sparse graph also reduces the number of edges by 90% for all dataset sizes, which
will be made clear in table 2 in section 4.3.
4.2
Pre-compression Evaluation
In this section the performance of the pre-compression technique will be con-
sidered. The input dataset will be RLZ compressed wrt. a single reference file.
These compressed files and the original input files will then be used as input
to the HRLZ algorithm. The compressed files can be used when generating the
sparse graph, where it will be based on fingerprints of these files. Furthermore
the edge weight calculations can then be based on the RLZ distance between
either the compressed files or the corresponding original files. Finally, the actual
compression is based on the hierarchy formed when applying the MWSA algo-
rithm on the cost graph and can be applied to the compressed or uncompressed
files.
4.2.1
Pre-compression: Results
First, the compressed files need to be constructed, and the time of this needs
to be taken into account, which is shown in figure 5. Here it is clear that the
compression time is linear in the size of the dataset, as analyzed theoretically.
The x-axis indicates how many sequences of the dataset are used, which was
named m in earlier analysis, and since all sequences are similar in length, the
total dataset size, n, grows linear with m.
#Sequences
Time[s]
0
50
100
150
200
250
50
100
150
200
219
RLZ compression
Suffix array
RLZ compression and Suffix array
Figure 5: Time taken to compress all files wrt a single reference files and sub-
sequently computing the corresponding suffix arrays
After compression, the number of characters in each file has been reduced, which
can be seen in figure 6.
Page 22 of 53
==PAGE:28==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
file index
#Characters in file
0
2000000
4000000
6000000
50
100
150
200
uncompressed
compressed
Characters in files before and after RLZ compression
Figure 6: Amount of characters in a file before and after being RLZ compressed
with a reference file from the dataset.
From the RLZ compressed dataset, the sparse graph is constructed based on
their fingerprints.
The time this takes can be seen in figure 7.
Despite the
RLZ-compressed sequences are shorter than the original sequences, it is slower
to compute the cost graph. This could be due to the choice of either k or q,
since in the baseline experiments these values were based on the original files
with an alphabet size of |σ| = 4, where the alphabet of the compressed files is
larger.
#Sequences
Time[s]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
50
100
150
200
219
APRX HRLZ
Based on compressed files
Sparse cost graph construction times
Figure 7: Time taken to construct the cost graph using finger prints of size 4
and k=16. Blue being the baseline approximate HRLZ algorithm run on the
original dataset and red being run on the RLZ compressed files.
From the sparse graph made from the compressed files, the edge weights can be
computed. Here there are two options, computing the edge weights as the RLZ
Page 23 of 53
==PAGE:29==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
distance between the original files or the compressed files, where both options
use the sparse graph created from the compressed files. The result hereof can
be seen in figure 8, where the edge weight computation time for the baseline
algorithm is included as a reference. Here, using the sparse graph constructed
from the compressed files, spends less time computing edge weight, both when
using RLZ distance between original files and compressed files. The explanation
here could be the sparse graph created from the compressed files, generates less
edges, hence less time spend computing RLZ distances.
#Sequences
Time[s]
0
200
400
600
800
50
100
150
200
219
APRX HRLZ
Compressed RLZ
Un-compressed RLZ
Edge weight computation times
Figure 8: Edge weight times of computing the RLZ distances in the sparse
graph, basing the distance on either the original or compressed files.
Finally, the final compression performance can be seen in figure 9. The figure
depicts the two baseline results from previous section as ”APRX HRLZ” and
”Optimal HRLZ”. It also includes ”APRX HRLZ on compressed files”, which
is the algorithm using the compressed files for both cost graph construction and
RLZ distance measures. On the left figure, it is seen that the approximate HRLZ
algorithm on compressed files generates up to 5% fewer phrases than the optimal
algorithm on original files and 10-14% less compared to the approximate HRLZ
using original files. On the right figure, the time to perform the final compression
once the the hierarchy has been computed, is depicted, which sees a speedup
of 1.3-1.6 compared to the optimal baseline algorithm. This speedup can be
explained by the fact that the compressed files are smaller than the original
files.
Page 24 of 53
==PAGE:30==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
#Sequences
#Phrases
0
10000000
20000000
30000000
50
100
150
200
219
APRX HRLZ 
APRX HRLZ on compressed files
Optimal HRLZ
Phrases generated on different input and algorithms
#Sequences
Compression time [s]
0
200
400
600
50
100
150
200
219
APRX HRLZ
APRX HRLZ on compressed files
Optimal HRLZ
Final compression time on different input and algorithms
Figure 9: Total number of phrases generated (left) and time to compress to
outputfile (right). Blue is the baseline Approximate HRLZ algorithm applied
to the original files. Red is the same algorithm applied to the compressed files.
Yellow is the optimal algorithm on the fully connected graph with the original
files as input.
4.2.2
Pre-compression: Discussion
Exploring the usage of compressed files as input further led to another approach
which combined the usage of original files and compressed files. By constructing
the hierarchy using the compressed files and compressing the original files wrt
this hierarchy, it was theorized a speed-up could be achieved when constructing
the hierarchy, while still performing good compression ratio. However doing so
led to the algorithm generating up to 25 times more phrases than the optimal,
and was hence not considered a potential solution. This result indicates that
compressed files that share similarities do not directly translate to the same
similarities in the original files.
Another drawback of this technique is that it is now required to store the
first reference file in plain text, and store the root of the HRLZ arborescence as
a suboptimally compressed file based on the random choice of reference string
in the pre compression. Furthermore, decompression times will also suffer from
this, since it would have to decompress each file twice, once from the HRLZ
compression, and one from the RLZ pre-compression.
Despite showing better compression performance than the baseline approx-
imate algorithm, the extra time and space required does not make it a viable
contender in its current state. However had the parameters been tunes more
towards the compressed files these results might look different. Due to this in-
sight, the subsequent algorithms will be based on the baseline algorithm and
original sequence files, to better be able to fairly test their performance against
the baseline algorithms.
4.3
Jacc/Mash distance Evaluation
The approximate Jaccard and Mash distance will be computed with the readily
available Mash tool. Before efficiently incorporating the Mash tool in the HRLZ
source code, a prototype was created concerning only the compression quality,
to determine if these approximate distance measures could provide competitive
Page 25 of 53
==PAGE:31==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
compression performance.
This prototype was realized by precomputing all
approximate Jaccard and Mash distances, between all sequences, storing the
results on disk, and looking them up when assigning edge weights.
4.3.1
Jacc/Mash distance: Results
The compression performance can be seen in figure 10. The results show that
the algorithms using approximate distances as edge weight, perform significantly
worse than both baseline algorithms. Both the approximate Jaccard and the
Mash version of the fully connected cost graph generate 47%-81% more phrases
than the optimal HRLZ baseline algorithm, depending on the choice of dataset
size. This is significantly worse than the approximate HRLZ baseline which only
generates 8%-10% more phrases than the optimal HRLZ.
#Sequences
#Phrases
0
10000000
20000000
30000000
40000000
50000000
50
100
150
200
219
Jacc Full
Mash Full
Jacc Sparse
Mash Sparse
ARRX HRLZ
Optimal HRLZ
Phrases generated with approximate distance measures and 
baseline algorithms.
Figure 10: Number of phrses generated based on different algorithms.
Jacc
and Mash refers to using the approximate jaccrd distance or Mash distance as
distance measure for weights. Sparse and full refers to the type of cost graph
the algorithm is run on.
Surprisingly, the algorithm using the approximate distance measures and the
sparse graph construction from the approximate HRLZ algorithm performs bet-
ter than the algorithm using approximate distance measures on the fully con-
nected cost graph.
Another observation from the result is that both the approximate Jaccard
distance and the Mash distance on the fully connected graph provide the same
amount of generated phrases, indicating they end up with the same hierarchy
at the end. However, the sparse graph version differs slightly, due to the ran-
domness of the creation of the sparse graph stemming from the random hash
function, where the connections differ between iterations.
Page 26 of 53
==PAGE:32==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
4.3.2
Jacc/Mash distance: Discussion
The large performance gap between the algorithms using the real RLZ distances
as edge weights and the approximate distance indicates the approximate Jac-
card distance and the Mash distance are not good approximations of the actual
RLZ distance. It does however still perform better than assigning random edge
weights to the fully connected cost graph or letting the hierarchy be a star with a
random sequence as the center, where all other sequences will be compressed wrt
this reference sequence, as illustrated in figure 11. This indicates there still is,
however slightly, a correlation between the RLZ distance and the approximate
distance. Based on this observation, the next section will explore approximate
distance measures further.
#Sequences
#Phases
0
20000000
40000000
60000000
50
100
150
200
219
Random star
Random weight Full
Jacc Full
Jacc Sparse
Figure 11: Number of phrases generated by 4 different algorithms. Random star
has a single sequence as reference to all other sequences and Random weight
full is the fully connected cost graph with random edge weights between 1 and
1000.
When using the approximate Jaccard distance or Mash distance as edge weight
measure, the fully connected graph generates between 15%-24% more phrases
than the sparse graph. This is the opposite correlation as when using the actual
distances, where the fully connected graph performs better. This relation in-
dicates the sparse graph is connected with edges primarily between nodes that
have a small RLZ distance between them. This can be confirmed in table 2,
where the average RLZ weight of an edge in the fully connected graph is 20%
higher than in the sparse graph, which is reflected in the total amount of phrases
generated when using the Jaccard distance in the full or the sparse graph.
Page 27 of 53
==PAGE:33==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
Sparse graph
Fully connected graph
Number of
sequences
Total edges
Average
RLZ weight
Total edges
Average
RLZ weight
50
362
199315
2450
237875
100
1062
202077
9900
239882
150
1728
198532
22350
240694
200
3908
200429
39800
240273
219
5922
199258
47742
240209
Table 2: A table containing the amount of edges and their average RLZ weight
in different subsets of the full dataset
Furthermore, this indicates that sequences with similar fingerprints are similar.
Hence the next section deals with using fingerprints as a distance measure.
The final thing to discuss regarding the results of the approximate Jaccard
and Mash distance is how the two distance measures when used on the fully
connected graph, give the same result. A possible explanation for this is that the
sequences are all very similar, and share a large amount of hashes. Looking at
the first sequence in the database and how it compares to the remaining 218 files,
it can be seen that the average approximate Jaccard distance is 0.09686, which
means on average the sequences share 903 of 1000 bottom sketches. At these low
distances, the relationship between the mash distance and the Jaccard distance
becomes close to linear.
And since we are using the measures as distances,
they can be multiplied by constants without changing the result of the MWSA
algorithm, hence Jaccard and Mash provides the same result. By normalizing
the jaccard distance and mash distance, the two can be plotted which shows
how similar the two measures become as seen in figure 12.
Indicator for reference file
Normalised distance
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
50
100
150
200
Normalized jaccard
Normalized mash
Figure 12: The distance between one file to all other files using either the normal-
ized approximated Jaccard distance or the normalized Mash distance. Notice
how, when the two distances are normalized, they become close to identical.
4.4
Fingerprint Distances Evaluation
The following section deals with the algorithm using fingerprints in the distance
measure when computing edge weights in the cost graph.
Both approaches,
Page 28 of 53
==PAGE:34==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
either multiple short or a single long fingerprint will be tested, where the single
long fingerprint will be computed in different ways.
4.4.1
Fingerprint Distances: Results
Multiple fingerprints The first approach to approximate distances with fin-
gerprints is to generate multiple fingerprints for each sequence and let the ap-
proximated distance between two sequences be the number of fingerprints the
two sequences differ. Hence if for 50 generated fingerprints, 4 fingerprints are
identical, the distance would become 50 −4 = 46, and if all 50 fingerprints are
identical, the distance becomes 0. For the first setup, the choice of k is still 16
and the length of a fingerprint is still 4, as it proved good values when bench-
marking the baseline algorithms. With these constants locked in, the variable in
the first experiment is the number of fingerprints generated for each sequence,
where the experiments will be conducted at lengths of 25, 50, 75, and 100.
The compression performance hereof can be seen in figure 13, where tests
have been conducted on both a sparse cost graph (left) and a fully connected
cost graph (right). For the sparse graph, the worst-performing test on all dataset
sizes was the one with the fewest number of fingerprints, being 25, generating on
average 12% more phrases than the equivalent test using the actual number of
RLZ phrases as the distance measure. The trend in the tests, for all dataset sizes,
is that the more fingerprints are used the better the compression performance
becomes.
The best-performing experiment is conducted at 100 fingerprints,
which on average between the different dataset sizes generates only 4% more
phrases than the baseline approximate HRLZ algorithm, which uses the actual
RLZ distance as distance measure. It can also be noted all fingerprint distances
outperform the Jacc/Mash distance discussed earlier.
For the tests run on the fully connected cost graph, the same conclusion
can be made. Here, the worst-performing test generates on average 23% more
phrases and the best-performing test generates 9% more than the fully optimal
HRLZ algorithm. In both figures, the baselines are shown for comparison. (left
being the sparse graph and right being on the full graph).
#equences
#Phrases
0
10000000
20000000
30000000
40000000
50000000
50
100
150
200
219
Jacc sparse
Finger 25 sparse
Finger 50 sparse
Finger 75 sparse
Finger 100 sparse
APRX HRLZ
Phrases generated with sparse graph and fingerprint distances, 
with variable number of fingerprints
#Sequences
#Phrases
0
10000000
20000000
30000000
40000000
50000000
50
100
150
200
219
Jacc full
Finger 25 full
Finger 50 full
Finger 75 full
Finger 100 full
Optimal HRLZ
Phrases generated with full graph and fingerprint distances, with 
variable number of fingerprints
Figure 13: Number of phrases generated on different datasets with different
fingerprint sizes in the distance measure. The left graph shows algorithms run
on the sparse graph and the right shows algorithms run on the full cost graph.
The Jaccard distance and baseline algorithms are included as well.
Page 29 of 53
==PAGE:35==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
Generating a larger amount of fingerprints results in a time increase. The com-
putation time of computing all the fingerprints for each algorithm can be seen in
figure 14. Here even the worst-performing test, in compression quality, is slower
than the baseline approximate HRLZ algorithm using a sparse cost graph with
actual RLZ-distance. Figure 14 shows the time to compute the fingerprints,
which makes it clear how the time is linearly dependent on m, the number
of sequences, as analyzed in section 3.4. These times are also independent of
the number of edges in the cost graph, eg. if the cost graph is sparse or fully
connected. However, once the fingerprints have been computed, computing the
edge weights for each edge becomes linear in the number of edges. Despite the
full graph having upwards of 10 times more edges, and hence more distance
computations are required, the computation time of both graphs is below one
second and therefore not included in the graph.
In figure 14 it can further be seen how the optimal HRLZ is faster than
the fingerprint measures at smaller datasets and only outgrows the fingerprint
distance at larger datasets. An explanation for this is the running time of the
optimal HRLZ has to perform an expensive direct comparison for every edge,
which grows exponentially in m. Whereas the fingerprint distance can perform
this direct comparison very quickly once the expensive fingerprints have been
computed, where finding the fingerprints is only linear in m. This is also evident
in the sparse and fully connected graphs, where it takes the same amount of
time to compute the fingerprints since they have the same number of sequences.
#Sequences
Fingerrint computation time[s]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
50
100
150
200
219
Optimal HRLZ
25
50
75
Computation times based on number of fingerprints used for 
fingerprint distance
Figure 14: How long it takes in seconds to compute the required fingerprints,
at different fingerprint and dataset sizes. Longer fingerprints are not included
in the larger dataset due to immense time usage surpassing the optimal algo-
rithm. The blue bars represents the time to compute all edge weights in a fully
connected graph using the RLZ-distances, included for comparison.
Long fingerprints When using a single fingerprint per sequence for the dis-
tance measure, it can be computed in two ways: minimum values from a single
Page 30 of 53
==PAGE:36==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
hash function or the minimum value from a set of different hash functions. In
the experiments, there are two variables, the number of minimum values a hash
function saves x min, and the number of hash functions q.
For the experi-
ments, either x min or q is set to 1, hence the length of a fingerprint becomes
max(q, x min) = q · x min. Both versions are run on the sparse graph com-
puteded with the baseline parameters. The length of each fingerprint is then
varied by changing either x min or q. The number of phrases generated as a
function of the number of sequences and length of the fingerprint can be seen
in figure 15. Here it is evident that the longer the fingerprint becomes, the
closer the number of phrases generated gets to the optimal result. Here the
best-performing algorithm at length 100 generates 10%-12% more phrases than
the fully optimal HRLZ algorithm, which rivals the baseline approximate HRLZ
using RLZ phrases as distance measure for the edge weights.
#Sequences
#Phrases
0
10000000
20000000
30000000
40000000
50
100
150
200
x_min=10
x_min=25
x_min=50
x_min=75
x_min=100
APRX HRLZ
Optimal HRLZ
Phrases generated on the sparse graph at diffent fingerprint 
sizes at q=1.
#Sequences
#Phrases
0
10000000
20000000
30000000
40000000
50
100
150
200
q=10
q=25
q=50
q=75
q=100
APRX HRLZ
Optimal HRLZ
Phrases generated on the sparse graph at diffent fingerprint 
sizes at x_min=1.
Figure 15: Phrases generated on different size datasets when using different size
fingerprints when computing fingerprint distance. Figure to the left only the
x min value is varied and to the right only q is varied. Both baseline algorithms
are included as comparisons.
Furthermore, while the dominating factor in performance is the length of the
fingerprint and size of the dataset, using one or multiple hash functions has
little influence on the number of phrases generated. However, this choice has
an impact on the time performance, which is illustrated in figure 16. Here it is
clear how maintaining the minimum values of a single hash function in a priority
queue outperforms having multiple hash functions. The time performance of
using multiple hash-functions, grows linearly in the number of hash functions
used, which quickly outgrows the baseline approximate HRLZ algorithm.
Page 31 of 53
==PAGE:37==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
#Sequences
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
50
100
150
200
x_min=10
x_min=25
x_min=50
x_min=75
x_min=100
APRX HRLZ
Optimal HRLZ
Total time spent on the sparse graph at diffent fingerprint sizes 
at q=1.
#Sequences
Time [s]
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
50
100
150
200
q=10
q=25
q=50
q=75
q=100
APRX HRLZ
Optimal HRLZ
Total time spent on the sparse graph at diffent fingerprint sizes 
at x_min=1.
Figure 16: The two figures show the time it takes to construct the hierarchy
when using a sparse graph and different size fingerprints for the fingerprint
distances. Left figure only varies x min and right only varies q. The vertical
axis has been cut at s=2000 to focus on the faster times.
The main goal of creating the sparse graph through clustering is to reduce the
number of edges and hence number of direct comparisons between sequences.
This is beneficial when a comparison is expensive which is the case for the
baseline algorithms where computing the actual RLZ distance between two se-
quences is linear in the length of the reference sequence. However, once the
fingerprints have been computed, it is only linear in the length of the finger-
print to approximate the distance between two sequences. With this in mind,
for datasets with a small number of sequences, a speedup might occur when
computing fingerprint distances on a fully connected graph, compared to the
sparse graph.
To formally verify this, the best performing algorithm from the former test,
the one using several minimum values from a single hash function, on the fully
connected graph. The compression performance can be seen in figure 17. As
in the former experiment, the longer the fingerprints become, the closer to the
optimal the algorithm performs.
The performance of the longest fingerprint
also outperforms the former experiment on the sparse cost graph. Using the
100 smallest values from a single hash function and computing edge weights on
the fully connected graph, the algorithm generates only 5%-6% more phrases
than the optimal algorithm, which is an improvement to the baseline approxi-
mate HRLZ algorithm using a sparse cost graph, which generated 8%-10% more
phrases compared to the optimal.
The time performance is also competitive as can be seen in figure 17, which
shows the time it takes the different algorithms to construct the fully connected
cost graph, compute all fingerprints (if any), compute all edge weights and finally
running the MWSA algorithm. The algorithm using fingerprints of length 100
performed best in compression quality and depending on the size of the dataset,
enjoys a speedup of 6.8-8.3 when compared to the approximate HRLZ baseline
algorithm. Compared to the optimal baseline algorithm, the speedup becomes
7.3-26.9.
Page 32 of 53
==PAGE:38==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
#Sequences
Time[s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
50
100
150
200
x_min=25
x_min=50
x_min=75
x_min=100
Optimal HRLZ
APRX HRLZ
Time with fingerprint distance measures and fully connected 
cost graph.
#Sequences
#Phrases
0
10000000
20000000
30000000
40000000
50
100
150
200
x_min=25
x_min=50
x_min=75
x_min=100
Optimal HRLZ
APRX HRLZ
Phrases generated with fingerprint distance measures and fully 
connected cost graph.
Figure 17: Time taken to compute distance measures (left) and phrases gener-
ated (right) on the fully connected cost graph on different subsets of the dataset
with edge weights computed from fingerprint distances at different fingerprint
lengths. Left vertical axis has been cut at s=2000, to better show the faster
algorithms. Both baseline algorithms are included for comparison purposes.
As a final result, it is verified that the time it takes to perform the final com-
pression according to the hierarchy, once the hierarchy has been generated, has
not been much affected compared to the baseline algorithms. As mentioned in
the analysis, the final compression is dependent on n and not how the hierarchy
is found. The time can be seen in figure 18.
#Sequences
Compression time [s]
0
200
400
600
50
100
150
200
219
Optimal HRLZ
Fingerprint distance
Final compression time
Figure 18: Time it takes to compress different sized subsets to the outputfile.
Blue is the optimal HRLZ and red is the fully connected graph using fingerprint
distances.
4.4.2
Fingerprint Distances: Discussion
Having experimented with two different approaches to approximating a distance
between sequences using their fingerprints, the favorable option is using long
fingerprints with a single hash function, saving a number of the smallest values.
Furthermore, when approximating the distances with fingerprints on the E. coli
dataset, regardless of how the fingerprints are computed, the computational load
Page 33 of 53
==PAGE:39==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
is shifted from comparing several pairs of sequences (one for each edge in the
cost graph) to generating the fingerprints. This means on smaller datasets it is
unnecessary to spend time computing a sparse graph, since there is no time saved
in reducing the number of edges. However, as the dataset grows, the exponential
factor might outgrow the time to create the sparse graph, making the sparse
graph faster and hence a better approach. One factor that speaks against this
however is how the ECC algorithm is efficient despite computing all pairwise
comparisons of even larger sets. This indicates that even on larger datasets,
where ECC and the Mash pre-computations, are efficient, constructing the fully
connected cost graph and performing all fingerprint distance computations is
still efficient. This leaves the only MWSA as a factor against the fully connected
graph, since it is dependent on the number of edges, where as mentioned earlier
runs in O(e log m + m log2 m) time.
Another benefit of using approximate distance measures instead of the ac-
tual RLZ distances is reducing the number of suffix trees needed to create and
store during the compression algorithm. When using RLZ distances, one suffix
tree is needed for each sequence, since all sequences act as a reference when cal-
culating edge weights. However, when performing the final compression, only
internal nodes in the final hierarchy are used as reference sequences in the RLZ
compression, hence all leaf nodes do not require a suffix tree. Furthermore, the
fingerprint distance is bidirectional, so the number of distance computations in
a fully connected graph can be halfed, going from m · (m −1) to m·(m−1
2
. This
does not change the asymptotic running time but can still result in a speed
increase.
Finally a third approach was tested, namely combining different values of q
and x min instead of keeping either at 1. The test was run on the largest dataset
with different values such that the total length of the final long fingerprint would
be 100. The results can be seen in figure 19, where it is clear that keeping x min
high and q low, gives better performance in both time and compression, and
the superior method is to use a single hash function.
q * x_min
Time [s]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
1*100
2*50
4*25
6*16
8*12
10*10
Total time using fully connected graph on the full dataset
q * x_min
#Phrases
0
10000000
20000000
30000000
40000000
1*100
2*50
4*25
6*16
8*12
10*10
Total phrases using fully connected graph on the full dataset
Figure 19: Figure shows the result of the full dataset using different combi-
nations of q and x min when computing the fingerprint distances on the fully
connected graph. The Left shows the time performance and the right the com-
pression performance.
Page 34 of 53
==PAGE:40==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
4.5
Iterative Bucket Hierarchy Evaluation
This section sets to experimentally evaluate the performance of the iterative
bucket hierarchy, where first the fast but random top-down approach will be
tested, and afterward, the bottom-up approach, including cost graphs will be
tested. Both algorithms include fingerprints and a threshold value, where good
choices of both will be experimentally evaluated. This is done by testing several
combinations of the two on the full dataset. For the bottom-up version using
edge weights and distances, the long fingerprint, of x min = 100 is being used
since it showed good performance in section 4.4.
4.5.1
Iterative Bucket Hierarchy: Results
Top-down hierarchy: Results The algorithm has been run on the full dataset
of 219 sequences with different fingerprint sizes when splitting into buckets and
threshold values. The result hereof can be seen in figure 20 representing the
phrases generated when using the top-down bucket tree as the final arborescence
and time taken to compute the tree. This approach however shows poor per-
formance, where even the best-performing parameters at a low threshold value
and short fingerprints, generate 44% more phrases than the optimal baseline
algorithm. Furthermore, as the fingerprints increase in length, the compression
quality decreases.
#Phrases
0
20000000
40000000
60000000
x_min=1
x_min=2
x_min=4
x_min=8
x_min=16
Threshold=2
Threshold=5
Threshold=10
Threshold=15
Threshold=20
Phrases generated with top-down iterative bucket algorithm at 
different threshold and x_min values on full dataset. 
Time[s]
0
200
400
600
x_min=1
x_min=2
x_min=4
x_min=8
x_min=16
Threshold=2
Threshold=5
Threshold=10
Threshold=15
Threshold=20
Time taken to generate the top-down iterative bucket tree at 
different threshold and x_min values on full dataset. 
Figure 20: Number of phrases generated (left) and time taken to construct
the hierarchy tree (right) on the full dataset, using the top-down algorithm at
different x min and threshold values.
This could be explained by how sequences are divided into buckets, where they
share a bucket when they share a fingerprint. This means, that at longer fin-
gerprints, there are more sequences with unique fingerprints, leading many se-
quences to be the only element in their respective bucket. The extreme case of
this can be seen when the fingerprints have a length of 16. Here all 219 finger-
prints are unique, and the tree essentially becomes a star graph with the first
sequence as the root, giving similar results when the star graph was tested in
section 4.3. The hierarchical compression simply becomes the RLZ algorithm
with a single reference string. This also explains that the algorithm generates
the same amount of phrases at this length regardless of the threshold value,
Page 35 of 53
==PAGE:41==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
since the same star graph is created for each iteration. As the fingerprints be-
come shorter, the number of unique fingerprints decreases, which is shown in
figure 21, where the unique number of fingerprints in the full dataset are shown
as a function of the length of the fingerprint. For smaller-sized fingerprints, the
number of unique fingerprints seems to be linear in the size of the fingerprint.
However, at x min = 6 the otherwise linear growth of unique fingerprints de-
creases rapidly and at x min = 14 and onwards none of the 219 sequences share
a fingerprint.
Length
#Unique fingerprints
0
50
100
150
200
250
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Unique fingerprints in full dataset at different fingerprint lenghts
Figure 21: The graph shows the number of unique fingerprints that’s expected to
be found in the full dataset when each sequence has one fingerprint, as function
of the length of the fingerprint which is determined by x min, the number of
minimum values saved from the hash function.
The time to create the tree is shown in figure 20 (right). Here, contrary to
earlier algorithms, the shorter the fingerprint is, the more time is spent building
the tree.
Furthermore, smaller thresholds also result in longer computation
time. Regardless, despite being faster to compute a short fingerprint, having
smaller fingerprints means more sequences hash to the same bucket, and if the
threshold is small as well, buckets will be split more before being below the
threshold. Dividing a bucket requires new fingerprints, which explains the time
increase at low x min and threshold values. Furthermore, the time performance
at these values performs well and is similar, this is due to the fact the algorithm
only needs to generate close to one fingerprint pr sequence before every bucket
is below the threshold and the final hierarchy is formed. On the other hand,
having smaller fingerprints, and having sequences be in multiple buckets before
the tree is complete, improves the compression performance. This follows the
theory well, where sequences sharing a fingerprint should be more similar and
hence the more buckets two sequences have shared, the more likely it is that
they are being compressed with a sequence of high similarity.
Overall, despite the fast computation time, the random approach is not a
good contender to the baseline algorithms due to its poor compression quality.
To improve this, the bottom-up version of the algorithm is introduced.
Bottom-up hierarchy: Results When computing the tree in a bottom-up
fashion, the process is divided into two sections. Step 1: Building the bucket
Page 36 of 53
==PAGE:42==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
tree and step 2: Connecting the sequences starting at the leaves, hence it is
necessary to measure the time spent at both. Creating the tree is the same
time complexity as the random top-down tree, but connecting the sequences
should be considered. Again, the algorithm will be tested on the full dataset
with different parameter values. The results hereof can be seen in figure 22 and
figure 23.
Time [s]
0
250
500
750
1000
x_min=1
x_min=2
x_min=4
x_min=8
x_min=16
Threshold=2
Threshold=5
Threshold=10
Threshold=15
Threshold=20
Time to create the bucket tree of the full dataset.
Time [s]
0
250
500
750
1000
x_min=1
x_min=2
x_min=4
x_min=8
x_min=16
Threshold=2
Threshold=5
Threshold=10
Threshold=15
Threshold=20
Time to connect the sequences in the bucket tree of the full dataset. 
Figure 22: Time in seconds to generate the bucket tree by iteratively splitting
large buckets into smaller child buckets (left) and time it takes to connect the
sequences in the tree starting at the bottom leading to the hierarchy used in the
final compression (right). The test has been run on the full dataset at various
fingerprint size (x min) and bucket size threshold.
#Phrases
0
10000000
20000000
30000000
40000000
50000000
x_min=1
x_min=2
x_min=4
x_min=8
x_min=16
Threshold=2
Threshold=5
Threshold=10
Threshold=15
Threshold=20
Phrases generated bottom-up bucket algorithm on full dataset. 
Figure 23: Number of phrases generated from the full dataset when using the
bottom-up hierarchy algorithm at various parameter values, to compute the tree
for the final compression.
Creating the bucket tree sees the same time performance as the random ap-
proach, where longer fingerprints and larger thresholds decrease the time, again
due to fewer fingerprints needing to be computed.
When the bucket tree has been constructed and all leaves contain less than
the threshold, the second part of the algorithm begins. The result hereof can
be seen in figure 22 (right). Again the tendency for x min = 8 and x min = 16
are almost identical and show similar compression performance seen in section
3.4, where the long fingerprints are used on the fully connected cost graph. The
explanation for this is seen when sequences are sent to the parent bucket and
Page 37 of 53
==PAGE:43==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
connected. At long fingerprints, the root of the bucket tree has as many children
as there are unique fingerprints in the first round. Hence when the number of
children approaches the number of sequences, the bucket receives m sequences
that are then fully connected. This fully connected graph consists of the same
m · (m −1) edges as the fully connected graph used in the baseline algorithms.
Hence, the compression performance of this graph is dependent on the choice
of distance measure used for the edge weights in the cost graph. In these tests,
the long fingerprint measure of x min = 100 has been chosen, hence we see the
same compression performance as in section 3.4.
The runs performed at shorter fingerprints perform worse on both time and
compression performance.
This can be explained by the small dataset size.
Here it is more efficient to create a fully connected graph from the very shallow
bucket tree and compute all distances approximately than it is to perform sev-
eral smaller graphs in the inner nodes of the bucket tree, which requires more
fingerprint computations.
4.5.2
Iterative Bucket Hierarchy: Discussion
In theory, the advantage of the iterative bucket hierarchy should be that it only
fully connects smaller subsets of sequences subsequently, instead of fully con-
necting all m sequences. This strength however is not fully utilized on the E. coli
dataset, when using the fingerprint distances as distance measures. As could
be concluded in section 3.4, once the fingerprints have been computed for m se-
quences, computing all edge weights on a sparse graph or a fully connected graph
both took neglectable amount of time, below 1 second. The Iterative Bucket
Hierarchy would therefore be more suited for datasets with large amounts of
sequences, where the reduction in the number of edge weight computations is
significant compared to the time spent generating fingerprints and dividing the
sequences into buckets in the bucket tree.
Another issue with the iterative bucket hierarchy is the size of the fingerprints
used when building the bucket tree. As seen in section 3.4, the shorter a finger-
print becomes, the less information is carried about the sequence it comes from.
However, if the fingerprints are too long they become too unique and there will
be too many buckets with only a single sequence within.
To accommodate this, instead of splitting sequences into the same bucket if
they exactly share a fingerprint, they would be put in the same bucket if the
distance between the fingerprints is below a certain value. This makes it possible
to generate longer fingerprints while still having decently sized buckets. To avoid
computing the distances between all pairs of fingerprint, the approach to this is
to first sort the fingerprints and go through them sequentially. The fingerprints
are assigned the same bucket, as long as the distance to the previous fingerprint
is below a threshold. This is based on the assumption that the distance between
adjacent fingerprints (when stored in an array) is smaller when the fingerprints
are stored in sorted order. This assumption is confirmed in figure 24, showing
the 218 neighbor distances in the sorted and unsorted fingerprints, of length 100,
Page 38 of 53
==PAGE:44==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
where the average distance on the unsorted fingerprints is 56, and the average
distance on the sorted set is 40.
0
25
50
75
100
50
100
150
200
unsorted
sorted
Distance to adjacent fingerprint when sorted and unsorted
Figure 24: Distance to the adjacent fingerprints of length 100 when stored in an
array. Blue denotes the unsorted fingerprints, stored in the same order as the
sequence files. Red denotes the sorted fingerprints.
The result of this approach can be seen in figure 25, where all fingerprints have
a length of 100 and the threshold distance, being the shared integers in the
fingerprints, is varied. The bucket size threshold is kept at 5. For low distance
threshold values, 10-30, all trees became one layer deep, essentially creating a
fully connected graph when each child pushes a node to the root and connects
the sequences. This is because almost all distances are above these values, and
since a new bucket is created for a sequence if the distance towards the previous
sequence is above the threshold. On the other end, at a distance of 60, referring
to figure 24, almost all sequence distances, when sorted are below this value.
This is also reflected in the result, where it was not possible to create a tree at
this distance without timing out. The reason for this is at such high distances,
almost all sequences would be put in the same bucket, creating a very deep
tree that needs a lot of computation time to generate fingerprints at each level.
However at thresholds 40 and 50, it is possible to create a tree that does not
result in a fully connected cost graph, however, both approaches had worse
performance than previously tested methods.
Page 39 of 53
==PAGE:45==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
Threshold distance
#phrases
0
10000000
20000000
30000000
40000000
10
20
30
40
50
Total number of phrases generated using different distance 
threshold values when creating new sibling buckets
Threshold distance
Time[s]
0
500
1000
1500
10
20
30
40
50
Total time creating the hierarchy using different distance 
threshold values when creating new sibling buckets
Figure 25: Phrases generated (left) and time it takes (right) when generating the
hierarchy with the bottom-up bucket tree approach where splitting sequences
into buckets is done when the distance to the previous sequence is above a
threshold value.
Another way to implement the bottom-up algorithm would be to split each
bucket into a constant number of children by sorting the fingerprints in the
array and splitting them into equal-sized subarrays. However, this was never
implemented as it was theorized the performance would not be competitive.
This conclusion was based on the results in figure 25, at threshold 50, where the
sorted fingerprints are split similarly, and showed poor performance.
5
Discussion
This report has explored multiple ways and directions in which the efficiency
of reference-based compression techniques can be improved. The HRLZ algo-
rithms were used as baselines from which new algorithms were developed. Each
algorithm focused on a section of the HRLZ algorithm and modified it, to im-
prove the overall efficiency of the compression, be it mainly the time usage or
the compression efficiency. A main computational bottleneck of the baseline
HRLZ algorithms was quickly realized to be edge weight computations in the
cost graph, where the original HRLZ accommodates this by reducing the number
of edges in the cost graph, thus reducing the number of edge weight computa-
tions. In this report, multiple of the algorithms discussed also aim to improve
the time spent computing edge weights. This is done by either reducing the
number of computations or reducing the time usage per computation. In many
aspects, the algorithms approximating the distances used for the edge weights,
are similar, where one uses the approximate Jaccard distance using sketches,
and the others based on the similarity between fingerprints.
The two approaches are similar in the sense they both use hash functions
to dimension reduce the k-mer-sets of sequences, and measure their similarity
based on the shared integers. However, the results are vastly different where
the Mash and approximated Jaccard distance generated 47%-81% more phrases
than the optimal and the best-performing fingerprints only generated 5%-6%
more fingerprints. Beyond being similar in design to the fingerprint distance,
it is also surprising the Mash distance is not suitable for edge weights, when it
Page 40 of 53
==PAGE:46==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
lead to good performance when used in the ECC algorithm.
Fingerprints were initially introduced to connect sequences when construct-
ing the sparse graph in the HRLZ. To make the fingerprints more suitable for
edge weight computations, changes were made to how they were computed.
Changing the way a fingerprint is generated from using many hash functions,
to using a single hash function, led to time improvement without affecting the
compression quality, when used for distance measure in the edge weights. This
raises the question, of whether the fingerprints generated from a single hash
function could be used instead of the original fingerprint scheme when creating
the sparse graph, to save time but maintain good compression quality. This
was however not tested or implemented. Furthermore, when working with a
sparse graph and with fingerprint distances, fingerprints are essentially used in
multiple steps of the algorithm. Reusing the same fingerprint in multiple steps
could then lead to potential time savings.
This could have been implemented by letting the first m fingerprints gener-
ated during the creation of the sparse graph be of length 100, and saving them
for the next step of the algorithm, being the edge weight computation. By do-
ing this all fingerprints used in the edge weight computations come from the
same hash function, and for the sparse graph creation, the first 4 integers of the
fingerprint could have been used to have the same parameter as in the baseline
computations.
The pre-compression scheme could have been explored further, or been com-
bined with the other algorithms discussed in this report. However, since this
step is seen as a preprocessing step that would merely alter the input of the
actual algorithm, more focus was put on other steps of the HRLZ algorithm,
changing the inner workings of the algorithms.
Several insights were gained from dealing with the iterative bucket algo-
rithm. Since each layer required new fingerprints, it became computationally
demanding when the tree became deep, and a sequence would have been in
several buckets on its way from the root to the leaf..
The gain in a deep tree is smaller fully connected graphs when connecting
the sequences in the bucket tree since the branching factor is smaller.
This
gain in computation time did not outweigh the time it takes to generate new
fingerprints, for each layer. Furthermore, in section 4.1, it was shown how when
all fingerprints were computed, finding all O(m2) edge weights took less than
one second. From this, it can be deduced that the iterative hierarchy would not
gain a speedup by splitting a large fully connected graph into several smaller
fully connected graphs. However, as mentioned before, the number of edges in
a fully connected graph of m nodes is exponential in m. Hence if the algorithm
runs on a much larger dataset the iterative bucket hierarchy might gain some
advantage in reducing the total number of edges and edge computations.
Changes have mainly been made to how the cost graph is created, or how
edge weights are computed.
This means it is possible to combine the algo-
rithmic techniques introduced in this report with the techniques discussed in
Page 41 of 53
==PAGE:47==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
the literature review in section 2. Most cutting-edge algorithms contain one or
more post-processing compressions, where the compressed dataset is compressed
even further. This was left out of this report to focus on the main parts of the
algorithm, namely the hierarchical structure, and how to compute it. ´
6
Conclusion
This report explores four main directions for potentially improving the baseline
HRLZ algorithms. The different approaches showed varying degrees of results.
The preprocessing technique compressing the dataset before using it as input
to the HRLZ algorithm generated slightly fewer phrases than the baseline, but
was discarded due to the extra time it takes to both compress and decompress
the target files. Changing the way cost graphs are created by introducing the
iterative bucket hierarchy, or changing the way edge weights are computed with
Mash distance or Approximate Jaccard distance, both showed promise in the-
ory. However, as the results could conclude, these approaches did not rival the
baseline algorithms in either time and compression performance.
Exploring more ways to approximate the edge weights led to re-purposing
the fingerprints generated when computing the sparse graph of the approximate
HRLZ algorithm. Through experimentation on several iterations of the finger-
print distance measure and parameters hereof, good results were achieved. By
only generating up to 6% more phrases than the optimal, the speedup compared
to the optimal was in the range of 7.3-26.9 depending on the size of the dataset.
The speedup was achieved by moving the computational load from perform-
ing e, (number of edges in the cost graph), comparisons between full sequences
to generating the m fingerprints. This led to significantly faster comparisons,
for the e edges, at the cost of generating fingerprints.
This new approach to computing the edge weights can be used regardless
of how the cost graph is generated, but for the dataset used throughout this
report, the best performance, both in time usage and phrases generated, was
achieved when applied to the fully connected graph, since the time to create
a sparse graph did not outweigh the extra time needed to perform all O(m2)
comparisons.
References
[1]
P. Bille, I. L. Gørtz, S. J. Puglisi, and S. R. Tarnow, “Hierarchical relative
lempel-ziv compression,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.11371, 2022.
[2]
T. Tang, Y. Liu, B. Zhang, B. Su, and J. Li, “Sketch distance-based clus-
tering of chromosomes for large genome database compression,” BMC ge-
nomics, vol. 20, pp. 1–9, 2019.
[3]
B. D. Ondov, T. J. Treangen, P. Melsted, et al., “Mash: Fast genome and
metagenome distance estimation using minhash,” Genome biology, vol. 17,
pp. 1–14, 2016.
Page 42 of 53
==PAGE:48==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
[4]
E. L. Stevens, R. Timme, E. W. Brown, et al., “The public health impact
of a publically available, environmental database of microbial genomes,”
Frontiers in microbiology, vol. 8, p. 808, 2017.
[5]
J. Ziv and A. Lempel, “A universal algorithm for sequential data compres-
sion,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 337–
343, 1977. doi: 10.1109/TIT.1977.1055714.
[6]
S. Kuruppu, S. J. Puglisi, and J. Zobel, “Relative lempel-ziv compression
of genomes for large-scale storage and retrieval,” in International Sym-
posium on String Processing and Information Retrieval, Springer, 2010,
pp. 201–206.
[7]
R. E. Tarjan, “Finding optimum branchings,” Networks, vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 25–35, 1977.
[8]
S. Kuruppu, S. J. Puglisi, and J. Zobel, “Optimized relative lempel-ziv
compression of genomes,” in Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Australasian
Computer Science Conference-Volume 113, 2011, pp. 91–98.
[9]
I. Ochoa, M. Hernaez, and T. Weissman, “Idocomp: A compression scheme
for assembled genomes,” Bioinformatics, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 626–633, 2014.
[10]
S. Deorowicz, A. Danek, and M. Niemiec, “Gdc 2: Compression of large
collections of genomes,” Scientific reports, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 11 565, 2015.
[11]
S. Deorowicz and S. Grabowski, “Robust relative compression of genomes
with random access,” Bioinformatics, vol. 27, no. 21, pp. 2979–2986, 2011.
[12]
S. Saha and S. Rajasekaran, “Ergc: An efficient referential genome com-
pression algorithm,” Bioinformatics, vol. 31, no. 21, pp. 3468–3475, 2015.
[13]
M. Dietzfelbinger, T. Hagerup, J. Katajainen, and M. Penttonen, “A re-
liable randomized algorithm for the closest-pair problem,” Journal of Al-
gorithms, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 19–51, 1997.
Page 43 of 53
==PAGE:49==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
A
Supporting tables
A.1
Section 4.1. Baseline Algorithms
k
Frac of max
Frac of unique
1
1
0.0000007736621872
2
1
0.000003094649347
3
1
0.00001237859978
4
1
0.00004951440871
5
1
0.0001980576732
6
1
0.0007922308459
7
0.9999755859
0.00316884663
8
0.9984039307
0.01265546714
9
0.9830596924
0.04984388247
10
0.87762146
0.1779915083
11
0.5588421822
0.4533580215
12
0.2287210703
0.7421955984
13
0.06957424581
0.903068684
14
0.01857958212
0.9646467212
15
0.004741613753
0.984733244
16
0.001192985661
0.9910321074
17
0.0002988794353
0.9931357384
18
0.00007478382613
0.9939861493
19
0.00001870416236
0.9944226112
20
0.000004677466131
0.9947259642
21
0.000001169662301
0.9949777525
22
0.000000292477614
0.9951890395
23
0.0000000731336911
0.9953836928
24
0.00000001828672609
0.9955637239
25
0.000000004572433454
0.9957276628
26
0.000000001143285955
0.9958825499
27
0.0000000002858637105
0.9960298552
28
0
0.9961666773
Table 3: Data from Figure 1.
Page 44 of 53
==PAGE:50==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
k=16
k=32
k=64
k=128
k=256
Optimal HRLZ
50
451
486
513
585
813
392
100
624
997
1058
1194
1748
1470
150
1077
1061
1802
1868
2317
3218
200
1757
2003
2418
2685
3080
5654
219
1836
2177
2191
2346
3702
6995
Table 4: Data from Figure 2(left).
k=16
k=32
k=64
k=128
k=256
Optimal HRLZ
50
7692752
7543128
7974621
8229831
7671225
7119831
100
14745095
14268301
14503192
14944036
14620889
13285175
150
20155046
20820897
20587687
21429055
20830538
19370776
200
27420623
26525776
27228418
26445029
26152647
25088579
219
30078744
29396022
28592803
29966430
31532705
27308639
Table 5: Data from Figure 2(right).
k=16
k=32
k=64
k=128
k=256
Optimal HRLZ
Graph connecting [s]
1098
1401
1522
1814
3024
0
Weight computation [s]
738
776
669
532
678
6995
Table 6: Data from Figure 3.
Compression time
Decompression time
APRX HRLZ
Optimal HRLZ
APRX HRLZ
Optimal HRLZ
50
129
125
1.566637
1.177201
100
239
230
2.938071
2.911714
150
412
352
3.490566
3.343466
200
488
459
6.210361
9.296197
219
520
511
8.276279
8.156850
Table 7: Data from Figure 4.
Page 45 of 53
==PAGE:51==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
A.2
Section 4.2. Pre-compression
RLZ compression
Suffix array
50
43
4.5
100
84
9.1
150
130
13.7
200
177
18.2
219
196
20
Table 8: Data from Figure 5.
APRX HRLZ
Based on compressed files
50
368
301
100
427
580
150
749
872
200
1139
1145
219
1098
1239
Table 9: Data from Figure 7.
Un-compressed RLZ
Compressed RLZ
APRX HRLZ
50
70
71
83
100
208
141
197
150
302
277
328
200
612
513
618
219
573
587
738
Table 10: Data from Figure 8.
APRX HRLZ
APRX HRLZ on
compressed files
Optimal HRLZ
Original files on compres-
sed files sparse graph
50
7844493
7036552
7119831
170604728
100
14603095
12906573
13285175
347586253
150
20885051
18632619
19370776
518924342
200
27207543
23424655
25088579
696932413
219
29829924
25875203
27308639
766192012
Table 11: Data from Figure 9(left).
Page 46 of 53
==PAGE:52==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
APRX HRLZ
APRX HRLZ on compressed files
Optimal HRLZ
50
129
80
125
100
239
176
230
150
412
215
352
200
488
301
459
219
520
336
511
Table 12: Data from Figure 9(right).
A.3
Section 4.3 Jacc/Mash distance
Jacc Full
Mash Full
Jacc Sparse
Mash Sparse
ARRX HRLZ
Optimal HRLZ
50
10445101
10445101
9058889
9213451
7692752
7119831
100
22705930
22705930
18343757
18705748
14745095
13285175
150
33722329
33722329
29179955
29112670
20155046
19370776
200
45023336
45023336
38353216
37951303
27420623
25088579
219
49563773
49563773
42058633
40628171
30078744
27308639
Table 13: Data from Figure 10.
Random star
Random weight Full
Jacc Full
Jacc Sparse
50
12777263
12050896
10445101
9058889
100
25666323
24261031
22705930
18343757
150
39011591
36402891
33722329
29179955
200
51832783
48050753
45023336
38353216
219
56695034
53595812
49563773
42058633
Table 14: Data from Figure 11.
Page 47 of 53
==PAGE:53==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
A.4
Section 4.4. Fingerprint distance
50
100
150
200
219
Jacc sparse
9058889
18343757
29179955
38353216
42058633
Finger 5 sparse
9340692
17754531
26560730
34328107
37437896
Finger 10 sparse
8748066
17556203
25107423
32697389
36666641
Finger 25 sparse
8906895
16115094
24363410
31726741
33851793
Finger 50 sparse
8767322
15362182
23746688
29558019
32741368
Finger 75 sparse
8811432
14952359
22762416
29219824
31359704
Finger 100 sparse
8392478
15463106
22356168
28722677
31032537
Optimal HRLZ
8182997
15153611
21234999
27234341
29732707
Jacc full
10445101
22705930
33722329
45023336
49563773
Finger 5 full
10252744
19436009
28966379
37359305
40306758
Finger 10 full
9572271
17460425
26323084
34254194
37210678
Finger 25 full
8431516
15999320
24029617
31178687
34235591
Finger 50 full
8169509
15137590
22293457
28792353
31500440
Finger 75 full
7772662
14570183
21399875
27419870
30073845
Finger 100 full
7690070
14497909
21248658
27247816
29732707
Optimal HRLZ
7119831
13285175
19370776
25088579
27308639
Table 15: Data from Figure 13.
25
50
75
Optimal HRLZ
50
533
1324
2627
392
100
2755
5303
N/A
1470
150
4449
7986
N/A
3218
200
5329
N/A
N/A
5654
219
5781
N/A
N/A
6995
Table 16: Data from Figure 14.
Page 48 of 53
==PAGE:54==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
50
100
150
200
x min=10
8525751
16431403
24764907
32452218
x min=25
8089834
15582048
23263795
30746200
x min=50
7952456
15812613
22616074
29833923
x min=75
7932520
14753274
22337233
28274816
x min=100
8379629
14939885
21332587
28102193
q=10
8784107
16936634
24731039
33172227
q=25
8769623
16096343
23595302
30505565
q=50
8478084
15330508
22267756
29603733
q=75
8548261
15471664
23056861
28621332
q=100
8150238
15316594
21852804
27734180
Optimal HRLZ
7119831
13285175
19370776
25088579
APRX HRLZ
7692752
14745095
20155046
27420623
Table 17: Data from Figure 15.
50
100
150
200
x min=10
412
510
1072
864
x min=25
414
796
757
1001
x min=50
424
811
902
898
x min=75
421
813
999
1332
x min=100
427
825
1117
1059
q=10
818
1597
2361
3164
q=25
973
2041
2983
4050
q=50
1418
2795
4025
5363
q=75
1814
3553
5062
7194
q=100
2185
4288
6360
7725
Optimal HRLZ
392
1470
3218
5654
APRX HRLZ
451
624
1077
1757
Table 18: Data from Figure 16.
x min=25
x min=50
x min=75
x min=100
Optimal HRLZ
APRX HRLZ
50
8155056
7581779
7420598
7432490
7119831
7692752
100
15296787
14324732
14196034
14120312
13285175
14745095
150
22641313
22196092
20657064
20913406
19370776
20155046
200
31041705
27451243
26500611
26452832
25088579
27420623
Table 19: Data from Figure 17 (right).
Page 49 of 53
==PAGE:55==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
x min=25
x min=50
x min=75
x min=100
Optimal HRLZ
APRX HRLZ
50
38
52
52
54
392
451
100
80
98
100
105
1470
624
150
119
144
148
158
3218
1077
200
159
193
198
210
5654
1757
Table 20: Data from Figure 17 (left).
Optimal HRLZ
Fingerprint distance
50
125
114
100
230
228
150
352
294
200
459
513
219
511
528
Table 21: Data from Figure 18.
q*x min
Phrases
Time
1*100
28806297
232
2*50
30909098
417
4*25
32766644
754
6*16
34071787
1236
8*12
34745655
1382
10*10
37139047
1670
Table 22: Data from Figure 19.
A.5
Section 4.5. Iterative Bucket Hierarchy
x min=1
x min=2
x min=4
x min=8
x min=16
Threshold=2
43674401
45418402
50738049
56077764
56695034
Threshold=5
42877717
45110687
51376514
55060797
56695034
Threshold=10
46299488
49273114
50314933
55789118
56695034
Threshold=15
44007467
44919293
52158250
54819528
56695034
Threshold=20
46697030
42658712
50466460
56004141
56695034
Threshold=2
587
380
280
178
183
Threshold=5
427
307
186
169
184
Threshold=10
346
209
166
162
185
Threshold=15
312
205
162
166
183
Threshold=20
250
222
152
160
186
Table 23: Data from Figure 20.
Page 50 of 53
==PAGE:56==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
Fingerprint len
Unique fingerprints
in full dataset
1
10
2
34
3
84
4
130
5
171
6
198
7
212
8
216
9
216
10
218
11
218
12
218
13
218
14
219
15
219
16
219
Table 24: Data from Figure 21.
Left
x min=1
x min=2
x min=4
x min=8
x min=16
Threshold=2
958
497
365
185
193
Threshold=5
471
317
199
172
192
Threshold=10
301
317
250
172
191
Threshold=15
333
199
161
170
193
Threshold=20
281
198
161
172
191
Right
Threshold=2
753
551
402
250
235
Threshold=5
612
565
471
254
236
Threshold=10
452
529
383
254
238
Threshold=15
395
391
396
266
236
Threshold=20
348
408
404
254
238
Table 25: Data from Figure 22.
Page 51 of 53
==PAGE:57==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
x min=1
x min=2
x min=4
x min=8
x min=16
Threshold=2
38576151
38150995
32565456
29440158
29182889
Threshold=5
37709011
38247510
33931628
29209898
28885830
Threshold=10
40380856
35444215
32642307
29634265
29122406
Threshold=15
35722373
35872049
32878314
29337772
29290379
Threshold=20
35622723
34309744
32445719
29116056
28723232
Table 26: Data from Figure 23.
Threshold
Phrases
Time [s]
10
29117728
499
20
29115374
541
30
29344911
562
40
31127081
687
50
36938897
1495
Table 27: Data from Figure 25.
B
Problem definiton
Problem definition
Growing databases of large strings, such as genome banks, require good com-
pression techniques to store and transfer efficiently. The performance of a com-
pression algorithm is measured in multiple ways, such as compression time, de-
compression time and compression ratio, and finding a good trade-off between
them is key to a good compression algorithm.
Reference-based compression
has shown promising results in databases with highly similar strings, which is
the case of many genome banks. Since reference-based compression performs
better when the target and reference are similar, a fundamental problem with
reference-based compression is selecting a (or multiple) good reference string(s),
for the numerous target strings. Furthermore, another aspect of reference-based
compression is how the actual compression algorithm performs the compression,
once the reference string(s) have been decided.
Previous work
Reference-based compression has developed in several directions. A simple base-
line example is the Relative Lempel Ziv (RLZ) algorithm, a reference-based
version of the original Lempel Ziv algorithm. Based on the RLZ algorithm [1]
introduces a hierarchical scheme (HRLZ), which creates an arborescence where
each parent in the rooted tree, is the reference string of its children. The main
challenge in this approach is thus creating the arborescence in efficient time,
such that the parent nodes are a good reference for their children.
Page 52 of 53
==PAGE:58==
Reference-based compression techniques for large string databases
Another reference-based approach is seen in [2]. The main argument when
picking a good reference string, is the string should be highly similar to the
target string. To ensure this is the case [2] implements a clustering scheme,
grouping similar strings, before applying a reference-based compression on each
of the clusters. The main novelty in this approach comes from the clustering
step and the authors argue any reference-based compression algorithm can be
used in the compression step.
Aim of project
Survey recent work on reference-based compression techniques.
Analyse and implement compression techniques that achieve good tradeoffs
between compression time, decompression time and compression performance.
The aim of this project is thus to combine and further develop compression
techniques from recent work.
C
Timetable
Week
Activity
1
Read and understand initial papers.
Thesis: Write project plan and project agreement.
2-3
Litterature search on reference-based compression.
Thesis: Introduction and related work.
3-5
Source code familiarisation and implement initial ideas.
Thesis: Test and discuss initial results.
6-8
Implement pre-compression.
Thesis: Test and discuss pre-compression.
9-12
Implement fingerprint distance.
Thesis: Test and discuss fingerprint distance.
13-16
Implement iterative bucket hierachy.
Thesis: Test and discuss iterative bucket hierachy.
17-21
Thesis writing.
22
Thesis hand in
Page 53 of 53
