==PAGE:1==
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides
Into Liposomes
Your Subtitle Here
Master Thesis
DTU Health Technology
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Preface
This Master’s thesis amounting to 30 ECTS is submitted to obtain the degree of Master
of Science in Engineering in Pharmaceutical Design and Engineering from the Technical
University of Denmark (DTU). The project started in the early January 2024 and comes
to an end in early June 2024. Supervision of the project has been carried out by as-
sociate professor Andrew James Urquhart at Department of Health Technology, DTU. I
would like to thank my supervisor associate professor Andrew James Urquhart for his
guidance throughout this project and also for his open mind regarding my personal ideas
for the project. I would like to thank the group that I have been working with for the past
months. Girisa Prahbu, Hira Muneeb, and Antonia Chalkia have contributed massively to
this project by synthesising all of the liposomes and also carrying out the remote loading
experiments. I would also like to thank research consultant Martin Bak who’s knowledge
regarding synthetic procedures and relevant characterization methods has been invalu-
ble. A big thanks also goes to associate professor Charlotte Held Gotfredsen, who helped
record the NMR spectra presented in the thesis. Lastly, a big thanks to my friend Mikkel
Niklas Rasmussen for helping me set up this document in LATEX.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
iii
==PAGE:4==
List of abbreviations
2-CTC
2-chlorotrityl chloride
ACN
Acetonitrile
AcOH
Acetic acid
Boc
tert-Butyloxycarbonyl
BOP
(Benzotriazol-1-yloxy)tris(dimethylamino)phosphonium hexafluorophosphate
Collidine
2,4,6-trimethylpyridine
COSY
Correlated spectroscopy
cryo-Tem
cryo-Trnasmission electron microscopy
DBF
Dibenzofulvene
DCM
Dicholoromethane
DEPBT
3-(diethoxyphosphoryloxy)-1,2,3-benzotriazin-4(3H)-one
DIC
Diisopropylcarbodiimide
DIPEA
Diisopropylethylamine
DMAP
4-dimethylaminopyridine
DMF
N,N-dimethylformamide
DMSO
Dimethylsulfoxide
DMSO-d6
Deuterated dimethylsulfoxide
EtOAc
Ethyl acetate
Fmoc
9-Fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl
GPCR
G-protein coupled receptors
HATU
Hexafluorophosphate Azabenzotriazole Tetramethyl Uronium
HBTU
Hexafluorophosphate Benzotriazole Tetramethyl Uronium
HCTU
O-(1H-6-Chlorobenzotriazole-1-yl)-1,1,3,3-tetramethyluronium hexafluorophosphate
HMBC
Heteronuclear Multiple Bond Correlation
HSQC
Heteronuclear single quantum coherence
MALDI-TOF
Matrix-assisted laser dissorption/ionization time-of-flight
MS
Mass spectrometry
MQ
MilliQ-water
NMR
Nuclear magnetic resonance
NOESY
Nuclear Overhauser Effect Spectroscopy
PBS
Phosphate buffered saline
PEG
Polyethylene glycol
PyBOP
Benzotriazole-1-yl-oxy-tris-pyrrolidino-phosphonium hexafluorophosphate
RP-HPLC
Reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography
RT
Room temperature
SA
Sinapinic acid
SPPS
Solid phase peptide synthesis
TBTU
2-(1H-Benzotriazole-1-yl)-1,1,3,3-tetramethylaminium tetrafluoroborate
TFA
Trifluoroacetic acid
TFE
Trifluoroethanol
TEA
Triethylamine
Tm
Phase transition temperature
TIPS
Triisopropylsilane
iv
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Abstract
Peptide drugs have gained prominence as efficient modulators of intracellular targets, pre-
viously thought of as undruggable targets. They posses many favourable characteristics
as drugs such as high specificity, low toxicity and excellent biocompatability. However,
the reported cellular permeability for peptide drugs is rather poor for most peptides due
to a high polar surface area and many charged hydrophilic moieties. Peptide cyclization
can reprotedly in some instances increase the permeability of cellular bilayers. A solu-
tion for efficient delivery of peptide drugs could be in the form of liposomes. The lipidic
nanoparticles have gained large noteriety due to the ability to accomodate many different
types of molecules. Loading of these these liposomes is however an issue when it comes
to peptide formulations. Typically, passive loading methods are used, yielding subpar en-
capsulation. Therefor, active loading methods are explored in order to obtain liposomal
formulations with high concentrations of encapsulated peptide. Peptide synthesis and cy-
clization was explored through synthesis of the endogenous µ-opioid receptor modulator
endomorphin-1 and two analogs of this, with altered peptide sequences. An analog of the
plaque forming β-amyloid was synthesized to examine its ability to self assemble in aque-
ous solution. Lastly, various methods were tried for peptide cyclization, yielding a cyclic
heptamer with decent purity. Peptides were characterized by MALDI-TOF and UHPLC.
The cyclic peptide was analyzed further using 1D and 2D NMR. Peptides were remote
loaded into liposomes using an ammonium sulphate gradient, yielding a 60% encapsula-
tion efficiency for endomorphin-1, 37% for an analog with arginine and 28% for the cyclic
peptide.
Resume
Peptider som lægemidler har vundet fremtrædende plads som effektive modulatorer af
intracellulære mål, der tidligere var anset for at være umulige at medicinere. De har
mange gunstige egenskaber som lægemidler, såsom høj specificitet, lav toksicitet og
fremragende biokompatibilitet. Imidlertid er den rapporterede cellulære permeabilitet for
de fleste peptider temmelig dårlig på grund af et højt polært overfladeareal og mange lad-
ede hydrofile grupper. Cyklisering af peptide kan i nogle tilfælde øge permeabiliteten af
cellemembraner. En løsning til effektiv levering af peptidlægemidler kunne være i form
af liposomer. De lipidiske nanopartikler har fået stor noteritet på grund af evnen til at
rumme mange forskellige typer molekyler. Indkapsling af moleyler i disse liposomer er
imidlertid et problem, når det kommer til peptidformuleringer. Typisk anvendes passive
indkapslingsmetoder, hvilket giver ringe indkapsling. Derfor undersøges aktive indkap-
slingsmetoder for at opnå liposomale formuleringer med høje koncentrationer af indkap-
slet peptid. Peptidsyntese og ringslutning blev undersøgt gennem syntese af den endo-
gene µ-opioidreceptormodulator endomorphin-1 og to analoger af denne med ændrede
peptidsekvenser. En analog af plaquedannende β-amyloid blev syntetiseret for at under-
søge dets evne til selv at samle sig i vandig opløsning. Til sidst blev forskellige metoder
afprøvet til peptidcyklisering, hvilket gav en cyklisk heptamer med anstændig renhed.
Peptider blev karakteriseret ved MALDI-TOF og UHPLC. Det cykliske peptid blev analy-
seret yderligere under anvendelse af 1D og 2D NMR. Peptider blev fjernladt i liposomer
ved anvendelse af en ammoniumsulfatgradient, hvilket gav en 60% indkapslingseffek-
tivitet for endomorphin-1, 37% for en analog med arginin og 28% for det cykliske peptid.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
v
==PAGE:6==
vi
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
List of abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Peptides as therapeutics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Self associating peptides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.3
Peptide cyclization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1.4
Liposomal Formulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
1.5
Loading drug liposomes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
2
Materials and Methods
27
2.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
2.2
Synthesis of Endomorphin-1 and derived peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
2.3
Synthesis of cyclic peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
2.4
Liposome formulation and remote loading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
3
Results and Discussion
35
3.1
Synthesis of Endomorphin-1 and analogs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
3.2
Synthesis of amyloid peptide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
3.3
Synthesis of cyclic peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
3.4
Remote loading peptides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4
Future Perspectives
51
5
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
A Appendix
63
A.1 Data from Prep-HPLC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.2 NMR data and proton assignment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.3 UHPLC data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
vii
==PAGE:8==
viii
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Peptides as therapeutics
Traditionally, the world of therapeutics has relied heavily on small molecule drugs[1].
These small molecules are often have a molecular strucure based upon a natural product
in order to act as an antagonist or agonist in the body[1]. More recently, scientific focus
has shifted more towards the use of biologics and molecules derived from cellular pro-
cesses due to their enhanced specificity and reportedly reduced side effects [2]. DNA and
RNA based therapeutics have gained a lot of attention, especially due to the use of mRNA
in Covid-19 vaccine by Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna [3]. Another class of drugs derived
from cellular processes that has gained attention is peptide therapeutics[4]. Peptides are
typically signalling molecules in cells and have very high affinities for their specific targets.
Like their larger counterparts, proteins, peptides are are chains of amino acids, typically
in the range 2-100 amino acids[5]. In general, peptides are divided into oligopeptides and
polypeptides[6]. Oligopeptides (oligo; a few) are shorter, typically up to 20-25 amino acids
[6]. Polypeptides (poly; many) are bigger than oligopeptides, typically from 20-100 amino
acids[7]. In this project, the focus has been solely on synthesizing oligopeptides and thus,
for the sake of simplicity, all peptides regardsless of size will be referred to as peptides
throughout this paper. The use of peptides as therapeutic agents has been explored for
many years. In 1921, one of the first well known therapeutic peptides, Insulin, was iso-
lated from the pancreas of a dog by surgeon Frederick Banting and his assistant Chrales
Best [4]. Since 1921, big developments have happened regarding the production of pep-
tides like insulin. It is no longer harvested from animal pancreas, but is instead produced
through recombinant genes in organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae or Chinese
hamster ovary (CHO) cells [8]. By using recombinant technologies, production of peptide
and protein drugs have become much more versatile, as it allows for greater control of the
end product[8]. By introducing recombinant technologies, protein engineering was also
introduced which is the study of how structural changes affect the protein. Insulin is a good
example of how protein engineering can be utilized to alter release kinetics in the body.
When insulin was first produced as a recombinant product it was synthesized as human
insulin. This peptide self assembles into a hexamer with a central coordinating zinc ion[9].
This structure can be seen in figure 1.1. Insulin is administered subcutaneously, and the
absorbtion from subcutis to the blood stream is highly affected by the dimers dissociation
from the hexamerUnfortunately, which unfortunately is a rather slow process[10].
Figure 1.1: Insulin hexamer with central coordinating zinc ion.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
1
==PAGE:10==
In healthy patients, insulin is excreeted from the pancreas and will accumulate in the liver
along with the glucose that has to be broken down[9]. When human insulin is administered
subcutaneously, a higher concentration of the insulin will be accumulating in muscle and
fat tissues, while insufficient amounts accumulate in the liver. These poor release kinetics
for human insulin when administered subcutaneously can lead to spikes in blood glucose
in diabetic patients and it can also lead to extremely low blood glucose, which can cause a
patient to go into an acute coma[10]. Therefor, Novo Nordisk changed the sequence of in-
sulin by substituting a proline in the B chain of insulin for an aspartic acid. This substitution
did not alter the function of insulin but it destabalized the dimeric form of insulin through
charge repulsion, which significantly shortened release time for insulin[10][11]. Follow-
ing a similar approach, Novo Nordisk also made a slow release analog of insulin as they
wanted to develop a therapeutic that could be injected once a week. They did achieved
this through acetylating a lysine residue in the B-chain, which they then attached to a lipid
via a PEG spacer. Through these addition they achieved a new variant of insulin which
has the ability to bind to human serum albumin, which is the most prevalent protein in the
blood stream. By doing this, the release of insulin became much slower[12]. In general,
peptide therapeutics are quite attractive due to their high level of specificity for enzyme
receptors in biological systems[13]. Even peptides as short as 4 amino acid residues
such as the 4 amino acid peptides endomorphin-1 and 2 have been shown to have high
specificity for the µ-opiod receptor and could potentially replace morphine, which targets
the same receptor. The endogneous endomorphin peptides reportedly have higher affin-
ity for this receptor, are less toxic, and does not cause addiction like morphine[14]. High
specificity is always highly desirable for any therapeutic as it minimizes side effects and
increases efficacy. This allows for lower dosing which minimizes risks for toxicity[15].
Another benefit to using peptides as therapeutics is that they are biocompatible, mini-
mizing toxicity[13]. One disadvantage for peptide drugs is their metabolic stability[13].
Peptides that are produced through recombinant technologies will only contain L-amino
acids amino acids that are endogenous to the human body, and thus these peptides are
easily by proteases[16]. Some bacterial species have been found to produce and use
other amino acids than the 20 cannocical amino acids but these organisms are typically
not used for production of pharmaceuticals[17]. In these bacteria, D-isomers of natural
amino acids are often found along with non-proteogenic amino acids. Non-protegogenic
amino acids are molecules that serve the function of natural amino acids, but can not be
broken down by proteases[18]. Examples of these are molecules such as hypoglycine,
canavanine, and mimosine[18].
Figure 1.2: General structure for natural L-amino acid.
All of the 20 cannonical L-amino acids have the general structure shown in figure 1.2,
containing an amino group, a carboxylic acid and a side chain. The only two exceptions
are proline and glycine. In proline, the side chain is a aliphatic chain which is connedted
to the α-carbon and the amino group, forming a 5-membered heterocycle. Glycine is the
only non chiral amino acid as its side chain is a hydrogen. This also makes it the smallest
2
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:11==
amino acid out of the 20 cannonical[19].
1.1.1
Peptide synthesis
While recombinant technologies offer more flexibility than previous methods for changing
the structure of peptides, it still can not accomodate unnatural amino acids. One method
that allows incorporation of all amino acids is peptide synthesis. Synthesis of linear pep-
tides is a well described procedure and has been improved upon since the first reported
synthesis of a peptide in 1901 by Emil Fischer[20]. Introduction of solid phase peptide
synthesis was especially important for making peptide synthesis a very standardized pro-
cess it is today[21]. When peptide synthesis was first performed, it was done in solution
and was a quite difficult and inefficient[20]. By introducing SPPS, the synthesis became
much more efficient compared to in solution synthesis, which was how Fischer did it ini-
tially. SPPS utilizes a solid support material which consists of insoluble polymeric resin,
on which the peptide chain is assembled while bound to a linker[20][21]. Attaching amino
acids to the linker and the peptide chain is done through an activation of the carboxyl of
amino acids using various coupling reagents, often derived from 1-hydroxybenzotriazole
(HOBt). There are many different coupling reagents and equally many different resins to
choose from, making it a very flexible method[20]. When synthesizing a peptide using
solid phase, the first step is to select the type of C-terminal moiety that the peptide should
have, and from that, choose an appropriate resin. There are many to choose from, but
in general they fall under two main categories. They are either designed for fluorenyl-
methoxycarbonyl (Fmoc) peptides or for tert-butyloxycarbonyl (Boc) peptides[20]. Most
newer procedures for solid phase peptide synthesis will utilize amino acids where the
amino group is protected using Fmoc[20]. This protecting group allows for better control
of the synthesis, as it caps the peptide chain when the amino acid has been attached,
only allowing elongation once deprotected[21]. Previously it was common to use amino
acids, where the amino group was protected using a Boc protecting group. As the Boc
protecting group is acid labile, it is typically removed using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), which
is a rather harsh chemical. TFA is used for multiple cycles during these SPPS procedures
which produces large amounts of highly toxic and very corrosive waste. Once the peptide
is fully elongated it is cleaved using hydrofluoric acid[20]. The use of Fmoc allows for
milder conditions as this group is base labile and can be removed using piperidine[22]. In
order to cleave the peptide, TFA is used. For this thesis, all amino acids used for synthesis
of linear peptides were Fmoc-protected.
Removal of Fmoc protecting group
Removing the Fmoc protecting group is essential for coupling the next amino acid to the N-
terminus of the peptide. It can also be necessary to remove Fmoc in order to attach the first
amino acid to the solid support, but this depends on the resin which is used. Deprotection
is carried out using piperidine[22][20]. Piperidine is a sterically hindered base, which
is used to abstract an acidic hydrogen from the extended ring structure, causing a β-
elimination reaction. This β-elimination causes a decarboxylation, releasing CO2 as a
leaving group and dibenzofulvene as a byproduct. Dibenzofulvene is removed by way
of a reaction with the nitrogen lone-pair on piperidine in order to prevent any unwanted
side reactions caused by dibenzofulvene, as this molecule is a strong electrophile. After
this, the now deprotected amino group can abstract a hydrogen from the conjugated acid
of piperidine[23] to regenerate piperidine. A depiction of the mechanism can be seen in
figure 1.3.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.3: Mechanism for deprotection of Fmoc using piperidine with alanine as exam-
ple[23].
Attaching the first amino acid to 2-CTC resin
Attaching the first amino acid to the solid support can be done using different methods
depending on the resin. Resins such as the 2-chlorotrityl chloride (2-CTC) are not be
protected prior to loading of the first amino acid as other resins are. This resin is how-
ever more sensitive to water than other resins, which necessitates the use of dry sol-
vents for the first coupling at least and the resin might need reactivation using SOCl2[24].
Coupling the first amino acid is done by pre-activation of the amino acid with a sterically
hindered base, such as N,N’-diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA)[25]. DIPEA will abstract the
most acidic proton in the amino acid, which is found in the carboxyl group. Through this
preactivation, a highly reactive carboxylate is formed, which will perform a SN1 reaction
on the resin, with chloro as leaving group[26]. When the peptide is cleaved from this resin,
the C-terminal will be a carboxylic acid. The reaction mechanism can be seen in figure
1.4.
Figure 1.4: Mechanism for attachment of first amino acid (Ser) using DIPEA[24].
Formation of amide bond
If an amide resin such as TentaGel S-Ram is used, the first step would be removal of the
Fmoc protecting group, which was previously described in detail. When TentaGel S-Ram
is used for peptide synthesis, the peptide will have a C-terminal amide upon cleavage.
Deprotection is carried out as previously described in figure 1.3 and after this, the free
amino group on the resin is ready for the first coupling. Coupling an amino acid to a resin
like TentaGel proceeds through the same mechanism as when an amino acid is linked
to a peptide chain. As with the 2-CTC, the carboxyl group on the amino acid needs to
be activated in order for the reaction to proceed[22]. To form the amide bond, the amino
group of another amino acid or the resin must perform a nucleophilic attack on the elec-
trophilic carbonyl carbon in the next amino acid[22]. Without activation of the carboxyl
group, the amino group is not strong enough as a nucleophile to perform this attack[20].
Therefor, activation is needed in to make the reaction favourable and also to control the
4
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:13==
stereochemistry of the newly formed bond[27]. The activation starts out by deprotona-
tion of the carboxyl group. As before, deprotonation of the carboxyl group is carried out
by a sterically hindered non-nucleophillic base such as DIPEA, 4-dimethylaminopyridine
(DMAP), triethylamine (TEA), or 2,4,6-trimethylpyridine (collidine). In this thesis, the ster-
ically hindered base that was used for SPPS was collidine. After this, a coupling reagent
such as 1-[Bis(dimethylamino)methylene]-1H-1,2,3-triazolo[4,5-b]pyridinium 3-oxid hex-
afluorophosphate (HATU) is typically used in order to form an activated ester from the
carboxylic acid[21]. Previously, it was common to use two different coupling reagents,
where the first typically would be a carbodiimide such as N,N′-Diisopropylcarbodiimide
(DIC)[20][28]. This molecule contains the very electron deficient carbodiimide carbon,
that is readily attacked by the carboxylate. The second coupling reagent would be a
derivative of 1-hydroxybenzotriazole (HOBt), which is used to minimize isomerization of
the backbone[27]. The function of these two molecules have since been combined into
one molecule in the form of various coupling reagents such as the very popular uronium
salts like HATU. Reagents of this kind contain both the functionality of the DIC and the
HOBt in one molecule, which often come in a salt form. Among these uronian/guanidinium
salts, HATU is considered the golden standard[29].
Figure 1.5: Depiction of the mechanism for amide bond formation using HATU and DI-
PEA[30]. R=Amino acid, R’=H, R”=Petide chain or Solid Support[30].
When using a reagent like HATU, the reaction proceeds as shown in figure 1.5. The car-
boxylate makes a nucleophilic attack on uronium to substitute azabenzotriazole. This re-
sults in the formation of an O-acylisourea group, which is an excellent leaving group. The
formation of this leaving group allows the hydroxy-group of azabenzotriazole to make a
nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon, releasing a urea derivative as a leaving group.
Binding azbenzotriazole to the carboxyl group forms the so-called activated ester, that al-
lows the free amine to make a nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon, substituting
azabenzotriazole[29]. After the amine performs the nucleophilic attack, a 7-membered
ring intermediate is formed which is stabilized by hydrogen bonding. This reaction in-
termediate causes the reaction to be stereoselective[29]. During SPPS, many cycles of
Fmoc deprotections and couplings are performed in order to obtain the desired peptide
product[21]. In between these reactions, the resin will be thouroughly washed with N,N-
dimethylformaide, in order to remove excess reagents and byproducts[22].
TFA-mediated cleavage from resin and deprotection of sidechains
After completing the elongation of the peptide chain, it has to be detached from the solid
support. This cleavage can be done using different methods, depending on the resin.
The most commonly used method for cleaving a peptide from the solid support is to use
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
5
==PAGE:14==
TFA and a mixture of various chemicals known as scavengers[22]. Peptide cleavage is
caused by TFA mediated protonation of the amide carbonyl group adjacent to the solid
support. After protonation of the oxygen atom, the cleavage follows the reaction shown
in figure 1.6 resulting in a free peptide chain.
Figure 1.6: TFA-mediated cleavage of peptide chain from amide resin. Nu−= Nucle-
ophile[31]
As mentioned, TFA also removes the side chain protecting groups, i.e. Boc groups on
tryptophan or tert-butyl on tyrosine. The mechanism is similar to the cleavage reaction in
that it involves protonation causing the protecting group to be removed through an SN1
reaction mechanism[31]. When these protecting groups are removed from the amino acid
side chains they form reactive cations, which are easily can cause unwanted alkylation
with the amino acid side chains[22]. Therefor the cleavage mixture is prepared with scav-
engers, which are used to ”capture” the reactive species formed through TFA-cleavage.
An example of a typical scavenger is triisopropyl silane (TIPS), which is used to scavenge
protecting groups such as Boc or t-Butyl due to its ability to act as a hydride donor[32]. An
example of a side chain deprotection is shown in figure 1.7, showing the TFA mediated
cleavage of a Boc protecting group followed by cation scavenging by TIPS. Other com-
mon scavengers are ethane-1,2-dithiol (EDT) and phenol[31]. The peptide sequence and
the protecting groups will determine the exact mix of scavengers that should be used. For
example, scavengers like EDT are often used to scavenge cations after deprotection of
peptides containing cysteine[31].
6
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:15==
Figure 1.7: TFA mediated removal of Boc-protecting group and neutralization using
TIPS[31]
Cleavage of protected peptide from 2-CTC resin
When using the 2-CTC resin, another milder method can be used for peptide cleavage.
As mentioned previously, the 2-CTC resin is much more sensitive to oxidizing compared
to an mide resin[24]. Because of this sensitivity, the peptide chain can be cleaved from the
resin using a mixture of trifluoroethanol (TFE), acetic acid (AcOH), and dichloromethane
(DCM)[25]. Using this mixture to cleave a peptide from the 2-CTC results in a peptide
with all sidechain protecting groups still attached[33]. This can be useful if the peptide
has to modified in either the C or N-terminal in solution or if the peptide has to be cyclized.
TFE is strong enough as an acid, that it can protonate the C-terminal hydroxyl causing
the cleavage from the resin[33] as shown in figure 1.8.
Figure 1.8: TFE mediated peptide cleavage from 2-CTC resin
1.1.2
Optimizing peptide design
As mentioned, using SPPS allows the use of unnatural amino acids such as D-isomers,
synthetic amino acids, and incorporation of other molecules in the sequence[22]. By for
instance substituting L-amino acids with D-amino acids, the peptide can be made resistant
to proteolytic degradation[34]. These tactics can also be utilized in order to increase
permeability by either attaching a molecule with high affinity for a receptor expressed on
a cell[4]. It can also be a molecule which is able to mask the polar surface area of the
peptide such as a lipid[12]. When incorporating unnatural amino acids, it is often to avoid
proteosomal degradation, as the active site of the enzyme is unable to recognize the un-
natural amino acid[34]. Another option that is also used by biological systems would be
to add groups to the C-terminal or the N-terminal of the molecule, e.g. acetylation of the
C-terminus[35]. This is also done in order to mask the peptide from proteases[13]. It is
also possible to prolong the halflife of a peptide in circulation through N-methylation of
the backbone. By introducing a methyl group to the backbone nitrogen, steric hindrace is
created for the protease when it attempts to bind[36]. Peptide drugs do also face an issue
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
7
==PAGE:16==
regarding their poor cellular uptake due to their highly hydrophilic structure[35]. This is
true for most peptides, but there are a class of peptides that have very good permeability
called cell-penetrating peptides (CPP)[37]. These peptides are derived from bacterial and
viral peptide sequences, which have been found to enter cells[38]. There has been done
quite a lot of research on converting these CPP’s into therpeutic peptides, or grafting
residues from CPP’s onto therapeutic peptides[37][35]. Most peptides sequences apart
from CPP’s do however face major issues regarding permeability[4]. When designing
drug molecules in general, the balance between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity is key,
as this has a huge impact on the drugs ability to enter a cell. A very hydrophilic molecule
is generally easily solubilized, but this in turn means that diffusion across a lipidic bilayer
is more difficult. A very hydrophobic molecule will be very hard to dissolve in biological
fluids making diffusion rather difficult[39]. It is therefor important to also base the structural
design of a peptide drug or any drug for that matter upon a partitioning coefficient[40].
There are two partitioniing coefficients to keep in mind when designing a drug, the simplest
of which is logP. This partitioning coefficient is defined as follows:
logP = [P]Octanol
[P]H2O
(1.1)
Where P in this example is short for peptide. As one can clearly make out from this equa-
tion, logP determines how a molecule is partitioned between a very hydrophobic phase
and a hydrophilic phase. It is a quite simple way of gauging how hydrophilic or phobic a
molecule is. The logP is quite easy to measure as temperature and pH are not taken into
account[40]. As the pH varies throughout biological systems, another patitioning coeffi-
cient which takes this into account is desirable. This partitioning coefficient is called logD
and defined as follows:
logD = [P uncharged]octanol + [P charged]octanol
[P uncharged]H2O + [P charged]H2O
(1.2)
By including the charged species in solution, logD takes the changing pH into account.
Therefor, logD varies depending on the pH in solution, just like the solubility and hy-
drophilicity of a molecule[40]. logD is mostly used as a parameter for molecules that are
ionizable as unionizable molecules will have a a more constant logD. For such molecules,
logP is a better figure to use, but for peptides, logD is applicable[40]. All peptides are ion-
izable in some way due to the structure of the backbone, which also means that peptides
in general are very water soluble[41]. In figure 1.2, a generalized structure of an amino
acid was shown with no charge on the amino group or the carboxyl group. When proteins
and peptides are in physiological fluids however, they will not be unionized as is shown
here. Instead, the amino acids will be in a zwitterionic form, which means that both the
amino group and the carboxyl group will be ionized, giving a net charge of zero. This
zwitterionic state of the peptide backbone also means that the peptide backbone can ex-
ist in two different resonance forms as shown in figure 1.9. These resonance forms gives
the peptide backbone double bond charateristics, reducing flexibility[41]. The water sol-
ubility of peptides can be further increased through the amino acids incorporated in the
sequence, e.g. aspartic acid, glutamic acid, lysine, and arginine. Some amino acids can
also decrease solubility, if their side chain is hydrophobic such as leucine, isoleucine, and
alanine.
8
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.9: Resonance structures of the peptide backbone
Peptides have also been used as conjuagtes for other drug molecules such as DNA and
RNA through reactions such as Copper catalyzed Azide Alkyne Cycloaddition (CuAAC)[42].
Synthetic amino acid residues with side chain moieties such as an azide or an alkyne
can be incorporated into a peptide structure through standard SPPS reactions, prov-
ing the flexibility that this method provides[22][42]. Apart from being attractive as drug
molecules, peptides also have the ability to play a substantial role in drug delivery for
other molecules[43][42]. A good example of this is peptide-drug conjugates, where a
drug is conjugated to a peptide with high affinity for a specific cell membrane bound re-
ceptor. An example of such a peptide could be an analog of the well studied RGD peptide
(arginine-glycine-aspartic acid)[44]. The RGD motif has been explored a lot due to its high
affinity for integrin proteins, heavily expressed on the surface of tumor cells[44]. This high
affinity can exploited for delivery of chemotherapeutics since most traditional molecules
in that class of drugs are rather toxic. It is therefor desirable to minimize the exposure
to these therapeutics for healthy tissues so as to limit severe adverse effects that are
usually associated with chemotherapeutics[44][45]. RGD peptides can be used as a tag
for chemotherapeutics, directing the drug to the tumors and avoiding the healthy tissues.
One additional benefit to the use of RGD is its ability to increase tumor penetration for
the chemotherapeutic which can be an issue for solid tumors[46]. In the tumor microen-
vironment one will typically encounter an increase in the expression of proteins forming
epithelial junctions and the extracellular matrix (ECM) structures[47]. This increase in the
density of the extracellular matrix leads to poor pentration for therapeutics. Because of
this, a higher dose is required in order to affect the tumor sufficiently. By using a RGD pep-
tide to target tumors, it has been shown that it is possible to modulate the epithelial junc-
tions leading to increased penetration in the tumor[47]. Other research groups have also
tried to attach conjugates to larger nanostructure such as liposomes in order to make them
more specific[48]. Liposomes typically rely on passive targeting through what is known
as the enhanced permeability and rentention (EPR) effect, which will further discussed in
section 1.4. Some research has suggested that liposomes can be made selective to spe-
cific tissues through a similar strategy as the one used for peptide-drug conjugates[48].
Among the peptides that have been used in this approach is the RGD, which has been
covalently attached the surface of the liposome in order to target tumors[47].
1.2
Self associating peptides
In biology, many molecules are known to selfassociate into larger macrostructures. Through
self assembly many biological structures such as the cell membrane, enzymes and ten-
dons are formed[49]. Proteins and peptides are known to form complex self assembled
nanostructures, and most cellular proteins exist in some form of complex with other pro-
teins or only exihibit activity when in a complex[5]. Insulin for instance will associate into
a dimer, and this dimer will form a hexamer along with two other dimers[10]. Proteins and
peptide complexes can be composed of molecules with identical structures such as with
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
9
==PAGE:18==
insulin, or they can be composed of molecules with different structures. An example of
a protein complex composed of molecules with different sturctures is G-protein coupled
receptors (GPCR) and the associated G-protein[5]. The receptor itself is a membrane
embedded domain, that detects signaling molecules from the extracellular environment.
When the receptor detects no signal from the extracellular environment it is coupled to the
protein complex which consists of three subunits, α, β, and γ[5]. These three subunits are
associated in a complex which keeps the G-protein in a dormant state. However, when a
GPCR detects an extracellular signal, the receptor will associates to the α-unit, allowing
the α-unit to bind GTP. This causes the α-unit to dissociate from the other two subunits,
allowing the it to send an intracellularly signal. GPCR’s are extremely important for cel-
lular interactions and is a prime example of the importance of protein-protein interactions
are[5].
Figure 1.10: Structure of G-protein and G-protein coupled receptor[50]
Self association of peptides can be utilized for purposes such as drug delivery and bio-
materials. However, sometimes when peptides and proteins self associate, it can lead to
severe diseases such as most neurodegerative diseases[51]. The β-amyloid sequence
(LVFFA), shown in figure 1.11, is derived from a larger peptide, which has been heavily
studied due to its involvement in the progression of Alzheimer’s disease[51][52]. In pa-
tients suffering from this disease, an error occurs in the folding of the precursor protein,
which causes the peptide to self assemble[51]. Through this self association the peptide
forms insoluble β-sheet containing plaques, which accumulates in cells[51][52]. The self-
association is mostly contributed to two centrally placed phenyl alanine residues, that are
able to intermolecularly bind through π-stacking. Also leucine is known to be important
for van der Waals interactions, and is also contributing to the β-sheet formation[52]. Fur-
thermore, peptides and proteins are able to fold in such a way that highly hydrophobic
residues such as the ones found in the β-amyloid sequence are shielded from the aque-
ous environment. The central role played by the two phenyl alanine residues has been
proven by reducing the peptide to only FF, which still self associated into plaques[53].
Figure 1.11: Structure of a β-amyloid derived peptide, which was studied in this thesis
Using the knowdledge gained from the β-amyloid and other self associating peptides and
proteins can be used to develop biomaterials of various kinds and also be used for drug
delivery purposes. The molecular dynamics leading to self assembly of peptides such
10
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:19==
as the β-amyloid sequence can for instance be applied to surfactant like peptides[54].
A surfactant is defined as a molecule which sits at the transition between two phases,
e.g. an oily phase and an aqueous phase[55]. Another word describing these molecules
would be amphiphilic. A well known example of an amphiphile is phospholipids or lipids
in general, which contain a higly hydrophilic ”head” in the form of a phosphate group or a
carboxylic acid[56]. The rest of the molecule is a highly hydrophobic ”tail”, and will asso-
ciate with other hydrophobic moities in an effort to shield itself from the aqueous solution.
The ”head” of a surfactant faces the surrounding aqueous environment and shields the
hydrophobic tail. Due to the amphiphilic structure of surfactants, they tend to form large
nanostructures when subjected to aqueous environments[55][56]. Like the long aliphatic
chains of lipids, peptides can be very hydrophobic due to their side chanis as it was de-
scribed for the β-amyloid sequence[51]. This is also seen for large proteins from biological
systems, where hydrophobic parts of the sequence tend to be isolated from the solution in
hydrophobic pockets deep inside the structure[35]. Surfactant like peptides synthesized
with hydrophobic residues as the ”tail” portion of the surfactant and polar residues as the
hydrophilic ”head”[54]. The self assembly of surfactant like peptides can be engineered
through changes in the amino acid sequence. Through these changes, one can alter the
strength of the interactions between the peptides[54]. Unlike self assemblies of lipids that
only rely on weak van der Waals interaction and dipolar[56], assemblies of peptides can
also benefit from the stronger intermolecular interaction, hydrogen bonding, due to the
backbone structure of peptides[5]. As mentioned previously, the peptide backbone con-
sist of repeating unit of [-HN-CαHR-CO-]n as seen in figure 1.2. The amide proton and
the carbonyl oxygen can form relatively strong hydrogen bonds, which furhter stabilizes
intermolecular interactions and self assembly[57]. These intermolecular interaction are
obviously not as strong as covalent bonds, but these are harder to introduce for these as-
semblies. In the tail portion of surfactant like peptides, the side chains contribute mainly
through dipole-dipole interaction and van der Waals interactions such as π-stacking with
aromatic residues[57]. The self association does not happen only because of one single
residue, but rather due to the sum of forces keeping the molecules together[54]. The
strength of the interactions can however be changed if the surrounding pH or the tem-
perature is changed just as folded proteins[57]. The secondary and tertiary structure of
proteins are relatively temperature sensitive, and if for instance the temperature is raised
it can cause the protein to denature. The same applies to surfactant like peptides, where
the self assembly can be destroyed through changes in pH or temperature, e.g. in a lyso-
some[54]. Another form of self assembly, which is often seen in nature and also utilized
for biomaterials is coiled coil peptides[58].
Figure 1.12: Structure of the coiled coil peptides: a) A view of the heptad structure seen
from inside the core. b) 3D depiction of the coiled coil structure
These peptides show great potential as biomaterials due to their well understood pro-
grammability htrough changes in the sequence[58]. The general structure of coiled coils
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
11
==PAGE:20==
consitst of multiple alpha helices that are coiled around each other, similar to how the
strands in a rope are coiled[58]. Coiled coil peptides are structured in a heptad format;
abcdefg, with a and d being hydrophobic residues and e and g being hydrophilic charged
residues. Due to this heptad strucure, the hydrophobic residues will be facing the core of
the bundle of alpha helices as depicted in 1.12. This makes the choice of these reisudes
important for the packing of the entire structure[58]. When choosing the charged peptides
it is important that positions e and g are differently charged in order to stabilize the struc-
ture through ionic interactions[58]. The remaining residues in the structure are usually
hydrophillic residues although not necessarily charged. By altering the structure of the
core, one can achieve a dimeric, trimeric, and tetrameric coiled coil[58].
1.3
Peptide cyclization
Cyclic peptides are interesting molecules as they reportedly have increased proteosomal
resistance, increased affinity for hydrophobic protein targets and increased cell perme-
ability[25][59]. In linear peptides, the side chains and the backbone have free movement
which can hamper some interactions with protein targets, as the peptide is in a less ideal
conformation[60]. When it comes to the conformation adapted by the side chains and the
backbone, changes in pH and temperature are important[59]. In general, sterically bulky
side chains are also expected to position themselves away from other sterically bulky
groups in order to minimize steric clashes[60]. By cyclizating a peptide, it is possible to
lock the molecule into a more potent conformation by reducing the flexibility[59]. This
has been shown to be an effective tool, especially when targeting protein-protein interac-
tions[61]. Protein-protein interactions play pivotal roles in many cellular processes such
as Ubiquitination of proteins for degradation[35]. Often times a linear peptide will fold in
such a way in a physiological fluid, that the hydrophobic residues are more shielded[60].
Due to this, the interaction between a linear peptide and a hydrophobic pocket in a protein
can be challenging, as the fold of a linear peptide can be more difficult to predict[59][35].
One specific interaction that has been modulated through the use of cyclic peptides is the
interaction between the tumor supressing protein p53 and the polyubiquitinase Mdm2[62].
The interaction between these two proteins has been linked to tumour growth in cancer,
and thus is a desirable target for cancer treatment[62][35]. Cyclic peptides are quite at-
tractive as drug molecules due to the reasons mentioned above. Unfortunately, there is no
unanimously agreed upon method for the synthesis of these compounds. Unlike SPPS,
which has very well defined protocols with minor differences[22], cyclization has multiple
methodologies, each one quite different from the other[33][63][64]. Cyclization is a no-
toriously slow reaction, which often leads to other side reaction happening instead[64].
Very short peptide sequences can be extremely difficult to cyclize, and attempts to do
so will often lead to a high degree of dimerization[65]. For larger peptides the chance of
obtaining a cyclic peptide is higher, but it is also quite likely that some dimerization will be
observed[64].
1.3.1
Head-to-tail cyclization
When synthesizing a cyclic peptide, there are a number of options for the type of cycliza-
tion that one can make. In this paper, the main focus has been head-to-tail cyclization,
which is a cyclization where the C-terminal and N-terminal are linked, typically through
a lactamization. This cyclization method can be applied to all peptides regardless of se-
quence unlike some of other methods[63]. The only structural requirement for the peptide
is to have a C-terminal carboxylic acid and a N-terminal amine. As mentioned previously,
many resins will result in a C-terminal amide when the peptide is cleaved from the solid
support (see figure 1.6, whereas others will result in a carboxylic acid, see figure 1.8[22].
When a peptide is synthesized with the purpose of being cyclized head-to-tail, the resin
12
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:21==
that is used is typically 2-CTC[25]. This is due to the mild cleavage conditions that can
be used with this resin, allowing for cleavage of a peptide with all side chain protecting
groups still attached. Having the side chain protecting groups still attached is conve-
nient, as it minimizes risk of unwanted side reaction between side chains and the C- or
N-terminal[25]. The lactamization reaction used to connect the C-terminal and the N-
terminal follows the same mechanism as the amide bond formation shown in figure 1.5.
However, as mentioned, this reaction is not as favoured due to the energy barrier asso-
ciated with folding the peptide[59]. Figure 1.9 shows how the backbone of the peptide
can exist in two different resonance forms, which gives the backbone some double bond
characteristics. This has quite a big impact on the flexibility of the backbone, which in
turn affects cyclization[41]. To form the ring lactamization, some groups have reported
the use of HATU[63], while others report the use of non-guanidinium based reagents
such as benzotriazol-1-yloxytripyrrolidinophosphonium hexafluorophosphate (PyBOP) or
3-(diethoxyphosphoryloxy)-1,2,3-benzotriazin-4(3H)-one (DEPBT)[25][66].
The reason
for using reagents such as DEPBT and PyBOP is to avoid guanidination of the N-terminal.
This is an unwanted side reaction that can occur if a reaction using guanidine is particularly
slow[29]. It has also been shown that guanidination can occur particularly for cylizations
because the carboxylate is not preactivated seperated from the amino group. This is of
course impossible seen as the two groups are part of the same molecule[39]. Trying to
cyclize a peptide head-to-tail often leads to dimerization of the peptide instead, as this
reaction proceeds at a much higher rate than cyclization[66]. There are ways to combat
these issues, and techniques for peptide cyclization that have been shown to produce
good results[33]. Cyclizing a peptide head-to-tail can be done on resin or in solution de-
pending on how the linear peptide synthesis is performed[63], but the reaction is most
commonly done in solution[33]. Many groups have found that adding sodium is benefi-
cial to the cyclization of peptides. The exact mechanism of the sodium is unknown, but
it is thought to coordinate the carbonyl groups in the peptide backbone, causing it to fold
around the sodium ion[59]. When sodium is added to the reaction, it is often by way
of a sodium salt of the base used to deprotonate the carboxylic acid[25]. Keeping the
concentration low is a critical parameter for combatting dimerization in solution as well.
The typical concentration of linear precursor used for in solution cyclizations is around 1
mM[25]. When performing an on-resin peptide cyclization, the synthetic procedure for the
linear precursor has to be altered slightly in order to accomodate the needs of this method.
One example of a reported procedure for on-resin cyclization starts by attaching the first
amino acid to the resin by its side-chain[63]. This method can be seen in figure 1.13.
Because of this, the amino acid sequence must contain one trifunctional amino acid. Be-
fore attaching the amino acid, the protecting group attached to the side chain is removed
and an orthogonal protection group is attached to the carboxyl group. This protecting
group will typically be an allyl group as they can be selectively removed using a palladium
catalyst[64]. This allows for head-to-tail cyclization after removal of the N-terminal Fmoc
protecting group. Lactamization can be done using standard coupling reagents as de-
scribed previously[63]. Following this, the now cyclic peptide can be cleaved of the resin
with TFA and scavengers as shown in figure 1.6[63]. This approach has been reported to
give high yields, while some argue that it is not the ideal approach citing less impressive
yields[64][67]. When cyclization is performed on resin, dimerization can not occur, as the
C-terminus is bound to the solid support and the peptide chains are physically kept apart
due to the resin[63]. This creates a state of pseudo-low peptide concentration, which
is beneficial for the reaction[63]. On-resin cyclization is a method which seems rather
convenient, although it does add quite a lot of worktime to the procedure because of the
need for additional protecting groups[63]. The method is not as flexible as in solution
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
13
==PAGE:22==
lactamization, because it neccesitates the use of hydrophilic amino acids in the peptide
structure[64].
Figure 1.13: Schematic depiction of on-resin peptide cyclization[63]
More complicated methods for head-to-tail cyclization have been developed. One group
described a method, that they called CyClick[67]. CyClick is reportedly a chemoselec-
tive reaction, due to the formation of a terminal aldehyde in the peptide structure. The
ring closing reaction will then be between an aldehyde and an amine or amide. Due to
the electrophilicity of the aldehyde, the ring closure will be more favoured compared to
aformentioned reaction conditions[67]. The group have developed different methods for
introduction of an aldehyde in the peptide, making this a rather flexible method. Also, this
method is not limited by the need for any specific amino acids in the peptide sequence.
To convert the N-terminal amine into an aldehyde is perhaps the simplest of the three
methods. For this method, the linear peptide precursor has to be synthesized on a resin
such Tentagel S-Ram or Rink as a C-terminal amide is necessary for cyclization. After
completing synthesis of the linear peptide, the peptide is cleaved as per usual with TFA
and scavengers[67]. Following this, the amine is converted into an aldehyde by adding a
large excess of sodium periodate as depicted in figure 1.14
Figure 1.14: Synthetic procedure for converting N-terminal to aldehyde[67]
If instead, the C-terminal has to be converted to an aldehyde, the procedure is slightly
more complex. The aldehyde is created by way of the first three amino acids, which
will not be present in the final peptide. The first amino acid which is attached is glycine,
which acts as a sort of spacer between the resin and the peptide[67]. Next, threonine is
added using standard SPPS reagents. Following this, an arbitrary amino is added with
an aldehyde instead of the carboxyl group. In the procedure, this amino acid is coupled
using DIPEA only, as this allows for formation of a five membered heterocyclic ring formed
by the carboxyl group on threonine and the aldehyde. The amine is then protected with a
BOC protecting group by addition of Boc anhydride. Following this, the procedure follows
standard SPPS protocols. Upon cleavage of the peptide, it is released as a C-terminal
14
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:23==
aldehyde, due to the aforementioned ring structure. When the TFA is added to the resin,
this ring is cleaved to release the aldehyde[67].
Figure 1.15: Synthetic procedure for convertion of C-terminal to an aldehyde[67]
When a fully elongated peptide with either a C-terminal or N-terminal aldehyde has been
synthesised, the cyclization can take place. Cyclisation happens as an intramolecular re-
action where either the N-terminal amine or the C-terminal amide (from a resin like Rink
or Tentagel S-Ram) makes a nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl carbon of the aldehyde
catalysed by DMAP[67]. Another method for head-to-tail cyclization of peptides is by way
of an oxygen to nitrogen acyl migration. This method is reported to minimize racemiza-
tion when synthesizing the cyclic peptide[25]. The reaction protocol can be seen in figure
1.17. For this approach, a Boc-serine with no side chain protection group is coupled to a
2-CTC resin as the first amino acid. Using the Boc-amino acid in this instance is done in
an effort to retain the protecting group during synthesis. The other amino acids used in
the synthesis are all Fmoc protected, which means that the Boc group will not be removed
during synthesis. After attaching the Boc-serine, the second amino acid in the sequence
is attached via the side chain of serine, effectively creating an ester. The reaction is cat-
alyzed by N,N′-Diisopropylcarbodiimide (DIC) and DMAP. Only a small amount of DMAP
is needed in order to deprotonate the carboxyl group of the second amino acid, which can
then make a nucleophilic attack at the electrophilic diimide carbon[25]. The mechanism
for this step in the synthesis can be seen in figure 1.16.
Figure 1.16: Mechanism for coupling the second amino acid to sidechain of serine
This makes the carbonyl carbon a significantly better electrophile, allowing the alcohol
in the serine sidechain to make a nucleophilic attack at this site[22]. Following the ester
formation, the remaining amino acids are attached using standard solid phase peptide
synthesis procedures. As the resin used for the synthesis is 2-CTC, the peptide chain
can be cleaved under mild conditions with TFE/AcOH/DCM[24]. After cleaving, cycliza-
tion is achieved using PyBOP and NaHCO3 as coupling reagents. As mentioned earlier,
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
15
==PAGE:24==
the use of sodium in cyclization reactions has been found to increase yield[33]. After
cyclizing comes the migration reaction, which can be done in two ways using alkaline
solutions. One method is done in organic solvents, using 20 % piperidine in DMF for
the O to N acyl transfer. The other method is done in an aqueous solution of phosphate
buffered saline (PBS). By using this approach, some of the racemization caused by cou-
pling reagents should in theory be eliminated due to the resonance forms that the molecule
goes through[25].
Figure 1.17: Synthetic procedure for peptide cyclization via O-N migration[25]
1.3.2
Structural optimization for peptide cyclization
In order to optimize cyclization reactions, the impact of different amino acids in the se-
quence has been investigated. Many groups have reported that the inclusion of proline or
glycine are beneficial for the reaction rate and yield. Both proline and glycine are known
to induce β-turns in larger peptide structures and proteins, which is a hairpin like struc-
ture[59]. When it comes to peptide cyclization, the inclusion of proline is able to induce a
turn, bringing the C-terminus and N-terminus closer together. This is due to the unique
structure of proline, which restricts the movement of the backbone. Glycine does not in-
duce turns in the same way as proline, because the structure is completely different[59].
Another optimization that can be made for cyclization is to include D-isomers of natural
amino acids[59].
Figure 1.18: D- and L-configuration of an arbitrary amino acid
In figure 1.18, a L- and a D-amino acid are shown. This figure clearly shows the differ-
ence in structure for the two, which is leads to a different conformation of the side chain,
when incorporated in a peptide sequence. Figure 1.19 depicts Newmann projections of
three staggered conformers, with the angle between the amine and the side chain being
either 180◦or 60◦[68]. In a staggered confirmation, angles between the substituents will
be 60◦when as a Newman projection. There are three possibilities for the staggered con-
formations in terms of the placement of substituents in relation to one another. In order
16
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:25==
for the amino acid to switch between the staggered conformers, it has to go through less
energetically favoured eclipsed transition states[68]. In figure 1.19, drawn from the most
favoured to the least favoured from left to right. In the figure, two gauche confimations
and one trans confirmation for the α-carbon, where the gauche(-) has been shown to be
the energetically preferred conformer. For other molecules, the trans conformer would be
the most stable, as it minimizes steric clashing between the biggest substituents. How-
ever, for amino acids the Gauche effect comes into play, which a term used to describe
molecules where a Gauche conformer is more stable than the trans conformer[68].
Figure 1.19:
Newman projection of the three staggered confirmations for L-amino
acids[68]
For the D-isomer the same confirmational rules can be applied, the only difference being
that NH and OC in figure 1.19 will be placed opposite to what the figure shows[59]. This
means, that for the D-isomer of an amino acid, the side chain (R) will be pointing down
when in a gauche(-). Due to this, D-amino acids can benefit the fold of the peptide chain
because this amino acid effectively will be on the backside of the cyclic peptide[59].
1.3.3
Other methods for peptide cyclization
In biology, cyclic peptides and proteins often have cyclic structures. The cyclization most
commonly seen in such proteins is side-chain-to-side-chain cyclization in the form of disul-
fide bridges. These types of crosslinkages are both seen in human insulin and also in
large proteins such as monoclonal antibodies, which are held together by these covalent
bonds[69][12]. To create a disulfide bridge in a peptide, two cysteine residues are re-
quired, as the disulfide bridge is covalent bond between the thiol moieties of the cysteine
sidechain[70]. Linking the two thiols together chemically is done through a redox reaction
where one thiol will be deprotonated and act as a nucleophile, attacking the other thiol
to create the bridge. This is typically carried out by addition of a large amount of iodine
into a solution of the peptide[70]. This reaction can be carried out on resin, making it
rather convenient[71]. Disulfide bridges are not a particularly strong bonds compared to
the amide bonds described previously. It is suspectible to rapid reduction, but this feature
can be usefull in cases such as the RGD peptide[47]. One analog of the RGD peptide
named the iRGD is synthesized as a cyclic peptide with a disulfide bridge. Part of the
mechanism for this specific analog, is the enzymatic reduction of the disulfide bond which
releases the RGD sequence[47]. There are also other forms of side-chain-to-side-chain
cyclizations, which use unnatural amino acids with bioorthogonal chemistry to stabilize
the molecule. Bioorthogonal chemistry is often used as a way to increase stability for
drugs[61]. A typical bioorthogonal motif in a cyclic peptide could for instance be introduced
by using unnatural amino acids to form a triazole ring via click chemistry[42]. The use of
the Copper-Catalyzed Azide-Alkyne Cycloaddition (CuAAC) reaction or Click chemistry
in biomolecular chemistry and medicinal chemistry has become quite popular, as it offers
a bioorthogal motif to the molecule, making potential drug molecules more resistant to
degradation[61]. The other reason why this reaction is rather popular is that click chem-
istry is a very robust and versatile reaction, usually giving relatively high yields. This is
generally the case for metal catalyzed reactions[72][61]. As the name of the reaction
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
17
==PAGE:26==
implies, it is a cycloaddition reaction, where copper (I) is used as a catalyst to form a tria-
zole ring from an azide and a alkyne in a dipolar 1,3-cycloaddition[72]. To create a cyclic
peptide through click chemistry, two or more residues therefor has to be unnaturla amino
acids with these moieties as side chains. These amino acids are commercially avalable
and can be incorporated into a peptide through standard SPPS protocols. Using click
chemistry in peptide cyclizations is often associated with a class of cyclic peptides called
stapled peptides[61]. Typically the azide and alkyne amino acids needed for thi reaction
will be placed in an i, i+4 or i, i+7 pattern in order to induce an α-helical structure in the
peptide[61][35]. These amino acids are commercially available and can be incorporated
into the peptide chain using standard SPPS reaction conditions. A depiction of the amino
acid pattern associated with stapled peptides can be seen in figure1.20.
Figure 1.20: Depiction of the different α-helix inducing motifs used in stapled peptide. A)
i, i+4; B) i, i+7; C) double i, i+4 [61]
Structural analysis of peptides and proteins has shown that approximately 3.6 amino acids
are needed per turn in an α-helix[61]. This is why the aforementioned spacing is used.
Standard click-chemistry reaction conditions is however not without flaws as the removal
of the copper catalyst from the sample has proven to be quite difficult[72]. This has been
shown with mass spectrometry of the final product, which will show a peak at M+63 indi-
cating the presence of copper[72]. Because of this, an alternative to the cooper catalyzed
reaction has been developed which instead is called strain promoted azide-alkyne cy-
cloaddition (SPAAC)[73]. This reaction is a modified version of CuAAC, and as such it
is still a dipolar 1,3-cycloaddition between an alkyne and azide. The main difference is
that the alkyne in CuAAC is linear and terminal but in SPAAC the alkyne is part of an 8
membered ring[73]. As alkynes geometrically are flat molecule, incorporating this moiety
into an 8 membered ring creates a massive amount of strain. This allows the reaction
to proceed without the need for copper as the strain allows the use of flourescence as
catalyst[73].
Figure 1.21: Catalytic cycle for CuAAC induced triazole formation[61]
18
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:27==
Another reaction which is often associated with stapled peptides is olefin metathesis[61].
The olefin metathesis reaction is a [2+2] cycloaddtion reaction followed by a [2+2] retrocy-
cloaddition, which is catalyzed with a metal-carbene complex[62]. Grubb’s catalyst is the
most commonly used catalyst, as it allows greater flexibility than other catalysts[61]. This
catalyst is a ruthenium-based carbene complex capable of connecting two alkene moi-
eties by forming a new double bond[35]. To create a stapled peptide using this method
requires the incorporation of two synthetic amino acids with a terminal alkene in their side
chain. First step in the catalytic cycle is the cycloaddition, where a 4-membered ring is
formed between the two alkenes. Next, the [2+2] retrocycloaddition forms the new double
bond and releases the catalyst once again[61]. The catalytic cycle can be seen in figure
1.22.
Figure 1.22: Catalytic cyclic for olefin metathesis[61]
1.4
Liposomal Formulations
As the pharma industry has started to explore molecules such as oligonucleotides and
peptides as drugs, the need for drug delivery methods ensuring stability for these molecules
have become even bigger[56]. This need has led to the use of various nano-particles as
delivery vesicles for these highly sensitive moelcules. Many different compositions have
been explored for these nano particles, among which are various polymers and espe-
cially lipids[56][74][62]. In this thesis, the lipidic nano particle formulation known as lipo-
somes have been explored. Liposomes are among the most studied nanostructures for
drug delivery, partly because they are one of the oldest as they were first described in
the 1960’s[56]. Structurally, a liposome is a supramolecular aggregate in the shape of a
sphere composing either one or multiple bilayers made from amphipathic lipids[56][74].
As mentioned earlier, an amphiphile is defined as a molecule that has a highly polar hy-
drophilic ”head” and a non-polar hydrophobic ”tail”, making it behave like a surfactant[55].
Just like the surfactant like peptides that were described earlier, these phospholipids will
form aggregates when subjected to an aqueous phase as a means to shield the hydropho-
bic tail[56]. When these aggregates form, they organize themselves in one or more bilayer
similar to the bilayer found in cells, with the lipid tails facing eachotherand the phosphate
head facing the surrounding environment and the aqeous core[75]. A liposomal structure
is depicted in figure 1.23.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 1.23: Depiction of a liposome with an aqueous core, a lipid bilayer, and the aque-
ous exterior[76]. The structure also has PEGylated lipids, indicating that it is is a stealth
formulation.
As the structure has both hydrophobic and hydrophilic sites, the liposome becomes rather
versatile as a drug delivery tool[56]. Hydrophobic drugs have been shown to accumulate
inside the bilayer, whereas hydrophilic drugs will accumulate in the aqueous core[56].
The lipids used for liposomal formulations are usually phosphorlipids, and can vary in
length depending on the desired thickness of the bilayer[75]. Changing the length of the
lipid tails will also affect the phase transition temperature (Tm) for the bilayer, which is
the temperature at which the lipids will transition from a solid ordered to a liquid disor-
dered state[56]. In general, longer fatty acids will have a higher Tm value than shorter
fatty acids, while unsaturated lipids have very low Tm values because the double bond
introduces a kink in the structure, creating a destabilized bilayer[56]. As mentioned ear-
lier, intermolecular interactions are relatively weak, and thus rely more on a large amount
of weaker interactions creating a collectively big force[55]. Many liposomal formulations
include cholesterol, which when added into the lipid formulation transforms the bilayer into
the liquid ordered (LO) state[77]. For drug delivery purposes, incorporation of cholesterol
can be hugely beneficial as the LO phase is less sensitive to temperature. It is tyically
incorporated in liposomal formulations in order to increase circulation times and stabil-
ity[56]. Going through litterature on liposomal formulations, they tend to be composed of
2-3 different phospholipids and cholesterol, and the lipids will be chosen based on the
desired characteristics of the vesicle[56].
1.4.1
Formulating and producing liposomes
Producing liposomes in the laboratory can be quite simple. The method which is typically
used is called thin film hydration[56]. When using this method, the first step is to com-
pletely dissolve the mixture of lipids in desired ratio. Typically, the lipids are dissolved in
an organic solvents such as chloroform in a round-bottomed flask. After addition of the
organic solvent, the flask is placed in rotary evaporator in order to remove the solvent. By
rotating the flask while removing the solvent, the lipids are dispursed on the flask, creating
a thin lipid film[56]. By rehdrating the film using an aqueous buffer, liposomes are cre-
ated due to lipid aggregation[78][56]. What buffer to use is chosen based on the loading
method for the liposome and also the structure of the drug molecule[78]. As the thin film
is rehydrated, the amphiphilic lipids will aggregate and form nanostructures[55]. The thin
film method is extremely simple, but it also has some downsides. The major downside to
the method is that it is highly unlikely that all of the thin film will be rehydrated. If many
different lipids are used for the formulation at very specific ratios, it will be very hard to
control that these ratios remain the same after rehydration[56]. When the liposomes are
formed during rehydration, they tend to be large multilamellar vesicles which typically is
20
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:29==
not desirable. Furthermore, the sizes of the liposomes tend to vary a lot[79]. Experiments
have been made with multilamellar vesicles[75], but in most of the litterature, unilamel-
lar liposomes are the golden standard[56]. Reducing the size of liposomes and making
them more homogenous is typically done through a process called extrution, but can also
be done through sonication[56]. Extrution is a process where the liposomes are being
mechanically reduced in size by being pushed through one or mulitple filters in order to
disperse the lipids[80]. It is usually performed under high pressure and high temperatures
in order to achieve a more liquid state for the bilayer as the process is ongoing[80]. For
many pharmaceutical purposes, the desired diameter is around 100 nm[79]. This size
can be achieved through extrution through gradually smaller filters, typically starting at
800 nm and ending at 100 nm. Extrution does tend to cause some loss of lipids, which
will be visible on the filters when finishing the process[79]. Obviously, this can be slightly
problematic for controlling the lipid contents of the liposomes. The method does also
have some issues regarding capacity, which typically is quite low. Therfor, this method is
mostly used in laboratory settings and not that much for industry. In indsutry, the method
which is typically used is sonication[80].
1.4.2
The enhanced permeability and retention effect
Liposomes have been widely tested as drug delivery tools, especially for delivery of chemother-
apeutics to solid tumors[81][82]. The use of liposomes in this context serves two purposes.
Firstly, many chemotherapeutics have quite poor cellular uptake and are metabolically
unstable[82]. By encasulating them in a liposome, the rate of metabolic clearance is sig-
nificantly lowered, as the liposome protects the drug[80]. The liposome will cause the
circulation time for the drug to be prolonged[56]. Secondly, chemotherapeutics are often
toxic and cause severe side effects to healthy tissues[82]. It is not desirable to have these
type of drugs affecting the healthy tissues, and thus liposomes are used as studies have
shown that they accumulate in tumors[79]. This is due to an effect known as the enhanced
permeability and retention (EPR) effect. The EPR effect is a phenomenon which has been
observed primarily in rodents, and is characterized by sinusoidal membranes found in the
vasculature of solid tumors[79]. Many drug-delivery groups have claimed that this type of
vasculature is found in the tumor endothelial membranes, claiming it to be the reason for
the observed accumulation of liposomes in these tissues[79]. The sinusoidal membrane
structure causes leaky vasculature in the tumors, allowing large structures such as lipo-
somes to escape circulation in these tissues[83]. It is believed that the fenestrations found
in the vasculature is caused by the rapid growth of tumourcells and their increased need
for nutrient uptake[83]. The EPR effect is however rather controversial as the sinusoidal
vasculature is not always seen when doing an autopsy of a person who has died due to
cancer[84]. Some studies of the vasculature in tumors indicate that the endothelial mem-
branes don’t have the large fenestrations associated with the EPR effect, but that they
instead are composed of a lot more tight junctions than healthy vasculature[84]. This re-
search also indicated that physiology of vasculature varied hugely between different types
of tumors[84].
1.4.3
Stealth formulations
Historically, liposomes have been used for delivery of antiparasitic and antimicrobial drugs
in the mononuclear phagocytic system (MPS). The liposomes used for these purposes
are referred to as conventional liposomes, and are only composed of phospholipids and
cholesterol[85]. By not having any surface molecules attached, the liposomes are quite
quickly removed from circulation by the MPS, which is a system in the blood stream de-
signed to capture and remove pathogens[79]. The liposome or any other foreign molecule
is tagged with protein in the bloodstream called opsonins, which are proteins recognized
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
21
==PAGE:30==
by MPS. As MPS detects the opsonins, the liposome is removed from circulation[85]. If
however, the target of the encapsulated drug is beyond the MPS, the liposome needs
protection from opsonins in the blood stream. Stealth liposomes differ from conventional
liposomes as the stealth formulation incorporates hydrophillic surface molecules capable
of protecting the liposome from being cleared by MPS[85]. These hydrophilic molecules
include structures such as monoganglioside 1 (GM1) and polyethylene glycol(PEG) with
the latter of the two being most popular[85]. For this project, stealth formulations were
made using PEGylated lipids. These polymers are incorporated into the supramolecular
structure by covalently attaching them to the head of phospholipids, which can then be
incorporated when formulating the liposome as described earlier[56]. Figure 1.23 also de-
picts these pegylated lipids. PEG polymers consist of multiple repeating units of ethylene
glycol. When formulating stealth liposomes using PEG, it is important to incorporate the
polymer at a sufficient concentration to ensure the ideal conformation for the polymer[85].
PEG polymers are quite flexible molecules, and thus can exist in many different confor-
mations. There are, however, two main conformers that which are seen in liposomal
formulations; mushroom and brush conformation[85]. The former of the two is the non-
desirable conformation, as the mushroom conformation does not create a spacial barrier
around the liposome[48]. When PEG polymers adopt the mushroom conformation, the
polymer is bundled up and does not extend far of the surface of the liposome[85]. The
brush conformation on the other hand, is the desired confirmation for stealth liposomes.
When the PEG molecule adopts a brush confirmation, it is extended further out from the
surface of the liposome as depicted in figure 1.23. In order for the PEG polymers to
adapt a brush confirmation, the concentration of the lipids with PEG modifications has to
be sufficient in the lipid mix[85]. The PEG chain will typically be covalently bonded to the
phosphoric ”head” of a C18 or C16 phospholipid such as DSPE. Typically, these lipids will
make up around 10% of the lipid mixture in order to achieve the brush conformation[48].
If the concentration is too low, the PEG will adapt a mushroom conformation as some
repulsion from the other PEG polymers is needed in order to straighten it out[85]. The
stealth liposomes were developed as long circulating liposomes, having the long PEG
polymers as a protection against different proteins in the blood stream[79]. As it has been
mentioned, these structures rely on passive targeting in order to deliver their load. They
have mostly been used to prolong circulation times of chemotherapeutics, and as these
formulations are relatively stable compared to other liposomal formultions, the release is
quite slow[85]. There have been some studies on modifications of the PEG chain in order
to achieve active targeting rather than relying on the EPR effect. This attempts at making
targeted liposomes have been carried out by covalently attaching a target moiety to the
end of the PEG molecule such as peptides[48]. By attaching molecules that have speci-
ficity for certain tissues, the liposomes should theoretically accumulate in the tissue that
they have been directed to[48].
1.5
Loading drug liposomes
Liposomes are drug delivery tools, used to carry cargo in the form of metabolically unsta-
ble or toxic drugs. But in order for the liposome to deliver a drug, the drug first has to be
encapsulated by the liposome. In general, the methods for loading liposome are divided
into active and passive loading methods[56]. The simplest way of passively loading a
drug into liposomes would be to add the drug molecule while formulating the liposome
using the aforementioned thin film method[56]. Thereby, the drug will be encapsulated by
the lipids as the liposomes form in the aqueous environment. This technique has some
quite obvious drawbacks, namely a low encapsulation efficiency and also loss of drug
through the following extrution process[56]. It also limits the choice of drug, as only water
22
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:31==
soluble drugs can be used for this method[56]. Another way of passively loading drugs
into liposomes is through the use of freeze-thaw cycles or freeze-anneal-thaw cycles[86].
This method is quite simple like the previous, but reportedly has higher encapsulation
efficiency[86]. The way the method is set up is as the name implies, by having a series
of cycles where a solution of free drug and blank liposomes are first frozen at -196 ◦C
(using liquid nitrogen) and then thawed at high temperatures (around the Tm value for
the lipids)[86]. A third step might be included, which is an annealing phase in between
the freeze and thaw step. This would typically be around 0 ◦C. The aim of the tech-
nique is to disrupt the bilayer, which allows free drug molecules to permeate the bilayer.
Freeze-thaw cycles are mostly used for large unilamellar vesicles (LUVs), containing large
molecules such as proteins[86]. Active loading methods are reportedly the most effective
methods for achieving high loading[82]. These methods are typically driven by a form
of gradient across the bilayer which is selected based on the characteristics of the drug
molecule[87]. This form of loading is also reffered to as remote loading. Remote loading
relies on the drug permeating the bilayer and remaining in the aqueous core, typically in
an ionized state[78]. The gradient is very often set up in a way that creates a difference
in pH across the bilayer along with a difference in salt concentration. Common salts to
use for remote loading are ammonium sulfate for weak bases and calcium acetate for
weak acids[82]. When the drug has been either protonated or deprotonated inside the
liposome, the drug will be trapped by the counter ion from the buffer solution[82]. Follow-
ing salt formation, the remaining ion from the salt buffer will cross the bilayer and leave
the liposome[78]. Through this cross-membrane transport of molecules an equilibrium is
achieved with equal amounts of peptide entering and ions leaving. An example of a re-
mote loading process, using ammonium sulphate is shown in figure 1.24. While the drug
is being remote loaded, the lipid mixture is heated to the Tm for the lipids in order to make
the bilayer more permeable, although the effects of heating a lipid mixture containing
cholesterol is somewhat questionable[78]. As it was described earlier, adding cholesterol
to a liposomal formulation transforms the bilayer into a liquid ordered (LO) state perma-
nently[77]. This state is seen as a hybrid between liquid disordered (LD) and solid ordered
(SO) state, where the latter of the two is the least permeable[76]. LO is more permeable
than SO, with LD being the most permeable state for a liposome[76].
Figure 1.24: Schematic depiction of the process of remote loading using an ammonium
sulphate gradient[45]
The gradient across the bi-layer is set up while formulating the liposomes[78]. If the lipo-
somes are formulated using the thin film method, the thin film is hydrated using a solution
of e.g. ammonium sulfate to create a gradient suited for loading molecules with weakly
basic properties[82]. After extrution of the liposomes, they are dialyzed to exchange the
external buffer with a different solution such as phosphate buffered saline (PBS)[78]. The
liposomal formulation with an internal aqueous environment of ammonium sulphate and
external environment of PBS buffer, has been made popular due to it being used for the
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
23
==PAGE:32==
chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin[82]. Different counter ions have been explored for
their ability to entrap drugs in liposomes. Citrate, sulfate and phosphate salts of ammo-
nium have all been found to give high encapsulation efficiencies for doxorubicin >95 %,
while it was found that sodium salts with the same counter ions give much lower encap-
sulation (~50%)[82].
1.5.1
Molecular parameters for remote loading
Although remote loading might seem very convenient, it is a rather complex process with
many requirements for the drug molecule. Generally speaking, molecules which are either
a weak base or acid can be remote loaded, although there are a number of exceptions. A
general guideline is that the logD should be between 2 and -2 at pH 7 and there should be
a clear drop for this value as the pH is either raised or lowered[78]. Earlier in this thesis,
logD was described as a distribution coeeficient, describing a ratio between the concen-
tration of a species and its ionized form dissolved in octanol and the same species and
its ionized form dissolved in water[40]. When the solubility increases significantly around
a certain pH, so does the amount of ionized species which is desirable for remote load-
ing[78]. When a drug is being remote loaded, it needs to become ionized after entering
the liposome, meaning that logD can be used to predict a drug’s ability remote load. The
logD can also be used to aquire important knowledge about solubility[78]. Solubility is
often closely linked to the permeability of drug, as highly soluble molecules tend to have
poor permeability[78]. On the other hand, having a poorly soluble molecule will likely lead
to aggregation before remote loading is possible[78]. Another important parameter, which
is linked to the varying logD values is the acid dissociation constant, pKa. The pKa is a
figure used to describe the strength of an acid, where the lower the value of pKa, the
stronger the acid[78]. This constant can also be used to determine the concentration of
the charged species at a given pH through the Henderson-Hasselbach equation[88]:
pH = pKa + log( [A−]
[HA])
(1.3)
As the equation shows, the pKa is directly linked to the ionization state of the molecule[88].
Knowing the pKa of the molecule intended for remote loading is important when setting
up a gradient, in order to assure ionization in the liposomal core. To give an example, the
chemotherapeutic agent doxorubicin has a pKa of 8.97[82]. When doxorubicin enters the
liposome, its amine moiety (fig. 1.26) will be protonated due to the high concetration of
protons, giving it a positive charge and allowing it to form an ionic bond to the sulphate
ion. On the outside of the liposome, it will only be partially protonated depending on the
pH[82]. Permeability is also affected by the polar surface area of a molecule[78]. The
polar surface area is defined as the sum of the contributions to molecular surface area
of polar atoms such as oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogens attached to these[89]. Calcu-
lating this number can be rather complex, and thus a simplification is often made called
the topological polar surface area. In general, a high polar surface area will result in
poor remote loading because the drug will be less prone to diffuse across the bilayer.
Some molecules can change their conformation based on the solvent in order to either
increase or decrease the polar surface area, which could allow some molecules to be
remote loaded even though they are quite polar[89]. Another quite important parameter
for remote loading is the drug’s propensity for supersaturation[78]. The term supersatu-
ration is used to describe a non-equilibrium, physical state where the solution contains
more solute than the equilibrium solubility allows at the given temperature and pressure
in the system[90]. It has been shown to be driving force in nucleation, meaning the forma-
tion of crystal structures in the liposome[90]. If the degree of supersaturation is low, the
growth of the crystals will be growing faster than they nucleate, resulting in large crystals.
24
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:33==
High degrees of supersaturation causes the opposite. Achieving supersaturation during
remote loading has been shown to cause the loading rate to increase linearily with the
degree of supersaturation[78]. Even if a drug molecule follows all guidelines for remote
loading, it is not guaranteed to remote load. One example of this is the chemotherapy drug
gemcitabine. It is a type of chemotherapy drug called an anti-metabolite, as it mimics the
natural nucleoside cytosine and blocks DNA synthesis in tumor cells[81]. The structure
of the molecule can be seen in figure 1.25.
Figure 1.25: Structure of gemcitabine
This molecule should in theory be able to be remote loaded as it has a logP of -1.4 and a
pKa of 3.6, which in theory makes it a weak acid. As the structure indicates, the molecule
contains four ionizable groups, although only two of them will be ionized at certain pH
values[78]. The non-substituted pyrimidine nitrogen is protonated at pH 3.6 and below,
while the 5’ alcohol is deprotonated at pH 11.5. Otherwise, the molecule exists as a neu-
tral species, which should allow it to permeate the bilayer[78]. When a group attempted
to remote load this molecule however, they only achieved a encasulation efficiency of
12%[81]. One of the first molecules that were succesfully remote loaded was the afore-
mentioned doxorubicin[82]. Figure 1.26 shows the chemical structure of Doxorubicin.
This chemotherapeutic agent is a DNA intercalator which means that it inserts itself in the
DNA string by way of intermolecular interactions. It does so by way of its extended ring
structure with an anthracene as a scaffold. The anthracene structure is a fused aromatic
ring structure which can be found in many compound in cigaret smoke and particulate
matter in air[91]. Remote loading of doxorubicin has been quite succesful with some
groups reaching upwards of 98% encapsulation efficiency[82]. It also became one of the
first drugs to be comercially available as a liposomal formulation known as Doxil[92].
Figure 1.26: Structure of Doxorubicin
One class of molecules, that have historically not been investigated as drugs for remote
loading into liposomes is peptides. There have been published papers on remote load-
ing of peptides, but these attempts have been in other forms of nano particles[93][94].
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
25
==PAGE:34==
Wang et al explored aqueous remote loading of setmelanotide in poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid)[70]. Setmelanotide is an octameric peptide, that has been made cyclic by way of
a disulfide bridge, which is used to treat rare forms of obesity[70]. Proving that this pep-
tide can be remote loaded in a polymeric system does indicate that similar peptide also
could be remote loaded into a similar system or even a liposome. There are of course
big differences in the structure of the polymer system and the liposome, but given the
aforementioned molecular requirements, it should be possible[70][78]. Many of the char-
acteristics that are required for remote loading are true for peptides, and given the ease
with which peptide structures can be changed, remote loading into a liposome should be
possible. It has in fact been achieved by Mehrad Khosani, who managed to achieve an
encapsulation efficiency 60%, remote loading the aromentioned endomorphin-1[95].
26
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:35==
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Materials
All standard amino acids used for the synthesis of linear and cyclic peptides were pur-
chased from Iris Biotech GMBH. Fmoc-D-Trp(Boc)-OH, piperidine, collidine, 4-dimethylamino
pyridine (DMAP), triethyl amine (TEA), diisopropylcarbodiimide, sodium bicarbonate, and
diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 1-[Bis(dimethylamino)
methylene]-1H-1,2,3-triazolo[4,5-b]pyridinium 3-oxid hexafluorophosphate (HATU), Benzotriazole-
1-yl-oxy-tris-pyrrolidino-phosphonium hexafluorophosphate (PyBOP), triisopropylsilane (TIPS),
and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) were purchased from FLuoroChem Ltd. All solvents were
purchased from VWR.
2.2
Synthesis of Endomorphin-1 and derived peptides
Figure 2.1: Chemical structures END-1, END-K, and END-R
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.2: Chemical structure for β-amyloid peptide
All of the Endomorphin-1 analogs and the β-amyloid sequence were syntheized using am
automated Fmoc strategy on a 0.5 mmol scale. The resin used for the synthesis was 1
gram of TentaGel S RAM (loading 0.5 mmol/g) with a HATU/collidine coupling strategy.
For the amino acids, 4 equivalents of amino acid was dissolved in DMF to a final concen-
tration 0.5 M. All reagents and resin were loaded into a biotage system for the automated
synthesis. First step in the synthetic procedure was to swell the resin with DMF (70◦C)
for 30 minutes. Then followed removal of the Fmoc group on the resin using 20% Piperi-
dine in DMF. The reaction was carried out at 70◦C for 13 minutes. Following removal of
Fmoc, the coupling of the first amino acid proceeded. The first amino acid was coupled
two times to ensure efficient coupling to the solid support. First, the coupling was carried
out at 70◦C for 1 hour followed by a second reaction at room temperature (rt) for 2 hours.
After this followed Fmoc deprotection with same procedure as before and then elongation
of the peptide chain with remaining amino acids. These amino acids were all coupled
at 70◦C for 1 hour and all Fmoc deprotections were carried out at 70◦C for 13 minutes.
Coupling of arginine was the only exception, as this coupling reaction was carried out at
50◦C for 2 hours. The following amino acid, meaing the one adjacent to arginine, was
coupled once at 70◦C and once at rt due to the sheer bulkiness of the arginine residue
with the 2,2,4,6,7-pentamethyldihydrobenzofuran-5-sulfonyl (Pbf) protecting group. In be-
tween coupling reactions and Fmoc deprotections, the resin was washed thoroughly with
repeated cycles of DMF and dichloromethane (DCM). When all amino acids had been
coupled, the last Fmoc deprotection was carried out, followed by a pre-cleavage washing
step using DCM. After this final washing step, the resin was transferred to a polypropylene
syringe with a filter, followed by cleavage of the peptide chain from the solid support using
TFA/triisopropyl silane (TIPS)/MQ (95/2.5/2.5 v/v) (10-20 ml/g resin). The resin was left
suspended in the cleavage mixture for 3 hours at rt with gentle agitation. After three hours,
the cleavage mixture was drained into a 50 mL falcon tube. TFA and scavengers were re-
moved under nitrogen flow untill almost all had evaporated, after which cold diethyl ether
was added to precipitate the crude peptide. The peptide suspension was centrifuged at
5000 rpm for 30 minutes. After this, the supernatant was removed and more diethyl ether
was added. This procedure was repeated three times. Following this, the crude peptide
was purified using Prep-HPLC. The crudes were loaded onto a Gemini 5 µm NX-C18
column (250x21.2 mm) and eluted using 0.1% TFA in ACN and 0.1% in MQ as solvents.
The amyloid sequence was purified using another column (Gemini 5 µm NX-C18 column
250x30 mm) to avoid clogging. A gradient was applied, increasing the concentration of
ACN from 5% to 100% over 20 minutes. Fractions were collected automatically from
when the apparatus registrered UV signals at 285 stemming from tryptophan. The frac-
tions were combined after analyzing them using MALDI-TOF mass spectroscopy, and the
28
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:37==
Figure 2.3: Chemical structure of linear precursor for Veber-Hirschmann peptide deriva-
tive
combined fractions were then lyophillized to obtain pure peptides. These peptides were
all analyzed using MALDI-TOF mass spectroscopy and the endomorphin-1 analogs were
analyzed using UHPLC to confirm purity.
2.3
Synthesis of cyclic peptides
Synthesis of the cyclic peptides was more complex than for the linear peptides. Multiple
methods were tried, which will be explained in greater detail below.
2.3.1
Synthesis of linear precursor
The linear precursor for the cyclic peptides (VHpep) were synthesized using the 2-chloro
trityl (2-Cl-Trt) resin (loading capacity=1.6 mmol/g) at a 0.5 mmol scale. 0.312 g of 2-Cl-Trt
was weighed out in a peptide synthesis reactor tube (30 mL). The resin was then swollen
in anhydrous DCM for 30 minutes under an argon atmosphere. During these 30 minutes,
6 equivalent of the first amino acid was dissolved in anhydrous DCM and preactivated
with 10 equivalents of N,N-diisopropylethylamine (DIPEA). After preactivation, the amino
acid was added to the resin and allowed to react overnight under an argon atmosphere
with gentle agitation. The following day, solvent was removed from the tube and the resin
was washed with DMF and DCM (3x2 minutes respectively). After coupling the first amino
acid, the following elongation was automated using the biotage and the same procedure
as stated above. After completing the required amount of reaction cycles, the reaction
tube was removed from the biotage and the resin was split in two parts and transferred to
two syringes fitted with filters. For the first syringe, the resin was suspended in TFA/TIP-
S/MQ (95/2.5/2.5 v/v) to achieve a linear version of the peptide (VHpep-lin). The second
portion was suspended in a mixture of trifluoro ethanol (TFE), acetic acid (AcOH) and
DCM (20:10:70 v/v) to obtain a linear peptide with the side chain protection groups still
attached (VHpep-pre). Both peptides were purified using prep-HPLC by loading the crude
onto a Gemini 5 µm NX-C18 column (250x30 mm) and eluted using the same method as
described before. The wide column was used, as it was observed that the smaller column
reached pressures above the maximum (165 mbar). For both the linear version with and
without protecting groups, the fractions from the prep-HPLC were pooled and lyophilized.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
29
==PAGE:38==
2.3.2
Cyclization using HATU
Figure 2.4: Structure of FLPAA
An attempt was made to cyclize VHpep-lin using HATU as coupling reagent. 25 µmol of
VHpep-pre was dissolved in 470 µL of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). To this, 35 µL TEA in
11.2 mL DCM was added and the mixture was stirred. Then, 2.5 equivalents of HATU was
added to the mixture which was stirred overnight at rt. The following day, the reaction was
quenched by pouring in 1 mL AcOH, and stirring the mixture for 10 minutes. Afterwards,
the volume was reduced under vacuum and the resulting mixture was filtered using a
syringe filter (3mm, 2µm pore size). After filtering the mixture, it was loaded onto a prep-
HPLC column (Gemini 5 µm NX-C18 column 250x21.2 mm) with same solvent system
as previosly described. The collected fractions were lyophilized. After lyophilization, the
side chain protection groups were removed by dissolving the peptide in TFA/TIPS/MQ
(95:2.5/2.5) and gently agitating for 30 minutes. After 30 minutes, the TFA and scav-
engers were removed under nitrogen flow. When nearing complete dryness, cold diethyl
ether was added to the tube to precipitate the peptide. The ether suspension was then
centrifuged at 500 rpm for 20 minutes, and the supernatant was removed. The peptide
was loaded onto a prep-HPLC column (Gemini 5 µm NX-C18 column 250x21.2 mm) and
eluted with the same solvents as previously described and finally lyophilized to obtain
the purified peptide product. The products were analyzed further with MALDI-TOF mass
spectroscopy.
2.3.3
Cyclization using PyBOP
Figure 2.5: Chemical structure of cyclic Veber-Hirschmann peptide derivative
30
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:39==
Figure 2.6: Chemical structure of cyclic peptide synthesized using O-N acyl migration
Another method for peptide cyclization was attempted using benzotriazol-1-yloxy tripyrro-
lidino phosphonium hexafluorophosphate (PyBOP) as coupling reagent. In this method,
84.2 mg of the linear precursor VHpep-pre was dissolved in DMF (20 mL). While stirring
this mixture, 29.4 mg NaHCO3 and 36.42 mg of PyBOP was added to the solution and
this mixture was stirred overnight at rt under an argon atmosphere. Next day, the re-
action was stopped and the volume was reduced under reduced pressure, also utilizing
co-evaporation with toluene. When the mixture had been concentrated to approximately
2 mL, a saturated aqueous solution of sodium bicarbonate was added. The product was
extracted using ethyl acetate and the combined organic phases were washed with a sat-
urated aqueous solution of NaCl (brine) and dried over magnesium sulphate. Solvent
was then removed under reduced pressure and the crude was dissolved in DMSO be-
fore loading onto a Gemini 5 µm NX-C18 column 250x30 mm column for purification. The
combined fractions were lyophilized and the powders obtained from this were treated with
TFA/TIPS/MQ (95/2.5/2.5) for 1 hour to remove side chain protection groups. The cleav-
age mixture was removed under nitrogen flow, and the peptide was precipitated with cold
diethyl ether. The ether was removed after centrifuging (5000 rpm, 30 minutes) and the
pelet was dissolved in DMSO and loaded onto the same column again as before. Frac-
tions were pooled and lyophilized to obtain VHpep-cyc. The cyclic and linear peptide were
analyzed using various NMR techniques, MALDI-TOF mass spectroscopy, and UHPLC.
2.3.4
Cyclization via O-N acyl migration
A method for cyclizing a peptide via an O-N acyl transfer was tried. The first step in
this synthesis was to synthesize the linear peptide. For this synthesis, 2-Cl-Trt (load-
ing=1.6 mmol/g resin) was used as resin. 1 gram of resin was loaded into a SPPS filtra-
tion column and swollen in anhydrous DCM. 5 equivalents of Boc-Ser-OH was dissolved
anhydrous DCM and preactivated with 10 equivalents of DIPEA. This reaction was gen-
tly agitated under an argon atmosphere overnight. Next day, the solvent and excess
reagent was drained from the tube and the resin was washed thouroughly with DMF and
DCM (3x2 minutes for each). While washing the resin, 6 equivalents of Fmoc-Ala-OH
was dissolved in DMF and preactivated with N,N′-Diisopropylcarbodiimide (DIC) and 4-
Dimethylaminopyridine (DMAP). This mixture was added to the resin, which was gen-
tly agitated under an argon atmosphere overnight. The following day, excess reagents
and solvent was removed and the resin was thoroughly washed as before. The remain-
ing synthesis followed the same procedure as described in previous sections, using a
HATU/collidine approach. After elongation of the peptide chain was complete, the resin
was treated with TFE/AcOH/DCM (20:10:70) for 2 hours. After 2 hours, solvent was re-
moved under reduced pressure. The solid crude in the flask was then dissolved in DMF
(100 mL, 2mM peptide concentration) and to this solution, 5 equivalents of NaHCO3 and
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
31
==PAGE:40==
1 equivalent of PyBOP was added. The reaction was stirred overnight at room tempera-
ture under an argon atmosphere. Next day, the reaction mixture was concentrated under
reduced pressure using toluene for co-evaporation. When the reaction mixture had been
contrated to approximately 2 mL, 50 mL saturated aqueous NaHCO3 was poured in. The
product was extracted using EtOAc (3x50 mL) and the combined organic phases were
washed with brine and dried over MgSO4. Solvent was removed under reduced pressure
and the crude material was then treated with TFA/TIPS/MQ (95:2.5:2.5) for 30 minutes.
Afterwards, the cleavage mixture was removed under nitrogen flow. When almost all of
the cleavage mixture had been removed, the peptide was precipitated using cold diethyl
ether. The Ether was then removed under reduced pressure and the remaining solid was
dissolved in 20% piperidine in DMF and this solution was stirred at room temperature for
3 hours. Following this, the reaction mixture was concentrated and then loaded onto a
prep-HPLC column with UV detection (Gemini 5 µm NX-C18 column 250x21.2 mm) and
eluted with same solvents as described previously. Fractions containing product were
pooled and lyophilized. Products were analyzed using MALDI-TOF mass spectroscopy
and UHPLC.
2.4
Liposome formulation and remote loading
The following methods described were carried out by Antonia Chalkia, Girisa Prabhu and
Hira Muneeb and the descriptions are written by Girisa Prabhu, but were included in this
thesis as this is deemed valuable information for this thesis.
2.4.1
High pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC)
Analytical RP-UHPLC ELSD was carried out using a XTERRA RP8 5um C8 column (4.6
X 150mm), solvent A (5% MeCN + 20mM HFBA in MQ) and solvent B (20mM HFBA in
MeCN) with a 1mL/min flow rate. During the first minute the initial gradient was 100:0
(A:B), from minute 2 to minute 15 the gradient increased to 0:100 (A:B) and then back to
the initial gradient of 100:0 (A:B) from minute 18 to 21. The oven temperature and injection
volume was kept constant for all samples at 40°C and 10µL respectively. Analytical RP-
UHPLC PDA was carried out using a XTERRA RP8 5um C8 column (4.6 X 150mm),
solvent A (5% MeCN + 20mM HFBA in MQ) and solvent B (20mM HFBA in MeCN). During
the first minute the initial gradient was 100:0 (A:B), from minute 2 to minute 15 the gradient
increased to 0:100 (A:B) and then back to the initial gradient of 100:0 (A:B) from minute 18
to 21. The oven temperature and injection volume were kept constant for all the samples
at 40°C and 10uL respectively. This method was used to create a 6-point standard curve
for peptides END-1, END-K, END-R, AMY1 and VHpep-cyc. The detector was set to 280
nm and the peptide concentrations varied from 0 to 2.5 mg/mL.
2.4.2
Liposome synthesis and characterization
Liposomes were formulated by adding an exact mass of the lyophilized HSPC/DSPE-
mPEG2000/Cholesterol (3:1:1) to a 250mM ammonium sulphate solution (pH 5.2). The
mixture was left with continous stirring for 60 minutes at 70◦C. This was followed by high
pressure extrusion at 70°C through 3x800nm, 2x400nm and 2x100nm filters to obtain li-
posomes with desired size and PDI. Afterwards, the liposomes were dialysed overnight in
a 10mM PBS solution (pH 7.6) under stirring at RT. The liposomes were then character-
ized with respect to size, PDI and zeta potential at RT with dynamic light scattering (DLS).
Additionaly, the analytical RP-HPLC method described in section 2.4.1 was carried out to
determine the lipid concentration after high pressure extrusion (HPE). The prepared lipo-
somes underwent lysis by being diluted in MeOH (at a ratio of 1:50) to avoid overloading
of the HPLC, followed by vortexing. Subsequently, they were analyzed using HPLC to
account for lipid loss during the extrusion process and determine the final concentration
32
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:41==
of liposome.
2.4.3
Remote loading
To achieve remote loading, the exact quantity of the target drug was weighed and added
into a 10mM PBS solution, combining it with a known concentration of liposomes formed
the ammonium sulfate-PBS gradient described in 2.4.2. This mixture was stirred at 70°C
for 3 hours and immediately refrigerated at -4°C to stop the loading. Afterwards, the
loaded liposomes underwent overnight dialysis at 4°C to eliminate any free, unloaded
compounds. Subsequently, the loaded liposomes were analyzed for size, PDI, and zeta
potential at room temperature using DLS. A control experiment was conducted by adding
an exact concentration of the compound of interest to a 10mM PBS solution. This drug
solution was mixed with a known concentration of liposomes in PBS solution (no gradient)
under stirring at 70°C for 3 hours and immediately refrigerated at -4°C to stop the remote
loading. The control liposomes were dialysed overnight in PBS solution at 4°C. All mea-
surements were determined in triplicates and all the data data are represented as mean
± standard devation (SD).
2.4.4
Liposome quantification
RP-UHPLC-ELSD method as mentioned in section 2.4.1 was utilized for the quantification
of the lipids in the stealth mix. A standared curve from a dilution series of the lipoid stealth
mix was established and the linearity assessed. The standard curve was established by
plotting the area under the curve (AUC) as function of the known standard concentrations.
Linear regression was applied to obtain the equation of the straight line and regressing
correlation coefficient (R2).
2.4.5
Encapsulation Efficiency quantification
RP-HPLC method mentioned in section 2.4.1 was utilized for quantification of the encap-
sulation efficiency (EE%). A standard curve from dilution series for each compound of
interest was established and the linearity was assessed. The standard curve was es-
tablished by plotting AUC as function of the known standard concentrations. Linear re-
gression was applied to obtain the EE% based on the obtained standard curves for each
peptide.
EE% = Cα
Cβ
× 100
The EE% was calculated using equation 2.4.5 , where Cα is the concentration encap-
sulated in the liposomes (mg/mL) and Cβ is the total concentration used for the remote
loading procedure mentioned in section 2.4.3.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
33
==PAGE:42==
34
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:43==
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
Synthesis of Endomorphin-1 and analogs
For this project, the endogenous µ-opiod receptor ligand Endomorphin-1 (END-1) was
synthesized using solid phase peptide synthesis. Furthermore, two analogs of this pep-
tide were synthesized where the second amino acid in the sequence, proline (P), had
been substituted for lysine (END-K) or arginine (END-R) respectively. As described in the
methods section, all peptides were synthesized using the same reagents (HATU/Collidine)
and resin (TentaGel S-Ram). The resulting peptides were all analyzed post synthesis us-
ing UHPLC and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. The latter form of analysis confirmed
succesful synthesis of all three peptides. For the endogenous form of endomorphin-1,
MALDI-TOF showed a clear peak at m/z=611, corresponding to the [M+1]-peak. A minor
peak also appeared at m/z=633, which is correlating to a [M+Na+] peak caused by the
matrix used for analysis (sinapinic acid). The mass spectrum recorded of the peptide can
be seen in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Mass spectrum recorded using MALDI-TOF of Endomorphin-1
Likewise, the mass spectrum recorded of END-R had a clear [M+1]-peak at m/z=670.4
and a slightly less intense peak indicating a [M+Na+]-peak at m/z=692.4. Interestingly,
in the mass spectrum recorded prior to lyophilization, the most intense peak was [M+1],
but when a spectrum was recorded post lyophilization, the most intense peak was the
[M+Na+], while the [M+1] was the second most intense peak. This was contributed to a
local difference in concentration of sodium in the matrix solution, as there should be no
difference in the molecule’s chemical structure. Both spectra can be seen in figure 3.2.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.2: Caption
The last analog, END-K, was also succesfully synthesized which was confirmed by a
peak at m/z=664.6, corresponding to the [M+Na] peak. The mass spectrum can be seen
in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Caption
When analysing the peptides by UHPLC, the difference in polarity between the peptides
was quite clear. The endogeneous END-1 had a retention time of 7.10 minutes at a 5
mg/mL concentration and the chromatogram indicated high purity. When changing to
the END-K analog, the retention time became 6.73 minutes for 5 mg/mL indicating an
increased polarity. As for END-1, the chromatogram for END-K indicated a high level of
purity with one sharp peak at the given retention time. For END-R, the retention time
was 6.87 minutes at 5 mg/mL and once again the peak in the chromatogram was sharp
indicating high purity. The chromatograms for each peptide can be viewed in the appendix.
The results described above can be seen summarized in table 3.1.
Compound
UHPLC
Ret. Time
(minutes)
MALDI-TOF
(m/z)
Purified
Yield%
END-1
7.1
611
633
87%
END-K
6.73
664.6
685.6
85%
END-R
6.87
670.4
694.4
80%
Table 3.1: Table summarizing results for Endomorphin-1 and analogs
36
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:45==
Synthesis of these three peptides was made easier through automated synthesis using
the biotage system. When SPPS is done without the use of automation it is a labour inten-
sive process and the risk of errors increases[22]. The synthetic procedure that was used
for these three peptides and the amyloid peptide was adapted from litterature and from
past experiences, working tih peptide synthesis[22][35]. In most articles, the procedure
will include the use of a sterically hindered non-nucleophilic base[22]. For these three
peptides, the non-nucleophilic base of choice was collidine. The main reason for this was
availability. Secondly, the use of this base was recommended by Martin Bak, who has a
lot of expertise with peptide synthesis. As it was stated in the introduction, many other
bases of this type exist and could have been used as well, yielding identical results. The
coupling reagent of choice for synthesizing these three peptides was HATU. This reagent
was chosen based on previous experience with peptide synthesis, but it is also regarded
as the golden standard for SPPS reagents[31]. Other coupling reagents were available,
but as HATU had yielded good results in the past, it was the obvios choice. Data col-
lected by Merck and Aapptec peptides was rather helpful as well for choosing the best
reagent[96][97]. In the literature, HATU is used the most but other coupling reagents are
also in use[22][63]. In the introduction, examples like HBTU, HCTU, TBTU and PyBOP
were mentioned and all of these are being used in various degrees. HBTU, HCTU, and
TBTU are used quite a lot by various groups synthesizing peptides as the structural and
mechanistic differences are minimal[96]. There is however a higher chance of guanidi-
nation when using HBTU, TBTU and HCTU compared to HATU[97][39]. Therefor, HATU
was chosen as coupling reagent for synthesis of all linear peptides. In the methods sec-
tion, it was stated how the first amino acid was coupled twice to ensure coupling to the
solid support. As stated, first coupling was carried out at 70◦C and the following at room
temperature. The decision to do this was again made based on previous projects regard-
ing peptide synthesis, and it was also recommended by Martin Bak to do this. He also
recommended doing the coupling reaction twice when coupling adjacent to a large, bulky
amino acids such as arginine and tryptophan. This method has not been found in any
papers that have been read for this thesis. It is unknown if this method is in fact used by
others, but left out of the methods section in papers.
3.2
Synthesis of amyloid peptide
Another peptide that was studied in this thesis was the β-amyloid sequence due to its
ability to self assemble into large β-sheet fibrils[52] and also the peptides physicochemical
properties, making this peptide a potential candidate for remote loading. As the main
objective for this project was to explore some of the boundaries for remote loading of
peptides into liposomes, this peptide naturally had to be part of the project in order to
determine if it could be remote loaded despite of its self assembling capabilities. The
synthesis was deemed succesful after recording a mass spectrum of the compound where
the most intense peak was at m/z=617.6 corresponding to [M+1].
Figure 3.4: Mass spectrum recorded using MALDI-TOF of β-amyloid peptide
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
37
==PAGE:46==
This can be seen in figure 3.4. Recording a mass spectrum of the β-amyloid sequence
proved to be a challenge as it was quite difficult do dissolve, making it hard to transfer
it onto the MALDI-TOF target plate. In order to dissolve a lot of organic solvent had to
be used. For the other peptides, a 50:50 mixture of acetonitrile and water was used to
dissolve the peptide, which is a very useful solvent combination specifically for MALDI-
TOF target plates, as the solution will be deposited in the target well as a droplet that
sticks to the well. For the amyloid, it was determined that the solvent had to be methanol.
Given that the matrix solution primarily consists of acetonitrile, it meant that after mixing
the peptide solution and the matrix, it was primarily organic solvents. When this was
deposited in the target well, the solution was quickly dispersed across a much larger
area, leaving almost none of the mixture in the well. As one can see from the recorded
mass spectrum, the peak indicating the peptide is not as intense as for the endomorphin
peptides. It is believed that this was caused by the dispersion of the solution.
3.3
Synthesis of cyclic peptides
As described in the methods section, different methods for peptide cyclization were ex-
plored for this project. While the method changed, the sequence remained roughly the
same except for the O-N acyl transfer, which will be discussed later. The chosen se-
quence was cyclo(Val-Lys-Trp-Tyr-Lys-Phe) which was designed based on the Veber-
Hirschmann peptide, which is an analog og somatostatin[98]. The original peptide se-
quence was modified to increase polarity of the molecule and also to increase probability
for ionization. This was done in an effort to design a cyclic peptide that theoretically could
be remote loaded into liposomes using a pH gradient based on ammonium sulphate[78].
The chemical structure of the peptide can be seen in figure 2.5 in the methods section.
To synthesize the cyclic peptide, a linear precursor was synthesised using the 2-Cl-Trt
resin and cleaved using TFE/AcOH/DCM (20:10:70), which was a method adapted from
Amblard et al[25]. Using the milder cleavage mixture was done in an effort to achieve a
fully protected peptide chain. Attempts were made to record a mass spectrum of the fully
protected peptide, but these attempts were unfortunately not succesful. The reason for
this is unknown, as the same procedure for MALDI-TOF was used for the unprotected
peptides yielding clear results. When attempting the first cyclization method, HATU and
triethylamine were used as coupling reagents. This method was adapted from an arti-
cle, although the authors used DEPBT as coupling reagent instead[66]. As this reagent
was not available, it was decided to use HATU as it was assumed that it would produce
similar results. When the reaction was stopped, the crude products were analyzed. As
for the protected linear peptide chain, the mass spectrum did not show any meaningful
data, and it did not improve after deprotecting the side chains with TFA. It was therefor de-
cided to investigate if a cyclization was actually possible with HATU as coupling reagent.
To do this, another peptide was synthesized with a different sequence of amino acids,
cyclo(Phe-Leu-Pro-Ala-Ala), shown in figure 2.4. There is two reasons why this specific
peptide sequene was chosen for this investigation. Firstly, it had been cyclized before
and secondly it does not have any reactive side chains[65]. By avoiding having reactive
side chains, the peptide could be cleaved using TFA instead of the aformentioned cocktail
for cleavage of a fully protected peptide. After synthesis of the linear peptide, followed by
peptide cyclization, the supposedly cyclic peptide was analyzed using MALDI-TOF.
38
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:47==
Figure 3.6: Mass spectrum of cyclic Veber-Hischmann derivative recorded using MALDI-
TOF
Figure 3.5: Mass spectrum recorded of FLPAA after cyclization using MALDI-TOF
The recorded mass spectrum had a clear peak at [M+100]. The expected mass for a
cyclic peptide is the mass of the linear minus 16, so this was a clear indiaction that the
reaction had not worked. The unexpected mass was caused by the use of HATU as the
coupling reagent, as this reagent can cause guanidination if the reaction is too slow. The
guanidine derivative found in HATU has a mass of 100[96], which explains the [M+100]-
peak. Due to this result, no further analysis was conducted for this particular molecule.
Guanidination is an unwanted reaction for peptides, whereby guanidine is bound to the
N-terminal amine, effectively blocking the cyclization[29]. It can happen if the coupling
reaction is too slow, which for most cyclization reactions is the case[29]. As stated in
the introduction, peptide cyclization is notoriously slow and therefor, if HATU is used it
will most likely cause guanidinylation rather than cyclization. In the paper that described
the method, they used DEPBT instead[66], which would most likely have produced better
results than HATU as it is not based on guanidine. The second cyclization attempt was
done using PyBOP and NaHCO3 as coupling reagents, which was a method adapted
from Amblard et al[25]. After finishing the synthesis, yield was determined to be 83.7 mg.
The product was analyzed using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. This analysis clearly
showed a peak at 853 m/z, confirming that the peptide had indeed been cyclized. The
recorded spectrums can be viewed in figure 3.6. To ensure that the cyclization indeed
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
39
==PAGE:48==
has been succesful, further analysis was done through UHPLC, where the cyclic peptide
was compared to the linear version. The linear analog had a retention time of 6.92 min-
utes and the cyclic had a retention time of 7.16, highlighting a difference in the polarity
of the two. As mentioned previously, cyclization has been shown to decrease polar sur-
face area which in turn has been shown to increase important pharmaceutical parameters
such as cell permeability[33]. Given the retention times through a reverse phase column,
it is quite clear that cyclization has reduced the polarity of the peptide when compared to
the linear analog. The reverse phase column is based on a C-18 aliphatic chain which
causes prolonged retention for hydrophobic molecules and very short retention times for
hydrophilic molecules[99]. Furthermore, both the linear and the cyclic peptide were an-
alyzed using various NMR techniques. All of the recorded spectra can be viewed in the
appendix. First, a 1D H1-NMR was recorded of both the linear and cyclic version of the
peptide using DMSO-d6 as solvent. This was done in order to determine if the carboxylic
acid hydrogen in the C-terminus could be detected and if so, if it could be detected for
both peptides. Typically, such a hydrogen will be found very far downfield in the spectrum
and the peak is characteristically rounded unlike the sharp peaks usually associated with
1D-NMR techniques. This peak was predicted by ChemDraw to have a chemical shift of
around 12.5 ppm and in the spectrum for the linear peptide, a very flat and wide signal
can be seen around 12.7 ppm.
Figure 3.7: H1-NMR signal indicating presence of C-terminal free hydroxyl
Given the characteristics of this peak, it is assumed that this signal must belong to the hy-
drogen bound to the C-terminus. This same signal could not be detected when recording
a spectrum of the cyclic peptide, which further confirms the cyclization as being succesful.
The 1D data did also indicate an impurity in the sample at δ=3.37 which is contributed to
water[100]. It is thought that this water was not removed as the samples were lyophilized,
thus appering in this spectrum. The water peak can be seen in both of the 1-D proton
spectra(see appendix). When analyzing the linear 1D NMR spectral data, it also became
clear that the sample was not 100% pure, as a lot of minor peaks can be seen in the spec-
trum. All the minor peaks seem to be reasonably similar to the major peaks attributed to
the peptide. This could indicate that its either linear peptide that has not been cyclized or
the peaks are caused by an isomer of the cyclic peptide. As the data for the linear peptide
does not have these minor peaks. Given the intensity of the minor peaks, the molecule
which these are attributed to is only present in trace amounts. As it was mentioned previ-
ously, isomerization is an issue that can occur during the ring lactamization reaction[25].
It is not desirable, but can be hard to avoid and the isomer can be hard to remove us-
40
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:49==
ing Prep-HPLC. Looking at the chromatogram from the UHPLC, one would assume that
it is only one species, but the NMR data indicates otherwise. Based on the intensities
observed for the supposed isomer peaks, it is assumed that approximately 10% of the
product is the less favourable isomer. In the litterature, groups have proposed the use
of DEPBT as coupling reagent to reduce the isomerization[66]. This specific reagent has
been shown to reduce the isomerization due to steric hindrance. Another way that has
been proposed for reducing isomerization is synthesis of peptides via O-N acyl transfer,
as the acyl transfer is stereospecific to the L-isomer[25]. This method was in fact at-
tempted for this thesis, but the synthesis was unsuccesfull, and thus the claims about the
stereospecific character of the acyl transfer could not be confirmed. To further analyze
the structural differencies between the linear and the cyclic peptide, a series of 2D-NMR
experiments were conducted as well. All spectrums and full assignment of signal can
be seen in the appendix. For the linear peptide, assignment of the hydrogen and car-
bon signals was farely straight forward, which can be seen from the assignments in the
appendix. Hydrogen and carbon signals could quite easily be segmented into three cate-
gories; aliphatic, α-carbon, and aromatic signals. The hydrogens were then assigned to
specific carbon atoms through heteronuclear single quantum coherence (HSQC). By us-
ing correlation spectroscopy (COSY), spin systems within the molecule could be mapped
elucidating the structures of the aliphatic residues, valine and lysine. The aliphatic chain
in the aromatic residues was assigned to the correct aromatic side chain by analyzing
the heternuclear multiple bond correlation (HMBC) spectrum. For the cyclic peptide, it
was also possible to divide the signals into the three aformentioned groups, but assign-
ment of the individual protons was very difficult. As the 1D-H1NMR shows, the aliphatic
signals were a lot closer in this spectrum, which made differentiating between them very
difficult. As mentioned previously, some impurities could also be seen in the spectrum,
and due to how close all the signals were, some of these signals have interfered with the
analysis of this spectrum, primarily by making it difficult to integrate and pick the correct
peaks. Cyclization definitely changed the polarity of the peptide, which is clearly reflected
by the spectrum, seen as the chemical shift have generally shifted upfield. By having no
carboxylic acid in the molecule and also no N-terminal amine, the protons have generally
become more shielded. It also appears that cyclization have caused the protons to be
much closer, which is reflected in both the 1D-H1NMR spectrum, but also in the COSY
spectrum. Particularly the aliphatic area of the COSY, where it seems as if all aliphatic
hydrogens are part of one large spin system. Given that the peptide has been folded in
order to be cyclized, this is expected.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
41
==PAGE:50==
(a) HSQC of linear analog, segmenting signals
into aliphatic, α-carbon and aromatic
(b) HSQC of cyclic analog, segmenting signals
into aliphatic, α-carbon and aromatic
Figure 3.8: HSQC for linear and cyclic Veber-Hirschmann peptide
Cyclization of peptides proved to be a rather difficult process compared to synthesis of
linear peptides. As mentioned in the introduction, there are quite a lot of different ways
of cyclizing peptides that have been published in the litterature, which makes it hard to
decide what method to use. Given the relatively limited time frame that we had to work
on this thesis, it became quite important to choose a method that seemed effective, and
also a method that used reagents that were already available. When the possibility of
a cyclic peptide was first discussed, the proposed structure was synthesised through a
olefin metathesis reaction, which was described in greater detail the introduction[35]. This
idea was however replaced with a more simple idea, wherein the peptide would be cy-
clized head to tail through a lactamization. There were still a lot of methods to choose from
however, and therefor some different published methods had to be tried. As mentioned,
the first method was altered slightly to fit the reagents available, which then caused the
errors described above[63]. When this method produced guanidinated peptides rather
than cyclic peptides, it was decided that HATU no longer should be used for cyclizations.
That led to the use of the method published by Amblard et al[25], which in the original pa-
per was used for cyclization followed by O-N acyl migration. The reason why this method
was chosen was due to the use of BOP as coupling reagent. which is not a guanidine
based reagent[96]. BOP was however substituted with PyBOP for the synthesis as BOP
has been shown to produce a very toxic byproduct[97]. Secondly, the procedure used
NaHCO3 as a base, and as mentioned previously, the use of sodium has been shown to
increase the reaction rate for cyclizations[25][33].
3.3.1
Cyclization through O-N acyl migration
Given that the cyclization using the method by Amblard et al[25] had worked for the Veber-
Hirschmann derivative, it was decided to try their method for cyclization via an O-N acyl
migration. When designing the peptide, that was synthesised using this method, it was
primarily designed based on logD values calculated using ChemAxon. As mentioned
earlier, for a molecule to remote load, the logD should generally be somewhere in between
2 and -2 at pH 7 to ensure solubility in the exterior medium and also to ensure that the
peptide is non-ionized upon interaction with the exterior of the bilayer[78]. The peptide
that was designed for this method was the heptamer cyclo(Ser-Ala-Tyr-Phe-Phe-Lys-Phe)
and had a predictied logD at pH 7 of approximately -0.6. Having serine as aprt of the
42
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:51==
structure is a requirements, as the sidehain from this amino acid was the anchoring point
for alanine[25]. Serine did however alter the logD in an undesired way, as it made the
peptide slightly more acidic. This was balanced by adding lysine into the structure which
gave the peptide characteristics as a weak base. Adding the phenyl alanine residues
into the structure was done in an effort to reduce the polarity of serine and lysine. The
chemical structure of the peptide named ONAC-ESK can be seen in figure 3.9, which also
shows the chemical structure of the peptide before acyl transfer.
Figure 3.9: Chemical structures for ONAC-ESK before and after acyl transfer
The synthesis of this cyclic peptide was unfortunately not succesfull, as the peptide could
not be detected using MALDI-TOF. In the appendix, the chromatogram from the Prep-
HPLC can be seen, which also shows that no clear peaks were detected indicating un-
succesfull synthesis. If the chromatogram is compared to that of END-1, it is clear that
close to nothing was detected. This could be an error when selecting the wavelengths for
detecting the peptides. However, all of the other peptides were detected using the same
wavelength (280 nm or 213 nm). 280 nm was primarily used to detect peptides containing
tryptophan, as the heterocyclic indole ring absorbs light at this wavelength. However, for
ONAC-ESK the only clear peak in the chromatogram can be contributed to the DMSO
which was used as solvent when loading the sample onto the column. Before the DMSO
was added, the tube clearly contained a solid which was assumed to be the peptide, but
the solid was more likely a mixture of impurities and a small amount of peptide. It is there-
for assumed that the main error that occured for this peptide, was during synthesis. Since
no peptide can be detected using MALDI-TOF, it could very well be the coupling of alanine
to the side chain of serine that did not work as this was the only difference between the
other peptides that had been synthesised and this one. If we examine the mechanism
for this reaction, it is similar to the coupling reactions described earlier for SPPS. The
main difference is that the nucleophile is a primary alcohol rather than an amine. Figure
1.16 shows the mechanism for coupling alanine to the side chain of serine. As the figure
shows, the reaction is catalyzed by the sterically hindered base DMAP, which was added
in catalytic amounts (0.3 eq)[25]. If we however compare this reaction to the coupling of
the first amino acid to a 2-CTC resin seen in figure 1.4, where DIPEA is used, there is a
rather big difference in the amount of base used. Now obviously, the two reactions are not
the same and have vastly different mechanisms. The first coupling to the 2-CTC resin is a
SN2 reaction and the other is an esterfication. Still, it is strange that the protocol, that was
used in this thesis for coupling the first amino acid, calls for 10 equivalents of DIPEA while
the protocol by Amblard et al calls for the use of 0.3 equivalents of DMAP[25]. It becomes
especially strange, when the two bases are compared based on their pKb, which is used
to measure how prone a base is to abstract a proton, meaning the strength of the base.
The pKb for DIPEA is 3.02, while the pKb for DMAP is 4.48, which means that DIPEA is a
significantly more prone to abstract a proton. While setting up the synthesis, these details
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
43
==PAGE:52==
were not thought over and the protocol was followed as it was. If there had more time in
the project, the synthesis would have been repeated using a larger amount of DMAP for
this perticular coupling.
3.4
Remote loading peptides
The peptides that were synthesised by Emil Skovgaard Kristensen, were all synthesised
with the purpose of being remote loaded into liposomes using a pH gradient based on
ammonium sulphate. The liposomes were synthesised by Antonia Chalkia, Girisa Prahbu,
and Hira Muneeb as described in the methods sectio. They also did the remote loading of
the endomorphin peptides and the Veber-Hirschmann analog and conducted the UHPLC
analysis of the peptides.
3.4.1
Remote loading Endomorphin-1 and analogs
As mentioned in the introduction, remote loading of peptides is not a subject which has
been described in litterature. It was shown by previous Master’s student in this group,
Mehrad Khorasani, that the endogenous µ-opioid receptor ligand Endomorphin-1 could
be remote loaded into liposomes using an ammonium sulphate gradient[95]. Further-
more, peptides have been remote loaded into other drug delivery vesicles[93][94]. The
encapsulation efficiency (EE) measured by Mehrad Khorasani was around 60%, which
raised the question, if this figure could be improved upon[95]. In order to try and raise
the EE, peptides were modified in order to change their distribution coefficient logD[78].
This resulted in the three peptides depicted in figure 2.1. These three peptides were all re-
mote loaded into stealth liposomal formulations with a lipid mix consisting of HSPC/DSPE-
mPEG2000/Cholesterol (3:1:1) as described in the methods section 2.4.3. Endomorphin-
1 was remote loaded with an EE of around 60%. This was achieved using a drug-to-lipid
(DL) molar ratio of 1:33, which was calculated from the DL ratio used my Mehrad Kho-
rasani[95]. His DL ratio was 1:4, but this ratio was only based on cholesterol whereas the
1:33 ratio is based of the entire lipid mixture[95].
Figure 3.10: Encapsulation efficiencies of endomorphin peptide in stealth liposome for-
mulation. Control = no cross-membrane gradient.
Interestingly, only the endogenous peptide was able to remote load in the above men-
tioned formulation, whereas no remote loading was observed for the two others. To make
them remote load, a new batch of liposomes were produced, where cholesterol has been
removed from the formulation. In the introduction it was described how the addition of
44
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:53==
cholesterol to a lipidic bilayer could transform state of the bilayer into a liquid ordered
state with higher permeability than the solid ordered state and less permeable than the
liquid disordered state[77]. These two states are the ones that liposomal formulations
without cholesterol can move between depending on the temperature[77]. The TM value
for the lipids determines at what temperature this change in state will occur for the bilayer,
and is described in the introduction it is a reflection of how stable the liposomal the bilayer
is. Cholesterol adds even more stability into a bilayer through van der Waal’s interaction
with the lipid tails, essentially keeping them together even if they become more fluid as
the temperature is raised[77]. One could also argue that cholesterol takes up space in
the bilayer where the peptide has to pass through. Now, for endomorphin-1 this does
not seem to be a problem as indicated by the EE, while it may be causing issues for the
two others. This suggests that the endomorphin-1 peptide is able to interact with choles-
terol in a way that allows the peptide to diffuse through the bilayer and enter the aqueous
core. It was mentioned how more conformationally restricted peptides had been shown to
have increased cell permeability. Even though endomorphin-1 is not a cyclic peptide, the
proline residue does still make the structure more restricted. It was also mentioned that
proline residues are often found in turns in proteins due to their unique structure[59]. The
effect of the proline can clearly be seen if we examine a 3D simulation of one conformer
of endomorphin-1.
Figure 3.11: 3D structure of one conformer for endomorphin-1
If the structure seen in figure 3.11, it is clear that because of the proline, the peptide is
able to fold so that the aromatic side chains of tyrosine and tryptophan to interact through
van der Waals interactions. From the simulation it also looks like the proline can inter-
act with the phenyl alanine. These interactions aid in stabilizing this specific conformer
but they also aid in shielding the polarity in the backbone, which could be the reason for
endomorphin-1’s ability to permeate the bilayer. The two other peptides do not have the
same interaction across the sidechains because the proline has been substituted for more
polar residues. Also, arginine and lysine do not induce turns in the same way as proline,
as they do not have the same restricted structure. There is also the issue of molecular
size, as the two analogs are larger than the endogneous form of endomorphin-1. The
difference is 30 Da and 60 Da for lysine and arginine respectively. Lastly, there is the
change in pKa, as the two analogs have two residues that are much more basic than pro-
line. The pKa for the sidechain of lysine is 10.54 and for arginine it is 12.48. This is quite
a big difference, as the proline in the endogenous peptide can not be ionized. The two
polar residues were introduced in an effort to lower the logD value for the peptide at pH 7,
but the residues do also introduce a positive charge to the molecule. In the introduction
it was described how charged molecules tend to not be able to permeate a lipidic bilayer,
as the charged molecule will prefer to be in an aqueous solution[78]. We can quite clearly
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
45
==PAGE:54==
see from the data, that introduction of a charge inhibits the peptide from permeating the
lipid bilayer. This was further confirmed when a control was run wherein the exterior was
not changed to PBS buffer through dialysis. Thereby there was not established a gra-
dient across the membrane. This was done to show how the pH gradient affected the
loading but also in an effort to show the effect of charge on the loading. As expected, the
loading dropped significantly in this experiment, and the small amount that was detected
afterwards had likely not been loaded into the liposome but was rather stuck somewhere
in the membrane. It is worth bearing in the mind that the hydrophilic heads of the phos-
pholipids used for these formulation are charged. The will carry a negative charge in the
form of the phosphate group and a positive charge in the form an amine moiety, giving
it a net neutral charge. Endomorphin-1 is positively charged in the ammonium sulphate
buffer which in this experiment also constitutes the exterior environment. This means that
upon interacction with the bilayer, the peptide could theoretically interact with the nega-
tive charge of the phosphate. This experiment does also confirm, that in some way the
endogenous peptide has some form of affinity for the lipids or for the head groups. The
two analogs again showed no remote loading, so this affinity likely has to due with the
lipoohilicity of the residues and also their ability to fold due to the proline.
A second batch of liposomes were prepared with the same lipid mixture as previously
described except for cholesterol, which was removed from the formulation. The peptides
were remote loaded using the same pH gradient based on ammonium sulphate with a
neutral exterior environment. A control experiment like the one described before was also
made for the same reasons as previously described. Interestingly, removing cholesterol
from the liposomal formulation allowed END-R and END-K to remote load, with END-R
having the highest EE at approximately 37% with the same D/L ratio as before. The EE
was quite a lot lower than for END-1, but it is nevertheless high enough to conclude that
the peptide did infact diffuse across the bilayer. In the case of the control experiment,
all three of the peptides were detected, with END-1 reaching 27% EE, END-R reaching
12/‰ and END-K reaching 8%. The data clearly shows that END-K is unable to be remote
loaded in this formulation at least. The measured EE for this peptide does not indicate that
peptide diffused across the membrane, but rather that trace amounts were able bind to
the bilayer. In the dataset one can also see that almost no END-1 was able to be remote
loaded into this formulation. This data is most likely flawed, as it is very unlikely, given the
relatively high EE measured in the previous experiment.
Figure 3.12: Encapsulation efficiencies for endomorphin peptides in stealth liposome with-
out cholesterol. Control = no cross-membrane gradient.
46
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:55==
The formulation without cholesterol reveals some things about the peptides and their in-
teractions with the bilayer. The data somewhat confirms the transformation of the bilayer
into the LO phase through the introduction of cholesterol. From the dataset, we can see
that the endogenous endomorphin-1 has some form of affinity for the lipidic bilayer, which
was also observed with the formulation containing cholesterol. It was observed that the
peptide apparently had higher EE when liposomal formulations contained high levels of
DSPC, while formulations that had different compositions of shorter lipids showcased a
lower EE. This data was unfortunately not aquired for this thesis. This indicates that
endomorphin-1 must be able to interact with both the lipids and also cholesterol. To do
this, it must be able to shield highly polar moieties such as the backbone As mentioned, re-
moving cholesterol from the formulation lead to END-R being remote loaded with 37% EE.
The data somewhat confirms the transformation of the bilayer into the LO phase through
the introduction of cholesterol. Removing the cholesterol means that this liposome has
increased permeability which can also be seen from EE in the control experiment with
END-1, which has doubled compared to the formulation with cholesterol[77][101]. This
increased permeability has likely contributed to the EE for END-R, but has not had the
same effect on the END-K. This indicates that the difference lies in the chemical structure
of the amino acids and their interactions with the bilayer.
Figure 3.13: Chemical structures of arginine (left) and lysine (right)
Figure 3.13 shows the structures of arginine and lysine depicted as L-isomers (Structures
generated using ChemDraw). Arginine has quite a unique side chain with its guanidinium
group consisting of three nitrogens and one central carbon[41]. This group is rather basic
as mentioned previously. Because of the basic properties, the side chain is protonated
at neutral pH, but because of the conjugation between the double bonds and the nitro-
gen lone pairs in guanidinium, the charge is delocalized. This makes the ionized form of
arginine very stable, and it also makes it one of the best amino acids for making hydro-
gen bonds. Lysine has a primary amine side chain which, like arginine’s side chain, is
charged at neutral pH[41]. Like arginine it is categorised as a basic amino acid due to
its positive charge and it also contributes to hydrogen bonding in proteins and peptide,
allthough it can not make hydrogen as strong as the ones with arginine. The charge can
not be delocalized in lysine and will be solely on the nitrogen[41]. We hypothesize, that
the ability to delocalize the charge is the reason why END-R is able to remote load and
END-K can not. When the peptide is going to diffuse through the bilayer, it must approach
the surface of the liposome and will at some point interact with the surface moieties be-
fore moving deeper into the bilayer. The delocalized charge and the strong ability to form
hydrogen bonds could be aiding in the interaction with the negatively charged phosphate
group and in avoiding elctrical repulsion from the amine group attached to the phsophate.
As shown for END-1, parts of the peptide sequence is clearly has some affinity for the
lipids in the bilayer, and these residues could very well be the aromatic residues of ty-
rosine, tryptophan, and phenyl alanine. The data suggests that END-K can interact with
the bilayer to an extend, but the very low incapsulation indicates that the interaction is
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
47
==PAGE:56==
disfavoured compared to END-R. Seeing as the charge on arginine is delocalized, this
would also allow the charge to be shielded, which could aid in the peptides ability to dif-
fuse through the lipid bilayer. There is not a lot of litterature on remote loading of peptides
into liposomes available at the time of writing this thesis. Rempte loading of peptides has
however been reported before, although this was in a poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) poly-
mer capsules[93]. These peptides are however so small, that they should be comparable
to small molecules such as doxorubicin. As mentioned, remote loading of doxorubicin
has been quite succesful, reaching very high amounts of incapsulated drug[82]. Remote
loading of this molecule has historically been done using ammonium sulphate, which has
made this specific buffer quite common for this process[82]. There are however a num-
ber of other ammonium based buffers, which could be better for the peptides described in
this thesis[102]. Some of these buffer solutions such as ammonium citrate reportedly has
even higher measured EE’s than ammonium sulphate. Fritze et al also discuss the use
of sodium salts in the buffer solution, which has been shown to yield bad results. How-
ever, this does not mean that the use of sodium salts could not work for remote loading
peptides[78].
3.4.2
Remote loading the amyloid sequence
An attempt was made, trying to remote load the β-amyloid sequence that was synthesised
for this thesis. As previously described, this peptide is a fragment of the β-amyloid pep-
tide, which have been linked to disease progression in people suffering from Alzheimer’s
disease[51]. What is observed in these patients is that the protein precursor will misfold
leading to a fragmentation. These peptide fragments will then form insoluble plaques
via β-sheet-like interaction. The purpose of synthesising it and trying to remote load this
sequence was to investigate if the peptide could be remote loaded and if so, if the self
associating nature of the peptide would affect the liposome[51]. Remote loading of this
peptide was carried out by Girisa Prahbu. Before the peptide could be remote loaded,
it had to be dissolved which proved to be quite difficult. Once synthesised, the peptide
started to form these plaques, especially in aqueous solutions. It was even an issue when
the peptide was purified using the Prep-HPLC, as the peptide clogged the column. In or-
der to dissolve it, the PBS buffer had to be mixed with 20% DMSO. To make sure that
the addition of this solvent would not interfere with the integrity of the bilayer, the dye
methylene blue (MB) was remote loaded using these same conditions. Remote loading
was observed, thus confirming that the addition of DMSO did not interfere with the bilayer.
Remote loading the amyloid sequence was however not succesfull. No peptide was de-
tected upon lyzing the liposomes, thus indicating that no peptide molecules had been able
to diffuse through the membrane. This is rather interesting, as many of the characteris-
tics listed for endomorphin-1. The pKa is 8.13 and the logD at pH 7 is 0.78 and drops to
around -1 at pH 5n(predicted using ChemAxon). These number should be indicative of a
molecule that would be able to pass the bilayer and become ionized in the aqueous core,
but that does not happen[78]. Given that MB was able to remote load under the same
conditions that were used for the amyloid sequence, it could not have been due to disrup-
tion of the liposomes. The amyloid sequence is a very hydrophobic peptide compared to
endomorphin-1, as it only contains very hydrophobic residues, see figure 2.2. However,
as it was seen for END-1, this could be beneficial as it would allow the peptide to interact
with the lipids in the bilayer. This was, however, not observed, and is contributed to the
self assembling nature of the peptide[52]. It was observed time and time again, that when
the peptide was left in solution or cooled in solution, it would rapidly form plaques that
would precipitate in solution. The peptide sequence would have to be modified in some
way in order to keept this from happening so rapidly. As mentioned in the introduction,
the two phenyl alanine residues have been found to be key for the self association of the
48
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:57==
peptide, which indicates that the interaction keeping the peptides together most likely is
π-interactions in collaboration with aliphatic van der Waals interactions caused by the va-
line, the alanine and the leucine[53]. In total, this amount to a strong enough force that will
shield the hydrophobic residues by way of forming these plaques. In order to make this
self association less rapid, one could experiment with incorporating charged residues in
either the C- or N-terminal to create electrostatic repulsion[52]. It could also be possible
to create more repulsion by substituting peptides in the sequence for ones that are similar
in size but differ in polarity, i.e. substitute valine for threonine or substitute one of the
phenyl alanine residues with tyrosine. As said previously, the point of synthesising this
peptide and trying to remote load it was to examine how the self association affected the
liposome, and in a way that question was answered. But the only thing that was learned
from this is that the peptide was unable to remote load because of the self assembly.
3.4.3
Remote loading og cyclic Veber-Hirschmann peptide analog
The Veber-Hirschmann peptide analog that was described previously was also subjected
to remote loading via the same ammonium sulphate gradient. This was done in an effort
to examine the effects of cyclization on a molecules ability to remote load. In the intro-
duction it was described how cyclic peptides can have better permeability through cellular
membranes due their restrained structure[59]. Even though there are some strucutral
similarities between cell membranes and liposomes, the complexity of the cell membrane
is far beyond that of a liposome[49]. Therefore, the supposedly increased permeabil-
ity of cyclic peptides does not guarantee that the peptide will remote load. The remote
loading of VHpep-cyc was handled by Hira Muneeb. First, an attempt was made to re-
mote load VHpep-cyc into the aforementioned stealth liposomal formulation containing
HSPC/DSPE-mPEG2000/Cholesterol (3:1:1). This liposomal formulation was available
in relatively large amounts and, as mentioned, it had worked with endomorphin-1. For the
initial experiments, the remote loading time was kept the same and the temperature was
kept the same. Having learned from END-1 and the analogs, the D:L ratio was initially
1:15, but was varied between the initial 1:15 to 1:20, 1:25, and 1:30 in order to find the
optimal ratio. Unfortunately, no data was generated from these experiments as no remote
loaded peptide could be detected in subsequent HPLC analysis. As figure 2.5 showed,
the cyclic peptide has two lysine residues, which were added in order to increase polarity
of the peptide. The data for remote loading of the endomorphin-1 analogs showed quite
clearly that lysine in particular has a hard time moving across bilayers. This could be
part of the reason for no observable remote loading. Another reason why the peptide was
uable to be remote loaded is the LO phase that the bilayer is in due to cholesterol[77]. This
reduces permeability, and likely does not create gaps in the bilayer that are big enough
for VHpep-cyc to diffuse through. As with END-R and END-K, remote loading was also
attempted into liposomal formulations without cholesterol. As with the other liposomal
formulation, the initial attempts were done with varying D:L ratios. The ratios were 1:20,
1:25, 1:30, 1:35 and 1:40.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 3.14: Remote loading of VHpep-cyc at different D:L ratios
The highest EE was attained using the 1:40 (0.025 M) D:L ratio, which gave an EE of
28.06% on average, but on single measurements reached as high as 31%. This was
the highest EE that was achieved for the cyclic peptide. Afterwards, experiments were
made investigating the effect of the length of the active loading in time. This experiment
indicated that the ideal time was 4 or 3 hours to achieve maximal loading efficiency. At
remote loading times beyond 4 hours the EE dropped below 20%.
Figure 3.15: Remote loading of VHpep-cyc using different remote loading times
The maximal EE of 31% did highlight, that this peptide has potential to be remote loaded,
and that through optimization, the loading could be increased. These changes could ei-
ther be in the form of structural changes to the peptide or as mentioned previously, chang-
ing the buffer[59][102]. Given that doxorubicin is often reagrded as a sort of benchmark
compound for remote loading, initial experiments usually start with the same conditions
used to remote load the chemotherapeutic agent[59]. The main reason why doxorubicin
was used as the primary reference molecule for remote loading in this thesis is that as
mentioned, close to no litterature exists on remote loading peptides in liposomes. Given
that doxorubicin and the endomorphin are similar in molecular weight, doxorubicin was
chosen as the best reference available[82][14]. Another reason is that remote loading of
doxorubicin has been studied much more than any other compound and so, there is a
lot of data on this particular process. As mentioned previously, an octameric cyclic pep-
tide has been shown to remote load in a polymeric vesicle using a gradient based on
trehalose[93]. This octameric peptide is similar in size to the Veber-Hirschmann deriva-
tive synthesized for this thesis, and the findings by Wang et al indicate that a peptide like
should be able to remote load giveen the right conditions. Many other salts have been
explored as buffer solutions for establishing the gradient, which could potentially increase
the encapsulation for all of the above listed peptides[78].
50
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:59==
4
Future Perspectives
Peptide drugs and liposomal formulations of these have already been studied, but re-
mote loading peptides into liposomes is somewhat untouched territory even though many
peptides have suitable molecular characteristics for remote loading[95][75]. Delivery of
peptide drugs is also not just limited to liposomal formulations but could also be achieved
through other delivery systems such as polymeric delivery systems[93]. Remote loading
peptides is possible in polymeric delivery systems, which has been shown using set-
melanotide as the drug[93] and it has also been shown to be possible in liposomes, which
this thesis now confirms. The data gathered in this paper showed how much the EE is
affected by changes in the active loading parameters such as time, temperature and D:L
ratio, which will need to be studied further in order to find the optimal value for those pa-
rameters. The effect of cyclization on remote loading was explored in this paper as well.
Furthermore, various different methods for cyclization were attempted. As cyclic pep-
tides have been reported to be superior to their linear counterparts, exploration of effcient
methods for delivery of these should be explored further[103]. The cyclic peptide that was
synthesiszed in this paper, was synthesized through a head-to-tail lactamization, but as
mentioned, many other methods exist for cyclization. For example, in the paper published
by Wang et al, the peptide that is remote loaded into the polymeric vesicle is cyclized via a
disulfide bridge[70]. Exploring how different forms of cyclic peptides behave when remote
loading would be valuable as way to deliver these potential drug candidates efficiently. In
this thesis it was also described how different buffer solutions can be utilized for remote
loading[78]. To optimize the remote loading of peptides in liposomes, an exploration of
various gradient is needed. As mentioned previously, the remote loading in this thesis
was done using a gradient based on ammonium sulphate as doxorubicin was used as a
model compound for the peptides. While it was useful to have some guidelines for the
remote loading, the conditions could probably optimized. As it was discussed previously,
doxorubicin and the peptides synthesized for this thesis have little to no similarities struc-
turally, which should also be reflected in the buffer used for remote loading. Finally, further
exploration of the β-amyloid peptide should be made in order to examine the effects of
peptide self-association on remote loading and the stability of the liposome. It could be
a usefull tool for achieving supersaturation in the liposome[90]. Through peptide engi-
neering is should be possible to produce a peptide that only self assembles at certain pH
values allowing it to remote load[54].
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
51
==PAGE:60==
52
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:61==
5
Conclusion
In conclusion, three peptides based on the endogenous µ-opioid receptor binding pep-
tide endomorphin-1 were succesfully synthesized and characterized using MALDI-TOF
and UHPLC. The analysis methods indicated succesful synthesis and high purity of the
compounds. Two of these peptide were also shown to remote load into liposomes using
a pH gradient based on ammonium sulphate. The endogenous enomorphin-1 was able
to remote load in a stealth liposome formulation with cholesterol in the bilayer, giving an
encapsulation efficiency of 60%. The analog, END-R, was unable to remote load in the
aforementioned formulation, but it was shown to remote load in a similar formulation with-
out cholesterol. This peptide reached an encapsulation efficiency of 37%, proving that
substituting the proline for arginine made the diffusion across the bilayer less favourable.
This also showed the effect cholesterol has on stabilizing the bilayer. Lastly, the ana-
log END-K was unable to remote load in the formulation with cholesterol, and the results
aquired for the formulation without were somewhat inconclusive, most likely indicating
that the peptide was stuck in the bilayer, and not that it was actually able to be remote
loaded. An analog of the β-amyloid was also succesfully synthesized for this thesis as
confirmed by MALDI-TOF. Further analysis of this peptide was unfortunately limited due
to its propensity for forming insoluble plaques, which made it difficult to work with. Finally,
a cyclic peptide was synthesised through a head-to-tail lactamization reaction in solution.
First an attempt was made using the coupling reagent HATU, which did not yield the de-
sired cyclic peptide, but instead a side product with a guanidinated N-terminal. This was
confirmed through synthesis of a different sequence. A cyclization method that included
an acyl migration was attempted for this thesis. Unfortunately this methods yielded no
conclusive results. A different method was therefor used for cyclization wherein the cou-
pling reagent PyBOP was used. A yield of 83.7 mg of the cyclic peptide was produced,
which was confirmed by MALDI-TOF and various NMR-techniques. UHPLC indicated
high purity of the peptide, but NMR did indicate impurities in the product attributed to ex-
cess solvent and isomerization. Comparison of H1-NMR spectras of the cyclic peptide
and a linear version concluded that cyclization had been succesful. The cyclic peptide
was also proven to remote load, reaching an encapsulation efficiency of 28% on average.
Further studies are needed in order to determine the optimal conditions for peptides such
as the ones synthesized in this thesis.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:63==
Bibliography
[1]
Qingxin Li and Congbao Kang. “Mechanisms of action for small molecules re-
vealed by structural biology in drug discovery”. In: International Journal of Molecu-
lar Sciences 21.15 (Aug. 2020), pp. 1–18. ISSN: 14220067. DOI: 10.3390/ijms21155262.
[2]
Favour Danladi Makurvet. “Biologics vs. small molecules: Drug costs and pa-
tient access”. In: Medicine in Drug Discovery 9 (Mar. 2021), p. 100075. ISSN:
25900986. DOI: 10.1016/j.medidd.2020.100075.
[3]
Vrinda Gote et al. “A Comprehensive Review of mRNA Vaccines”. In: International
Journal of Molecular Sciences 24.3 (Feb. 2023). ISSN: 14220067. DOI: 10.3390/
ijms24032700.
[4]
Lei Wang et al. “Therapeutic peptides: current applications and future directions”.
In: Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy 7.1 (Dec. 2022). ISSN: 20593635.
DOI: 10.1038/s41392-022-00904-4.
[5]
Simon R. Foster et al. “Discovery of Human Signaling Systems: Pairing Peptides
to G Protein-Coupled Receptors”. In: Cell 179.4 (Oct. 2019), pp. 895–908. ISSN:
10974172. DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2019.10.010.
[6]
Jean-François Lambert. “Oligopeptide”. In: Encyclopedia of Astrobiology (2011).
Ed. by Gargaud Muriel et al., p. 1174. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-11274-4{\_}1106.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-11274-4_1106.
[7]
Shin Miyakawa. “Polypeptide”. In: Encyclopedia of Astrobiology (2011). Ed. by
Muriel Gargaud et al., p. 1326. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 642- 11274- 4_1256. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-11274-4_1256.
[8]
Nabih A Baeshen et al. Cell factories for insulin production. Tech. rep. 2014. URL:
http://www.microbialcellfactories.com/content/13/1/141.
[9]
Michael A. Weiss. “Chapter 2 The Structure and Function of Insulin. Decoding
the TR Transition”. In: Vitamins and Hormones 80.C (2009), pp. 33–49. ISSN:
00836729. DOI: 10.1016/S0083-6729(08)00602-X.
[10]
Irl B. Hirsch et al. “The evolution of insulin and how it informs therapy and treatment
choices”. In: Endocrine Reviews 41.5 (2021), pp. 733–755. ISSN: 19457189. DOI:
10.1210/ENDREV/BNAA015.
[11]
Eva Y. Wong and Lisa Kroon. “Ultra-rapid-acting insulins: How fast is really needed?”
In: Clinical Diabetes 39.4 (Oct. 2021), pp. 415–423. ISSN: 08918929. DOI: 10.
2337/cd20-0119.
[12]
Philip Home and Peter Kurtzhals. “Insulin detemir: From concept to clinical expe-
rience”. In: Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy 7.3 (Feb. 2006), pp. 325–343.
ISSN: 14656566. DOI: 10.1517/14656566.7.3.325.
[13]
Giacomo Rossino et al. “Peptides as Therapeutic Agents: Challenges and Op-
portunities in the Green Transition Era”. In: Molecules 28.20 (Oct. 2023). ISSN:
14203049. DOI: 10.3390/molecules28207165.
[14]
Zheng Hui Gu et al. “Endomorphins: Promising endogenous opioid peptides for
the development of novel analgesics”. In: NeuroSignals 25.1 (Jan. 2018), pp. 98–
116. ISSN: 14248638. DOI: 10.1159/000484909.
[15]
Mala L. Radhakrishnan and Bruce Tidor. “Specificity in molecular design: A physi-
cal framework for probing the determinants of binding specificity and promiscuity in
a biological environment”. In: Journal of Physical Chemistry B 111.47 (Nov. 2007),
pp. 13419–13435. ISSN: 15206106. DOI: 10.1021/jp074285e.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
55
==PAGE:64==
[16]
Pieter De Brabander et al. “Challenges and progress towards industrial recombi-
nant protein production in yeasts: A review”. In: Biotechnology Advances 64 (May
2023). ISSN: 07349750. DOI: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2023.108121.
[17]
Felipe Cava et al. “Emerging knowledge of regulatory roles of d-amino acids in
bacteria”. In: Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 68.5 (Mar. 2011), pp. 817–831.
ISSN: 1420682X. DOI: 10.1007/s00018-010-0571-8.
[18]
Muhammad Idrees et al. “Multimodal role of amino acids in microbial control and
drug development”. In: Antibiotics 9.6 (June 2020), pp. 1–23. ISSN: 20796382.
DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics9060330.
[19]
MJ. Lopez and SS. Mohiuddin. Biochemistry, Essential Amino Acids. Tech. rep.
StatPearls [Internet], 2024. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK557845/.
[20]
Gregg B. Fields. “Introduction to Peptide Synthesis”. In: Current Protocols in Pro-
tein Science 26.1 (Dec. 2001). ISSN: 1934-3655. DOI: 10 . 1002 / 0471140864 .
ps1801s26.
[21]
Irene Coin, Michael Beyermann, and Michael Bienert. “Solid-phase peptide syn-
thesis: From standard procedures to the synthesis of difficult sequences”. In: Na-
ture Protocols 2.12 (Dec. 2007), pp. 3247–3256. ISSN: 17502799. DOI: 10.1038/
nprot.2007.454.
[22]
Lei Liu Editor. Protein Ligation and Total Synthesis II. URL: http://www.springer.
com/series/128.
[23]
Omar F. Luna et al. “Deprotection reagents in Fmoc solid phase peptide synthesis:
Moving away from piperidine?” In: Molecules 21 (11 Nov. 2016). ISSN: 14203049.
DOI: 10.3390/molecules21111542.
[24]
Tanya Román et al. “Improving 2-Chlorotrityl Chloride (2-CTC) Resin Activation”.
In: Methods and Protocols 6.5 (2023). ISSN: 2409-9279. DOI: 10.3390/mps6050082.
URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2409-9279/6/5/82.
[25]
Jennifer Lécaillon et al. “Synthesis of cyclic peptides via O-N-acyl migration”. In:
Tetrahedron Letters 49.31 (July 2008), pp. 4674–4676. ISSN: 00404039. DOI: 10.
1016/j.tetlet.2008.05.049.
[26]
Mei Wu et al. “DIPEA-induced activation of OH−for the synthesis of amides via
photocatalysis”. In: RSC Advances 12 (23 May 2022), pp. 14724–14728. ISSN:
20462069. DOI: 10.1039/d2ra02107b.
[27]
Md. Chanmiya Sheikh et al. “Mechanistic studies of DCC/HOBt-mediated reac-
tion of 3-phenylpropionic acid with benzyl alcohol and studies on the reactivi-
ties of ‘active ester’ and the related derivatives with nucleophiles”. In: Tetrahe-
dron 66.36 (2010), pp. 7272–7278. ISSN: 0040-4020. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.tet.2010.07.011. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0040402010010513.
[28]
Arun K. Ghosh and Dana Shahabi. “Synthesis of amide derivatives for electron
deficient amines and functionalized carboxylic acids using EDC and DMAP and
a catalytic amount of HOBt as the coupling reagents”. In: Tetrahedron Letters 63
(Jan. 2021). ISSN: 18733581. DOI: 10.1016/j.tetlet.2020.152719.
[29]
Yi Yang. “Chapter 5 - Side Reactions Upon Amino Acid/Peptide Carboxyl Activa-
tion”. In: Side Reactions in Peptide Synthesis. Ed. by Yi Yang. Oxford: Academic
Press, 2016, pp. 95–118. ISBN: 978-0-12-801009-9. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/B978-0-12-801009-9.00005-7. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780128010099000057.
[30]
URL: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HATU.
[31]
Diego Arantes Teixeira Pires, Marcelo Porto Bemquerer, and Claudia Jorge Do
Nascimento. “Some mechanistic aspects on Fmoc solid phase peptide synthesis”.
56
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:65==
In: International Journal of Peptide Research and Therapeutics 20 (1 Mar. 2014),
pp. 53–69. ISSN: 15733149. DOI: 10.1007/s10989-013-9366-8.
[32]
“Total iron measurement in human serum with a smartphone”. In: vol. 2019-November.
American Institute of Chemical Engineers, 2019. ISBN: 9780816911127. DOI: 10.
1039/x0xx00000x.
[33]
Yun-Hua Ye et al. “Studies on the synthetic methodology of head to tail cyclization
of linear peptides”. In: ().
[34]
Othman Al Musaimi et al. “Strategies for Improving Peptide Stability and Deliv-
ery”. In: Pharmaceuticals 15 (10 Oct. 2022). ISSN: 14248247. DOI: 10 . 3390 /
ph15101283.
[35]
Yuki Nagano et al. “Grafting Hydrophobic Amino Acids Critical for Inhibition of
Protein-Protein Interactions on a Cell-Penetrating Peptide Scaffold”. In: Molecular
Pharmaceutics 19.2 (Feb. 2022), pp. 558–567. ISSN: 15438392. DOI: 10.1021/
acs.molpharmaceut.1c00671.
[36]
Xuefei Li et al. “Backbone N-methylation of peptides: Advances in synthesis and
applications in pharmaceutical drug development”. In: Bioorganic Chemistry 141
(2023), p. 106892. ISSN: 0045-2068. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioorg.2023.
106892. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0045206823005539.
[37]
Ryan A. Bottens and Tohru Yamada. “Cell-Penetrating Peptides (CPPs) as Ther-
apeutic and Diagnostic Agents for Cancer”. In: Cancers 14.22 (Nov. 2022). ISSN:
20726694. DOI: 10.3390/cancers14225546.
[38]
Huifeng Zhang et al. “Recent Advances of Cell-Penetrating Peptides and Their Ap-
plication as Vectors for Delivery of Peptide and Protein-Based Cargo Molecules”.
In: Pharmaceutics 15.8 (May 2023). ISSN: 19994923. DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics15082093.
[39]
Nicole J. Yang and Marlon J. Hinner. “Getting across the cell membrane: an overview
for small molecules, peptides, and proteins”. In: Methods in molecular biology
(Clifton, N.J.) 1266 (2015), pp. 29–53. ISSN: 19406029. DOI: 10.1007/978- 1-
4939-2272-7_3.
[40]
Sanjivanjit K. Bhal et al. “The Rule of Five Revisited: Applying Log D in Place of
Log P in Drug-Likeness Filters”. In: Molecular Pharmaceutics 4.4 (2007). PMID:
17530776, pp. 556–560. DOI: 10.1021/mp0700209. eprint: https://doi.org/10.
1021/mp0700209. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/mp0700209.
[41]
URL: https://www2.chemistry.msu.edu/faculty/reusch/virttxtjml/protein2.htm.
[42]
Kira Astakhova et al. “”clicking” Gene Therapeutics: A Successful Union of Chem-
istry and Biomedicine for New Solutions”. In: Molecular Pharmaceutics 15 (8 Aug.
2018), pp. 2892–2899. ISSN: 15438392. DOI: 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.7b00765.
[43]
Vahab Alamdari-palangi et al. “Recent advances and applications of peptide–agent
conjugates for targeting tumor cells”. In: Journal of Cancer Research and Clinical
Oncology 149.16 (Nov. 2023), pp. 15249–15273. ISSN: 14321335. DOI: 10.1007/
s00432-023-05144-9.
[44]
“Advantages of RGD peptides for directing cell association with biomaterials”. In:
Biomaterials 32 (18 June 2011), pp. 4205–4210. ISSN: 01429612. DOI: 10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2011.02.029.
[45]
Felicitas Lewrick and Regine Suss. “Remote Loading of Anthracyclines into Lipo-
somes”. In: Liposomes: Methods and Protocols, Volume 1: Pharmaceutical Nanocar-
riers. Ed. by Volkmar Weissig. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, 2010, pp. 139–145.
ISBN: 978-1-60327-360-2. DOI: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 60327 - 360 - 2 _ 9. URL: https :
//doi.org/10.1007/978-1-60327-360-2_9.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
57
==PAGE:66==
[46]
Vijay Bhooshan Kumar et al. “Design of Functional RGD Peptide-Based Biomateri-
als for Tissue Engineering”. In: Pharmaceutics 15 (2 Feb. 2023). ISSN: 19994923.
DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics15020345.
[47]
Sujin Kang, Sooyeun Lee, and Soyeun Park. “iRGD peptide as a tumor-penetrating
enhancer for tumor-targeted drug delivery”. In: Polymers 12.9 (Sept. 2020). ISSN:
20734360. DOI: 10.3390/POLYM12091906.
[48]
Jafrin Jobayer Sonju et al. “Peptide-functionalized liposomes as therapeutic and
diagnostic tools for cancer treatment”. In: Journal of Controlled Release 329 (Jan.
2021), pp. 624–644. ISSN: 18734995. DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2020.09.055.
[49]
GM. Cooper. Structure of the Plasma Membrane. Tech. rep. Sunderland (MA):
Sinauer Associates, 2000.
[50]
URL: https://www.nature.com/scitable/topicpage/gpcr-14047471/.
[51]
John C. Fiala. “Mechanisms of amyloid plaque pathogenesis”. In: Acta Neuropatho-
logica 114.6 (Dec. 2007), pp. 551–571. ISSN: 00016322. DOI: 10.1007/s00401-
007-0284-8.
[52]
Peptide forming amyloid-like fibrils (Neurodegenerative Therapy) *Sequence: FFK-
LVFF* MW: 947 MW Sequence: Ac-EFFAAE-NH2 MW: 753. Tech. rep.
[53]
Iuliia Stroganova, Sjors Bakels, and Anouk M. Rijs. “Structural Properties of Phenylalanine-
Based Dimers Revealed Using IR Action Spectroscopy”. In: Molecules 27 (7 Apr.
2022). ISSN: 14203049. DOI: 10.3390/molecules27072367.
[54]
Jie Li et al. “Surfactant-like peptides: From molecular design to controllable self-
assembly with applications”. In: Coordination Chemistry Reviews 421 (Oct. 2020).
ISSN: 00108545. DOI: 10.1016/j.ccr.2020.213418.
[55]
Y. Nakama. “Chapter 15 - Surfactants”. In: Cosmetic Science and Technology.
Ed. by Kazutami Sakamoto et al. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2017, pp. 231–244. ISBN:
978-0-12-802005-0. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-802005-0.00015-X.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978012802005000015X.
[56]
Hamdi Nsairat et al. “Liposomes: structure, composition, types, and clinical appli-
cations”. In: Heliyon 8 (5 May 2022). ISSN: 24058440. DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.
2022.e09394.
[57]
J.C. Stendahl et al. “Intermolecular Forces in the Self-Assembly of Peptide Am-
phiphile Nanofibers”. In: Advanced Functional Materials 16.4 (2006), pp. 499–508.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.200500161. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1002/adfm.200500161. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1002/adfm.200500161.
[58]
Won Min Park. “Coiled-coils: The molecular zippers that self-assemble protein
nanostructures”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 21.10 (May 2020).
ISSN: 14220067. DOI: 10.3390/ijms21103584.
[59]
Rasha Jwad, Daniel Weissberger, and Luke Hunter. “Strategies for Fine-Tuning
the Conformations of Cyclic Peptides”. In: Chemical Reviews 120.17 (May 2020),
pp. 9743–9789. ISSN: 15206890. DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c00013.
[60]
Isabella L. Karle. “Conformational characteristics of peptides and unanticipated
results from crystal structure analyses”. In: Biopolymers 28.1 (1989), pp. 1–14.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/bip.360280104. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/pdf/10.1002/bip.360280104. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/
10.1002/bip.360280104.
[61]
Mattia Moiola, Misal G. Memeo, and Paolo Quadrelli. “Stapled peptides-a useful
improvement for peptide-based drugs”. In: Molecules 24.20 (Oct. 2019). ISSN:
14203049. DOI: 10.3390/molecules24203654.
58
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:67==
[62]
Xishan Chen et al. “A stapled peptide antagonist of MDM2 carried by polymeric mi-
celles sensitizes glioblastoma to temozolomide treatment through p53 activation”.
In: Journal of Controlled Release 218 (Nov. 2015), pp. 29–35. ISSN: 18734995.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.09.061.
[63]
Laura Posada and Gloria Serra. “Three Methods for Peptide Cyclization Via Lac-
tamization”. In: Methods in Molecular Biology 2371 (2022), pp. 3–17. ISSN: 19406029.
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-1689-5{\_}1.
[64]
Maria C Alcaro et al. “On-resin head-to-tail cyclization of cyclotetrapeptides: Opti-
mization of crucial parameters”. In: Journal of Peptide Science 10.4 (May 2004),
pp. 218–228. ISSN: 10752617. DOI: 10.1002/psc.512.
[65]
“CA2345067A1”. Patent reference without complete details.
[66]
Yan-chun Tang et al. “Synthesis of cyclopentapeptides and cycloheptapeptides
by DEPBT and the influence of some factors on cyclization”. In: The Journal of
Peptide Research 60.2 (2002), pp. 95–103. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1399-
3011.2002.201000.x. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1034/j.1399-
3011.2002.201000.x. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1034/j.1399-
3011.2002.201000.x.
[67]
Victor Adebomi et al. “CyClick Chemistry for the Synthesis of Cyclic Peptides”. In:
Angewandte Chemie 131.52 (Dec. 2019), pp. 19249–19256. ISSN: 0044-8249.
DOI: 10.1002/ange.201911900.
[68]
Azzurra Stefanucci et al. “Conformationally constrained histidines in the design
of peptidomimetics: Strategies for the χ-space control”. In: International Journal
of Molecular Sciences 12.5 (May 2011), pp. 2853–2890. ISSN: 14220067. DOI:
10.3390/ijms12052853.
[69]
Mark L. Chiu et al. “Antibody structure and function: The basis for engineering
therapeutics”. In: Antibodies 8 (4 Dec. 2019). ISSN: 20734468. DOI: 10.3390/
antib8040055.
[70]
Lijun Wang et al. “Application of Iodine as a Catalyst in Aerobic Oxidations: A
Sustainable Approach for Thiol Oxidations”. In: Molecules 28 (19 Oct. 2023). ISSN:
14203049. DOI: 10.3390/molecules28196789.
[71]
Kiyotaka Kobayashi et al. ““On-Resin” Disulfide Peptide Synthesis with Methyl
3-Nitro-2-pyridinesulfenate”. In: European Journal of Organic Chemistry 2021.6
(2021), pp. 956–963. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ejoc.202001517. eprint: https:
//chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/ejoc.202001517. URL:
https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/ejoc.202001517.
[72]
Estela Haldón, M. Carmen Nicasio, and Pedro J. Pérez. “Copper-catalysed azide–
alkyne cycloadditions (CuAAC): an update”. In: Org. Biomol. Chem. 13 (37 2015),
pp. 9528–9550. DOI: 10.1039/C5OB01457C. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
C5OB01457C.
[73]
Ngalle Eric Mbua et al. “Strain-Promoted Alkyne–Azide Cycloadditions (SPAAC)
Reveal New Features of Glycoconjugate Biosynthesis”. In: ChemBioChem 12.12
(2011), pp. 1912–1921. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/cbic.201100117. eprint: https:
//chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/cbic.201100117. URL:
https://chemistry-europe.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cbic.201100117.
[74]
Hong Li et al. “Multivesicular Liposomes for Oral Delivery of Recombinant Human
Epidermal Growth Factor”. In: Arch Pharm Res 28.8 (2005), pp. 988–994. URL:
http://apr.psk.or.kr.
[75]
Emilie Ducat et al. “The experimental design as practical approach to develop and
optimize a formulation of peptide-loaded liposomes”. In: AAPS PharmSciTech 11.2
(May 2010), pp. 966–975. ISSN: 15309932. DOI: 10.1208/s12249-010-9463-3.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
59
==PAGE:68==
[76]
URL: https://conductscience.com/liposomes-structure-classification-and-applications/.
[77]
Frédérick de Meyer and Berend Smit. “Effect of cholesterol on the structure of a
phospholipid bilayer”. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106.10
(2009), pp. 3654–3658. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0809959106. eprint: https://www.pnas.
org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.0809959106. URL: https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10.
1073/pnas.0809959106.
[78]
Navami Rajan Nambiar et al. “Remote loading in liposome: a review of current
strategies and recent developments”. In: Journal of Liposome Research (2024).
ISSN: 15322394. DOI: 10.1080/08982104.2024.2315449.
[79]
M. Danaei et al. “Impact of particle size and polydispersity index on the clinical
applications of lipidic nanocarrier systems”. In: Pharmaceutics 10 (2 May 2018).
ISSN: 19994923. DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics10020057.
[80]
URL: https://ascendiapharma.com/newsroom/2022/07/28/liposome- vs- lipid-
nanoparticle.
[81]
Hongtao Xu et al. “Development of high-content gemcitabine PEGylated liposomes
and their cytotoxicity on drug-resistant pancreatic tumour cells”. In: Pharmaceuti-
cal Research 31.10 (Mar. 2014), pp. 2583–2592. ISSN: 1573904X. DOI: 10.1007/
s11095-014-1353-z.
[82]
Mohamed Alyane, Gillian Barratt, and Mesbah Lahouel. “Remote loading of dox-
orubicin into liposomes by transmembrane pH gradient to reduce toxicity toward
H9c2 cells”. In: Saudi Pharmaceutical Journal 24.2 (May 2016), pp. 165–175.
ISSN: 13190164. DOI: 10.1016/j.jsps.2015.02.014.
[83]
Mahboob Morshed and Ezharul Hoque Chowdhury. “Gene Delivery and Clinical
Applications”. In: Encyclopedia of Biomedical Engineering. Ed. by Roger Narayan.
Oxford: Elsevier, 2019, pp. 345–351. ISBN: 978-0-12-805144-3. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801238-3.99883-0. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/B9780128012383998830.
[84]
“Challenging paradigms in tumour drug delivery”. In: Nature Materials 19 (5 May
2020), p. 477. ISSN: 14764660. DOI: 10.1038/s41563-020-0676-x.
[85]
Maria Laura Immordino, Franco Dosio, and Luigi Cattel. “Stealth liposomes: Re-
view of the basic science, rationale, and clinical applications, existing and poten-
tial”. In: International Journal of Nanomedicine 1.3 (2006). Cited by: 1831, pp. 297–
315. URL: https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-34548482374&
partnerID=40&md5=70749e5d28ca8f0a1f87932c1cc2eff8.
[86]
Ying Zheng Zhao and Cui Tao Lu. “Increasing the entrapment of protein-loaded li-
posomes with a modified freeze-thaw technique: A preliminary experimental study”.
In: Drug Development and Industrial Pharmacy 35.2 (Feb. 2009), pp. 165–171.
ISSN: 03639045. DOI: 10.1080/03639040802220300.
[87]
Ghazal Rastegar, Mohammad Musa Salman, and Shashank R. Sirsi. “Remote
Loading: The Missing Piece for Achieving High Drug Payload and Rapid Release in
Polymeric Microbubbles”. In: Pharmaceutics 15.11 (Nov. 2023). ISSN: 19994923.
DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics15112550.
[88]
N.V. BHAGAVAN. “CHAPTER 1 - Water, Acids, Bases, and Buffers”. In: Medical
Biochemistry (Fourth Edition). Ed. by N.V. BHAGAVAN. Fourth Edition. San Diego:
Academic Press, 2002, pp. 1–16. ISBN: 978-0-12-095440-7. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/B978-012095440-7/50003-2. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/B9780120954407500032.
[89]
S. Prasanna and R. Doerksen. “Topological Polar Surface Area: A Useful Descrip-
tor in 2D-QSAR”. In: Current Medicinal Chemistry 16.1 (Dec. 2008), pp. 21–41.
ISSN: 09298673. DOI: 10.2174/092986709787002817.
60
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:69==
[90]
URL: https://www.mt.com/gb/en/home/applications/L1_AutoChem_Applications/
L2_Crystallization/Supersaturation_Application.html.
[91]
URL: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Anthracene.
[92]
Yechezkel (Chezy) Barenholz. “Doxil® — The first FDA-approved nano-drug: Lessons
learned”. In: Journal of Controlled Release 160.2 (2012). Past, current and future
applications of liposomes - Grand Challenges and Opportunities in Nanomedicine,
pp. 117–134. ISSN: 0168-3659. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2012.03.020.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168365912002301.
[93]
Shuying Wang et al. “Aqueous remote loading of setmelanotide in poly(lactic-co-
glycolic acid) microspheres for long-term obesity treatment”. In: Journal of Con-
trolled Release 364 (Dec. 2023), pp. 589–600. ISSN: 18734995. DOI: 10.1016/j.
jconrel.2023.09.015.
[94]
Morgan B. Giles et al. “Efficient aqueous remote loading of peptides in poly(lactic-
co-glycolic acid)”. In: Nature Communications 13.1 (Dec. 2022). ISSN: 20411723.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-30813-7.
[95]
Mehrad Rohi Khorasani. Peptide Loading in Liposomes.
[96]
URL: https://www.sigmaaldrich.com/DK/en/technical-documents/technical-article/
chemistry-and-synthesis/peptide-synthesis/peptide-coupling-reagents-selection-guide.
[97]
URL: https://www.peptide.com/resources/solid-phase-peptide-synthesis/coupling-
reagents/.
[98]
Daniel F. Veber et al. “A super active cyclic hexapeptide analog of somatostatin”.
In: Life Sciences 34.14 (1984), pp. 1371–1378. ISSN: 0024-3205. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/0024-3205(84)90009-2. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/0024320584900092.
[99]
Ozlem Coskun. “Separation Tecniques: CHROMATOGRAPHY”. In: Northern Clin-
ics of Istanbul (2016). ISSN: 21484902. DOI: 10.14744/nci.2016.32757.
[100]
Gregory R. Fulmer et al. “NMR chemical shifts of trace impurities: Common labora-
tory solvents, organics, and gases in deuterated solvents relevant to the organometal-
lic chemist”. In: Organometallics 29 (9 May 2010), pp. 2176–2179. ISSN: 02767333.
DOI: 10.1021/om100106e.
[101]
Fundamentals of Pharmaceutical Nanoscience. Tech. rep.
[102]
Andreas Fritze et al. “Remote loading of doxorubicin into liposomes driven by a
transmembrane phosphate gradient”. In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) -
Biomembranes 1758.10 (2006), pp. 1633–1640. ISSN: 0005-2736. DOI: https :
//doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamem.2006.05.028. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0005273606002070.
[103]
Matthew A Hostetler et al. “Synthetic Natural Product Inspired Cyclic Peptides”. In:
ACS Chemical Biology 16.11 (May 2021), pp. 2604–2611. ISSN: 15548937. DOI:
10.1021/acschembio.1c00641.
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
61
==PAGE:70==
62
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:71==
A
Appendix
A.1
Data from Prep-HPLC
Figure A.1: Prep-HPLC chromatogram for END-1, 213 nm
Figure A.2: Prep-HPLC chromatogram for END-1, 280 nm
Figure A.3: Prep-HPLC chromatogram for END-K, 213 nm
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure A.4: Prep-HPLC chromatogram for END-K, 280 nm
Figure A.5: Prep-HPLC chromatogram for END-R, 213 nm
Figure A.6: Prep-HPLC chromatogram for END-R, 280 nm
64
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:73==
Figure A.7: Prep-HPLC chromatogram for AMY-1, 280 nm
Figure A.8: Prep-HPLC chromatogram for VHpep-lin, 280 nm
Figure A.9: Prep-HPLC chromatogram for VHpep-cyc, 280 nm
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure A.10: Prep-HPLC chromatogram for ONAC, 213 nm
Figure A.11: Prep-HPLC chromatogram of ONAC peptide
Figure A.12: Prep-HPLC chromatogram of FLPAA
66
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:75==
A.2
NMR data and proton assignment
A.2.1
Linear Veber-Hirschmann derivative
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
ppm
6.00
4.35
5.00
3.04
0.98
0.76
1.03
4.00
1.04
0.94
1.00
1.11
1.11
1.04
0.97
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.97
1.88
0.95
1.82
0.97
1.00
1.03
3.92
0.98
1.01
1.40
5.15
2.01
1.00
1.00
0.97
0.98
0.93
0.50
Current Data Parameters
NAME     DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpepY2_Lin
EXPNO                20
PROCNO                1
F2 - Acquisition Parameters
Date_          20240503
Time              18.46 h
INSTRUM           spect
PROBHD   Z145819_0005 (
PULPROG            zg30
TD                65536
SOLVENT            DMSO
NS                   16
DS                    2
SWH           16025.641 Hz
FIDRES         0.489064 Hz
AQ            2.0447233 sec
RG                12.46
DW               31.200 usec
DE                20.00 usec
TE                298.0 K
D1           1.00000000 sec
TD0                   1
SFO1        799.9869399 MHz
NUC1                 1H
P1                 7.50 usec
PLW1         9.69999981 W
F2 - Processing parameters
SI                65536
SF          799.9820065 MHz
WDW                  EM
SSB                   0
LB                 0.30 Hz
GB                    0
PC                 1.00
Group CHG
DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpepY2_Lin
1D 1H 64 scans
290424
Figure A.13: H1-NMR of linear VHpep
Proton assignment - Linear VHpep: 1H-NMR (800 MHz, DMSO-d6) δ 0.81 (dd, 6H, Val
CH3), 1.24 (m, 4H, Lysine side chain CH2), 1.48 (m, 5H, Lys side chain CH2), 1.63 (m, 3H,
Lys side chain CH2), 1.94 (m, 1H, Val CH), 2.63 (dd, 1H, Tyr aliphatic), 2.7 (dt, 4H, Lys
side chain CH2), 2.88 (dd, 1H, Phe aliphatic), 2.92 (dd, 1H, Tyr aliphatic), 2.97 (dd, 1H,
Trp aliphatic), 3.04 (dd, 1H, Phe aliphatic), 3.12 (dd, 1H, Trp aliphatic), 3.69 (t, 1H, Lys1
α-carbon), 4.2 (dd, 1H, Val α-carbon), 4.32 (q, 1H, Lys2 α-carbon), 4.43 (dt, 1H, Phe α-
carbon), 4.5 (m, 1H, Tyr α-carbon), 4.56 (m, 1H, Trp α-carbon), 6.62 (d, 2H, Tyr aromatic
hydrogens), 6.97 (t, 1, Trp aromatic hydrogen), 7.03 (d, 2H , Tyr aromatic hydrogens),
7.06 (dt, 1, Trp aromatic hydrogen), 7.15 (d, 1H, Trp aromatic hydrogen adjacent to NH),
7.18 (q, 4H, Phe aromatic hydrogens), 7.18 (m, 1H, Phe aromatic hydrogen), 7.32 (d, 1H,
Trp aromatic hydrogen), 7.59 (d, 1H, Trp aromatic hydrogen), 7.73 (d, 1H, N-terminal),
8.07 (d, 2, Amino group - Lys1 and Lys2), 8.25 (d, 1H, Amino group - Phe), 8.36 (d, 1H,
Amino group - Tyr), 8.49 (d, 1H, Amino group - Trp), 9.26 (s, 1H, OH - Tyr), 10.78 (s, 1H,
NH in ring - Trp), 12.75 (s, 1H, C-terminal).
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
67
==PAGE:76==
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
Current Data Parameters
NAME     DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpepY2_Li
EXPNO                11
PROCNO                1
F2 - Acquisition Parameters
Date_          20240429
Time               9.27 h
INSTRUM           spect
PROBHD   Z145819_0005 (
PULPROG    cosygpmfphpp
TD                 4096
SOLVENT            DMSO
NS                    8
DS                   16
SWH            9615.385 Hz
FIDRES         4.695012 Hz
AQ            0.2129920 sec
RG               202.59
DW               52.000 usec
DE                20.00 usec
TE                298.0 K
D0           0.00004316 sec
D1           2.00000000 sec
D11          0.03000000 sec
D12          0.00002000 sec
D16          0.00020000 sec
IN0          0.00010400 sec
SPARSELI              0
TDav                  1
SFO1        799.9863999 MHz
NUC1                 1H
P1                 6.94 usec
P2                13.88 usec
P17             2500.00 usec
PLW1         9.69999981 W
PLW10        0.74812001 W
GPNAM[1]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ1              10.00 %
GPNAM[2]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ2              20.00 %
P16             1000.00 usec
F1 - Acquisition parameters
TD                  256
SFO1           799.9864 MHz
FIDRES        75.120193 Hz
SW               12.019 ppm
FnMODE      States-TPPI
F2 - Processing parameters
SI                 1024
SF          799.9820000 MHz
WDW               QSINE
SSB                   2
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
PC                 1.40
F1 - Processing parameters
SI                 1024
MC2         States-TPPI
SF          799.9820000 MHz
WDW               QSINE
SSB                   2
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
Group CHG
DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpepY2_Lin
DQF-COSY
290424
Figure A.14: COSY of linear VHpep
-1
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
ppm
Current Data Parameters
NAME     DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpepY2_Lin
EXPNO                12
PROCNO                1
F2 - Acquisition Parameters
Date_          20240429
Time              10.52 h
INSTRUM           spect
PROBHD   Z145819_0005 (
PULPROG  hsqcedetgpsisp2.3
TD                 4096
SOLVENT            DMSO
NS                    8
DS                   32
SWH            9615.385 Hz
FIDRES         4.695012 Hz
AQ            0.2129920 sec
RG               202.59
DW               52.000 usec
DE                20.00 usec
TE                298.0 K
CNST2       145.0000000
CNST17       -0.5000000
D0           0.00000300 sec
D1           1.50000000 sec
D4           0.00172414 sec
D11          0.03000000 sec
D16          0.00020000 sec
D21          0.00360000 sec
D24          0.00089000 sec
IN0          0.00001510 sec
SPARSELI              0
TDav                  1
SFO1        799.9857599 MHz
NUC1                 1H
P1                 6.94 usec
P2                13.88 usec
P28                   0 usec
PLW1         9.69999981 W
SFO2        201.1707206 MHz
NUC2                13C
CPDPRG[2 bi_p5m4sp_4sp.2
P3                12.00 usec
P14              500.00 usec
P24             2000.00 usec
P31             1498.00 usec
P63             1500.00 usec
PLW0                  0 W
PLW2       146.39999390 W
PLW12        8.43260002 W
SPNAM[3] Crp80,0.5,20.1
SPOAL3            0.500
SPOFFS3               0 Hz
SPW3        42.94699860 W
SPNAM[7]    Crp80comp.4
SPOAL7            0.500
SPOFFS7               0 Hz
SPW7        42.94699860 W
SPNAM[14 Crp48,1.5,20.2
SPOAL14           0.500
SPOFFS14              0 Hz
SPW14       20.61499977 W
SPNAM[18  Crp60_xfilt.2
SPOAL18           0.500
SPOFFS18              0 Hz
SPW18       12.41600037 W
SPNAM[31 Crp48,1.5,20.2
SPOAL31           0.500
SPOFFS31              0 Hz
SPW31        5.15360022 W
GPNAM[1]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ1              80.00 %
GPNAM[2]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ2              20.10 %
GPNAM[3]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ3              11.00 %
GPNAM[4]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ4              -5.00 %
P16             1000.00 usec
P19              600.00 usec
F1 - Acquisition parameters
TD                  256
SFO1           201.1707 MHz
FIDRES       258.692047 Hz
SW              164.599 ppm
FnMODE    Echo-Antiecho
F2 - Processing parameters
SI                 4096
SF          799.9820000 MHz
WDW               QSINE
SSB                   2
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
PC                 1.40
F1 - Processing parameters
SI                 2048
MC2       echo-antiecho
SF          201.1556339 MHz
WDW               QSINE
SSB                   2
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
Group CHG
DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpepY2_Lin
edHSQC
290424
Figure A.15: HSQC of linear VHpep
68
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:77==
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
ppm
Current Data Parameters
NAME     DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_
EXPNO                23
PROCNO                1
F2 - Acquisition Parameters
Date_          20240502
Time               7.15 h
INSTRUM           spect
PROBHD   Z145819_0005 (
PULPROG    hmbcetgpl3nd
TD                 4096
SOLVENT            DMSO
NS                   16
DS                   16
SWH            9615.385 Hz
FIDRES         4.695012 Hz
AQ            0.2129920 sec
RG               202.59
DW               52.000 usec
DE                20.00 usec
TE                298.0 K
CNST6       120.0000000
CNST7       170.0000000
CNST13        8.0000000
D0           0.00000300 sec
D1           2.00000000 sec
D6           0.06250000 sec
D16          0.00020000 sec
IN0          0.00001130 sec
SPARSELI              0
TDav                  1
SFO1        799.9863999 MHz
NUC1                 1H
P1                 6.94 usec
P2                13.88 usec
PLW1         9.69999981 W
SFO2        201.1757495 MHz
NUC2                13C
P3                12.00 usec
P24             2000.00 usec
PLW2       146.39999390 W
SPNAM[7]    Crp80comp.4
SPOAL7            0.500
SPOFFS7               0 Hz
SPW7        42.94699860 W
GPNAM[1]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ1              80.00 %
GPNAM[3]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ3              14.00 %
GPNAM[4]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ4              -8.00 %
GPNAM[5]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ5              -4.00 %
GPNAM[6]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ6              -2.00 %
P16             1000.00 usec
F1 - Acquisition parameters
TD                  223
SFO1           201.1757 MHz
FIDRES       396.841156 Hz
SW              219.946 ppm
FnMODE    Echo-Antiecho
F2 - Processing parameters
SI                 2048
SF          799.9820000 MHz
WDW                SINE
SSB                   4
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
PC                 1.40
F1 - Processing parameters
SI                 1024
MC2       echo-antiecho
SF          201.1556339 MHz
WDW               QSINE
SSB                   2
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
Group CHG
DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpepY2_Lin
HMBC
290424
Figure A.16: HMBC of linear VHpep
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
69
==PAGE:78==
A.2.2
Cyclic Veber-Hirschmann derivative
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
ppm
0.90
3.00
5.23
2.52
6.43
2.96
0.95
1.32
2.24
2.38
1.26
1.90
0.55
3.01
0.97
1.10
0.99
1.00
1.16
0.52
1.77
1.80
1.10
2.03
3.62
1.84
0.94
1.83
7.87
0.86
1.79
0.99
0.93
0.93
Current Data Parameters
NAME     DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpep_final
EXPNO                20
PROCNO                1
F2 - Acquisition Parameters
Date_          20240504
Time               6.10 h
INSTRUM           spect
PROBHD   Z145819_0005 (
PULPROG            zg30
TD                65536
SOLVENT            DMSO
NS                   16
DS                    2
SWH           16025.641 Hz
FIDRES         0.489064 Hz
AQ            2.0447233 sec
RG                14.08
DW               31.200 usec
DE                20.00 usec
TE                298.0 K
D1           1.00000000 sec
TD0                   1
SFO1        799.9869399 MHz
NUC1                 1H
P1                 7.50 usec
PLW1         9.69999981 W
F2 - Processing parameters
SI                65536
SF          799.9820065 MHz
WDW                  EM
SSB                   0
LB                 0.30 Hz
GB                    0
PC                 1.00
Group CHG
DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpep_final
1D 1H 16 scans
290424
Figure A.17: H1-NMR of cyclic peptide
Proton assignment - Linear VHpep: 1H-NMR (800 MHz, DMSO-d6) Aliphatic resonances:
δ 0.74 (d, 3H), 0.85 (m, 5H), 1.01 (m, 3H), 1.36 (m, 6H), 1.69 (m, 2H), 2.11 (m, 1H), 2.58
(m, 2H), 2.68 (m, 3H), 2.72 (dd, 1H), 2.76 (m, 2H), 2.84 (m, 1H), 3.03 (m, 3H) Backbone
CH: δ 3.68 (m, 1H), 3.92 (m, 1H), 4.07(dd, 1H), 4.23 (dd, 1H), 4.26 (dd, 1H), 4.41 (dt, 1H)
Aromatic: δ 6.59 (d, 2H, Tyr), 6.86 (d, 2H, Tyr), 6.99 (t, 1H), 7.06 (m, 2H), 7.23 (m, 4H,
Trp), 7.29 (t, 2H, Phe), 7.32 (d, 1H, Phe), 7.48 (d, 2H, Phe), 8.00 (m, 1H, Trp), 8.33 (dd,
2H), 8.41 (d, 1H) Other signals: δ 9.20 (s, 1H, OH Tyr), 10.77 (s, 1H, NH Trp)
70
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:79==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
ppm
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
Current Data Parameters
NAME     DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpep_final
EXPNO                21
PROCNO                1
F2 - Acquisition Parameters
Date_          20240502
Time               1.11 h
INSTRUM           spect
PROBHD   Z145819_0005 (
PULPROG    cosygpmfphpp
TD                 4096
SOLVENT            DMSO
NS                    8
DS                   16
SWH            9615.385 Hz
FIDRES         4.695012 Hz
AQ            0.2129920 sec
RG               202.59
DW               52.000 usec
DE                20.00 usec
TE                298.0 K
D0           0.00004319 sec
D1           2.00000000 sec
D11          0.03000000 sec
D12          0.00002000 sec
D16          0.00020000 sec
IN0          0.00010400 sec
SPARSELI              0
TDav                  1
SFO1        799.9863999 MHz
NUC1                 1H
P1                 6.92 usec
P2                13.84 usec
P17             2500.00 usec
PLW1         9.69999981 W
PLW10        0.74274999 W
GPNAM[1]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ1              10.00 %
GPNAM[2]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ2              20.00 %
P16             1000.00 usec
F1 - Acquisition parameters
TD                  512
SFO1           799.9864 MHz
FIDRES        37.560097 Hz
SW               12.019 ppm
FnMODE      States-TPPI
F2 - Processing parameters
SI                 1024
SF          799.9820000 MHz
WDW               QSINE
SSB                   2
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
PC                 1.40
F1 - Processing parameters
SI                 1024
MC2         States-TPPI
SF          799.9820000 MHz
WDW               QSINE
SSB                   2
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
Group CHG
DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpep_final
DQF-COSY
290424
Figure A.18: COSY of cyclic peptide
-1
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
ppm
Current Data Parameters
NAME     DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpep_final
EXPNO                22
PROCNO                1
F2 - Acquisition Parameters
Date_          20240501
Time              10.37 h
INSTRUM           spect
PROBHD   Z145819_0005 (
PULPROG  hsqcedetgpsisp2.3
TD                 4096
SOLVENT            DMSO
NS                    8
DS                   32
SWH            9615.385 Hz
FIDRES         4.695012 Hz
AQ            0.2129920 sec
RG               202.59
DW               52.000 usec
DE                20.00 usec
TE                298.0 K
CNST2       145.0000000
CNST17       -0.5000000
D0           0.00000300 sec
D1           1.50000000 sec
D4           0.00172414 sec
D11          0.03000000 sec
D16          0.00020000 sec
D21          0.00360000 sec
D24          0.00089000 sec
IN0          0.00001510 sec
SPARSELI              0
TDav                  1
SFO1        799.9857599 MHz
NUC1                 1H
P1                 6.94 usec
P2                13.88 usec
P28                   0 usec
PLW1         9.69999981 W
SFO2        201.1707206 MHz
NUC2                13C
CPDPRG[2 bi_p5m4sp_4sp.2
P3                12.00 usec
P14              500.00 usec
P24             2000.00 usec
P31             1498.00 usec
P63             1500.00 usec
PLW0                  0 W
PLW2       146.39999390 W
PLW12        8.43260002 W
SPNAM[3] Crp80,0.5,20.1
SPOAL3            0.500
SPOFFS3               0 Hz
SPW3        42.94699860 W
SPNAM[7]    Crp80comp.4
SPOAL7            0.500
SPOFFS7               0 Hz
SPW7        42.94699860 W
SPNAM[14 Crp48,1.5,20.2
SPOAL14           0.500
SPOFFS14              0 Hz
SPW14       20.61499977 W
SPNAM[18  Crp60_xfilt.2
SPOAL18           0.500
SPOFFS18              0 Hz
SPW18       12.41600037 W
SPNAM[31 Crp48,1.5,20.2
SPOAL31           0.500
SPOFFS31              0 Hz
SPW31        5.15360022 W
GPNAM[1]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ1              80.00 %
GPNAM[2]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ2              20.10 %
GPNAM[3]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ3              11.00 %
GPNAM[4]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ4              -5.00 %
P16             1000.00 usec
P19              600.00 usec
F1 - Acquisition parameters
TD                  256
SFO1           201.1707 MHz
FIDRES       258.692047 Hz
SW              164.599 ppm
FnMODE    Echo-Antiecho
F2 - Processing parameters
SI                 4096
SF          799.9820000 MHz
WDW               QSINE
SSB                   2
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
PC                 1.40
F1 - Processing parameters
SI                 2048
MC2       echo-antiecho
SF          201.1556339 MHz
WDW               QSINE
SSB                   2
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
Group CHG
DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpep_final
edHSQC
290424
Figure A.19: HSQC of cyclic peptide
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
71
==PAGE:80==
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
ppm
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
ppm
Current Data Parameters
NAME     DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpe
EXPNO                13
PROCNO                1
F2 - Acquisition Parameters
Date_          20240503
Time              21.54 h
INSTRUM           spect
PROBHD   Z145819_0005 (
PULPROG    hmbcetgpl3nd
TD                 4096
SOLVENT            DMSO
NS                   16
DS                   16
SWH            9615.385 Hz
FIDRES         4.695012 Hz
AQ            0.2129920 sec
RG               202.59
DW               52.000 usec
DE                20.00 usec
TE                298.0 K
CNST6       120.0000000
CNST7       170.0000000
CNST13        8.0000000
D0           0.00000300 sec
D1           2.00000000 sec
D6           0.06250000 sec
D16          0.00020000 sec
IN0          0.00001130 sec
SPARSELI              0
TDav                  1
SFO1        799.9863999 MHz
NUC1                 1H
P1                 6.91 usec
P2                13.82 usec
PLW1         9.69999981 W
SFO2        201.1757495 MHz
NUC2                13C
P3                12.00 usec
P24             2000.00 usec
PLW2       146.39999390 W
SPNAM[7]    Crp80comp.4
SPOAL7            0.500
SPOFFS7               0 Hz
SPW7        42.94699860 W
GPNAM[1]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ1              80.00 %
GPNAM[3]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ3              14.00 %
GPNAM[4]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ4              -8.00 %
GPNAM[5]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ5              -4.00 %
GPNAM[6]     SMSQ10.100
GPZ6              -2.00 %
P16             1000.00 usec
F1 - Acquisition parameters
TD                  256
SFO1           201.1757 MHz
FIDRES       345.685852 Hz
SW              219.946 ppm
FnMODE    Echo-Antiecho
F2 - Processing parameters
SI                 2048
SF          799.9820000 MHz
WDW                SINE
SSB                   4
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
PC                 1.40
F1 - Processing parameters
SI                 1024
MC2       echo-antiecho
SF          201.1556339 MHz
WDW               QSINE
SSB                   2
LB                    0 Hz
GB                    0
Group CHG
DTU800_290424_HEALTH_CHG_Emil_VHpep_final
HMBC
290424
Figure A.20: HMBC of cyclic peptide
72
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:81==
A.3
UHPLC data
 24-05-2024 14:40:57  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\END1 calibration\20240229 Endo_5_009.lcd
Data2 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\END1 calibration\20240229 Endo_4_008.lcd
Data3 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\END1 calibration\20240229 Endo_3_007.lcd
Data4 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\END1 calibration\20240229 Endo_2_006.lcd
Data5 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\END1 calibration\20240229 Endo_1_005.lcd
Data6 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\END1 calibration\20240229 Endo_6_010.lcd
Data7 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\END1 calibration\20240229 Endo_0_004.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
1000000
2000000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
Data6
Data7
min
uV
6,75
7,00
7,25
7,50
7,75
0
500000
1000000
1500000
2000000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
Data6
Data7
Figure A.21: UHPLC chromatogram for END-1, calibration plot
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
73
==PAGE:82==
 24-05-2024 14:43:12  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\Endomorphin K\20240229 EndK_2_020.lcd
Data2 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\Endomorphin K\20240229 EndK_1_019.lcd
Data3 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\Endomorphin K\20240229 EndK_0_018.lcd
Data4 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\Endomorphin K\20240229 EndK_6_024.lcd
Data5 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\Endomorphin K\20240229 EndK_5_023.lcd
Data6 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\Endomorphin K\20240229 EndK_4_022.lcd
Data7 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\Endomorphin K\20240229 EndK_3_021.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
1000000
2000000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
Data6
Data7
min
uV
6,25
6,50
6,75
7,00
7,25
7,50
0
250000
500000
750000
1000000
1250000
1500000
1750000
2000000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
Data6
Data7
Figure A.22: UHPLC chromatogram for END-K, calibration plot
74
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:83==
 24-05-2024 14:42:16  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\EndomoephinR\20240229 EndR_6_017.lcd
Data2 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\EndomoephinR\20240229 EndR_5_016.lcd
Data3 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\EndomoephinR\20240229 EndR_4_015.lcd
Data4 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\EndomoephinR\20240229 EndR_3_014.lcd
Data5 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\EndomoephinR\20240229 EndR_2_013.lcd
Data6 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\EndomoephinR\20240229 EndR_1_012.lcd
Data7 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\EndomoephinR\20240229 EndR_0_011.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
500000
1000000
1500000
2000000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
Data6
Data7
min
uV
6,25
6,50
6,75
7,00
7,25
7,50
7,75
0
250000
500000
750000
1000000
1250000
1500000
1750000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
Data6
Data7
Figure A.23: UHPLC chromatogram for END-R, calibration plot
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
75
==PAGE:84==
 24-05-2024 14:45:27  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240301 Cholestrol Calibration_New\20240301 Cholestrol_C5_006.lcd
Data2 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240301 Cholestrol Calibration_New\20240301 Cholestrol_C6_007.lcd
Data3 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240301 Cholestrol Calibration_New\20240301 Cholestrol_C1_002.lcd
Data4 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240301 Cholestrol Calibration_New\20240301 Cholestrol_C0_001.lcd
Data5 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240301 Cholestrol Calibration_New\20240301 Cholestrol_C4_005.lcd
Data6 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240301 Cholestrol Calibration_New\20240301 Cholestrol_C3_004.lcd
Data7 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240301 Cholestrol Calibration_New\20240301 Cholestrol_C2_003.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
Data6
Data7
min
uV
11,5
12,0
12,5
13,0
13,5
14,0
14,5
15,0
0
50000
100000
150000
200000
250000
300000
350000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
Data6
Data7
Figure A.24: UHPLC chromatogram for cholesterol, calibration plot
76
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:85==
 24-05-2024 14:47:13  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240223 Stealth mix 31.2conc\2Stealth Mix001_003.lcd
Data2 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240223 Stealth mix 31.2conc\20240226 stealth mix 10mg$ml_002.lcd
Data3 :  C:\...\Data\Master students\20240223 Stealth mix 31.2conc\20240226 stealth mix 7.5mg$ml_003.lcd
Data4 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240223 Stealth mix 31.2conc\20240226 stealth mix 15mg$ml_001.lcd
Data5 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240223 Stealth mix 31.2conc\2Stealth Mix005_007.lcd
Data6 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240223 Stealth mix 31.2conc\2Stealth Mix004_006.lcd
Data7 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240223 Stealth mix 31.2conc\2Stealth Mix003_005.lcd
Data8 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240223 Stealth mix 31.2conc\2Stealth Mix002_004.lcd
Data9 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240223 Stealth mix 31.2conc\2Stealth Mix000_002.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
500000
1000000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
Data6
Data7
Data8
Data9
min
uV
11,5
12,0
12,5
13,0
13,5
14,0
14,5
15,0
15,5
0
250000
500000
750000
1000000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
Data6
Data7
Data8
Data9
Figure A.25: UHPLC stealth liposome calibration data
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
77
==PAGE:86==
 24-05-2024 13:05:32  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240209 Stealth Mix\Stealth Mix005.lcd
Data2 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240209 Stealth Mix\Stealth Mix004.lcd
Data3 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240209 Stealth Mix\Stealth Mix002.lcd
Data4 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240209 Stealth Mix\Stealth Mix001.lcd
Data5 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240209 Stealth Mix\Stealth Mix003.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
250000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Data4
Data5
Figure A.26: UHPLC stealth liposome calibration data
78
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:87==
 24-05-2024 14:19:33  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240424 Endo1 RL and control\20240424 Endo1 control 37_004.lcd
Data2 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240424 Endo1 RL and control\20240424 Endo1 control 37_005.lcd
Data3 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240424 Endo1 RL and control\20240424 Endo1 control 37_006.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
25000
50000
75000
Data1
Data2
Data3
min
uV
6,00
6,25
6,50
6,75
7,00
7,25
7,50
7,75
8,00
400
500
600
700
800
900
Data1
Data2
Data3
Figure A.27: UHPLC data, remote loading END-1 in stealth formulation with cholesterol,
control experiment
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
79
==PAGE:88==
 24-05-2024 13:41:25  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240515 Attempt 45-49\20240515_Attempt 45.1_001.lcd
Data2 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240515 Attempt 45-49\20240515_Attempt 45.3_003.lcd
Data3 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240515 Attempt 45-49\20240515_Attempt 45.2_002.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
25000
50000
Data1
Data2
Data3
min
uV
6,25
6,50
6,75
7,00
7,25
7,50
7,75
8,00
8,25
8,50
500
1000
1500
2000
Data1
Data2
Data3
Figure A.28: UHPLC data, remote loading END-1 in stealth formulation with cholesterol
80
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:89==
 24-05-2024 14:34:18  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240506 40-42\20240506_Attempt41_003.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
25000
50000
Data1
min
uV
6,00
6,25
6,50
6,75
7,00
7,25
7,50
7,75
8,00
8,25
8,50
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
Data1
Figure A.29: UHPLC data, remote loading END-R in stealth formulation without choles-
terol
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
81
==PAGE:90==
 24-05-2024 14:37:16  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240502\20240502 ENDR control B8_001.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
25000
50000
Data1
min
uV
6,25
6,50
6,75
7,00
7,25
7,50
1250
1500
1750
2000
2250
2500
2750
Data1
Figure A.30: UHPLC data, remote loading END-R in stealth formulation without choles-
terol, control experiment
82
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
==PAGE:91==
 24-05-2024 14:33:03  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240506 40-42\20240506_Attempt40_002.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
25000
50000
Data1
min
uV
6,25
6,50
6,75
7,00
7,25
7,50
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Data1
Figure A.31: UHPLC data, remote loading END-K in stealth formulation without choles-
terol
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
83
==PAGE:92==
 24-05-2024 14:31:46  Page 1 / 1 
==== Shimadzu LabSolutions Data Comparison ====
Data1 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240516 Attempt 50-52\20240516_Attempt 51.3_007.lcd
Data2 :* C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240516 Attempt 50-52\20240516_Attempt 51.2_006.lcd
Data3 :  C:\LabSolutions\Data\Master students\20240516 Attempt 50-52\20240516_Attempt 51.1_005.lcd
min
uV
0,0
2,5
5,0
7,5
10,0
12,5
15,0
17,5
20,0
0
25000
50000
Data1
Data2
Data3
min
uV
6,25
6,50
6,75
7,00
7,25
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Data1
Data2
Data3
Figure A.32: UHPLC data, remote loading END-R in stealth formulation without choles-
terol
84
Exploring Remote Loading of Oligopeptides Into Liposomes
