==PAGE:1==
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of
Marine
Environments
using
LiDAR
and
SONAR
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR
and SONAR
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Aimas Lund
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at as a collaboration between DTU Electro
and DTU Aqua, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics, robotics and
networking.
Aimas Lund - s174435
Signature
Date
ii
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores the ability to perform 3D Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) in GNSS-denied environments, with the Belvedere Canals in Sydhavn, Copen-
hagen, as a case study. To overcome the limitations of GNSS, the advanced SLAM algo-
rithm LIO-SAM is utilised for multi-modal sensor fusion of a 3D LiDAR, imaging sonar,
IMU, and GPS. This is implemented as a distributed network of Raspberry Pis, using
ROS2 Humble middleware, on the Maritime Robotics ”Otter” USV to achieve real-time
performance. Using a proposed point cloud extraction method, the points from LiDAR
and sonar are concatenated into a single point cloud stream LIO-SAM accepts, generat-
ing a 3D map using features above-ground and underwater. The findings of this method
demonstrate the ability to perform 3D mapping of GNSS-denied marine environments with
an average uncertainty of 1% and greatly enhanced localisation capabilities compared to
GNSS. These findings lay the foundational work for incorporating LiDAR and sonar with
real-time SLAM on the USV platform, mitigating the limitations of GNSS and provid-
ing a viable method for obtaining 3D mapping of above-ground and underwater domains
simultaneously.
Keywords:
SLAM, LIO-SAM, GNSS, GNSS-denied, Marine, SONAR, LiDAR
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Roberto Galeazzi, Associate Professor, DTU Electro
Thank you for providing an exciting project and providing supervision and guidance from
a holistic point of view.
Peter Nicholas Hansen, Post Doc, DTU Electro
Thanks you for the day-to-day sparring of ideas and guidance with data acquisition, design
& implementation and data analysis.
Fletcher Francis Thompson, Researcher, DTU Aqua
Thank you for for your guidance in everything related to the aquatic domain, sonars and
usage of the Otter sensor platform.
Patrizio Mariani, Professor, DTU Aqua
Thank you for providing your expertise towards data acquisition in marine environments.
Rune Garmund, Marine Techinician, DTU Aqua
Thank you for your assistance with modifying the USV and supervision of the USV data
acquisition campaign.
Søren Beyer Nielsen, Engineer, DTU Electro
Thank you for your assistance with 3D printing of mounting components for the sensor
platform.
Oda Byskov Aggerholm, MSc Graduate, DTU Electro
Thank you for the collaboration wrt. the RTK positioning data acquisition campaign.
Lucas Sandby, MSc Student, DTU Electro
Thank you for the assistance during the USV data acquisition campaign.
iv
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Literature Review
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Contribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
The Unmanned Surface Vehicle Sensor Platform
5
2.1
Inertial Measurement Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Sonar Imaging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Light Detection and Ranging
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Global Navigation Satellite System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.5
Design and Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.6
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.7
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3
Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping
30
3.1
LIO-SAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.2
Integrating LIO-SAM with ROS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.4
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4
Data Acquisition
49
4.1
USV Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.2
RTK Positioning Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
4.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.4
Chapter Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5
3D Mapping & Localisation Results
64
5.1
Localisation Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
5.2
3D Reconstruction Through Movement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.3
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
6
Future Work
77
7
Conclusion
78
Bibliography
79
A Appendix
85
A.1 USV Platform . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
A.2 SLAM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.3 Data Acquisition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
A.4 RTK Campaign . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
A.5 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
v
==PAGE:8==
List of Abbreviations
ASV
Autonomous Surface Vehicle
CDR Common Data Representation
CPU Central Processing Unit
DOP Dilution of Precision
DVL Doppler Velocity Log
ECEF Earth-Centered, Earth-Fixed
EKF
Extended Kalman Filter
ENU East-North-Up
FoV
Field of View
FoxDP Foxglove Data Platform
GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System
GPS
Global Positioning System
IMU Inertial Measurement Unit
IP
Internet Protocol
KDE Kernel Distribution Estimate
KF
Kalman Filter
LiDAR Light Detection and Ranging
LIO-SAM LiDAR-Intertial Odometry Smoothing and Mapping
LTS
Long Time Service
MBES Multi-Beam EchoSounder
MPU Microprocessor Unit
NMEA National Marine Electronics Association
NTP Network Time Protocol
OS
Operating System
PoE
Power over Ethernet
QoS
Quality of Service
RF
Radio Frequency
RMSE Root Mean Square Error
RPi
Raspberry Pi
ROS
Robot Operation System
RTK Real-Time Kinematics (Positioning)
RTSP Real-Time Streaming Protocol
SAM Smoothing and Mapping
SDK Software Development Kit
SLAM Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
SONAR Sound Navigation and Ranging
SOP
Standard Operating Procedure
SSD
Solid-State Drive
ToF
Time-of-Flight
TTD Time-to-Deploy
UDP User-Datagram Protocol
USB
Universal Serial Bus
USV
Unmanned Surface Vehicle
VHF Very High Frequency
vi
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent decades, we have seen advancements in autonomous vehicle technology, signif-
icantly for self-driving cars and unmanned aerial drones[1]. Autonomous vehicles have
countless potential applications for transporting people and goods safely and eﬀiciently[2]
and navigating challenging environments previously inaccessible [3]. An imperative ability
for any vehicle, regardless of its mode of operation, is establishing environmental aware-
ness. Consequently, the capacity for environmental mapping and self-localisation emerges
as a fundamental necessity. These maps can also offer direct value, in terms of practicality
and security, for a wide range of professionals by mapping critical infrastructure[4] and
places previously unknown.
Mapping and self-localisation in marine environments pose a unique set of challenges, as
this process occurs at the interface between two domains – above- and underwater. This
setting provides a wide variety of feature density and environmental dynamics. Applying
single modalities for mapping or localisation purposes across both domains is challenging,
as most affordable sensors operate effectively within one of these domains. Furthermore,
using Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) for self-localisation is not always viable
due to signal multipath propagation or no direct line-of-sight to satellites[5]. Due to inter-
national tension, GNSS signal jamming and spoofing is also becoming a more prominent
concern[6]. Consequently, utilising a multi-modal sensor fusion method without relying
on GNSS is an approach to mapping and localisation across both domains.
This thesis explores the ability to perform 3D mapping in GNSS-denied, urban, marine
environments, where the Belvedere Canal in Sydhavn, Copenhagen, is chosen as a case
study. Sydhavn is an environment with shallow- and narrow canals (< 6-meter depth
and 8-16 meter width) with plentiful above-water features to such a degree that they can
obstruct accurate GNSS localisation for small vessels. Instead of relying on GNSS, we turn
to other modalities, such as Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) and Sound Navigation
and Ranging (SONAR), to create a map relative to the local surroundings of a Unmanned
Surface Vehicle (USV) sensor platform. This approach aims to provide an accurate and
detailed 3D map and simultaneously overcome the limited usability of GNSS in the given
environment. To summarise, the problems we seek to address in this thesis are:
1. How to create a 3D map of a man-made marine environment using LiDAR and
SONAR, and how would such a map compare with other available maps?
2. How to obtain a suﬀicient position and velocity estimate for the USV in the presence-
and absence of GNSS in a man-made marine environment?
1.1
Literature Review
This section provides a high-level overview of the literature review at the beginning of this
thesis. These studies highlight previous work fully- or partially addressing the abovemen-
tioned problems, and delves into fields from which this thesis can draw inspiration.
1.1.1
Under and Above-water Mapping in Man-made Marine
Environments
Using ASVs to perform under and above-water mapping is not a novel idea. Several inde-
pendent works have been carried out in different contexts, utilising LiDAR and imaging
sonars to obtain 3D reconstruction through movement.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
1
==PAGE:10==
In the work of [5], similar modalities (2 LiDARs, a Blueview imaging sonar, IMU and
GNSS - but with an added Doppler Velocity Log (DVL)) and a SAM-type SLAM algorithm
are used to obtain simultaneous mapping under- and above water. This work utilises a
mode-switching error model that monitors the reported GPS satellite count, Dilution of
Precision (DOP), and other features to indicate whether the GPS is reliable (mode S0)
or not (mode S1). If in mode S1, a the motion model will mostly rely on dead reckoning
through IMU and DVL inputs. This study obtains promising mapping and localisation
results, given that the survey was carried out over a decade ago.
1.1.2
GNSS-based Bathymetry Mapping
Similar to [5], the work [7] has a similar dual-LiDAR approach, utilising EKF-based state
estimation and GPS measurements. In addition, [7] utilises visual odometry via planar
feature extraction to optimise the motion model when GNSS is unreliable. This imple-
mentation is tested in a real scenario near- and underneath a semi-submersible offshore
platform.
The work in [4] also explores simultaneous under and above-water mapping in the context
of mapping offshore wind platforms. This work focuses on mapping around the platform
and performing bathymetry scanning simultaneously. Therefore, the selected environment
is not GNSS-denied and can reliably utilise GPS-IMU fusion for odometry estimation. A
sliding window approach is used for the imaging sonar to create overlapping planes. These
planes and point cloud input from the LiDAR are fused using the odometry estimate, and
subsequently registered to the accumulated 3D map with LM-ICP. The work is tested using
a perfect odometry estimate in a simulated Gazebo[8] environment and a real scenario set
in a harbour using RTK reference data. The work in [9] is an extension of this, focusing
on implementing a research platform utilising this approach.
The work in [10] and [11] have similar goals, compared to [4] and [9]. These pieces of
work have an implementation focus on 3D mapping of offshore power plant systems and
bathymetry scanning of power cables, with a ROS-based ASV in open waters.
These
papers present a GPS-based mapping approach focusing on practical initiatives, such as
faster statistical outlier removal methods and closed-loop ASV controller design.
1.1.3
Visual Odometry using Sonar Imaging
A relevant aspect of using underwater features for 3D reconstruction is investigating meth-
ods of obtaining visual odometry using sonar imaging directly. This can be beneficial in
obtaining an autonomous vehicle utilising above- and under-water visual odometry. The
work [12] utilises a forward-facing imaging sonar to implement a filter-based approach
for simultaneous localisation and mapping for autonomous underwater vehicles. A sparse
point cloud is extracted using threshold segmentation and distance-constrained filtering
and used for a top-down 2D mapping of an environment. The proposed approach is tested
in simulation and real scenarios.
1.2
Method
The literature review reveals the interest and significance of this thesis topic, highlight-
ing the challenges of obtaining a 3D reconstruction of the above-ground and underwater
domains in a marine environment.
However, the state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction in
GNSS-denied environments has not been addressed, as most work within the past decade
has revolved around more open waters.
This thesis addresses this problem by applying the LIO-SAM SLAM algorithm for 3D
reconstruction and localisation. This state-of-the-art graph-based algorithm leverages Li-
DAR, IMU, loop closure, and optional GNSS factors to achieve 3D reconstruction and
2
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:11==
localisation. This algorithm is particularly effective where revisiting previous locations is
commonplace, such as in the canals of Sydhavn. This algorithm is implemented in con-
text of online usage of a USV platform. On the USV, an Ouster OS1 LiDAR[13] and
a Blueview M900-2250-S 130/45-Mk2 imaging sonar[14] are used to obtain above- and
underwater features of the canals, additionally with an Xsens MTi-30-2A8G4 9-axis IMU
[15] and Ublox NEO-M8 [16]. The platform of sensors consists of a Marine Robotics ”Ot-
ter” USV[17] platform, connected via a distributed network of Raspberry Pi’s based on
the ROS middle-ware framework [18]. In this work, we extend the functionalities of the
existing USV setup [19] by adding driving functionalities for the aforementioned 9-axis
IMU and incorporating initiatives, such as data stream re-routing, data compression, and
indexation. Lastly, quality-of-life components are added for easier data post-processing
and analysis.
A method of concatenating the LiDAR and sonar point cloud streams is proposed for
combined integration into LIO-SAM. This integration is a crucial step in our goal of
performing simultaneous localisation and mapping using features from the above- and
underwater domains.
The process of planning and performing a data acquisition campaign with the USV sensor
stack and acquiring centimetre-accurate Real-Time Kinematics (Positioning) (RTK) mea-
surements as reference data is presented to evaluate the accuracy of the 3D reconstruction
of the Sydhavn canals.
Finally, we analyse aspects of the 3D map, such as the transition of point clouds be-
tween LiDAR and sonar points, and evaluate the underwater depth map. We will analyse
how well LIO-SAM with the sensor stack performs in localisation compared to GNSS.
Additionally, we will explore which modalities contribute to this localisation performance.
Figure 1.1: High-level overview of the proposed methods, from having a stream of sensor
data to performing simultaneous localisation and mapping using LIO-SAM.
1.3
Contribution
The work in this thesis extends the foundational work of [19], from which the USV sensor
platform was initially designed and built, based on the Otter USV, the Blueview imag-
ing sonar and Ouster OS1 LiDAR. The platform extension happens with scalability and
usability in mind, working towards obtaining a solid platform by applying best practices
within software development to leap to a sensor platform that can carry out many dis-
tinct survey missions. In light of the proposed method, the extended USV platform is
used for a data acquisition campaign in a GNSS-denied canal in Sydhavn to perform 3D
reconstruction and localisation using the proposed sensor modalities.
Whereas [19] provided data processing flows and a method of mapping above-water and
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
3
==PAGE:12==
underwater domains separately, this work contributes by applying the state-of-the-art
graph-based LIO-SAM algorithm to obtain simultaneous localisation and mapping using
LiDAR, SONAR, GNSS and IMU data in one instance, with the aim for laying the ground-
work of implementation for real-time use. We explore the effects of applying sonar from
a mapping and localisation standpoint, discussing the significance of sonar configuration,
such as orientation and operating frequency.
1.4
Thesis Overview
The general structure of the thesis aims to systematically guide the reader through the
process of generating 3D maps using the proposed methodology. Each chapter will present
relevant theory and practical implementations, providing the necessary context, discussion,
and evaluation of the results.
Chapter 2: The Unmanned Surface Vehicle Sensor Platform provides an overview
of the platform for acquiring data and how each modality works theoretically. It also
presents the integration of each modality into the platform and other design choices and
updates. The new state of the platform is evaluated, and potential future upgrades are
discussed.
Chapter 3: Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping provides insights into obtain-
ing a 3D reconstruction and localisation from the modalities described in Chapter 2. The
chapter elaborates on the theory behind the utilised LIO-SAM algorithm and how it com-
pares with other multi-modal sensor fusion methods. This chapter also highlights any
data formatting necessary to utilise the LIO-SAM algorithm with the available modali-
ties, discusses the advantages and disadvantages of the proposed method, and proposes
adjustments to enhance further the integration of LIO-SAM with the USV sensor platform.
Chapter 4: Data Acquisition outlines the data acquisition survey for data utilised in
this thesis, from the planning phase to execution, showcasing potential issues, how they
were addressed, and how they impacted the data acquisition campaign.
Chapter 5: 3D Mapping & Localisation Results is a culmination of the research,
where the results obtained by applying the proposed methodology in Chapter 3 onto the
acquired data from Chapter 4 in an online context, are presented and discussed. The
chapter evaluates the strengths and weaknesses of the proposed approach. It highlights
the significant impact of the results in the context of the proposed methodology, and
summarises the limitations and suggests areas for improvement.
Chapter 6: Future Work and Chapter 7: Conclusion present future avenues of re-
search in the context of the proposed method, and provide concluding remarks, completing
the work of this thesis.
4
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:13==
2
The Unmanned Surface Vehicle
Sensor Platform
A variety of sensors are essential for capturing an understanding of the surroundings to
achieve mapping and localisation. Whether using cameras, laser scanners, or sonars, each
sensor modality has strengths and weaknesses. Integrating multiple sensors can combine
their strengths to create a more robust and versatile system. However, more than just
sensors are required; they require a solid platform to supply power, control, and kinematic
capabilities.
The following chapter will explore all of the relevant modalities, old and new, before
a deeper dive into the implementation in Section 2.5, highlighting design choices and
modifications following a set of design requirements.
Before this work, such a USV sensor platform was developed in [19], based on the Maritime
Robotics ”Otter” [17]. The Otter is an USV with onboard capabilities such as GNSS,
forward-facing camera and RF remote control out-of-the-box (see Table 2.1). The Otter
can be disassembled for transportation, making it operable with as few as two people[17].
Additionally, in 2023, a 3D LiDAR and an imaging sonar were mounted on the Otter [19],
with corresponding electronics and mountings (see Table 2.2).
Table 2.1: Overview of the most relevant out-of-the-box functionalities of the Otter USV,
based on [17].
Feature
Details
Dimensions
2000mm x 1080mm x 1065mm
Dry weight
62 kg
Endurace
20 hours operation time at 2 kts
Power Source
4x 31 Ah, 30V lithium-ion batteries
Carrying Capacity
30 kg
Situational awareness
Forward-facing camera
AIS class B receiver
GNSS
UBLOX NEO-M8 [16]
Communication links
5 GHz Wi-Fi
LTE
VHF (proprietary RF)
Ethernet (switch)
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
5
==PAGE:14==
Table 2.2: Overview of modalities relevant for mapping and localisation using the USV.
*Added as part of this thesis and not part of the originals peripherals from [19].
Product Name
Modality
Ouster OS1 [13]
3D LiDAR
6 axis IMU
Teledyne Blueview M900-2250-S 130/45-
Mk2 [14]
Imaging SONAR
Xsens MTi-30-2A8G4* [15]
9 axis IMU
UBLOX NEO-M8 [16]
GNSS module
2.1
Inertial Measurement Units
An Inertial Measurement Unit (IMUs) is a device containing an ensemble of sensitive
sensors for perceiving the kinematics of a system, typically involving some or all of the
following[20]:
1. Three axes of linear acceleration from an accelerometer.
2. Three axes of angular velocity from a gyroscope.
3. Three axes of orientation with respect to the Earth’s magnetic field from a magne-
tometer (compass).
The combination of accelerometer and gyroscope is classically referred to as a 6-axis IMU
due to the integration of 6 degrees of freedom in the sensor.
Additionally, adding all
the above modalities is referred to as a 9-axis IMU. These sensors collectively offer com-
prehensive and accurate information about an object’s kinematics at sample rates in the
hundreds of Hertz [15].
With these properties, it is clear why IMUs are so desirable in navigation. However, there
are disadvantages to consider. Using an IMU to estimate the position of a vessel, the vessel
relies on dead reckoning to infer position and orientation through relative changes of the
IMU’s frame of reference obtained from the accelerometer and gyroscope. Due to noise
and IMU bias, this inference will inevitably drift and diverge from the actual position
and orientation, as this data is not related to a stable frame of reference[21]. Including
a compass alleviates some of the drift in orientation by obtaining an absolute orientation
relative to a reasonably stable inertial frame, pointing towards magnetic north.
Additionally, given the choice of IMU, there are trade-offs to consider, including price per
unit, power consumption, and specific implementation to accommodate the number of axes
required. 9-axis IMUs will be at the slightly more expensive and power-consuming end
of the spectrum compared to the 6-axis, although these parameters vary between models
and manufacturers.
2.1.1
XSens MTi-30 IMU
In the previous work [19], the built-in 6-axis IMU of the LiDAR was utilised, giving rise
to two potential issues:
1. To align a generated 3D map with a map, an absolute reference from the compass
would likely be needed, with this ability required by some state-of-the-art SLAM
algorithms for state initialisation[22] [23].
6
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:15==
2. From inspecting their data, there were many collisions. Hypothetically, a 9-axis IMU
may provide stability by having an absolute reference.
Therefore, the 6-axis IMU from the Ouster OS1 was substituted with the XSens MTi-30
9-axis IMU (see Figure 2.1 and specifications in Table 2.3).
The IMU has Protection
Classification IP67 casing and connector, making it suitable for marine missions where
the occasional splashing is unavoidable. The IMU supports USB interface, which is con-
venient, given that the LiDAR RPi has USB ports to spare. The IMU also has suﬀicient
performance metrics with relatively low noise and a full-scale range well within what is
needed.
Adding the MTi-30 has minor cost concerning power consumption as it includes additional
features, such as a barometer and GNSS, which are not used in this setup. Nevertheless,
the power consumption is still negligible when considering some other modalities[13][17]
and the onboard energy storage.
Figure 2.1: Illustration of the XSens IMU MTi-10 series. Adapted from [15].
Table 2.3: Specifications for the accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer of the XSens
MTi-10 series IMU, which includes the utilized MTi-30 model. All values obtained from
the XSens MTi-10 series User Manual [15].
Properties
Accelerometer
Gyroscope
Magnetometer
Bandwidth
375 Hz
415 Hz
375 Hz
Full Scale Range
±200 m/s2
±450 ◦/s
±8 Ga
Noise Density
60 µg/
√
Hz
0.01 ◦/s/
√
Hz
60 µg/
√
Hz
Initial Bias Error
0.05 m/s2
0.2 ◦/s
0.05 m/s2
In-run Bias Stability
15 µg
18 ◦/h
15 µg
Power Consumption
478 mW
Outline dimensions
57 x 42 x 24 mm
Weight
55 g
2.2
Sonar Imaging
Sonar is a robust, mature technology for underwater ranging and imagery, leveraging sound
wave echos to infer distances. To use sonar imaging for mapping purposes, a fundamental
understanding of how active sonar imaging works is needed.
To leverage sound waves to form images, sonars use beam forming and time-of-flight to
determine the relative heading and distance from the sonar to the point of interest. Beam-
forming harnesses wave interference from a phased array of transducers to enhance signal
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
7
==PAGE:16==
gain in specific directions, known as lobes, relative to the sonar head while reducing signal
in other directions. The number of lobes created depends on the number of transducers
in the phased array. Tuning parameters such as signal frequency, transducer distance and
phase shift can be focused in an intended direction, referred to as the main lobe. This
enables the sonar to direct signals without actuators. Phased arrays can be configured in
a linear arrangement or a planar grid, with a linear array enabling signal azimuth steering
in the array’s plane and a planar grid providing control over both azimuth and altitude of
the lobes, as seen in Figure 2.2. Linear phase arrays will, therefore, have a vertical FoV
and will be unable to distinguish signals in its vertical axis (see Figure 2.5). Therefore, any
signal, regardless of its vertical position, will be squashed into a convoluted representation
on the phase array plane.
(a) Linear phase array of 8 isotropic transducers.
(b) Planar phase array of 8x8 isotropic transduc-
ers.
Figure 2.2: Demonstration of signal lobes for linear- 2.2a and planar 2.2b phase arrays
forming a lobe at azimuth angle ψ = 0, using 0.5 signal wavelength distance.
Notice
how multiple lobes are created, but the main lobe in the intended direction is the largest.
Image from MatLab Sensor Array Analyser [24].
Extracting images from these beams can be done in many ways, of which many commer-
cially used methods are proprietary. However, a textbook example is the ”delay-and-sum”
approach. Here, an adjustable time-delay ∆m is added to the time-series signal of each
transceiver ym(t) in the phased array to introduce a phase shift in the received signal.
Each signal is subsequently added to obtain an aggregated signal z(t), representing the
returned time series signal in a given direction.
Formally, for a phased array with M transducers, the reference point on the phased array
is referred to as the ”phase centre” and is defined such that
M−1
X
m=0
xm = 0
(2.1)
where xm is the relative position of the transducer m from the phase centre in Cartesian
coordinates.
8
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:17==
Introducing the delay-and-sum strategy, the following expression can be formalised for the
accumulated signal:
z(t) =
M−1
X
m=0
wmym(t −∆m)
(2.2)
where wm is the amplitude weight, ym is the received time-series signal and ∆m is the
introduced time delay, all at a given transducer m.
The weights wm adjust the contribution of each transducer to the aggregated signal. At
the same time, ∆m introduces a phase shift for each transducer’s signal, allowing the
steering of the signal lobe. Tuning these parameters and signal frequency optimises the
model for specific applications and conditions.
With the time-series signal zn(t) for a given beam n, the signal intensity can be mapped
onto an array of discrete ranges using the speed of sound in water c at discrete time
intervals and determining the signal intensity and distance at a given discrete time, using
equations (2.3) and (2.2), respectively. Doing this for all azimuth angles in the sonar FoV
will yield an image of the sonar field in a polar coordinate system
Rn(k) = 1
2ck∆t
(2.3)
where c is the speed of sound in water, ∆t a discrete time interval and k is the index for
a given discrete space in the mapping.
Calculating discrete ranges with (2.3) assumes idealised conditions. In reality, c depends
on temperature, pressure and salinity. While mitigating methods exist, such as time-varied
gain, depth binning or ray tracing, exploring these is especially relevant when signal time-
of-flight is large. As the marine environments considered in this thesis involve shallow
waters, where these effects are relatively minimal, a constant value for c can be assumed.
Figure 2.3: Example of the Delay-and-Sum sonar imaging. The red signal waves indicate
the phase-shifted signal for each transmitter, forming a concentrated signal in a specific
azimuth angle (gray box). The returned signal is then passed to the the signal adder,
obtaining the accumulated green signal.
This green signal can then be mapped in a
discrete polar coordinate space, as indicated on the bottom right. Adapted from [25]
With the ability to obtain images via beam forming, the signal from the sonar must be
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
9
==PAGE:18==
suﬀiciently high to receive the return signal, overcoming attenuation and noise. This signal-
to-noise ratio can be estimated with the sonar equation [26]. This equation systematically
considers various environmental and technology-specific gain and attenuation to estimate
a signal-to-noise threshold, expressed as:
RT = SL −2TL + TS −NL + PG
(2.4)
where terms in equation (2.4) are gains relative to 1 µPa of pressure [27]. The equation
can also be roughly translated into:
Threshold = Signal −Losses −Noise + Gain
(2.5)
The signal terms SL and TS are the source- and target-level gains, respectively. Each
are measured at a distance of 1 meter. SL will correspond to the signal strength of the
transmitted signal, while TL depends on the material properties and geometry of the
target.
Identifying the loss terms, there are transfer losses TL and loss due to noise NL. TL
describes the signal loss due to the signal traversing the medium. Assuming the signal
spreading is spherical and uniform, the inverse square law can be used to obtain an estimate
for the transfer loss in decibels by considering the power of the signal at two different ranges
from the signal source:
P = 4πR2
0I0 = 4πR2I ⇒I = I0
R2
0
R2

(2.6)
where R is the range travelled by the signal and I is the signal intensity. Using this signal
intensity relation (2.6), and a value of R0 = 1 m, an expression of the transmission loss in
decibels can be described as:
TL(R) = −10 log10
 I
I0

+ αR ⇒TL(R) = 20 log10(R) + αR
(2.7)
where R is the range travelled by the signal and α is a signal attenuation coeﬀicient for the
given medium and utilised signal frequency. Given that a signal will travel the distance R
twice, TL is multiplied by 2 in (2.4).
NL can be introduced from many sources. Noise usually comes in the form of self-noise,
environmental noise, and bandwidth noise. Self-noise is any noise from the vessel or sonar
itself, while environmental noise is introduced from anything other than the sonar system
or vessel itself.
This could be signals from external sources or the transmitted signal
echoing from the environment due to the spherical traversal nature of the signals and
multiple bounces.
Signals that bounce multiple times will often be seen in the image
as some features appear further away, as multiple bouncing takes a longer path before
reaching the sonar transceiver. More diﬀicult noise sources result from duplicate signals
overlapping to form high signals in unexpected places. There is also noise associated with
the choice signal pulse duration [27]. All these factors add up to a signal noise that the
received signal must overcome, leaving it as a negative term in (2.4).
Lastly, the process gain PG describes the gain as a result of amplifying the signal through
posterior processing though amplifiers.
Knowing the details of NL, selecting the orientation of the sonar is a pivotal factor to
minimise noise, especially for the linear phase array sonar configurations. To minimise the
10
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:19==
noise for the leading edge of the signal, orienting the sonar such that the transmitted signal
range is shortest in the phase array plane will mitigate most of the noise from bouncing
signals.
Figure 2.4: This figure illustrates the significance of orientation of linear phase array
sonars concerning a given target. On the left, the noise signal has a shorter travel distance
and will, therefore, show the target (green arrow) to be closer than it is. On the right,
the signal on the linear phase array plane has the shortest travel distance, and any noise
resulting from bouncing signals will show later in the time series signal z(t).
2.2.1
Blueview M900-2250-S 130/45-Mk2
The Teledyne Blueview M900-2250-S 130/45-Mk2 imaging sonar (referred to as Blueview
or simply imaging sonar), used in this work, has multiple sets of linear phase arrays, each of
which is tuned for different depths, resolutions and FoV. The Blueview allows for choosing
between these sets, making it versatile and able to be utilised in different environments
with varying constraints. Table 2.4 contains the main configuration options.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
11
==PAGE:20==
Properties
Option 1
Option 2
Operating Frequency Settings
Operating Frequency
900 kHz
2250 kHz
Max range
100 m
10 m
Optimal range
2-60 m
0.5-7 m
Field of View Settings
Field of View
130◦
45◦
Maximum Number of Beams
768
256
Vertical Beam Width
12◦
20◦
Table 2.4: Blueview M900-2250-S 130/45-Mk2 configu-
ration options [14]. The table is separated into two sub
tables, where the setting in italic yields the following op-
erating properties listed below.
Table
2.5:
The
Blue-
view M900/2250-S 130/45-
Mk2. Adapted from Tele-
dyne Marine [28].
Table 2.6: Overview of the Blueview imaging sonar and the available configurations.
As a product, the Blueview handles signal transmission/receiving, beam forming, and
imaging encoded into magnitude images. These images encode each sonar beam on an
azimuth angle paired with a fixed-length array of 16-bit unsigned integer intensities (or
magnitudes), representing the discretized signal intensities. These sonar images can be
extracted using a provided SDK [29], allowing for further processing of the acquired sonar
images.
Figure 2.5: Sonar image from the Blueview imaging sonar. In this example the sonar is
fitted vertically as such to capture a wall and the harbour floor in a city canal. Credit to
Fletcher Thomson, obtained using ProViewer [30]
.
12
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:21==
2.3
Light Detection and Ranging
LiDAR is a technology vastly popular within vehicle autonomy and is a cornerstone for
the current success of self-driving cars[31]. Utilising time-of-flight of reflected laser pulses
to determine the relative positions of surrounding feature points thousands of times per
second. Adding multiple laser transceivers, at different altitudes, onto a spinning actuator,
the LiDAR can obtain a full 360◦horizontal FoV in 3D. A full rotation scan from a single
transceiver on these LiDAR types is often referred to as rings. In addition to positional
information, the LiDAR can analyse the reflected signal for each point. Properties such as
reflected signal amplitude (intensity) can provide information that can be used to classify
surfaces and structures in the point clouds.
In the context of using LiDAR for mapping and localisation, LiDARs provide a huge benefit
in procuring dense point clouds with many features, which can be used as a reference for
visual odometry and high-density 3D maps. The disadvantage of using a LiDAR is that
it is challenging to map underwater features unless using specialised LiDARs [32]. While
underwater LiDARs exist, they are expensive and sensitive to environmental factors, such
as high turbidity[33].
Another thing to consider is that due to the rotational actuator, the received points can
become noticeably skewed if suﬀiciently large angular- or linear velocities are applied to
the LiDAR, resulting in significant drift for mapping and visual odometry purposes.
2.3.1
Ouster OS1
The utilised LiDAR in this work is the Ouster OS1[13]. This LiDAR is a 360◦LiDAR with
32 vertical channels, designed for all weather conditions. The OS1 also has an integrated
6-axis IMU (see Table 2.7).
Ouster also provides high-performance drivers and SDK. The Robot Operation System
(ROS) driver used in this work encodes the point clouds obtained by the LiDAR into the
PointCloud2-message type[34], where each point is represented as a C-struct-like data
format, detailed in Table 2.10. Each point is arranged in a 2D grid, similar to an image
with a width M and a height N, as shown in Figure 2.6.
Table 2.10: PointField definition for the Ouster OS1 points in the ROS PointCloud2
message type[34]. All distances in [x, y, z, range] are given in meters, t is given as an epoch
timestamp. The padding in the end of the message is 0 bytes. A single point occupies 48
bytes of memory. For visual representation, see Figure 2.6.
Name
Offset
Datatype
Count
x
0
FLOAT32
1
y
4
FLOAT32
1
z
8
FLOAT32
1
intensity
16
FLOAT32
1
time
20
UINT32
1
reflectivity
24
UINT16
1
ring
26
UINT16
1
ambient
28
UINT16
1
range
32
UINT32
1
padding
36
UINT16
6
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
13
==PAGE:22==
OS1 LiDAR Properties
Dimensions
Diameter: 87 mm
Height: 74.2 mm
Weight
495 g
Minimum Range
0.5 m
Maximum Range
*200 m
Connection
UDP over Ethernet
Power Consumption
**14-20 W
Horizontal FoV
360◦
Vertical FoV
45◦
Horizontal Resolution
512, 1024, 2048
Vertical Resolution
32, 64, 128
Rotation Rate
10, 20 Hz
Range Accuracy
(mean error) 2.5 cm
Precision (1 σ)
Min: ±0.5 cm
Max: ±3 cm
Table 2.7: Specifications for the Ouster
OS1 LiDAR. Source [13].
Table 2.8: The Ouster OS1 LiDAR on
its mount on the USV.
Table 2.9: *In reality this value depends on the reflectivity and the desired detection
probability. This estimate is a ballpark limit provided by Ouster. **Under normal run-
ning conditions. Higher peak power can be obtained during start-up or low operating
temperatures.
Figure 2.6: Point cloud arrangement of individual points for a single 360◦scan of the
LiDAR. See Table 2.8 for reference to the encoding of a single point.
14
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:23==
2.4
Global Navigation Satellite System
GNSS is a technology that many people can relate to being a general term for sys-
tems, such as GPS, Galileo and GLONASS. Utilising signals from satellites in orbit, a
GNSS receiver can estimate its position in a geodetic coordinate system.
As the sur-
face of Earth is approximately spherical, GNSS position is provided in 3D coordinates
x = [latitude, longitude, altitude], where latitude and longitude are the horizontal- and
vertical angles w.r.t. an arbitrarily defined prime meridian, and an altitude signifying the
range from the spherical centre, as depicted in Figure 2.7.
Fundamentally, the GNSS satellites periodically broadcast their current position1 and
timestamp. Assuming all satellites are synchronised, a GNSS receiver can use the time
difference between its clock and the received timestamp and use time-of-flight with the
speed of light c to infer pseudo-ranges to each satellite. Obtaining a minimum of four satel-
lites, a system of four trilateration problems can be solved to output a position estimate
for the GNSS receiver. Due to noise and clock inaccuracies, using a constellation of more
than four satellites will yield a better position estimate via least-squares optimisation.
Essentially, this problem can be formalised in the following way:
Ri = c(tR −ti) + ctbias
(2.8)
R′
i =
p
(xi −x)2 + (yi −y)2 + (zi −z)2
(2.9)
where i signifies the index in a set of satellites, Ri is the measured pseudo-range, R′
i
is the pseudo-range expression to estimate the receiver position from the satellite orbit
information, where the least squares of the residual ri = Ri −R′
i. tbias is a bias term to
account for the inaccuracies in clock synchronisation [35].
With this technology, current GNSS technologies can provide a best-case positional esti-
mate with a 3-5 meter error margin[36].
Figure 2.7: Relationship between (latitude, longitude), i.e.
(λ, ϕ), and a given local
tangent plane in East-North-Up coordinates. Adapted from [37].
GNSS is a great technology for navigation purposes when it operates within its best-case
operational window. However, multiple factors affect its performance.
1The satellites broadcast information about their orbits in Almanac and Ephemerides messages, which
can be used to estimate satellite positions.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
15
==PAGE:24==
Firstly, given that the signal is transmitted from orbit, the received signals are feint[38].
The GNSS receivers require direct line-of-sight to the GNSS satellites to properly receive
the signals.
Receivers can use signal amplification2, but GNSS is generally suited for
outdoor applications.
Secondly, GNSS is sensitive to timing inaccuracies.
Given the magnitude of c, a ten
nanosecond error can propagate R = 10−8c ≈3m error in the pseudo-range measurement
[20].
Therefore, GNSS localisation is subject to error when the received GNSS signal
bounces off environmental obstacles - a phenomenon called signal multi-path. As such,
the signal has travelled slightly longer, and the time delta is also longer.
Another factor that affects GNSS localisation is the geometric factors of the satellite con-
stellation, which are quantified by the Dilution of Precision (DOP). The DOP measures
the geometric quality of the satellite constellation in a given location. To minimise locali-
sation uncertainty, the constellation of reachable satellites should be uniformly scattered
across the sky, covering the largest area.
Understanding the limitations of GNSS, particularly in urban environments, is crucial.
The presence of numerous tall, rigid structures and bridges can obstruct direct line-of-
sight to orbiting satellites. In addition, signals that do reach the receiver often bounce off
these structures, leading to less accurate positional estimates.
2.4.1
Applying GNSS Technology
When obtaining GNSS measurements from an implemented module, the position estimate
is handled internally. The GNSS receiver will transmit its estimated location and related
metadata with the NMEA 0183 protocol in packages called NMEA sentences [39] encoded
as ASCII strings, as seen in Listing 2.1.
1
\$<Talker >GGA,<Timestamp >,<Lat>,<N/S>,<Long>,<E/W>,<GPSQual >,<Sats>,<HDOP>,<
Alt>,<AltVal>,<GeoSep>,<GeoVal>,<DGPSAge >,<DGPSRef >*<checksum ><CR><LF>
Listing 2.1: Format for the GGA type message containing most relevant information about
a position and related metadata.
Different type of NMEA sentences have distinct scopes and are published at different
frequencies. Table 2.11 provides an overview of NMEA sentence utilised in this work.
Table 2.11: Overview of NMEA sentences relevant to this work. More such message types
exist.
Sentence Type
Description
GGA
Global positioning fix data.
GLL
Geographic position data.
GST
Geographic position error estimates.
GSA
Receiver operation metadata suchas DOP
and number of satellites.
RMC
Position, course-over-ground and speed-
over-ground data.
Latitude and longitude coordinates are not convenient when localisation relates these
positions to a Cartesian coordinate space relative to the vessel. To do this, the latitude/-
longitude can be mapped onto a local tangent plane, where the East-North-Up (ENU)
2This is referred to as active GNSS.
16
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:25==
variation maps the estimated position as [x, y, z] = [east, north, up], where ”north” is true
north and ”up” is the normal vector of the local tangent plane away from the globe (see
Figure 2.7). The conversion error is negligible as long as movement is confined to a local
area.
With this, a local position estimate can be obtained in Cartesian space and seamlessly
relate to the USV frame of reference.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
17
==PAGE:26==
2.5
Design and Implementation
This section will provide an overview of the platform and the system’s main components,
present how they are integrated mechanically, and showcase the software infrastructure,
including relevant considerations and adjustments for the USV during this project phase.
Throughout the platform’s design phase, it is essential to identify relevant design con-
straints for the USV. The USV has physical limits, such as carrying capacity, weight
distribution, and battery life, which should be considered.
The environment that the USV has to navigate is shallow and narrow canals with low-
hanging bridges. Consequently, there are limitations to the spatial dimensions of the USV
for it to navigate the environment successfully. Moreover, the system will always be close
to salt water, which can lead to short-circuiting, build-up of crystallised salt in joints, and
corrosion. In addition to these hard constraints, DTU Aqua intends to conduct missions
involving various modalities, including ones irrelevant to this thesis work. These high-level
constraints give rise to a design of the USV that is generally loosely coupled and modular.
In this context it is also advantageous to consider the ease of use and extension.
Additionally, analysing the data available in [19], no 9-axis IMU data was available. As
many state-of-the-art SLAM algorithms require 9-axis IMUs for map- and odometry ini-
tialisation, this section also presents the integration of such a sensor on the preexisting
USV sensor platform.
To summarise, the USV system requirements are:
• Adding a 9-axis IMU.
• Loosely coupled and modular.
• Splash- and corrosion resistance.
• Conform to spatial constraints and resource limitations.
• Implemented solutions should be easy to extend and use.
2.5.1
Physical Setup
Extending the USV design from [19], there are considerations regarding integrating the
new IMU and enhancing existing applications.
In general, the USV’s philosophy is to expose no devices or connections not certified to
have splash resistance. The custom onboard electronics are encapsulated in a splash-proof
container (see Figure 2.9 and 2.10).
The Blueview sonar is mounted in a 3D-printed casing fastened on a 2.5 m aluminium
rod. The mounting rod can be fastened to a rod mount on the USV, allowing for altitude
and azimuth angle adjustments for the Blueview sonar (see Figure 2.9). In addition, the
Blueview sonar 3D mount is fastened to a set of ratchet joints that adjust rotation and
pitch angle with a resolution of 15 ◦and can be locked tight.
With this design, the
Blueview can be configured with 3 degrees of freedom of rotation and 1 degree of freedom
in the vertical axis, such that different configurations of the sonar can be seamlessly utilised
without extensive need for tools. References for these configurations are also added to the
USV. Reference marks with 20 cm spacing and a longitudinal line are machined into the
rod, and a 3D printed yaw angle reference (see Figures 2.8 and 2.10b) is glued onto the
mount. The resolutions of each reference are provided in Table 2.12. This setup allowed
for a quick and decently accurate way of configuring the position and orientation of the
sonar relative to the USV in the field.
18
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:27==
Table 2.12: Blueview sonar mount reference resolutions. *Using the ROS REP-103 stan-
dard[40] with a [x, y, z] = [forward, left, up] reference frame.
–
Resolution
Interval
*Altitude
20 cm
[−2m, 0m]
*Yaw
10 ◦
[−50◦, 50◦]
Pitch
15 ◦
[−180◦, 180◦]
Roll
15 ◦
[−180◦, 180◦]
(a) Sonar pole altitude reference marks.
Each mark corresponds to 20 cm.
(b) Sonar pole mount angle ref-
erence marks.
Each mark corre-
sponds to a azimuth angle of 10◦.
Figure 2.8: Implementations of mechanical position and orientation reference points on
the USV, as such references were missing in the previous setup from [19].
The LiDAR is mounted high above the USV, within the spatial constraints of the envi-
ronment, to minimise obstructions its view of the surroundings. In fact, the LiDAR only
captures the sonar mount pole. The LiDAR mount from [19] was also extended with a 3D
printed mount add-on (see Figure A.1) to attach the 9-axis IMU to the USV. This place
was chosen as:
1. The spot was convenient, as it could easily be attached to the LiDAR mount without
additional use of screws or adhesive.
2. The IMU would capture the kinematics near the LiDAR.
3. Power and data cables were easier to manage, as cables were already going to the
LiDAR from the LiDAR RPi.
Finally, all custom electronics were placed in a sealed container with a small outlet for
network- and peripheral cables (see Figure 2.9 and 2.13c). Figures 2.9 and 2.10 provide a
comprehensive overview of the USV sensor platform setup.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.9: Setup of USV sensor platform during. (1) LiDAR mount, IMU mount, Ouster
OS1 LiDAR and Xsens IMU. (2) Sonar pole mount mechanism. (3) Water-resistant con-
tainer for RPis. (4) Blueview imaging sonar.
(a) View of the USV bow.
(b) Yaw angle reference for Blueview sonar.
(c) Blueview sonar mount from bottom an-
gle.
(d) USV from the stern.
Figure 2.10: Images of the final USV from different angles during data acquisition.
With different components on the USV, a transform tree is practical for modelling the
relationships of relevant frames of reference on the USV. With this, the translation and
20
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:29==
rotation from one frame of reference to another can be easily obtained. The USV transform
tree, shown in Figure 2.11, defines a transform for each sensor and joint. This model allows
changes in any joint configuration to seamlessly cascade throughout the model, eliminating
the need to perform measurements anew if, for example, the sonar is reoriented during a
mission. Instead, the changes can be read from the above references and plugged directly
into the model (see an example in Appendix A.1.2).
(a) View of the transform model of
the USV from starboard side.
(b) USV Transform tree structure.
Gray
nodes are inertial frames, blue nodes are re-
lated to the imaging sonar, orange nodes
are related to the Ouster LiDAR and green
nodes are related to the 9-axis IMU.
Figure 2.11: Overview of the transform structure for the USV, utilised for the ROS im-
plementation.
2.5.2
Hardware & Software
Due to the system requirement of high modularity, the added hardware on the system
is designed as a distributed system of Raspberry Pi (RPi) Microprocessor Unit (MPU),
connected via the onboard Ethernet switch on the Otter USV, each having a static IP in
the Otter USV local network. One RPi is primarily designed to handle data streams from
the SONAR (ref. sonar RPi), and another primarily handles LiDAR and IMU data streams
(ref. LiDAR RPi). Each RPi has an external storage drive, allowing each RPi to function
independently on, or off, the USV. The high-level overview of the drivers, peripherals and
interfaces is depicted in Figure 2.12. The onboard Network Time Protocol (NTP) server
on the USV platform is important for distributed systems to function properly.
This
server allows the nodes on the network to synchronise their internal clocks down to less
than 10 ms[41]. Time synchronisation is paramount to ensure the high quality of the data.
Without precise synchronisation, inconsistencies can arise, leading to significant errors in
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
21
==PAGE:30==
data fusion and interpretation. Proper time alignment is essential to accurately correlate
data from various sensors, thereby enhancing the overall performance and reliability of
the USV platform. The overview is provided in Figure 2.12 below.
Figure 2.12: A high-level overview of the USV distributed network along with the physical
connections of relevant peripherals.
The software framework of the LiDAR RPi implementation is based around ROS (ROS2
Humble)[18], which is an open-source suite of libraries for use within robotics. ROS lever-
ages a publish/subscribe architecture where live data is transmitted as ROS messages[42]
using FastDDS middle-ware[43]. Essentially, sensor drivers implemented using ROS can
create nodes that publish live data to topics on the network via User-Datagram Pro-
tocol (UDP), which other nodes can subscribe to, creating an intricate network of data
streams containing live sensor data, transformations between frames of reference and more.
In addition, ROS provides a method of storing data serialised temporally in ROS ”bags”
(rosbags)[44]. Rosbags contain recorded data published on topics in real-time, allowing
22
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:31==
the data to replay on demand. Consequently, there is no need to manually correlate data
sources. Moreover, given that rosbags replicate incoming data in real-time, implemented
ROS applications can be tested as if they were online, tremendously increasing the devel-
opment experience. ROS also includes standardised message types for most sensor types
and tools for visualisation, time-series data storage and more.
(a) The LiDAR RPi
setup.
(b) The Sonar RPi setup.
(c) Splash-proof container for the RPi
boxes.
Figure 2.13: Overview of the Raspberry Pi implementations onboard the USV, where (a)
is the peripheral setup for driving and logging data from the Ouster LiDAR and the Xsens
IMU, (b) is responsible for driving and logging for the Blueview imaging sonar, and (c) is
the waterproof container both setups are stored on the USV.
Table 2.13: Overview of sensors and with publication metadata in ROS. Additionally, the
Post-Process column indicates if the data is obtained through post-processing of acquired
data.
Sensor
Topic Name
Message Type
Frequency
Post-Process
[ROS Message]
[Hz]
[yes/no]
Ouster LiDAR
/ouster/points
PointCloud2
10
no
Ouster LiDAR
/ouster/metadata
String
0
no
Ouster LiDAR
/ouster/imu
Imu
350
no
xsens IMU
/imu/data
Imu
100
no
xsens IMU
/imu/mag
MagneticField
100
no
xsens IMU
/velocity
TwistStamped
100
no
Ublox GNSS
/nmea_sentences
nmea_msgs
Sentence
75
no
Blueview
M900
/blueview/points2
PointCloud2
15
yes
Static
Trans-
forms
/tf_static
TFMessage
1
no
Forward
Fac-
ing Camera
/camera/image
Image
3
no
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
23
==PAGE:32==
2.5.3
The LiDAR RPi
The primary responsibility of the LiDAR RPi is to drive the Ouster OS1 LiDAR and the
onboard Xsens 9-axis IMU, including interfacing with its dedicated hardware, as well as
formatting, publishing and logging its measurements. The LiDAR RPi was initially just
responsible for the Ouster LiDAR[19], and in the work, the responsibilities of the LiDAR
RPi are extended to handle the 9-axis IMU sensor and add loose coupling to externally
available data sources. Recalling that modularity is a design constraint for this platform,
keeping these connections loosely coupled, the platform still adheres to this constraint. If
external data streams of interest exist, the LiDAR RPi will collect this data. This section
offers a comprehensive overview of the relevant components, software implementations,
and frameworks integral to the LiDAR RPi system.
A detailed description of dependencies and how to run the ROS workspace is provided in
the LiDAR RPi README.md in the LiDAR RPi ROS driver Git repository [45].
Table 2.14: Components contained in the LiDAR RPi implementation.
Component
Details
MPU
Raspberry Pi 4 Model B
OS
Ubuntu 22.04 LTS
Voltage Divider
Vin: 30V, Vout: 5V, 25V
LiDAR driver board
For Ouster OS1
External SSD
2 TB Samsung MU-PC2TOT
Out-going Ethernet Port
For connection to USV local network
LiDAR
Ouster OS1
IMU
Ouster OS1 6 axis
Xsens IMU MTi-30 series 9 axis
ROS Package Stack
Having the USV system based on ROS [18], the LiDAR RPi incorporates ROS packages
to drive and log data from peripherals on the USV. For the peripherals connected directly
to the LiDAR RPi, the oﬀicial Ouster LiDAR ROS driver [46] and a Python ROS driver
[47] from the Xsens MTi-10 series IMUs are utilised. The data from these peripherals can
be configured and broadcast to the local network in a format described in Table 2.13.
Investigating the data available from other nodes in the local USV network, there are a
couple of data streams of interest:
• A UDP Real-Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP) video stream from the onboard
forward-facing camera on the Otter USV.
• An NMEA message[39] ROS topic from the Sonar RPi with GNSS data from the
Otter USV onboard GNSS module.
The RTSP stream is beneficial, as forward-facing camera footage can be used for visual
odometry and mapping solutions.
Unfortunately, the RTSP stream is based on UDP
packets, meaning that data packets are sent only once, even though packages might be lost.
Losing suﬀicient packets for a key image frame on the stream results in data corruption,
which happens roughly every five seconds in this RTSP stream, as demonstrated in Figure
2.14. Therefore, the RTSP stream is currently better suited as a low frame-rate reference
for posterior analysis. For this purpose, a ROS node is implemented in C++ to sample the
24
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:33==
RTSP stream at 3 Hz and publish the image sample as a ROS Image message, minimising
CPU and memory resources on the LiDAR RPi.
The GNSS NMEA sentence topic from the Sonar Pi can be seamlessly integrated into the
data recording of the LiDAR RPi by configuring the same ROS domain id[48] for both of
the LiDAR- and Sonar RPis, allowing the ros2 bag record-functionality to log the data
arriving at the /nmea_sentence-topic.
Lastly, a static transform broadcaster is added to publish the entire reference frame trans-
form tree at 1 Hz. The reasoning for transmitting the static transforms regularly is elab-
orated in section 2.5.6.
(a) Camera stream functioning normally.
(b) Camera stream with dropped key frames.
Figure 2.14: Example of the RTSP stream quality from the forward-facing camera on the
Otter USV. This footage is obtained from the data set acquired in [19]. (a) shows the
perspective of the forward-facing camera with no noticeable artefacts. (b) showcases the
corruption of the camera stream when UDP packages for key image frames are lost.
With the ROS nodes mentioned above, the LiDAR RPi can acquire LiDAR- and IMU
data while also logging available camera feeds and GNSS NMEA sentences. This overview
is visualised in Figure 2.15.
Figure 2.15: Overview of the ROS nodes and their corresponding topics on the LiDAR
RPi. Blue boxes are running ROS nodes, yellow is an external device and green is an
external sensor.
The ROS package stack is implemented as a recursive Git repository structure, where
each sensor ROS node is encapsulated as a Git submodule. With this structure, version
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
25
==PAGE:34==
control can be kept for each sensor driver and seamlessly utilised by other projects using
the same sensors.
The package includes a launch file that starts every node with the
correct parameters. Configuring each node correctly is abstracted into a single file which
can simply be run, posing a benefit for future users of the platform. Lastly, to mimic the
design of the Sonar RPi, a systemd autostart service is also included, which will launch
all the ROS nodes at boot-up, keeping a more standardised design pattern across different
MCUs in the USV platform’s distributed system.
2.5.4
The Sonar RPi
The Sonar RPi is the node responsible for interfacing with Blueview and performing
auxiliary functions, such as publishing the GNSS NMEA sentence stream, as mentioned
in the previous section. Contrary to the LiDAR RPi, the Sonar RPi is not upgraded in
this thesis. Therefore, the functionality and key design choices are briefly described.
The Sonar RPi is designed to function as both a part of the distributed network on
the Otter USV and as a stand-alone data logging tool for the Blueview. Therefore, this
system is outfitted with its own power supply, data storage and Power over Ethernet (PoE)
circuitry to power the Blueview (see Table 2.15). Similarly to the LiDAR RPi, the Sonar
RPi is based on ROS, encapsulating the nodes as daemons running as Ubuntu systemd
services at boot-up. If the static IP of the Blueview is detected, ROS services are exposed
to the interface. An example of how these services are called is described in the data
acquisition Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) provided in SectionA.3.4.
As the system is designed to be operable on its own, it is also designed to be compati-
ble with the native driving software ProViewer[30]. Therefore, sonar images are stored
in a proprietary .son file format must be processed in post to be fully integrated into
the rosbags, with the rest of the data. Although a ROS CompressedImage stream ser-
vice is exposed to broadcasting sonar images, the service is prone to segmentation faults,
particularly during extended journeys. Remedying the issue is not prioritised due to the
complexity of the solution, increasing the risk of critical errors. As this will result in the
system not being fully only, the processing of this data is performed and merged with a
rosbag, mocking the data stream as real-time. (as seen in Table 2.13).
Table 2.15: Components contained in the sonar RPi implementation.
Component
Details
MPU
Raspberry Pi 4 Model B
Power Supply
50 Ah, 130W Power Supply
PoE
Control circuit + Ethernet bus
Outgoing PoE Port
For Blueview imaging sonar
Outgoing Ethernet Port
For connection to USV local network
External SSD
2 TB
2.5.5
Load Analysis
Testing the updated ROS package stack with the distributed network, an issue with the 9-
axis IMU ROS driver[47] was identified. With the limited CPU resources on the Raspberry
Pi’s BCM2711 ARM Cortex-A72 processor[49], the Xsens 9-axis IMU driver will entirely
saturate one of the four CPU cores on the LiDAR RPi, at default settings of publishing
data at 300 Hz. Consequently, this causes CPU contention, as other resources (including
other running ROS nodes) request resources from that core, slowing down all processes.
In the best-case scenario, this will result in data loss as the ROS topic buffers become
26
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:35==
saturated and start dropping messages, which would be detrimental to a data acquisition
campaign.
To mitigate this issue, four options are considered:
1. Drop the 9-axis IMU entirely.
2. Find another publicly available driver.
3. Implement a new driver.
4. Adjust configurations of the driver to reduce the CPU load.
(1) is the least desirable, as the 9-axis IMU is the primary reason for updating the LiDAR
RPi module. (2) could be viable, assuming such a driver exists, with a risk of the third-
party package not working as expected. (3) would be the most time-consuming option
but could be a last resort. (4) would be ideal, assuming the adjustments do not impact
the data quality to any significant extent. Consequently, (4) is the option chosen in this
work, with the data rate from the IMU decreased from 300 Hz to 100 Hz. This is below
what is recommended for some SLAM algorithms [22], but the same data rate as for the
IMU in the previous work [19].
Running the ROS package stack on the LiDAR RPi with the reconfigured IMU driver,
the RPi reaches a mean CPU utilisation of 80% CPU usage, evenly distributed between
all cores, with no indication of accumulating RAM usage due to memory leaks.
2.5.6
Data Storage and Handling
Logging data from all these modalities, the amount of gathered data can be substantial.
For reference, the collected data in [19] for the Ouster LiDAR amounted to ∼60 GB
per hour of data in sqlite3 rosbags [44], which can be problematic in terms of storage
space and cumbersome during post-processing. This section presents the initiatives for
improving storage capabilities and quality-of-life improvements for posterior data analysis
and processing.
Rosbags is a time-series data storage format native to ROS. Using rosbags allows for
live recording of published data in their original Common Data Representation (CDR)
serialisation, with corresponding metadata such as nanosecond timestamps, Quality of
Service (QoS) and reference frame identifiers, allowing for an identical playback of the
acquired data at any later point. Contrary to regular database storage or spreadsheets,
this eliminates the need for complex sampling or interpolation when using the data in post-
processing. However, native rosbags have shortcomings, including a lack of compression
and data indexing. Consequently, storage space is wasted, and processing time is high
when querying specific data.
To handle these issues, the rosbag storage format is changed from the default sqlite3
database to the mcap format[50], which addresses these issues and provides plenty of
extra, quality-of-life features. The mcap-format directly tackles the problems as mentioned
above by indexing stored data and supporting zstd[51] and lz4[52] compression formats.
Applying zstd-compression to the data set acquired in [19], a 2/3 storage reduction is
achieved.
mcap is also fully self-contained, as ROS topics message schemes are stored as metadata
in the mcap rosbag, eliminating the need to keep track of custom ROS message schemes
on the side. In addition, the mcap rosbags have also been further optimised for increased
writing bandwidth [53].
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
27
==PAGE:36==
Using mcap files, other quality-of-life tools become available, including the Foxglove stack
[54], providing a highly interactive and customisable visualisation tool and a cloud storage
platform for mcap rosbags.
Having data stored in a standardised cloud solution also
provides contingency protection and a platform to acquire the data for later use.
A disadvantage of using rosbags for data storage is the ”publish-once-and-done” philosophy
for static transforms in ROS. Static transforms in ROS are, by default, only broadcasted
at the very beginning when the static transformation is available and are only transmitted
again if a node explicitly broadcasts them. Consequently, the static transform messages
are only initially recorded in rosbags. As a result, if a subsection of the data should be
extracted for analysis, the static transforms will be missing. A static transform node that
published all static transforms at 1 Hz is implemented on the USV to counteract this. This
requires negligible bandwidth and storage space and ensures that any meaningful portion
of the acquired data contains at least one static transform message for all reference frames.
2.5.7
USV Control
With a USV able to collect and store data, what is finally needed is the ability for the
USV to navigate the chosen environment. While the Otter platform supports navigation
through waypoints, this feature is not available for this instance. Instead, the USV can
be remotely controlled through a PlayStation 5 controller via onboard 2.4 GHz Wi-Fi or
a proprietary Very High Frequency (VHF) Radio Frequency (RF) solution.
The RF solution was chosen for this work due to its superior range to Wi-Fi.
2.6
Discussion
The main components of the USV sensor platform have been presented, and it conforms
to the design requirements mentioned in the introduction of this chapter:
• 9-axis IMU: It is integrated and tested on the LiDAR RPi system.
• Modular: Yes, the system is still modular. There are a couple of loose dependencies
in the form of the LiDAR RPi listening for camera and GNSS feeds. However, These
are not required for the system to run and only add convenience by centralising the
data logging to one instance. The LiDAR RPi and Sonar RPi can still function
independently from the USV sensor platform, although the LiDAR RPi does require
another external 30V power source.
• Splash- and corrosion resistance: Yes. The only new physical component added
is the 9-axis IMU, which is IP67-certified.
• Conforms to spatial constraints of the environment: Yes. The biggest con-
cern here is the pole mount for the sonar, which can be adjusted to barely fit under
the bridges in the Belvedere Canal without the sonar being mounted deeper than 2
meters.
• Conforms to resource constraints: Most notably, the resource constraints on
the USV platform are power, network bandwidth and computational power. Consid-
ering power consumption, the practical argument is that the only power-consuming
component that is added is the 9-axis IMU (see Table 2.3), which has below an order
of magnitude average power consumption compared to the LiDAR (see Table 2.7)
and is therefore a borderline negligible change. Assuming the USV conformed to
the resource constraints before, it is safe to assume that adding the IMU does not
affect the overall picture significantly. An alternative approach could be to model
the power system to quantify the available margins analytically. However, this was
28
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:37==
omitted, as from practical experience, the margins are so large that power is of little
concern for the mission duration currently in scope for the platform. Network band-
width and computational power are tested using the ad-hoc load analysis mentioned
earlier.
Generally, the system in its current state has many strengths compared to the platforms
used by studies presented in the literature review. Modular and light, the platform can be
easily disassembled and transported from storage to a given mission environment. With
high modality, the platform can be used in a wide range of contexts, which is highly
beneficial for a platform that is supposed to support many different kinds of surveys.
Moreover, in its current state, the USV sensor platform works well mostly as a data
acquisition tool.
Due to the limited computational power of the RPIs, there are minimal resources to
implement more complex systems, such as online SLAM or neural networks, as indicated
by the findings of the ad-hoc load analysis. For this purpose, a more powerful, dedicated
computational unit could be added to the network, levering the platform’s distributed
framework and then seamlessly subscribing to the already-exposed ROS topics.
With
such a dedicated unit, it makes sense to start looking into stabilising the video feed from
the forward-facing camera, as this could be used for computer vision tasks. Areas to look
into with the camera feed are investigating how stable the network is or whether the video
stream can be transmitted with TCP/RTSP instead of UDP/RTSP.
Another aspect to consider for the USV is the managerial aspects of having such a shared
platform across departments; having a set of openly available, standardised checklists
and operating procedures is paramount.
These will ensure that single people are not
the sole holders of critical details about the platform. These standards are critical for
such a modular system, as each module and all the mounts, cables, bolts, etc., are stored
separately. Speaking from experience, missing a few bolts can make the entire platform
unfit for sailing, having to go back to storage and find them can cost hours in the field.
In this work, the groundwork for making these standards is made (see Appendix A.3 and
A.3.4), but these should be extended with more nuances and structured labelling of parts.
2.7
Chapter Summary
Below are the major points covered in this chapter:
• The onboard modalities are a 3D LiDAR, an imaging sonar, a 9-axis IMU and a
GNSS module, implemented as a distributed system using ROS middle-ware on a
local network mounted on a remote-controlled USV. The USV is designed to be
modular, easily configurable, and conform to the environmental constraints of the
Belvedere Canals.
• The imaging sonar can map echoing signals onto a polar coordinate plane in front
of it. It is blind in its vertical axis, which means that the orientation of the sonar
has significant implications for the quality of the sonar images it provides.
• The GNSS module is unreliable in these urban environments due to signal multi-path
and limited line-of-sight to orbiting GNSS satellites.
• The 9-axis IMU onboard the USV platform is limited to 100 Hz, which can affect
the final 3D reconstruction performance.
• The LiDAR can provide an accurate, dense point cloud above water. The LiDAR
encodes metadata in each point, a crucial detail for Chapter 3.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
29
==PAGE:38==
3
Simultaneous Localisation and
Mapping
In this chapter, the uses of SLAM algorithms are presented, along with the process of
selecting the ideal algorithm to achieve the goals of this thesis. Subsequently, the chosen
SLAM algorithm will be elaborated, presenting its inner workings and how the USV sensor
modalities are integrated.
SLAM algorithms are designed to construct a local map and determine the location of
a vehicle by leveraging data from multiple sensors. This approach is particularly suited
to addressing the issues in the introductory chapter. Various SLAM algorithms embody
different philosophies and methodologies, each presenting distinct advantages and lim-
itations depending on the specific application. Hence, the selection of the appropriate
algorithm is paramount. SLAM algorithms are classified into filter-based and graph-based
approaches. The former includes varieties of Kalman and particle filters, where a state
vector represents the system’s current state. A motion model allows the system to predict
its a priori state estimate, and incoming measurements enable it to update its a posteriori
state estimate.
The graph-based approaches tracks measurements and states at different times in a graph
structure with nodes representing the vehicle’s poses and landmarks and edges represent-
ing constraints derived from observations. In graph-based SLAM, the critical task is to
optimise this graph to find the configuration of nodes that best satisfies all constraints.
This also allows for features such as loop closure, which is not supported in filter-based
approaches[55].
While SLAM algorithms can leverage a multitude of sensors[5], LiDAR and IMUs often
constitute the core of many state-of-the-art SLAM algorithms due to their high precision,
dense features and low drift [56]. However, many also include additional sensor modalities
such as GNSS to increase algorithm robustness [22].
In this work, an existing SLAM algorithm is adapted to achieve the goals presented in
the introduction, in the context of having an easily deployable implementation that can
be used in an online context by the USV data platform.
Consulting Table 3.1 an overview of state-of-the-art LiDAR-IMU-based SLAM algorithms
can be obtained.
30
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:39==
Table 3.1: Overview of features and relevant compatibility for different state-of-the-art
SLAM algorithms. Based on the work of [57].
LIO-SAM
FAST-LIO2
RTAB-Map
hdl_graph
Loop Closure
✓
×
✓
✓
Feature
Extrac-
tion
Edge, Plane
×
×
×
LiDAR-IMU
Coupling
Tight
Loose
Loose
Loose
GNSS Support
✓
×
×
✓
9-axis
IMU
Re-
quired
✓
×
×
✓
ROS2
Humble
Compatible
✓
✓
✓
×
In choosing a SLAM algorithm for mapping and localisation in Belvedere Canal, a highly
beneficial feature to consider is loop closure (detailed in section 3.1.5), which allows the
algorithm to correct its state graph by revisiting previous locations to correct accumulated
drift. This feature is highly beneficial for use in the Belvedere Canal, as the likelihood of
revisiting a location is high given that the Belvedere Canal is relatively narrow. Secondly,
for a SLAM algorithm to support GNSS support out-of-the-box is beneficial, as the effect
of adding this sensor modal for a GNSS-denied environment is of interest. Additionally,
GNSS support can be helpful if this work’s proposed method should be used in more open,
GNSS-enabled areas, where loop closure will be less effective.
Considering more practical requirements, the advantage of the SLAM algorithm imple-
mentation being compatible with ROS2 Humble cannot be overstated.
This compati-
bility ensures a seamless integration with the USV platform that utilises this distribu-
tion. Additionally, the specific implementation details, such as adequately integrating the
sonar data stream into the SLAM algorithm, are crucial. Other factors, such as Time-to-
Deploy (TTD) and run-time performance, are also relevant.
Selecting between the presented SLAM algorithms in Table 3.1, the reasoning is as follows:
1. RTAB-Map: This algorithm was used in the previous work [19] for mapping of the
LiDAR-IMU data stream. From experience, the run-time performance and TTD are
not satisfactory compared to other algorithms in the selection pool [58].
2. FAST-LIO2: This algorithm is based on Kalman filters.
FAST-LIO2 is highly
performance optimised, featuring specialised data structures and automatic IMU
transform estimation, ideal for performance-constrained devices[59]. Adapting such
an optimised implementation to handle sonar data is likely a cumbersome task.
While also not supporting loop closure or GNSS, this algorithm is not considered
further[60].
3. hdl_graph: This algorithm is a good fit for the scope of this work, supporting loop
closure and GNSS. In addition, the sensor modalities are loosely coupled, which is
advantageous for integrating more. However, at the time of this work, hdl_graph
does not support ROS2 distributions[23].
4. LIO-SAM: This algorithm emerges as a strong contender. Like hdl_graph, it in-
corporates loop closure and GNSS. LIO-SAM offers a scalable and high-performing
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
31
==PAGE:40==
solution, boasting a 10x normal speed performance. Its support for Docker con-
tainerisation out-of-the-box further enhances its practicality. However, the feature
extraction and the tightly coupled LiDAR and IMU did introduce some uncertainties
regarding synergy with the sonar data.
Considering points 1-4 above, this work uses the LIO-SAM algorithm to perform simulta-
neous localisation and mapping.
3.1
LIO-SAM
This section presents how LIO-SAM works under the hood by showcasing how a factor
graph [61] of state nodes, LiDAR landmarks and constraint factor edges is created and how
the factor graph is leveraged to obtain computationally eﬀicient and accurate mapping
and localisation.
Additionally, the implementation of LIO-SAM is highlighted with a
method using both LiDAR and sonar to obtain accurate localisation and a cross-domain
3D reconstruction of GNSS-denied marine environments, such as the Belvedere Canal.
LIO-SAM is a graph-based Smoothing and Mapping (SAM) algorithm which builds on the
LOAM model [62]. The algorithm is based on tightly coupled LiDAR inertial odometry
and factor graphs to relate point cloud features of the environment as the vehicle moves
through the environment.
LIO-SAM represents the vehicle state x as
x = [R⊤, p⊤, v⊤, b⊤]⊤
(3.1)
where R is the rotation matrix denoting the vehicle’s rotation, p is the vehicle position,
v is the vehicle velocity and b is the IMU bias modeled using a Brownian Motion model.
Each state is encoded as nodes x in a factor graph over time. To establish associations
between states, LIO-SAM leverages IMU, LiDAR, GNSS and loop closure factors to in-
troduce constraints between nodes, as shown in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: LIO-SAM system structure, providing the overview of how factors from dif-
ferent modalities are utilised in the factor graph, to obtain localisation of a vessel and
surrounding point cloud features. Source [22].
3.1.1
Environment Modelling and State Estimation
Before exploring how sensor modals can be integrated with LIO-SAM, it is beneficial to
have an overview of how LIO-SAM models incoming measurements and performs state
estimation.
32
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:41==
In the LIO-SAM algorithm, a Factor Graph is used to model probabilistic relationships
between states and measurements from the sensor modalities. Factor graphs is a bipartite
graph structure, where two distinct sets of nodes X and F are connected, such that there
are no edges connecting nodes within the same set[61]. In the context of a SLAM problem,
the nodes X represent the state variables for a vehicle or landmarks at different times in an
environment, and F represents functions f(·) describing the measured relationships and
measurement uncertainties, called factors, between states in X. Figure 3.2 provides an
example of a factor graph.
Figure 3.2: An illustration of the factor graph structure, where vehicle states x and land-
marks l are related using factor edges f.
With the factor graph, a vehicle can navigate an environment and model all the estimated
states and measurements gathered so far.
To solve the non-linear state estimation of the system, LIO-SAM leverages the iSAM2
algorithm[63], which utilises the factor graph structure to incrementally solve the optimi-
sation problem as new measurements are added to the factor graph.
The goal of the iSAM2 algorithm is to perform the following non-linear least squares
optimisation assuming a Gaussian measurement model:
argmin
Θ
(−log(f(Θ))) = argmin
Θ
1
2
X
i
||hi(Θ) −zi||2
Σi
(3.2)
where Θ is a set of variable (or state) nodes, hi is a measurements function, zi is a
measurement, and ||e||2
Σi is the squared Mahalanobis distance using the covariance matrix
Σi.
This expression is linearised around a linearisation point Θ to get the linearised
problem:
argmin
∆
(−log(f(∆))) = argmin
∆
||A∆−b||2
(3.3)
where A is the measurement function Jacobian and ∆is the update vector. Determining
∆, a new estimate ′Θ = Θ⊕∆, which can be reinserted iteratively in (3.2) as needed, where
⊕denotes addition or exponential maps in the case for quaternions and homogeneous point
representations. ∆can be obtained through matrix factorisation[63].
Crucially to the performance of the iSAM2 algorithm, the factor graph model is converted
to a Bayes tree [64] format. This is done via factor elimination, which combines factors into
joint probability distributions. The incremental updates can be performed to the affected
parts of the tree structure using a Bayes tree format instead of performing redundant
calculations to update the entire graph.
Using the iSAM2 algorithm, LIO-SAM can handle measurement and state estimation
for a graph of states in a memory—and computationally eﬀicient manner by minimising
redundancies. This incremental approach makes LIO-SAM ideal for real-time performance.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
33
==PAGE:42==
3.1.2
IMU Preintegration Factor
Provided from the IMU is a high-frequency measurement of linear acceleration and angular
velocity of the body frame FB (see Section 2.1). With these measurements, IMU factors
can be generated and added to the LIO-SAM factor graph using a defined motion model.
Due to the high frequency of measurements, adding an IMU factor for each measurement
would introduce many factors, leading to a denser factor graph, utilising more memory
and requiring more computational power to process estimate updates.
Instead, LIO-
SAM utilises IMU pre-integration factors, a method of accumulating measurements to
summarise the relative motion between two keyframes from the LiDAR.
Using the method presented in [65], the measurements obtained from the IMU can be ap-
plied to a kinematic model to perform a state estimation between two IMU measurements.
This state estimation is then generalised for arbitrary measurements between key frames
i and j. This estimate can be used as a pre-integration factor for the IMU in the factor
graph.
In [65], the linear acceleration- and angular velocity measurements are described as:
B˜a(t) = R⊤
WB(t)(W a(t) −W g) + ba(t) + ηa(t)
(3.4)
B ˜ωBW (t) = BωBW (t) + bω(t) + ηω(t)
(3.5)
where B˜a and B ˜ωBW are the measured linear acceleration and angular velocity, respec-
tively, in FB. The W a the linear acceleration in FB BωBW is the angular velocity in FB
relative to the world frame FW .
W g is the gravity vector in FW . R⊤
WB is the transfor-
mation from FW to FB. (3.4) and (3.5) also considers the white noise η and time-varying
bias b introduces by their respective sensors.
A kinematic model can be introduced using (3.4) and (3.5). With this model, expressions
can be derived to estimate the state between IMU measurements.
R′
WB = RWB BωBW ,
W ˙v = W a,
W ˙p = W v
(3.6)
Integrating the terms in (3.6), the motion model for the state vector x between interval
[t, t + ∆t] can be derived, assuming constant acceleration and angular velocity in the
interval:
RWB(t + ∆t) = RWB(t) exp (BωBW (t)∆t)
W v(t + ∆t) = W v(t) + W a(t)(t)∆t
(3.7)
W p(t + ∆t) = W p(t) + W v(t)∆t + 1
2 W a(t)∆t2
The motion model between measurements in (3.7) and the measurements in (3.6) can
then be extended to express the estimated motion between keyframes i and j, assuming a
constant measurement interval ∆t:
34
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:43==
Rj = Ri
j−1
Y
k=i
exp ((˜ωk −bω
k −ηω
k ) ∆t)
vj = vi + g
 j−1
X
k=i
∆t
!
+
j−1
X
k=i
Rk

˜ak −bk
a −ηk
a

∆t
(3.8)
pj = pi +
j−1
X
k=i

vk∆t + 1
2g∆t2 + 1
2Rk

˜ak −bk
a −ηk
a

∆t2

While (3.8) can be used as an IMU pre-integration factor in the factor graph, this imple-
mentation relies on recomputing all integrations if a liberation point at time ti changes.
Instead, the pre-integrated IMU measurements expression can be adjusted to express the
relative change ∆Rij, ∆vij and ∆pij between key frames i and j directly:
∆Rij = R⊤
i Rj
∆vij = R⊤
i
 
vj −vi −g
 j−1
X
k=i
∆t
!!
(3.9)
∆pij = R⊤
i

pj −pi −vi
 j−1
X
k=i
∆t
!
−1
2g
 j−1
X
k=i
∆t
!2

Figure 3.3: An example illustrating the benefit of IMU preintegration is maintaining
a sparse factor graph.
(a) IMU measurements are added per measurement, with no
selectiveness and preintegration of IMU measurements. Here, the factor graph will be
densely populated with sequential IMU measurements. (b) IMU preintegration factors
are calculated between LiDAR keyframes to obtain a sparse factor graph. Illustration
modified from [65].
Using (3.9), the IMU pre-integration factor can be calculated and applied to the LIO-SAM
factor graph whenever a robot state node is introduced [65] [22].
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
35
==PAGE:44==
3.1.3
LiDAR Factors
In the LIO-SAM model, LiDAR points are used for multiple purposes, namely tracking
surrounding landmarks and the vehicle’s relative position to these landmarks. Before the
obtained LiDAR points can be used reliably, reverting skewness would otherwise cause
significant drift over time.
To do this, LIO-SAM keeps track of the recent rotation states R reported by the IMU in
a queue QR data structure:
Ri+1 = Ri + ωi∆t
(3.10)
where Ri is the rotation for index i, ωi is the measured angular velocity from the IMU
and ∆t is the difference in time between IMU measurements.
The related time measurement m of the first measured point in the incoming, raw point
cloud P is extracted, and nearest rotation Rm in time is obtained from QR. For subsequent
N −1 points in P, the corresponding rotations {Rm+1, ..., Rm+N−1} ∈QR, and each point
is deskewed using (3.11).
p′
m+n = (R−1
m Rn) · pm+n
(3.11)
Throughout the remainder of this chapter, a crucial detail to note is that point clouds are
encoded as flat arrays using the points[i + Nr*j] notation, where Nr is the number of
points in a LiDAR ring, i is the row index and j is the ring index. As such, algorithms
using single indexes can iterate the entire point cloud measurement and have implications
for integrations with LIO-SAM.
LiDAR Odometry Factor
LiDAR odometry factors are obtained through feature extraction of the incoming LiDAR
point cloud P. Feature extraction allows the SLAM algorithm to remove noise from P and
extract easily identifiable areas. LIO-SAM performs feature extraction using the proposed
method in [66], where corner- and planar features are extracted by evaluating the local
smoothness around a small region of N points:
δi =
 N=5
X
k=i−N
(rk + rN+k+1 −2ri)
!2
(3.12)
where i is the index of a given point in P, ri is the point range for the point specified
by i. In [66], the range is normalised to remove the scale effect, which is omitted in the
LIO-SAM implementation[67].
Calculating δi for each point in the input point cloud provides an indication of smoothness
in a given ring, where δi →0 will indicate a line segment and higher values for δi will
indicate an occluded region or a corner feature.
Occluded regions are not actual features but rather a product of the perspective of the
LiDAR, as displayed in Figure 3.4. Therefore, such features are not reliable as the vessel
navigates the environment.
In addition, line segments that are mainly parallel to the
laser beam will also produce unreliable features. To filter these features, the difference of
the ranges to neighbouring points ri and ri+1 are calculated. If the difference is above a
predefined threshold, the entire region of points is flagged and discarded. Further feature
extraction details can be found in [66] and the LIO-SAM git repository[67].
36
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.4: (a) Example of parallel beam points for point A. (b) Example of an occluded
region, where C and D are not corner features, but instead the point D obstructs the view
of the line segment at C. Illustration modified from [66].
Sorting the filtered points by their corresponding δ values, a LiDAR frame Ft = {Fc
t, Fp
t }
composed of corner- and planar features, Fc
t and Fp
t , can be extracted at time t.
To further optimise the computational eﬀiciency and maintain a sparse factor graph, LIO-
SAM will not match all incoming LiDAR points clouds. Instead, keyframe selection is
introduced, where a LiDAR frame Ft+1 is selected if the difference between the vehicle
pose and the previous state xt exceeds a defined threshold. Should the defined thresholds
be exceeded, the goal is to obtain the relative transform ∆Tt,t+1, providing the best fit of
Ft+1 onto the accumulated kdtree voxel map of previous features Mt.
For computational eﬀiciency, a local map of n most recent keyframes, called sub-keyframes,
are sampled and transformed into the world frame FW using the associated transforma-
tions for each sub-keyframe Mt = {Mc
t, Mp
t }.
The LiDAR frame Ft+1 is subsequently
transformed to FW using the ˜Tt+1 IMU factor to obtain ′Ft+1. Using the proposed scan
matching method in [66], the corner- and planar correspondence patches of the features
′Ft+1 in Mt can be obtained.
By formulating expressions to calculate the normalised
distance between corner- and planar features ((3.13) and (3.14)) and their correspond-
ing patches, Gauss-Newton least squares optimisation (3.15) can estimate the optimal
transformation by minimising the distances[22]:
dc
k =


pc
t+1,k −pc
t,u

×

pc
t+1,k −pc
t,v

∥pc
t,u −pc
t,v∥
(3.13)
dp
k =

(pp
t+1,k −pp
t,u) · ((pp
t,u −pp
t,v) × (pp
t,u −pp
t,w))
(pp
t,u −pp
t,v) × (pp
t,u −pp
t,w)


(3.14)
min
Tt+1





X
pc
t+1,k∈′Fc
t+1
dp
k +
X
pp
t+1,k∈′Fp
t+1
dp
k





(3.15)
where, for (3.13), the distance dc
k denotes the distance from corner feature point pc
t+1,k ∈
′Fc
t+1 to the corner line spanning pc
t,u and pc
t,v. For (3.14), the distance dp
k denotes the
distance from planar feature point pp
t+1,k ∈′Fp
t+1 to the plane spanning pp
t,u, pp
t,v and pp
t,w.
From (3.15), the optimised LiDAR odometry factor ∆Tt,t+1 is obtained and added to the
factor graph, as showcased by the grey edges in Figure 3.1.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
37
==PAGE:46==
3.1.4
GPS Factor
As opposed to the abovementioned factors, the GPS factor is an auxiliary factor to help
correct long-term drift. LIO-SAM accepts measurements in a local Cartesian frame and
will add a GPS factor to the factor graph up to every 5th meter[67] if and only if both of
the following conditions are satisfied:
1. The GPS measurement covariance is less than a configurable threshold TΣ,G.
2. The current estimated pose is larger than a configurable threshold TΣ,p.
As the GPS measurement is provided in ENU frame, a transformation TENU
G
between
the geodetic coordinates and ENU must be applied to the GPS measurement. With this
transformation, the GPS measurement can be directly applied to the factor graph.
3.1.5
Loop Closure Factor
Loop closure is a core concept used within graph-based SLAM models. So far, factors have
been added in chronological order. Loop closures relate newly added states to previous
states nearby when revisiting a previously mapped location. When the state estimation
is optimised, the loop closure factor effectively allows the SLAM model to correct drift
resulting from minor accumulated errors.
LIO-SAM utilises loop closure as another factor in the factor graph by searching for
previous states nearby, using Euclidian distance, to a newly acquired state xi+1. If such
states are found, the state with closest proximity xi−c is chosen and the LiDAR key
frame Fi+1 associated with xi+1 is used for scan matching with the corresponding sub-key
frames {Fi−c−m, ..., Fi−c+m} associated with xi−m. The obtained relative transformation
∆TLC
i−c,i+1 is encoded as a loop closure factor in the factor graph[22].
This process is
illustrated in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: An example showcasing the effect of a loop closure constraint in SLAM. The
vessel (green) navigates an environment, tracing its path of states (yellow) before adding
the loop closure constraint. The vessel then revisits a prior location and makes a loop
closure detection, applying a constraint ∆TLC
i−6,i (red) between the old state xi−6 and new
state xi. Optimising the graph for this new constraint moves the previous state estimates
to a new, more accurate position (blue).
3.2
Integrating LIO-SAM with ROS
Building on the fundamentals of the LIO-SAM model, this section details the design for
interfacing LIO-SAM with the data acquired from the USV sensor platform.
38
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:47==
3.2.1
LIO-SAM ROS Stack
LIO-SAM is implemented as a ROS package, providing distinct nodes coded in C++ for
optimal performance. At its core, the LIO-SAM ROS package starts four concurrent ROS
nodes, each with separate responsibilities and connected via the ROS pub/sub connection
model, as shown in Figure 3.6. Using multiple nodes concurrently, LIO-SAM leverages
the parallel nature of the tasks it must perform[67].
At its core, LIO-SAM leverages the GTSAM C++ library[68], which provides an extensive
set of tools for SLAM purposes, including creation and management of factor graphs and
using smoothing and mapping algorithms such as iSAM2 for state estimation.
The package also provides additional features, such as:
1. A launch-file, to boot up all nodes with the correct configurations
2. A params.yaml is a centralised file to perform any provided configuration options
in this implementation, ranging from threshold definitions, topic definitions, buffer
sizes, and more.
Figure 3.6: Software architecture, on a functional level, for the LIO-SAM ROS implemen-
tation[67]. The input sensor models IMU, Point Cloud and GNSS are at the top, and the
available outputs are provided at the bottom.
In this implementation, the following assumptions are made about the incoming data:
1. The IMU- and LiDAR data are provided in the LiDAR frame of reference, following
the ROS REP-105 convention[69].
2. For simplicity, the LiDAR- and body frame of reference are identical.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
39
==PAGE:48==
3. Incoming IMU data is 9-axis, as the herein provided orientation is used to initialise
the map.
4. The point field from the provided PointCloud2 topic follows the convention outlined
in Table 2.10.
Additionally, as the system’s performance relies on the IMU frequency, a minimum of 200
Hz is generally recommended.
Configuring LIO-SAM is important to adjust the algorithm for the environment chosen in
this work. With the plethora of configurations, the most notable are the following:
• LiDAR Range Filter: Defined to range between 1.5 and 200 meters. The lower
bound is set as some of the points from the LiDAR come from the USV itself and
should be filtered out, as LIO-SAM would otherwise consider these points environ-
mental features and add unnecessary noise to the state estimation. The Ouster OS1
is rated to a maximum of 200 meters, and the sonar will never reach these distances.
The upper bound limit is set to prevent potentially noisy data samples beyond this
range.
• LiDAR Mode: Set to ouster-mode with number of rings defined as N = 64, with
M = 1024 points per ring. These settings inform LIO-SAM about the specific LiDAR
point encoding and initialised internal buffers to handle the number of incoming
points from the LiDAR. As the LiDAR and the sonar point clouds are fused together,
LIO-SAM is instructed to initialise suﬀicient memory for the combined set of points.
• Loop Clousure: LIO-SAM is set to look for loop closures every second, to ensure
these constraints being leveraged as much as possible. Higher frequencies provided no
additional loop closures due to the internally defined constraints described in section
3.1.5. The loop closure search radius is set to 15 meters, only considering past states
at least 40 seconds. This ensures that loop closures do not happen between two
recently added states, which will otherwise have minimum effect on correcting drift.
• ICP Fitness Threshold: Defined as a very low value to ensure the scan matching
finds the best possible fit for incoming keyframes to obtain the most accurate map.
This threshold can be set very low, as the GTSAM ICP implementation is a built-in
mechanism for flagging convergence, regardless of the threshold. The disadvantage
is the potential for additional iterations for the ICP algorithm. However, on the
Intel Core i5-11400H 2.70 GHz CPU on which this implementation is tested, there
are no noticeable effects w.r.t. computational performance.
• GNSS Thresholds: When using the GNSS thresholds TΣ,G and TΣ,G are configured
such that GPS factors are accepted if the pose covariance TΣ,p > TΣ,G and TΣ,G <
32m2. The idea is to use the GNSS to correct the pose threshold, but only when a
good GNSS position measurement is available.
The remaining configurations are toggled depending on what sensor modalities are in-
cluded or according to their topic names. They are kept as the defaults for outdoor use.
3.2.2
Data Processing
Given the design constraints of the USV sensor platform, described in section 2.5, the .son-
files containing sonar images are processed and mocked in an online context through data
playback. To use these points for 3D reconstruction with LIO-SAM, this work proposes a
simple point cloud concatenation.. This can be done since the metadata is encoded within
each point (as described in section 2.3).
40
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:49==
With the design constraint that these processes should be run online, a focus is placed on
implementing them so that they can work in a real-time context.
Sonar Image Point Cloud Extraction
With an incoming stream om sonar images, a scanline of points P∫can be extracted using
a signal threshold along each beam, extracting the leading edge of the signal, as proposed
in [19]. This method assumes that every point lay on the xy-plane on the sonar frame Fs,
(x, y, z) = (forward, left, up), and ignores the uncertainty in elevation introduced by the
linear phase array. This method is fast to compute and can be easily run concurrently, as
each range calculation is independent. This method, however, discards all of the remaining
image, which encapsulates a lot of environmental information. Therefore an additional
method of extracting the subsequent falling edge after the leading edge is introduced.
This approach is more likely to capture convolutions rather than actual features, but can
possibly aid in localisation by providing spatial information about the environment.
The leading edge is characterised as the point along the beam, starting from the sonar head
and extending to the range, where the intensity value surpasses a predefined threshold T.
The falling edge is a subsequent point, continuing traversal from the leading edge point,
where the intensity drops below T again. Obtaining the occupation grid G for the leading-
and falling edges can be seen in algorithms 1 and 2.
The magnitude image is transformed into an occupation grid by generating these points
from each beam. Knowing metadata about the image, such as resolution of range bins
∆R and azimuth angle resolution ∆ψ, the 2D Euclidean distance for each point can be
calculated in Fs, using trigonometry:
R(k) = ∆Rk, ψ(l) = ∆ψ

l −N
2

| Gk,l = 1
(3.16)
x
y

=
R(k) cos(ψ(l))
R(k) sin(ψ(l))

(3.17)
where the origin of Fs is in the centre of the sonar head and the Cartesian coordinates
of the frame are (x, y, z) = (forward, left, up). The implementation of acquiring the point
clouds from the occupancy grid is demonstrated in Algorithm 3, and visualised in Figure
3.7.
Both leading- and falling edge approaches assume that convolution effects occur after the
’real’ features in the time domain.
Running Algorithm 1 and 2, in a Python implementation without concurrency using an
Intel Core i5-11400H 2.70 GHz CPU, results in an average frame rate of 45.2 ± 7.6 and
32.0 ± 3.6 Hz, respectively.
These results should suﬀice for running the algorithms in
a real-time context, assuming similar or slightly worse CPU performance, with ample
opportunity for further optimisations.
Given that the interest for these points is both to perform mapping and localisation, the
intention of leveraging leading- and falling edge points is to provide the SLAM algorithm
with more context to infer motion in the vertical axis of the sonar, even though the
sonar is essentially blind in this direction. The drawback is that the falling edge points
will be points indicating convoluted features of the sonar. As such, these points do not
represent any actual position in space and will provide incorrect points for mapping. In
brief, the hypothesis is that introducing falling edges may achieve some benefits in terms
of localisation by sacrificing mapping accuracy.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
41
==PAGE:50==
Algorithm 1 leadingEdgeOccupancyGrid
Require: A sonar magnitude image IM×N, with M beams of length N, and a threshold
value T
Ensure: A sonar image occupancy grid representation GM×N
G ←{0}M×N
for k ←1 to M do
for l ←1 to N do
p ←0
if Ikl > T then
p ←l
break loop
end if
if p > 0 then
Gkp ←1
end if
end for
end for
Return G
Algorithm 2 fallingEdgeOccupancyGrid
Require: A sonar magnitude image IM×N, with M beams of length N, and a threshold
value T
Ensure: A sonar image occupancy grid representation GM×N
G ←{0}M×N
for k ←1 to M do
for l ←1 to N do
p ←0, q ←0
if Ikl > T then
if p = 0 then
p ←l
end if
else
if p ̸= 0 and q = 0 then
q ←l
Break inner loop
end if
end if
if p > 0 then
if q > 0 then Gkq ←1
else GkN ←1
end if
end if
end for
end for
42
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:51==
Algorithm 3 calculatePointProfile
Require: A sonar image occupancy grid representation GM×N, with M beams of length
N
Ensure: A 3D point cloud P in the sonar frame Fs
P ←{0}M
for k ←1 to M do
p ←0
for p ←[1, ..., N] do
if Gkp = 1 then
Calculate Cartesian coordinates using (3.17)
Add pixel intensity to point
Break inner loop
end if
end for
end for
Return P
Figure 3.7: Example of extracted point clouds from a sonar image using the leading edge
approach. The green dots are the extracted point for each beam of the sonar image.
Point Cloud Concatenation
With the extracted point clouds from sonar images, these points can be concatenated for
use with LIO-SAM. Ensuring the point clouds coming from the imaging sonar are encoded
identically (see the point field encoding in Table 2.10, for reference), Ps can be transformed
to the LiDAR reference frame and subsequently concatenated to a flattened set incoming
LiDAR points Pl. This will yield a concatenated set of points Psl, which LIO-SAM can
use for mapping and localisation.
Ps and Pl at time t are denoted as follows:
Ps
t = {[x, y, z, intensity, t, reflectivity, ring, ambient, range]⊤
k | k = 1, 2, ..., K}
(3.18)
Pl
t = {[x, y, z, intensity, t, reflectivity, ring, ambient, range]⊤
i,j | i = 1, 2, ..., M; j = 1, 2, ..., N}
(3.19)
Where K is the number of points from the sonar image, M is the number of points from a
single ring revolution and N is the number of rings. Encoding the sonar points identically is
relatively straightforward, as [x, y, range] is already known from the point cloud extraction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
43
==PAGE:52==
described in Alg. 3. Assuming the measurements of each sonar beam are obtained at the
same time, the remaining fields can be populated:
[z, time, reflectivity, ring, ambient] = [0, t, 0, Nring + 1, 0]
(3.20)
Subsequently, Ps
t can be transformed from the sonar reference frame to the LiDAR refer-
ence frame, using the static transform STL obtained from the transform model in Figure
2.11.
′Ps
t = STLPs
t
(3.21)
Finally, Pl
t can be flattened, and the point clouds can be concatenated:
Psl
t = Pl
t ∪′Ps
t
(3.22)
where Pl
t = {Pl
q | q = 1, 2, ..., Q}, q = N(i −1) + j mapping some index i, j to q and
Q = N · M.
This method embeds the sonar point cloud into the LiDAR point cloud as an additional
ring, as shown in Figure 3.8.
Testing the proposed point cloud concatenation using list comprehensions in Python on a
Intel Core i5-11400H 2.70 GHz CPU yields an average concatenation frequency of 71.8±9.6
Hz.
X
Y
Z
LiDAR rings
Sonar ring
(a) Ring model from star-
board.
X
Y
Z
LiDAR rings
Sonar ring
(b) Ring model from above.
X
Y
Z
LiDAR rings
Sonar ring
(c) Ring model from the top.
Figure 3.8: The point cloud ring model for the concatenated point cloud Psl
t , in the USV
body frame of reference, in context of orienting the sonar using Orientation 1.
3.2.3
Runtime Implementation
Implementing the full stack SLAM implementation, the data processing methods are com-
bined with a stack of ROS nodes to feed the data to LIO-SAM.
To implement the point cloud concatenation in ROS, a custom post-processing flow is
implemented, extracting the LiDAR points from the rosbag and the sonar points from the
.son-file, using the point cloud extraction Algorithm 3, to create a processed rosbag with
the point concatenation, as presented in Figure 3.9. This way, optimal point cloud inter-
polation can be guaranteed with no dropped packages, as expected from operating in an
online setting. Implementations with guides are included in the thesis Git repository[70].
44
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:53==
Figure 3.9: Visualisation of the post-processing flow for the data obtained by the USV
sensor platform. The processed rosbag will contain suﬀicient data for use with the LIO-
SAM ROS stack.
With a processed rosbag and a configured LIO-SAM algorithm, there are three remaining
issues before the full SLAM implementation is operational:
1. IMU Transformation. As mentioned earlier, LIO-SAM assumes that the LiDAR
and IMU frames are identical, which are not in the data set.
2. GNSS Publishing. LIO-SAM accepts GNSS input in the form of nav_msgs/Odometry
ROS message, containing the measured pose of the USV in Cartesian space.
3. QoS Overrides. LIO-SAM expects the QoS for the transmitted data to be reliable.
The solutions to these issues are addressed as follows:
IMU Transformation Solution
LIO-SAM can be configured to perform this transformation internally if a transformation
matrix is provided. In this work, a separate ROS node has been implemented to handle this
task. The provided static transform tree broadcasted to /tf_static is leveraged to obtain
the transform between the LiDAR and IMU reference frames, which is then rebroadcasted
to a separate topic. With this implementation, there is no need for explicitly re-configuring
this transform, should it change in the future.
GNSS ENU Frame Solution
As the GNSS data is encoded as NMEA sentences containing positional data in latitude
and longitude, a ROS node is implemented to transform these NMEA sentences into ENU
frames, with the origin set to (0, 0, 0).
As different NMEA sentences contain distinct
information (see Table 2.11), this node parses the sentences and populates an internal
state vector:
xgnss = [t, lat, lon, alt, σlat, σlon, x, y, z, ψ]⊤
Where t is the timestamp of the newest received sentence, (lat, lon, alt) is the parsed
geodetic coordinates, (σlat, σlon) is the uncertainty estimate provided in meters, provides
by the GNSS module, (x, y, z) is the USV pose in ENU coordinates with origin at the
first received position and ψ is the yaw angle or heading in ENU frame. Whenever the
position is updated, the ROS node will compose and publish an Odometry message based
on the information in xgnss. These ENU coordinates can be used as LIO-SAM initialises
the heading with the orientation readings from the 9-axis IMU. Depending on the 9-axis
reports the orientation w.r.t. the magnetic- or true north, the magnetic declination can
be added as a parameter, if necessary.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
45
==PAGE:54==
This solution also incorporates a path generator, publishing the accumulated path gener-
ated by the GNSS odometry.
QoS Overrides Solution
In the context of ROS, reliable specifically means that data is rebroadcasted, should a
packet be lost during transmission, at the cost of transmission overhead. This overhead
is often not affordable in online systems and will defer to best effort, making no such
re-transmission effort.
As the data is captured using best-effort reliability, the rosbag
will default to this QoS when replayed. To override these settings, a qos_override.yaml
file (see Appendix A.2.1) is created to redefine the QoS of specific topics to follow the
requirements of LIO-SAM[71].
Consolidating the Solutions
The architecture of the SLAM implementation is showcased in Figure 3.10, incorporating
the LIO-SAM stack, the solutions mentioned above and the processed rosbag obtained from
3.9, with a launch-file to run all the nodes from a single source file. The implementation
is encapsulated in a docker container with a compose file for easy distribution, system
initialisation and dependency management.
Because of an incompatibility between Docker and the FastDDS version used in ROS2
Humble, communication between docker containers and the system host is not possible by
default. This is due to FastDDS handling message transport via shared memory[72], which
is not accessible between the user on the host and the user within the containerized system.
To circumvent this, the compose file will expose the shared memory volume /dev/shm to
the host and initialise a user in the container context with a fixed group- and user ID that
the host can imitate.
With this containerisation, the proposed SLAM implementation can be seamlessly de-
ployed to other machines or adapted to an independent online SLAM module for future
USV implementations.
Running the stack on an Intel Core i5-11400H 2.70 GHz, the runtime stack including
LIO-SAM and rosbag replaying, has ∼170% CPU core utilisation distributed on 12 cores,
totalling 14% of the total available CPU bandwidth.
Figure 3.10: Architecture of the SLAM implementation stack, integrated the processed
data with LIO-SAM.
46
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:55==
3.3
Discussion
The proposed method of concatenating point clouds enables the integration of sensor
modalities for multiple domains. It extends the original scope of LIO-SAM with minimal
intervention to the original model. This approach opens the door for additional point cloud
sources, as long as their field-of-view does not overlap, thereby preventing incorrect feature
extraction from LIO-SAM. However, it is essential to acknowledge challenges associated
with this approach.
Firstly, the point cloud encoding is specific to the Ouster OS1. Therefore, using other
mechanical 3D LiDARs may require a different point cloud encoding.
An alternative
method, which involves adding a separate stream of point cloud factors to the factor
graph of LIO-SAM, is a time-consuming and complex endeavour. This is because the
existing point cloud flow is tightly coupled to the entire implementation.
Secondly, due to the sparsity and dimensionality of the extracted sonar points, the feature
extractions of LIO-SAM might be an issue. As the sonar point cloud is a scanline, no
planar features will be extracted. Moreover, if the underwater environment is relatively
featureless, the down-sampling due to the feature extraction could be severe.
Lastly, LIO-SAM is designed for real-time use, while this implementation is pseudo-online,
requiring post-processing of acquired data. If this method should be run in a real-time
context, it requires the following adjustments:
1. Sonar point clouds must be extracted and published in real-time.
2. LiDAR and sonar point clouds must be concatenated in real-time.
3. The USV must have suﬀicient onboard computational resources to run these addi-
tional nodes and a LIO-SAM instance.
Considering (1), this requires live sonar images to be broadcast to the ROS network, which
is already in place but prone to segmentation faults, which must be resolved. Running
the point cloud extraction online on the USV is feasible, as the current implementation
performs significantly faster than the frame rate of the imaging sonar. The implementation
can also be optimised in a compiled language or run in parallel. For (2), the concatenation
of point clouds can be reduced to pointer operations, a transform and some interpolation
logic to match the correct point clouds at the proper times. Given the sparsity of the sonar
point clouds, these operations should be doable in real-time context. The disadvantage of
this implementation in a real-time context is that it may introduce slight delays and lost
packages. Considering (3), using existing infrastructure on the USV, adding these features
is not feasible, as the Raspberry Pi’s are already pushed to their limits. For this method to
run in a real-time context, computational resources must be added. While it is uncertain
what magnitude these computational resources should be, adding nodes to the system
should be easy due to its distributed nature. A simple model could retain Raspberry Pis
to handle sensor driving and data logging and add a more robust computational unit to
handle data processing and SLAM algorithms.
3.4
Chapter Summary
To summarise this chapter, the key takeaways are provided below:
• To perform 3D reconstruction and localisation, the SLAM algorithm LIO-SAM is
chosen because it is a fast and scalable solution, supporting loop closure and ROS2
compatibility for the distribution used on the USV.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
47
==PAGE:56==
• To employ LIO-SAM to perform mapping using the sonar- and LiDAR point clouds,
a method is proposed to extract points from the sonar and concatenate the point
clouds and feed them as a combined point cloud stream to LIO-SAM.
• An auxiliary set of ROS nodes is implemented to feed data from the USV to LIO-
SAM in a format the algorithm expects.
• All processes are designed to run in a real-time context.
48
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:57==
4
Data Acquisition
With a USV data platform presented in chapter 2, this chapter delves into the data
acquisition campaign undertaken in this work, detailing considerations and preparation
employed to obtain data of adequate quality within the constraints of the project.
The chapter is split into two sections, each outlining the process of gathering data from
the USV and gathering ground truth data via RTK.
4.1
USV Data Acquisition
This section focuses on the processes involved in collecting data using the USV sensor
platform, presented in chapter 2.
During the initial research phase of this project, a key observation was that many ad-
vanced SLAM algorithms rely on 9-axis IMUs. Furthermore, the unique characteristics
of the imaging sonar (as described in section 2.2) present an opportunity to explore the
effectiveness of underwater 3D reconstruction and localisation with different sonar orienta-
tions. The primary identified goals of the USV data acquisition campaign were, therefore,
to:
1. Gather data incorporating the 9-axis IMU modality
2. Acquire data with different orientations of the imaging sonar.
4.1.1
Preparation
For a successful data acquisition, it is paramount to understand the constraints of available
resources and the environment. Therefore, to adequately prioritise features, it is important
to know where and when to perform the data acquisition.
Early in the progress of this thesis, it was apparent that time was a critical factor for data
acquisition, as the supervisor with end-to-end knowledge about the system and how to
operate it would become unavailable after the first 1/3 of the project. Hence, a few days
before his departure, the planned deadline was set to maximise the time to get acquainted
with the USV sensor platform and test features with the most capable hands. The risk
of not prioritising data acquisition is that the data collected from the campaign may be
compromised due to overlooked details if the USV cannot be operated.
Additionally,
the scheduled data acquisition campaign deadline not being met and a lack of qualified
personnel to operate the USV could also result in consequences.
When choosing a location for the data acquisition, selecting an area that reflected the
environmental conditions scoped for this thesis was most critical - a GNSS-denied marine
environment. Therefore, the choice of location fell on the Belvedere Canal in Sydhavn,
which was also investigated in [19], with the following reasons:
1. From the available data set, it is evident that GNSS localisation is unreliable for
USVs in this area.
2. The area is tried and tested; therefore, there are solutions for minor practicalities,
such as if the USV can navigate the area, where to park and assemble the USV, or
what authorities to contact.
3. The data acquired can be compared with the previous data set from [19], if necessary.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
49
==PAGE:58==
Considering the selected environment, the imaging sonar’s operating frequency and ori-
entations are essential. Choosing the operating frequency is a trade-off between imaging
resolution and range. A signal frequency with a short range is insuﬀicient in an environ-
ment with ranges spanning outside the operating range. Contrarily, a signal frequency
with a long operating range can also be problematic in confined environments, where the
emitted signals from the sonar can bounce around the environment, introducing noise to
the obtained sonar images. With this in mind, the sonar imaging settings in Table 2.4 and
the environment dimensions presented in Table 4.1, it is clear that the 2250 KHz signal
frequency, with a maximum operating range of 10 meters and horizontal FoV of 130◦, is
suﬀicient for configuration intended for bathymetry scanning and forward-facing options.
Considering the orientation of the imaging sonar, the range, convolution effects, and the
vertical axis should be kept in mind (see section 2.2 for details). To explore these trade-offs,
the ability to seamlessly configure the imaging sonar in the field is utilised to try different
orientations of the imaging sonar with different goals. All imaging sonar orientations are
expressed w.r.t. the REP-103 ROS body frame standard [40].
Orientation 1
This orientation aims to leverage the properties of the imaging sonar to maximise local-
isation capabilities, as the blind, vertical axis is not in the direction of movement of the
USV. To avoid extracting points from the water surface due to vertical FoV, a slight pitch
angle is introduced:
[ϕ, θ, ψ]⊤=
h
0, −π
6 , 0
i⊤
(4.1)
Consequently, the maximal, measurable depth obtainable dmax is reduced to:
dmax = Rmax
cos(α) ≈5 [m]
(4.2)
Additionally, due to the vertical FoV properties of the imaging sonar, an estimated, worst-
case range error ratio ϵr due to signal convolutions:
ϵr = 1 −
d
cos(α−β)
d
cos(α)
= 1 −
cos(α)
cos(−α + β) = 0.22
(4.3)
α = π
2 + θ,
β = 1
2γv
where θ is the pitch angle, γv = π
9 is the vertical FoV angle of the imaging sonar and Rmax
is the maximum range of the imaging sonar, assuming a flat canal bed. While dmax is
mainly within the estimated depth of the environment (see Table 4.1), the error range ϵr
of up to 22% for flat surfaces will be problematic for the underwater mapping quality.
Orientation 2
This orientation is the classic within bathymetry-scanning, where the imaging sonar is
mounted orthogonal to the plane of movement.
[ϕ, θ, ψ]⊤=
h
0, −π
2 , 0
i⊤
(4.4)
Contrasting with orientation 1, the proposed configuration offers significant advantages.
It fully utilises the imaging sonar’s operating range to map the canal depth while minimis-
ing potential errors from signal convolutions. This is achieved by ensuring the imaging
50
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:59==
plane is orthogonal to the canal bed, as illustrated in Figure 2.4. The disadvantage of
this configuration is that the blind, vertical axis is in the direction of movement, which
intuitively will be detrimental for the imaging sonar to contribute to the localisation of
the USV.
Orientation 3
This orientation aims to apply a linear combination of angles. The hypothesis is that this
combination can achieve a compromise between mapping and localisation.
[ϕ, θ, ψ]⊤=
h
−π
6 , −π
6 , −π
6
i⊤
(4.5)
These configuration- and orientation choices are tested using Project Dave [73]. Project
Dave is a simulation tool using ROS and Gazebo with integrated models for imaging sonars
based on the sonar equation (see Eq. 2.4 in section 2.2). With this simulation tool, a mock
environment can be set up using the properties in Table 2.4 and dimensions from Table
4.1 to verify the expected outcome of each imaging sonar orientation.
Table 4.1: Dimensional information about the Belvedere canals chosen as data acquisition
environement. *Estimated using Google Maps[74]. **Estimate from By og Havn[75].
Canal Section
*Canal Width
**Canal Depth
[m]
[m]
Frederiksholmsløbet (wide)
60
2.5 - 5.5
Belvederekanalen (medium)
17
2.5 - 5.5
Linus Paulings Vej (narrow)
8
2.5 - 5.5
Finally, the course and surge speed is planned to get a comparable set paths between
runs (see Figure 4.1). Additionally, it is vital to maintain the vessel’s constant speed to
obtain a uniform mapping of the canals. The surge speed to achieve is determined to be
∼2 kts with the reasoning that this is within the legal surge speed in the area and speeds
maintainable by human operators over a prolonged time. As the USV is manually piloted,
inevitable human errors are involved in controlling the USV speeds. To minimise human
errors, the maximum thruster power is limited to 1/3 of the maximum power, where
the theoretical maximum thruster power is 5 kts[17], assuming linear power-to-velocity
transfor ratio.
Notably, this campaign also involves a significant amount of management work. Examples
of this, such as the created SOP, checklists and identified uncertainties, can be found in
Appendix section A.3.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 4.1: Planned route in Sydhavn, Copenhagen S (55.654511N, 12.552760E) for the
USV for each configuration of the Blueview MBES, signified by the red arrows. (1) USV
assembly area (2) USV reconfiguration area. The route is segmented into three zones, with
the deepest and widest (Frederiksholmsløbet, orange), the medium size (Belvedere Canal,
green) and the small and shallow side-canal (Linus Paulings Vej, blue). Map acquired
from Google Maps [74].
52
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:61==
4.1.2
Results
In this section, the resulting data of the acquisition, as mentioned above, is presented.
Environmental Data
Date
2024-08-04
Weather**
Partially cloudy
Temperature**
14 - 17 ◦C
Wind Speeds**
2-5 m/s ↗
Magnetic Declina-
tion*
0.0871±0.007 [rad]
Table 4.2: Environmental data from the
data acquisition field day.
* Magnetic Declination is estimated us-
ing the World Magnetic Model at the
coordinates for the USV reconfiguration
zone [76]. ** Source dmi.dk.
Table 4.3: Otter USV sailing in Belved-
erekanalen in Sydhavn, Copenhagen.
Table 4.4: *This value depends on the reflectivity and the desired detection probability.
This estimate is based on the ballpark limit provided by Ouster. **Under normal run-
ning conditions. Higher peak power can be obtained during start-up or low operating
temperatures.
Figure 4.2: Data availability of the raw mcap rosbag file acquired by the USV. Each row
is colored when a ROS message is published for a given topic, indicating the publishing
frequency and potential missing data.
Due to adverse weather conditions, the planned date set to have the knowledgeable su-
pervisor available for the fieldwork was not met. Consequently, no one with end-to-end
experience with the USV platform was available to acquire data. Fortunately, a fieldwork
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
53
==PAGE:62==
exercise with the USV used as an opportunity for knowledge hand-over and practical
experience with the platform before the planned data acquisition campaign. Having no
experienced hands during platform assembly resulted in a more extended assembly period
with multiple mistakes and incidents, described in Table A.4 in the Appendix.
A significant incident occurred during data collection, leading to the premature halt of
the data acquisition campaign. The port-side thruster malfunctioned after data collection
using orientation 1 for the imaging sonar, which was later attributed to malfunctioning
controller electronics with an unidentified cause. Unfortunately, the timing of this incident
left no option for a second data acquisition. As a result, a strategic decision was made to
pivot the project’s focus, primarily concentrating on orientation 1.
Upon analysing the available data in Figure 4.2, it is evident that all the essential data
sources were consistently available during the data acquisition period. This robust data
availability underscores the accuracy of our load analysis, providing a reliable impression
of the system’s performance. The camera image stream, however, was the only exception,
gradually decreasing its publishing frequency until the node ceased operation.
As no
other nodes were seemingly affected, the issue is likely due to congested internal buffers
or queues. Given that the camera stream is only for auxiliary use, further diagnosis is not
included in this report.
(a) Wide canal section.
(b) Narrow canal section.
(c) Example of sonar imaging noise from signal multi-path. Shopping
cart for scale.
Figure 4.3: Collection of sonar images from the data acquisition campaign at different
sections of the course.
54
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:63==
Topic Name
Mean Frequency
[Hz]
/camera/image
0.14
/nmea_sentence
73.01
/tf_static
1.0
/imu/mag
99.9
/imu/data
99.9
/imu_data_str
99.9
/ouster/imu
349.48
/.../scan
9.99
/.../points
7.89
/.../range_image
9.99
/.../signal_image
9.99
/.../nearir_image
9.99
/.../reflec_image
9.99
Table 4.5: Overview of the data publishing
frequency for obtained data.
Table 4.6: Visualisation of obtained
point cloud obtained from the 3D
LiDAR in Belvedere Canal.
Table 4.7: Overview of obtained data from the LiDAR RPi.
Examining the sonar data in Figure 4.3, there are noticeable features with implications
for the quality of the point cloud extraction. Figure 4.3a showcases longitudinal artefacts
in five noisy lines, likely due to the proprietary beam forming technique utilised by the
Blueview imaging sonar. Figure 4.3b shows a more feature-rich environment where the
canal walls are significantly highly pronounced. At specific angles and ranges, these walls
do, however, produce noise artefacts due to signal multi-path, as showcased in Figure 4.3c.
Given that these noise artefacts become the leading edge for a noticeable amount of the
FoV, they may well be falsely extracted as feature points.
Investigating the localisation estimate from the GNSS module, in Figure 4.4, presents a
couple of insights. Firstly, the USV is estimated to be on land for the first ten minutes of
the journey, with quite a margin. Notably, the localisation estimate increases significantly
when the USV navigates under bridges, exceeding 100-meter horizontal uncertainty. Cross-
referencing with Figure 4.5, it is clear that these peaks in uncertainty are due to no
line-of-sight to GNSS satellites, as the satellite count dips below the critical threshold of
four visible satellites. After line-of-sight is re-established, the position estimate still takes
minutes to stabilise. Contrarily, in more open waters (bottom left corner of Figure 4.4),
the expected uncertainty of ∼3 meters, and roughly captures the actual path of the USV.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 4.4: Estimated path by the GNSS, color-coded with the log10 estimated error by
the GNSS module.
11:55:00
12:00:00
12:05:00
12:10:00
UTC Timestamp (HH:MM:SS)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
GPS Localization Error [m]
Latitude Error (1 σ)
Longitude Error (1 σ)
Satellite Count < 4
Figure 4.5: Latitude and Longitude error reported by the GNSS module.
56
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:65==
4.1.3
Discussion
This section evaluates the USV data acquisition campaign as a whole and the data obtained
from it.
Contemplating the campaign itself, the overall verdict is that the minimum viable data
was acquired, even though only one of two goals were met. The primary issue with this
campaign is the malfunctioning thruster, causing the other planned sonar imaging orienta-
tions to be missed. While this malfunction was severe, it was not caused by the fieldwork
team, and there were no preventive actions that could have been taken to avoid the mal-
function aside from having spare parts available. A contingency plan was attempted using
an indoor pool and an OptiTrack pose estimation for ground truth to obtain sonar orien-
tation data for odometry. Regrettably, this plan had to be abandoned due to numerous
errors in the ground-truth data. As a last resort, the existing data set from the previous
work could have been used [19].
There is room for improvement regarding the campaign’s planning. Not considering the
unpredictability of the spring weather in Denmark, the deadline for having fully-capable
hands available to aid in the fieldwork was missed. Consequently, the risk of something
going wrong was tremendously increased. Discarding some quality-of-life features imple-
mented in the USV would increase the likelihood of finishing with a suﬀicient buffer to
account for unpredictable weather. Secondly, it was evident that using RF for remote
controlling the USV has up to ten seconds of latency. Therefore, the USV would often
spin and collide with the canal walls, which could cause problems with the 3D reconstruc-
tion and localisation. While the range of RF is beneficial in more open environments, it
has less benefit in an environment such as the Belvedere Canal, where the USV can be
followed on foot. Using the onboard Wi-Fi could introduce a lower control input latency
for future reference.
The quality of the obtained data is without gaps and defects, with only the auxiliary data
from the RTSP camera stream missing. This data is not intended for direct use in 3D
reconstruction, so it is an acceptable loss. Still, the issues relating to the lost camera data
could likely be caught with a more extended test of the entire system instead of a shorter
load test.
There are also noticeable artefacts in the sonar images due to noise. These artefacts, in
particular, could be mitigated using other orientations but cannot be entirely eliminated.
The bottom of the canals is also filled with aquatic vegetation and algae, containing air
bubbles, which can also lead to noise in the extracted points from the sonar images.
Considering the GNSS measurements, the motion of this work is evident. Relying solely
on these measurements for localisation, reconstruction through movement, or any system
autonomy will be impractical. Most autonomous systems would likely incorporate GNSS
as part of a filter- or particle-based state estimation incorporating sensor modalities such
as IMU regardless. Nevertheless, the GNSS measurements should be heavily marginalised
in GNSS-denied environments, as their reliability is erratic. This is illustrated in Figure
4.4, where the estimated error is around ten meters in a narrow canal stretch. Despite this
error, the USV is incorrectly positioned in the backyard of a building complex, further
than ten meters from any water. Thus, even the GNSS uncertainty estimates in such
scenarios are not dependable.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
57
==PAGE:66==
4.2
RTK Positioning Data Acquisition
With a data set to perform 3D reconstruction, this section describes the process of acquir-
ing reference data to evaluate the accuracy of the mapping from this work.
The goal is to obtain the position features in the environment that can be used to compare
the acquired 3D map globally by identifying the same features in the 3D map. Acquiring
reference data can be done with Google Maps[74], which is available and accessible but
poses a few disadvantages:
1. Selecting points manually in Google Maps introduces human error.
2. The uncertainty of the Google Maps is unknown.
3. Obtaining altitude via Google Maps in the required resolution, as available altitude
maps are provided for terrain only, not including man-made constructions. There-
fore, using Google Maps, the reference data will be in 2D.
Using RTK, the disadvantages mentioned above are mitigated, as it can obtain the hor-
izontal and vertical position with centimetre accuracy[77]. RTK is based on GNSS but
leverages a fixed, accurately located base station network (see Figure 4.6). The base sta-
tions analyse the carrier wave[78] conveying the GNSS information to correct for errors
from atmospheric interference, satellite clock and orbit inaccuracies, and more[79]. This
correctional data is continuously transmitted to the RTK rover for a centimetre-accurate
estimate. RTK can also be used to get dynamic positioning of vehicles[80], but rovers can
be expensive.
The RTK rover used in this work is the Septentrio Altus NR3 [81]. Each measurement is
the calculated mean and standard deviation of 10 independent measurements.
Figure 4.6: Model overview of the RTK positioning system, where GNSS is used for
positioning and the correction data is transmitted by a nearby base station.
58
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:67==
Table 4.8: Overview of relevant features and advertised performances for the Septentrio
Altus NR3[81]. *This property is configurable, with the selected value chosen for this
survey. **Uncertainty is for best performance with fixed RTK.
Property
Antenna Height*
2 m
Horizontal Uncertainty**
0.6 cm
Vertical Uncertainty**
1 cm
4.2.1
Preparation
A set of points is identified for measurement to acquire reference data points for the
Belvedere Canal. To ensure the RTK fix is not faulty, each point is measured by manually
holding the RTK device, with at least 2 hours of time intervals, which ensures that different
satellite constellations are used to ensure the validity of the measured points.
The requirements for the point measurements are:
1. The point location should be easily identifiable in the environment, such that the
two measurements are performed for the same spot.
2. The point location should be visible on the 3D map of the environment.
3. The points should be distributed across the environment to compare the entire 3D
map accurately.
The selected locations are corners distributed along the Belvedere canals, as shown in
Figure 4.7c. Corners are easily identifiable features, not only in reality but also in the
point cloud. As a contingency, edges are identified to be measured with a tape measure
in case the Altus NR3 malfunctions.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
59
==PAGE:68==
(a) Example of measure-
ment of reference points
with RTK positioning.
(b) Spirit-level used to
keep the Septentrio or-
thogonal to the ground.
(c) Points and edges measures during the
RTK campaign.
Satellite image adapted
from Google Maps.
Figure 4.7: Figures illustrating the practicalities of measuring the ground-truth RTK
positioning data in Sydhavn.
4.2.2
Results
Having collected two sets of points from Belvedere Canals, their validity can be analysed
by computing the pairwise component residual (Easting, Northing, and altitude) and
the Euclidian distance between the point pairs (see Figure 4.8). This way, a set of 36
distances spanning lengths ranging 18 and 260 metes all across the environment can be
used to identify global map errors down to centimetre accuracy.
To compare RTK measurements and publicly available maps, a set of corresponding points
to the RTK measurements are manually extracted from Google Maps—the residuals be-
tween the sets are calculated and presented in Figures 4.9. As reliable altitude cannot be
extracted from Google Maps, this dimension is omitted for this comparison.
The aggregated statistics of each comparison are provided in Table 4.9.
60
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:69==
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Measurement Point ID
−0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Residual [m]
RTK Easting Abs. Residual
RTK Northing Abs. Residual
(a) The pairwise component residual between
the RTK measurement sets Northing and East-
ing components.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Measurement Point ID
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
Euclidian Distance [m]
RTK Point Residuals
(b) The pairwise Euclidian distance (Northing
and Easting) between RTK measurement sets.
Figure 4.8: Pairwise comparison of each point in the RTK measurement data sets, prop-
agating the measured standard deviations.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Measurement Point ID
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Residual [m]
Easting RTK/GMaps Residual
Northing RTK/GMaps Residual
(a) The pairwise component residual between
the RTK measurements and corresponding
points in Google Maps.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Measurement Point ID
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Euclidian Distance [m]
RTK vs Google Maps
(b) The pairwise Euclidian distance (Northing
and Easting) between RTK measurements and
Google Maps.
Figure 4.9: A pairwise comparison of each point in the RTK measurements compared to
manually selected corresponding points in Google Maps. Standard deviation is propagated,
but the error associated with manually selecting points in Google Maps is not included
here.
To aggregate the residuals from the RTK and Google Maps data, the weighted average
and RMSE is used:
¯x =
Pn
i=1 wixi
Pn
i=1 wi
,
wi = 1
σ2 ,
xi = yi −˜yi
(4.6)
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −˜yi)2
(4.7)
where ˜yi and yi are the residuals and wi are the weights corresponding to the inverse of
the measurement variance.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
61
==PAGE:70==
Table 4.9: Aggregates of the residuals of between the two RTK measurement sets and
the RTK vs. the Google Maps sample. Residuals are calculated by finding the Euclidian
distances using Northing and Easting coordinates only. Average residual is weighted by
the standard deviation. Standard deviation is not included from Google Maps, as this
value is not known.
Residual Aggregate
RTK/RTK
RTK/Google Maps
[m]
[m]
Maximum
0.046
0.964
Minimum
0.008
0.733
Weighted Avg.
0.026
0.835
Std. dev.
0.011
–
RMSE
0.029
0.838
RMSE (Altitude)
0.036
–
The raw measurements are included in the Appendix A.5.
4.3
Discussion
With the RTK measurement comparisons, Figures 4.8 and Table 4.9 showcase centimetre
accuracy of the obtained points, with an average standard deviation of 0.011 meters.
The residual and average standard deviation are more significant than expected, compared
to the advertised performance in Table 4.8. The standard deviation is also significant
compared to the calculated RMSE and weighted average of the Euclidian distances between
RTK sets. This is likely due to human error, given the Septentrio Altus NR3 being held by
hand. A worst-case analysis can be performed to reason about this proposition, assuming
the RTK is held at the same point for each pair of measurements. Assuming the error
is only introduced as a function of the tilt angle of the Septentrio, introduced by human
errors. To quantify the magnitude of this tilt angle, the maximum horizontal error with
one standard deviation is introduced from a tilt angle on the two-meter-long antenna pole:
α = sin−1
0.046 + 0.011
2

= 1.48◦
(4.8)
Holding Septentrio vertical within an tilt angle of 1.48◦tilt angle is likely within what can
be expected for the accuracy a human can retain, only using a spirit level for reference.
Therefore, it can be safely assumed that most of the introduced errors are caused by
human error, which could be mitigated by mounting the Septentrio on a rigid structure.
Regardless, the accuracy of the RTK data should be suﬀicient to be used as a reference
to the 3D map from the SLAM algorithm, as the RTK mean error is roughly the same as
the LiDAR range accuracy.
Conversely, the error comparing RTK and Google Maps is more than an order of magnitude
larger than RTK/RTK. Investigating Figures 4.9, there is a noticeable bias in the Easting
component of the residuals. Nevertheless, these figures indicate the potential uncertainty
introduced using manually selected Google Maps points as ground-truth data.
To sum up, these results reaﬀirm the potential of RTK data as ground truth. Its significant
accuracy and reliable provision of altitude and 3D ground truth data make it a robust
reference point in geospatial data collection and analysis.
62
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:71==
4.4
Chapter Summary
Below are the major take-away’s of this chapter:
• All critical data from the USV data platform is available at the expected data rates,
and there are no outages when the platform is running.
• Multiple imaging sonar orientations were planned, but only configuration 1 (pitch =
30 degrees) was fully completed, due to a thruster malfunction. This orientation can
have implications regarding increased error for the sonar points due to convolution.
• Using orientation 1 for the sonar, up to 22% range bias can be expected for a flat
surface, which will result in an under-estimation of the canal bottom depth.
• Nine points are collected with RTK positioning to assess the accuracy of the obtained
3D reconstruction, with as little uncertainty as 1 centimetre.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
63
==PAGE:72==
5
3D Mapping & Localisation Results
In this chapter, the implementations and methods outlined in the previous chapters are
leveraged to perform simultaneous mapping and localisation for the Belvedere Canal us-
ing LiDAR and sonar data. The product of this work is presented and analysed using
statistical and distance metrics to evaluate the performance of the proposed method. The
achieved performance is discussed, and initiatives for improvement are suggested, high-
lighting the potential for further advancements in this area.
The results of this work are split into two sections, discussing the mapping- and localisation
aspects separately.
5.1
Localisation Performance
In this section, the LIO-SAM algorithm’s localisation performance is evaluated and com-
pared to that of raw GNSS to highlight the significance of using this method in a GNSS-
denied environment. LIO-SAM publishes the path and current odometry measurements
at 10 and 4 Hz, respectively. These localisation streams provide an overview of where
the algorithm believes the USV is in a live context and where it is believed to have been
throughout its journey.
The unreliability of the raw GNSS measurements was evident in the data acquisition (see
section 4.1.2). Figure 5.3a shows the GNSS localisation with the obtained path from LIO-
SAM (using LiDAR and sonar), showcasing significant pose estimation improvements.
Notably, the pose estimate from LIO-SAM is always in a valid area, i.e.
on a water
segment, demonstrating the algorithm’s precision compared to GPS. As expected, the
LIO-SAM localisation is not vulnerable to the same issues as GNSS, having a smooth and
accurate path along the entire loop. Considering Frederiksholmsløbet in the south, GNSS
and LIO-SAM roughly correspond, albeit with some temporal displacement between the
two.
Looking at Figures 5.1 and 5.2, the localisation error between GNSS and LIO-SAM in
the time domain is substantial and heavily increasing during more extended periods spent
under bridges, with a mean Euclidian distance displacement of about 15 meters, roughly
corresponding the width of the Belvedere Canal.
11:55:00
12:00:00
12:05:00
12:10:00
UTC Timestamp [HH:MM:SS]
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
GNSS vs LIO-SAM Error [m]
Easting
Northing
Euclidian Dist.
Figure 5.1: Time-series error between LIO-SAM and raw GNSS localisation, presented in
Figure 5.3a. Gray background indicates the USV being underneath a bridge.
64
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:73==
Easting
Northing
Euclidian Dist.
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
GNSS vs LIO-SAM Error [m]
Figure 5.2: Comparison of localisation performance of raw GNSS and LIO-SAM using
LiDAR, sonar and GNSS, with a maximum temporal deviation of 100 ms.
(a) Comparing the path resulting from the lo-
calisation estimates of the GNSS (blue) and
LIO-SAM (red) using LiDAR, sonar and GNSS,
starting at the triangle and ending at the flag.
(b) Euclidian distance between raw GNSS and
LIO-SAM path, where color encoding is given
as log10 distance.
The distance is calculated
assuming the GNSS and LIO-SAM is initialised
in the same point.
Figure 5.3: Overview of the path difference in performance between raw GNSS and LIO-
SAM.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
65
==PAGE:74==
(a) The open canal.
(b) Belvedere Canal north.
Figure 5.4: Loop closures (yellow) during simultaneous localisation and mapping in the
Belvedere Canals.
With the ability to obtain the localisation estimate from LIO-SAM mapping odometry, the
algorithm can be run with different sets of sensor modalities, namely LiDAR (1), LiDAR &
sonar (2), LiDAR & sonar & GNSS (3), to see the effects on its current position estimate.
This way, the localisation contribution of each sensor modality is shown more purely,
without obscuring the image with loop closure optimisations. Aggregating the localisation
estimates for one whole journey in Figure 5.5, the verdict is that the difference concerning
North and East between any of the sensor configurations is insignificant. With the boxes’
overlap and errors ranging to no more than 20 centimetres in the 75th percentile, this
deviation is likely due to various noises in the system. This would indicate that neither
GNSS nor sonar points contribute significantly to the position estimate using LIO-SAM.
Running LIO-SAM using the sonar point cloud data only reveals that LIO-SAM does not
find any features using the leading edge, the falling edge or both, even for sections with the
most defined features, such as the side canal. With no extracted features, no localisation
factors are added to the factor graph from the sonar points, thereby not contributing to
the state estimations. Considering the GNSS, it is likely that the reported variances from
the GNSS module are always too high or the pose covariance is generally very low. Even
adjusting the GPS factor thresholds TΣ,G and TΣ,G to highly favour the addition of GPS
factors, there is still no noticeable difference.
However, Figure 5.5 reveals noticeable altitude outliers that warrant further exploration.
Upon inspecting the time-series data in Figure 5.6a, a spike of a few meters in altitude
estimate is observed when the USV loops the open canals at the end of the journey, after
normalising again reaching back to the Belvedere Canals. The spike is prevalent for all
sensor combinations, with a slight reduction in the magnitude for combinations 2 and
3, albeit stabilising about half a minute later than combination 1.
Investigating their
discrepancies, we find that 2 has the lowest peak. As it is certain that the sonar points
do not contribute to the odometry estimate, the disparity between 1 and 2 must be due
to noise and stochastic effects. As the peak of combination 3 falls between 1 and 2, there
is no evidence of the GPS factors having any effect. These findings provide insights into
the limitations of the proposed method, enhancing the understanding of its localisation
estimate.
66
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:75==
Easting
Northing
Altitude
Euclidian
Coordinate Components
−0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Euclidian Distance Error [m]
Comparison
LiDAR vs. Sonar-LiDAR
LiDAR vs. Sonar-LiDAR-GPS
Figure 5.5: Comparison of the localisation obtained using different sets of sensor modalities
when performing simultaneous localisation and mapping, with just LiDAR and IMU data
as a baseline. The error is calculated by interpolating the position estimates using the
associated timestamp, with a maximum threshold of 50 ms.
12:08:00
12:08:15
12:08:30
12:08:45
12:09:00
12:09:15
12:09:30
12:09:45
12:10:00
12:10:15
UTC Timestamp [HH:MM:SS]
−0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Altitude [m]
LiDAR
Sonar-LiDAR
Sonar-LiDAR-GPS
(a) Time-series altitude estimate of all the sensor configurations during
the open canal loop.
(b) The open canal
Frederiksholmslø-
bet.
Figure 5.6: The open canal Frederiksholmsløbet connecting to the Belvedere Canal.
Concerning a velocity estimate, LIO-SAM does have a velocity estimate included in its
state vector.
However, LIO-SAM does not expose this velocity in its odometry ROS
topics. Obtaining the velocity vector by differentiating the position estimate yields an
average vessel speed of 1.92±0.98 kts, with a cruising surge speed of 3.21 kts. From these
values, it is clear that the thruster power threshold is set too high to obtain the desired 2
kts cruise speed, and most of the time, the USV is not spent at cruise speed. This impacts
underwater mapping, with more dense mapping in areas where the USV speed through
the water is near 0.
5.2
3D Reconstruction Through Movement
Running the ROS SLAM stack with the processed rosbag results in a pseudo-online con-
text, and the 3D reconstruction is subsequently extracted. This section considers a recon-
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
67
==PAGE:76==
struction using all sensor modalities (IMU, LiDAR, sonar and GNSS) for analysis.
Inspecting the 3D reconstruction (3D map) qualitatively, the LIO-SAM algorithm pro-
duces a feature-rich map above the water. The underwater map is relatively sparse, which
is expected as the sonar comparatively provides a sparser input point cloud than the Li-
DAR. Overlaying the map onto a satellite image, as shown in Figure 5.7c, there is a good
fit, with only a few wall features with noticeable displacement. The sonar points in the
water have excellent coverage in the eastern side canal but with some missing points in the
middle of the main channel and a low density of points in the open Frederiksholmsløbet
to the south.
(a) 3D map of the Belvedere Canal viewed from
the south. Color gradient set along the North
axis.
(b) 3D map of the Belvedere Canals viewed
from north-east. Color gradient set along the
North axis.
(c) Top view of the 3D map (green) as
an overlay on OpenStreetMap, aligned with
true north.
Figure 5.7: Collection of visualisations of the generated 3D map.
To quantify the properties and accuracy of the above- and underwater properties, the
three following points of interest are considered:
1. The global map accuracy (in subsection 5.2.1)
68
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:77==
2. The transition between domains (in subsection 5.2.2).
3. Depth map abilities (in subsection 5.2.3).
To quantify (1), the centimetre-accurate RTK reference points are compared. For (2) and
(3), there is a need to classify the points in the 3D map such that there is a notion of
whether the point is above- or underwater. This classification is performed using altitude
threshold segmentation, where a threshold is selected by obtaining the minimum altitude
of a selected set of points belonging to the dense LiDAR features that are visible at the
water level. With this classification, the distribution of points belonging to each map is
3627603 and 88245 for LiDAR and sonar, respectively, which roughly corresponds to a
40:1 point ratio.
5.2.1
Global Map Accuracy
To get a metric for the global accuracy of the 3D map, the RTK reference points are
leveraged, providing a centimetre-accurate reference to the map. Each point in the RTK
set DRTK is matched to the corresponding point in the 3D map Dm by way of manual
selection. For each set of points, the Euclidean distance is calculated between each set of
points:
D =

dij | dij =
q
(xi −xj)2 + (yi −yj)2 + (zi −zj)2, 1 ≤i < j ≤N

(5.1)
where D is the set of distances between each point pair in a set and N is the number of
points in the set of points in DRTK and Dm.
With these distances, the pairwise residuals E are calculated:
E = {ϵi | ϵi = DRTK,i −Dm,i}
(5.2)
These residuals represent the deviation of the 3D map of stretches across all sections.
Aggregating these residuals provides a distance metric indicating the global accuracy of
the 3D map.
Calculating the distances (see Appendix A.5.1), the distances can be used to provide in-
sights about the 3D map. Generally, the residuals are summarised in Table 5.1, indicating
an average error of 1% when comparing the 3D map to both RTK data and Google Maps.
Along with a significant standard deviation relative to the mean and the minimum and
maximum, it is clear that there are some statistical outliers. Using Figure 5.8 to provide
further insights, it is evident that distances involving point 9 at the end of the small
sub-canal are responsible for the most significant residuals, almost always resulting in a
1.5-2.5 % error. As no other points are nearby, it is unclear whether this error is due to
general skewness of the 3D map or errors in selecting that particular point. Aside from
this outlier, the average percentage error is below 1%.
To check how the reference points from the 3D map are in a publicly available map in
Figure 5.9. There is a discrepancy between points 3 and 9 compared to where they should
be located, likely as a result of disparities in the 3D map and human errors.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
69
==PAGE:78==
Table 5.1: Aggregation of the distance residuals, using RTK points, points from Google
Maps and corresponding points in the 3D map. *2D Euclidean distance is used, as suﬀi-
cient altitude data is not available in Google Maps.
Residual Metric
RTK / 3D Map
Google Maps / 3D Map*
[meter]
[meter]
Mean
1.257 ± 0.927
1.344 ± 0.962
Median
1.283
1.411
Min/Max
0.020 / 3.662
0.012 / 3.966
Mean (%)
1.035 ± 0.757
1.103 ± 0.800
Min/Max (%)
0.015 / 2.993
0.008 / 3.970
50
100
150
200
250
RTK Length [m]
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
RTK/PCL Residual (%)
1-6
2-6
4-6
2-4
1-2
3-6
1-5
3-8
2-5
4-5
3-5
7-94-81-7
2-7
1-8 4-7
3-4
3-7
2-8
1-4
5-76-7
6-8
2-3
4-9
1-9
3-9
8-9
5-8
2-9
1-3
5-6
5-9
6-9
7-8
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
PCL Residual [m]
Figure 5.8: Scatter plot of the percentage residual between RTK reference points and the
3D map as a function of the ground truth length, provided by the RTK measurements.
70
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:79==
(a) Southern reference points (1, 2, 3, 4 and 9).
(b) Northern reference points (5, 6, 7
and 8).
Figure 5.9: Reference points from the 3D map projected to OpenStreetMap.
5.2.2
Wall Mapping Analysis
To obtain a notion of the consistency across domains, the canal walls can be utilised, as
they are features present in both domains. As such, the points obtained on these walls
from each sensor modality can be analysed to quantify their overlap and alignment.
For this purpose, two wall stretches are selected in areas of different depths, where the
points belonging to the sonar and LiDAR are classified using the threshold value used for
the depth map. Subsequently, the points are projected onto the N/E plane to showcase the
overlaps of the classes in Figures 5.11a and 5.11b. Additionally, the Kernel Distribution
Estimation for each class, using Gaussian kernels, in the wall width (Y-direction) is used
to showcase the distribution of points of each class on the walls, shown in Figures 5.11c
and 5.11d. With these distributions, the Hellinger Distance between them is obtained to
quantify the similarity of the discrete probability distributions:
dhd =
1
√
2
v
u
u
t
k
X
i=0
(√pi −√qi)2
(5.3)
where pi and qi are the probabilities in a discrete intervals. dhd = 0 indicates identical
distributions and dhd = 1 indicates complete dissimilarity.
Additionally, the cosine similarity can be used to quantify the similarity between the two
point clouds by considering the angle between two vectors of equal length. Due to the
imbalance between the LiDAR and sonar data, a matching set of points in the LiDAR set
is used to find the nearest neighbour in the LiDAR set for each point in the sonar set.
Next, each set is flattened to a single vector, and the cosine similarity can be calculated:
cos(θ) =
A · B
||A|| ||B||
(5.4)
A cosine similarity cos(θ) = 1 indicates perfect alignment, and cos(θ) = 0 indicates that
the data sets are orthogonal. The Hellinger Distance and the cosine similarity values are
provided in Table 5.2.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
71
==PAGE:80==
Wall 1
Wall 2
Length [m]
30
79
Width (LiDAR) [m]
0.54
0.67
Width (sonar) [m]
0.71
0.79
Width Hellinger dist.
0.194
0.128
Cosine similarity
0.942
0.979
Table 5.2: Dimensions and metrics for
the selected wall sections.
Table 5.3: Reference for location of se-
lected wall segments.
Table 5.4: Wall segments selected for further analysis of the overlap between LiDAR and
sonar points in the 3D reconstruction.
Inspecting the top view of Wall 1 and 2 segments, the LiDAR and sonar points overlap
in both segments. At more considerable depths for Wall 1, the points from the sonar
point cloud are visibly sparser than at shallower waters at Wall 2, which is natural given
that point density decreases with distance, although some distance discrepancies can also
be a function of the surge velocity when passing by the wall. Looking at the probability
distributions, the Hellinger Distance shows that the distributions for both walls are roughly
similar. The prominent peaks roughly align, but the sonar has a secondary rise and the
land-side of the wall. This rise is likely due to signal multi-path noise from the sonar, as
showcased in Figure 4.3c. The slight rise in the sonar distribution on the water side of the
wall is likely due to outlier points signifying the bottom of the canal and not the wall.
The cosine similarity indicates the same, indicating a high similarity between the classes
for both walls, indicating that the points along the wall are well-aligned.
Figure 5.10: Example of top view of a wall with sonar points of the canal bed.
72
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:81==
0
1
2
3
4
5
X [m]
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Y [m]
LiDAR Points
Sonar Points
Vessel Course
(a) Top-view of a five-meter section of Wall 1.
15
16
17
18
19
20
X [m]
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Y [m]
LiDAR Points
Sonar Points
Vessel Course
(b) Top-view of a five-meter section of Wall 2.
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Y [m]
0
1
2
3
4
5
LiDAR KDE
Sonar KDE
(c) KDE for the points along the width of Wall
1.
−0.4
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
Y [m]
0
1
2
3
4
5
LiDAR KDE
Sonar KDE
(d) KDE for point along the width of Wall 2.
Figure 5.11: Overview of the overlap of the LiDAR and sonar points in the selected wall
segments. The light blue section indicates the canal side of the wall, and the white side is
land. The green arrow indicates the USV trajectory, to showcase the effect of the direction
of travel for the point cloud distributions.
5.2.3
Depth Map
A depth map can be generated by classifying points above and underwater. This map can
be used to sanity-check the underwater points in the 3D map by cross-referencing them
with the provided range of 2.5-5.5 meters, reported by By & Havn (see Table 4.1). A
grid map in the East/North plane can be established to obtain each grid cell’s mean and
standard deviation of each underwater point.
By segmenting the acquired map into 5x5 meter grids, we obtain the depth maps in Figures
5.12. These maps provide a significantly more detailed and comprehensive picture than
other publicly available data. The grid size is chosen qualitatively to balance the missing
coverage of the canal bottom while maximising the resolution of the obtained depth map.
Wider canals generally have more considerable depths, and all canals seemingly fall be-
tween the depth range reported by By & Havn. The standard deviation increases towards
the walls, primarily due to the transition between points belonging to the canal bottom
and the walls. In the side canal between 723525 and 723625 meters in East, the water
is significantly shallower, almost equalling the mounting depth of the sonar. Considering
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
73
==PAGE:82==
the main channel stretching from 350-550 meters in the North axis, the channel is most
profound in the middle. It gradually gets shallower, reaching the walls and retaining a
standard deviation below one meter.
Considering the orientation of the imaging sonar and given the canals are relatively flat,
the estimates 22% ranging error for the sonar points, resulting in an underestimation of
the actual depth by this factor as well.
723450
723475
723500
723525
723550
723575
723600
723625
723650
Easting [m]
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Northing [m]
+6.1730000000 × 106
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
Depth [m]
(a) Depth map of the Belvedere Canal, using
threshold segmentation.
723450
723475
723500
723525
723550
723575
723600
723625
723650
Easting [m]
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
Northing [m]
+6.1730000000 × 106
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Std. Uncertainty [m]
(b) Uncertainty (1σ) of the depth map.
Figure 5.12: Depth map obtained from the 3D map using threshold segmentation. Each
grid cell represents a 5x5 meter grid.
5.3
Discussion
The presented results show that the proposed method can map a GNSS-denied environ-
ment accurately, with global displacements below 2% on average, providing an excellent
transition between the above- and underwater domains. In addition, the localisation per-
formance significantly outperforms the raw GNSS measurements, allowing the USV to
navigate small, urban canals and under bridges, retaining an accurate pose estimation.
Granted, comparing with raw GNSS is unfair, as GNSS alone rarely would be used for
robot localisation alone; a more fair comparison would be to create a filter- or particle-
based state estimation, utilising the GNSS and the IMU.
Overall, this method seems particularly effective in feature-rich environments, where the
LiDAR can extract many features for visual odometry and features closer to the sonar.
Contrarily, there are indications that the method is less effective in more open areas,
indicated by the drift in the altitude estimation in Figure 5.6, and the loss of point density
from the sonar, indicated by Figures 5.12 and 5.7c.
Focusing on the localisation performance aspects, it is clear that, in this work, the LiDAR,
74
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:83==
IMU preintegration, and loop closure factors are the driving measurements for the state
estimation of the USV. GPS factors may have an impact, but they are not noticeable
from the analysis. There is no contribution from the sonar points on their own. The
sonar is expected to procure few features as the point cloud is relatively sparse, and it is
only a scanline of points, meaning no planar features will be extracted. A proposition for
why no corner features are extracted may be due to the occlusion filter discarding large
sections of points. These occluded regions in the sonar data can be partially attributed to
artefacts as a result of beam forming (see the longitudinal lines prevalent in Figure 4.3a)
and the vegetation on the canal bottom, storing high-impedance air bubbles. In addition,
usable features very close to the sonar are discarded due to the minimum range filter to
discard points on the vessel itself, such as when the USV follows a wall. Unfortunately,
the minimum range cannot be increased as LiDAR points hit an antenna located on the
USV bow, and the occlusion-like points are a product of the sonar orientation combined
with the point cloud extraction method. This issue can be tackled by moving the LiDAR
high enough, such that the vertical FoV does not coincide with the bow of the USV, or
adjusting the feature extraction to accommodate the sonar points better, assuming there
are gains to be had in terms of localisation estimation from these. Another alternative
may also be to look into deep learning approaches for extracting point clouds from sonar
imagery, such as the work of [82], [83] or [84].
Addressing the altitude displacement in the open canal, it is evident that the LIO-SAM
algorithm may need some additional tuning, such as adjusting the provided gravity vector
and the LiDAR keyframe search parameters. If the USV was ever to operate in an environ-
ment with very sparse features, the GPS factors should be accurate enough to counteract
drift in altitude.
Considering the mapping aspects of this method, there are generally accurate maps with a
few outliers that can introduce a few meters of error. The acquired depth map also reports
water levels within the expected interval, and the transition between domains aligns and
overlaps decently. Yet, points are being lost when the water depth becomes too large.
While the source of these issues is not entirely quantified, the uncertainty of the overall
mapping performance can be attributed to the following:
1. Instrument uncertainties from the sensor modalities.
2. IMU frequency below the recommended 200 Hz.
3. Inaccurate range measurements resulting from the orientation of the imaging sonar.
4. Human errors from manual reference point selection and measurements.
While more accurate instruments can be procured, this is not the most eﬀicient and
prevalent source of error. Instead, the 2-4 should be addressed first. The solution for (2)
is to develop or acquire a more eﬀicient ROS2 Humble driver for the 9-axis IMU or buy a
suiting 9-axis IMU with off-the-shelf ROS2 Humble compatibility.
To address (3), the most straightforward solution is to use the sonar strictly for bathymetry
scanning (like the proposed orientation 2 in Chapter 4) or wall scanning, ensuring that
the imaging sonar xy-plane is orthogonal to the target surface to eliminate the bias error
introduced by convolutions. This solution would also extend the range for depth measure-
ments, possibly allowing the USV to map the open canal and the Belvedere Canals more
accurately.
With (4), a few human elements cause errors.
Most notably, manually selecting the
reference points to pair with the obtained RTK measurements can introduce significant
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
75
==PAGE:84==
uncertainty. To roughly quantify the uncertainty introduced from human error, assuming
a Gaussian distribution, the following error propagation for the Euclidian distance:
σf(x) =
s ∂f
∂x1
2
σ2x1 +
 ∂f
∂x2
2
σ2x2 +
 ∂f
∂x3
2
σ2x3 + · · ·,
x = [x1, x2, x3, ...]
(5.5)
f(p1, p2) =
p
(x2 −x1)2 + (y2 −y1)2 + (z2 −z1)2,
pi = [xi, yi, zi]⊤
(5.6)
Guesstimating a set of standard deviations from human point selection [σx, σy, σz]⊤=
[0.2, 0.2, 0.1]⊤, the mean propagated uncertainty is σD = 0.281±0.000[m]. Indeed, guessing
the standard deviation directly is not a good practice to get any meaningful results, but
for the scope of getting an idea, it is suﬀicient to see how the error propagates. Regardless,
the uncertainty when manually selecting the reference points in the 3D map cannot be
described by a Gaussian distribution, as most features are corners.
A more suitable
solution for aligning the RTK reference points with the map, could be using RANSAC and
ICP to and then select the nearest neighbour point to create the pairing algorithmically.
RANSAC and ICP will not converge from experimentation in this work using just the
RTK points. Therefore, a method could be to interpolate some features from the RTK
measurements, like a line segment for points on the same wall stretch or taking multiple
RTK measurements in a corner, using these to construct an interpolated corner feature
that is easier to fit with scan matching.
Finally, it is also clear that there are several drawbacks to using orientation 1 for mapping
purposes, with no localisation gains. As demonstrated in the results, orientation 1 leads
to underestimation of the depth due to the shorter travel time for signals with a vertical
angle offset to the projection plane. Additionally, the orientation of the sonar induces noise
on the walls for specific angles of attack. While this kind of noise cannot be eliminated
entirely, a good rule of thumb is keeping the projection plane orthogonal to a given target,
as shown in Figure 2.4. Adjusting the orientation for this method, using a bathymetry
scanning orientation (such as the proposed orientation 2), is more suiting, as this maximises
the mapping accuracy while sacrificing odometry that cannot be extracted regardless.
76
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:85==
6
Future Work
This section outlines potential technological advancements and their expected impact on
future developments. Based on the results from the presented method, there are a few
avenues to explore.
One intriguing possibility is to test this method further in a feature-sparse environment,
where the visual odometry through the LiDAR will be less effective, and the system
must rely more heavily on the GNSS for localisation. As such, testing this method where
different sensor modalities are reliable could be an excellent way to indicate the robustness
of the proposed method.
Another prospect is to enable real-time autonomous localisation for the USV data plat-
form by implementing re-localisation techniques using the maps generated through this
method. Another option is to use online simultaneous localisation and mapping in an
unknown GNSS-denied environment, allowing immediate decision-making. With this, a
path planning logic and control loop would yield an ASV capable of survey tasks in urban
canals or unexplored terrain. To test the USV’s real-time self-localisation capabilities, the
next step could involve revisiting the Belvedere Canals and using ICP scan matching of
the 3D map presented in the results.
Finally, an area of research could explore alternative methods for extracting points from
the underwater domain. A more dense underwater point cloud with additional features
could be obtained by investigating more advanced ways of extracting point cloud features
from sonar images, such as using 3D multi-beam sonars or multiple imaging sonars. This
could significantly enhance the resulting map and localisation estimate, opening up new
possibilities for underwater exploration.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
77
==PAGE:86==
7
Conclusion
The main objective of this thesis was to create a 3D map of a man-made environment using
sonar and LiDAR technology while also determining an accurate position and velocity
with and without GNSS. The goal was to apply this solution to a USV sensor platform
for real-time use while ensuring high modularity and ease of use in its development and
deployment.
This thesis has demonstrated a method of obtaining a 3D map using the advanced LIO-
SAM SLAM algorithm with LiDAR, sonar, IMU and GNSS sensor modalities and live
playback of the self-acquired data from the Belvedere Canals. The proposed method is
implemented on a modular USV sensor platform based on ROS, providing a design that is
not only modular and scalable but also adaptable. This adaptability allows the addition of
sensor modalities and the deployment of real-time SLAM implementation, ensuring that
the method can evolve with DTU’s evolving needs for the USV sensor platform.
Compared to Google Maps and obtained RTK points, the generated 3D map achieves
a global uncertainty of about 1%, with good alignment of the above- and underwater
domains. It also shows a high similarity for both study cases and a small Helligner Distance
for the point distribution along the width of the canal walls. This 3D map allows for
generating a depth map with much higher resolution than publicly available data. The
method achieves suﬀicient positioning within the canal without exceeding the operating
domain and a reasonable velocity estimate inferred from the position. The estimate is
compared to the GNSS location, demonstrating the viability of using this method for
localisation in a GNSS-denied environment.
These obtained results can, however, be
further improved by adjusting the orientation to be orthogonal to the water surface to
minimise biases in the sonar image and upgrading the IMU driver to reach a higher
measurement frequency.
78
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
B. Padmaja et al. “Exploration of issues, challenges and latest developments in
autonomous cars”. In: Journal of Big Data 10.1 (2023), p. 61. issn: 2196-1115. doi:
10.1186/s40537-023-00701-y. url: https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-023-00701-y.
[2]
Margarita Martínez-Díaz and Francesc Soriguera. “Autonomous vehicles: theoreti-
cal and practical challenges”. In: Transportation Research Procedia 33 (2018). XIII
Conference on Transport Engineering, CIT2018, pp. 275–282. issn: 2352-1465. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2018.10.103. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2352146518302606.
[3]
Arif Wibisono et al. “A Survey on Unmanned Underwater Vehicles: Challenges,
Enabling Technologies, and Future Research Directions”. In: Sensors 23.17 (2023).
issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10 . 3390 / s23177321. url: https : / / www . mdpi . com / 1424 -
8220/23/17/7321.
[4]
Daniel Filipe Campos, Aníbal Matos, and Andry Maykol Pinto. “Multi-domain Map-
ping for Offshore Asset Inspection using an Autonomous Surface Vehicle”. In: 2020
IEEE International Conference on Autonomous Robot Systems and Competitions
(ICARSC). 2020, pp. 221–226. doi: 10.1109/ICARSC49921.2020.9096097.
[5]
Jacques C. Leedekerken, Maurice F. Fallon, and John J. Leonard. “Mapping Com-
plex Marine Environments with Autonomous Surface Craft”. In: Experimental Robotics:
The 12th International Symposium on Experimental Robotics. Ed. by Oussama
Khatib, Vijay Kumar, and Gaurav Sukhatme. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2014, pp. 525–539. isbn: 978-3-642-28572-1. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-
28572-1_36. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-28572-1_36.
[6]
The Dangerous Rise of GPS Attacks. 2024. url: https://www.wired.com/story/the-
dangerous-rise-of-gps-attacks/.
[7]
Jungwook Han and Jinwhan Kim. “Three-Dimensional Reconstruction of a Marine
Floating Structure With an Unmanned Surface Vessel”. In: IEEE Journal of Oceanic
Engineering 44.4 (2019), pp. 984–996. doi: 10.1109/JOE.2018.2862618.
[8]
Gazebo Simulator. 2024. url: https://gazebosim.org/home.
[9]
Daniel Filipe Campos, Aníbal Matos, and Andry Maykol Pinto. “Modular Multi-
Domain Aware Autonomous Surface Vehicle for Inspection”. In: IEEE Access 10
(2022), pp. 113355–113375. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3217504.
[10]
Jongdae Jung et al. “Consistent mapping of marine structures with an autonomous
surface vehicle using motion compensation and submap-based filtering”. In: Ocean
Engineering 290 (2023), p. 116418. issn: 0029-8018. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.oceaneng.2023.116418. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0029801823028020.
[11]
Jongdae Jung et al. “Multi-Modal Sonar Mapping of Offshore Cable Lines with an
Autonomous Surface Vehicle”. In: Journal of Marine Science and Engineering 10.3
(2022). issn: 2077-1312. doi: 10.3390/jmse10030361. url: https://www.mdpi.com/
2077-1312/10/3/361.
[12]
Chensheng Cheng et al. “Underwater Localization and Mapping Based on Multi-
Beam Forward Looking Sonar”. In: Frontiers in Neurorobotics 15 (2022). issn: 1662-
5218. doi: 10.3389/fnbot.2021.801956. url: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.
3389/fnbot.2021.801956.
[13]
Ouster. Ouster OS1 LiDAR datasheet. 2023. url: https://data.ouster.io/downloads/
datasheets/datasheet-rev7-v3p0-os1.pdf.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
79
==PAGE:88==
[14]
Teledyne. BlueView M900-2250-130-Mk2 Product Page. 2024. url: https://www.
teledynemarine.com/brands/blueview/m900-2250-130-mk2.
[15]
Xsens. Xsens IMU MTi User Manual. 2020. url: https://eu.mouser.com/datasheet/
2/1484/MTi_usermanual-3241593.pdf.
[16]
UBlox. UBlox NEO-M8 GNSS datasheet. 2022. url: https://content.u-blox.com/
sites/default/files/NEO-M8-FW3_DataSheet_UBX-15031086.pdf.
[17]
Maritime Robotics. The Otter - Uncrewed Surface Vessel (USV). 2024. url: https:
//maritimerobotics.ams3.digitaloceanspaces.com/statamic/files/otter-brochure-2023-
digital-1703072383.pdf.
[18]
ROS2 Humble. 2024. url: https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/index.html.
[19]
F. Thompson et al. “Autonomous inspection and data fusion for maritime critical
infrastructures”. In: Accepted in FUSION 2024, 27th International Conference on
Information Fusion. IEEE, 2024.
[20]
Jay Farrell. Aided Navigation: GPS with High Rate Sensors. 1st ed. USA: McGraw-
Hill, Inc., 2008. isbn: 0071493298.
[21]
IMU Sensor. 2024. url: https://assistiverobotcenter.github.io/projects/2019/06/19/
sensors-paper1.
[22]
Tixiao Shan et al. “LIO-SAM: Tightly-coupled Lidar Inertial Odometry via Smooth-
ing and Mapping”. In: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). IEEE. 2020, pp. 5135–5142.
[23]
hdl slam git repository. 2024. url: https://github.com/koide3/hdl_graph_slam?tab=
readme-ov-file.
[24]
MathWorks. MatLab - Sensor Array Analyzer App. 2024. url: https://se.mathworks.
com/help/phased/ref/sensorarrayanalyzer-app.html.
[25]
ndtatbristol. Classical Array Beamforming. 2012. url: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=NV5CEdE7MCo.
[26]
Discovery of Sound in the Sea - Sonar Equation. 2024. url: https://dosits.org/
science/advanced-topics/sonar-equation/.
[27]
Discovery of Sound in the Sea - Active SONAR. 2024. url: https://dosits.org/
science/advanced-topics/sonar-equation/sonar-equation-example-active-sonar/.
[28]
Teledyne. Blueview M900-2250-S 130-45-Mk2 product page. 2024. url: https://www.
teledynemarine.com/en-us/products/Pages/M900-2250-S_130-45-Mk2.aspx.
[29]
Teledyne Marine. Blueview Software Development Kit. 2024. url: https://www.
teledynemarine.com/brands/blueview/sonar-software-development-kit-sdk.
[30]
Teledyne Marine. ProViewer 4. 2024. url: https://www.teledynemarine.com/brands/
blueview/proviewer.
[31]
You Li and Javier Ibanez-Guzman. “Lidar for Autonomous Driving: The Principles,
Challenges, and Trends for Automotive Lidar and Perception Systems”. In: IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine 37.4 (2020), pp. 50–61. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2020.2973615.
[32]
Patrizio Mariani et al. “Range-Gated Imaging System for Underwater Monitoring in
Ocean Environment”. In: Sustainability 11.1 (2019). issn: 2071-1050. doi: 10.3390/
su11010162. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/11/1/162.
[33]
Andrzej Szafarczyk and Cezary Toś. “The Use of Green Laser in LiDAR Bathymetry:
State of the Art and Recent Advancements”. In: Sensors (Basel) 23.1 (Dec. 2022),
p. 292. doi: 10.3390/s23010292.
[34]
ROS2 PointCloud2 Message Documentation. 2024. url: https://docs.ros.org/en/
ros2_packages/rolling/api/sensor_msgs/interfaces/msg/PointCloud2.html.
[35]
S. Koteswara Rao R. Revathi K. S. Ramesh and K. Uday Kiran. “Application of
Least Squares Algorithm for Precise GPS Receiver Positioning”. In: 2018, pp. 297–
80
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:89==
299. doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-7563-6_3. url: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-
7563-6_3.
[36]
GPS Accuracy: HDOP, PDOP, GDOP and Multipath. 2024. url: https://gisgeography.
com/gps-accuracy-hdop-pdop-gdop-multipath/.
[37]
User Mike1024. Local tangent plane from latitude and longtitude figure. 2010. url:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Local_tangent_plane_coordinates#/media/File:
ECEF_ENU_Longitude_Latitude_relationships.svg.
[38]
United States. Department of Defense. Global Positioning System Standard Position-
ing Service Performance Standard. Tech. rep. United States. Department of Defense,
Sept. 2008. url: https://rosap.ntl.bts.gov/view/dot/16930.
[39]
OpenCPN. OpenCPN Manuals - NMEA Communication. 2024. url: https://opencpn.
org/wiki/dokuwiki/doku.php?id=opencpn:manual_basic:nmea0183.
[40]
REP-103. 2024. url: https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0103.html.
[41]
Time Synchronization Accuracy With NTP. 2024. url: https://kb.meinbergglobal.
com/kb/time_sync/time_synchronization_accuracy_with_ntp.
[42]
ROS Messages. 2024. url: https://wiki.ros.org/Messages.
[43]
FastDDS. 2024. url: https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/getting_
started/definitions.html.
[44]
ROS bags. 2024. url: https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Tutorials/Beginner- CLI-
Tools/Recording-And-Playing-Back-Data/Recording-And-Playing-Back-Data.html.
[45]
LiDAR RPi Git Repository. 2024. url: https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/dtu-asl/robotic-
platforms/otter-usv.
[46]
Ouster LiDAR ROS Driver. 2024. url: https://github.com/ouster-lidar/ouster-ros.
[47]
Xsens MTi-10 series IMU ROS Driver. 2024. url: https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/dtu-
asl/code/ros-packages/xsens_imu_ros2.
[48]
ROS Domain Id. 2024. url: https://docs.ros.org/en/foxy/Concepts/About-Domain-
ID.html.
[49]
Raspberry Pi 4 Processor Datasheet. 2024. url: https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/
bcm2711/bcm2711-peripherals.pdf?_gl=1*11plf1i*_ga*MTI3NTM5MjYwMC4xNzE4MTEyNTc4*
_ga_22FD70LWDS*MTcxODExMjU3OC4xLjEuMTcxODExMjU5My4wLjAuMA...
[50]
MCAP Specifications. 2024. url: https://mcap.dev/spec.
[51]
zstd Compression. 2024. url: https://github.com/facebook/zstd.
[52]
LZ4 Compression. 2024. url: https://lz4.org/.
[53]
MCAP Main Page. 2024. url: https://mcap.dev/.
[54]
Foxglove Main Page. 2024. url: https://foxglove.dev/.
[55]
Hamid Taheri and Zhao Chun Xia. “SLAM; definition and evolution”. In: Engineer-
ing Applications of Artificial Intelligence 97 (2021), p. 104032. issn: 0952-1976. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2020.104032. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0952197620303092.
[56]
Jun Zhu, Hongyi Li, and Tao Zhang. “Camera, LiDAR, and IMU Based Multi-
Sensor Fusion SLAM: A Survey”. In: Tsinghua Science and Technology 29.2 (2024),
pp. 415–429. doi: 10.26599/TST.2023.9010010.
[57]
Diego Tiozzo Fasiolo, Lorenzo Scalera, and Eleonora Maset. “Comparing LiDAR and
IMU-based SLAM approaches for 3D robotic mapping”. In: Robotica 41.9 (2023),
pp. 2588–2604. doi: 10.1017/S026357472300053X.
[58]
RTAB-Map git repository. 2024. url: https://github.com/introlab/rtabmap/tree/
humble-devel.
[59]
Wei Xu et al. “FAST-LIO2: Fast Direct LiDAR-Inertial Odometry”. In: IEEE Trans-
actions on Robotics 38.4 (2022), pp. 2053–2073. doi: 10.1109/TRO.2022.3141876.
[60]
Fast-LIO2 git repository. 2024. url: https://github.com/hku-mars/FAST_LIO.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
81
==PAGE:90==
[61]
F.R. Kschischang, B.J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger. “Factor graphs and the sum-product
algorithm”. In: IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 47.2 (2001), pp. 498–519.
doi: 10.1109/18.910572.
[62]
Ji Zhang and Sanjiv Singh. “LOAM : Lidar Odometry and Mapping in real-time”.
In: Robotics: Science and Systems Conference (RSS) (Jan. 2014), pp. 109–111.
[63]
Michael Kaess et al. “iSAM2: Incremental Smoothing and Mapping Using the Bayes
Tree”. In: International Journal of Robotic Research - IJRR 31 (May 2012), pp. 216–
235. doi: 10.1177/0278364911430419.
[64]
Michael Kaess et al. “The Bayes Tree: An Algorithmic Foundation for Probabilistic
Robot Mapping”. In: Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics IX: Selected Contributions
of the Ninth International Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics. Ed.
by David Hsu et al. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 157–
173. isbn: 978-3-642-17452-0. doi: 10.1007/978- 3- 642- 17452- 0_10. url: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-17452-0_10.
[65]
Christian Forster et al. “On-Manifold Preintegration for Real-Time Visual–Inertial
Odometry”. In: IEEE Transactions on Robotics 33.1 (Feb. 2017), pp. 1–21. issn:
1941-0468. doi: 10.1109/tro.2016.2597321. url: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TRO.
2016.2597321.
[66]
Ji Zhang and Sanjiv Singh. “Low-drift and real-time lidar odometry and mapping”.
In: Autonomous Robots 41 (2017), pp. 401–416. url: https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:9634924.
[67]
TixiaoShan. LIO-SAM git repository. 2024. url: https://github.com/TixiaoShan/
LIO-SAM.
[68]
GT-SAM C++ Library. 2024. url: https://gtsam.org/.
[69]
REP-105. 2024. url: https://www.ros.org/reps/rep-0105.html.
[70]
Thesis Git Repository. 2024. url: https://gitlab.gbar.dtu.dk/dtu- asl/student-
projects/master-projects/slam-lidar-and-sonar.
[71]
ROS Quality of Service. 2024. url: https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Concepts/
Intermediate/About-Quality-of-Service-Settings.html.
[72]
FastDDS - Shared Memory Transport. 2024. url: https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.
com/en/latest/fastdds/transport/shared_memory/shared_memory.html.
[73]
Field Robotics Lab. Project DAVE. 2024. url: https://field-robotics-lab.github.io/
dave.doc/.
[74]
Google. Google Maps. 2024. url: https://www.google.com/maps.
[75]
By og Havn. 2024. url: https://byoghavn.dk/.
[76]
Magnetic Field Calculators. 2024. url: https://ngdc.noaa.gov/geomag/calculators/
magcalc.shtml#declination.
[77]
Setentrio. Setentrio Altus NR3 Data Sheet. 2024. url: https://globalgpssystems.
com/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Septentrio_Altus_NR3_LR-1.pdf.
[78]
ESA. ESA.gov Navipedia: GNSS Signal. 2024. url: https://gssc.esa.int/navipedia/
index.php/GNSS_signal.
[79]
ESA. ESA.gov Navipedia: RTK Fundamentals. 2024. url: https://gssc.esa.int/
navipedia/index.php?title=RTK_Fundamentals.
[80]
Euiho Kim and Sae-kyeol Kim. “Global Navigation Satellite System Real-Time Kine-
matic Positioning Framework for Precise Operation of a Swarm of Moving Vehicles”.
In: Sensors 22.20 (2022). issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10 . 3390 / s22207939. url: https :
//www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/20/7939.
[81]
Setentrio. Setentrio Altus NR3 User Guide. 2024. url: https://globalgpssystems.
com/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/altus_nr3.pdf.
82
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:91==
[82]
Yannik Steiniger, Dieter Kraus, and Tobias Meisen. “Survey on deep learning based
computer vision for sonar imagery”. In: Engineering Applications of Artificial In-
telligence 114 (2022), p. 105157. issn: 0952-1976. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.engappai.2022.105157. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0952197622002718.
[83]
Minsung Sung et al. “Underwater-Sonar-Image-Based 3D Point Cloud Reconstruc-
tion for High Data Utilization and Object Classification Using a Neural Network”.
In: Electronics 9.11 (2020). issn: 2079-9292. doi: 10.3390/electronics9111763. url:
https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/9/11/1763.
[84]
Cheng Kun, Xu Feng, and Yang Juan. “Three Dimensional Reconstruction of Forward-
Looking Sonar Images Based on Oren and Nayar Model”. In: 2021 OES China Ocean
Acoustics (COA). 2021, pp. 1011–1015. doi: 10.1109/COA50123.2021.9519951.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
83
==PAGE:92==
84
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:93==
A
Appendix
A.1
USV Platform
A.1.1
3D Component Models
Figure A.1: 3D model of the 9-axis IMU extender for the LiDAR mount
A.1.2
Transform Model Configuration
# Date: 2024-04-08
# Sonar Configuration: 1 (forward-facing, 30 deg pitch, 0 deg roll)
transforms:
- frame_id: base_link
child_frame_id: otter
invert: false
translation:
x: -0.26
y: 0.0
z: 0.0
rotation:
x: 0.0
y: 0.0
z: 0.0
- frame_id: otter
child_frame_id: otter_frd
invert: true
translation:
x: 0.0
y: 0.0
z: 0.41
rotation:
x: 180.0 # Z axis will be pointing downwards
y: 0.0
z: 0.0 # The yaw of the Blueview is controlled here
- frame_id: otter_frd
child_frame_id: blueview_joint1
invert: false
translation:
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
85
==PAGE:94==
x: 0.0
y: 0.0
z: 1.24
rotation:
x: 0.0
y: -30.0 # The pitch of the Blueview is controlled here
z: 0.0
- frame_id: blueview_joint1
child_frame_id: blueview_joint2
invert: false
translation:
x: 0.0
y: 0.0
z: 0.04
rotation:
x: 0.0 # The roll of the Blueview is controlled here
y: 0.0
z: 0.0
- frame_id: blueview_joint2
child_frame_id: blueview
invert: false
translation:
x: 0.1
y: 0.0
z: 0.12
rotation:
x: 0.0
y: 0.0
z: 0.0
- frame_id: base_link
child_frame_id: os_sensor
invert: false
translation:
x: 0.0
y: 0.0
z: 0.0
rotation:
x: 0.0
y: 0.0
z: 180.0
- frame_id: os_sensor
child_frame_id: os_lidar
invert: false
translation:
x: -0.26
y: 0.0
z: 0.53
rotation:
x: 0.0
y: 0.0
86
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:95==
z: 0.0
- frame_id: os_sensor
child_frame_id: os_imu
invert: false
translation:
x: -0.26
y: 0.0
z: 0.53
rotation:
x: 0.0
y: 0.0
z: 0.0
- frame_id: base_link
child_frame_id: imu
invert: false
translation:
x: 0.22
y: 0.0
z: 0.49
rotation:
x: 0.0
y: -90.0
z: 0.0
A.2
SLAM
A.2.1
QoS Override Settings
/tf_static:
reliability: reliable
durability: transient_local
history: keep_last
depth: 1
/ouster/points:
reliability: reliable
durability: transient_local
history: keep_last
depth: 10
/points/fusion:
reliability: reliable
durability: transient_local
history: keep_last
depth: 10
/imu/data/transformed:
reliability: reliable
durability: transient_local
history: keep_last
depth: 10
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
87
==PAGE:96==
A.3
Data Acquisition
A.3.1
Data Acquisition Risks
Source
Description
Mitigating Action
Waves
Waves induce changes in orientation
that can be diﬀicult to account for.
It is plausible that the IMU can ac-
count for this.
Carefully select weather conditions
and/or environment to investigate
Water Current
Water currents introduce changes in
Speed Over Ground (speed relative
to the ground directly underneath
the vessel) that are disproportional
to the Speed Through Water (speed
relative to the water). This can in-
troduce inaccuracies with the odom-
etry.
Carefully select weather conditions
and/or environment to investigate
Wind
Same as above
Carefully select weather conditions
and/or environment to investigate
GNSS
Uncer-
tainty
GNSS module typically has inherent
uncertainty in the best of circum-
stances. In urban areas, with signal
reflections and limited access to the
sky, this uncertainty will increase.
Collisions
Depends on the IMU. Can set the
odometry adrift.
If the SLAM model cant handle this,
it can be removed in post process-
ing.
Weather Con-
ditions
Sunshine/cloudy/dark.
There
might
be
brightness
and
other
weather
conditions
that
might
affect the performance of the ex-
terioceptive sensors.
Same with
bubbles in water for the MBES.
Configuration
/
Frame
TF
Inaccuracies
Placing and orienting the sensors
will introduce uncertainties that can
have a big effect, especially on the
sonar.
Set markers on all sources of degrees
of freedom
Sonar Echos/-
Convolution-
s/Noise
The sonar noise (bubbles!) and con-
volutions will depend on the en-
vironment and the settings (fre-
quency, FoV, etc.) of the sonar.
Adjust settings of the sonar to min-
imize noise.
Unsynced
Clocks
Unsynced clocks will result in mis-
alignment between sensors, which
will introduce inaccuracies in odom-
etry and mapping.
Wait for the NTP server to properly
sync all devices in the network
Overencumbered
CPUs
Having too large a workload can de-
lay messages being passed around
the system.
Check CPU + RAM consumption
and Ethernet bandwidth
Table A.1: Sources of potential errors and mitigating actions for the data acquisition
campaign.
88
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:97==
A.3.2
Data Acquisition Planned Schedule
Time
Activity
09:00 - 10:30
Assembly of the Otter, set Configuration 1
10:30 - 11:00
Sail the Otter from Assembly Zone (1) to Config Change Zone (2). Use as test run.
11:00 - 12:00
Patch test (?) & run data acquisition for Configuration 1
12:00 - 13:00
Lunch Break
13:00 - 13:30
Change sonar configuration to Configuration 2
13:30 - 14:30
Patch test (?) & Run data acquisition for Configuration 2
14:30 - 15:00
Change sonar configuration to Configuration 3
15:00 - 16:00
Patch test (?) & Run data acquisition for Configuration 3
16:00 - 16:30
Packing down equipment
Table A.2: Planned Schedule for Blueview imaging sonar configuration and Data Acqui-
sition.
A.3.3
Equipment Checklist
Table A.3: Data Acquisition Equipment Checklist to verify that all equipment directly
used are prepared prior to the field day. This checklist excludes auxiliary items such as
tools and vehicles.
Id
Equipment
Quantity
Notes
1
Otter USV
1
1.1
Otter sides
2
1.1.1
Butterfly bolts
4
2 bolts for each side
1.2
Lithium Ion batteries
4
Fully charged
1.2.1
Lithium ion battery arming devices
4
1.2.2
Magnet keychain
1
For arming [1.3]
1.2.3
Battery connectors
4
1.3
Antenna
1
With mount
1.3.1
PoE power source for antenna
1
1.3.2
Antenna tripod
1
1.3.3
PoE ethernet cable
1
∼10 meters, yellow
1.3.4
Ethernet cable
1
1.4
Otter Dell PC
1
Fully charged
1.4.1
Otter Dell PC charger
1
1.5
Otter PS2 controller
1
Fully charged
1.6
Otter Smartphone controller
1
Fully charged
1.7
Sonar attachment system
1
1.7.1
Attachment system on Otter USV
1
1.7.2
Sonar pole
1
1.7.3
Blueview pole mount (pink 3D print)
1
1.8
Rotor connector cables
2
1.9
Otter USV Manual
1
1.10
Support legs
2
For mounting the Otter on if no
crane is available
2
Blueview case
1
2.1
Blueview sonar
1
2.2
Blueview waterproof PoE cable
1
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
89
==PAGE:98==
3
Sonar Raspberry Pi System
1
3.1
System case
1
Should contain a Raspberry Pi,
Powerbank, PoE converter, Voltage
divider
3.2
External harddrive
1
Minimum 1 TB
3.3
Waterproof ethernet cable
1
4
LiDAR + IMU system
1
4.1
Ouster L1 LiDAR
1
4.1.1
LiDAR connector cable
1
Fastened on [4]
4.2
Xsens IMU
1
Orange box
4.2.1
Xsens connector cable
1
Fastened on [4.4]
4.3
3D print LiDAR mount
1
4.3.1
Bolts for mounting on Otter
8
4.3.2
Xsens IMU mount
1
4.4
Box with Raspberry Pi
1
Colored yellow
4.4.1
External SSD
1
Minimum 2 TB
4.4.2
Waterproof ethernet cable
1
4.4.3
Otter power connector
1
Fastened on [4.4]
5
Box for containing [4] and [3]
1
With a hole for cables
A.3.4
Standard Operating Procedure for Data Acquisition Campaign
STEP 1: Assemble the Otter
When the Otter is transported, it is in a disassembled state. The Otter should
therefore be assembled on site and each part should be tested on land before
starting data acquisition.
1. Move all the parts for the Otter out on a dry work area.
2. Move the frame onto the sides, and lock with bolts.
3. Place each of the 4 batteries inside the sides of the Otter.
4. Connect the batteries and the motor cables to their respective connectors on the
Otter frame.
5. Connect all the battery arming devices on the batteries.
6. Attach the Ouster LiDAR mount and Xsens IMU on the Otter.
7. Attach the Blueview on the vertical pole and attach the pole to the Otter.
8. Place the Sonar Pi and the Ouster Pi in the black box on the Otter.
9. Connect all peripherals to their respective Pi.
10. Use the magnet to turn on each of the arming devices.
They should eventually
blink twice in a heartbeat rhythm to indicate that they are properly active and the
batteries are live.
11. Check that the motors are operational.
STEP 2: Bootup Sonar Pi
Once the Otter is operational, the Pi responsible for controlling the Blueview
sonar should be booted and verified.
90
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:99==
The starting point assumes that all the steps from STEP 1 are completed successfully.
1. Power on the Sonar Pi.
(a) Check that the Blueview ROS services are operational.
2. Set the head service:
ros2 service call /get_set_active_head blueview_msgs/srv/GetSetInt64
'{flag: 0, value: 0}'
3. Set the start range:
ros2 service call /get_set_stop_range blueview_msgs/srv/GetSetFloat64
'{flag: 0, value: 0.2}'
4. Set the stop range:
ros2 service call /get_set_stop_range blueview_msgs/srv/GetSetFloat64
'{flag: 0, value: 10.0}'
5. Gain adjustment:
~/get_set_gain_adjustment
6. Check speed of sound and other adjustments.
STEP 3: Bootup Ouster Pi
This step involves setting up the Ouster Pi (yellow box) to be ready for oper-
ation, checking all functionalities before data acquisition start.
Before starting, make sure the yellow box is placed in the designated compute box contain-
ing Raspberry Pi, Ouster controller PCB, Power Converters (25 V output & 5 V output)
and SSD hard drive.
1. Verify that the SSD hard drive is plugged in via USB and has at least 1 TB of free
storage.
2. Verify that the Xsens IMU is plugged in via USB.
3. Verify that Ouster controller is connected properly (Pi →USB →USB/Ethernet
converter →Ethernet →Ouster controller PCB).
4. Verify that power is properly wired (blue →LOW, green →HIGH).
(a) HIGH: Cable →Brown →Green →Big Power Converter.
(b) LOW: Cable →Blue →Blue →Big Power Converter.
(c) HIGH (green) & LOW (blue) connected in parallel between the big and small
power converter.
5. Plug the power cable (gray) into the power supply on the Otter. The fans should be
spinning when the Pi starts.
6. After the bootup sequence (might take a minute), login to the Pi via SSH using the
local network.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
91
==PAGE:100==
(a) IP: 192.168.53.252
(b) User: aut
7. Verify that the SSD drive is mounted.
8. Verify that the following ROS modules are present in the ros2_ws directory:
(a) imu_logger: Xsens IMU ROS driver.
(b) ouster-ros: Ouster ROS driver.
(c) tf_static_publisher: Static transform publisher for all frames.
(d) rtsp_publisher: Capturing forward-facing camera RTSP feed at low frame
rate.
9. Running start_imu_system.sh starts the following:
(a) xsens_driver.
(b) ouster_driver.
(c) tf_static_publisher.
(d) rtsp_publisher.
10. Check the video stream from the forward-facing camera.
STEP 4: Clock Synchronization
Once all systems are operational, they will connect to the NTP server on the
Otter onboard system.
Having both the native Otter system, the Sonar Pi, and the Ouster Pi running…
1. Check if the NTP IP is present in the local network.
2. Check if the clock is synced between all systems. This can take several minutes.
STEP 5: Start Logging
Once a data acquisition trip has finished, the Otter will now need a new sonar
configuration.
Once the Otter USV is in the water, start data acquisition with the following:
1. Access the Blueview Sonar RPi and check if all ROS services are available.
2. Start the Blueview by calling the service:
ros2 service call /start_pinging std_srvs/srv/Trigger
(make sure the Blueview is completely submerged in the water).
3. Check the feed via the service call:
ros2 service call /start_streaming std_srvs/srv/Trigger
This will publish the sonar images in a compressed format in the colored_xy topic.
(Note: check this fast, as the service has a tendency of causing segfaults).
4. Start recording the data with the service call:
92
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:101==
ros2 service call /start_recording std_srvs/srv/Trigger
5. Access the LiDAR RPi and source the ros2_ws and run the launch file:
ros2 launch launch/otter-usv.launch.py
This should start the static transform publisher, the Xsens IMU, the Ouster LiDAR,
the RTSP subscriber, and the rosbag recorder.
STEP 6: Changing Configuration
Once a data acquisition trip has finished, the Otter will now need a new sonar
configuration.
From the [Enter a few words to clarify what the starting point is]:
1. Turn off the Blueview by running the services:
ros2 service call /stop_recording std_srvs/srv/Trigger
ros2 service call /stop_pinging std_srvs/srv/Trigger
2. Change the configuration of the Blueview.
3. Place the Otter USV back in the water and turn on the recording again (see STEP
5).
STEP 7: Finish Data Acquisition
Before the Otter goes back on land.
1. Turn off rosbag recording.
2. Turn off sonar recording.
3. Turn off sonar pinging.
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
93
==PAGE:102==
A.3.5
Data Acquisition Events
Table A.4: Notes from the data acquisition campaign.
Event
Notes
Sonar misalignment
Sonar was not aligned with marking on the sonar
mount rod. Solution: turn the treads to realign.
LiDAR not turning on
Solution: Reboot by cutting and reapplying power
Motors thrust inconsistency
Generally inconsistent control when testing thrusters
on land. Could be compensated in the water by learn-
ing the control quirks.
Unable to connect with SSH to Li-
DAR/IMU
Caused by a loose ethernet connection.
Connection to Otter Lost
Ethernet cable came loose.
Sonar images not visualisable
Solution:
Installed RQT to view the sonar image
stream.
Patch Test object floating
Solution: added weights
Slow transfer
Langsom overførsel: brug wifi isf radio.
Forgot battery plugs
Salt water has come in contact with parts that can
oxidise. Cleaned after retuning to campus.
RF control delay
Inputs to PS5 controller has up to 5-10 seconds de-
lay. Solution: learning patterns, applying simpler and
more predictive inputs.
Thruster stopped working
Port side thruster stopped spinning. No object seemed
stuck in the axle. Had to recall the USV.
A.3.6
Data Acquisition Plan B
Figure A.2: Plan B setup for acquiring data using different orientations of the imaging
sonar, to see if some kind of visual odometry could be extracted. The Optitrack in ASTA
was used for location reference.
94
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:103==
A.4
RTK Campaign
A.4.1
Collected Data Points
Table A.5: Collected reference points for mapping data in Sydhavn using ETRS89 UTM32.
All points are acquired in the ”Fixed” status.
Id
Time
Northing
Easting
Altitude
HDOP
NSDV
ESDV
1.1
13:29:05
6173336.245
723492.129
37.0111
0.81
0.006
0.005
1.2
16:10:30
6173336.252
723492.097
37.0103
0.7
0.007
0.006
2.1
13:31:24
6173368.087
723500.668
36.3224
1.72
0.013
0.007
2.2
16:09:44
6173368.072
723500.712
36.4136
1.83
0.013
0.01
3.1
13:33:11
6173325.65
723530.088
38.207
0.81
0.007
0.006
3.2
16:11:23
6173325.643
723530.067
38.2001
0.76
0.008
0.005
4.1
13:36:43
6173332.481
723473.964
38.5234
0.77
0.007
0.006
4.2
15:52:50
6173332.463
723473.953
38.5489
0.99
0.008
0.006
5.1
13:39:07
6173463.655
723522.394
38.4858
0.81
0.007
0.006
5.2
15:56:21
6173463.654
723522.425
38.5267
0.72
0.007
0.006
6.1
13:40:20
6173461.945
723541.967
38.2051
0.72
0.007
0.006
6.2
16:03:48
6173461.969
723541.974
38.2106
0.76
0.007
0.006
7.1
13:45:43
6173580.767
723486.565
37.9439
1.1
0.008
0.007
7.2
15:59:09
6173580.736
723486.577
37.9313
0.73
0.007
0.006
8.1
13:42:56
6173569.98
723508.845
38.2098
0.94
0.007
0.006
8.2
16:01:46
6173569.998
723508.859
38.2387
0.77
0.007
0.006
9.1
13:49:33
6173392.382
723626.075
38.6289
1.1
0.012
0.007
9.2
16:05:56
6173392.383
723626.067
38.6372
0.73
0.007
0.005
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
95
==PAGE:104==
A.5
Results
A.5.1
3D Reconstruction Global Map Lengths
Table A.6: Euclidean Distances between Points in sets from RTK measurements, Google
Maps and the 3D map.
From
To
RTK Distances
Google Maps Length
3D Map Distances
1
6
135.234546
135.278982
135.255275
2
6
102.552640
102.874344
102.494507
4
6
146.259871
146.052653
146.064180
2
4
44.524845
44.082460
44.450922
1
2
32.966334
32.673487
33.043392
3
6
136.828305
136.775720
136.478473
1
5
130.958645
131.089047
130.515761
3
8
245.262665
244.972970
246.472562
2
5
98.011800
98.440013
97.496166
4
5
139.843943
139.667831
139.100682
3
5
138.220877
138.283420
137.422118
7
9
234.399182
234.456708
235.778727
4
8
240.066440
239.574473
241.520941
1
7
244.565802
244.764635
243.049535
2
7
213.140165
213.644073
211.563363
1
8
234.339132
234.171047
236.104624
4
7
248.599636
248.450005
246.724036
3
4
56.532653
56.595462
56.093692
3
7
258.788344
258.870807
256.768117
2
8
202.074415
202.208029
203.758221
1
4
18.542938
18.602228
18.700686
5
7
122.458601
122.463068
121.246899
6
7
131.077179
131.241847
129.723516
6
8
112.994299
112.776283
114.515971
2
3
51.615854
51.222897
50.918939
4
9
163.484670
163.471114
165.716161
1
9
145.243282
145.240482
147.344027
3
9
116.911389
116.955813
118.857234
8
9
212.800678
212.497504
216.463044
5
8
107.195246
106.835988
109.169420
2
9
127.713959
127.740683
130.145575
1
3
39.417362
39.295438
38.659286
5
6
19.634367
19.791460
20.034144
5
9
125.798570
125.891238
128.845659
6
9
109.148658
109.048820
111.987708
7
8
24.744584
24.996359
24.003897
96
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
==PAGE:105==
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping of Marine Environments using LiDAR and SONAR
97
==PAGE:106==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.electro.dtu.dk
