==PAGE:1==
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
The Impact of Input Seeds
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
The Impact of Input Seeds
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Patrick Lopdrup Hansen
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of computer science and
programming.
Patrick Lopdrup Hansen - s185092
Signature
Date
ii
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Humans do not always find bugs in their code before it is too late. We cannot think of every
single input our programs could be targeted with. This is where fuzzy testing comes in.
Fuzzy testing can try millions of inputs and guide new inputs to explore more and more
of the code by mutating the inputs. In this thesis, I analyze different mutation strategies
and how we can set the fuzzer, here AFL++, up for success with the use of input seeds.
The analysis is performed on an SQL parser and a JSON parser, which expect structured
data as input. I find that by using a combination of grammar-based mutation and random
mutation, we get the best of both worlds. With this, we are able to explore more of the
code than if we only used grammar-based mutation and we are still able to create seeds
that go deep into the code, which we do not find with pure random mutations.
I also find that input seeds make a huge difference in a fuzzing campaign and that it
does, in fact, make sense to use time to create or find seeds which can help bootstrap
the fuzzing. Furthermore, I find that the more input seeds used, the better the fuzzing
campaign becomes and that sometimes singular seeds can single-handedly result in a
larger code coverage of the target. I also analyze and conclude that it does not make a
difference whether the input seeds are few and large or plenty and small, meaning that
time should not be spent combining or separating input seeds.
This thesis contributes to a better understanding of the use of mutation strategies and
input seeds in fuzzy testing on parsers. On top of that, it also contributes with a grammar
for SQL, which can be found in AFL++’s custom grammar and to the discovery of a bug
and a limitation in the Hyrise SQL parser, which has now been patched.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Patrick Lopdrup Hansen, MSc Computer Science and Engineering, DTU
Tyge Tiessen, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, DTU
A huge thanks to Tyge for being my supervisor for my master’s thesis about fuzzing. From
the very beginning, Tyge was open about that fuzzing was not his expertise, but that he
was always happy to learn new things. He was very helpful from the brainstorm phase all
the way through all our meetings about the project. Thanks for your professionalism and
relaxed personality.
iv
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Software Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Purpose and Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Introduction to Fuzzing
5
2.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Types of Fuzzers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Key Concepts and Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Evolution of Fuzzy Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Modern Fuzzing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Related Work
11
4
Methodology
13
4.1
Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Use of Large Language Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
The Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.4
Fuzzing Example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5
Experiments and Results
21
5.1
Comparing Grammar vs. Random Fuzzing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.2
The Importance of Seeds: Empty vs. Multiple . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.3
Impact of Varying Seed Quantities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
5.4
Evaluating the Equivalence of Seeds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5.5
Evaluating Seed Size
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.6
Best of Both (Mutation) Worlds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.7
Crash . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.8
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6
Conclusion
41
Bibliography
43
A sql_parser.cpp
47
B SQL Grammar
48
C json_parser.cpp
51
D AFL++ Fuzzing Campaign
52
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
v
==PAGE:8==
E
Files for JSON batch 2
53
F
Queue for JSON batch 2
54
G Unicode Seed vs Normal Seed
55
H Random Mutation Strategies for SQL Parser: Empty Seed vs. 50 Seeds
56
vi
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Fuzzing is, as its Wikipedia article formulates, “[…] an automated software testing tech-
nique that provides invalid, unexpected, or random data as inputs […]” [1]. Or in other
words: “yelling bad data at your code”, as the Youtuber “Low Level Learning” [2] calls it.
And it is exactly that - with a couple of caveats.
There are multiple ways to fuzz test and we will cover a handful of them. One of the ways
is to do the yelling of bad data. Here we do not want to do anything sophisticated, like
use any knowledge of what we have already seen and done to the program, but rather
just be random. And by random I mean flipping bits left and right! However, this might not
be the best way to find bugs in a piece of software. For instance, if the software expects
numbers and will do error handling on all other inputs, we will likely end up getting rejected
at the entrance, not even getting to the festivity. Imagine ’12’ as an input to this program.
It does something, but no crash. But we went to some internal state of the program! Let’s
change the input with some bit flips. 12, as a string, in bits is: 00110001 00110010. Let
us say that we change one bit in each byte and get ’q"’. Okay, now we are not getting to
any internal state in our number program. Let’s flip a bit in each byte again. ’a*’. Okay?
But were we not talking about numbers? Well, it seems quite tricky to get back to creating
numbers from this approach, which is called mutation-based fuzzing, as it mutates inputs.
The bit flips can be seen below.
00110001 00110010
12
01110001 00100010
q”
01100001 00101010
a*
Table 1.1: Example of two rounds of bit flips from a start input being ’12’ (ASCII string).
In this thesis, we will understand what fuzzy testing is and why it can be a great tool to
discover bugs. We will look at both random fuzzing, as we saw in the example above,
but also more sophisticated fuzzing, where we use knowledge from the program we are
testing. Here we will look at fuzzing of structured language parsers with the use of gram-
mars. We will test how much of a difference a grammar makes, and look at how we can
prime the fuzzy engine before we even begin our tests. This is called input seeds, which
we will cover in much greater detail later.
But to understand what fuzzy testing is and why it exists, let us first look at software testing
in general and its history.
1.1
Software Test
Software testing is not a new discipline. A paper by Lu Luo shows a timeline of the history
of software testing. It tracks the earliest software tests back to 1957, where it was referred
to as “program checkout”. Here the developers made sure that the program could run and
that the program could solve the problem it was made for [3].
Testing of software systems has become more important over the years, as shown in [4],
which provides data on more and more publications of papers regarding software testing
from 1982 to 2018. The paper also touches upon the increasing complexity of software
systems. The more complex the software is, the higher the chance of bugs and vulnerabil-
ities, which is concluded in [5], which shows that using complexity, coupling, and cohesion
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
1
==PAGE:10==
as metrics, it is possible to predict close to 75% of vulnerability-prone files. Vulnerabili-
ties in software can be measured with a Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE)
score. If we look at the CVEs published over the years in Figure 1.1, we also see an
increase. Because new software often builds on other software (read: libraries), it can
end up many layers deep. The libraries can also use other libraries that further abstract
the code. Abstractions are also seen in operating systems that can be preloaded with
open-source software. A malicious backdoor was discovered by Andres Freund, in the
“xz/liblzma” program which he wrote about in an article on Openwall [6]. This program
comes pre-installed on many Debian based Linux distributions.
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
Year
Number of CVEs
Figure 1.1: Number of CVEs per year from 2010 to 2023 [7].
Bugs, errors, and vulnerabilities can be found while developing the software by the pro-
grammers themselves, perhaps utilizing agile processes where the developers will test
the software many times while working on it. But sometimes software is released with
bugs and vulnerabilities. This is of course a problem for the vendors, as they would not
like their software to be hacked or for their customers to be victims of an attack. Because
of this, some companies have a bug bounty program where people outside the company
can report a bug and in return be rewarded with some money. Bug bounties trace back
to the early 2000s [8]. In 2005, TippingPoint started the “Zero Day Initiative” (ZDI), which
was made to encourage the reporting of zero-day vulnerabilities to companies [9]. Today
some of the larger companies have their own bug bounty programs. An example is Ap-
ple Inc., which pays up to $2,000,000 to the person who can find a security vulnerability
in their products. For the $2 million, the attack must be a zero-click remote chain with
full kernel execution, including kernel PAC1 bypass on the latest iOS device running in
“Lockdown Mode” [10].
Types of Software Test
Software tests come in a large variety of forms. Some tests are written before the pro-
duction code is written, and other tests are performed to compare the speed of different
implementations. All the tests have a purpose, and we will cover some of them in this
section.
At a high level, we have two kinds of tests: Functional testing and Non-functional testing
1Pointer Authentication Code
2
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:11==
[11].
Functional Testing
This type of testing can be anything from small unit tests to full
acceptance tests of a complete system. Unit tests are used all the time in Test-Driven
Development (TDD), which is a term created by Kent Beck. In his book: Test-Driven
Development By Example [12], he shows how one can write reliable, bug-free code with
the use of unit tests. In functional testing, one would also want to answer the questions:
do the features live up to the requirements, and did we build the right thing? For this, it
is possible to use a tool like “Framework for Integrated Tests” (FIT). Integration tests are
where multiple parts of the software are tested together. FIT is a framework where these
kinds of tests are defined in HTML and then run by the code [13]. With this separation
of test and code, it also makes it possible to let the tests be written by the customers.
This can be done using FitNesse, which is FIT hosted in a wiki. This then becomes a tool
for automated acceptance tests. FitNesse was developed, among others, by Robert C.
Martin, the author of the popular book Clean Code [13, 14].
Non-Functional Testing
This type of testing is where the test does not exercise the
functionality of the software. This could, for instance, be a performance test where we
want to see how a system performs under different workloads or how different implemen-
tations compare. Security testing is also considered non-functional, which could be a
penetration test where the testers try to think like a hacker and see where there are secu-
rity flaws in the implementation. This helps developers to mitigate the risk of the system
and patch it before an actual intruder tries to compromise it.
We have established that different types of test exist in the software realm. We have also
talked about some reasons why we test our systems and that some companies even pay
for the knowledge of bugs in their products. Now let us look at some examples of what
can happen if small bugs in a system are not caught before it is too late.
When Software Crashes
Not all bugs are found under development. An extreme example of this is the rocket Ariane
5, which on June 4, 1996, was launched by the European Space Agency that exploded
shortly after lift-off. The development had cost around $7 billion. The bug was due to a
64 bit floating point number. This was converted to a 16 bit signed integer, and because it
happened that the number stored in the 64 bit was larger than 32,767, the largest integer
in 16 bit, the conversion failed [15]. Another software bug, which took place on Earth and
not in a rocket in space, was the Heartbleed vulnerability. This vulnerability was because
of a bug in the implementation of a functionality in the widely used OpenSSL library. The
functionality was used to ensure that two computers were still communicating, called a
heartbeat. The way it was implemented was that one computer would send a heartbeat
request to the other computer with a message and the length of the message. The other
computer would then read the message of that length and sent it back to the first computer.
The bug that makes the computer bleed with information, hence the name Heartbleed,
is that the length was never checked. This means that if one computer sent a message
of 10 KB, but said the length was 40 KB, when the other computer would send back the
first 10 KB of data from the original message and then an additional 30 KB of data that
happened to be stored after [16, 17].
1.2
Purpose and Objectives
The aim of this thesis is to contribute even more knowledge and data to the field of com-
puter security, software testing, and in particular fuzzy testing. The contribution I want to
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
3
==PAGE:12==
make with this thesis is:
• to conduct experiments and analyze how much of a difference grammar-based
fuzzing does compared to random fuzzing, and
• to test and analyze how much of a difference the amount of input seeds does to a
fuzzing campaign.
The experiments will be performed on parsers, e.g., programs to parse SQL queries into
C++ objects. Regarding input seeds, I especially want to answer whether some input
seeds are better than others or whether it is purely a numbers game, meaning that more
input seeds equals better fuzzing.
After this brief introduction to software testing in general, we will look into fuzzy testing in
the next chapter. After we have a broader idea of what fuzzy testing is, we will look at
related work within this domain. This will give us an understanding of the kind of research
that has been done in the area. After this, we will make our way into the methodology of
how we are going to conduct our research. This will give an overview of what to expect
for the different experiments, which has been set up. Right after this, we will dive into the
different experiments in the final chapter, where we will also discuss the outcomes as we
move along.
1.3
Summary
In this chapter, we started out with a taste of why random bit flips might not suffice for
testing parsers and we briefly mentioned the term, grammar-based fuzzing, which we will
come back to multiple times throughout this thesis. Then we glanced over the history of
software tests in general and saw which kind of tests exists. We also made it clear why
we test our software, and went over a rocket blowing up due to a bug in the code. Finally,
we got an idea of what to expect from this thesis going forward. So while software testing
is still fresh in your memory, let us go a little further and discover the niche kind of test
that fuzzy testing is, in the next chapter.
4
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:13==
2
Introduction to Fuzzing
In this chapter, we will start by giving an overview, then dive into the different types of
fuzzers that exist. Then, go over some key concepts, which will be useful throughout
the entire thesis. From there, I will go over the evolution of fuzzy testing in chronological
order. After this, I will show some of the modern fuzzers, and also go into some limitations
which exist.
2.1
Overview
The Origin
The word fuzzing comes from modems’ tendency to fail due to random input
caused by line noise on “fuzzy” telephone lines [18, 19]. The first paper to carry out fuzzy
tests is credited to Barton Miller et al. from the University of Wisconsin-Madison published
in 1990 [18]. In the paper, they describe their program, named fuzz, to be “[…] a generator
of random characters. It produces a continuous string of characters on its standard output
file.”. This was used to test a set of UNIX tools. In the paper, they define fuzzing this way:
If we consider a program to be a complex finite state machine, then our testing
strategy can be thought of as a random walk through the state space, search-
ing for undefined states. [18]
In the rest of the chapter, we will look at newer fuzzers and more refined fuzzing tech-
niques that we know of today.
High-level
On a high level, fuzzers have three components: input generator, executor,
and defect monitor. The input generator creates the input and gives them to the executor.
The executor then runs these inputs on a target program, which we want to test. The job of
the defect monitor is to detect if we have hit new paths in the code and if the program has
crashed on a specific input [20]. The ultimate goal for fuzzers is to find bugs in software
[21]. Essentially, give some input to a program and see what happens. If it did what you
expected, change the input a bit and watch the result. Continue until it crashes (or you
get bored).
2.2
Types of Fuzzers
Fuzzers can be categorized into different types depending on the degree of information
about the source code being tested. In this section, we will cover black-box, white-box,
and grey-box fuzzers.
Black-box
This type of fuzzing is like a black-box test of other kinds. This means that
we do not know the inner workings of the program we are testing. We give an input and
we see an output. Nothing in between [22]. For black-box fuzzing, we only need the
program to execute, as we do not touch the source code. This is essentially what Miller
et al. did in 1990 from the previous section [23].
White-box
This type of fuzzing is, as the name suggests, the opposite of black-box
fuzzing. Here, we have all the source code and can use it to perform program analysis
when fuzzing [23]. An example of insight into the source code could be an algorithm,
which is shown in [24], where there is a program P under test that takes an initial input
I. The white-box fuzzy algorithm makes a symbolic execution of program P where it find
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
5
==PAGE:14==
some constraints in the code. These constraints are then negated and the result are new
test input. In this way, the inputs will hopefully exercise many code paths in the program.
Grey-box
This type of fuzzing is a middle ground between black- and white-box fuzz
testing. In this middle ground, grey-box fuzzers requires access to the source code in
contrary to black-box fuzzing, but it does not require heavy program analysis in com-
parison to white-box fuzzing. Instead, grey-box fuzzing uses lightweight instrumentation
in the binary. This can be used to create small “checkpoints” in the code, that provide
information about which part of the code some input has hit [25].
Summary
To sum it up: black-box fuzzing has no access to source code; it only requires
the program to run. White-box fuzzing uses the full potential of the source code and
performs sophisticated analysis on it. Grey-box fuzzing has access to source code, which
it uses to instrument with some checkpoints. This thesis focuses on grey-box fuzzing
going forward, which is also what all experiments are performed on in a later chapter.
2.3
Key Concepts and Terminology
In this section we will learn about key concepts and terminology used in fuzzing. This will
also be useful in all of the rest of the thesis. We will look at what input seeds are and how
new seeds are being created. We will also learn about how code coverage is being used
as a measurement and we will look at different fuzzing techniques.
2.3.1
Input Seed Selection and the Corpus
Seeds are the test files used in the fuzzy campaign against a target. Inputs seeds are the
initial seeds used by the fuzzer. Input seeds are collected inside an initial corpus given to
the fuzzer at start-up. The corpus can be seen as the set of seeds. These can be chosen
in different ways. They can be completely random, hand-picked, or even empty [21]. A
survey evaluating 32 different fuzzing papers found that most of them did not care about
seed selection because they thought they would work equally well [26]. However, this
does not seem to be the case. The selection of good input seeds plays an important role
in the fuzzing campaign, as concluded by [21]. Later in this thesis, we will test various
input seeds on different targets and look at the importance of input seed selection.
2.3.2
Code Coverage and Path Coverage
Code coverage is used as a measurement in fuzzing. It measures how much code is
covered by an input or by the whole fuzzing campaign. A basic assumption is that an
increase in code coverage increases the likelihood of finding bugs. It is reported that a
1% increase in code coverage gives a 0.92% increase in bug discovery [20]. The cov-
erage is stored in a control flow graph where nodes are code blocks, and edges denote
control flow paths [27, 20]. Therefore, code coverage for a target program can be used
as a measurement of how well the fuzzing campaign has been. This is especially true
with generation-based fuzzing as we will see later. Here, it uses a specification, like a
grammar, such that the fuzzer is able to create inputs that can go further than an initial
syntax parser method in a program. By keeping track of the edges, we can see which
paths in the code an input took. It is assumed that the code coverage is known prior to
fuzzing. However, path coverage is not known and every time we encounter a new path,
we count it up, but we do not know how many are left [28].
2.3.3
Fuzzy Techniques
We have learned about different types of fuzzers and now we will look into various tech-
niques that can be used in fuzzing. On a high-level there exist two fuzzy techniques:
6
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:15==
mutation-based and generation-based [29], but we will also see some subcategories of
these techniques.
Mutation-based fuzzing
When starting fuzzing, this is one of the easier mutation strate-
gies to start with. It only requires knowledge of how to use the program under test, as the
fuzzer should start with one or more valid initial inputs. For example, if the program is a
calculator, a valid input could be: 1 + 2 ∗3. With mutation-based fuzzing, this input is then
used to randomly create other inputs by mutating it. It could for instance choose a random
bit from the input and flip it [22]. A slightly more interesting mutation strategy is known as
havoc. Havoc is found in many of the major fuzzy engines available. We will look at these
later in this chapter. Havoc works by picking a seed from the corpus. It then split the seed
into chunks, where it is able to create multiple new mutant-seeds which can be used to
test with. If any of the mutants explore new paths in the code, i.e., expands the code cov-
erage, these will be saved to the corpus and can be used by the havoc algorithm later to
create even more new seeds [30]. Because mutation-based fuzzing is rather random by
design, it is well suited for testing images and videos, but when it comes to tests of highly
structured data, like a parser for a programming language, it falls short. These parser
programs normally work by first checking the syntax of the input and at a later stage per-
forming the application execution. This means that our mutation strategy will most likely
create seeds that cannot even pass the syntax check [31]. Splice is another approach,
which resamples havoc a bit, but splice simply takes two inputs from the corpus and split
them at some arbitrary midpoint and stitches them together to form new inputs [32].
Generation-based fuzzing
If the limitations of mutation-based fuzzing are unfeasible
for a program under test, generation-based fuzzing might be what you are looking for.
Generation-based fuzzing creates new seeds from a known specification. This means that
in contrast to mutation-based fuzzing, one must get a bit more involved with the program
under test. For this technique, we must understand the program to a greater extent.
Seeds can for instance be generated from a specification where integrity constraints like
a checksum are compliant. Generation-based fuzzing is also used for structured data,
e.g., to generate input seeds using a grammar that specifies the syntax of the data [31].
When seeds are created this way, the inputs no longer gets stuck in the syntax parser of
some program, and because the overall structure of the data is valid, it is able to explore
more code paths than what could have been done by mutation-based fuzzing in such
cases.
Grammar-based fuzzing
This is a sub-category of a fuzzing technique. As mentioned
shortly above, it is used to generate seeds from a grammar, such that the seeds keep a
specific structure. For instance does the popular fuzzer AFL++, which we will cover later,
have a grammar-based custom mutator. With this mutator, is is not only able to gener-
ate seeds by a grammar, but also mutate them with tree-based mutation [33]. Because
grammar-based fuzzing in some ways is the opposite of using random fuzzing and mu-
tations, tree-based mutation works a bit more sophisticated than random bit flips or the
havoc algorithm. The grammar for AFL++’s custom mutator uses Context-free grammar
(CFG). Context-free grammars are essentially “Some variable X (non-terminal symbol)
can be replaced by the following array of strings (terminal-symbols) and variables” [34].
This is being constructed as a tree (i.e., an abstract syntax tree (AST)) and because of
this tree structure of the seeds generated by the grammar, the tree-based mutator is able
to substitute some branches with others without loosing the structure [34].
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
7
==PAGE:16==
Coverage-based fuzzing
This is also one of the useful sub-techniques in which the
program under test is instrumented with extra data in the binary under compile time. This
extra data is used to gain information about coverage when the program is fuzzed. It also
adds data to measure hit counts on different branches in the code [35]. To get a sense
of this, we compile a program with the instrumentation and without to see the difference
in the size of the binary. In this example, we are going to compile a small C++ program
of 533 bytes (the one in Appendix A). If we compile it with the normal g++ version 11.4.0,
meaning without instrumentation1, the executable file is 18KB, where if we compile it with
afl-g++, which is AFL’s instrumentation, the size of the executable becomes 103KB. This
extra information is used to guide the generation of seeds to cover interesting paths in the
code [36]. This approach is often used to give feedback to mutation-based fuzzers [37],
but can also be used to guide generation-based fuzzers [29].
Best of Both Worlds
These techniques are not either/or. Some fuzzy engines can take
multiple mutators at the same time. This will simply result in the fuzzer making some new
seeds by bit flips, some via the havoc algorithm, and some generated from a custom
grammar [38].
2.4
Evolution of Fuzzy Testing
Early Fuzzers
Fuzzy testing has come a long way since its official beginning in 1990,
where Miller et al. used it to fuzz UNIX tools, as we learned in Section 2.1 about the
origin of fuzzing. Richard McNally et al.’s state of the art paper from 2012 [39] talks
about the history and evolution of fuzzy testing from its beginning to 2012. In 1995 Miller
co-authored a follow-up paper and this time they used other fuzzing strategies including
garbled messages, which are existing messages with modifications injected into them
such as bit flips or deletion of bytes. The idea of fuzzing became more widely spread
in 2001 with the release of SPIKE, which is a creation kit to build a fuzzer and is mostly
used for fuzzing networks protocols [40]. It was also around this time that people realised
that programs, expecting valid checksums in addition to the input, would not work if the
input was simply randomized. Also in 2001, Kaksonen described something called mini-
simulations which could generate inputs that looked like it would comply with the target
program. This is what we today know as grammar-based fuzzing. A big leap in fuzzy
techniques came around 2007. Before, only the input and output of the target programs
was considered. Now, run-time analysis of the programs was being used to guide the
fuzzing. This was the start of coverage-based fuzzing.
Focus on Input Seeds
Another paper, this time from 2018, examined 171 primary stud-
ies about fuzzy testing [41]. The paper addresses some of the state of the art in the fuzzing
domain to be seeds generation and selection because the quality of seed can influence
the result of a fuzzing campaign. Another hot topic mentioned by the paper, is the abil-
ity to fuzz targets which uses integrity validations (e.g., a checksum). A fuzzer named
TaintScope has been proposed for this problem, where it uses dynamic analysis to detect
where checksums are applied. In 2018 there were some papers focusing on a way to
rank the inputs that crashes the program in a way that inputs causing multiple bugs would
be ranked in the top of the list. This way, testers could focus on analyzing these bugs.
Machine Learning
Wang et al. reviewed 44 papers on machine learning in fuzzing in
2020 [42]. Here, there are studies working with neural network models trying to predict
1g++ -Isql-parser/src -Lsql-parser -o sql_parser sql_parser.cpp -lsqlparser
8
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:17==
which part of a program were more vulnerable. This way, seeds were created to reach
these locations in the code. Other studies focused on grammar-based fuzzing. Here, the
grammar rules of the PDF format was learned by Learn&Fuzz via machine learning. The
idea is that writing the grammar for a fuzzer is time consuming and machine learning can
potentially help by teaching itself the grammar of a particular language.
State of the Art 2024
To end this section on the evolution of fuzzing, we will look at future
directions in the domain. Zhao et al. points out how the fuzzing scene looks like as of 2024
in [43], where they go over different uncovered areas. New techniques are requested with
reinforcement learning and Large Language Models (LLMs). Also a fuzzing technique that
is vulnerability-aware. This is defined as a fuzzer being able to leverage the information
from previous found vulnerabilities, such as triggers or input patterns.
2.5
Modern Fuzzing
Some of the most popular fuzzers are AFL++ (American Fuzzy Lop plus plus), libFuzzer,
and Honggfuzz, which are grey-box fuzzer [21, 26].
“AFL++ is a superior fork to Google’s AFL […]”, as they write it on their Github page [44].
It has many options to fine tune it for a specific target, which can be read about
in depth in the documentation. It also has different sanitizers such as an address
sanitizer, memory sanitizer, and more. It can fuzz via different strategies such as
bit flips, havoc, and even custom grammars (which we will look at later).
LibFuzzer is a coverage-guided fuzzer. Like AFL++, libFuzzer targets a program and
generate mutations to place in the corpus. The purpose is to maximize the code
coverage [45].
Honggfuzz can be used with or without instrumentation, meaning that you do not have
to instrument the target program under compilation. As the two other, it also has
many options to optimize the fuzzing for different use cases [46].
AFL++ is not the only fork of AFL. AFLFast, AFLGo, AFLNET, AFL-HIER, and AFLChurn
also exist [20]. Another reason why AFL++, libFuzzer, and Honggfuzz are popular fuzzers
is that they are all supported by Google’s OSS-Fuzz [47], which means that Google finds
them useful. Also note that these are not official Google products, but AFL was initially
created by Google, libFuzzer’s contact info is to the “googlegroups”, and Honggfuzz is
located on Google’s Github repository. Google’s OSS-Fuzz is a free platform for critical
open-source projects and aims to make them safer [48, 47]. In 2023 OSS-Fuzz helped
find more than 10,000 vulnerabilities [47]. It has found bugs and vulnerabilities in popular
projects including sqlite, LLVM, and ffmpeg. Findings include heap-buffer-overflow, stack-
buffer-overflow, and use-after-free [49].
When to Stop Fuzzing
Some papers use 24-hour fuzzing campaigns [50, 51, 52], and some fuzzers (e.g., AFL++)
will contunue to fuzz until they are told to stop, while others (e.g., libFuzzer) will, by default,
stop after finding the first crash [26]. But what is the correct amount of time? When are we
sure we have covered all the paths in the program? To figure this out, we can use Anne
Chao’s estimate from 1984, which estimates the asymptotic total number of species S. In
terms of fuzzing, a species is seen as a unique statement, i.e., seeds that give a unique
path in the code (see Section 2.3.2 about path coverage) [53]. The estimate is used in
[28] where the estimated maximum number of paths that can be found in the target is
5408 by using the Chao1-estimator. It is also shown that after 24 hours of fuzzing, 97.7%
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
9
==PAGE:18==
of the paths had been discovered and after 7 days this had increased to 99.7%. Only two
percentage points increase with six more days of work.
Challenges and Limitations
We have talked about some fuzzing techniques requiring more knowledge and set up
compared to others. We also learned that this could be beneficial for structural data as
we would not get stuck in the initial syntax parsing. The setup process can be a chal-
lenge, as it requires more time. A limitation which exists in all software testing is that
we are never guaranteed to find all bugs. When fuzzing, we simply hope to find bugs
that were previously unknown. This is why Google’s OSS-Fuzz is running all the time.
Also the authors’ of [36] experience problems when preparing Huawei’s libmsg library for
fuzzy testing, where several obstacles emerged. They encountered inconsistency in the
configuration of the system they tried to fuzz and they had problems building the code in
order to be fuzzed. They also had to use time to develop a fuzzy driver to be able to run
tests for their target. In the paper, they mention that fuzzing is relatively new for many test
engineers and it shows that it is not always straight forward to implement fuzzy testing
into existing code bases.
2.6
Summary
In this chapter, we had a short history lesson about fuzzy testing and a high level overview
of how fuzzers work. Then we saw how black-, white-, and grey-box fuzzers differ from
each other. Black-box has no knowledge of the code, white-box does complex analysis of
the code, and grey-box fuzzing is in the middle of the two, making small instrumentation in
the code. From here, we went over some concepts in fuzzing. We touched upon different
ways to pick input seeds, such as creating them completely random or hand-picking them
such that they match the target under test. We also saw that code coverage is known
before the fuzzing campaign, but path coverage is not. Then we talked about different
fuzzing strategies, such as mutation-based, where seeds are simply mutated into new
seeds. Generation-based, where a grammar could be used in order to create seeds that
would reach far into the target’s code, and coverage-based, which is where the target is
instrumented with additional information about which parts of the code is reached. After
this, we talked about the evolution of fuzzing techniques from the beginning with simple,
random data to more sophisticated approaches using program analysis and grammars to
the use of machine learning and Large Language Models (LLMs) and we briefly mentioned
some of the famous fuzzers, AFL++, libFuzzer, and Honggfuzz. Towards the end of
the chapter, we learned about Chao’s estimate for when to stop the fuzzing and some
limitations with fuzzy testing, including the fact that we do not know if we are going to find
any bug.
In the next chapter, we will explore related work done in this field. We will look at grey-box
fuzzing, grammar-based fuzzing, and the selecting of seeds, as this is closely related to
the experiments we will examine in the end of this thesis.
10
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:19==
3
Related Work
There exist many papers on fuzzy testing. I have chosen to dive into papers that cover
different aspect of the research I have done with fuzzing. In this section, we will see papers
covering grammar-aware greybox fuzzing with AFL, AFL++, and other fuzzy engines on
parsers for structured data such as JavaScript, XML, and PHP. We will also consider a
paper talking about the importance of choosing good input seeds for fuzzing.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing
In [37] from 2019, Wang et al. extended AFL with what they
call Superion. A grammar-aware fuzzy engine. Their challenge was that coverage-based
grey-box fuzzers were good at fuzzing unstructured inputs such as images, but was lack-
ing when inputs became structural such as XML and JavaScript. Their approach, Supe-
rion, takes as input a target program and a grammar. They tested their grammar-aware
fuzzer against one XML engine, libplist, and three JavaScript engines, WebKit, Jerryscript,
and ChakraCore. In the test, they compared their results with AFL. Superion was able
to find 34 bugs, where AFL only found six of these. Also code coverage were compared
where Superion covered 16.7% more lines and 8.8% more functions than AFL. A limitation
stated by the paper is that the fuzzer needs a grammar provided by the user, which limits
the use if the target program does not have a public available grammar. It is concluded
that Superion, which is grammar-aware, is significantly better than fuzzers unaware of
grammars for structural data. A similar paper from 2021 [29] also proposes a grammar-
aware fuzzer because the current approaches does not test deep into interpreters. The
structured data that this paper tests against are the programming languages Ruby, PHP,
and JavaScript. The targets are interpreters for these languages: mruby, PHP, and Jer-
ryscript. They discover 10 new bugs and has 24.2% more coverage compared to existing
fuzzers.
Input Seed Selection
Herrera et al. published a paper in 2021 [21] analyzing seed
selection prior to a fuzzing campaign. The paper was created due to lack of studies that
addressed this point in fuzzing. In the survey they did, they found that the majority of
published research in the area either used a singleton corpus (i.e., a single seed) or the
empty corpus. They report that the choice of seeds has an impact on code coverage. Less
than 1% of the program readelf’s code were covered when uninformed seeds were used.
This increases to 38% when valid input seeds were used. Some of the research question
Herrera et al. have is (i) whether fuzzers perform better with a small set of input seeds
(e.g., empty or a single seed), or a large corpus of seeds and (ii) how does the selection of
input seed affect code coverage? They find that in a few instances, the empty input seed
is the fastest at finding some specific bugs in a reliable way. It is reported that the empty
corpus explore less code than when larger corpora are used: on average only half as
much code. When the program expect highly-structured inputs, the empty seed explores
less than half of the target’s code compared to other corpora. Overall, the empty seed is
inferior to other input seed selections. In the end of the paper, they recommend that the
empty seed is used quickly to weed out shallow bugs in the system, but for industrial-scale
fuzzing, the empty seed should never be used.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
11
==PAGE:20==
12
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:21==
4
Methodology
In this chapter, we will go over the different analysis and data collection approaches I have
used for my research for getting a better understanding of how the data will be presented.
We will also talk about the use of Large Language Models and how they have been used
as an assistant for research-specific tasks. I will also show the setup that has been used
to run the tests for the experiments, and, lastly, I will make a walk-through of a fuzzing
campaign.
4.1
Research
The design of the experiments is chosen to show how it is possible to fuzzy test parsers
of structured data in ways that exercises the underlying code the most. The experiments
focus on the grammar and the input seeds fed into the fuzzer engine at the beginning of
the fuzzing campaign. To highlight the difference the input seeds has on the outcome of a
fuzzing campaign, this variable is held isolated in the tests. Everything else is kept as still
as possible between experiments. Furthermore, I want the data found by the research
to be able to be recreated by others. It can be tricky to get the exact same results, as
fuzzy testing has a random element to it by definition. However, by providing details on
how the tests are run, what programs are being used, and providing the grammar and
how the input seeds have been created, it will give other researchers a foundation for
reproducibility of the data.
Approach
The research approach used in this thesis is quantitative. I want to gather
numerical data through tests, which can then be analyzed in graphs. Hypotheses will
be established for each test. This will ensure that an understanding of the experiment is
present and will be the entrance to a discussion on the experiments afterward. The data
that should be used for analysis should show how performant one input is to another and
how much of a difference the grammar makes.
Data Collection
The fuzzer engine AFL++, which is the program used to fuzz the target
under test, collects various measures while the test is running and collects all of these
in a Comma Separated Values (CSV) file called plot_data. The plot_data file collects 12
types of data points every five seconds. The data points are [54]:
• Number of cycles completed
• Current item being processed
• Size of the corpus
• Number of entries waiting to be fuzzed
• Number of favored entries waiting to
be fuzzed
• Percentage of the the bit map covered
• Number of crashes saved
• Number of hangs
• Number of levels in the generated
data set
• Number of executions per seconds
• Number of total executions
• Number of found edges
The interesting measures for the tests I want to conduct in the next chapter are the size of
the corpus and the number of found edges. The size of the corpus can show us how many
interesting inputs AFL++ was able to create while fuzzing. The number of found edges
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
13
==PAGE:22==
gives information about how much of the underlying code was exercised doing the tests.
Because the data is collected over time, it is easy to plot and compare. For comparison
of data, Microsoft Excel has been used to create drafts of the graphs in the early stages
of the analysis. Excel makes it easy to plot multiple graphs and compare data quickly.
Some other programs were initially considered to be used to collect data, but was deemed
unfit due to different technical limitations. One of the programs was afl-cov, which can
give a report about coverage of the target code under the fuzzing campaign. It can show
which lines and functions were hit duing the fuzzy test. When using afl-cov, the program
must be compiled with the -fprofile-arcs -ftest-coverage compiler flags in order to
work [55]. When testing, it was shown that this did not give interesting enough results,
as some of the target programs were relatively small such that no significant differences
were shown between tests. This did not mean that the tests showed exactly the same,
but rather that a method can be reached from different places inside the code, and afl-cov
only shows whether a function is hit or not. This is therefore considered a limitation and
not very informative for the research, as I want to show how well different inputs correlate
with how much the target program is exercised in terms of how many different paths it
creates in the code: this is what AFL++ calls edges found.
AFL++ is not the only fuzzy engine on the market, as mentioned in Section 2.5 and
libFuzzer was also considered.
LibFuzzer gave initial problems when I tried to used
grammar-based fuzzing. With AFL++ it was somewhat straightforward to implement a
new grammar and use it, which is the reason why this fuzzer is the one used for tests.
Data Analysis
To understand the data from the experiments, we will look at scatter plots
comparing several tests. Because fuzzy testing works by creating inputs over time, we
can compare different values by plotting them against each other on graphs. This gives
an immediate idea about the relation between some tests: if the lines are close or far from
each other. We will compare different tests in terms of how much coverage on the edges
we measure in the code, and occasionally look at the difference in the size of the corpus
between experiments.
Validity
The validity of the different experiments is assured due to the approach where
only a single variable is exposed in each test. By having a hypothesis for the outcome of
each test, we make sure that we know what we are going to test before running it. By doing
this, we will have a better understanding of the results and especially if we see something
which contradicts our hypothesis. When we only have a single variable exposed, we can
better pinpoint why we might see one result instead of another.
4.2
Use of Large Language Model
OpenAI’s ChatGPT 3.5 has been used as an assistant for gather information and for help
writing some of the code needed for the project.
Large Language Models (LLMs) have a very large vocabulary in many different domains.
This means that they can be very useful to create different content within a domain - and
probably faster than most humans can muster, which specifically helps in the prototyping
phase where multiple different options are tested. In the following sections we will see its
potential.
Creating Grammar
ChatGPT was used to create a grammar file for SQL. It was promp-
ted with the grammar file for Javascript, which is provided in the AFL++ repository un-
14
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:23==
der AFLplusplus/custom_mutators/grammar_mutator/grammar_mutator/grammars/java-
script.json. It was then asked to make such a grammar file for SQL. This grammar con-
tained SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, and CREATE TABLE. WHERE statements
were also part of the grammar. This SQL grammar was then used again as a prompt for
ChatGPT with the additional question if something was missing from the grammar. It re-
ported that JOINS were missing, which it was then asked to implement into the grammar.
Here, it added the following to the grammar:
1
"<SELECT >": [
2
["SELECT ", "<COLUMNS >", " FROM ", "<TABLE>", "<JOIN_CLAUSE >", "<
WHERE_CLAUSE >"],
3
],
4
"<JOIN_CLAUSE >": [
5
["<JOIN_TYPE >", "<TABLE>", " USING (", "<COLUMNS >", ")"]
6
],
7
"<JOIN_TYPE >": [
8
["INNER JOIN"], ["LEFT JOIN"], [...]
9
],
Listing 4.1: Part of the SQL grammar used for grammar-based fuzzing with AFL++
showing JOIN clauses.
The complete grammar can be found in Appendix B. This grammar can help AFL++ to
be capable of creating SQL statements for SELECT, with or without a WHERE and JOIN
clause. It can use INNER-, LEFT-, RIGHT-, and FULL OUTER JOIN. In addition, INSERT,
UPDATE, DELETE, and CREATE TABLE can be constructed. It can also structure logical
operations with AND or OR, and use comparison operators, such as equal, less than,
LIKE, IN, or BETWEEN. Furthermore, it gives the possibility to create strings which can be
used for table names where it has all the letters of the English alphabet and the numbers
zero to nine to its disposal.
Here, ChatGPT was able to first create a foundation for the grammar, which it immediately
understood from the JavaScript grammar provided. It did not add spaces before and after
keywords, which would have resulted in invalid SQL. After manually adding spaces such
that the result would be valid it was both able to recognize some missing statements in
the grammar and then able to incorporate it into its own foundation. This makes it very
useful to create a grammar because of the patterns it is able to recognize in the prompted
grammar and the consistent syntax in the output grammar.
Like the JavaScript or JSON grammar which are provided by AFL++ to use by everyone,
I wanted to contribute my grammar for SQL, such that other researchers in the future can
use it to find even more bugs and keep their programs secure. The grammar files are not
located directly in the AFLplusplus source code, but can be fetched by a script within. This
script downloads all the grammars from the Grammar-Mutator repository also hosted on
the AFLplusplus Github page. I created pull request #47 [56], which is now merged into
the stable branch to be used by everyone working with custom mutators in AFL++.
Creating Seeds
The seeds needed to be small and different while still being valid SQL.
ChatGPT was asked to “[...] make different small sql statements used for testing”. It was
first prompted to make some for CREATE. Then for SELECT and so on. Because of
ChatGPT’s domain knowledge and consistency it was able to create 67 SQL statements
where 52 were able to be parsed successfully by the SQL-parser. Some of the seeds
were basic SQL statements, and others were a bit more complex. Some of the basic
ones it created was:
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
15
==PAGE:24==
1
SELECT * FROM Employees;
2
3
INSERT INTO Employees (id, name, age, department)
4
VALUES (1, 'Alice', 30, 'Engineering');
5
6
DELETE FROM Products WHERE product_id = 101 OR price > 30;
Listing 4.2: Basic SQL queries from ChatGPT.
and some of the more complex it returned was:
1
UPDATE Employees
2
SET department =
3
CASE
4
WHEN Projects.project_id IS NULL THEN 'Unassigned'
5
ELSE Projects.department
6
END
7
FROM Employees
8
LEFT JOIN Projects ON Employees.id = Projects.manager_id;
Listing 4.3: Complex SQL query from ChatGPT.
Writing Code
The fuzzy engine, here AFL++, must run on a target in order to test it.
One can choose to test different parts of a system, but in this thesis, I chose to test the
main functionality of the parsers: Can it take an input and parse without breaking? To
show this, I read other programs written for fuzzy testing and found that it is okay for
the program to throw an exception, this simply means that the author of the parser has
thought about this error and handled it properly. A well handled error is okay in fuzzing,
here it is mostly crashes we care about. I prompted ChatGPT with my knowledge and
the use case of the code it was supposed to produce. I also prompted it with code from
other small programs found on Github used to fuzz other libraries. ChatGPT then returns
a small program to test the functionality we want. In Appendix A sees the program for
the SQL parser and in Appendix C sees the program for the JSON parser. ChatGPT also
assisted for programs used behind the scenes. It helped creating a small script to test
how many inputs in different folder were able to be parsed by the two parsers.
4.3
The Setup
The Hardware Used
The fuzzy testing was run on a PC with the specifications shown in
Table 4.1. However, neither the system nor the tests are optimized for the best possible
fuzzing campaign. The reason will become clear in the next chapter.
Operating System
Ubuntu 22.04 (Windows Subsystem for Linux)
CPU
AMD Ryzen 7 7700X
Number of Cores
8
GB of RAM
32
GPU
NVIDIA GTX 1660Ti
Table 4.1: Specifications for the PC running the experiments.
16
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:25==
Fuzzy Engine
For the fuzzy tests, I use the grey-box, coverage-based fuzzer AFL++
(version 4.10c). This means that each target program is instrumented in compile time
by a compiler from AFL++. For this thesis, afl-g++ (g++ version 11.4.0) is used. This
instrumentation helps AFL++ to detect interesting seeds while fuzzing. For most of the
tests, I use grammar files to create seeds in the fuzzing campaign. This is specified for
each test in the next chapter. I mainly focus on grammar-based fuzzing. For this I use a
JSON grammar provided by AFL++ and an SQL grammar that I have created as part of
my research. For the tests using grammar-based fuzzing, the flag AFL_CUSTOM_MU-
TATOR_ONLY is set. If we look in the documentation for AFL++ this means: “Note: If
AFL_CUSTOM_MUTATOR_ONLY is set, all mutations will solely be performed with the
custom mutator.” This means that we use tree-based mutations. When random mutation
is used, this flag is not set and I provide AFL++ with the -D argument to enable random
mutation strategies. To measure the coverage of the fuzzing campaign, I use the output
file plot_data from the fuzzer. This provides us with how many edges were found over
time in the target program to give us an idea of how much of the underlying code were
exercised.
Fuzzer Limitation
All experiments are being run with AFL++. As we have seen earlier
in Section 2.5, AFL++ is not the only fuzzy engine available. This can give the experi-
ments less credit for what they show, as the results might not be replicated by all fuzzers.
However, it is assumed that AFL++, like other big fuzzers, is heavily tested, and because
of the nature of my tests, they should all be fuzzer-independent, as no specific AFL++
feature is used. The results should therefore be equivalent to the same experiments ran
on other fuzzers.
Targets
The programs under test are an SQL parser and a JSON parser. The SQL
parser is from hyrise on Github with 716 stars and is written in C++. Its purpose is to parse
SQL queries into C++ objects. The JSON parser is from nlohmann on Github with around
40.900 stars and is also written in C++. The parser is made to be easy to implement in
an existing C++ code base as it only requires a single header file.
Grammar Limitation
The fuzzing is being performed on an SQL- and a JSON parser.
At first, I also wanted to conduct experiments with XML parsers, but because the grammar
is built on Context-free grammar, this made it difficult as proper XML is not context free
[34]. An SQL parser was therefore chosen as an alternative for an XML parser. XML data
can look like this: <Name>Alice</Name>. It has tags, both an opening- and a closing tag.
If these do not match, most parsers would quickly throw a parse error, and no interesting
code paths would be touched, as we saw in Section 2.3.3 about fuzzy techniques. If we
were to have a grammar for XML, it could look something like Listing 4.4, which shows
that an XML string consist of an opening tag, then some content, and finally a closing
tag. When this grammar specification is used, an opening tag will first be created to some
string, then some content, which we assume is also a string. In the end a closing tag is
needed, which should match the first tag, but no. A new tag would here be created the
same way the opening tag was created and because this is random, it most likely does
not end up being the same string.
1
"<start>": [["<element >"]],
2
"<element >": [["<", "<tag>", ">", "<content >", "</", "<tag>", ">"]],
3
...
Listing 4.4: Example of a beginning of an XML grammar.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
17
==PAGE:26==
Isolate Variable
Due to randomness in fuzzy testing, we would like to keep most things
as constant as possible. For this reason, I only run one test at a time and do not use the
PC while running the tests. The PC is also restarted between tests. This gives the same
baseline for all tests and only exposes the one variable that we would like to test for each
of the experiments.
4.4
Fuzzing Example
In this section I will go over the process of running a fuzzing campaign against a target.
Everything from building the program from source and creating the grammar mutator all
the way to starting the fuzzy campaign.
Instrument Target
First we need to build the program from source in order to instrument
it such that AFL++ can use its coverage-based feedback for seed mutation. This is done
with a compiler from AFL++. In this example we use the SQL parser program, which can
be seen in Appendix A. We compile the target with the following command:
1
~/AFLplusplus/afl-g++ -Isql-parser/src -Lsql-parser -o sql_parser sql_parser.
cpp -lsqlparser
Build Grammar Mutator
To build the custom grammar mutator for SQL, we locate the
Context-free grammar written in JSON in the grammars folder and execute the following:
1
make GRAMMAR_FILE=grammars/sql.json
This uses the antlr program to build a grammar file which can be understood by AFL++.
Here, it will create a libgrammarmutator-sql.so file.
Use the Grammar
With the .so file created, we tell AFL++ to use it by setting a flag for
AFL++ with this command:
1
export AFL_CUSTOM_MUTATOR_LIBRARY=../libgrammarmutator -sql.so
With this done, we also have the option to tell AFL++ to only use this grammar mutator.
This is done by running:
1
export AFL_CUSTOM_MUTATOR_ONLY=1
Fuzz the Target
Now, everything is set up and we assume that we have some seeds
inside a folder. Now we can start the fuzzing campaign by running this:
1
~/AFLplusplus/afl-fuzz -i seeds_50/ -o out_50/ -- ./sql_parser @@
This will start the fuzzing and will end when we press ctrl+c. A screenshot of how this
looks can be seen in Appendix D. In the screenshot, it can be seen that 1223 crashes have
been found, but only 20 are saved. This means that only 20 of the crashes are unique in
that they found different edges before resulting in a crash. afl-fuzz is the program we
are using to fuzz. We give the -i seeds_50/ argument, which provides AFL++ with all the
seeds located in that folder. The -o out_50/ will create a folder for all the outputs created
while fuzzing. In the last part, after the double dashes (- -) meaning the end of command
options in Bash, we see ./sql_parser @@. This means that we are running against the
SQL parser that we compiled earlier and the @@ is specified because the SQL parser takes
files as inputs. AFL++ will create new seeds, place them in files and substitute the @@ for
the file name.
18
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:27==
4.5
Summary
In this methodology chapter, I explained that the research in this thesis is primarily focused
on the use of grammars and input seeds when fuzzing structured data. I also went through
the approach of collecting data points from the fuzzing campaigns and comparing results
in graphs. I also highlighted the importance of keeping everything constant, except for the
variable we are testing. From here, I mentioned the help from LLMs for seed and grammar
creation due to their large domain knowledge and pattern recognition. Then I described
the setup used for the experiments, from the hardware used to the fuzzy engine, AFL++.
I also discussed some limitation by only using a single fuzzer and problems in creating
a grammar for XML with Context-free grammar. Here, I also showed my contribution
to AFL++’s custom grammar mutator with my pull request for the SQL grammar I built,
which was successfully merged into the stable branch to be used by other people. Lastly,
I showed a step-by-step process for starting a fuzzy campaign, from compiling the code,
to building the grammar mutator to actually begin the fuzzing. Hopefully, this has given a
good foundation for how the tests are going to be performed and a better understanding of
how fuzzing works practically. In the next, and final chapter before the conclusion, we will
see Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers, which conveniently is also the name
of the thesis.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
19
==PAGE:28==
20
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:29==
5
Experiments and Results
Intro
In this chapter, we will examine the research conducted on parsers and look at the
data nicely transformed into graphs. We will also discuss the results of the experiments.
We will start off by comparing the difference between grammar-based fuzzing and ran-
dom, mutation-based fuzzing. From here, we will analyze the impact that the input seeds
have on grammar-based fuzzing campaigns. After this, we see whether the input seeds
are simply a numbers game or if some seeds are better than others. Hereafter, we will
compare a single large input seed vs. multiple small ones. Then, we analyze the use of
multiple mutators simultaneously. In the end, we will examine a crash found by grammar-
based fuzzing.
Experiments
Each experiment is in its own section. Each section has three parts to
it: about, telling us something about what the experiment is and why we conducted it,
hypothesis, showcasing the hypothesis of the experiment and thoughts behind it, and
finally the results, where we dive into the results, which is also here a small discussion
about the results will be located.
Graphs
The graphs in this section have an x-axis of time in minutes and a y-axis of
the count of either the number of edges found, unique code paths, of the corpus count,
interesting seeds created. Higher values on the y-axis should be interpreted as better
results. The text on top of the graphs tells which parser the test was performed on: the
SQL parser, the JSON parser, or both of them. Each graph also have a short caption ex-
plaining what the graph is showing. When both the SQL- and JSON parsers are displayed
on the same graph, it should be noted that they are two completely different programs.
This means that it does not make sense to compare the number of edges found between
the two directly.
Note
It is worth noting that these fuzzing campaigns are not optimized to be the fastest
nor the best. The tests are kept simple in order to analyse the difference the input seeds
and the grammar-based mutation makes while fuzzing. AFL++ and other fuzzy engines,
have a lot of different dials and configurations, which can be used to optimize for specific
purposes. This will not be looked further into in this thesis. Let us dive into the experi-
ments.
5.1
Comparing Grammar vs. Random Fuzzing
About
To have a baseline for this analysis of grammar-based fuzzy testing and to see
whether our grammar file works, an experiment was set up to showcase just this. Intu-
itively, this test could only go one way. If we think about testing a parser for any pro-
gramming language, we might expect, even without looking at the implementation, that
the parser in question would quickly throw an error if the input starts off with something
not recognizable. If we think of JSON, we would not expect an input starting with a pipe
(|) or a dollar sign ($) to branch out to many parts of the code. We would expect it to fail
very fast. Moreover, if we think of SQL, we would probably expect an input to start with
one of the different keywords in that language. To create interesting paths in the code for
parsers of any language, we would like to build inputs that keep the syntax of the language
in mind while still being somewhat bizarre.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
21
==PAGE:30==
With this in mind we could create our first set of tests.
For both tests, we used an
empty seed as input.
This was just a single file with a dot (.), as AFL++ refused to
run without any seed. For the first test we used the custom grammar mutator with the
AFL_CUSTOM_MUTATOR_LIBRARY=/path/to/libgrammarmutator-sql.so and AFL_CUSTOM_MU-
TATOR_ONLY=1. For the second test, we ran it without the grammar mutator and instead
used random mutation strategies, like havoc and splice. These can be read in more
depth in Section 2.3.3.
Hypothesis
The hypothesis for this experiment was not too controversial considering
the paragraphs above. The hypothesis was that grammar-based fuzzing would be signif-
icantly better than the random approach. Better here, means that it was able to exercise
more of the target’s code.
Results
If we examine Figure 5.1 and look at the blue lines, where grammar-based
fuzzing and random fuzzing for SQL are compared, we see that our hypothesis holds.
We traversed way more unique edges when using our SQL grammar than when we tried
to construct statements randomly. The same was not true for JSON, which can be seen
on the orange lines in the figure. Here, the random approach, without any grammar and
only with a single dot as input, was able to find more edges in the code than when it had
a grammar for support. Multiple things could play into this, as we will look at in a bit.
Intuitively, it does not make much sense that it kept finding new edges when using the
random approach, where our grammar-based approach seemed to flatten out. When we
look into some potential reasons for this, we would not want to forget the hypothesis: that
the random fuzzing would be worse than the grammar-based and with that fall victim to
hindsight bias. Hindsight bias is well described in Daniel Kahneman’s book: Thinking,
fast and slow
A general limitation of the human mind is its imperfect ability to reconstruct
past states of knowledge, or beliefs that have changed. Once you adopt a
new view of the world (or of any part of it), you immediately lose much of your
ability to recall what you used to believe before your mind changed. [57]
If we instead focused on why our initial hypothesis was the way it was, we can learn from
it and use it to construct better hypotheses for the upcoming experiments. Let us dive into
how and why AFL++ was able to find more edges for the randomly created JSON inputs
compared to the one based on the grammar file. And why was this not the case for SQL?
If we look at a basic example of SQL and a basic example of JSON, we can see some
differences. For JSON, the parser successfully parses a single number: 1, an empty
object: {}, or an empty array: []. For SQL one of the smallest statements that the
parser can successfully parse is a constant SELECT statement: SELECT 1. We can
immediately see that the chance of creating a single number is higher than that of creating
the letters S-E-L-E-C-T (case insensitive) followed by a space and then a constant. Let
us for a moment imagine that AFL++ only were to select letter from the English alphabet
(26 letters), then the possibility to create the six letters in SELECT would be 1/266 =
1/308, 915, 776. In the experiment we did, we made 3,874,029 inputs to the SQL parser
in the span of 30 minutes. Around 80 times fewer than needed.
Every time AFL++ finds a seed exploring something interesting, it saves this seed in a
queue to use for mutations for new inputs. These interesting inputs are the corpus. Let
us look at Figure 5.2 to see the amount of saved corpus for our random approach for
both SQL and JSON. We see the graph for SQL flattens out quickly, where the graph for
22
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:31==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Time (minutes)
Edges found
SQL- and JSON parser
SQL Grammar-based
SQL Random
JSON Grammar-based
JSON Random
Figure 5.1: Found edges in grammar-based vs. random fuzzing for parsers of structured
languages: SQL- and JSON parser.
JSON seems to keep going up. As mentioned, AFL++ uses the created corpus for its
later mutations, and when looking at the graph going up, it seems like it found more and
more interesting inputs for the JSON parser. If we compare the amount of corpus that
was actually parsable by each parser, we see something interesting. By feeding all the
created corpus into each parser and counting each time it is able to parse, we get the
numbers shown in Table 5.1 on page 25. Here we see that none of the 190 “interesting”
inputs were valid SQL. For JSON we see that 42% were able to be parsed. Let us look
at the first input seed that the JSON parser was able to parse. 5. The number 5, which,
discussed earlier, is one of the simplest JSON strings to create. This valid input was the
9th seed saved to the corpus. If we look at the 9th seed in the saved corpus for SQL,
we are pleased with a file containing: ffff ffff ffff ffff ffff ffff ffff ffff (in
hexadecimal), which translates to something like ÿÿÿÿÿÿÿÿÿÿÿÿÿÿÿÿ in ASCII. Not quite
valid SQL. As mentioned in the very introduction of this thesis, it can be difficult to construct
a valid input if the only inputs to mutate are far from what we are looking for. This can also
be a part of what we see for SQL. The opposite is true for JSON, where AFL++ was able to
use the parsable inputs in its mutation and therefore construct even more valid JSON. For
future research, one could look into testing other programs expecting structured inputs to
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
23
==PAGE:32==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
1,400
1,600
Time (minutes)
Corpus count
SQL- and JSON parser
Random SQL
Random JSON
Figure 5.2: Corpus count using only random mutations: SQL- and JSON parser.
see if random mutations perform better than grammar mutations in other cases as well.
5.2
The Importance of Seeds: Empty vs. Multiple
About
To analyze if input seeds had any use in grammar-based fuzzing, an experiment
was set up. I wanted to check if the grammar file did all the heavy lifting or if the seeds
provided also had an impact. The way we check which configuration is better is by looking
at edges found while fuzzing, which is how much coverage our seeds made, which we
learned about in Section 2.3.2 about code- and path coverage. I ran two tests against
both the SQL- and the JSON parser. The input seeds were the isolated variables. For
the first test I created a single seed - because AFL++ refused to run without any. The
seed was a file containing a single dot (.): not valid SQL nor JSON. For the second test,
I fuzzed the SQL parser with 67 different seeds and for the JSON parser I had 50 seeds
which was given as input to the fuzzing campaign. These seeds were created with the
help of ChatGPT, as we saw in Section 4.2. These seeds tried to exercise as much as
possible of the two languages. All tests for this experiment ran for 3 hours.
Hypothesis
The hypothesis of the experiment was that the use of multiple input seeds
would be significantly better than an empty seed. The idea being that the fuzzer, when
giving multiple seeds, would have more initial knowledge of the program under test. I
would imagine that when the seeds covered many, or even more, keywords available in
24
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:33==
Parser
Parsed / Total Corpus
Percentage Parsed
SQL
0 / 190
0%
JSON
655 / 1560
42%
Table 5.1: Seeds from the corpus, created by random mutations, which can be parsed
successfully by the parsers: SQL and JSON.
the grammars, it would have more chances of creating different combinations of inputs,
which might end up being interesting paths in the program under test. This would also
make sense according to what we learned about tree-based mutation in Section 2.3.3.
With tree-based mutation, different seeds would be combined while keeping the structure
intact.
Results
Let us look at Figure 5.3 to see the amount of edges found over time when
starting with an empty seed compared to starting with multiple seeds for grammar-based
fuzzing. We immediately see that the results for the SQL parser differ more than the
results for the JSON parser. When we look a bit closer, we see that the use of multiple
seeds was better than using an empty seed, which holds true for the fuzzing of both
parsers. This was also on a par with our hypothesis. Now we have tested and shown
that many input seeds are better than an empty one, but we are yet to figure out if the
number of seeds changes anything or not. This will be done in our next experiment. As
mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, the results for the SQL- and JSON parser
should not be compared directly, but here we see a larger gap between the tests for the
SQL parser than for the JSON parser. One of the reasons for this, could be the sizes of
the languages themselves. It can be found that the number of types that JSON supports
dwarfs compared to the number of reserved keywords for SQL. A further investigation will
not be found in this thesis, but could be interesting for future research.
5.3
Impact of Varying Seed Quantities
About
With the previous experiment concluding that input seeds in fact make a differ-
ence, one could ask whether we would have obtained similar results had we used fewer
seeds. In the next tests, we are going to consider this question by comparing different
quantities of input seeds. We test both the SQL parser and the JSON parser with 1, 5,
10, 25, and 50 seeds. Again, for this experiment, we are going to look at the edges found
while fuzzing and we used grammar-based mutations. In this way we could investigate
how much code each of the tests exercised. The seeds have been chosen such that they
“increase” in complexity. By this, I mean that the test with one seed, only has one basic
seed which would be a simple SELECT statement for the SQL parser. For the five seeds,
it would be basic queries for SELECT, INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, and CREATE. Here,
the one with five seeds also contains the seed used for the test with a single seed. Like-
wise, the test with 10 seeds contained all the seeds from the test with five seeds and so
on. This means that the only set of seeds being unique was the last 25 seeds of the input
corpus of 50 seeds. We will first look at the test for the SQL parser and then for the JSON
parser. They have been placed in two different graphs for better visualisation. All tests in
this experiment ran for 30 minutes.
Hypothesis
The hypothesis for both tests was that more seeds equals more edges
found. Like the idea behind the previous test, the more seeds the fuzzer has to work
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
25
==PAGE:34==
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Time (minutes)
Edges found
SQL- and JSON parser
Empty seed SQL
Multiple seeds SQL
Empty seeds JSON
Multiple seeds JSON
Figure 5.3: Found edges for grammar-based fuzzing comparing the use of an empty seed
vs. the use of multiple seeds: SQL- and JSON parser. 3 hour run.
with, the more interesting seeds can be created. I would expect to see the test with one
seed explore the fewest edges, five explore some more, 10 more again, then 25 with
even more edges found, and lastly the test with 50 seeds to explore the most edges in
the experiment.
Results
Let us examine Figure 5.4 to see the graph for the fuzzing of the SQL parser.
By a quick look, it looks exactly like the description of the hypothesis and it even intuitively
makes sense that the 25 and 50 seeds explored way more edges than 10 or fewer seeds,
due to the large gap from 10 to 25, and again from 25 to 50. If we zoom in a little (sorry if
this is non-digital), we see that one and five are very close to each other and it is actually
the test with one seed that found more edges. However, these test only ran for half an
hour, and it can also be seen that, at least the tests with one, 10, and 50 seeds, were
still finding new edges. Despite that, this test does in fact show that the more seeds, the
better, and that the quantity of seeds does have a difference in grammar-based fuzzing.
Let us now consider the same setup ran on the JSON parser, which can be seen in Figure
5.5. This does not look the same. At all! We see that the tests with one, five, 10, and 25
seeds are basically identical in the edges found. The test running with 50 input seeds is
26
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:35==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Time (minutes)
Edges found
SQL parser
1 seed
5 seeds
10 seeds
25 seeds
50 seeds
Figure 5.4: Found edges for grammar-based fuzzing comparing the use of different
amount of input seeds: SQL parser.
of significant difference. Let us explore some possibilities of why we see such differences
between the two experiments.
Randomness. Fuzzing has an element of randomness. Both the way the seeds are
generated from the grammar and how they are mutated by the fuzzer. However,
the tests of the JSON parser seem too specific in the grouping of four out of five
tests for this to be the sole reason.
Time. The tests only ran for 30 minutes, which makes it hard to say if anything would
have changed had they ran for longer. However, it does not look like the graphs are
going anywhere but horizontal.
Language size. The size of keywords in SQL is larger than for JSON. It could be that
because SQL has a larger set of keywords, we can more easily see a difference in
the edges found, e.g., by five input seeds compared to 10 input seeds. Whereas for
JSON, we might already have seen all interesting edges with one seed, such that
there is no different between one and 25 input seeds. But how do we then explain
the gap between the four grouped-up lines and the line for 50 seeds?
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
27
==PAGE:36==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Time (minutes)
Edges found
JSON parser
1 seed
5 seeds
10 seeds
25 seeds
50 seeds
Figure 5.5: Found edges for grammar-based fuzzing comparing the use of different
amount of input seeds: JSON parser.
Input seeds. As mentioned earlier, the seeds was picked in such a way that the test
with 50 seeds had all the seeds from the test with 25 seeds and then it had some
additional 25 seeds, which were not in any of the other tests. Could it be that some
of the 25 unique seeds made a huge difference?
Let us consider this last case about the input seeds. Maybe input seeds are not just a
pure numbers game, maybe some seeds contributes to more edges than others. We will
try to answer this question in the next experiment that spawned from the result of this
experiment. The reason for the grouping of four of the tests are however not investigated
further in this thesis.
5.4
Evaluating the Equivalence of Seeds
About
To understand whether input seeds are “worth” the same (i.e., contributing equal
amount to the edges found), an experiment was set up. In this experiment we made five
batches with 10 seeds in each batch. We then ran five tests for both the SQL parser
and the JSON parser with each batch as input seeds. Each grammar-based test ran for
30 minutes. The five batches had been constructed by taking seeds from the corpus of
28
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:37==
50 seeds. This means that we have seen all the seeds in the earlier experiment. The
batches were crafted by picking some basic-, intermediate-, and complex seeds for each
batch. This means that one of the batches were not just consisting of basic seeds (e.g.,
basic SELECT statements for SQL). Also, different kinds of seeds had been used for the
JSON parser. Again, this means that not only seeds consisting of numbers or arrays were
together in a single batch. Again, we considered the number of edges found.
Hypothesis
The hypothesis of the experiment was that seeds bundled together in this
way would result in the same number of edges being found. However, I had an assump-
tion about more complex seeds were able to find more edges than that of simple seeds.
However, due to the way these batches had been created, described above, I would ex-
pect the lines on the graphs to be very close together, but not necessarily the same as the
10 seed line from the earlier experiment (Section 5.3) due to the seeds in this experiment
contained both simple and complex seeds.
Results
Let us first consider the five batches for the SQL parser seen in Figure 5.6. We
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Time (minutes)
Edges found
SQL parser
Batch 1
Batch 2
Batch 3
Batch 4
Batch 5
Figure 5.6: Found edges for grammar-based fuzzing comparing five batches of 10 seeds:
SQL parser.
can see that the lines are somewhat close and overlapping, but it seems that batch 3 found
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
29
==PAGE:38==
marginally more edges than both batch 1 and 5. However, we have already established
that fuzzing has a random element to it, which means that this experiment is rather difficult
to conclude anything from. If we remember from the earlier experiment, where the SQL
parser was also fuzzed with 10 seeds, we see that the findings in this experiment show
better edge coverage (in the earlier experiment the test for 10 seeds hovered around
the 2000 line on the graph). These lines are a bit higher on the y-axis. This is not too
surprising as these batches contained both simple as well as more complex seeds, which
the 10 seeds from the earlier experiment did not. Let us now look at the same experiment,
but this time performed on the JSON parser, to see whether it shows the same result. This
can be seen in Figure 5.7. Here we see something curious. Every batch except for batch
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Time (minutes)
Edges found
JSON parser
Batch 1
Batch 2
Batch 3
Batch 4
Batch 5
Figure 5.7: Found edges for grammar-based fuzzing comparing five batches of 10 seeds:
JSON parser.
2 is all on top of each other. This is nearly in line with my hypothesis except for one of the
batches. With these results, it seemed that singular seeds could make a difference, but
to conclude that, we had a closer look at batch 2, as it seemed like there could be some
seeds in that batch that found more edges than other input seeds. After a closer look at
the seeds used in batch 2 (the input seeds can be seen in Appendix E), it showed that
emojies and other Unicode characters were a part of these seeds. These types of seeds
were not found in the other batches. To get an idea if any single seed were the reason
30
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:39==
for the more edges being found in the fuzzy campaign, we examined the queue. The
queue in AFL++ is a queue of all interesting seeds that have been created, also referred
to as the corpus. Hence, when a seed was mutated and ended up exploring some edges
that had not been seen before, it was added to the queue. In the queue, for the fuzzing
with batch 2 as input, we saw that many of the first seeds in the queue were different
mutations of the input seed reading: "unicode": "Café is the same as cafe\u0301",
which is the seed on line 36-38 in Appendix E. Again, it was difficult to conclude that
this was the sole reason for the result that we saw. To understand this better we should
have an isolated test of a seed containing a Unicode character and a seed only consisting
of ASCII characters, which we would call a “normal” seed. Ten of the mutations to the
Unicode input seed from the queue can be seen in Appendix F.
Once again, an experiment was set up. This experiment was only tested against the
JSON parser. We used the JSON grammar and let the tests run for 30 minutes. Two
tests were performed, each with a single input seed for the fuzzer. The first test had a
seed containing a Unicode-specific character, the other without any such character; this
was called the normal seed. The two seeds can be seen in Appendix G. The normal seed
was on purpose chosen to contain multiple different types from the JSON specification. It
had strings, an integer, a float, a boolean, an object, and an array. In this way, it was not
a simple seed, but this would show us if Unicode-specific characters has a saying in the
findings of edges compared to other things from the JSON specification.
The hypothesis was, with the earlier results in mind, that the Unicode seed would perform
better than the normal seed and find more edges. The result of the experiment can be
seen in Figure 5.8. Here, it is clear that the Unicode seed found more edges than the
normal JSON seed did. We can, therefore, with more confidence than before, say that
singular input seeds can make a significant difference in fuzzing. But does this mean that
adding a seed with a Unicode specific character in the input corpus always will result in a
higher number of found edges? Not exactly. We have to keep in mind that when we are
working with grammar-based fuzzing, we have to be knowledgeable of the program under
test and what we provide to the fuzzer. The JSON grammar used for the experiments in
this thesis, was only able to produce ASCII characters for the strings. This means, that the
fuzzer itself was not able to generate the input seed we provided. The moment we pro-
vided such a seed, it was able to mutate it in various ways, as we saw when we examined
the queue for batch 2. This goes in favor of using inputs seeds when doing grammar-
based fuzzing, because even if our grammar is unable to generate specific seeds, our
initial seed corpus will ensure that these paths are also being explored.
5.5
Evaluating Seed Size
About
In this experiment, I wanted to test if it was better to have a single large seed or
to have many small, compact seeds. The idea was that the fuzzer might have an easier
time mutating small inputs into something interesting rather than if it was simply one large
file. To answer this question, I set up two tests for each of our targets. To test the SQL
parser, 50 input seeds were used. The total size being 4429 bytes with a median size of
86.5 bytes, where the largest seed took up 154 bytes of space. For the JSON parser, 28
small seeds were used totaling 912 bytes. The median file size of the seeds was 24 bytes
and the largest seed took up 121 bytes of space. These numbers can also be seen in
Table 5.2. The single large seed had been created such that it represented the same data
as the small seeds as much as possible. This meant, for the fuzzing of the SQL parser,
that all 50 seeds had been combined into one long string of multiple SQL queries. All the
small seeds ended with a semicolon (;) and in SQL, this just means that the query ends
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
31
==PAGE:40==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Time (minutes)
Edges found
JSON parser
Unicode
Normal
Figure 5.8: Found edges for grammar-based fuzzing comparing the use of a seed con-
taining unicode specific characters vs. a seed that does not: JSON parser.
and a new one can begin. This also meant that there was no overhead in the file size, as
this single large input seed took up as much space as all the small seeds combined, 4429
bytes. For the JSON parser, the 28 input seeds had been combined into one large JSON
object (i.e., inside curly brackets with commas in between) to form a valid JSON object.
In contrast to the large SQL seed, this gave a bit of overhead and the large JSON input
ended up being 1096 bytes in size.
Parser
Total seed size (bytes)
Median seed size (bytes)
Largest seed (bytes)
SQL
4429
86,5
154
JSON
912
24
121
Table 5.2: Table showing the total-, median-, and largest seed sizes of corpora of many
small seeds: SQL and JSON.
Hypothesis
The hypothesis for the experiment was that the multiple small seeds would
find more edges in the programs under test, as I assumed that AFL++ could more easily
mutate small inputs into more interesting new seeds.
32
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:41==
Results
The results for the experiments can be seen in Figure 5.9. We see that it was
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Time (minutes)
Edges found
SQL- and JSON parser
1 large seed SQL
Multiple small seeds SQL
1 large seed JSON
Multiple small seeds JSON
Figure 5.9: Found edges for grammar-based fuzzing comparing the use of a single large
input seed vs. multiple small inupt seeds: SQL- vs JSON parser.
very close for both the SQL parser and the JSON parser. It can be seen that for SQL,
the results were nearly identical, whereas for JSON, the multiple small seeds came out
a little better than the single large input. One explanation for this could be that the large
seed for SQL was simply all the small ones one after the other, separated by semicolons.
In the large JSON seed, it was again the same data, but here it was enclosed in an outer
JSON object in order to be parsable. This enclosure could mean that outer objects are
being parsed differently than inner objects. However, we did not see anything remarkable
by using one technique instead of the other, which means that it probably does not make
sense to either combine all your seeds into one large one or split your large seeds into
small ones. The hypothesis is therefore not proven to be correct.
5.6
Best of Both (Mutation) Worlds
About
In Section 2.3.3, we learned that different fuzzing mutations were not exclusive
or, but it was, in fact, possible to use multiple mutation strategies in the same fuzzy cam-
paign. In this experiment, we wanted to compare grammar-based mutation vs. random
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
33
==PAGE:42==
mutation (e.g., havoc and splice) vs. a combination of grammar-based and random mu-
tations. This worked by telling AFL++ to use both grammar-based mutation and random
mutation strategies, which would be used one at a time in the campaign. Each test ran
for 30 minutes and had 50 input seeds at its disposal.
Hypothesis
The hypothesis for this experiment was that the use of both the grammar-
based and random mutations would be the one finding the most edges for both the SQL-
and JSON parsers. The idea was that when both grammar- and random mutations were
used, we got the best of both worlds. The thought behind it was that the grammar-based
mutation would create most of the valid seeds, and the random mutation would then hope-
fully be able to change these seeds just a tiny bit in order to keep them in a valid state, but
still explored new territory in the code that the tree-based mutation from the grammar mu-
tator would not have created. However, as we learned in the experiment in Section 5.1,
the random mutation strategy was actually able to create valid JSON from thin air1, which
should be kept in mind. In that experiment, we also saw that not a single valid SQL query
was created. Therefore, my hypothesis for the SQL parser was that the test that would
find the second most edges would be the grammar-based mutation, whereas I thought it
would be the random mutations for the JSON parser. The third place for the SQL parser
was then the random mutations and for the JSON parser, it was the grammar-based mu-
tations.
Results
The results for the SQL parser can be seen in Figure 5.10. Like the last time we
experimented with random mutation-based strategies, we see here a result that differed
from the hypothesis. If our memory is good, we might ask how the random mutation
strategy did so well in this experiment, but when we used the same random strategy
on the SQL parser in Section 5.1, we created exactly zero valid SQL statements and it
found only around 650-750 edges. The difference between the setup in this experiment,
compared to the earlier one, was that the earlier experiment had only a single, empty
seed as input whereas the fuzzer this time had 50 SQL statements to work with. It is clear
from this, that AFL++ cannot create random SQL statements from nothing, but if it gets a
bit of help with input seeds, it is able to create some valid seeds. It created 330 valid SQL
statements out of 1679 total seeds in the corpus (19.7%). I have placed a graph comparing
random mutation fuzzing of the SQL parser with an empty input seed (from Section 5.1)
vs. 50 input seeds in Appendix H. When looking at how well the random mutation-based
fuzzing performed, it might not be too much of a surprise to see that the combination of
both random and grammar-based fuzzing was the second best option in this test. It might
however come as a surprise that it did not performing better than it did. We see that it
flattened out, which was not seen with the pure random mutations. One reason for this
could be that AFL++ spent way more time using the grammar-based mutation strategy
instead of the random one. This was observed by looking at the interface provided by
AFL++, where the current strategy being used was shown. When we took a look at the
corpus, where interesting seeds are placed, we saw that 51.5% of these were created
using the SQL grammar we provided, the rest by random mutations. The number of seeds
created by each strategy can be seen in Table 5.3. One thing to note is that even though
it seemed like the random strategy was the best in this test because it found so many
more edges, it might not be the whole story. The random fuzzing found zero crashes,
whereas the other two strategies were able to crash the program with multiple seeds.
This showed a limitation of using edges to show the coverage of the fuzzing campaign.
Even though this kind of coverage information was unique, it gave us no information about
1Technically speaking, these were created from a dot (.), which was the input seed used in the experiment.
34
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:43==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
Time (minutes)
Edges found
SQL parser
Grammar-based
Random
Both
Figure 5.10: Found edges comparing grammar-based mutation, random mutation, and a
combination of both using 50 input seeds: SQL parser.
the depth. By depth, I mean how far into the underlying target’s program a given seed
was exercising code. This would give a better indication of whether the coverage was
good or just shallow. The same test was run on the JSON parser, which results can be
seen in Figure 5.11 on page 37. Here we saw the same pattern emerging as for the
test against the SQL parser. The completely random approach was the one yielding the
most found edges, then the combination of the two mutation strategies, and in third place
the grammar-based mutation. However, the results were a lot closer in this test. Our
hypothesis for the JSON parser was also for the combination of the mutations, both in the
graph, to be the best of the three. Again, one possibility for this result could be that AFL++
uses lots of time on the grammar-based mutation strategy. In this test, it was found that
81% of the interesting seeds saved to the corpus, were created by the grammar-mutation,
leaving only 19% for the random mutation strategies. The number of seeds can be seen
in Table 5.3.
Here, it suggests that we use a combination of different mutation strategies, as even
though the pure random mutation strategy found many edges, it did not find a crash,
which the other tests did. For future research, it could give great insight into the fuzzy
campaigns if a better code coverage indicator was used. One that is able to make a
distinction between deep and shallow code paths. This could potentially give us a better
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
35
==PAGE:44==
Grammar Mutation
Random Mutation
Total
SQL
311
293
604
JSON
615
144
759
Table 5.3: Table showing the number of seeds created by the grammar mutation, the
random mutation, and the total: SQL and JSON.
idea whether the pure random mutation strategy is any good or not.
5.7
Crash
The Bug
When fuzzing the SQL parser with the custom-build SQL grammar, AFL++
reported many crashes. The first thought that came to my mind was that I must have
made an error in the small wrapper-program used to test the parser, as had happened
before in the early phases of this research. Because AFL++ stores all unique crashes
in a separate folder, it was easy simply to replay one of the files onto the parser. This
gave a segmentation fault and I knew that the fuzzer had created a statement that hit an
unhandled error in the code. Let us look at the actual bug. When using SQL to query data
in a relational database, multiple tables can be joined together. This can be done with the
USING clause or the ON clause. A successfully parsed SQL query could look like this:
1
SELECT * FROM foo INNER JOIN bar USING (user_id);
Listing 5.1: Successfully parsed SQL input.
Here we assume there is a user_id column in both the foo and bar tables and the state-
ment is valid. However, the grammar-based fuzzer does not always produce valid SQL.
Often, this just results in the parser giving an error back to the user about why it failed and
maybe where the error seems to be. Other times, it crashes with a segmentation fault,
which is unintended. This happened for the hyrise sql-parser [58] when the grammar-
based fuzzer created an input with an asterisk (*) inside the USING clause. Where the
parser before could interpret the string user_id, it failed when receiving this single char-
acter. The input causing the error looks like this:
1
SELECT * FROM foo INNER JOIN bar USING (*)
Listing 5.2: Input resulting in a segmentation fault.
To get an idea of how many different inputs AFL++ create, let us look in detail at how this
statement can be constructed by using parts of the SQL grammar, which can be seen in
Listing 5.3 on page 38. The path to the crash is highlighted in red. The beginning of the
grammar is labeled <START> and goes to <STATEMENTS> (plural). From here it goes
to <STATEMENT> (singular) which can end up being one of five. For the crash, it goes to
the <SELECT> block where it chooses the select statement with the <JOIN_CLAUSE>.
Here, it first selects some <COLUMNS>, which can be an asterisk (*) or a string consisting
of letters and numbers. It can also be multiple of these separated by comma, e.g., an SQL
statement reading SELECT foo, bar FROM [...]. Then the <TABLE> is formed, which
can be a string of letters and/or numbers. The choice for the <JOIN_CLAUSE> has to be
the one with the USING statement inside. When this is picked, the <COLUMNS> inside
the USING statement must be picked as the asterisk (*), and <COLUMNS_1> must be
picked as the empty option. This then comes out as something like SELECT OEGjy AS
Pb6X FROM P FULL OUTER JOIN q USING (* );.
36
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:45==
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
Time (minutes)
Edges found
JSON parser
Grammar-based
Random
Both
Figure 5.11: Found edges comparing grammar-based mutation, random mutation, and a
combination of both using 50 input seeds: JSON parser.
Github Issue
The bug was reported as an issue on the Github page of the parser [59]
and confirmed by one of the maintainers, named dey4ss on Github and real name Daniel
Lindner, that it was indeed a bug in the system. Lindner wrote: “So this seems just to be
an underspecification in our grammar. Furthermore, we only allow a single column rather
than multiple ones.”. The response to the issue also went into different tests using the
website DB Fiddle using PostgreSQL 15. Compliance with PostgreSQL is the goal of the
parser, as Lindner adds to the response. These tests were the one that showed that it
was indeed valid PostgreSQL to have more than one column inside a USING clause. A
pull request was quickly made by Lindner in request #240 and after a short discussion
with another maintainer of the project, Bouncner, the fixes were merged into the main
branch.
Grammars Superiority
After reading this, it seems quite improbable that this bug would
be found only by using random fuzzing (e.g., bit flips, havoc, etc.) due to the highly
structured query that was responsible for the bug. To test if AFL++ would be able to
find this bug without the use of an SQL grammar, I created a seed that was very close to
the bug, but was actually parsable by the SQL parser, which can be seen in Listing 5.4
below. Essentially, what the fuzzer had to do, was to replace the id inside the USING with
an asterisk (*) and the bug would appear.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
37
==PAGE:46==
1
"<START>": [
2
["<STATEMENTS>"]
3
],
4
"<STATEMENTS >": [
5
["<STATEMENT>", ";"]
6
],
7
"<STATEMENT >": [
8
["<SELECT>"],
9
["<INSERT >"], ["<UPDATE >"],
10
["<DELETE >"], ["<CREATE_TABLE >"]
11
],
12
"<SELECT >": [
13
["SELECT ", "<COLUMNS >", " FROM ", "<TABLE>", "<JOIN_CLAUSE>"],
14
["SELECT ", "<COLUMNS >", " FROM ", "<TABLE>", "<WHERE_CLAUSE >"],
15
["SELECT ", "<COLUMNS >", " FROM ", "<TABLE>"]
16
],
17
"<JOIN_CLAUSE >": [
18
["<JOIN_TYPE >", "<TABLE>", " ON ", "<EXPR>"],
19
["<JOIN_TYPE >", "<TABLE>", " USING (", "<COLUMNS>", ")"]
20
],
21
"<JOIN_TYPE >": [
22
[" INNER JOIN "], [" LEFT JOIN "],
23
[" RIGHT JOIN "], [" FULL OUTER JOIN "]
24
],
25
"<COLUMNS >": [
26
["* ", "<COLUMNS_1>"],
27
["<COLUMN >", "<COLUMNS_1 >"]
28
],
29
"<COLUMNS_1 >": [
30
[",", "<COLUMN >", "<COLUMNS_1 >"],
31
[]
32
],
33
...
Listing 5.3: Listing showing part of the SQL grammar. The highlighted text can be used
to trace an input resulting in a crash for the SQL parser.
1
SELECT * FROM Employee INNER JOIN Farmers USING(id);
Listing 5.4: A seed that is close to the SQL query that results in the bug for the SQL
parser.
This seed was given as input to AFL++ which ran without the use of any grammar, instead
it used random mutation strategies such as bit flips, byte flips, and havoc/splice. After the
fuzzer had ran for 30 minutes, where it had tried 3.7 million inputs to the SQL parser (an
average of around 2000 inputs per second), it was not able to find the bug. This gives a
clear indication about the importance of grammar-based fuzzing for structured data such
as a programming language.
Post Fix Fuzzing
One thing we have learned about grammar-based fuzzing is that it
makes it possible to create seeds that can wiggle through the initial syntax parsing of
programs and into the more interesting parts of the code. This was how the SQL gram-
mar helped us find the bug inside the USING statement. Now, after the SQL parser has
been patched, it would only make sense to try and fuzz the parser again. We may not
find anything or maybe we are able to go further into the code, where we before saw a
segmentation fault, and find another bug. We set up a test using the 50 seeds that we
38
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:47==
used in the experiment in Section 5.3, but this time with some more seeds. We copied all
the seeds from the crashing folder into our seeds folder and used these as input seeds
to the fuzzy campaign. This gave us 75 input seeds in total. Letting AFL++ run for 30
minutes with the same grammar used to find the bug, resulted in 0 crashes.
5.8
Summary
This chapter is where the whole thesis culminate. We have now seen every experiment
performed on the two parsers - SQL and JSON - for the research of this thesis. The results
will shortly be listed in this summary. We will also look at learnings and future research in
the end.
Mutation Strategies
We started by creating a baseline for the tests by testing whether
grammar-based fuzzing showed any differences to random fuzzing. We found that, not
surprisingly, grammar-based fuzzing was better than random fuzzing for structured data,
which was what the parsers expected as input. We also found it was possible for the
fuzzer to create valid JSON from thin air and we saw that this would have taken much
longer time if we were to create valid SQL this way. We also ended our experiments by
testing mutation strategies. This time we compared grammar-only mutations, random-
only mutations, and a combination of both. We found that the pure random mutation
strategy found the most edges, but we did not conclude that this was the better strategy
when fuzzing parsers. We saw that the random mutations were not able to find any bugs,
which both the pure grammar mutation and the combination of the two strategies did. We
also mentioned that the use of edges found as a measurement might not be the best
at representing a fuzzy campaign due to the lack of knowledge about the depth of the
edges. We concluded that the use of both of the mutation strategies combined resulted
in the best of both worlds. We were able to find a bug in the code and we explored more
edges than if we had only used grammar-based mutation.
Importance of Seeds
The next set of tests looked into the importance of the input seeds
in fuzzy campaigns. Here, we found that input seeds did, in fact, make a difference in the
fuzzing campaign for grammar-based fuzzing. We also saw a difference in the gap be-
tween the edges found for an empty seed vs. multiple seeds for the SQL parser compared
to the JSON parser. We mentioned that this could be interesting to look into for future re-
search.
Seed Quantities
In the last test we found that input seeds had some meaning in gram-
mar-based fuzzing, but how much? Here, we tested different amounts of input seeds to
conclude something about the quantities. We found that for the SQL parser, the more
seeds, the better. For the JSON parser, we saw interesting results. Four out of five tests
gave the same result. This spawned our next test.
Difference in Seeds
Here, we tested whether some individual seeds were better than
others. This led us to create five batches of 10 seeds and check whether they were equally
good. For the SQL parser, we found that all batches were close enough to suggest that
input seeds are only about the numbers. However, for the JSON parser, we found that
one of the batches of 10 seeds performed better than the other. We looked into this and
by creating a new test we found that a Unicode character was the difference maker.
Seed Size
Next up, we conducted tests about whether the size of the input seeds made
any difference in the fuzzing. We found that it does not, which means that it would not
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
39
==PAGE:48==
make sense to use time to either split large seeds into smaller ones nor to combine small
seeds into a larger file.
Crash
While fuzzing our targets, we also found a bug in the SQL parser. The fuzzer was
able to create a seed via its grammar such that the program resulted in a segmentation
fault. The query looked like this: SELECT * FROM foo INNER JOIN bar USING (*). An
issue was created on the Github page, and has now been patched.
Learnings
As we have seen in all, but one, experiment, we only fuzzed for 30 minutes.
This, combined with the fact that each experiment was only tested once, is a limitation
worth noting. In a paper cited multiple times in this thesis, Herrera et al., they say “[…]
individual fuzzing trials vary wildly in performance” [21], which means that some of the
tests in these experiments could be showing results better or worse than average. In the
paper from Herrera et al., they used thirty 18 hour trials for each fuzzing campaign to come
to an average. This is also more in line with what we learned in Section 2.5 about when
to stop fuzzing. Other things worth mentioning are the lack of dictionaries. Dictionaries
can also be used to fuzz structured data. They contain keywords for the structured data
under test which the fuzzer can then use while mutating seeds. For future research, it
could be tested how dictionaries compare to grammar-based fuzzing. Much of this thesis
is about the input seeds, but none of them have been minified. An input seed corpus
can be minified such that every seed in the corpus exercises unique paths in the code.
AFL++ has afl-cmin, which can be used for this purpose. This would have provided better
and more consistent seeds and made it easier to compare data. Especially in Section 5.3
about varying seed quantities.
40
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:49==
6
Conclusion
At this point in the thesis - the very end of it - we have hopefully gained a better under-
standing of what fuzzy testing is by exploring different types of fuzzers and some key
concepts such as seeds and corpus. The importance of fuzzy testing has become clear,
as we humans do not seem to find all bugs in our software our selves. These bugs can
be very detrimental, as we have learned with the failed rocket launch in the beginning.
Fuzzy testing can help us find these seemingly hidden bugs.
The goal of this thesis was to make a contribution to the field of computer security, more
particularly, fuzzy testing. By analyzing grammar-based and random fuzzing techniques
against an SQL- and a JSON parser, we have been able to show that by using grammar-
based fuzzing for structured data, it is possible to explore paths in the code that random
fuzzing was not able to find: even when practically handing a seed for a bug to the ran-
dom fuzzer, it was not able to find it. Furthermore, we showed that using a combination of
grammar-based and random fuzzing, we were able to both find a bug and explore more
edges than when using the grammar-based fuzzing alone. We were also critical of the
use of found edges as a measurement when the random fuzzing found more edges than
the other approaches, but did not find any bug. Here, we discussed the difference be-
tween deep and shallow edges. We can therefore conclude that by using grammar-based
fuzzing on parsers, we are able to explore the target programs more deeply and discover
more bugs.
Seeds played a significant role in this thesis. Especially, input seeds used to kick-start
the fuzzing campaign. We were able to analyze the use of these in combination with
both grammar-based fuzzing and random fuzzing, which showed that not only was more
input seeds better than fewer, we were also able to show that a single seed can have
a huge impact on fuzzy testing. By first evaluating the results from testing equivalence
in input seeds to pin-point a single seed which looked different from the others, to then
constructing a test, to finally show that some seeds, here a seed with a Unicode character,
can make the fuzzy campaign explore more edges than using a normal seed, as we called
it. We also found that many small seeds is as good as one large seed. We can conclude,
that the use of seeds in grammar-based fuzzing has a huge impact and that it does, in
fact, make sense to take some time to understand ones program better in order to create
valid input seeds. Here, also try to create seeds which has more features than what the
grammar is able to create by itself, as this also helps the fuzzing. It is also concluded that
the more seeds, the better.
Not only did we analyze grammar-based fuzzing, random fuzzing, and the use of different
input seeds to help provide more knowledge to the field of computer security and fuzzy
testing. We also created a custom grammar for SQL, which has been merged into the
custom mutator of the popular AFL++ on Github for other researchers to use. Moreover,
with this custom grammar we were able to discover an unknown bug in the Hyrise SQL
parser, which we helped fix by providing an issue on their Github page.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:51==
Bibliography
[1]
Wikipedia contributors. Fuzzing — Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. https://en
.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fuzzing&oldid=1225066318. [Online; accessed
15-June-2024]. 2024.
[2]
everyone should test their code this way. https://youtu.be/diUiwAEPjcQ?si=C3
NEH35W-EL_RGna. (Visited on 15. 06. 2024).
[3]
Lu Luo. “Software testing techniques”. In: Institute for software research interna-
tional Carnegie mellon university Pittsburgh, PA 15232.1-19 (2001), p. 19.
[4]
Vahid Garousi et al. “Software-testing education: A systematic literature mapping”.
In: Journal of Systems and Software 165 (2020), p. 110570.
[5]
Istehad Chowdhury and Mohammad Zulkernine. “Using complexity, coupling, and
cohesion metrics as early indicators of vulnerabilities”. In: Journal of Systems Ar-
chitecture 57.3 (2011), pp. 294–313.
[6]
Andres Freund. Backdoor in upstream xz/liblzma leading to ssh server compromise.
https://www.openwall.com/lists/oss-security/2024/03/29/4. Mar. 2024. (Visited on
01. 05. 2024).
[7]
Published CVE Records. https://www.cve.org/About/Metrics. (Visited on 01. 05. 2024).
[8]
Jukka Ruohonen and Luca Allodi. “A bug bounty perspective on the disclosure of
web vulnerabilities”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09850 (2018).
[9]
The ZDI Mission. https://www.zerodayinitiative.com/about/. (Visited on 01. 05. 2024).
[10]
Apple Security Bounty Categories. https://security.apple.com/bounty/categories/.
(Visited on 01. 05. 2024).
[11]
Functional vs non-functional software testing. https://circleci.com/blog/functional-v
s-non-functional-testing/. (Visited on 27. 05. 2024).
[12]
Kent Beck. Test-Driven Development. Pearson Education, Inc., 2003. ISBN: 978-
0-321-14653-3.
[13]
Michael C. Feathers. Working Effectively with Legacy Code. Pearson Education,
Inc., 2005. Chap. General Test Harnesses.
[14]
What are the advantages of FitNesse automated acceptance tests? https://fitness
e.org/FitNesse/UserGuide/AcceptanceTests.html. (Visited on 04. 05. 2024).
[15]
The Explosion of the Ariane 5. https://www-users.cse.umn.edu/~arnold/disasters/ari
ane.html. (Visited on 27. 05. 2024).
[16]
The Heartbleed bug: How a flaw in OpenSSL caused a security crisis. https://ww
w.csoonline.com/article/562859/the-heartbleed-bug-how-a-flaw-in-openssl-caused-a-se
curity-crisis.html. (Visited on 27. 05. 2024).
[17]
The Heartbleed Bug. https://heartbleed.com/. (Visited on 27. 05. 2024).
[18]
Barton P Miller, Lars Fredriksen, and Bryan So. “An empirical study of the reliability
of UNIX utilities”. In: Communications of the ACM 33.12 (1990), pp. 32–44.
[19]
Peter Oehlert. “Violating assumptions with fuzzing”. In: IEEE Security & Privacy 3.2
(2005), pp. 58–62.
[20]
Xiaogang Zhu et al. “Fuzzing: a survey for roadmap”. In: ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR) 54.11s (2022), pp. 1–36.
[21]
Adrian Herrera et al. “Seed selection for successful fuzzing”. In: Proceedings of
the 30th ACM SIGSOFT international symposium on software testing and analysis.
2021, pp. 230–243.
[22]
Jun Li, Bodong Zhao, and Chao Zhang. “Fuzzing: a survey”. In: Cybersecurity 1
(2018), pp. 1–13.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
43
==PAGE:52==
[23]
Marcel Böhme, Van-Thuan Pham, and Abhik Roychoudhury. “Coverage-based grey-
box fuzzing as markov chain”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Confer-
ence on Computer and Communications Security. 2016, pp. 1032–1043.
[24]
Patrice Godefroid, Adam Kiezun, and Michael Y Levin. “Grammar-based whitebox
fuzzing”. In: Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGPLAN conference on programming
language design and implementation. 2008, pp. 206–215.
[25]
Marcel Böhme et al. “Directed greybox fuzzing”. In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security. 2017, pp. 2329–
2344.
[26]
George Klees et al. “Evaluating fuzz testing”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 ACM
SIGSAC conference on computer and communications security. 2018, pp. 2123–
2138.
[27]
Chen Chen et al. “A systematic review of fuzzing techniques”. In: Computers &
Security 75 (2018), pp. 118–137.
[28]
Marcel Böhme. “STADS: Software testing as species discovery”. In: ACM Trans-
actions on Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM) 27.2 (2018), pp. 1–
52.
[29]
Prashast Srivastava and Mathias Payer. “Gramatron: Effective grammar-aware fuzzing”.
In: Proceedings of the 30th acm sigsoft international symposium on software testing
and analysis. 2021, pp. 244–256.
[30]
Mingyuan Wu et al. “One fuzzing strategy to rule them all”. In: Proceedings of the
44th International Conference on Software Engineering. 2022, pp. 1634–1645.
[31]
Junjie Wang et al. “Skyfire: Data-driven seed generation for fuzzing”. In: 2017 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE. 2017, pp. 579–594.
[32]
AFL contributors. AFL User Guide. https://afl-1.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guid
e.html. (Visited on 09. 06. 2024).
[33]
Grammar Mutator - AFL++. Github. URL: https://github.com/AFLplusplus/Gramma
r-Mutator (visited on 12. 06. 2024).
[34]
Cornelius Aschermann et al. “NAUTILUS: Fishing for Deep Bugs with Grammars.”
In: NDSS. 2019.
[35]
Marcel Böhme, Van-Thuan Pham, and Abhik Roychoudhury. “Coverage-based Grey-
box Fuzzing as Markov Chain”. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Confer-
ence on Computer and Communications Security. CCS ’16. Vienna, Austria: As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, 2016, pp. 1032–1043. ISBN: 9781450341394.
DOI: 10.1145/2976749.2978428. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2976749.2978428.
[36]
Jie Liang et al. “Fuzz testing in practice: Obstacles and solutions”. In: 2018 IEEE
25th International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering
(SANER). IEEE. 2018, pp. 562–566.
[37]
Junjie Wang et al. “Superion: Grammar-aware greybox fuzzing”. In: 2019 IEEE/ACM
41st International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE). IEEE. 2019, pp. 724–
735.
[38]
AFLplusplus. Custom Mutators in AFL++. https://aflplus.plus/docs/custom_mutato
rs/. (Visited on 30. 05. 2024).
[39]
Richard McNally et al. “Fuzzing: The State of the Art.” In: (2012).
[40]
Stephen Bradshaw. An introduction to fuzzing: using fuzzers (SPIKE) to find vul-
nerabilities. https://www.infosecinstitute.com/resources/hacking/intro-to-fuzzing/.
(Visited on 07. 06. 2024).
[41]
Hongliang Liang et al. “Fuzzing: State of the art”. In: IEEE Transactions on Reliability
67.3 (2018), pp. 1199–1218.
44
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:53==
[42]
Yan Wang et al. “A systematic review of fuzzing based on machine learning tech-
niques”. In: PloS one 15.8 (2020), e0237749.
[43]
Xiaoqi Zhao et al. “A systematic review of fuzzing”. In: Soft Computing 28.6 (2024),
pp. 5493–5522.
[44]
American Fuzzy Lop plus plus (AFL++). https://github.com/AFLplusplus/AFLpluspl
us. (Visited on 03. 06. 2024).
[45]
libFuzzer – a library for coverage-guided fuzz testing. https://llvm.org/docs/LibFuz
zer.html. (Visited on 03. 06. 2024).
[46]
Honggfuzz. https://github.com/google/honggfuzz. (Visited on 03. 06. 2024).
[47]
OSS-Fuzz: Continuous Fuzzing for Open Source Software. https://github.com/go
ogle/oss-fuzz?tab=readme-ov-file#trophies. (Visited on 03. 05. 2024).
[48]
OSS-Fuzz. https://bughunters.google.com/open-source-security/oss-fuzz. (Visited on
03. 05. 2024).
[49]
OSS-Fuzz. https://bugs.chromium.org/p/oss-fuzz/issues/list?q=Proj%3Dsqlite3%2
Cllvm%2Cffmpeg&can=1. (Visited on 03. 05. 2024).
[50]
Stefan Nagy and Matthew Hicks. “Full-speed fuzzing: Reducing fuzzing overhead
through coverage-guided tracing”. In: 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Pri-
vacy (SP). IEEE. 2019, pp. 787–802.
[51]
Wei You et al. “Profuzzer: On-the-fly input type probing for better zero-day vulner-
ability discovery”. In: 2019 IEEE symposium on security and privacy (SP). IEEE.
2019, pp. 769–786.
[52]
Hui Peng, Yan Shoshitaishvili, and Mathias Payer. “T-Fuzz: fuzzing by program
transformation”. In: 2018 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE.
2018, pp. 697–710.
[53]
A. Zeller et al. How Do We Know When to Stop Fuzzing? https://www.fuzzingbook
.org/html/WhenToStopFuzzing.html. (Visited on 03. 06. 2024).
[54]
Addendum: status and plot files. https://aflplus.plus/docs/afl-fuzz_approach/.
(Visited on 20. 05. 2024).
[55]
afl-cov - AFL Fuzzing Code Coverage. https://github.com/mrash/afl-cov. (Visited
on 20. 05. 2024).
[56]
patricklopdrup. Add grammar for SQL. Github. Pull reqeust 47. 2024. URL: https:
//github.com/AFLplusplus/Grammar-Mutator/pull/47 (visited on 10. 06. 2024).
[57]
Daniel Kahneman. Thinking, fast and slow. 1st. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2013.
ISBN: 978-0-374-53355-7.
[58]
C++ SQL Parser. https://github.com/hyrise/sql-parser. (Visited on 08. 05. 2024).
[59]
Hyrise/sql-parser. Segmentation fault when: [...] USING (*). GitHub. Issue 239. 2024.
URL: https://github.com/hyrise/sql-parser/issues/239 (visited on 08. 05. 2024).
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:55==
A
sql_parser.cpp
1
#include <iostream >
2
#include <fstream >
3
#include <string>
4
#include "sql-parser/src/SQLParser.h"
5
6
int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
7
// Open the input file
8
std::ifstream input_file(argv[1]);
9
10
// Read the SQL query from the file
11
std::string query;
12
std::getline(input_file , query);
13
input_file.close();
14
15
// Parse the SQL query
16
hsql::SQLParserResult result;
17
hsql::SQLParser::parse(query, &result);
18
19
if (result.isValid()) {
20
std::cout << "Successfully parsed SQL query." << std::endl;
21
return 0;
22
}
23
return 1;
24
}
Listing A.1: The wrapper program used to test the SQL parser.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
47
==PAGE:56==
B
SQL Grammar
1
{
2
"<START>": [
3
["<STATEMENTS >"]
4
],
5
"<STATEMENTS >": [
6
["<STATEMENT >", ";"]
7
],
8
"<STATEMENT >": [
9
["<SELECT >"],
10
["<INSERT >"],
11
["<UPDATE >"],
12
["<DELETE >"],
13
["<CREATE_TABLE >"]
14
],
15
"<SELECT >": [
16
["SELECT ", "<COLUMNS >", " FROM ", "<TABLE>", "<JOIN_CLAUSE >"],
17
["SELECT ", "<COLUMNS >", " FROM ", "<TABLE>", "<WHERE_CLAUSE >"],
18
["SELECT ", "<COLUMNS >", " FROM ", "<TABLE>"]
19
],
20
"<JOIN_CLAUSE >": [
21
["<JOIN_TYPE >", "<TABLE>", " ON ", "<EXPR>"],
22
["<JOIN_TYPE >", "<TABLE>", " USING (", "<COLUMNS >", ")"]
23
],
24
"<JOIN_TYPE >": [
25
[" INNER JOIN "],
26
[" LEFT JOIN "],
27
[" RIGHT JOIN "],
28
[" FULL OUTER JOIN "]
29
],
30
"<COLUMNS >": [
31
["* ", "<COLUMNS_1 >"],
32
["<COLUMN >", "<COLUMNS_1 >"]
33
],
34
"<COLUMNS_1 >": [
35
[",", "<COLUMN >", "<COLUMNS_1 >"],
36
[]
37
],
38
"<COLUMN >": [
39
["<IDENTIFIER >"],
40
["<IDENTIFIER >", " AS ", "<IDENTIFIER >"]
41
],
42
"<TABLE>": [
43
["<IDENTIFIER >"]
44
],
45
"<WHERE_CLAUSE >": [
46
[" WHERE ", "<EXPR>"],
47
[]
48
],
49
"<EXPR>": [
50
["<CONDITION >"],
51
["(", "<EXPR>", ")"],
52
["<EXPR>", "<LOGICAL_OP >", "<EXPR>"]
53
],
54
"<CONDITION >": [
55
["<COLUMN >", "<COMPARISON_OP >", "<VALUE>"]
56
],
57
"<COMPARISON_OP >": [
48
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:57==
58
[" = "],
59
[" < "],
60
[" > "],
61
[" <= "],
62
[" >= "],
63
[" <> "],
64
[" LIKE "],
65
[" IN "],
66
[" BETWEEN "]
67
],
68
"<LOGICAL_OP >": [
69
[" AND "],
70
[" OR "]
71
],
72
"<VALUE>": [
73
["<NUMBER >"],
74
["<STRING >"],
75
["<NULL>"]
76
],
77
"<INSERT >": [
78
["INSERT INTO ", "<TABLE>", "(", "<COLUMNS >", ")", " VALUES ", "(", "<
VALUES >", ")"]
79
],
80
"<VALUES >": [
81
["<VALUE>", ",", "<VALUES >"],
82
["<VALUE>"]
83
],
84
"<UPDATE >": [
85
["UPDATE ", "<TABLE>", " SET ", "<COLUMN >", " = ", "<VALUE>", "<
WHERE_CLAUSE >"]
86
],
87
"<DELETE >": [
88
["DELETE FROM ", "<TABLE>", "<WHERE_CLAUSE >"]
89
],
90
"<CREATE_TABLE >": [
91
["CREATE TABLE ", "<TABLE>", "(", "<COLUMNS_DEFINITION >", ")"]
92
],
93
"<COLUMNS_DEFINITION >": [
94
["<COLUMN_DEFINITION >", ",", "<COLUMNS_DEFINITION >"],
95
["<COLUMN_DEFINITION >"]
96
],
97
"<COLUMN_DEFINITION >": [
98
["<IDENTIFIER >", "<DATA_TYPE >", "<CONSTRAINTS >"]
99
],
100
"<DATA_TYPE >": [
101
[" INT "],
102
[" VARCHAR ", "(", "<NUMBER >", ")"],
103
[" TEXT "],
104
[" BOOLEAN "],
105
[" FLOAT "],
106
[" DOUBLE "],
107
[" DATE "],
108
[" TIME "],
109
[" DATETIME "]
110
],
111
"<CONSTRAINTS >": [
112
[" PRIMARY KEY ", "<CONSTRAINTS_1 >"],
113
[" NOT NULL ", "<CONSTRAINTS_1 >"],
114
[" UNIQUE ", "<CONSTRAINTS_1 >"],
115
[" DEFAULT ", "<VALUE>", "<CONSTRAINTS_1 >"],
116
[]
117
],
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
49
==PAGE:58==
118
"<CONSTRAINTS_1 >": [
119
["<CONSTRAINT >", "<CONSTRAINTS_1 >"],
120
[]
121
],
122
"<NUMBER >": [
123
["<DIGITS >"]
124
],
125
"<DIGITS >": [
126
["0"], ["1"], ["2"], ["3"], ["4"], ["5"], ["6"], ["7"], ["8"], ["9"]
127
],
128
"<STRING >": [
129
["'", "<CHARACTERS >", "'"],
130
["\"", "<CHARACTERS >", "\""]
131
],
132
"<CHARACTERS >": [
133
["<CHARACTER >", "<CHARACTERS_1 >"]
134
],
135
"<CHARACTERS_1 >": [
136
["<CHARACTER >", "<CHARACTERS_1 >"],
137
[]
138
],
139
"<CHARACTER >": [
140
["a"], ["b"], ["c"], ["d"], ["e"], ["f"], ["g"], ["h"], ["i"], ["j"],
141
["k"], ["l"], ["m"], ["n"], ["o"], ["p"], ["q"], ["r"], ["s"], ["t"],
142
["u"], ["v"], ["w"], ["x"], ["y"], ["z"],
143
["A"], ["B"], ["C"], ["D"], ["E"], ["F"], ["G"], ["H"], ["I"], ["J"],
144
["K"], ["L"], ["M"], ["N"], ["O"], ["P"], ["Q"], ["R"], ["S"], ["T"],
145
["U"], ["V"], ["W"], ["X"], ["Y"], ["Z"],
146
["0"], ["1"], ["2"], ["3"], ["4"], ["5"], ["6"], ["7"], ["8"], ["9"],
147
["_"], ["-"]
148
],
149
"<NULL>": [
150
["NULL"]
151
],
152
"<IDENTIFIER >": [
153
["<CHARACTERS >"]
154
]
155
}
Listing B.1: Custom grammar for SQL.
50
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:59==
C
json_parser.cpp
1
#include <fstream >
2
#include <nlohmann/json.hpp>
3
#include <string>
4
5
using json = nlohmann::json;
6
7
int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
8
std::string
filePath = argv[1];
9
std::ifstream f(filePath);
10
11
try {
12
json const j1 = json::parse(f);
13
14
try {
15
// first serialization
16
std::string const s1 = j1.dump();
17
18
// parse serialization
19
json const j2 = json::parse(s1);
20
21
// second serialization
22
std::string const s2 = j2.dump();
23
24
// serializations must match
25
if (s1 == s2) {
26
return 0;
27
} else {
28
return 1;
29
}
30
} catch (const json::parse_error &) { return 1; }
31
} catch (const json::parse_error &) {
32
// parse errors are ok, because input may be random bytes
33
} catch (const json::out_of_range &) {
34
// out of range errors may happen if provided sizes are excessive
35
}
36
37
return 1;
38
}
Listing C.1: The wrapper program used to test the JSON parser.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
51
==PAGE:60==
D
AFL++ Fuzzing Campaign
Figure D.1: Fuzzing campaign using AFL++ against an SQL parser.
52
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:61==
E
Files for JSON batch 2
{ 
1 
    "arr": [] 
2 
} 
3 
 
4 
[[[]]] 
5 
 
6 
{ 
7 
    "exp": -3.14E2 
8 
} 
9 
 
10 
{ 
11 
    "exp": 1.23e-5 
12 
} 
13 
 
14 
123456789123456789123456789 
15 
 
16 
{ 
17 
    "recipe": { 
18 
        "name": "Spaghetti Carbonara", 
19 
        "ingredients": [ 
20 
            {"name": "Spaghetti", "quantity": "200g"}, 
21 
        ], 
22 
        "instructions": [ 
23 
            "one", 
24 
            "two" 
25 
        ] 
26 
    } 
27 
} 
28 
 
29 
true 
30 
 
31 
{ 
32 
    "emoji": "Emoji  " 
33 
} 
34 
 
35 
{ 
36 
    "unicode": "Café is the same as cafe\u0301" 
37 
} 
38 
 
39 
{ 
40 
    "emoji": " ", 
41 
    "chinese": "你好", 
42 
    "greek": "γειά σου" 
43 
} 
44 
Figure E.1: The 10 input seeds used for batch 2 for the JSON parser. A new seed starts
at every new line.
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
53
==PAGE:62==
F
Queue for JSON batch 2
{ 
1 
    "unicode": "Caf is the same as cafe\u0301" 
2 
} 
3 
 
4 
{"unicode": "Caf is the same as cafe\u0301" 
5 
} 
6 
 
7 
{^M  "unicode": "Caf is the same as cafe\u0301" 
8 
} 
9 
 
10 
{   "unicode": "Caf is the same as cafe\u0301" 
11 
} 
12 
 
13 
{ 
14 
 
15 
  "unicode": "Caf is the same as cafe\u0301" 
16 
} 
17 
 
18 
{ 
19 
   "": "Caf is the same as cafe\u0301" 
20 
} 
21 
 
22 
{ 
23 
   "u"icode": "Caf is the same as cafe\u0301" 
24 
} 
25 
 
26 
{ 
27 
   "O\f6]k+z": "e?}@X7F*0G {%{~ o% Io=e\u0301" 
28 
} 
29 
 
30 
{ 
31 
   "un"code": "Caf is the same as cafe\u0301" 
32 
} 
33 
 
34 
{ 
35 
   "uni\"ode": "Caf is the same as cafe\u0301" 
36 
} 
37 
Figure F.1: 10 of the mutations to the unicode input seed by AFL++.
54
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:63==
G
Unicode Seed vs Normal Seed
1
// Seed with a unicode character
2
{
3
"unicode": "Café is the same as cafe\u0301"
4
}
5
6
// Seed without any unicode specific characters
7
{
8
"product": {
9
"id": 101,
10
"name": "Widget",
11
"price": 19.99,
12
"in_stock": true,
13
"tags": ["gadget", "tool"]
14
}
15
}
Listing G.1: Input seeds for JSON parser. Unicode vs non-unicode seed
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
55
==PAGE:64==
H
Random Mutation Strategies for SQL
Parser: Empty Seed vs. 50 Seeds
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
Time (minutes)
Edges found
SQL parser
Empty seed
50 seeds
Figure H.1: Found edges for random mutation based fuzzing comparing an empty input
seed with 50 input seeds: SQL parser.
56
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
==PAGE:65==
Grammar-Based Fuzzing Analysis of Parsers
57
==PAGE:66==
Technical
University of
Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
