==PAGE:1==
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery
pack thermal management system under cold
weather conditions
Master Thesis
DTU Construct
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system un-
der cold weather conditions
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Arturo Alberto García Ramírez
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover picture:
Arturo Alberto García Ramírez, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Koppels Allé,
Building 404, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark Denmark
www.construct.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis was submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Master of Sci-
ence Mechanical Engineering, Honours Programme degree at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU).
The thesis was completed at the Section of Thermal Energy, Department of Civil and Me-
chanical Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark. The work was carried out
in a five-month period from January 22nd to June 22nd, 2024. The thesis was conducted
under the supervision of Jonas Kjær Jensen who is Head of Studies and Associate Pro-
fessor at DTU.
In addition, participation with a poster presentation in the 26th International Congress
of Refrigeration was successfully completed per the requirements of the Honours Pro-
grammes at DTU.
Arturo Alberto García Ramírez - s141301
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
June 22nd, 2024
ii
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis examines the energy-related effects of cold ambient temperatures in the us-
age of automotive Thermal Management Systems for Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs).
BEVs are viewed as a potential path towards electrification in the transportation sector,
yet they have shown to under-perform outside ideal thermal conditions, including extreme-
cold ambient temperatures. Furthermore, diverse Thermal Management System designs
and constantly-changing battery technologies create a fragile ground for comparisons of
existing products.
Constructing one-dimensional dynamic electro-thermal models for an automotive battery
pack and a proposed heat pump Thermal Management System, this thesis demonstrates
that cold ambient temperatures have a direct negative impact in a BEV range indepen-
dently of the extent of the usage of the Thermal Management System. Furthermore, this
thesis outlines the effects of different heat pump control strategies and temperature set-
points in an attempt to minimize energy usage in such conditions.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Arturo Alberto García Ramírez, MSc Mechanical Engineering, DTU
I would like to commend myself for fulfilling a self-promise made ten years ago. A Master’s
degree was always part of my plans but I never thought I would have to wait this long;
and the wait was worth every penny –literally and figuratively–.
Araceli Chávez Consuelo, fiancée, México
I would like to thank my fiancée Araceli, who only showed love when I mentioned I would
be applying for a Master’s degree halfway across the world. Thank you for understanding
that I had a pending educational goal in my life, and for all your unconditional love and
support despite the distance. Also, thank you for being a second pair of eyes to this report.
To my family / A mi familia, México
I would like to thank my parents Arturo and Rosario, and my sister Daniela, for raising,
educating, and supporting me in all possible ways. Thank you for teaching me to work
hard, but also for encouraging me to enjoy life. Thank you for understanding that I had to
come to Denmark for my education, and for all the love you have showed me my entire
life.
Jonas Kjær Jensen, Head of Studies and Associate Professor, DTU
I would like to thank professor Jensen, who has been my supervisor for the past two
years as part of the Honours Programme at DTU. Thank you for the support designing
my track, guidance through several courses, and continuous discussions about models,
thermodynamics, and heat transfer.
Wiebke Meesenburg, Postdoc Researcher, DTU
I would like to thank postdoc Meesenburg, who guided me on the basics of refrigeration
and heat pumps, and who later introduced me to the Modelica language. Thank you for
the explanations, tips and tricks, and endless patience throughout my courses and thesis.
Ignacio Javier Hidalgo Urquiza, MSc Mechanical Engineering student, DTU
I would like to thank my good friend Ignacio who shares with me a vision to do the right
thing no matter the circumstances. In addition, thank you for the willingness to discuss
Modelica, heat transfer, and fluid mechanics on a daily basis. Finally, thank you for being
a second pair of eyes for this report.
The international group, MSc Mechanical Engineering students, DTU
Thank you Marco Miolo, Jian-Ting Jhou, Bruce Durbano, Arun Rajendran, and Rolf Wil-
helm for sharing the Master’s degree with me at DTU. Also thank you for holding coffee
breaks when needed, and for stopping me from going broke at the nearest Lego store.
To my friends
I would like to thank all my friends at DTU, México, and elsewhere. The degree was not
an easy task, and doing so without your support would have been impossible.
To anyone reading this thesis
“Remember that wrong is wrong no matter if everybody does it, and that right is right no
matter if nobody is doing it.” (professor José Juan Chaparro speaking at Tecnológico de
Monterrey, Mexico City Campus, 2009).
In this world where money-making and showmanship seem like the only things that matter,
thank you for showing interest in science.
iv
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Decarbonization and electrification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Background
7
2.1
Lithium-ion battery technology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Battery pack Thermal Management Systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Extreme cold and pre-conditioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3
Component model formulations
14
3.1
Thermal Management System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.2
Li-ion battery cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Heat exchangers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Car cabin air and coolant reservoir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.5
Two-phase receiver
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.6
Flow devices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
3.7
Vehicle driving conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4
Modelica implementation
36
4.1
Modelica basics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2
Object-oriented approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.3
Two-phase fluid elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
4.4
Components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5
Component sizing, and model verification
48
5.1
Environmental and vehicle-level boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.2
Working fluids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.3
Component-level sizing and verification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.4
Model verification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
6
Results
61
6.1
Baseline: No heating demand . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
6.2
Case 1: Cabin heating only . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
6.3
Case 2: Cabin and battery heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
6.4
Range improvement efforts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
7
Discussion and conclusion
78
7.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
7.2
Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Bibliography
81
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
v
==PAGE:8==
A Battery cell data and thermo-electric model comparison
86
A.1 Battery cell data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.2 The Dual-polarization Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
A.3 Battery cell model parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
A.4 Dual-polarization vs Equivalent Model comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
A.5 Equivalent Model validation under constant discharge current . . . . . . . . 90
B Correlations
91
B.1 Convective heat transfer coefficient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
B.2 Frictional pressure drop . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
B.3 Chattering and smoothing functions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
C Thermal conduction resistances in a partial cylindrical wall
100
C.1 Radial resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
C.2 Azimuthal resistance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
D Vehicle-level data
102
D.1 Vehicle dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
D.2 Vehicle mass, frontal area, and drag coefficient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
D.3 Vehicle airflow through the cooling pack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
D.4 Compressor data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
D.5 Other drive-cycles
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
E
Media, UML and connection diagrams
104
E.1 Medium classes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
E.2 Battery cell elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
E.3 Single-phase fluid elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
E.4 Flow elements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 108
E.5 Walls and supporting components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
vi
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
Latin letters
Variable
Description
Units
a
geometric length
m
A
area
m2
A
correlation dimensionless parameter
−
AF
drag-related frontal area
m2
Ah
battery capacity
A·h or A·s
a∗to Z∗
correlation dimensionless parameters
−
b
geometric length, fin length
m
B
bore
m
Bo
Boiling number
−
c
geometric length
m
c
expansion valve degree of opening
−
cp
isobaric specific heat capacity
J·kg-1·K-1
C
electric capacitance
F
CD
drag coefficient
−
Co
Convective number
−
COP
Coefficient of performance
−
˙C
heat capacity rate
J·K-1·s-1
d, D
diameter
m
e
error
−
E
energy
J
f
friction factor
−
ff
fan or pump flow rate factor
−
fpm
fins per meter
m-1
F
force
kg·m·s-2
Fr
Froude number
−
g
gravity
m·s-2
G
mass flux rate
kg·m-2·s-1
h
enthalpy
J·kg-1
i
electric current
A
˙I
Momentum flux rate
kg·m·s-2
j
discretization element
−
J
dimensionless fluid velocity
−
k
thermal conductivity
J·m-1·K-1·s-1
Kp
control gain
−
Kv
capillary coefficient
m2
lratio
rectangular channel geometric ratio
−
L
length
m
m, M
mass
kg
m
′
fin parameter
−
˙m
mass flow rate
kg·s-1
n
number of
−
N
total number of discretization elements
−
Nu
Nusselt number
−
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
1
==PAGE:10==
Variable
Description
Units
NTU
net transfer units
−
p
pressure
Pa or kg·m-1·s-2
P
power
W or J·s-1
Pwe
wetted perimeter
m
Po
Poiseuille number
−
Pr
Prandtl number
−
˙q
heat flux rate
W·m-2 or J·m-2·s-1
˙Q
heat flow rate
W or J·s-1
R
electric or thermal resistance resistance
Ωor K·s·J-1
Re
Reynolds number
−
s
stroke
m
s
specific entropy
J·kg-1·K-1
Sn
transversal spacing
m
Sp
streamwise spacing
m
SOC
state-of-charge
−
t
time
s
th
thickness
s
T
temperature
°C or K
Ti
controller integral time constant
s
u, U
speed
m·s-1
V
electric potential or voltage
V
V
geometric volume
m3
˙V
volume flow rate
m3·s-1
W
weight
kg·m·s-2
We
Weber number
−
˙W
work rate
W or J·s-1
x3/4
rectangular channel heat ratio
−
Y
Controller output
several
x, y, z
Cartesian frame of reference axes
m, m, m
r, ϕ, z
cylindrical frame of reference axes
m, rad, m
Greek letters
Variable
Description
Units
α
convective heat transfer coefficient
J·m-2·K-1·s-1
∆
difference
−
η
efficiency
−
ϵ
effectiveness
−
µ
dynamic viscosity
kg·m-1·s-1
ω
rotational speed
rpm or rad·s-1
ϕ
contact angle
rad
ϕ∗
dimensionless two-phase multiplier
−
Ψ
dimensionless heat transfer coefficient
−
ρ
density
kg·m-3
σ
surface tension
kg·s-2
τ
controller integration time
s
θ
inclination angle
rad
φ
thermodynamic state property
several
2
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:11==
Subscripts
Variable
Description
Variable
Description
0
baseline
ini
initial
1
Equivalent Model
ins
insulated surfaces
2
Dual-polarization
Model
is
isentropic
air
air
j
discretization element
AEG, coolant
coolant
last
battery pack last cell
amb
ambient
load
electric load
b
bundle
loss
losses
bound
boundary
min
minimum
c
critical
max
maximum
cabin
car cabin
N
north (discretization)
cell(s)
cell(s)
NcB
nucleate boiling
comp
compressor
o
overall
cond
condenser
out
external/outlet
core
battery cell core
OC
open circuit
cycle
drive-cycle
p
parallel
cyl
cylinders
pack
battery pack
C
Coulomb
pump
liquid pump
Co
convective boiling
r
Along radial axis
CC
closed circuit
r
′
Along prime radial axis
dis
discharge
red
reduced (correlation)
D, max
outer
diameter
and
maximum air speed
rated
rated/nominal
e
electric
ratio
ratio
eq
equivalent
R
refrigerant
evap
evaporator
s
series
E
east (discretization)
sc
subcooling
f
saturated liquid
sh
superheat
fan
fan
sat
saturation
first
battery pack first cell
set
set-point
full
correlation state
suc
suction
fo
liquid-only mass
S
south (discretization)
fT
liquid-total mass
T
total
F
Fanning’s
tube
tube
Fi
fins
T
thrust
Fr
Froude number
TP, 0
heat transfer coefficient
FTP
FTP drive-cycle
TP, −90
heat transfer coefficient
g
saturated vapor
usage
cell usage
gen
generated
valve
cabin air valve
glass
glass surfaces
vol
volumetric
gT
vapor-total mass
w
wall
G
Darcy-Weisbach’s
wheel
wheel
h
hydraulic
W
west (discretization)
H
heated
ϕ
along azimuthal axis
HP
heated perimeter
x
along Cartesian axis x
in
internal/inlet
y
along Cartesian axis y
∞
free stream
z
along Cartesian axis z
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
3
==PAGE:12==
1
Introduction
1.1
Decarbonization and electrification
It should not surprise the reader to hear that decarbonization of the world economy is
likely the most pressing technical problem humanity is facing today. According to the
United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (UN-IPCC) “human activi-
ties, principally through the emission of greenhouse gases, have unequivocally caused
global warming” [1], with a measured average planet surface temperature increase of
1.1°C between 1850 to 1900 and the decade of 2010 to 2019. This observed warming
has been traced back to the release of greenhouse gases (GHG), mostly carbon dioxide
(CO2) and methane (CH4).
In a more pressing matter, the emission of greenhouse gases has only increased even
after the science behind global warming was presented to policy makers and the gen-
eral population. In a staggering figure, the IPCC [1] reported that in 2019 the equivalent
greenhouse emissions as a result from fossil fuels and industrial processes reached a
new record with 35 Tkg (tetra-kilograms) of equivalent CO2 per year, which represented
a 65 % of the world’s total emissions of GHG. Further study of the origin of these gases
has shown that Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and Small Island Developing States
(SIDS) have lower emissions per capita if compared with the global average of countries,
showcasing that the problem is driven by the industrialized, wealthy, and technologically
advanced countries all over the world. Historically, Europe alone has been responsi-
ble for approximately 16 % of the GHG emissions between 1850 and 2019, with North
America (Canada and the United States) accounting for 23 %, and Eastern Asia (China,
Japan) accounting for 16 %. In recent years, the so called LDCs and SIDS have called
for immediate action from the developed world [2] as their indiscriminate present and past
usage of fossil fuels has led to an increased sea level, heatwaves, heavy precipitation,
and droughts all over the world [1].
A potential solution to the problem of GHG emissions is the so called transition to net-zero
or electrification. According to WindEurope [3] the goal of net-zero emissions by 2050 can
be attained if “three-quarters or more of the total energy consumed in Europe is electrified
directly or indirectly,..., from clean energy sources”. On the energy production side this
means relying more heavily on renewable sources like wind or solar, followed by opti-
mizing and expanding the transportation and storage of electricity. Therefore, increasing
end-user electrified applications such as electric cars for transportation, and electric heat
pumps for industrial and private heating [3] would support these goals.
Within this frame, storing energy sourced from renewable sources like wind has been
identified as a key strategy impulsing Europe’s net-zero ambitions. In 2023, the Euro-
pean Commission for Energy adopted and published recommendations for energy stor-
age requirements towards 2050 [4]. These guidelines included thermal energy storage
sites (e.g. sand banks), mechanical energy (e.g. flywheels, and water storage systems),
and electrochemical energy (e.g. batteries) for different capacity ranges and discharge
duration. Furthermore, a foundational study also by the European Commission [5] found
that lithium-ion batteries (Li-ion) are a “common solution or a promising option for the
near future” in short-term, medium-term applications of energy storage in vehicle-to-grid
connections (V2G), bulk storage devices, transmission and distribution infrastructure, and
private customer requirements for applications under 1 MWh.
4
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:13==
1.2
Motivation
The focus of this thesis is to investigate the application of battery packs in automotive prod-
ucts, especially under cold weather conditions. Current Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs)
exhibit challenging technological requirements particularly associated with the battery
technology. According to Rainieri et al. [6] several researchers have found that vehicle
autonomy –also called range– ranks top within the biggest barriers towards widespread
BEV adoption. In practice, this is a well known fact among automotive engineering pro-
fessionals with work experience in electrification. It is of my opinion –and likely the opinion
of other fellow engineers– that range is a key attribute for the customer, yet it is one that
routinely keeps under-delivering outside nominal operational conditions, underwhelming
potential customers, and slowing down the transition.
Within this context, researchers have tried several approaches to study the effects of
cooling or heating in a vehicle’s range. Kim et al. [7] studied the effects of two distinct
condenser technologies in battery electric vehicles under standard (25 °C) and warm/hot
(up to 45 °C) ambient temperatures, and focusing on system COP. On the other hand,
Sun et al. [8] used a dynamic model to study the energy flow in a battery electric vehicle
only at -5 °C ambient, and compared the results with dynamometer chassis results for a
given vehicle. Finally, Yu et al. [9] quantitatively studied the main factors affecting battery
electric vehicle range within a range of -20 °C to 45 °C for a given cooling/heating system.
These authors successfully provided important information regarding battery electric vehi-
cles and potential ways to improve range. However, they also incur in important limitations
within their studies: Kim et al. [7] narrowed down the study to cooling applications only,
and did not provide ample information about the battery pack or cooling/heating system.
Sun et al. [8] provided important insights in cold ambient conditions but only for one ambi-
ent temperature that failed to follow the regulatory requirements. Finally, Yu et al. [9] did
not provide information about the battery temperature set-point, which is a key indicator
of the performance of the corresponding cooling/heating system.
These studies exhibit a need to study battery electric vehicles in conjunction with their
corresponding cooling/heating system –also called Thermal Management Systems–, for
multiple ambient conditions and clear temperature set-points. Furthermore, important
vehicle data such as range can be associated with system performance and overall energy
management, thus help drive high level engineering decisions in the segment.
1.3
Objectives
The main objective of this Master’s thesis is to study the effects of cold ambient temper-
atures in battery electric vehicles, and the underlining consequence of using a heating
system for the cabin and battery pack. Therefore, the primary objectives are:
• To study published literature regarding cold weather behavior of lithium-ion battery
cells (voltage, charge capacity, impedance, thermal conductivity, heat capacity, etc).
• To study published literature regarding state-of-the-art Thermal Management Sys-
tems for automotive battery packs, and their corresponding modelling requirements
and limitations.
• To construct a 1D transient model describing an automotive battery pack and its
corresponding Thermal Management System.
• To size the battery pack and its corresponding Thermal Management System to be
used in cold weather conditions.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
5
==PAGE:14==
• To apply the model to study automotive range in different cold weather settings,
including actively heating the passenger cabin and the battery pack, as well as their
impact in key battery pack parameters.
• To identify potential Thermal Management System control settings to improve the
range of the automotive product.
1.4
Thesis outline
The thesis contains seven chapters and an appendix. The contents are as follows:
Chapter 1 is the introduction, which contains some context and motivation, thesis objec-
tives, and an outline for the thesis.
Chapter 2 describes the mind models behind this thesis. As such, it begins with a back-
ground on lithium-ion battery cell technology and its relation to battery electric vehicles.
Insight into published studies regarding battery cell models, battery failure modes and
automotive Thermal Management Systems is also included in this chapter.
Chapter 3 contains the mathematical model formulations for the battery cells –including
electric and thermal–, heat exchangers, flow elements, and additional supporting ele-
ments. The chapter also provides information about regulatory requirements for auto-
motive products and their importance towards modelling accurate battery power loads.
Finally, this chapter also provides key modelling assumptions and limitations.
Chapter 4 is intended to provide a robust reference if the reader is interested in the details
of the modelling effort inside Modelica, which was leveraged to implement all the selected
models. For this reason, basic Modelica functionality is presented, followed by connection
diagrams and schematics for the main models used in the thesis.
Chapter 5 contains the sizing of the main components in the model, while providing ver-
ification results and justification for some modelling decisions. Finally, this chapter also
provides information about the control techniques and parameters used for the model.
Chapter 6 presents Thermal management System- and vehicle-level results for four dis-
tinct case studies. These studies cover the possibilities of not heating the battery or cabin,
only heating the cabin, heating both cabin and battery simultaneously, and a final attempt
to maximize the vehicle’s range by varying the control settings.
Chapter 7 presents the discussion and conclusion of this thesis. This chapter also in-
cludes future work recommendations.
Appendix A includes the battery cell data used for this thesis, and includes preliminary
modelling results supporting the battery cell modelling choices.
Appendix B provides all the correlations used for this thesis, followed by a brief explana-
tion of chattering and the importance of smoothed functions.
Appendix C includes the derivation of thermal conduction resistances in partial cylindrical
walls, an uncommon geometry required for this analysis.
Appendix D has vehicle-level data necessary for this thesis, including vehicle dimensions,
weight, drag, and cooling pack airflow. Compressor data, and studied secondary drive-
cycles are also included.
Appendix E presents full details on the base classes used for modelling inside Modelica,
and should be studied together with Chapter 4.
6
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:15==
2
Background
2.1
Lithium-ion battery technology
As mentioned in the previous sections, lithium-ion batteries are an important step to-
wards decarbonization. However, these batteries pose important challenges that arise
from physico-chemical, and geometrical characteristics. This section is intended to pro-
vide a brief overview of lithium-ion battery cell technology and the thermal challenges that
come with their usage.
2.1.1
Basic elements
According to an article by the Clean Energy Institute at the University of Washington,
lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries –as commonly known– are galvanic cells where a redox
chemical reaction occurs. In order for the reaction to take place, at least five elements
must be present: an anode, a cathode, an electrochemical bridge agent or electrolyte, a
separator, and two unique current collectors [10]. A schematic of the general parts of a
Li-ion battery can be observed in Figure 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Basic elements for a lithium-ion battery reproduced from the report by the
Clean Energy Institute at the University of Washington [10]
Commonly, Li-ion battery anodes are made of graphite, although improvements towards
energy denser and more robust batteries have started the use of silicone (Si) [11]. On
the other side, the cathode is often what differentiates a given battery from another. In
past years, Nickel Metal-Hydride (NiMH) cathodes dominated the market, then the drive
for increased battery capacity drove the adoption of Nickel-Manganese-Cobalt (NMC),
and the current demand for cheaper batteries pushed the market towards a significant
increase in the utilization of Lithium iron-phosphate (LFP) chemistries. The third element,
the separator, is a physical barrier –often made from several layers of polymers such
as polyethylene (PE) and polypropylene (PP)– between the anode and cathode material,
which prevents the two collectors from “touching while also allowing ion transport between
the anode and the cathode” [12]. Moreover, Liu et al. [13] explain that properly designed
separators will help shut-down batteries in case of extreme temperatures.
The fourth element in the construction of the cell is the electrolyte, responsible for allowing
the flow of electricity between the anode and the cathode. Electrolytes are often tailored
for the application, yet the composition is usually some form of lithium salt (e.g. LiPF6) in a
solution of an “organic compound such as ethylene carbonate (EC), propylene carbonate
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
7
==PAGE:16==
(PC), diethyl carbonate (DEC) or ethyl methyl carbonate (EMC)” [13]. The final elements
of the battery are the two current collectors, which are conductive materials connected ei-
ther to the anode or the cathode, and that function as the battery terminals for the external
electric connections.
2.1.2
Cell construction
For mass production purposes at least three different cell geometries exist: cylindrical,
prismatic and pouch batteries. In domestic applications the most known battery presen-
tation is cylindrical, and has been given commercially understood names such as A, AA
and AAA. Industrial applications of cylindrical batteries are often referred to as a 5-number
name, where the first two number define the battery diameter in millimeters, and the next
three numbers describe its length, also in millimeters. The second type of battery, or pris-
matic, is far less common, with the best example being 12 V batteries in gasoline and
diesel cars. The third type, called a pouch, is a sub-variant of the prismatic cell where the
vessel of the battery is more flexible for manufacturing reasons, hence it is expected to
be a key design in future energy-dense applications such as the automotive industry [14].
An important parameter in batteries is their capacity to hold energy, also known as energy
density. The energy density of a battery construction evidently depends on the battery
chemistry (anode, cathode, separator, electrolyte). However, the battery cell construction
is another important factor that affects the energy density in a cell: the larger the surface
area the anode and cathode share, the larger the density of the battery will be. This leads
to thinner material layers and tighter packaging inside the cell, limited by the manufac-
turing capability of the material layers themselves. Figure 2.2 shows a schematic of the
construction of a cylindrical and a prismatic battery cell, reproduced from the publications
by Al-Zareer et al. [15] [16].
Figure 2.2: Battery a) cylindrical, and b) prismatic constructions reproduced from the work
by Al-Zareer et al. [15] [16]
2.1.3
Cell electric behavior
Lithium-ion battery cells present a complex system of different layers of materials working
together to produce the desired effect of energy storage and availability. However, unlike
other analog electric components, battery cells have shown non-linear behavior in their
electric potential or voltage, and therefore in their current. For this reason, characterizing
battery behavior has been an essential part of the development process within battery
cell technology. According to Capasso et al. [17] at least three different models have
8
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:17==
been proposed to describe the electric behavior of lithium-ion batteries: Electrochemical
Models (EMs), Equivalent Circuit Models (ECMs), and Machine Learning Models (MLM).
As a start, Electrochemical Models combine physics and chemistry to describe the diffu-
sion of electrons and thus the electrochemical reactions in the battery cell. With these
models, “every single physical phenomenon that takes place is evaluated through partial
differential equations” [17]. According to the author, this creates very accurate physical
representations at the cost of employing a large amount of computational resources, in-
cluding time. Capasso et al. [17] mention that the other extreme of complexity lies within
machine learning techniques and models, where “data-driven algorithms estimate specific
cell parameters,..., on the basis of indirect experimental measurements”. The downside
of these models is that they require large amounts of data to process, and hence the
unique-time processing may also require a significant amount of time and resources.
The last model describing the behavior of batteries is the Equivalent (depending on the
number of elements it can be known as Dual-polarization Model) Circuit Model –also
called Equivalent Thévenin Model–, which represents the battery as a voltage source
with resistive, capacitive, and inductive elements present within. According to Capasso
et al. [17] this is widely used because it provides a “good trade-off in terms of fitting per-
formance and computational effort”. Importantly, this model has historically been widely
used to characterize battery cells, hence data is often published according to it. An early
study on cylindrical battery cells was published by Kameyama et al. [18], where labo-
ratory measurements using Electrical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) showed that the
tested NMC battery cells presented varying cell voltage according to the current level and
the state-of-charge. In addition, they have found that resistive and capacitive elements
are predominant in the battery behavior, which are also functions of the battery state-of-
charge. These findings have been confirmed in cylindrical, prismatic, and pouch cells by
Capasso et al. [17], Johnson and Pesaran [19], Ratnakumar et al. [20], Andre et al. [21],
Waag et al. [22], and Lin et al. [23], among many others.
2.1.4
Cell thermal behavior
Figure 2.3: Li-ion battery resistive and capacitive trends [17][19][20][21][22][23]
An additional problematic when characterizing lithium-ion battery cells arises due to tem-
perature. Many different researchers have reported that measurements of voltage, resis-
tance, and capacitance also vary with the internal temperature of the cell itself. Johnson
and Pesaran [19] reported that the high-power prismatic 6 Ah cell tested in their labora-
tory using the Current Pulse Method (CPM) –also known as the DC Polarization Method–
exhibited a decrease in maximum battery capacity of 14 % by dropping the temperature
from 25 °C to 0 °C. In addition, they showed that the measured open-circuit voltage of the
battery remained more stable at colder temperatures rather than warmer temperatures,
although recognizing that the change was not as significant as the one in battery capacity.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
9
==PAGE:18==
Ratnakumar et al. [20] (CPM) showed that the Mars rover batteries exhibited exponen-
tially decreasing electric resistance with increasing temperatures. These findings were
replicated by Andre et al. [21] in a 6.5 Ah cell similar to that tested by Johnson and
Pesaran [19], and manufactured by the same company. The overall change in resis-
tance measured by Andre et al. [21] (EIS) was more than 50 % when going from the
minimum tested temperature at -30 °C to the maximum at 50 °C. Moreover, the capaci-
tive impedance decreased by two orders of magnitude O(2) within the same temperature
range. Finally, Waag et al. [22] found the exact same trends in a prismatic 40 Ah NMC
cell using both EIS and CPM, whereas Lin et al. [23] showed that the trend was simi-
lar for a smaller 2.3 Ah LFP battery when tested using a variant of CPM known as the
Dual-polarization technique.
2.1.5
Battery cell failure modes
Besides varying electric characteristics due to changing battery cell temperatures, re-
searchers have shown that aging also affects most electrical parameters of the battery.
In the same publication previously mentioned, Waag et al. [22] also tested aged batteries
to compare against new ones. Their results indicate that the resistance of the aged battery
almost tripled for all possible state-of-charge states due to aging. In the case of the ca-
pacitance, the battery exhibited a 6-times higher value on the aged cell. Because of these
effects, the authors warn that “the dependencies described must be considered carefully
by dimensioning the cooling system of the battery. The battery must provide a certain
power even at the end-of-life and under unfavourable conditions” [22]. A fairly recent pa-
rameter called the state-of-health of the battery aims to measure a battery’s degradation
over time using resistive measurements as the benchmark. This parameter however has
not been widely adopted and hence most publications lack data for the application of this
indicator.
A second failure mode of Li-ion batteries can be observed at operating temperatures ex-
ceeding 50 °C, when the phenomenon of thermal runaway occurs. Thermal runaway has
been reported by researchers and the industry and has been identified as a condition
where “elevated battery temperature induces exothermic reaction” [13]. According to Liu
et al. [13] studies of the nature of thermal runaway have measured temperatures as high
as 870 °C, evidently leading to permanent damage of the cell followed by “fire and explo-
sions of the battery”. The author stresses that significant measures and tests have been
developed to assess the likelihood of thermal runaway to happen in a given battery cell
by measuring their reactions to adverse conditions (e.g. overcharging, crushing, etc.).
The third failure mode observed in these batteries is their usage in extreme cold tem-
peratures. Jaguemont et al. [24] published a study in 2016 where they showcased that
the total power delivered to the load decreased by half when comparing LFP batteries at
-20 °C against batteries at 25 °C. According to the authors this effect is not only the result
of lower electric conductivity in the electrolyte (observed in CPM and EIS as increased
resistance), but also a lower charge-transfer process of lithium ions at the anode and
cathode, where the graphite anode material is likely to be most to blame for such results.
The ultimate drop in performance of Li-ion batteries happens when the electrolyte freezes,
thus the inability of the ions to move yields an electrically inert battery.
10
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:19==
2.1.6
Battery pack construction
Battery cells may be used individually to power a load, however this is rarely the situation.
Instead, battery cells are assembled in packs. Battery packs are constructed through two
unique steps: 1) to connect a certain amount of cells Ns in series to yield a larger battery
pack voltage, and 2) to use multiple branches Np of the battery-in-series connections to
distribute the current and avoid ohmic losses. A schematic representing this connection
is depicted in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Battery pack construction
The most common architecture in automotive applications targets 400 V for the connection
in series, which means utilizing ≈120 battery cells of a typical 3.3 V LFP unit. Additionally,
range and usefulness requirements drive the need for 60 to 70 rows of parallel connec-
tions, aiming for a standard 60 kWh battery pack employing more than 7000 total cells.
Other automotive products with increasing need for energy may aim for packs in excess
of 10 kWh, meaning additional parallel rows must be added to the standard pack.
2.2
Battery pack Thermal Management Systems
As showcased in the previous sections, maintaining the entire battery pack cells at the
right temperature is paramount for energy efficient charge and discharge, reducing aging
phenomena, and to prevent extreme temperature failure modes. In practice, a system
designed to maintain the battery cell(s) at the desired temperature is often referred to
as a Battery Thermal Management System (BTMS). According to Liu et al. [13] BTMSs
can be classified according to the location of the cooling media: if the battery temper-
ature is managed through the surface they are often called external systems, whereas
inserting thermal management system elements inside the battery cell yield internal sys-
tems. External BTMSs are the most common across all current applications, although
some researchers have successfully showed internal cooling to be possible via numerical
simulations [25].
A second classification can be found based on the nature of the cooling, often in the form of
convective flow, and whether this flow is produced naturally or through an external source
like a fan or a pump. In such contexts, different fluids have historically been used such as
air, water, water dilutions (e.g. water-ethylene glycol), and refrigerants. Early applications
of Full Hybrid Electric Vehicles (FHEVs) such as the Toyota Prius or Ford Fusion used
some form of forced-air battery cooling systems, whereas the more recent Chevrolet Volt
also included a system with forced-air as the main cooling media. Interestingly, the system
for the Chevrolet Volt has been subject of criticism within the industry due to fire hazards
which ended in one of the largest –if not the largest– recall ever by an auto manufacturer
due to a single product [26].
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.5: Typical a) sandwich, b) zig-zag, and c) cold plate cooling system designs
Besides air cooling strategies, multiple systems have been proposed using single phase
water-ethylene glycol cooling the batteries through channels sandwiched in between the
batteries, zig-zagging channels surrounding cylindrical batteries, or cold-plates touching
flat surfaces in the batteries themselves. Some of these strategies are shown in Fig-
ure 2.5. In addition, compounded systems have reached commercial viability such as
that presented by Tesla in Model Y, where a combination of an ethylene-glycol loop and
a R134a refrigeration system work together to provide cooling or heating to the cabin and
battery under diverse environmental conditions. This system is presented as a schematic
in Figure 2.6 based on the patent publication by Mancini et al. [27] and the online expla-
nation by the Untangle Club [28].
Figure 2.6: Schematic from Tesla Model Y cooling system reproduced from [27][28]
Battery Thermal Management Systems (BTMSs) encompass more than the associated
cooling system. Fire risk in Li-ion batteries has driven the adoption of passive fire-retarding
elements in between batteries such as insulating layers of aerogel or thermal ceramics;
these elements are intended as a fail safe to ensure that the failure in a single cell does
not propagate to the surrounding elements and cause a catastrophic failure of the entire
pack. Additionally, BTMSs include electric high frequency contactors, voltage, current
and temperature sensors, and a robust control system designed to ensure all possible
parameters within each cell and the battery pack remain within acceptable parameters.
12
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:21==
2.3
Extreme cold and pre-conditioning
Battery temperature is important to enhance battery pack longevity, and to ensure most
optimal performance. In extreme cold conditions (e.g. ranging from 0 °C to -30 °C) the
problem has been tackled by manufacturers through the use of the industry-standard of
pre-conditioning. As explained by Chowdhury et al. [29] several studies have shown
that the driving range of an electric vehicle can be reduced “by as much 45 % under
ambient temperatures below -10 °C”. According to the author, automotive manufacturers
have “been experimenting with combinations of different thermal management concepts:
pre-conditioning of the cabin;... ; heat pumping; collection and re-use of waste heat”.
Pre-conditioning refers to a procedure where a car user inputs information into the vehicle
regarding driving departure time, and expected usage. This helps the vehicle start a
warm-up (in cold climate) or cool-down (in hot climate) routine while plugged into the grid,
intended to maximize the range of the vehicle while driving. This procedure is unique and
proprietary for each car manufacturer, where multiple patents have been issued in the
past years. Furthermore, the concept is supposedly appealing enough to the customer
that they will follow the instructions, plan ahead, and setup the vehicle such that it is ready
to drive when necessary, all in the name of efficiency.
In a study by Wang et al. (2020) [30] the driver’s ecologic behaviors were studied in the
United States. Several questions regarding positive habits were laid out to numerous
drivers of gasoline, hybrid, and electric vehicles with hopes of devising patterns in each
segment. From the five indicators the authors used to study the behavior, two were related
to pre-conditioning: travel planning and chaining, and route choice preferences. These
two behaviors assess if the driver will be willing to chain driving events to save energy, or
if they are willing to adjust their driving route for the same reasons. The study found that
drivers apply such habit modifications (from a combustion engine vehicle) when given the
opportunity to do so. However, the opportunity may not be universal.
According to multiple reports in the United States, purchasing an electric vehicle is still
limited by the lack of garages in major cities, as people tend to live in densely populated
areas. According to a news report by Ulrich (2020) from The New York Times [31] about
40 % of inhabitants in this country did not have a family owned space with a garage to
charge a Battery Electric Vehicle. Charging infrastructure on the streets was also lacking
where investment has been delayed with respect to other electrified countries, e.g. in
Europe. In such cases, the likelihood of a customer acquiring a Battery Electric Vehicle
is reduced, but if they decide to do so, pre-conditioning will not be attainable. With the
current infrastructure, users are mostly worried about finding an attainable parking spot
for the night, and not necessarily looking out for energy-efficient spots.
It is under this context that the present work is developed. What is the effect of pre-
conditioning the cabin and the battery? What will be the expense of battery energy under
cold-climate conditions? How will range (and hence the customer) be affected by the en-
gineering heating technology decisions? Is it possible to design a system that maximizes
the energy efficiency of the vehicle, and what would the key parameters of such system
be?
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
13
==PAGE:22==
3
Component model formulations
This chapter has the purpose of presenting all the models implemented in the Model-
ica language. The models are described in sufficient detail to ensure replicability of the
results and traceability of closure equations. The chapter starts by presenting the Ther-
mal Management System schematic desired to be modelled. Then, the description of
phenomena begins by presenting the battery cell electric Equivalent –Thévenin– Model
followed by a Lumped Thermal Capacity Model. Furthermore, the chapter shifts towards
representations of two-phase heat exchangers based on the One-dimensional Mixture
model, a compressor, and an expansion valve. For single-phase flows, it includes a One-
dimensional Heat Exchanger model. The chapter concludes by presenting the electric
load on the battery based on regulatory driving cycles for battery electric vehicles.
3.1
Thermal Management System
Unlike the system presented in Figure 2.6, the modelling efforts throughout this report
are based on a simpler cooling/heating system.
Consider the battery electric vehicle
schematic in Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Battery electric car schematic including the main Thermal Management Sys-
tem components
The vehicle’s battery pack is often placed as a sandwich layer underneath the passen-
ger’s feet, as it requires ample space to package the necessary batteries. All the batteries
in this arrangement are actively cooled or heated using the serpentine or zig-zag with a
single-phase fluid as presented in Figure 2.5b. The system exchanges heat through a
battery heat exchanger, and a water pump closes the circuit. On the other side of the
battery, a refrigeration system is used due to ample possible environmental conditions.
This refrigeration system includes the basic components such as a compressor and an
expansion valve, complemented by a receiver for varying operating conditions. Further-
more, a cabin condenser is considered for cabin air conditioning, whilst an outside heat
exchanger interacting with ram air is utilized to complete the thermal cycle. A schematic
of such system is available in Figure 3.2.
14
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.2: Thermal Management System schematic
3.2
Li-ion battery cell
3.2.1
Electric model
The most important element of this study is the battery cell. This battery cell must be
able to incorporate all the electro-thermal dependencies mentioned, including the battery
state-of-charge SOCcell and its temperature Tcell. However, this model is not expected to
provide details on the intricate complex chemical mechanisms occurring inside the battery.
For this reason, an Equivalent Circuit Model –also called Thévenin Model– as described
by Capasso et al. [17], and Lin et al. [23] was selected to describe the dynamic cell electric
behavior (see Appendix A for details on the validity of this model). Figure 3.3 shows the
equivalent circuit schematic for a single battery cell.
Figure 3.3: Battery cell Equivalent –Thévenin– Model [17][23]
where the open circuit voltage VOC is the driver of current i in a battery, and which has
dependency on the state-of-charge SOCcell. The next element is a resistor denoted as
R0, which is similarly influenced by the state-of-charge SOCcell. The third element of the
circuit is another resistor denoted as R1, which is influenced by both the state-of-charge
SOCcell and the battery temperature Tcell. Finally, the capacitance of the battery C1, which
is also influenced by both the state-of-charge SOCcell and the battery temperature Tcell.
Lin et al. [23] also showed that cylindrical LFP batteries exhibited variation of the resistive
and capacitive parameters of the cell solely based on the current direction (either charging
or discharging), yet this is not considered in the present work (see Appendix A).
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
15
==PAGE:24==
The electric model must be completed by means of the state-of-charge calculation. Ac-
cording to Johnson and Pesaran [19] the state-of-charge of a battery can be calculated
using the Coulomb counting technique defined as:
SOCcell = Ahmax −Ahusage
Ahmax
(3.1)
where Ah is stands for the battery capacity in Ampere-hours, which is the commonly-used
denomination. The battery cell capacity describes how much current is available within
the battery for a given discharge time. As an example, a 5 Ah battery will be able to
discharge 5 A of current within one hour, or 10 A of current for only half an hour. The
discharge/charge rate (or simply C-rate) of a battery is then defined as i/(Ah). Subscript
max denotes the maximum cell capacity while subscript usage describes the charge or
discharge process within a time-frame:
Ahusage =
Z t
0
ηC · idt,
ηC :
(
Discharge: = 1
Charge: ≤1
(3.2)
where it is evident that the capacity is given in hours, so calculations for Equation 3.1
require concordance between the cell capacity Ah and current i time scales by using a
factor of 3600. Moreover, the factor ηC is Coulomb’s charging efficiency which measures
charging losses due to the transport of lithium ions between anode and cathode.
An important adjustment to Equation 3.1 arises when dealing with temperature-dependant
battery capacity, which has been observed in Li-ion batteries when tested under extreme
temperatures. In this case, the state-of-charge equation can be rewritten in differential
form as:
dSOCcell
dt
= −ηC · i
Ahmax
+
R t
0 idt
Ahmax2
dAhmax
dT
dT
dt
(3.3)
This equation can be further simplified considering small time steps, which helps vanish
second term on the right-hand side because of a dominant quadratic cell capacity:
dSOCcell
dt
= −ηC · i
Ahmax
(3.4)
Equation 3.4 is seemingly identical to that presented by Lin et al. [23] however it is not, as
the authors assumed constant battery cell capacity Ahcell, whereas in the present case it
is dynamic in time as function of the temperature Tcell. Finally, −dSOCcell
dt
is the previously
mentioned C-rate of the battery, often reported in the units 1/h.
The last equation necessary is the battery cell heat generation ˙Qgen. During battery op-
eration, the difference between open circuit VOC and closed circuit voltage VCC can be
attributed to heat losses, which means that the heat generation can be calculated as:
˙Qgen = |i(VOC −VCC)|
(3.5)
16
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:25==
3.2.2
Lumped thermal model
Capasso et al. [17] explained that at least two thermal models have been proposed to
describe the heat generation and diffusion inside battery cells. The first model type are
Physical Models (PMs) which incorporate the heat generation in a source term within the
heat conduction –Fourier’s law– equation. The case for dynamic heat accumulation, gen-
eration, and diffusion does not have an exact analytic solution and hence must be solved
using a numerical method. On the other hand, Lumped Models (LMs) allow to describe
the problem through a simpler battery cell thermal capacitance working in conjunction with
a thermal resistance(s) to its surface boundary. The model proposed by Lin et al. [23]
used a second surface resistance describing the battery plastic surface, however Forgez
et al. [32] showed that the surface plastic resistance could be lumped along the core
thermal resistance without sacrificing accuracy.
In this study, the thermal model used by Lin et al. [23], and Forgez et al. [32] for a
cylindrical battery was extended to resemble that of a cylindrical battery being actively
heated on a fraction of its radial area, while the remainder is allowed to exchange heat
with a secondary heat source (e.g. ambient air). Consider the schematic in Figure 2.5b
where a series of cylindrical batteries are in contact with a zig-zag rectangular-shaped
channel. The battery will have a contact angle ϕcell with the channel, whereas it will have
an angle 2π −ϕcell in contact with the secondary heat source, which can be observed in
Figure 3.4.
Figure 3.4: Battery cell thermal contact angles
This dual angle definition helps redefine the cylindrical thermal model of the battery through
two radial thermal resistances:
Rr =
ln(D/dcore)
ϕcellLcellkcell,eq
Rr′ =
ln(D/dcore)
(2π −ϕcell)Lcellkcell,eq
(3.6)
where D is the outer diameter of the cell, dcore is the equivalent lumped mass inner di-
ameter of the core, Lcell is the height of the cell, and kcell,eq is an equivalent thermal
conductivity of the cell. The equivalent thermal conductivity kcell,eq, and the equivalent
lumped mass inner diameter of the core dcore must be tuned to provide accurate average
cell temperatures, thus they are parameters that often come from experimentation. The
derivation for radial conduction in a partial cylindrical wall is provided in Appendix C. Con-
sidering these two thermal resistances, the battery cell dynamic thermal behavior can be
described through a lumped capacitance equation as:
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
17
==PAGE:26==
mcellcp,cell
dTcore
dt
= ˙Qgen + ˙Qϕ + ˙Qϕ′
˙Qϕ = 1
Rr
(Tϕ −Tcore)
˙Qϕ′ =
1
Rr′ (Tϕ′ −Tcore)
(3.7)
where ˙Qgen is calculated with Equation 3.5, mcell is the mass of a cell, and cp,cell is the
specific heat capacity of the battery, which is another parameter that must is usually ob-
tained experimentally. Moreover, Tϕ, and Tϕ′ represent the boundary temperatures for
each azimuthal slice. Finally, Tcell has been replaced with Tcore to emphasize that the
battery cell is characterized by the lumped value near its symmetry line proposed by Lin
et al. [23], and Forgez et al. [32].
3.2.3
Electric load control
The battery cell circuit denoted in Figure 3.3 is connected multiple times in series to reach
higher voltage levels and conform a battery pack, as described in subsection 2.1.6. The
electric circuit is connected to power electronics that regulate the voltage and current
according to the demands in the load, such as a traction motor, vehicular instruments,
powertrain and cabin fan, pumps, and compressor, among many others. The model of
the electronic system, its control, and the detailed behavior of the load is beyond the
scope of this study. However, in order to obtain physically credible data it was necessary
to adjust the electric load for a given power demand.
A controllable voltage source was modelled to act as a current (and power) load control.
This voltage source is connected as a load in the circuit, and requires active measurement
of the current flowing through the branch of batteries in series and the voltage of the added
voltage source to compute the power at the load Pload. Then, the signal is fed to a PI
controller to adjust the system towards the desired setpoint Pload,set. A control schematic
for this process is included in Figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: Electric load controller schematic
Moreover, the equation describing the PI controller is:
Vload = KpeP + Kp
Ti
Z t
0
eP (τ)dτ
(3.8)
where eP is the error signal for the power at the load, Kp is the proportional constant of
the control, and Ti is the integral time constant. The controller’s constants Kp and Ti were
tuned using Ziegler-Nichols algorithm as an initial guess and live result verification using
the battery electric circuit model with further modifications. Note that these constants vary
for models with only one battery cell or many, as the overall voltage of the load will too.
Finally, this controller and tuning strategy are hereby presented to discuss electric power,
but they are also the basis for all other controllers discussed throughout this document.
18
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:27==
3.3
Heat exchangers
Heat exchangers likely represent one of the most studied, yet underestimated, compo-
nents within mechanical engineering and fluid mechanics. Within the steady state regime,
models have been developed to help size components and systems, such as the Loga-
rithmic Mean Temperature Difference (LMTD), or to help calculate operating conditions
outside the design intent, such as the Effectiveness - Net Transfer Units (ϵ - NTU) model
[33]. However, these models are not entirely well suited for dynamic modelling on their
own, as operating conditions are rarely known, but instead the initial conditions of the
system must be considered.
For this reason, multiple dynamic models have been developed across time to describe
the exchange of heat between a fluid and its surroundings. The simplest form of these
efforts are often called One-dimensional (1D) Models given by lumping the fluid as a single
element moving in the streamwise direction –hence the dimensional denomination– and
where properties of the control volume (e.g. flow streamwise velocity, density, enthalpy,
temperature, pressure, etc.) are distributed uniformly inside each control volume.
As stated by Jensen [34], there are at least two commonly used variants for 1D mod-
els: the One-dimensional Moving Boundary (MB) Model –also called Lumped Parameter
Model or Moving Interface Model–, and the Mixture Model –also called the Discretized
Two-phase Model–. The Moving Boundary Model, which was pioneered by Willatzen in
1998, and further enhanced by Zhang and Zhang in 2006 as explained by Kærn [35],
provides benefits “in control design and system optimization” at the expense of losing
localized information about the heat exchange process. This is achieved by assuming
that the three possible fluid thermodynamic states in a generic heat exchanger are single-
phase liquid, two-phase, and single-phase vapor, and that the boundaries between each
region are not fixed, but rather changing dynamically depending on initial and boundary
conditions. These models are usually not intended to output mass or refrigerant distri-
bution inside the heat exchanger, and require correlations for entire sections of the heat
exchanger rather than local ones. Some of these limitations were tackled in a later publi-
cation by Zhang et al. in 2009 [35].
On the other hand, Mixture Models are more commonly presented in literature and are the
basis for diverse modelling commercial libraries. In a good reference for understanding
these methods, Tummescheit [36] presented a comprehensive summary and a general
formulation used for libraries within the 2002 release of the Modelica language. These
libraries were further enhanced by Jensen in close collaboration with Tummescheit and
Modelica [34] in 2003. Furthermore, Richter [37] proposed new approaches to tackle the
formulations within these libraries in 2008, and suggested stability and runtime improve-
ments that later became the foundational blocks for what is commercialized today as the
TIL library.
The models within this thesis have the purpose of calculating the dynamic temperatures of
each battery cell in a pack, with particular emphasis in the effects of spatial discretization
under cold temperature conditions. In addition, the system is intended to have at least one
refrigerant working fluid and a secondary fluid, requiring a geometrically-detailed heat ex-
changer coupling both sides. From these requirements it is clear that the One-dimensional
Mixture (MM) Model is better suited to provide the desired results at the expense of com-
plexity and runtime.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
19
==PAGE:28==
3.3.1
One-dimensional Mixture Model
Both Jensen [34] and Tummescheit [36] presented highly detailed derivations of this
model in their respective PhD thesis. Similarly, Kærn [35], Richter [37], and Casella [38]
all provided their own simplified version of the governing equations by taking on different
assumptions. The short derivation and explanation presented in this section is the result
of studying the approaches by these different authors, and by using the PhD dissertation
by Kærn [35] as the starting point.
Figure 3.6: One-dimensional Mixture Model control volume (CV) schematic
Consider the control volume schematic presented in Figure 3.6. The control volume has a
streamwise cross-sectional area A, and mass flow rates through its left and right bound-
aries denoted as ˙m and ˙m + ∂˙m
∂z . As a result of mass flow rate, pressure p at the left
boundary is different from the pressure p + ∂p
∂z on the right hand side face, as the con-
trol volume experiences frictional pressure drop with the walls surrounding it. In addition,
properties within the control volume such as density ρ, mass M, temperature T, and en-
thalpy h can be considered constant. In his derivation, Kærn [35] showed that the mass
conservation dynamic equation for a homogeneous two-phase flow –meaning that the
liquid and vapor phases flow at the same velocity– can be written as:
∂
∂t(ρA) + ∂˙m
∂z = 0
(3.9)
Applying the Finite Volume (FV) method a control volume with constant cross-sectional
area A yields:
∂M
∂t = AL∂ρ
∂t = ˙min −˙mout
(3.10)
where subscripts in and out have been introduced to describe the inlet and outlet surfaces
of the control volume, respectively. This equation is consistent across the publications by
Jensen [34], Tummescheit [36], Richter [37], and Kærn [35]. As shown in the equation, the
change in mass inside the control volume is a result of the temporal variation of density.
Importantly, this term can be expressed in terms of enthalpy and pressure through the
chain rule:
∂ρ
∂t = ∂ρ
∂p

h
dp
dt + ∂ρ
∂h

p
dh
dt
(3.11)
20
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:29==
According to Jensen [34], using this definition of density allows for calculations compatible
with both single- and two-phase flows. Continuing with the analysis one can consider the
energy conservation equation [35]:
A ∂
∂t(ρh −p) + ∂
∂z ( ˙mh) =
˙Q
L
(3.12)
where ˙Q represents the total heat flow rate through the boundary of the control volume.
Applying the Finite Volume (FV) method, the equation has the form:
ALh∂ρ
∂t + ALρ∂h
∂t = ˙minhin −˙mouthout + AL∂p
∂t + ˙Q
(3.13)
Finally, noticing that the mass conservation definition in Equation 3.10 can be applied to
further reduce the left-hand side term, the equation becomes:
ALρ∂h
∂t = M ∂h
∂t = ˙min(hin −h) −˙mout(hout −h) + AL∂p
∂t + ˙Q
(3.14)
Notice that Equation 3.14 indicates that the increase in enthalpy in a control volume is
the result of a change in pressure, input of heat, or the relative inlet or outlet of energy
represented through enthalpy. Moreover, this equation is also consistent with the work
by Jensen [34], Tummescheit [36], and Richter [37] who disregarded potential and kinetic
energy changes. Interestingly, Jensen [34] presented a “inhomogeneous correction term”
quantifying the inflow and outflow of energy related to the phasic velocity, which is not
included in this work’s formulation. The final equation necessary for this analysis is the
momentum equation [34]:
∂˙m
∂t + ∂
∂z
 ˙m2
ρA

= −A∂p
∂z −AFw −Aρgsin(θ)
(3.15)
where ∂p
∂z represents the pressure drop across the control volume, Fw is the frictional force
per volume unit due to the surrounding walls, and the last term in the right-hand side of
the equation represents gravitational effects caused by the flow at an angle θ with the
horizontal and gravity g. Finally, the Finite Volume (FV) approach can be implemented
once more, leading to:
L∂˙m
∂t + ∆˙I = A(pin −pout) −ALFw ± ALρgsin(θ)
(3.16)
where ∆˙I = ∆˙m2
ρA stands for the spatial variation in momentum flux, while the first term of
the left-hand side of the equation describes the change in mass flow rate. Notice how the
term associated with the hydrostatic pressure drop has been given enough freedom as to
use flows on either direction of the pipe. Richter [37] exposed that the time derivative of
the mass flow rate can be disregarded when fast dynamic processes are not considered.
However, the term can be kept in the equations to explicitly relate the control volume mass
flow rate to the pressure drop.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
21
==PAGE:30==
3.3.2
Discretization
As suggested by Kærn [35] Equation 3.10, Equation 3.14, and Equation 3.16 are imple-
mented using a staggered grid as shown in Figure 3.7. As such, the solution of the mass
and energy equations happen in a single cell, also referred to as a volume cell, whereas
the solution of the momentum equation is obtained in another cell, called staggered flow
cell. Furthermore, a first-order upwind scheme is utilized to compute the thermodynamic
properties of the volume cells, which are also equal to the closest “upstream control vol-
ume center” [35].
Figure 3.7: Discretization for the two-phase One-dimensional Mixture Model
In Figure 3.7 the thermodynamic state properties are denoted by the generic thermody-
namic variable φ. In addition, notice that the left boundary of the jth staggered flow cell
is located at the center of the jth volume cell, whereas its right boundary is located at
the center of the j + 1th volume cell. As such, there are a total of Ns discretization ele-
ments in series in this arrangement. Therefore, the discretized forms of Equation 3.10,
Equation 3.14, and Equation 3.16 are:
AjLj
dρj
dt = ˙min,j −˙mout,j
Mj
dhj
dt = ˙min,j(hin,j −hj) −˙mout,j(hout,j −hj) + AjLj
dpj
dt + ˙Qj
Lj
d ˙mj
dt + 1
2( ˙Ij + ˙Ij−1) = Aj(pj−1 −pj) −AjLjFw,j ± AjLjρjgsin(θj)
Mj = ρjAjLj
(3.17)
where the notation for inlet and outlet mass flow rate ˙m and enthalpy h has been main-
tained for the reader, as these equations can be coded as presented to allow for reversible
flow. In cases where reversible flow is not expected, the equations will simplify due to the
upwind scheme application and the staggered grid definition. Richter [37] suggested to
write the CV mass definition in Equation 3.17 in differential form instead, something that
is necessary for DAE-index reasons when a regular grid is employed. The application of a
staggered grid avoids such issue, at the expense of adding one cell where computations
must be executed.
From Equation 3.17 it is necessary to define two independent variables to calculate ther-
modynamic state properties. For this purpose, Jensen [34], Tummescheit [36], Richter
[37], and Kærn [35] all recommend selecting enthalpy h and pressure p as the independent
variables. Evidently, some combinations like temperature T and pressure p are undesir-
able due to their dependency within the two-phase region, while combinations containing
density ρ may not appear intuitive enough. Finally, closure heat transfer coefficient α and
pressure drop ∂p
∂z expressions are required, as described in the following sections.
22
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:31==
3.3.3
Heat transfer
The heat transfer associated with internal flow can be described using the Newton’s law of
cooling presented in foundational heat transfer books such as those by Incropera et al. [33]
or Çengel [39]:
˙Q = αAH(Tw −T∞)
(3.18)
where α is the convective heat transfer coefficient, AH is the heated surface area, and
Tw and T∞are the wall and the free stream temperatures, respectively. For practical
purposes, T∞can be reduced to the control volume cell temperature T. Moreover, the
heat transfer coefficient is often obtained from diverse correlations for single or two phase
flows. Single-phase correlations are usually expressed in terms of the Nusselt number
Nu, which is defined for internal flows as [33][39]:
Nu = αDh
k
(3.19)
where Dh stands for the hydraulic diameter inside a pipe, formerly defined as 4A/Pwe. In
here, A stands for the cross-sectional area of the pipe, and Pwe is the wetted perimeter.
For cylindrical pipes, the hydraulic diameter matches the pipe diameter, however that is
not true for other pipe shapes, such as rectangular, triangular, etc. Moreover, parameter
k stands for the thermal conductivity of the fluid. Another important parameter is the
Reynolds number Re, which helps define laminar and turbulent flow, and is defined as:
Re = ρUD
µ
= GD
µ
(3.20)
where U is the mean flow velocity, D is the characteristic length –which is further defined
as the hydraulic diameter Dh in pipe flows–, and µ is the dynamic viscosity. Notice the
second definition which is more common in two-phase flows, where the mass flux G is
used instead. Correlations for single-phase laminar and turbulent flow Nusselt number
Nu, as well as heat transfer coefficient α in two-phase flow are described in great detail
within Appendix B.
3.3.4
Frictional pressure drop
The frictional pressure drop inside a pipe results from the flow shear stress near the wall.
Exact solutions are known for simplified laminar single-phase flows, whereas turbulent or
two-phase flow are complex enough to drive research towards correlations.
Assuming the flow is Newtonian and completely symmetrical, the single-phase pressure
drop can be expressed as [39][40]:
Fw = ∂p
∂z = 2fF
1
Dh
ρU 2
(3.21)
where fF is Fanning’s friction factor –not to be confused with Darcy’s friction factor–.
The notation fF will be kept throughout this report for clarity of the reader. Similarly to the
Nusselt number Nu, Fanning’s friction factor is a function of the Reynolds number Re, and
under laminar conditions it is a function of the shape of the pipe. Once more, correlations
for single-phase laminar and turbulent flow Fanning friction factor fF , as well as pressure
drop ∂p/∂z in two-phase flow are described in great detail within Appendix B.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
23
==PAGE:32==
3.3.5
Lumped Dynamic Wall Models
The fluid described in the previous section is enclosed by a solid wall, which allows con-
ductive heat transfer to/from another moving fluid element or through a different boundary
condition while also accumulating part of the thermal energy. Given that these walls do
not generate heat, the method of thermal resistances is properly suited to describe heat
conduction through them [33]. The following section describes the thermal resistance
models for dynamic lumped walls used for the different types of heat exchangers used
throughout this work.
Planar 2D wall
Figure 3.8: Schematic of a lumped model for a 2D planar wall
Consider a planar wall of dimensions a, b, and c as shown in Figure 3.8. Furthermore,
consider that each face in the wall will have an uniform face temperature that will be
responsible for driving heat flow through the wall into the other boundary. As such, the
thermal resistances R for the wall in the z-axis and x-axis, respectively, can be written as:
Rz =
c
kwAz
,
Rx =
a
kwAx
(3.22)
where the kw is the thermal conductivity of the wall, and Az = ab and Ax = bc are the
transversal areas in the z-axis and x-axis respectively. The heat flow rate ˙Q through each
boundary towards the center of the lumped wall can be approximated using the Finite
Difference (FD) approach, which yields:
z −axis →
n
˙QS =
2
Rz (TS −Tw),
˙QN =
2
Rz (TN −Tw)
x −axis →
n
˙QW =
2
Rx (TW −Tw),
˙QE =
2
Rx (TE −Tw)
(3.23)
where subscripts W, E, S, and N follow the convention followed for West, East, South,
and North boundaries in Finite Difference (FD) numerical approaches. Finally, the dy-
namic equation for the wall is:
Vwρwcp,w
dTw
dt
= ˙QW + ˙QE + ˙QS + ˙QN
(3.24)
where Vw = abc is the wall volume, ρw is the wall density, and cp,w stands for the specific
heat capacity of the wall.
24
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:33==
Cylindrical 2D wall
Figure 3.9: Schematic of a lumped model for a 2D cylindrical wall
Now consider a cylindrical wall where heat flows from the inner diameter din towards the
outer diameter dout, or viceversa, and also in the streamwise (z-axis) direction as shown
in Figure 3.9. In such case, the thermal resistances R for the wall in the radial r and
streamwise directions z, respectively, can be written as:
Rr =
ln

dout
din

2πkwL ,
Rz =
L
kwAz
(3.25)
where Az = ab is the transversal area in the streamwise direction. The heat flow rate
through each boundary towards the center of the lumped wall can be written as:
radial →
n
˙QS =
2
Rr (TS −Tw),
˙QN =
2
Rr (TN −Tw)
z −axis →
n
˙QW =
2
Rz (TW −Tw),
˙QE =
2
Rz (TE −Tw)
(3.26)
Notice that the calculated center for the lumped thermal wall element is not located at the
geometrical center between the two radii of the wall, but rather located in a point in be-
tween where the thermal resistance on either side are identical (an important detail if this
model was to be compared with more detailed Finite Element method calculations). In
contrast, the wall’s center point is located at the center line between the two streamwise
surfaces. Finally, the dynamic equation describing this lumped wall is identical to Equa-
tion 3.24 with the exception that the volume is that of a hollow cylindrical pipe, calculated
as Vw = π
4 (dout2 −din2)L.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
25
==PAGE:34==
Partial cylindrical 2D wall with azimuthal heat flux
Figure 3.10: Schematic of a lumped model for a 2D partial cylindrical wall with azimuthal
heat flux
Finally consider a scenario where the heat from the cylindrical battery must flow through
a partial cylindrical (annular) wall in both the radial and azimuthal directions, as shown
in Figure 3.10. The derivation for the thermal resistance in the radial Rr and azimuthal
directions Rϕ is included in Appendix C, and yields the expressions:
Rr =
ln

dout
din

ϕkwL
,
Rϕ =
ϕ
2Lkwall
dout + din
dout −din
(3.27)
where ϕ is the partial angle of the cylinder as show in Figure 3.10. Furthermore, the
thermal resistance in the radial direction Rr has the same definition as that given in Equa-
tion 3.6. Therefore, the heat flux in both the radial and azimuthal directions can be written
as:
radial →
n
˙QS =
2
Rr (TS −Tw),
˙QN =
2
Rr (TN −Tw)
azimuthal →
n
˙QW =
2
Rϕ (TW −Tw),
˙QE =
2
Rϕ (TE −Tw)
(3.28)
The dynamic equation for the lumped wall is identical to Equation 3.24 with the volume of
a partial annulus Vw = ϕ
8(dout2 −din2)L. Finally, consider that a sub-variant of this model
may be of interest where the azimuthal heat flux is negligible. If that is the case, the
azimuthal heat fluxes can be removed and the dynamic equation of the wall describes a
1D space only.
3.3.6
Air-side volume cell
Within the automotive industry it is common practice to employ fin-and-tube heat exchang-
ers to take advantage of the ram air at the front or bottom of the vehicles. Similarly, fin-
and-tube heat exchangers –which are also called radiators– are used inside the cabin as
a mean to cool or warm-up the space at the preference of the user. Within the scope of
this work, the air-side is modelled using an unmixed parcel of air. This air cell crosses
paths through the radiator and thus exchanges heat with the surface on the wall and its
fins. Figure 3.11 depicts the air control volume and geometrical considerations for fins.
26
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.11: Schematic for the a) air-side volume cell, and b) fin geometric definitions
The control volume cell depicted in Figure 3.11 is treated dynamically, with accumulation
of energy, but without accumulation of mass (invariant density), and considered to be
isobaric (it is not the purpose of this study to quantify the pressure drop in the radiator
or in the cabin Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) ducts). Additionally, an
effectiveness-NTU (ϵ - NTU) method is applied, which guarantees bounded heat transfer.
Hence the equations describing its behavior are:
0 = ˙min −˙mout →˙m
M ∂h
∂t = ˙min(hin −h) −˙mout(hout −h) + ˙Q
˙Q = ϵ ˙Cmin(Tw −Tair)
(3.29)
where subscripts denoting air and wall are only kept in the effectiveness formulation and
it should be understood that the other two equations refer to the air side only. Notice
that even though this is a one cell element, the upwind scheme is implicitly applied pro-
viding closure equations for the thermodynamic properties leaving the control volume.
The ϵ - NTU method considers that the maximum possible heat transfer is dominated by
the fluid with the lowest heat capacity rate ˙Cmin = ( ˙mcp)min, and the effectiveness ϵ of
the heat exchange process which depends on the ratio of the two fluid heat capacities
˙Cratio = ˙Cmax/ ˙Cmin, the net transfer units of the system NTU = αAT ηo/ ˙Cmin, and the
type of heat exchanger. In this formulation, the area for heat transfer AT is now the total
exposed fin-and-tube surface, and ηo is the overall fin efficiency. Several authors [33][39]
have shown that the presence of a two-phase flow reduces the equations to the same
expression regardless of the type of heat exchanger:
ϵ = 1 −exp(−NTU)
(3.30)
Furthermore, for the unmixed cross-flow (both fluids) heat exchangers proposed in this
project the corresponding single-phase expression for the method is:
ϵ = 1 −exp
h
˙C−1
ratio
  NTU 0.22 
exp

−˙Cratio
 NTU 0.78
−1
i
(3.31)
The natural next step is to describe the volume of the fluid and the heat transfer area using
geometrical parameters only. As shown in Figure 3.11 a smooth fin-and-tube (parallel
tubes) construction can be defined through the tube pitch in the transversal direction Sn,
the radiator depth a, the fin thickness thFi, and the fin density.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
27
==PAGE:36==
First, the tube pitch in the transversal direction is often given as a dimensionless parameter
based on the outer diameter of the pipe Sn∗= Sn/dout. It should be clear that the minimum
value for Sn∗is 1, but that such value for spacing is not realistic, hence values from 1.25 to
3 are more common. On the other hand, fin density is often given as a parameter known
as fins per decimeter. For simplicity, this definition is modified to fins per meter fpm within
this work. With this information in mind, it can be shown that the volume of air V , and the
heat transfer finned surface area AFi, pipe area Atube, and total area AT for one control
volume are:
V = [L −L(thFi)(fpm)]
h
aSn −π
4 dout2i
AT = AFi + Atube
AFi = 2L(fpm)
h
aSn −π
4 dout2i
Atube = πdout[L −L(thiF )(fpm)]
(3.32)
where all equations assume that the pipe outer diameter dout is smaller or equal than the
heat exchanger depth a, and that the total fin blockage (thFi)(fpm)L is smaller than the
pipe length L. The overall fin efficiency ηo can be calculated using the ratio of the finned
surface AFi and the total heat transfer area AT and the fin efficiency ηFi:
ηo = 1 −AFi
AT
(1 −ηFi)
(3.33)
where the fin efficiency is calculated as:
ηFi = tanh(m
′(b −0.5thFi))
m
′(b −0.5thFi)
m
′ =
r
2α
kFithFi
(3.34)
and where b is the length of the fin, which can be assumed to be Sn −dout. This model
was developed specifically to work in harmony with port connections in Modelica in a
closed-loop (e.g. in the cabin circuit), however a variant was also implemented for cases
where the ports are not required:
0 = ˙min −˙mout →˙m
˙Q = ˙mcp(Tout −Tin)
˙Q = ϵ ˙Cmin(Tw −Tair)
(3.35)
where once again the subscripts for air have been removed on purpose, yet it can be
understood that all quantities in Equation 3.35 refer to the air except for the wall tem-
perature Tw. The convective heat transfer coefficient required for the ϵ - NTU method
mandates closure relations across a finned bank of tubes. A correlation by Grimison
(1937) via Granryd [41] was implemented, where the details of its scope can be found in
Appendix B.
28
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:37==
3.3.7
Single-phase coolant volume cell
The system hereby presented also models the heat transfer between two-phase flow and
single-phase coolant. Coolant is the industrial name for the mixture of ethylene-glycol
and water used in automotive cooling systems. This mixture has the advantage of a
lower freezing point than that of water, allowing for operation in sub-zero climates, while
also providing adequate viscosity and heat capacity levels for heat transfer. At constant
pressure, the variations of density with respect to temperature are small enough to disre-
gard its effect in the equation of mass conservation, while the fluid’s temperature increase
can be described solely through the heat capacity at constant pressure cp. Finally, the
fluid’s momentum is solely driven by gravitational effects and friction. Hence, the mass,
energy, and momentum conservation equations for single-phase coolant flow are:
0 = ˙min −˙mout →˙m
Mcp
∂T
∂t = ˙minhin −˙mouthout + ˙Q
pin = pout + LFw ± Lρgsin(θ)
(3.36)
where the enthalpy variation has been substituted by the variation in the temperature of
the fluid, and its corresponding specific heat capacity cp. Moreover, notice how the right
hand side of the energy conservation in Equation 3.36 does not include the control volume
enthalpy but rather the inflow and outflow of such quantities.
Furthermore, the equations can be discretized in the streamwise direction. However,
unlike the two-phase model, using a staggered grid for Equation 3.36 does not provide the
same benefits as in two-phase flow. As such, it is possible to lump the mass, energy, and
momentum conservation equations into a single cell. The discretized equations describing
the flow in the single-phase coolant volume cell are:
Mjcpj
dTj
dt = ˙min,jhin,j −˙mout,jhout,j + ˙Qj
pin,j = pout,j + LjFw,j ± Ljρjgsin(θj)
(3.37)
where the inlet and outlet mass flow rates are identical and thus could be replaced with
˙m. However, Equation 3.37 is written without simplifications to provide the reader with
equations suitable for reversible flow in the programming language of their choosing.
3.4
Car cabin air and coolant reservoir
Figure 3.12: Schematic for the cabin control volume
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
29
==PAGE:38==
An important element in this model is the car cabin, which will require heating. The car
cabin is modelled as a large fluid control volume with three flow boundaries and two heat
boundaries. An schematic of the cabin can be found in Figure 3.12.
The inlet and outlet surfaces allow for the circulating airflow from the cabin (subscript
cabin) into the heat exchanger and back, while a check valve (subscript valve) is often
included in automotive applications to prevent unwanted changes in pressure. Two heat
interfaces are included in the cabin to allow for heat exchange through two different sur-
faces: the insulated (subscript ins) sections and glazing (subscript glass) of the car. The
insulated sections are the carpeted floor, cabin dashboard, car doors, and the trunk/seat
interface. Furthermore, glazing refers to all the glass interfaces of the car such as the
windshield, side windows, sunroof, and rear window or panel. The mass and energy
conservation equations used for the car cabin are presented in Equation 3.38.
V ∂ρ
∂t = ˙min −˙mout ± ˙mvalve
M ∂h
∂t = ˙min(hin) −˙mout(hout −h) ± ˙mvalve(hvalve −h) + ˙Qins + ˙Qglass
˙Qins =αAins(Tcabin −Tins)
˙Qglass =αAglass(Tcabin −Tglass)
(3.38)
where the subscript cabin has been removed for readability of the equation. The insu-
lated and glazing surfaces have unique thermal conductivity k, wall area A, thickness a,
density ρ, and specific heat capacity cp. Importantly, notice how the air density inside this
element is allowed to vary as that allows for the computation of the valve flow (as it may
be of interest for applications studying HVAC behavior). Finally, consider that the upwind
scheme is applied once again to provide a closure equation for the exiting thermodynamic
properties with respect to those inside the control volume.
On the other hand, the car cabin control volume holds similarities with the coolant reser-
voir, which is required to compensate the slight mass flow rate variations inside the single-
phase cooling system. Similar to the car cabin, the reservoir is considered a compressible
fluid, with the capacity to accumulate energy, and does not have a pressure drop com-
ponent (unlike the rest of the system). Finally, only one heat interface is included, as the
heat transfer through the air pocket in the reservoir is disregarded. A graphic depiction of
the reservoir is included in Figure 3.13.
Figure 3.13: Schematic for the coolant reservoir
where the three geometric dimensions Lz, Lx, and Ly are the length, width, and height,
respectively. Finally, it can be considered that the reservoir will not be full, hence the heat
transfer area will only be a fraction of the reservoir’s surface.
30
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:39==
3.5
Two-phase receiver
The operation of the heat pump under diverse boundary conditions is a strong indication
that a receiver will be required. A receiver is a vessel that serves as a buffer, holding a
certain amount of refrigerant according to the boundary conditions while releasing satu-
rated liquid refrigerant towards the expansion valve (see Figure 3.14). In practice, this is
accomplished through gravity by locating the receiver’s feed tube above the exit tube.
Figure 3.14: Schematic for the two-phase receiver
A two-phase receiver is modelled through a single control volume, with varying mass and
energy, but no pressure drop and without heat transfer to the ambient. Thus its equations
are:
AL∂ρ
∂t = ˙min −˙mout
M ∂h
∂t = ˙min(hin −h) −˙mout(hf −h) + AL∂p
∂t
(3.39)
which are almost identical to those in Equation 3.17, with the understanding that the dis-
cretization is that of one element, that the exit enthalpy is fixed to the saturated liquid
enthalpy hf of the vessel at the given pressure, and that heat losses are disregarded.
The resulting subcooling ∆Tsc in a system with a receiver is therefore 0 K.
3.6
Flow devices
This section describes the definition of the different machines used to induce flow across
the system. These include a compressor and an expansion valve for the two-phase sys-
tem, and an ideal fan and pump for the single-phase air and single-phase coolant, re-
spectively.
3.6.1
Compressor
The compressor can be studied using a 1D representation as mentioned by Kærn [35],
Tummescheit [36], and Richter [37], among many others. Considering that compressor
dynamics occur much faster than heat transfer in the heat exchangers and neglecting
any mass or energy accumulation, the mass and energy conservation equations for a
compressor are:
0 = ˙min −˙mout →˙m
0 = ˙m(hout −hin) + ˙W
(3.40)
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.15: Schematic for the a) compressor control volume, and its b) log(p)-h diagram
where no accumulation of mass inside the compressor yields that the inlet and outlet
mass flow rates are equal ( ˙m). In addition, the compressor’s heat loss is assumed to
be included in the compressor’s behavior and thus not explicitly stated in Equation 3.40,
furthermore the work input to the control volume is denoted with ˙W. The characteristics
of a given compressor are often provided via an isentropic efficiency ηis, which is defined
as:
ηis =
˙Wis
˙W
= hout,is −hin
hout −hin
(3.41)
where the subscript is denotes isentropic. From Equation 3.41 and the definition of isen-
tropic behavior it should be evident that ˙Wis ≤˙W, thus ηis is limited between 0 and 1.
Automotive refrigeration systems typically employ piston compressors, although some
newer products are slowly transitioning towards scroll compressors. Following a tradi-
tional approach, a piston compressor’s geometric information can be related to its volu-
metric efficiency ηvol and its mass flow rate ˙m by equations:
˙m = ηvol ˙V ρin
˙V = π
4 B2sncylω
(3.42)
where ˙V is the volumetric flow rate, calculated using the piston’s bore B, stroke s, num-
ber of cylinders ncyl, and rotational speed ω. Both ηis and ηvol are usually provided by
the manufacturers using polynomial coefficients. In this publication the coefficients have
been used to obtain isentropic and volumetric efficiencies as a function of pressure ratios
between outlet and inlet pout/pin for a standard superheat ∆Tsh of 5 K. A table providing
the compressor polynomials used in this project can be found in Appendix D.
Finally, a measurement of the heat pump performance is known as the Coefficient of
Performance or COP. The COP compares the input energy, often measured only as the
compressor power ˙Wcomp, and the output heat at the condenser ˙Qcond. A sub-variant for
COP may also consider the power necessary to work the fans ˙Wfan necessary for the
heat exchangers. A general expression to calculate the COP is therefore:
COP =
˙Qcond
˙Win
(3.43)
32
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:41==
3.6.2
Expansion valve
The expansion valve is a device in charge of throttling the fluid from a large pressure to-
wards a lower pressure using an orifice opening. As stated by Kærn [35] this process can
be assumed to be isenthalpic and without any heat flow rate or work, where no accumu-
lation of mass or energy occurs. As such, the mass and energy conservation equations
are:
0 = ˙min −˙mout →˙m
hin = hout
(3.44)
Figure 3.16: Schematic for the a) TXV control volume, and its b) log(p)-h diagram
Automotive applications employ thermostatic expansion valves (TXV) that measure the
temperature at the exit of the evaporator and compare this to the desired superheat ∆Tsh
in the system. In such conditions, the expansion valve mass flow rate ˙m can be related
to the pressure difference across the valve and the inlet density ρin as:
˙m = cKv
p
ρin(pin −pout)
(3.45)
where Kv is the capillary coefficient and c is the degree of opening, ranging from 0 to 1
according to the superheat Tsh. Temperatures larger than the desired superheat imply the
evaporation rate is too large and hence the valve should allow more mass flow, whereas a
lower-than-intended superheat implies the valve requires to close even further to increase
the evaporation rate of the system.
3.6.3
Ideal fan and liquid pump
The cabin heat exchanger model is coupled with an ideal fan model to force mass flow
through the control volume boundaries. The pressure drop in the fan is not under in-
vestigation, thus it is disregarded, and since the pressure drop in the entire flow path is
also unknown the power consumption of the cabin fan is not computable. Similarly, the
liquid pump is modelled using an ideal component as well. Overall, these two elements
are modelled statically, with no energy accumulation so Equation 3.44 also applies with
a small modification:
0 = ˙min −˙mout →˙m
˙m = ff ˙mrated
(3.46)
where ff is the flow rate factor, and the subscript rated is the nominal or design value for
each component.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
33
==PAGE:42==
3.7
Vehicle driving conditions
As seen in section 3.2 and subsection 3.2.3 the electric power demanded from the battery
will be responsible for the state-of-charge variations, with influence from the temperature
of the battery. It is therefore important to provide the model with a desired power cycle.
Figure 3.17: Car free body diagram
Consider Figure 3.17 where a car’s free body diagram is shown, and where W is the
vehicle’s weight, FD is the drag force due to the air, and FT is the thrust of the vehicle,
moving it forward at an angle θ with the horizontal. The equation describing the vehicle’s
movement in the x-axis is:
FT −FD −Wsin(θ) = mdU
dt
FT −1
2ρU 2(AF)CD −mgsin(θ) = mdU
dt
(3.47)
where ρ is that of the air, g is the gravity, and the rest of parameters are referred to the
vehicle: m is its mass, U is its velocity, AF is its frontal area, and CD is its drag coefficient.
Regulatory efforts in the automotive sector by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
in the United States have allowed for the standardization of drive-cycles representative of
the driver’s behavior. Moreover, these drive-cycles provide an objective benchmark point
for manufacturers. Within the EPA’s main drive-cycles one can find [42]:
• The Federal Test Procedure (FTP), which is a 31 minute trace that represents driving
in a city environment.
• The Fuel Economy Driving Schedule (HWFET), which is a 13 minute drive in a high
speed highway in the United States.
• The high acceleration driving (US06), which is a 10 minute drive supplemental in
the regulation, especially useful to describe aggressive driving styles.
• The high temperature (AC On) (SC03), which is also a 10 minute drive intended for
analysis with AC in hot climate.
The Federal Test Procedure (FTP) has a sub-variant called FTP20, which follows the
same velocity trace while assuming the passengers enable the heating system due to an
ambient temperature Tamb = −6.7 °C (20 F). In this mode the AC system is set to auto-
matic, meaning the user does not define the cabin’s temperature set-point, and instead
the vehicle’s control strategy determines it. For this reason, the FTP drive-cycle was se-
lected to be the main cycle used in this analysis. The speed trace for one FTP cycle is
shown in Figure 3.18.
34
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:43==
Figure 3.18: Federal Test Procedure (FTP) vehicle speed trace
If the desired velocity trace and the information of the vehicle are known, then it is possible
to calculate the demanded power at the wheel Pwheel as a result of the drive-cycle. This
is done by multiplying the thrust FT of the vehicle by its velocity U:
Pwheel = FT U = mU dU
dt + 1
2ρU 3(AF)Cd + mgsin(θ)U
(3.48)
where the component due to the inclination of the road can be disregarded in a cycle
like FTP because the procedure by the EPA do not consider grading. The final step in
this calculation requires to consider the power electronics, drivetrain, and other systems’
efficiency ηe. Hence, the power demanded from the battery pack Ppack, or a single cell
Pcell in the pack are:
Ppack = Pwheel
ηe
Pcell = Pwheel
Ncellsηe
(3.49)
Either of these power definitions can be utilized as the set-point for the electric-load con-
troller depending on the model setup. Two more drive-cycles other than FTP are utilized
briefly in this work, and thus are provided in Appendix D.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
35
==PAGE:44==
4
Modelica implementation
According to Fritzon [43] Modelica is a “modeling language that allows specification of
mathematical models of complex natural or man-made systems,..., for the purpose of
computer simulation of dynamic systems where behavior evolves as a function of time”.
According to the author, Modelica is an: 1) object-oriented, 2) equation-based program-
ming language with at least four key characteristics [43]:
• The language is based on acausal equations rather than assignment of variables.
As a en example consider the expression:
y = x2 + 3x −4
(4.1)
where the value for y(x = 1) = 0. However, what happens if we wish to provide
the system with argument y instead of x? MatLab, which is a causal programming
language, would require rewriting Equation 4.1 such that x becomes the new de-
pendent variable:
x(y) = −3 ±
p
9 + 4(4 + y)
2
(4.2)
whereas Modelica is able to solve Equation 4.1 without rewriting the original expres-
sion at all.
• Modelica allows modelling multi-domain systems such as electrical, mechanical,
chemical, thermodynamic, or biological, among many others. Furthermore, these
models can be incorporated to be simulated simultaneously or independently, ac-
cording to the modelling needs.
• The language is constructed based on C++, a robust and well known programming
language with possible interfaces with other languages, such as Python.
• The language comes with pre-coded base classes to assist with further program-
ming of classes or to help apply the language from the first try.
Understanding the main advantages of the language, Modelica currently provides an ex-
cellent platform to solve complex dynamic multi-domain numerical problems. For this
reason, Modelica was selected as the programming language to implement all the mod-
els presented throughout this work. The following sections provide a description of the
most important characteristics of the language that were used for its execution. Then, a
series of diagrams are provided for the reader to understand the implementation of key
elements and components that are used throughout this work.
4.1
Modelica basics
As mentioned by Kærn [35] and Fritzon [43] the Modelica language uses four different
types of data which are defined at the beginning of each object (called a class), which
are Real, Integer, Boolean, and String. In addition, these data types can be tied to a prefix
constant, parameter, input, or output, whereas abstaining from defining a prefix means that
the data type is a variable that must be calculated otherwise. Furthermore, these data
types have multiple attributes that help define their behavior, such as quantity, unit, fixed,
start, min, or max. A common strategy nowadays is to bundle attributes into a special class
called a Type, which is the basis for Modelica’s Units package. A Package is a collection
of classes which helps organize code in a structured way, among other possible uses. An
example of the different data types in Modelica is as follows:
36
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:45==
model DataTypesExample
constant Real gravity = 9.81; //m.s-2 Earth's gravity
parameter integer N = 4; //Integer N parameter
input Modelica.Units.SI.Current i; //Current input
output Modelica.Units.SI.Voltage v; //Voltage output
parameter Modelica.Units.SI.Pressure p; //Pressure parameter
Real enthalpy h; //Enthalpy variable
//Rest of the code omitted on purpose//
end DataTypesExample;
Other relevant classes used throughout this project were Model, Function, and Connector.
According to Fritzon [43] a Model is the most generic special class with the only restriction
that it may not be used inside Connector classes. In this project Models were reserved to
make up the basic building blocks such as a two-phase volume cell, and for aggregation
of several classes to obtain a component (more information on this process is shown in
the following sections). On the other hand, a Function is a class where an algorithm is
provided with input(s) to yield output(s). As such, correlations and repetitive calculations
were implemented in this code through functions.
The special class Connector allows communication between classes at the same hierarchi-
cal level. Moreover, connectors have special rules, while they facilitate the programming
endeavor. Importantly, these classes have been modified across the years and currently
have the following rules:
• Only one potential variable is allowed in a given connector. As an example, consider
a fluid transport connector to be used in a pipe. In such domain, the potential variable
is the pressure p at each connection point of the pipe.
• Only one flow variable is allowed in a given connector. Following with the example
of the pipe the flow variable is the mass flow rate ˙m.
• Stream variables may be introduced according to the need. Stream variables are
those that are transported by the flow variable across the connector boundary from
and into the neighboring elements. As an example, the pipe system mass flow rate
may transport enthalpy h as a stream variable.
Connectors are used by stating explicit connections in the equation section of a class, and
automatically build two equations when connected: 1) the sum of all flow variables must
be zero at a connector, and 2) the potential variables at a connector must be equal. Finally,
stream variables do not automatically add any equations to the connector. In this thesis
electric, heat, and customized flow connectors were used to communicate neighboring
cells through different phenomena.
4.2
Object-oriented approach
As exemplified in the previous section, there are multiple classes that can be used for dif-
ferent purposes in Modelica. In addition, it is important to showcase the types of relations
coded between the classes such that the reader may attempt to replicate such work. As
suggested by Kærn [35], the Unified Modeling Language (UML) along with fundamental
object-oriented relations is employed to communicate such relations between models.
The Modelica language employs at least four different object-oriented relations called
Composition, Aggregation, Inheritance, and Polymorphism. Composition occurs when a
given class requires other classes to be fully defined, and is therefore futile to describe
without such basic components. On the other hand, Aggregation describes a case where
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
37
==PAGE:46==
independent parts of a system may coexist independently and thus form different types
of larger systems as required. Inheritance describes a case where all the parameters,
variables, connectors, algorithms, and equations of one class are provided to another
class. Furthermore, Polymorphism occurs when a given model of function is deemed as
replaceable within the model and hence multiple declarations can be made. Finally, the
Input/Output type of interface is often overlooked, yet it is and important element within
the language, designed to transport information to and from several classes within the
same or different hierarchical levels.
The following notation style is reproduced from the work by Kærn [35] and is used through-
out the description of the implementation of the models.
Figure 4.1: Graphical notation for the object-oriented UML schematics, reproduced from
the work by Kærn [35], and the addition of an input/output element
4.3
Two-phase fluid elements
The following sections provide and example of the construction of the models in Modelica
by showcasing the implementation of the volume and flow cells which are the core ele-
ments of the two-phase heat exchangers. Then, these elements are aggregated to build
different components which are the cornerstone of the dynamic system model efforts.
Unlike Kærn [35], the classes constructed for this project did not fully take advantage
of the polymorphism capabilities of Modelica using the replaceable command –other than
within the Medium classes–. Instead, models where multiple options (e.g. correlations)
could be selected were explicitly coded such that the user could pick through simpler
String variables; I leave to the reader to decide if such coding technique can be consid-
ered as polymorphism or not. Other techniques such as composition, aggregation, and
inheritance were used extensively and thus will be recognizable within the UML diagrams.
4.3.1
Volume cell
The two phase volume cell, also referred to as VolTwoPhase was constructed using single-
phase and two-phase functions, which were also given multiple options regarding the
correlations for each phenomenon. The available single-phase Nusselt number correla-
tions coded were those by Dittus-Boelter (1930), and Gnielinski (1976). In addition, the
two-phase heat transfer coefficient correlations included were those by Shah (1979) and
Shah (2016) for condensation, and by Shah (1982) for evaporation. These correlations
are described in great detail in Appendix B.
It is important to mention that single-phase Nusselt number correlations are also used
within the two-phase functions to ensure smoothness close to the saturated liquid, and sat-
urated vapor transition points, as described in section B.3. Moreover, model ShapeofPipe
helps provide laminar Nusselt numbers depending on the shape and characteristic num-
ber –which can be the ratio of sides in a rectangular pipe, for example– for different ge-
ometries. The UML diagram for this element is shown in Figure 4.2.
38
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:47==
Figure 4.2: UML class diagram for the model VolTwoPhase
A relevant note for the reader is that the fluid connectors used in all two-phase elements
are new classes that inherit Modelica’s FluidPort and aggregate stream variable I_outflow
(defined just like h_outflow), which is used to transport momentum flux as needed. These
ports are included within the library as FlowPortwMomentum_a and FlowPortwMomentum_b.
4.3.2
Flow cell
Figure 4.3: UML class diagram for the model FlowTwoPhase
The element FlowTwoPhase (see Figure 4.3) is constructed similarly, by utilizing single-
phase pressure drop correlations by Blasius, and Philips (1987). Furthermore, the two-
phase pressure drop correlations included for potential usage were those by Grönnerud
(1979), and Müller-Steinhagen and Heck (1986). These correlations are described with
great detail in Appendix B.
Once more, single-phase correlations are used within the two-phase functions to produce
smooth results in the transition between phases. An important note to the reader is the
fact that different thermodynamic property schemes were tested for FlowTwoPhase. An
upwind scheme was attempted first resulting in numerical instability. Instead, a combina-
tion of average pressure p between the two boundaries and upstream enthalpy h yielded
better results. A similar approach was followed for the mass flow rate ˙m in VolTwoPhase
and FlowTwoPhase where an average between inlet and outlet ports had better numerical
stability and reduced the occurrence of chattering.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
39
==PAGE:48==
These two phase cell model UMLs are included as an example for the reader of how
element models were built. The remaining UML diagrams for single-phase fluid cells,
walls of different geometries, flow elements such as the compressor, expansion valve
and pump, electric elements, and other supporting models can be found in Appendix E.
4.4
Components
Element models were combined in multiple manners to construct the different heat ex-
changers and electro-thermal models; these combinations are denoted as components
throughout this project and are presented explicitly in the following subsections with the
purpose of supporting the validity of the model. Sub-components such as the compres-
sor, expansion valve, and pump are not included in this section because they are not
discretized, hence they can be used as described in Appendix E without further modifica-
tions.
4.4.1
Outside heat exchanger (evaporator)
The radiator at the front of the vehicle, which operates as an evaporator, is a component
named as model OutsideHeatExchanger. This model resembles a fin-and-tube parallel
channel heat exchanger where refrigerant flows inside the cylindrical tubes, and unmixed
airflow flows on its outside (see Figure 3.11). The models VolTwoPhase, FlowTwoPhase,
WallCyl2D, AirCell, ParallelManifoldTwoPhase, and FixedHeatFlow are the basis for this
component. The corresponding UML and connection diagrams are presented in Fig-
ure 4.4 and Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.4: Modelica icon and UML class diagram for the model OutsideHeatExchanger
Figure 4.5: Connection diagram for the model OutsideHeatExchanger
40
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:49==
Notice how the two-phase elements are connected in series through the entrance and exit
connections A, and B, whereas the heat interface in each fluid element is connected to the
wall through the cylindrical boundaries towards the air. The streamwise elements of the
wall are also interconnected in series, with exception of the edges, which are insulated.
As such, several elements are required to limit the influence of the insulated boundaries
towards the rest of the model. Overall, this forms one-out-of-Np branches in the parallel
heat exchanger construction.
4.4.2
Cabin heat exchanger
The cabin heat exchanger differs from the outside heat exchanger because the air has
available port connections to the cabin. Moreover, an ideal fan is used next to each
air cell to induce homogeneous airflow through the component. Therefore, aggregation
of classes VolTwoPhase, FlowTwoPhase, CylWall2D, AirCellPorts, Fan, and FixedHeatFlow
produce model CabinHeatExchanger. Finally, manifold classes ParallelManifoldTwoPhase,
and ParallelManifoldSinglePhase are also required to complete model of this component.
Figure 4.6: Modelica icon and UML class diagram for the model CabinHeatExchanger
The resulting UML and connection diagrams are shown in Figure 4.6 and Figure 4.7.
Notice that the connection diagram in Figure 4.5 differs from diagram in Figure 4.7 only
on the air side. Moreover, notice that the flow remains unmixed during the heat transfer
process representing the independent paths the fins enforce. Afterwards the airflow mixes
and flows from and towards the cabin.
Figure 4.7: Connection diagram for the model CabinHeatExchanger
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
41
==PAGE:50==
4.4.3
Single battery cell with static fluid
The first battery model is that of a single cell coupled thermally with a static fluid. Such
battery is meant to represent a case where the single-phase coolant loop is not circulating
flow, yet it remains physically connected to the battery and hence will act as a heat capaci-
tance or sink. This model also considers that all batteries remain at the same temperature,
given that they all are in contact with a static fluid cell, and ambient airflow with identical
properties in the entire battery pack. A schematic (not-to-scale) of this component is given
in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: Schematic for the single battery model with static fluid
As such, OneBatteryStaticFluid is built by aggregating one battery cell BatteryCellEq with
solid and liquid walls WallCylPartial, WallCylPartialAzi, WallCylPartialAziLiquid, and ele-
ments Convection, CurrentSensor and FixedHeatFlow, where the latter is available under
Modelica’s standard libraries. The resulting UML and connection diagrams are presented
in Figure 4.9 and Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.9: Modelica icon and UML class diagram for the model OneBatteryStaticFluid
Figure 4.10: Connection diagram for the model OneBatteryStaticFluid
42
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:51==
The connection diagram in Figure 4.10 shows how the ambient heat port of the battery
is connected to the convection air representing the air inside the battery pack enclosure.
For this work, enclosure air is modelled as static through time, yet tight cell packaging
would likely invalidate such assumption. The other available heat connection represents
the contact angle interface, physically connected to the thermal paste used to improve
heat transfer between the battery and the cooling system’s wall. Finally, the static fluid is
also modelled as a wall, sandwiched with an outer wall serving as the exterior boundary;
as Figure 4.8 suggests, all these elements are connected in the radial direction.
4.4.4
Battery bundle with flow
If the battery Thermal Management System is active then the temperature distribution
across several batteries becomes a relevant parameter to study. A battery bundle of
Nb batteries can be constructed, connected to a pipe consisting of the same amount of
elements. However, as explained in subsection E.3.3 the heat transfer and pressure drop
effects in each tube are multiplied by a factor Ns representing the batteries physically
present in the pack that are modelled through a single cell through bundling.
Figure 4.11: Schematic for a battery bundle model with moving fluid
The model BatteryMovingFluid is built by employing the class VolSinglePhaseIncomp, walls
WallCylPartial and WallCylPartialAzi, heat sink Convection, manifold ParallelManifoldAEG,
and Modelica’s standard CurrentSensor, and FixedHeatFlow. As a side note, the acronym
AEG is used as a synonym for coolant. The corresponding UML and connection diagrams
are shown in Figure 4.12 and Figure 4.13. Observe that the bundle’s first Tfirst and
last Tlast battery temperatures are available for monitoring, and possible use as control
variables, which is a common practice in battery pack systems for control and safety
purposes.
Figure 4.12: Modelica icon and UML class diagram for the model BatteryMovingFluid
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 4.13: Connection diagram for the model BatteryMovingFluid
4.4.5
Battery heat exchanger (condenser)
Figure 4.14: Schematic of a parallel plate heat exchanger
The battery’s coolant system is heated through another heat exchanger placed in the
refrigeration loop. This heat exchanger is modelled as a parallel plate component; a
schematic for such type of heat exchanger can be found in Figure 4.14. A parallel plate
heat exchanger has 2Np fluid paths; half for each fluid, and may be setup such that both
flows flow in the same direction or opposite.
Figure
4.15:
Modelica
icon
and
UML
class
diagram
for
the
model
ParallelPlateHeatExchanger
44
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:53==
This component was labelled ParallelPlateHeatExchanger, and is constructed by aggre-
gation of the two-phase models VolTwoPhase, FlowTwoPhase, wall element WallFlat2D,
coolant flow element VolSinglePhaseIncomp, and FixedHeatFlow. ParallelManifoldTwoPhase,
and ParallelManifoldAEG are required to complete the circuit by splitting the flow for each
corresponding path.
Figure 4.16: Connection diagram for the model ParallelPlateHeatExchanger
Importantly, the parallel plate heat exchanger will be characterized using rectangular mi-
crochannel correlations. These correlations are a function of the aspect ratio of the chan-
nel, and its hydraulic diameter. For more details on rectangular channel flow correlations
refer to Appendix B.
4.4.6
Car cabin
Figure 4.17: Modelica icon and UML class diagram for the model CarCabin
Model CarCabin is constructed using the models CarCabinAir2HP, two distinct 1D wall ele-
ments WallFlat representing the insulated and glazing surfaces, two VariableTemperature
sources maintained at the ambient temperature, and AmbientPressure that imposes the
ambient pressure onto the system. The corresponding UML and connection diagrams
are included in Figure 4.17 and Figure 4.18.
Figure 4.18: Connection diagram for the model CarCabin
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
45
==PAGE:54==
4.4.7
Coolant reservoir and hoses
Figure 4.19: Schematic for the coolant return line and coolant reservoir
A Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV) refrigeration system can be designed in a way to minimize
the heat losses by placing the components together near the nose of the car, the cabin,
and insulating the discharge line, if necessary. This is not necessarily the case for the
coolant lines feeding the battery pack, as depicted in Figure 4.19. In this case, the battery
pack’s coolant return hose likely exits at the back of the battery and makes its way to the
front while being exposed to the environment. Therefore it is of general concern during
the design of battery electric vehicles to understand if the heat losses in such long lines
will require insulation.
Figure 4.20: Modelica icon and UML class diagram for the model ReservoirAndHoses
Figure 4.21: Connection diagram for the model ReservoirAndHoses
The design hereby studied considers that the battery heat exchanger is located near the
dashboard and the battery pack coolant feed hose is situated at the front of the pack,
requiring a short hose to connect it. However, the hose is the longest on the return side,
with a length close to the total vehicle length as it must reach the coolant reservoir placed in
46
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:55==
the engine bay; coolant reservoirs are placed in the engine bay to allow for faster servicing
of the vehicle. The loop is closed with a small hose to the pump and back to the heat
exchanger.
For this reason, the model of the coolant reservoir was lumped together with an inlet and
outlet hoses to describe this behavior, and labelled ReservoirAndHoses, which includes
classes VolSinglePhaseReservoir, WallCyl, WallFlat, VolSinglePhaseIncomp, Convection, and
AmbientPressure. The corresponding UML and connection diagrams are shown in Fig-
ure 4.20 and Figure 4.21 where it can be observed that the hose walls are one-dimensional
in the radial direction only. This follows the fact that coolant hoses are often manufactured
with rubber, which is a good thermal insulator, therefore limiting the heat transfer capacity
through the least-dominant streamwise direction. Similarly, the reservoir is often manu-
factured from moldable plastics (e.g. PET) and therefore holds the same streamwise heat
transfer limitations as the hoses.
4.4.8
Fin-and-tube mass considerations
The heat exchanger models associated with fin-and-tube constructions require a final
modification. The fin’s heat transfer effect is effectively accounted for through the total
heat transfer area AT , the overall fin efficiency ηo, and the fin-and-tube resulting heat
transfer coefficient α. Nevertheless, the increase of mass as a result of different fin con-
structions was not coded into the wall models, particularly since the walls were not used
only with fin-and-tube heat exchangers. A multiplier was introduced through the specific
heat capacity of the heat exchanger walls cp,wall to counteract this deficiency. This multi-
plier was estimated to lie between 9 and 11 for known automotive HVAC systems, thus it
was settled as 10 for all fin-and-tube heat exchangers used in this work.
4.4.9
Computing information and numerics
All the results presented in this report were conducted using OpenModelica v1.20.0
with OpenModelica Simulator 2.1.1 in a 12th Gen Intel® Core™i7-12700H computer
equipped with 14 processors and 16 Gb of RAM. DASSL’s integration method was uti-
lized in all simulations alongside root finding, solver restart after an event, and a solver
tolerance of 1 × 10−6.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
47
==PAGE:56==
5
Component sizing, and model
verification
This chapter is intended to provide the reader with information about the Thermal Man-
agement System components designed, applied, and analyzed in chapter 6. Additionally,
this chapter also includes verification of the models at the component and system levels,
with a brief section including insights into the implemented control strategies.
5.1
Environmental and vehicle-level boundary conditions
This thesis has the intention to study extreme cold weather effects in the usage of battery
electric vehicles. For this reason, the ambient temperatures Tamb studied ranged from
-20 °C to 0 °C (although higher temperatures are presented for completeness). On the
vehicle level, the maximum suggested cabin fan mass flow rate ˙mfan,rated was provided
by an automotive colleague with a value of 0.04 kg/s for Internal Combustion Sport Utility
Vans (SUVs), however some authors studying the topic in battery electric vehicles have
studied as much as four times this value [44]. On the other side, the outside heat ex-
changer is equipped with a fan, usually in the range of 300 W to 500 W for battery electric
vehicles. CFD data for a 500 W fan installed alongside a fin-and-tube heat exchanger is
presented in Appendix D for different vehicle speeds, and assuming maximum power.
5.2
Working fluids
The automotive standard fluid for refrigeration systems in the United States is refrigerant
R134a. However, refrigerant R1234yf has taken over most of the applications in the Eu-
ropean Union and is expected to eventually take over the rest of markets. For this reason,
R1234yf was selected as the working fluid in this work. Reliable data for this working fluid
can be found down until ≈-49 °C, an important limit in this analysis due to the low am-
bient temperatures. Li et al. [44] studied this working fluid for cold-weather automotive
applications and deemed it suitable for such conditions.
Furthermore, ethylene-glycol (coolant) has been selected as the single-phase fluid to be
used in the battery interfaces. This fluid has adequate properties for working in cold-
climates and has been an industry standard for such flexibility. Finally, standard dry air
is used for the outside and cabin heat exchangers; the effects of air moisture are outside
the scope of this project. The definition of all the working fluids within Modelica can be
found in Appendix E.
5.3
Component-level sizing and verification
5.3.1
Battery pack and its heating system
Detailed cell data based on Lin et al. [23] work for the selected cylindrical LFP battery cell
can be found in Appendix A. Based on the current market offering for electric vehicles, it
is possible to select a system that provides current standard market architecture at 400
V, and competitive battery usable capacity; as a reference the 2020 Tesla Model Y has a
usable capacity of 57.5 kW [45] using a 400 V architecture. As such, consider a system
with 63 rows (Np) of 120 batteries in series each to provide a nominal 396 V, while totalling
a battery pack capacity of 57.4 kWh. In summary, this battery pack would contain a total
of 7560 cells (NT ) with an approximate weight of 530 kg.
48
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:57==
The battery pack heating system is designed following the zig-zag design that has been
selected by manufacturers using cylindrical batteries. The system is thought to maximize
the contact area with the cell at a standard contact angle ϕcell = 120 degrees. Further-
more, the suggested battery pack coolant mass flow rate ˙mcoolant for such application is
20 L/min of coolant, or an equivalent of 0.35 kg/s (as the density of coolant varies only
slightly within the studied temperature range). As such, the suggested channel to inter-
face with the battery is a rectangular cross-section channel with larger side b = 0.06315 m
and a shorter side a = 0.003 m, which yields a channel with an aspect ratio lratio = 21.05
(see Figure B.1 for details on rectangular channel lengths). The material often used in
such applications is aluminum, whereas it is often connected to the battery using a layer
of thermal paste matching the contact area of the circumference. The material data for
the aluminum and thermal paste can be found in Table 5.1.
Surface
ρ [kg/m3]
k [W/m·K]
cp [J/kg·K]
thickness [m]
Aluminum
2700
237
970
0.001
Thermal paste
2500
4
500
0.001
Table 5.1: Material information for aluminum [39] and thermal paste, and the selected
thickness
In order to continue, a study regarding the electric behavior of batteries in series was
conducted with the objective of finding how many batteries can be bundled into a single
element such that no significant information is lost. Two cases were studied: stand-alone
batteries in series (solid lines) with up to Ns = 30 elements, or bundled batteries (dotted
lines) that accounted for up to Nb = 30 and Ns = 12 only in combinations that yielded a
total of 120 cells. In all simulations a temperature gradient was given to assess its impact,
using a standard ηC = 0.95, and requesting the same power per each cell Pcell.
Figure 5.1 indicates that simulating a similar amount of batteries without bundling requires
5 to 6 times more simulation time. In addition, a larger temperature difference resulted in
a larger difference in final state-of-charge SOC. The results also suggest that a smaller
pack temperature gradient is a positive action towards maintaining homogeneous state-
of-charge within the battery pack, thus comparable duty-cycles and durability. Finally,
notice that the final SOC results do not vary significantly due to bundling, indicating that
it is an acceptable approach to reduce simulation time.
Figure 5.1: Comparison between stand-alone in-series (solid lines) and bundled battery
packs (dotted lines) using SOCini = 0.9 and diverse temperature distributions
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
49
==PAGE:58==
As stated previously, homogeneity between branches is expected, hence only one branch
is modelled. Therefore, a simulation with Nb = 10 and Ns = 12 was conducted. The elec-
tric system was completed using a variable voltage load and a power-based PI controller
with a desired power of a vehicle driving through the FTP cycle, at the given ambient
temperature and an overall drive-train efficiency ηe = 0.93. The PI controller was ad-
justed based on the number of modelled batteries, and started closely to the nominal
voltage of the battery for a given starting state-of-charge SOC; an initial state-of-charge
SOCini = 0.9 was selected for this simulation. Table 5.2 indicates the final parameters for
the controller, where Y refers to the output value of the controller.
Variable
Kp [V/W]
Ti [s]
Ymax [V]
Ymin [V]
Yini [V]
Value
0.455
0.05
9Nb
0
Nb · VOC(SOCini)
Table 5.2: PI controller parameters for a Ns battery bundle starting from zero power draw
The simulation was conducted at Tamb = −20 °C, Tamb = −10 , and Tamb = 0 assuming
an inflow of coolant at 30 °C, and only one pass of coolant through the total cells in series.
Gnielinski’s (1976), and Philips’s (1987) correlations were selected for the single-phase
heat transfer coefficient and the pressure drop, respectively. The results are shown in
Table 5.3, where subscripts first, last refer to the core of the first and last battery bundles
within a branch in series, and where loss stands for the heat losses of the battery pack.
Variable
Tamb = −20 °C
Tamb = −10 °C
Tamb = 0 °C
Tcoolant,out [°C]
25.4
26.3
27.2
Tfirst [°C]
23.9
25.1
26.3
Tlast [°C]
20.6
22.5
24.3
˙Qloss [W]
5350
4280
3220
Table 5.3: Steady-state battery pack temperature analysis for different ambient/initial tem-
peratures, and expected 30 °C incoming coolant flow
Notice in the results that the temperature of the first and last bundle’s core (Tfirst and
Tlast) are only 2 °C apart at an ambient temperature Tamb = 0 °C, and that the difference
increases to 3.3 °C at Tamb = −20 °C. In addition, the steady-state losses decrease by
≈1 kW for each 10 °C of ambient temperature increase. Overall, the results obtained in
this study indicate that the suggested mass flow rate of coolant ˙mcoolant and the minichan-
nel designed for the application are feasible. Finally, Figure 5.2 showcases the controller’s
accuracy in matching the instantaneous power demand to the provided cell power Pcell.
Figure 5.2: Electric load control strategy results for a portion of the FTP cycle
50
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:59==
5.3.2
Car cabin
Vehicle-level variables related to the cabin will have a direct impact in the heat load for the
system. As such, insulated surfaces –e.g. the front dash panel, doors, floor, and seat-
trunk interface– and the glazed surfaces –e.g. the windshield, windows, and sunroof–
need to be defined. The dimensions for a 2021 Tesla Model S are presented in Ap-
pendix D, concluding that the calculated insulated area Ains = 8.83 m2, and the glazing
surface area Aglass = 5.22 m2. Moreover, the convective heat transfer coefficient α for
the interior of these surfaces can be assumed to be 5 W/m2K. This convective heat trans-
fer coefficient is also used for the battery cell convective heat boundary in the ambient
surface, and inside the coolant reservoir. Other relevant variables are the values for the
density ρ, thermal conductivity k, and specific heat capacity cp of the insulation and glaz-
ing. They are presented in the following table:
Surface
ρ [kg/m3]
k [W/m·K]
cp [J/kg·K]
thw [m]
Insulation
500
0.065
1300
0.02
Glazing
2500
0.78
840
0.005
Table 5.4: Material information for the insulated (combination of polyethylene and air) and
glazed (pure glass) surfaces in the car cabin [33][39], and the selected thickness
Consider the car cabin starting at Tcabin = −20 °C, Tcabin = −10 , and Tcabin = 0 , which
also match the ambient temperature of the system. The car cabin model can be used
to study the expected steady state behavior (and hence the thermal load) by using an
airflow input at a desired maximum temperature. For this process it was assumed that
the maximum airflow temperature Tair,in coming from the cabin heat exchanger into the
cabin would be 40 °C at a mass flow rate ˙mfan = 0.05 kg/s.
The car cabin model yields that the steady-state cabin temperatures and heat loss of the
system will be:
Variable
Tamb = −20 °C
Tamb = −10 °C
Tamb = 0 °C
Tcabin [°C]
10.2
16.5
21.3
Tins [°C]
-11.6
-3.0
5.6
Tglass [°C]
-19.5
-9.6
0.3
˙Qloss [W]
1450
1135
930
tsteady [s]
4000
3600
3000
Table 5.5: Steady-state cabin temperature analysis for different ambient/initial tempera-
tures, and expected 40 °C incoming air
The results in Table 5.5 indicate that the the estimation of a 40 °C air to heat the cabin
is a proper start to warm it up, although it may not be enough to provide comfort to the
passengers without modifications to the fan airflow capacity. For this reason, the cabin
fan mass flow rate ˙mfan will require active control to help achieve the desired temperature
of the cabin.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
51
==PAGE:60==
5.3.3
Cabin heat exchanger (condenser)
The cabin heat exchanger is expected to operate within two different conditions. First,
it is expected to act as a de-superheater when both the cabin and battery heating are
on. When the battery heating is not operating, the cabin condenser should approach
condensation as closely as possible. Furthermore, the steady-state loads vary consider-
ably for different ambient temperatures and must be considered for the sizing of the heat
exchangers.
Consider first the case where both the cabin and battery heat exchanger are active and
have reached steady-state at an ambient temperature Tamb = −20 °C. The total expected
steady-state condenser load ˙Qcond of this system is 6.9 kW, thus the expected mass flow
rate ˙mR to deliver such load is 0.04 kg/s of R1234yf. This value and the consideration
that the flow inlet conditions to the cabin heat exchanger are those of superheated gas
(approximately 70 °C and 10.18 bar) provide key data to size the heat exchanger. For this
endeavor the cabin air mass flow rate ˙mfan was set to the nominal value of 0.04 kg/s.
The iterative design process around the heat exchanger was conducted using Gnielinski’s
(1976), and Philips’s (1987) correlations for the single-phase heat transfer coefficient and
the pressure drop, respectively. Moreover, Shah’s (1979), and Müller-Steinhagen and
Heck’s (1986) correlations for the two-phase heat transfer coefficient and pressure drop
were also selected, respectively. The resulting heat exchanger is described with the fol-
lowing parameters:
Variable
Np [-]
L [m]
din [m]
dout [m]
Sn∗[-]
fpm [-]
a [m]
thFi [m]
Value
10
4
0.006
0.007
1.5
750
0.016
0.001
Table 5.6: Cabin heat exchanger (condenser) dimensions
Importantly, it was necessary to calculate the airflow to induce full condensation if only the
cabin is demanding heat. In such scenario the calculated steady-state refrigerant mass
flow rate is ˙mR = 0.0092 kg/s and the airflow to achieve condensation is ˙mfan = 0.068 kg/s.
Finally, a mesh convergence study was performed by varying the refrigerant’s total stream-
wise discretization elements Ns. The results were obtained for both cases previously
stated and are shown in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Cabin heat exchanger total discretization elements Ns convergence results
First, notice that a lower refrigerant mass flow rate ˙mR deviates further from the con-
vergence value. Also notice that both conditions indicate that more than ten elements
would provide a small benefit towards convergence. This is exemplified with the results
52
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:61==
at Ns = 12, where a decrease in heat flow rate ˙Q can be traced back to a lower heat
transfer coefficient α in a given cell that lies right in the transition between single- and
two-phase flow. Finally, a 15-element component was utilized to verify the temperatures
at the refrigerant TR, wall Tw, and air exit Tair. The results are shown in Figure 5.4 for
both sizing conditions and under steady-state. Notice how the ϵ - NTU method effectively
bounds the air temperature Tair so the exit air never exceeds the wall temperature Tw.
Finally, the different heat transfer coefficients α within the two-phase region are in display
with distinct temperature difference between the walls and the refrigerant.
Figure 5.4: Steady-state cabin heat exchanger temperature T verification under two dis-
tinct boundary conditions
5.3.4
Battery heat exchanger (condenser)
The battery heat exchanger is dimensioned using only one steady-state condition.
If
coolant returns from the battery at around 26 °C then it must rise to 30 °C to fulfill the
desired temperature difference obtained in subsection 5.3.1 at the rated coolant mass
flow rate ˙mcoolant,rated = 0.35 kg/s. The refrigerant, on the other hand enters in a satu-
rated vapor state incoming from the cabin heat exchanger, at a pressure of 1012 kPa,
and rated mass flow rate ˙mR = 0.04 kg/s. An iterative process for this element was also
executed using Gnielinski’s (1976), and Philips’s (1987) correlations for the single-phase
heat transfer coefficient and the pressure drop –which included the adjustment factors
for a three-sided heated rectangular channel–, and Shah’s (2016) with Cavallini’s adjust-
ment for mini-channels, and Müller-Steinhagen and Heck’s (1986) correlations for the
two-phase heat transfer coefficient and pressure drop, respectively. Once more, the re-
sulting heat exchanger is described with the following parameters:
Variable
Np [-]
L [m]
a [m]
b [m]
lratio [-]
thw [m]
Value
50
0.2
0.05
0.00125
40
0.0005
Table 5.7: Cabin heat exchanger (condenser) dimensions
where it must be understood that there are Np paths for each fluid, and where the sub-
script w has been retaken to specify information about the wall, which is made of an
aluminum identical to that previously described. Importantly, heat transfer is assumed to
happen within the two larger areas of the minichannel and where the remaining sides are
disregarded. Once more, a mesh convergence study was performed by varying the total
discretization elements Ns, and its corresponding results are shown in Figure 5.5.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
53
==PAGE:62==
The results indicate that the heat flow rate ˙Q approaches convergence after 12 discretiza-
tion elements. A slight decrease occurs at 14 elements which can be attributed to a
brief transition in the heat transfer coefficient α in Shah’s (2016) correlation, which unlike
Shah’s (1979) correlation can be discontinuous within the two-phase region.
Figure 5.5: Battery heat exchanger total discretization elements Ns convergence results
Finally, a 15-element component was utilized to verify the temperatures at the refrigerant
TT , wall Tw, and coolant Tcoolant. An additional graph is included to showcase the large
difference between Shah’s (2016), and Shah’s with Cavallini’s adjustment (2016) corre-
lations for the two-phase condensation heat transfer coefficient α, presented indirectly as
the resulting vapor quality x. The newer correlation by Shah was explicitly developed to
accommodate the increase in usage of mini- and micro-channels, which was a disadvan-
tage of the older correlation [46]. The steady-state results are shown in Figure 5.6.
Figure 5.6: Steady-state battery heat exchanger temperature T verification, and steady-
state quality x under two distinct condensation correlations
Notice that heat exchangers follows the expected trend: on one side the refrigerant re-
mains at the saturation temperature Tsat throughout the process, while the entering coolant
increases in temperature. The intermediate wall temperature Tw is bound in between
these two temperatures. Once more, the relatively lower heat transfer coefficient α of
the refrigerant near the saturated liquid state causes the wall temperature Tw to decrease
and approach the coolant temperature Tcoolant more closely. Finally, Shah’s correlation
from (2016) with Cavallini’s adjustment for mini-channels would suggest that using Shah’s
(1979) correlation would under-predict the heat transfer coefficient α resulting in a larger
virtual component.
54
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:63==
5.3.5
Outside heat exchanger (evaporator)
The final heat transfer component to size is the outside heat exchanger, which acts as
an evaporator. Consider now that the inlet matches the exiting enthalpy from the parallel
plate heat exchanger. On the other hand, the pressure is given by the saturation ther-
modynamic state of R1234yf at the ambient temperature Tamb plus a temperature delta
∆T = −15 °C, which is a common temperature difference to the ambient in automotive
radiators. The resulting saturation evaporation pressure for this state is psat = 79 kPa.
Two cases arise from the two possible mass refrigerant mass flow rates previously de-
scribed: ˙mR = 0.0092, and 0.04 kg/s. In addition, the cooling pack airflow is the result of
a combination of ram air and fan-induced flow. Adjusted CFD for data a similar cooling
pack is presented in Appendix D using a 500 W fan at full power, and for different vehi-
cle speeds. One last time, an iterative process using Gnielinski’s (1976), and Philips’s
(1987) correlations for the single-phase heat transfer coefficient and the pressure drop,
and Shah’s (1982), and Müller-Steinhagen and Heck’s (1986) correlations for the two-
phase heat transfer coefficient and pressure drop were also selected, respectively. The
resulting heat exchanger is described with the following parameters:
Variable
Np [-]
L [m]
din [m]
dout [m]
Sn∗[-]
fpm [-]
a [m]
thFi [m]
Value
40
1.2
0.005
0.006
1.5
750
0.016
0.001
Table 5.8: Outside heat exchanger (evaporator) dimensions
A mesh convergence study was performed for this component too by varying the refriger-
ant’s total discretization elements Ns. The corresponding results are shown in Figure 5.7.
The results for both study conditions indicate that the heat flow rate ˙Q approaches a con-
vergence value after 12 elements, and suggests that using more elements may not justify
the computational effort unless they increase the numerical stability of the model.
Figure 5.7: Outside heat exchanger total discretization elements Ns convergence results
The 15-element grid was utilized to verify the temperatures at the refrigerant TR, wall Tw,
and air exit Tair, as shown in Figure 5.8. First, this heat exchanger design has sufficient
airflow to maintain the evaporation at both mass flow rates (unlike the cabin heat ex-
changer), thus the component is limited by the refrigerant mass flow rate ˙mR. Second, a
2 °C temperature glide is observed from the inlet to the outlet at rated mass flow rate due
to an 8.2 kPa pressure drop, something that does not occur at the lower mass flow rate
when only the cabin is operational. Finally, notice how the wall temperature Tw follows the
refrigerant temperature TR more closely when in the two-phase region, whereas it follows
the airflow temperature closer in the superheated region.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 5.8: Steady-state outside heat exchanger temperature T verification under two
distinct condensation correlations
5.3.6
Coolant reservoir and coolant hoses
The vehicle’s measurements from Appendix D can be used to estimate the dimensions of
the coolant hoses and reservoir. The values for such variables are as follows:
Variable
Hoses
Reservoir
Length [m]
L1 = 2.3
L2 = 0.3
Lz = 0.15
Lx = 0.15
Ly = 0.05
Thickness [m]
din = 0.03175
dout = 0.0381
thw = 0.002
ρ [kg/m3]
1350
1400
k [W/m·K]
0.15
0.2
cp [J/kg·K]
1800
1150
Table 5.9: Dimensions and thermal properties of the coolant hoses and reservoir [33][39]
Figure 5.9: Reservoir hoses total discretization elements Ns convergence results
A mesh convergence study was performed by varying the total discretization elements
Ns at a nominal coolant mass flow rate ˙mcoolant,rated = 0.35 kg/s, while utilizing Gnielin-
ski’s (1976), and Philips’s (1987) single-phase correlations. The corresponding results
are shown in Figure 5.9 and indicate that the variation in heat losses is negligible be-
tween 4 and 15 elements, yet the pressure drop approaches convergence above 12 total
elements. As this component is secondary in this study, Ns was set to a value of 4.
56
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:65==
5.3.7
Receiver, compressor, and expansion valve
Sizing the receiver was done through a rough calculation of the entire charge of the system
in full operation. The calculation yielded that a receiver with a volume V = 2.5 × 10−4 m3
would meet this requirement. In automotive applications, it is common to have the con-
denser end-tanks form a receiver, thus it is a long cylindrical pipe on the side of this
component. In this design however the two condensers make it difficult to assess if an
end-tank would be the ideal solution. In either case, the calculated size of receiver can
be accommodated inside the vehicle, but it would surely require additional analysis to
optimize its size and location.
On the other hand, sizing the compressor is done based on the steady-state worst-case.
Under the maximum condenser heat load ˙Qcond,max = 6.9 kW the expected compressor
power is ˙W = 3.2 kW. A compressor that fulfills this requirement was found in Bitzer’s cat-
alog under product number 4CES-6Y-40S from the reciprocating type’s family. Important
parameters such as number of cylinders ncyl, bore B, stroke s, and condenser capacity
˙Qcond,max are given in Table 5.10. Compressor coefficients to calculate the isentropic ηis
and volumetric ηvol efficiencies are provided in Appendix D.
Variable
ncyl [-]
B [m]
s [m]
˙Qcond,max [kW]
Value
4
0.055
0.0393
7.49
Table 5.10: Bitzer 4CES-6Y-40S compressor data
On the other hand, sizing the expansion valve required the expected steady-state pres-
sure ratio pratio, and the expected inlet density ρin. With this information, the two distinct
mass flow rates must also be considered. The calculated expansion valve capillary coef-
ficient Kv and the calculated degree of opening for the two nominal cases are as follows:
Variable
Case 1
Case 2
Kv [m2]
1.375×10-6
˙mR [kg/s]
0.04
0.0092
ρin [kg/m3]
1034
c [-]
0.9336
0.2147
Table 5.11: Expansion valve sizing parameters
5.3.8
Thermal Management System PI controllers
The final step necessary for a full system simulation consists in defining and tuning three
controllers. The first controller is required for the expansion valve degree of opening c, as
a function of superheat ∆Tsh. A PI controller was selected based on the recommendation
by Kærn (2011) [35]. The controller was tuned in favor of slower dynamics to enhance
model stability, with the resulting parameters shown in Table 5.12.
Variable
Kp [1/K]
Ti [s]
Ymax [-]
Ymin [-]
Value
0.03636
0.625
3
0.05
Table 5.12: PI controller parameters for the expansion valve
The second controller is required for the compressor velocity. As an engineer, the sim-
plest control variable is either the cabin or battery temperature to drive the system. How-
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
57
==PAGE:66==
ever, within the automotive industry it is a common practice to control the cabin’s heat
exchanger pressure –notice that it is not specified if this heat exchanger acts as a con-
denser or evaporator because heat pump applications are relatively new to the industry,
hence this comment is mainly related to internal combustion HVAC systems with cabin
evaporators–. This method however also introduces an undesired effect: as a user only
sets the desired cabin temperature this compressor controller must be complemented by
another one, such as a cabin fan flow ff controller.
As such, a first compressor controller was implemented to manage the pressure dis-
charge pdis using the compressor speed ω. Once again, slower dynamics were favored
in exchange for a more stable model. The resulting controller parameters are shown in
Table 5.13.
Variable
Kp [rpm/Pa]
Ti [s]
Ymax [rpm]
Ymin [rpm]
Value
0.0005
0.25
2500
200
Table 5.13: PI controller parameters for the compressor
and where the controller used to manage the fan speed as a percentage ff of the rated
flow rate ˙mfan,rated, using cabin temperature Tcabin as the control feedback signal. This
controller’s parameters can be found in Table 5.14.
Variable
Kp [1/K]
Ti [s]
Ymax [-]
Ymin [-]
Value
0.007
0.5
4
0.5
Table 5.14: PI controller parameters for the cabin fan
Within the operation of the full system only, a controller is also applied to the liquid pump
mass flow rate ˙mcoolant. This is accomplished by managing the percentage ff of its rated
value ˙mcoolant,rated using the last battery bundle core temperature Tlast as the control feed-
back signal. Thus, the resulting controller parameters can be found in Table 5.15.
Variable
Kp [1/K]
Ti [s]
Ymax [-]
Ymin [-]
Value
0.001
2
1
0.2
Table 5.15: PI controller parameters for the liquid pump
Finally, a second compressor control strategy may be considered when the full system is
operational. In this case, the need for a small temperature difference between the bat-
teries suggests maintaining the pump operating at its rated speed. In such scenario the
compressor speed ω is controlled using the last battery bundle core temperature Tlast
as the control feedback signal. The resulting controller parameters are provided in Ta-
ble 5.16.
Variable
Kp [rpm/K]
Ti [s]
Ymax [rpm]
Ymin [rpm]
Value
50
10
2500
200
Table 5.16: PI controller parameters for the compressor under the second control strategy
58
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:67==
5.4
Model verification
Figure 5.10: Verification model Modelica connections
The final verification step can be performed by simulating the simplest system as a whole.
For this effort, consider the schematic Figure 3.2 with the bypass enabled, hence the bat-
tery coolant loop is not included. The simpler one-stage heat pump was initialized us-
ing enthalpies hj and heat exchanger wall temperatures Tw,j discretized values obtained
while sizing and in steady-state. The system was uniquely controlled through the desired
compressor discharge pressure, set to a nominal value of Pdis = 1018 kPa, equivalent
to a saturation temperature Tsat of 40 °C while maintaining a fixed fan cabin flow mass
rate ˙mfan of 0.68 kg/s. The steady-state refrigeration cycle log(p) - h and T - s diagrams
–where s is the specific entropy of the fluid– are presented in Figure 5.11.
(a) log(p) - h diagram.
(b) T - s diagram
Figure 5.11: Verification heat pump cycle overlaid on top of R1234yf’s thermodynamic
property diagrams, plotted with CoolProp’s Python wrapper [47]
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
59
==PAGE:68==
The steady-state cycle indicates that the system is behaving as expected:
• The compressor discharge pressure pdis = 1018 kPa effectively matches the desired
saturation temperature Tsat = 40 °C (313 K) that has been defined as nominal op-
erating conditions.
• The receiver maintains the subcooling at ∆Tsc = 0 K thus providing saturated liquid
to the expansion valve.
• The evaporator and expansion valve successfully maintain the system’s superheat
at ∆Tsh = 5 K, while stabilizing at a saturation pressure of psat = 81.8 kPa, equiva-
lent to an evaporation temperature Tevap = −34.2 °C (239 K).
• Finally, the compressor successfully maintains the system in this state, running at a
speed ω of 530 rpm.
Now that the battery pack, cabin, and Thermal Management System have been sized
and verified it is possible to study the effect of heating in the vehicle’s range. This study
is presented in the next section.
60
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:69==
6
Results
This section provides insight into the results of four distinct case scenarios. The first sce-
nario analyzes the battery pack when neither the cabin nor the battery are being heated,
thus it is considered as a baseline. The second case occurs when only the cabin is
provided with heat, whereas the third case occurs when both the battery and the cabin
demand heating. The results include vehicle-level data such as the vehicle’s depletion
range. On a system level they include Thermal Management System data particular to
the battery pack such as state-of-charge SOC, battery cell temperature Tcore, battery
pack heat generation ˙Qgen, and heat pump data such as heat pump evaporator ˙Qevap,
condenser ˙Qcond, and compressor loads ˙Wcomp, and COP. Finally, the fourth scenario
attempts to improve the driving range in cold weather when both the cabin and battery
are actively heated.
6.1
Baseline: No heating demand
This first case considers the Battery Electric Vehicle (BEV) being driven at conditions
where neither the cabin nor the battery require any heating, which can be assumed to
happen when both the ambient Tamb and initial temperatures Tini of the system are be-
tween 10 °C and 20°C. This simulation includes a high voltage parasitic load characteristic
of these systems, and was given a value of 1 kW for the entire pack. Since the heating
systems are off it is to be expected that the vehicle will have the farthest possible range.
To provide a full picture of the impact which the ambient temperature may have on the
range a set of additional ambient temperatures below 10°C are also included.
Simulations using the model OneBatteryStaticFluid were performed by stacking consecu-
tive FTP cycles one after the other. The initial state-of-charge of the vehicle was limited to
a maximum of SOCini = 0.9 and the simulation was terminated when the vehicle reached
the minimum acceptable value of SOC = 0.1, which is a procedure known as battery de-
pletion or simply depletion. The ambient temperature was kept constant throughout the
simulations, and all other parameters were maintained as described in chapter 5. Two
more runs included reference cycles US06 and Davis Dam, with the purpose of showcas-
ing the model’s capabilities, and to give comparison values for the reader outside FTP’s
mild behavior. A connection diagram from Modelica is shown in Figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Baseline model Modelica connections
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
61
==PAGE:70==
6.1.1
Range
At an ambient temperature Tamb = 20 °C the vehicle is able to complete a total of 42 FTP
cycles, and reaches the minimum state-of-charge of SOC = 0.1 into the 43rd repetition.
On the other hand, the vehicle completes a total of 40 full cycles, while also reaching
the minimum value during the 41st drive-cycle at an ambient temperature Tamb = 10 °C.
The ensuing lower temperature simulations showed that the vehicle is able to complete a
minimum of 33 drive-cycles even at the coldest ambient temperature Tamb = −20 °C. The
resulting range for each of the test cases are shown in Table 6.1.
Variable
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
US06
DDam
Tamb [°C]
-20
-10
0
10
20
20
20
Cycles ncycle [-]
33
36
39
40
42
35
4
Range [km]
615
655
696
724
749
466
77
Table 6.1: Baseline depletion FTP range as a function of different ambient temperatures
Tamb, and no heating, including reference values for US06 and DDam
First, notice that the range is 3 % lower at an ambient temperature Tamb = 10 °C than at
Tamb = 20 °C, which increases to 18 % when comparing the values at Tamb = −20 °C and
Tamb = 20 °C. Second, notice how the range drops by almost 38 % when driving more
aggressively (US06) and it plunges to 77 km when towing a small trailer up a hill (DDam).
6.1.2
Battery core temperature and source voltage
Other two important parameters are the resulting battery core temperatures Tcore and
battery open-circuit voltage VOC. The former is presented in Figure 6.2 where it can be
observed that a lower ambient temperature Tamb increases the relative battery cell core
temperature due to an increase in the ohmic losses in the cell and the decrease of cell ca-
pacity with lower state-of-charge. In addition, notice how the battery cell behavior at lower
state-of-charge SOC –close to the end of the simulation– also supports observations from
the field. At low state-of-charge a sudden increase in ohmic losses occurs, which can be-
come dangerous and thus require current limitation strategies to be implemented. Finally,
notice how a more demanding drive-cycle like DDam increases the battery temperature
without indication of what the steady-state temperature would be, since it will deplete be-
fore reaching such state.
Figure 6.2: Baseline battery core temperature Tcore and ambient temperature Tamb differ-
ence as a function of the number of driven cycles, at different ambient temperatures Tamb,
and no heating, including reference values for US06 and DDam
62
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:71==
Second, the battery open-circuit voltage VOC is presented in Figure 6.3. Here it can ob-
served that the voltage profile is practically identical during the first 15 cycles regardless
of the ambient temperature. Afterwards, the voltage decreases at different rates but still
remains relatively constant and after approximately 25 cycles it starts decreasing rapidly.
Figure 6.3: Baseline battery open circuit voltage VOC as a function of the number of driven
FTP cycles nFTP , at different ambient temperatures Tamb, and no heating
6.1.3
Battery C-rate and heat generation
Figure 6.4 shows the C-rate and its Probability Density Function (PDF) for the last drive-
cycle before depletion for the simulation at Tamb = 20 °C. The results showcase the highly
transient nature of the battery cell usage with instantaneous values reaching 0.7C during
discharge (positive C-rate) and up to 0.6C during charge (negative C-rate). Observe that
the peaks do not present shaving, which would be characteristic of control strategies miti-
gating time-at-peak currents. These are relevant in the design of Battery Electric Vehicles
(BEVs) but are more dependent on the electric system itself and therefore out of the scope
of this project.
Figure 6.4: Baseline battery cell C-rate and p(C-rate) for Tamb = 20 °C, and no heating
The resulting effect of the C-rate is the battery pack heat generation, which is presented
in Figure 6.5. The results visually indicate how lower temperatures increase the likelihood
for higher instantaneous heat generation ˙Qgen, with values almost tripling across the entire
studied temperature range. Regardless, the average heat generation remains at 350 W
or below for all study cases.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 6.5: Baseline battery pack heat generation ˙Qgen and p( ˙Qgen) at different ambient
temperatures Tamb, and no heating
6.1.4
The effect of pre-conditioning
The results previously shown followed a case where the battery was not pre-conditioned
prior to driving. However, one might ask: what would happen pre-conditioned occurs, fol-
lowed by no active heating throughout the driving exercise? This section provides results
under such research question. Figure 6.6 includes the battery cell core temperature after
being driven for consecutive FTP cycles with a single initial pre-conditioning. Notice in the
results that the batteries maintain some of the thermal energy for the first 5 to 10 cycles
–which accounts for anywhere between 2.5 hours and 5 hours of continuous driving– only
to approach ambient temperatures afterwards.
Figure 6.6: Baseline battery core temperatures Tcore as a function of the number of driven
FTP cycles nFTP , at different ambient temperatures Tamb, after an initial pre-conditioning,
and no heating
Furthermore, the depletion range results from two pre-conditioning scenarios are pre-
sented in Figure 6.7, as are the baseline values (see Table 6.1). The first scenario consid-
ers that battery pre-conditioning only happens once before the first FTP cycle, whereas the
second case considers pre-conditioning is provided every three drive-cycles. The results
indicate that a single pre-conditioning event has a minimal effect towards increasing range
(e.g. for a long trip) without further active heating. On the other hand, pre-conditioning
every three cycles provides up to 11.5 % range improvement at Tamb = −20 °C and effec-
tively reduces the differences between observed ranges across all ambient temperatures.
64
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:73==
Figure 6.7: Baseline depletion FTP range as a function of different ambient temperatures
Tamb, with or without (baseline) initial pre-conditioning, and no heating
Overall, the results suggest that driving a battery electric vehicle in the winter should give
a comparable range to that from an Internal Combustion Engine (ICE) vehicle as long as
any additional systems (e.g. cabin heating) are not used, which is not realistic. For this
reason the next section discusses how heating the cabin using the Thermal Management
System at cold temperatures affects the vehicle’s range.
6.2
Case 1: Cabin heating only
As mentioned previously, cold weather will likely mean that the vehicle users will command
the Thermal Management System unit to warm the cabin, which is expected to happen
when the ambient temperature Tamb is 0 °C or below, down to a minimum studied temper-
ature of -20 °C. Once more, the simulation considers that a high voltage parasitic load of
1 kW will be present. Furthermore, the battery electric load also includes the heating unit
power consumption, which is a combination of the compressor and the outside fan power
draw. The corresponding system schematic has been reproduced in Figure 6.8 to provide
a straight reference for the reader, which includes the implemented control strategies, and
its equivalent Modelica connections diagram shown in Figure 6.9.
Figure 6.8: Cabin-only heating Thermal Management System schematic with the imple-
mented control strategies
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
65
==PAGE:74==
Figure 6.9: Cabin-only heating Modelica connections
The simulations were initialized using the same procedure described in section 5.4: a
series of enthalpies hj and temperatures Tj were provided explicitly for each heat ex-
changer, while also providing the initial output state of the controlled systems (e.g. the
compressor speed ω at 500 rpm). Furthermore, the system was controlled to achieve
the desired condensation pressure pdis = 1018 kPa via the compressor speed ω, and a
cabin temperature Tcabin of 20 °C using the cabin fan speed factor ff, as described in
subsection 5.3.8.
Finally, the refrigeration and battery simulations were run independently from each other.
This allowed running the refrigeration cycle first to obtain the compressor power demand
˙Wcomp, and subsequently using that information to complete the lengthier battery deple-
tion simulation. Overall, simulating the heat pump required anywhere between 2 hours
(Tamb = −20 ◦C) and 9 hours (Tamb = 0 ◦C) for the duration of one FTP cycle. The longer
simulation time at higher ambient temperatures was attributed to the model instabilities at
lower mass flow rates, thus it was decided to limit the compressor to a minimum speed ω
of 200 rpm.
6.2.1
Refrigeration cycle
The resulting steady-state refrigeration cycle log(p) - h and T - s diagrams are shown
twofold in Figure 6.10 for the three studied ambient temperatures. In the results all the
cycles indicate that:
• The expansion valve controller and the receiver –as expected– maintain the super-
heat ∆Tsh at 5 K and the subcooling ∆Tsc at 0 K, respectively.
• At higher ambient temperatures the evaporation temperature Tevap rises to balance
the heat transfer with the ambient Tamb.
• Lower compressor discharge temperatures Tdis are observed as a result of higher
compressor isentropic efficiencies ηis at higher ambient temperature conditions Tamb
and fixed discharge pressures pdis.
66
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:75==
(a) log(p) - h diagram
(b) T - s diagram
Figure 6.10: Cabin-only heating stationary heat pump cycles overlaid on top of R1234yf’s
thermodynamic property diagrams
The case at an ambient temperature Tamb = 0 °C showed an important limitation: if the
compressor speed ω has a lower limit of 200 rpm then incoming cabin airflow Tcabin at
20°C would be too hot to maintain condensation within the desired pressure. As such,
it was decided to change the cabin simulation to resemble Fresh air mode, a term used
in the automotive industry when outside air is brought in contact with the HVAC system
instead of recirculating air from inside the cabin. Figure 6.11 shows the resulting heat flow
rates at the evaporator ˙Qevap and condenser ˙Qcond, and the input power to the compressor
˙Wcomp, as well as the system’s COP and mass flow rates ˙m, and compressor speed ω.
Figure 6.11: Cabin-only heating system results
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
67
==PAGE:76==
The results show that the compressor power ˙Wcomp decreases within the entire ambient
temperature range, while the evaporator load remains virtually unchanged at Tamb = −20 °C
and Tamb = −10 °C, yet increases due to Fresh Air at Tamb = 0 °C. Overall, the system’s
COP lies between 2.14 and 3.11 if the fan electric load is not considered in the calculation,
and it drops to values between 1.32 and 1.63 if it is included.
6.2.2
Range, pre-conditioning, and cabin cooldown
The results of the battery depletion FTP procedure when the vehicle cabin is heated are
presented numerically in Table 6.2 and also graphically in Figure 6.12. Notice that an
additional range is presented, which considers the previously discussed 3-cycle FTP de-
pletion procedure with battery pack pre-conditioning in between each driving event.
Variable
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Tamb [°C]
-20
-10
0
Cycles nFTP [-]
21
24
26
Range [km]
388
437
472
Range w/Pre-cond [km]
434
464
482
Table 6.2: Cabin-only heating depletion FTP range as a function of different ambient tem-
peratures Tamb
Figure 6.12: Cabin-only heating depletion FTP range as a function of different ambient
temperatures Tamb, compared with the baseline results
Figure 6.13: Cabin cool-down temperature profiles at different ambient temperatures Tamb
after shutting down the heating system
68
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:77==
Figure 6.12 indicates that the range drops for all ambient temperatures studied when us-
ing the Thermal Management System to heat the cabin. As such, the range decreases
by 37 %, 33%, and 32 % if compared against the baseline results at Tamb = −20 °C,
Tamb = −10 °C, and Tamb = 0 °C, respectively when the battery is neither pre-conditioned
nor actively heated. The range improves when the battery is pre-conditioned every three
cycles yet it still shows decreases of 29 %, 29%, and 31 % if compared against the base-
line results at Tamb = −20 °C, Tamb = −10 °C, and Tamb = 0 °C, respectively.
Finally, Figure 6.13 shows the temperature profiles of the air inside the cabin Tcabin where
decreases of 10 °C occur within one minute of shutting down the system, and approach
ambient temperature within 5 - 10 minutes. Therefore, shutting down the cabin as an
attempt to increase range will hurt the occupant’s comfort quickly and should not be con-
sidered as a viable energy-saving option.
6.2.3
Battery core temperature, C-rate and heat generation
Finally, the results shown in Figure 6.14 indicate that the temperature of the batteries
increases with the additional electric load (as expected), yet this change is not sufficient
to raise the temperature of the batteries to the design-intent 20 °C set-point. Moreover, this
mild increase of temperatures suggests that the Thermal Management System will not be
required to actively cool the batteries under these environmental and driving conditions.
Figure 6.14: Cabin-only heating battery core temperature Tcore as a function of the number
of driven FTP cycles nFTP , at different ambient temperatures Tamb
Figure 6.15: Cabin-only heating battery cell C-rate at Tamb = −20 °C, and battery pack
heat generation ˙Qgen at different ambient temperatures Tamb
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
69
==PAGE:78==
On the other hand, the electric load increase is visible in the C-rate probability density
function provided in Figure 6.15 alongside the heat generation for the battery pack ˙Qgen.
It can be observed that the heat generation profile has been redistributed closer to higher
values overall, up to a maximum instantaneous value of ˙Qgen = 1.4 kW. The results ob-
tained by heating the cabin support industry data and driver testimonials where the range
of similar vehicles decrease by ≈33 % over the winter while driving in the city [48]. These
results also lead to the next question: would heating the battery pay off by increasing the
vehicle’s range in cold weather? This is explored in the third section of the results.
6.3
Case 2: Cabin and battery heating
Managing the temperature of the batteries in cold weather increases their efficiency and
longevity, but at what cost? This section studies the usage of the Thermal Management
System to warm both the cabin and the batteries simultaneously at ambient conditions at
Tamb = 0 °C or below, down a minimum studied temperature of Tamb = −20 °C.
To accomplish this analysis the battery model was coupled with the existing heat pump
model while also setting up two different control strategies:
• The first control strategy –also called case 2a– is identical to that presented in sec-
tion 6.2, where the compressor discharge pressure pdis is controlled to a set-point
of 1018 kPa via the compressor speed ω, and where the cabin fan ˙mfan and pump
˙mcoolant flow rates are controlled to achieve 20 °C at both the cabin temperature
Tcabin and the last battery cell bundle temperature Tlast. (NOTE: here notation φ
indicates the φ’s time average).
• The second control strategy –also called case 2b– maintains the cabin fan control in-
tact, while fixing the pump mass flow at the nominal value, hence ˙mcoolant = 0.35 kg/s.
Additionally, the compressor speed ω is controlled using the last battery cell bundle
temperature Tlast as described in subsection 5.3.8. Lastly, the cabin fan is limited to
a maximum of 4 times nominal flow rate (ff,max = 4) to maintain realistic fan mass
flow rates.
Figure 6.16: Cabin and battery heating Thermal Management System schematic with the
first control strategy (case 2a)
70
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:79==
Figure 6.17: Cabin and battery heating Thermal Management System schematic with the
second control strategy (case 2b)
Once more, the simulation considers a high voltage parasitic load of 1 kW and the heat-
ing unit power consumption, which is a combination of the compressor and the outside
fan power draw. The corresponding system diagrams are shown in Figure 6.16 and Fig-
ure 6.17, while the equivalent Modelica connections diagram only for case 2b is shown in
Figure 6.18.
Figure 6.18: Modelica connections associated the cabin and battery heating case 2b
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
71
==PAGE:80==
This simulation setup required an average of 3 hours to provide results for only one FTP
cycle. For this reason, the whole simulation was split into two distinct ones:
• First, the coupled simulation was used to study one FTP cycle in order to obtain
the general simulation settings such as mass flow rates ˙m. This simulation also
provided the resulting coolant boundary conditions hcoolant,in for the battery pack and
an estimation for the expected number of FTP cycles required for battery depletion.
• Second, the battery pack was decoupled and simulated only using the previously
gathered information. This procedure allowed to simulate the entire depletion pro-
cedure in under 6 hours for each temperature condition while maintaining key infor-
mation related to the variation of temperature Tcell and state-of-charge SOC of the
batteries within the battery pack.
6.3.1
Refrigeration cycle
Figure 6.19 shows the stationary log(p) - h and T - s diagrams with respect to the two
control strategies, with a yellow contour around the discretization points that belong to
the battery condenser.
(a) log(p) - h diagram, case 2a
(b) T - s diagram, case 2a
(c) log(p) - h diagram, case 2b
(d) T - s diagram, case 2b
Figure 6.19: Cabin and battery heating stationary heat pump cycles obtained under two
distinct control strategies overlaid on top of R1234yf’s thermodynamic property diagrams
72
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:81==
First, case 2a effectively maintains the condensation pressure as pdis = 1018 kPa, while
case 2b allows for condensation pressure variations depending on the heat requirements
of the cabin and battery pack. Notice that case 2a also employs the cabin condenser
mostly as a de-superheater (per design intent), whereas case 2b shows that the cabin
condenser de-superheats the flow and partially condenses it too; in either case this pro-
cess is completed by the battery condenser. Finally, the evaporation pressure between
the two control cases is slightly different as a result of the small variations within the mass
flow rate of refrigerant ˙mR.
Figure 6.20 shows the stationary loads for the system, and where both the cabin and bat-
tery condenser are given separately for comparability purposes. The results indicate that
cases 1a and 2b are intricately similar at Tamb = −20 °C since both cases operate closely
to the sizing point. However, a larger battery pack condenser heat load would indicate
larger energy expense for case 2a. As a final reference for this ambient temperature con-
dition, the battery pack heat load ˙Qpack is approximately three times larger than the cabin
heat load ˙Qcabin.
Larger differences can be observed at Tamb = −10 °C between both control strategies.
As an example, the battery condenser load is ≈200 W higher in case 2a if compared
against case 2b. This occurs because within case 2a the liquid pump is operating at 35 %
of its nominal mass flow rate ˙mcoolant, which effectively maintains the battery pack’s last
battery bundle temperature Tlast at 20 °C at the expense of a larger temperature gradient
among battery pack bundles (see subsection 6.3.3) and therefore larger thermal losses
˙Qloss. As far as case 2b, maintaining a nominal coolant flow allows the condensation
temperature Tcond to decrease to 34.7 °C, resulting in a system performance improvement
(see Figure 6.21).
Figure 6.20: Cabin-only heating system loads as a function of different ambient temper-
atures Tamb, under two distinct control strategies
Lastly, the simulation for case 2a at Tamb = 0 °C was not executed because it would re-
quire Fresh Air mode and a fixed minimum pump value to operate at, which is a combi-
nation that does not belong in the case scenario. At the same ambient conditions, case
2b indicates that the battery pack heat load ˙Qpack decreases until doubling the cabin heat
load ˙Qcabin. As such, this case scenario results in a condensation temperature Tcond of
merely 29.8°C. These test conditions yield the highest COP of all the simulations con-
ducted in this section. Overall, the system’s COP are larger under case 2b, if compared
with their respective counterparts in case 2a, as shown in Figure 6.21.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure 6.21: Cabin and battery heating system COP as a function of different ambient
temperatures Tamb, under two distinct control strategies
6.3.2
Range
The resulting depletion range associated with heating the cabin and the battery simulta-
neously are presented both in tabular form in Table 6.3 and graphically in Figure 6.22.
Variable
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Tamb [°C]
-20
-10
0
Case 2a range [km]
260
322
-
Case 2b range [km]
263
339
428
Table 6.3: Cabin and battery heating depletion FTP range as a function of different ambi-
ent temperatures Tamb, under two distinct control strategies
Figure 6.22: Cabin and battery heating depletion FTP range as a function of different
ambient temperatures Tamb, compared with the baseline results
Notice in Figure 6.22 that heating the cabin and battery simultaneously further reduces
the range of the vehicle. Moreover, the range decreases further at colder ambient temper-
atures. As a whole, the calculated case 2b depletion ranges are 57 %, 48 %, and 39 %
lower than their respective Baseline counterparts at Tamb = −20 °C, Tamb = −10 °C, and
Tamb = 0 °C. These results are in line with the findings by Chowdhury et al. [29] related
to range of automotive products in cold weather below Tamb = −10 °C.
74
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:83==
6.3.3
Battery pack temperature distribution
Analysis of the stationary data of the battery pack provided important insight towards
increasing the range of the vehicle. Figure 6.23 indicates the average temperature of
each battery bundle Tcore for the studied ambient temperatures and the two distinct con-
trol strategies. It is clear from the first two graphs that maintaining the nominal coolant
flowrate effectively reduces the temperature gradient between battery cell bundles. Sim-
ilarly, higher ambient temperatures also reduce the battery pack temperature gradient.
Figure 6.23: Cabin and battery heating battery bundle core temperature Tcore and final
SOC as a function of the number of bundle nb, at different ambient temperatures Tamb
and under two distinct control strategies
The effect of the temperature gradient is evident in the second set of graphs, where the
final SOC for each bundle is presented. Notice that a lower temperature gradient is also
directly related to a more moderate difference state-of-charge between bundles, which is
a desirable effect for safety, control, and durability purposes. Finally, notice how case 2a
at Tamb = −10 °C exhibits unique behavior. In such case, the final SOC for the bundles
with core temperatures near Tcore = 25 °C is higher, supporting the idea that lithium-ion
batteries have a most efficient operating temperature range [17]. For the LFP battery
studied in this work the most efficient temperature is Tcore ≈25°C.
Figure 6.24 is presented lastly to support the argument previously presented. For this
reason, the figure includes only data for case 2a at Tamb = −10 °C. The graph presents the
C-rate for the battery cell and the corresponding battery cell heat generation ˙Qgen,cell when
kept at Tcore = 20 °C (last bundle cell) and Tcore = 25.2 °C (third bundle cell). The figure
shows that the probability of heat generation decreases for the warmer cell despite both
working under the same electric current i. These results lead to the question: is it possible
to improve vehicle range by operating the battery closer to its optimal temperature? This
is explored in the next and final section of this thesis.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure 6.24: Cabin and battery heating battery cell C-rate and battery cell heat generation
˙Qgen, for bundles nb = 3 and nb = 10 under case 2a at Tamb = −10 °C
6.4
Range improvement efforts
The results from the previous section effectively showed that the battery operates more ef-
ficiently close to Tcore = 25 °C. However, increasing the temperature of the battery core will
require further energy expense at the compressor. On the other hand, it is also possible
to improve range by decreasing the battery temperature set-point, thus also decreasing
the compressor’s load in the system. As such, this section explores the effects of using a
distinct temperature setting for the battery pack, and its potential effect in maximizing the
range of the vehicle for the distinct ambient temperatures previously studied.
For these cases the compressor speed ω was set to a given value instead of being con-
trolled. Figure 6.25 shows the different sweeps obtained at each ambient temperature
previously presented, and all the operational points surrounding Tlast = 20 °C. The re-
sults suggest linear proportionality between the compressor speed ω and the condensa-
tion temperature Tcond, and the mean temperatures Tfirst and Tlast in the battery pack.
Figure 6.25: Cabin and battery heating sweep temperatures as a function of the compres-
sor speed ω, for different ambient temperatures Tamb
The limits for the sweep procedure were found in the following manner. First, inducing
a higher temperature in the batteries Tcore improves their performance when they reach
values close to 25 °C, however this benefit decreases if the battery temperatures exceed
this value. As such, the simulations were limited to average temperatures Tcore among
76
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:85==
all bundles equal or below to 25°C. As discussed in the previous section, colder ambient
temperatures also come with higher losses and thus larger temperature gradients within
the battery pack, hence this upper limit was found to be different for the three temperature
sweeps. The second limit was found at the lower end of the temperatures, where reducing
the condensation temperature Tcond effectively reached a limit where the fan could not
provide any additional airflow (presented previously as ff = 4). When this limit is reached
the cabin temperature decreases below the desired set-point of Tcabin = 20 °C.
The depletion range of the vehicle under all the simulations within the sweeps is presented
in Figure 6.26 as a function of the temperature of the last battery bundle Tlast. Notice that
the limits previously discussed are depicted on both sides of the graph to visually indicate
the areas where the cabin temperature is not met, areas where the battery capacity is
decreasing as a result of battery cell temperatures, and transition zones.
Figure 6.26: Cabin and battery heating sweep depletion FTP range as a function of the
last bundle temperature Tlast, for different ambient temperatures Tamb
Figure 6.27: Cabin and battery heating sweep depletion FTP range as a function of dif-
ferent ambient temperatures Tamb, compared with the heated cabin results
Finally, the depletion range is also presented in Figure 6.27, including the comparison
to the case where only the cabin is heated. It can be observed in the figure that neither
range improvement effort matches the vehicle’s range when only the cabin is heated.
However, it is clear that the vehicle’s range benefits from heating the battery, as shown
in the results for Tamb = 0 °C. At this temperature, reducing the last bundle’s temperature
Tlast by 2 - 4 °C brings the range within 6% of the heated cabin case result.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
77
==PAGE:86==
7
Discussion and conclusion
This section is intended to provide some general comments about the thesis’s strengths
and opportunities, and also to provide some recommendations for future work related to it.
Finally, some comments are provided regarding meeting the thesis objectives presented
at the beginning of this work.
7.1
Discussion
7.1.1
About the Modelica language
Despite the very positive aspects of Modelica I feel compelled to criticize some of its im-
plementation, providing some comments that may resonate with past and present users:
• The programming language feels outdated with mandatory definitions for types of
classes and variables, making the programming effort more time consuming than
expected. This is an observable trend though, where the programming language
Python requires a similar type of construction, while it gains immense traction mainly
because it is open source.
• Learning the language requires a significant amount of time. This means getting
acquainted with the declaration syntax, followed by the different classes, and un-
readable or nonexistent documentation for the existing libraries.
• The object-oriented approach may become a double-edged sword. This can be
seen within the basic Modelica classes intended as building blocks for more com-
plex systems where aggregation and inheritance are abused to the point where
traceability is no longer possible. This may not seem problematic to the experi-
enced user, but is definitely a limitation for the aspiring one. Finally, this unwanted
effect is present within commercial libraries, where multiple class levels are used
on purpose to deter users from modifying the code according to their needs. An
unethical yet accepted practice in today’s world.
Modelica is surely imperfect, thus advances in the language structure and capabilities are
greatly appreciated and celebrated by its users –including myself–. However, if Modelica
is expected to be part of future modelling efforts, I would suggest reforms to its declaration
syntax to make it more appealing for new users. In addition, I would suggest a more
rounded and coordinated effort from experienced users to document code in a readable
way, to actively teach the language through inclusive exercises (something more than the
clearly exhausted rocket example), and to actively respond to requests for clarification
and help related to their publications.
7.1.2
About the validity of the model
This effort was exclusively conducted through an extensive effort on the numerical side,
which may raise questions about the extent of the validity of its results. As such, some
statements regarding the validity of the model are:
• The models are derived from physical laws and first principles (e.g. electromag-
netism, thermodynamics and heat transfer, and fluid mechanics). These laws have
proven to be in excellent concordance with the physics they attempt to describe,
and are daily used for the advancement of science and technology in the world.
78
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:87==
• The models are complemented by correlations and model simplifications. In prac-
tice, correlations attempt to describe complicated phenomena with simpler mathe-
matical expressions and effectively introduce uncertainty in the models. As such,
the results must be treated carefully until the analysis is completed with multiple ex-
perimental results. Until such effort occurs, correlations and model simplifications
help provide results that are, to the very least, some guidance in understanding the
intrinsic relations between variables in the problem.
• The model building efforts, sizing, and verification were conducted with special care
to detail towards realistic data. As an example, the cooling pack design parameters
are entirely within acceptable margin to those from current automotive products.
Thus, it should be no surprise that the results are quantitatively close to those ob-
served in the field today. An even more specific example can be provided regarding
the flow velocity in the outside heat exchanger. The airflow used in this study comes
from CFD data and seven years of professional experience working with automotive
cooling systems for gasoline, diesel, hybrid, and battery electric products.
The results are therefore valid within the scope of the project, which was to describe the
thermal behavior of a battery electric vehicle under cold weather. Potential future work
to validate these results would be to conduct experimental tests at the component and
system levels with components like those hereby designed. A second possible line for
future work would be to study different Thermal Management Systems, and or distinct
battery cell technologies. A third option would be to simplify the model even further to
study if the results are replicable at a lower modelling and resource expenditure.
7.1.3
About the results of the model
The battery cell electric model was effective at incorporating existing battery cell data
(which is hard to obtain given it is usually confidential) and provide sensible results around
battery capacity and state-of-charge. This model effectively described industry-known pa-
rameters, such as increased cell efficiency levels close to a temperature of 25 °C, or incre-
mental battery cell losses at low state-of-charge. The model however has two important
deficiencies that could be studied in the future: first, the battery cells were modelled using
average charge/discharge electric parameters, which provided better numerical stability
but likely failed to capture further insight into their behavior; second, the battery state-
of-health was not included in the model which is a key parameter for current and future
battery applications’ cost.
On the refrigeration side, the model was effective at using the One-dimensional mixture
model to construct a simple dynamic heat pump system. The model exhibited physics
based behavior and helped complement the battery and cabin models in a timely man-
ner. As a result, the model effectively showed that a battery electric vehicle loses range
solely if the battery temperature drops below the optimal point. Moreover, maintaining
adequate cabin temperature in cold weather conditions significantly reduces the vehicle’s
range. This range is hurt even further if the battery pack is also heated, regardless of the
temperature setting. The heat pump model however exhibited limitations that are outside
the scope of this project, such as increased instability at low mass flow rates which was
observed throughout many dynamic conditions. Studying the reasons for this instability
can be part of the future work. Moreover, some key decisions in the modelling effort,
such as mass flow rate discretization schemes, or initialization methods for increased
initial stability could also be studied in more detail.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
79
==PAGE:88==
7.2
Conclusions
This thesis work successfully studied published literature regarding lithium-ion battery
cell technology and the effects of weather on it. In addition, state-of-the-art automotive
Thermal Management Systems were also studied. The result from these studies was a
dynamic electro-thermal model for an automotive battery pack linking battery cell temper-
atures Tcore, the electric parameters describing its electric performance, and the ambient
temperature Tamb. This model also successfully incorporated a dynamic heat pump and
passenger cabin, which were sized based on public information about commercial Battery
Electric Vehicles (BEVs).
This model provided results that match reported behavior of Battery Electric Vehicles in
cold ambient conditions between Tamb = −20 °C and Tamb = 0 °C, and successfully pro-
vided useful comparison range data for multiple cases. First, the range of a BEV de-
creases solely by means of lower battery cell core temperatures Tcore, caused by lower
ambient temperatures Tamb and the inability of the cell to generate enough heat in the
city-like FTP drive-cycle. The range results when neither the cabin nor the battery are
actively heated show that the vehicle’s range drops 17.9 % between Tamb = 20 °C and
Tamb = −20 °C. If the battery is pre-conditioned before a long trip the range improvement
is negligible, while pre-conditioning every three cycles contains the range decrease to
9.7 %. Furthermore, if the cabin is actively heated the range decreases even further,
yielding ranges that are 32 % - 37 % lower than baseline (no pre-conditioning), and 29 %
- 31 % lower than baseline (using 3-cycle pre-conditioning). In this case scenario the sys-
tem’s COP ranged from 2.14 to 3.11 if the fan is not considered in the calculation, and
1.32 to 1.63 if it is considered.
Studying the case where the battery pack is also heated showed that maintaining a fixed
pump flow rate helped achieve a lower battery pack temperature gradient. In addition, it
helped operate the system in a more efficient setting that at fixed discharge pressure, as
indicated by system’s COP ranging from 2.15 to 3.44 (without the fan), and from 1.86 to
2.31 (including the fan). However, the range was found to be 39 % - 57 % lower than the
baseline case despite using the efficient control setting. In an effort to increase range, a
series of range sweeps were conducted when both the battery and cabin require heating.
The results indicated that range could be improved by decreasing the battery temperature
set-point yet it would fail to match the range observed when solely the cabin is heated.
These results further indicate that heating the battery pack may be necessary for state-
of-health or safety purposes, but not from an energy savings perspective.
80
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:89==
Bibliography
[1]
Core Writing Team, H. Lee, and J. Romero (eds.) “IPCC, 2023: Sections”. In: Cli-
mate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III
to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(2019), pp. 35–115. DOI: 10.59327/IPCC/AR6-9789291691647. URL: https://www.
ipcc.ch/report/ar6/syr/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_SYR_LongerReport.pdf.
[2]
Jintamas Saksornchai. “Pacific Island leaders say rich countries are not doing enough
to control climate change”. In: Associated Press News (2023). URL: https://apnews.
com/article/pacific-island-leader-climate-change-b7d1a524eb25cc94449158e702919512.
[3]
WindEurope. “Net Zero? It’s all about electrification”. In: WindEurope Newsroom
(2023). URL: https://windeurope.org/newsroom/press- releases/net- zero- its- all-
about - electrification / # : ~ : text = To % 20achieve % 20climate % 20neutrality % 20by ,
electrification%20efforts%20are%20falling%20short..
[4]
European Comission. “Energy Storage - Underpinning a decarbonised and secure
EU energy system”. In: European Commission, Directorate-General for Energy.
2023. URL: https: / /energy .ec .europa .eu/document/download/12624902- 59aa-
483f-ade8-d5861181fdd3_en?filename=SWD_2023_57_1_EN_document_travail_
service_part1_v6.pdf.
[5]
O. Hoogland, V. Fluri, and C. Kost. “Study on energy storage”. In: European Com-
mission, Directorate-General for Energy, Publications Office of the European Union
(2023). URL: https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2833/333409.
[6]
Giuseppe Rainieri, Chiara Buizza, and Alberto Ghilardi. “The psychological, human
factors and socio-technical contribution: A systematic review towards range anxi-
ety of battery electric vehicles’ drivers”. In: Transportation Research Part F: Traffic
Psychology and Behaviour 99 (2023), pp. 52–70. ISSN: 1369-8478. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2023.10.001. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1369847823002012.
[7]
Jae Yeon Kim et al. “The effect of a dual condensing system on the driving range
for battery electric vehicles”. In: Case Studies in Thermal Engineering 54 (2024),
p. 103913. ISSN: 2214-157X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csite.2023.103913.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2214157X23012194.
[8]
Xilei Sun et al. “Experiment and simulation study on energy flow characteristics
of a battery electric vehicle throughout the entire driving range in low-temperature
conditions”. In: Energy 292 (2024), p. 130542. ISSN: 0360-5442. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.energy.2024.130542. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S036054422400313X.
[9]
Tianchan Yu et al. “Quantitative analysis of factors contributing to driving range
degradation of battery electric vehicles”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 250 (2024),
p. 123520. ISSN: 1359-4311. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2024.
123520. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359431124011888.
[10]
Clean Energy Institute. “What is a lithium-ion battery and how does it work?” 2023.
URL: https://www.cei.washington.edu/research/energy-storage/lithium-ion-battery/.
[11]
Md. Helal Hossain et al. “Advances on synthesis and performance of Li-Ion an-
ode batteries-a review”. In: Chemical Engineering Journal Advances 17 (2024),
p. 100588. ISSN: 2666-8211. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceja.2024.100588.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666821124000061.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
81
==PAGE:90==
[12]
Christoffer J. Orendorff. The role of separators in Lithium-ion cell safety. Tech. rep.
The Electrochemical Society, 2012. URL: https://www.electrochem.org/dl/interface/
sum/sum12/sum12_p061_065.pdf.
[13]
Huaqiang Liu et al. “Thermal issues about Li-ion batteries and recent progress in
battery thermal management systems: A review”. In: Energy Conversion and Man-
agement 150 (2017), pp. 304–330. ISSN: 0196-8904. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.enconman.2017.08.016. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0196890417307288.
[14]
Philip Müller-Welt, Katharina Bause, and Albert Albers. “Battery System Optimiza-
tion Using Format Flexible Pouch Cells – Literature Review and Research Method-
ology”. In: Procedia CIRP 119 (2023). The 33rd CIRP Design Conference, pp. 1078–
1083. ISSN: 2212-8271. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2023.02.181. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212827123006364.
[15]
Maan Al-Zareer et al. “Heat generation rates and anisotropic thermophysical prop-
erties of cylindrical lithium-ion battery cells with different terminal mounting con-
figurations”. In: Applied Thermal Engineering 223 (2023), p. 119990. ISSN: 1359-
4311. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2023.119990. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359431123000194.
[16]
Maan Al-Zareer, Carlos Da Silva, and Cristina H. Amon. “Predicting anisotropic
thermophysical properties and spatially distributed heat generation rates in pouch
lithium-ion batteries”. In: Journal of Power Sources 510 (2021), p. 230362. ISSN:
0378-7753. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2021.230362. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378775321008739.
[17]
Clemente Capasso et al. “Design approach for electric vehicle battery packs based
on experimentally tested multi-domain models”. In: Journal of Energy Storage 77
(2024), p. 109971. ISSN: 2352-152X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2023.
109971. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352152X23033704.
[18]
H. Kameyama et al. “Study on heat generation behavior of small lithium-ion sec-
ondary battery”. In: Trans IEE Jpn 122.11 (2002), pp. 1192–1199. DOI: 10.1541/
ieejpes1990.122.11_1192.
[19]
Valerie H. Johnson and Ahmad A. Pesaran. “Temperature-Dependent Battery Mod-
els for High-Power Lithium-lon Batteries”. In: 2000, pp. 1192–1199.
[20]
B.V. Ratnakumar et al. “The impedance characteristics of Mars Exploration Rover
Li-ion batteries”. In: Journal of Power Sources 159.2 (2006), pp. 1428–1439. ISSN:
0378-7753. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2005.11.085. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378775305016514.
[21]
D. Andre et al. “Characterization of high-power lithium-ion batteries by electrochem-
ical impedance spectroscopy. I. Experimental investigation”. In: Journal of Power
Sources 196.12 (2011). Selected papers presented at the 12th Ulm ElectroChem-
ical Talks (UECT):2015 Technologies on Batteries and Fuel Cells, pp. 5334–5341.
ISSN: 0378-7753. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2010.12.102. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378775311000681.
[22]
Wladislaw Waag, Stefan Käbitz, and Dirk Uwe Sauer. “Experimental investigation
of the lithium-ion battery impedance characteristic at various conditions and aging
states and its influence on the application”. In: Applied Energy 102 (2013). Special
Issue on Advances in sustainable biofuel production and use - XIX International
Symposium on Alcohol Fuels - ISAF, pp. 885–897. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.09.030. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S030626191200671X.
82
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:91==
[23]
Xinfan Lin et al. “A lumped-parameter electro-thermal model for cylindrical batter-
ies”. In: Journal of Power Sources 257 (2014), pp. 1–11. ISSN: 0378-7753. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2014.01.097. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0378775314001244.
[24]
J. Jaguemont, L. Boulon, and Y. Dubé. “A comprehensive review of lithium-ion bat-
teries used in hybrid and electric vehicles at cold temperatures”. In: Applied En-
ergy 164 (2016), pp. 99–114. ISSN: 0306-2619. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.apenergy.2015.11.034. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0306261915014841.
[25]
Shahabeddin K. Mohammadian, Ya-Ling He, and Yuwen Zhang. “Internal cooling of
a lithium-ion battery using electrolyte as coolant through microchannels embedded
inside the electrodes”. In: Journal of Power Sources 293 (2015), pp. 458–466. ISSN:
0378-7753. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2015.05.055. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378775315009362.
[26]
Robert Bryce. “GM’s 1.8 Billion Chevy Bolt Recall Shows Why Automakers’ EV
Rollouts Could Be ‘On Fire’”. In: Forbes (2023). URL: https://www.forbes.com/sites/
robertbryce/2021/08/22/gms-18-billion-chevy-bolt-recall-shows-why-automakers-ev-
rollouts-could-be-on-fire/?sh=37088f365f14.
[27]
Nicholas Mancini et al. Optimal source electric vehicle heat pump with extreme
temperature heating capability and efficient thermal preconditioning. US Patent 11
807 067 B2. Nov. 2023. URL: https://image-ppubs.uspto.gov/dirsearch-public/print/
downloadPdf/11807067.
[28]
Untangle club. Tesla Model Y Thermal management system with OCTOVALVE and
HEATPUMP. 2021. URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rgmBpEQtJ1s.
[29]
Sourav Chowdhury et al. “Total Thermal Management of Battery Electric Vehicles
(BEVs)”. In: SAE Technical Papers (2018), pp. 37–0026. DOI: doi:10.4271/2018-37-
0026.. URL: https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy18osti/71288.pdf.
[30]
Guangjun Wang et al. “Eco-driving behaviors of electric vehicle users: A survey
study”. In: Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 78 (2020),
p. 102188. ISSN: 1361-9209. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2019.11.017. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361920919302561.
[31]
Lawrence Ulrich. ‘Charger Desert’ in Big Cities Keeps Electric Cars From Main-
stream. 2020. URL: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/16/business/electric-cars-
cities-chargers.html.
[32]
Christophe Forgez et al. “Thermal modeling of a cylindrical LiFePO4/graphite lithium-
ion battery”. In: Journal of Power Sources 195.9 (2010), pp. 2961–2968. ISSN:
0378-7753. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2009.10.105. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S037877530901982X.
[33]
Frank P. Incropera et al. Introduction to heat transfer. 5th Ed. Wiley, 2007. ISBN:
9780471457275.
[34]
Jakob Munch Jensen. “Dynamic modelling of thermo-fluid systems with focus on
evaporator for refrigeration systems”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark,
2003.
[35]
Martin Ryhl Kærn. “Analysis of flow maldistribution in fin-and-tube evaporators for
residential air-conditioning systems”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark,
2011.
[36]
Hubertus Tummescheit. “Design and Implementation of Object-Oriented Model Li-
braries using Modelica”. PhD thesis. Lund University, 2002.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
83
==PAGE:92==
[37]
Christoph C. Richter. “Proposal of New Object-Oriented Equation-Based Model Li-
braries for Thermodynamic Systems”. PhD thesis. Technische Universität Braun-
schweig, 2008.
[38]
F. Casella. “Object-oriented Modelling of Two-Phase Fluid Flows by the Finite Vol-
ume Method”. In: 5th MATHMOD. 2006.
[39]
Yunus Çengel. Heat Transfer: A Practical Approach. 2nd Ed. McGraw-Hill, 2003.
[40]
Satish Kandlikar et al. Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow in Minichannels. 1st Ed. Else-
vier, 2006. ISBN: 0080445276.
[41]
E. Granryd et al. Refrigerating Engineering. Department of energy technology, 2005.
ISBN: 9789174154153.
[42]
US EPA. Dinamometer Drive Schedules. 2024. URL: https://www.epa.gov/vehicle-
and-fuel-emissions-testing/dynamometer-drive-schedules.
[43]
Peter Fritzon. Principles of Object-Oriented Modeling and Simulation with Modelica
2.1. Wiley-IEEE Press, 2004. ISBN: 9780471471639.
[44]
Wanyong Li et al. “Performance evaluation of R1234yf heat pump system for an
electric vehicle in cold climate”. In: International Journal of Refrigeration 115 (2020),
pp. 117–125. ISSN: 0140-7007. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijrefrig.2020.02.021.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140700720300748.
[45]
EV Database. Tesla Model Y. 2024. URL: https://ev-database.org/car/1743/Tesla-
Model-Y.
[46]
Mirza M. Shah. “Comprehensive correlations for heat transfer during condensation
in conventional and mini/micro channels in all orientations”. In: International Journal
of Refrigeration 67 (2016), pp. 22–41. ISSN: 0140-7007. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ijrefrig.2016.03.014. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0140700716300342.
[47]
Ian H. Bell et al. “Pure and Pseudo-pure Fluid Thermophysical Property Evalua-
tion and the Open-Source Thermophysical Property Library CoolProp”. In: Indus-
trial & Engineering Chemistry Research 53.6 (2014), pp. 2498–2508. DOI: 10.1021/
ie4033999. eprint: http://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/ie4033999. URL: http:
//pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/ie4033999.
[48]
EV Database. Tesla Model S. 2024. URL: https://ev-database.org/car/1404/Tesla-
Model-S-Dual-Motor.
[49]
Lixia Liao et al. “Effects of temperature on charge/discharge behaviors of LiFePO4
cathode for Li-ion batteries”. In: Electrochimica Acta 60 (2012), pp. 269–273. ISSN:
0013-4686. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2011.11.041. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0013468611017129.
[50]
Jan Philipp Schmidt et al. “Studies on LiFePO4 as cathode material using impedance
spectroscopy”. In: Journal of Power Sources 196.12 (2011). Selected papers pre-
sented at the 12th Ulm ElectroChemical Talks (UECT):2015 Technologies on Bat-
teries and Fuel Cells, pp. 5342–5348. ISSN: 0378-7753. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jpowsour.2010.09.121. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0378775310019786.
[51]
M.M. Shah. “A general correlation for heat transfer during film condensation inside
pipes”. In: International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 22.4 (1979), pp. 547–
556. ISSN: 0017-9310. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(79)90058-9. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0017931079900589.
[52]
M. M. Shah. “Chart correlation for saturated boiling heat transfer: Equations and
further study”. In: ASHRAE Transactions 88 (Jan. 1982), pp. 185–196. ISSN: 0001-
2505.
84
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:93==
[53]
H. Müller-Steinhagen and K. Heck. “A simple friction pressure drop correlation for
two-phase flow in pipes”. In: Chemical Engineering and Processing: Process Inten-
sification 20.6 (1986), pp. 297–308. ISSN: 0255-2701. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/0255-2701(86)80008-3. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/0255270186800083.
[54]
J. Bonilla, L.J. Yebra, and S. Dormido. “Chattering in dynamic mathematical two-
phase flow models”. In: Applied Mathematical Modelling 36.5 (2012), pp. 2067–
2081. ISSN: 0307-904X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apm.2011.08.013. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0307904X11005130.
[55]
Tesla, Inc. Model S Owner’s Manual. 2024. URL: https://www.tesla.com/ownersmanual/
models/en_us/.
[56]
Ankit Rohatgi. WebPlotDigitizer. 2024. URL: https://apps.automeris.io/wpd/.
[57]
Don Sherman. “Five slippery cars enter a wind tunnel: one slinks out a winner”. In:
Car and Driver (2014), pp. 86–92. URL: https://www.tesla.com/sites/default/files/
blog_attachments/the-slipperiest-car-on-the-road.pdf.
[58]
Francesco Casella and Christoph C. Richter. “ExternalMedia: a Library for Easy
Re-Use of External Fluid Property Code in Modelica”. In: 6th International Modelica
Conference. 2008, pp. 157–161.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
85
==PAGE:94==
A
Battery cell data and thermo-electric
model comparison
This section is based on the results published by Lin et al. [23] where a cylindrical LFP
battery with nominal 2.3 Ah, 3.3 V was studied through experimentation using Electrical
Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS). Additionally, a model comparison is presented to justify
the usage of the Equivalent Model rather than the Dual-polarization Model suggested by
the authors.
A.1
Battery cell data
The studied battery is commercialized under the brand A123, from the family ANR26650,
which is a lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4) high power battery cell. The battery is of
25.85 mm in diameter and 65.15 mm in length. Additionally, it weights 70 grams according
to the manufacturer. A battery cell schematic is included in Figure A.1.
Figure A.1: Battery cell dimensions
A.2
The Dual-polarization Model
As suggested and characterized by Lin et al. [23] the battery hereby presented is best
represented by the Dual-polarization Model, which is presented in Figure A.2.
Figure A.2: Battery cell dual-polarization model [17][23]
where the open circuit voltage VOC is the driver of current i in a battery, and which has
dependency on the state-of-charge SOCcell. The next element is a resistor denoted as R0,
which is similarly influenced by the state-of-charge SOCcell. The third and fourth elements
are R1 and C1, which are denoted in the first parallel branch depend both on the state-of-
charge SOCcell and cell temperature Tcell. Finally, the fifth and sixth elements are R2 and
C2, which also depend on both the state-of-charge SOCcell and cell temperature Tcell. For
a given load (and thus the current i) the closed circuit voltage is denoted as VCC.
86
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:95==
A.3
Battery cell model parameters
Lin et al. [23] presented a detailed characterization of VOC, R0, R1, C1, R2, and C2 through
experimentation. The published results were within the range of 5 °C and 45 °C cell core
temperatures Tcore, whereas the state-of-charge was tested between 0.1 and 0.9 approx-
imately, with measurable difference between the values obtained during charging and
discharging processes.
As suggested by Capasso et al. [17], Waag et al. [22], Lin et al. [23], Forgez et al. [32],
Liao et al. [49], and Schmidt et al. [50] the resistive values in the cell behave according
to an exponentially decreasing function of temperature –also referred to as Arrhenius
function–. As such, R0, R1, and R2 were extrapolated to temperatures below 5 °C, and
up to -30 °C, using an exponential fit for every state-of-charge. R0 was subsequently
averaged for each temperature only –as it is a weak function of state-of-charge–.
On the other hand, data for the capacitive values C1 and C2 have shown to behave linearly
with respect to temperature, and hence they were extrapolated using a linear function for
the temperature range previously stated. For numerical stability purposes the discharge
and charge values were averaged so that only one value remained for a given state-of-
charge and temperature. Finally, data below a state-of-charge SOC of 0.1 and above 0.9
were also obtained using linear extrapolation. The final values for the model parameters
are presented in Figure A.3 to Figure A.7.
Figure A.3: R0 values for −30 ◦C ≤Tcore ≤45 ◦C
Figure A.4: R1 values for −30 ◦C ≤Tcore ≤45 ◦C, and 0 ≤SOC ≤1
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
87
==PAGE:96==
Figure A.5: C1 values for −30 ◦C ≤Tcore ≤45 ◦C, and 0 ≤SOC ≤1
Figure A.6: R2 values for −30 ◦C ≤Tcore ≤45 ◦C, and 0 ≤SOC ≤1
Figure A.7: C2 values for −30 ◦C ≤Tcore ≤45 ◦C, and 0 ≤SOC ≤1
88
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:97==
Finally, the open circuit voltage VOC is a function of state-of-charge SOC, and the max-
imum capacity Ahmax is a function of the cell core temperature Tcore. As such, the data
for such relationships is shown graphically in Figure A.8.
Figure A.8: VOC and Ahmax battery cell data
Lin et al. [23] also provided the value for the equivalent thermal conductivity of the cell
kcell,eq = 4.1 W/m·K, whereas the core inner diameter dcore was calculated from their re-
sults and was given a straight value of 1 mm. On the other hand, the cell’s specific heat
capacity was obtained from the publications by Al-Zareer et al. [15][16] related to LFP
batteries, this given a value of 1127 J/kg·K. The values hereby presented for kcell,eq, dcore,
and cp,cell were utilized in all simulations of this thesis.
A.4
Dual-polarization vs Equivalent Model comparison
Given than Lin et al. [23] provided data for the Dual-polarization Model it would be the
first option as a model selection. However, the more complex model also increases the
computational effort, and thus the computational time. On the other hand, could it be
possible to use the Dual-polarization Model data in the Equivalent Model? What would
the error look like in such case?
The Dual-polarization Model was compared against the Equivalent –Thévenin– Model as
presented in Figure 3.3 with the purpose of identifying such potential differences. For
simplicity purposes the heat boundaries of the cell were applied a convective boundary
condition with Tamb and α = 5 W/m2·K across the entire cylindrical boundary of the cell.
Figure A.9: Resulting Pcell and VCC for a single battery cell starting at -30 °C and
SOC = 0.1
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
89
==PAGE:98==
The circuit was controlled using to match the required single-cell power derived from
the FTP cycle as described in section 3.7. Furthermore, the battery was initialized at
Tcore,ini = −30 °C matching the ambient temperature, and a worst-case initial state-of-
charge SOCini = 0.1. The results in Figure A.9 confirms that both models were subject
to identical power demand Pcell, yet the closed circuit voltage Vcc presents variations at
peak demand points that result from the varying resistance and capacitance.
Despite these differences, the resulting core temperature Tcore and final state-of-charge
SOC (see Figure A.10) are practically identical, hence justifying the use of the simpler
Equivalent –Thévenin– Model.
Figure A.10: Resulting Tcore and SOC for a single battery cell starting at -30 °C and
SOC = 0.1
A.5
Equivalent Model validation under constant discharge
current
This section verifies the Equivalent Model by simulating a single battery cell surrounded
by air at 25 °C and with a heat transfer coefficient with α = 5 W/m2K. This single cell is
subject to a constant current demand based on the nominal capacity, thus 1C is equiva-
lent to 2.3 A, 2C is 4.6 A and so on. The resulting state-of-charge SOC profile and core
temperature Tcore are presented in Figure A.11. Notice how the battery cell struggles to
achieve a steady-state temperature despite the constant current draw, hence supporting
the use of dynamic models in this thesis.
Figure A.11:
Resulting dynamic C-rate and Tcore battery cell starting at 25 °C and
SOC = 0.99
90
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:99==
B
Correlations
B.1
Convective heat transfer coefficient
B.1.1
Single-phase laminar flow
Several studies based on empirical and numerical observations have concluded that the
Nusselt number Nu for laminar single-phase fully developed flows is a function of the
shape of the pipe, the boundary condition of the heat flux, and possibly the aspect ratio
of the same. The following example numbers have been reproduced from the publication
by Kandlikar et al. [40] for a constant temperature boundary condition.
Shape
Circular
Rectangular
lratio
-
1
2
3
4
6
8
∞
Nu
3.66
2.98
3.39
3.96
4.44
5.14
5.6
7.54
Table B.1: Laminar, fully developed, constant temperature Nusselt number Nu for select
geometries
Figure B.1: Rectangular channel aspect ratio definition
where the aspect ratio lratio is defined per Figure B.1. For aspect ratios lower than 1 it is
valid to use the Nusselt numbers provided in the table per the reciprocal of lratio. Note that
the laminar flow in pipe flows has been confirmed by several authors to be upper-bound by
Re = 2300, hence the applicability of Table B.1 is limited to Reynolds numbers below this
value. The complete set of the possible values for the Nusselt numbers also at constant
heat flux, or for different geometries can be found in the publications by Kandlikar et al.
[40], or Çengel [39]. Importantly, information about unevenly-heated rectangular pipes is
also provided by Kandlikar as a multipler for the Nusselt numbers from Table B.1. For
three side-heated rectangular pipes, the multiplier x3/4 is defined as:
lratio
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.7
1
x3/4
1
1.036
1.065
1.085
1.096
1.096
1.067
0.962
lratio
1.43
2
2.5
3.33
5
10
>10
-
x3/4
0.854
0.765
0.711
0.665
0.637
0.635
0.654
-
Table B.2: Three-sided heated multiplier for the Nusselt number in rectangular pipes
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
91
==PAGE:100==
B.1.2
Single phase turbulent flow
Dittus-Boelter (1930)
The correlation by Dittus-Boelter is likely the most known correlation for single-phase
turbulent flows. It states that the turbulent Nusselt number Nu can be calculated as [39]:
Nu = 0.023Re0.8Prn∗,
104 ≤Re
n∗=
(
0.4,
Heating process
0.3,
Cooling process
(B.1)
In addition, Pr is the Prandtl number, which is solely a property of the fluid for a given
thermodynamic state, and is limited to a range between 0.7 and 160 for this correlation.
Despite its limited scope, Dittus-Boelter correlation is the basis for many two-phase cor-
relations.
Gnielinski (1976)
The correlation by Gnielinski is also widely used for single-phase turbulent flows. It states
that the turbulent Nusselt number Nu can be calculated as:
fG = (0.7904ln(Re) −1.64)−2,
3 × 103 ≤Re ≤5 × 106
Nu =
(fG/8)(Re −1000)Pr
1 + 12.7(fG/8)0.5(Pr2/3 −1)
(B.2)
where fG is often called the Darcy-Weisbach friction factor or also known as Pethukov’s
first equation according to Çengel [39]. The Prandtl number Pr validity for this expression
is also wider, as it is valid from 0.5 to 2000.
B.1.3
Two-phase flow
Two-phase flows behave in a completely different manner from single-phase. Accurate
prediction of these values is still complicated and many different approaches have been
recommended. However, a few authors have presented robust correlations that help
describe these complex processes, and are therefore presented in the following sections.
Shah (1979)
This correlation by Shah (1979) [51] is also widely used and remained state-of-the-art until
very recently. This correlation is simple from its definition:
α = αfT

(1 −x)0.8 + 3.8x0.76(1 −x)0.04
p0.38
red

(B.3)
where αfT is the liquid-total convective heat transfer coefficient calculated using Equa-
tion B.1 under a heating process assuming the entirely mass flow is in the form of liquid
(hence the naming convention), and Equation 3.19. Properties such as the density ρ, ther-
mal conductivity k, and Prandtl number Pr are all calculated at a saturated liquid state
(given by subscript f) of the condensing flow. Parameter x is the local vapor mass fraction
–also called quality– of the flow, and pred is defined as the reduced pressure, which is a
ratio of the condensation pressure p and the critical pressure pc, which is a constant for
each fluid.
Shah (2016)
The correlation by Shah from 1979 [51] remained widely implemented until a new cor-
relation was presented by Shah in 2016 [46]. This new correlation improved previously-
limited characteristics providing more accurate results when working with angled pipes,
or unevenly-heated pipes. The correlation is as follows:
92
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:101==
α =
(
αTP,0,
−30° ≤θ ≤90°
αTP,0 + (αTP,0 −αTP,−90)(θ + 30)/60,
−90° ≤θ < −30°
(B.4)
where the αTP,0 and αTP,−90 are the heat transfer coefficients calculated for horizontal
and vertical down-flow condensing flows, respectively, and θ is the pipe angle in de-
grees. Each one of these two are calculated differently according to three identifiable
flow regimes:
αTP,0 =





Regime I: αI,
Jg ≥0.98(Z∗+ 0.263)−0.62 & WegT > 100
Regime II: αI + αNu
Regime III: αNu,
Jg ≤0.95(1.254 + 2.27Z∗1.249)−1 & WegT > 20
αTP,−90 =





Regime I: αI,
Jg ≥(2.4Z∗+ 0.263)−1 & WegT > 100
Regime II: αI + αNu
Regime III: αNu,
Jg ≤0.89 −0.93 · exp(−0.087Z∗−1.17) & WegT > 20
(B.5)
where αI and αNu are calculated through:
αI = αfo

1 +
3.8
Z∗0.95
  µf
14µg
0.0058+0.557pred
αNu = 1.32Refo−1/3
"
ρf(ρf −ρg)gk3
f
µf 2
#1/3
(B.6)
where subscripts f and g denote saturated liquid and gas properties. In addition, pred has
the same definition as in Shah’s 1979 correlation. Notice how the heat transfer coefficient
αfo and the Reynolds number Refo are calculated with partial mass flow (based on the
vapor mass fraction):
Refo = G(1 −x)D
µf
(B.7)
The remaining parameter required for the calculation are the dimensionless parameter
Z∗, dimensionless vapor velocity Jg, and the vapor-total Weber number WegT , which are
defined as:
Z∗=
1 −x
x
0.8
pr0.4
Jg =
xG
(gDρg(ρf −ρg))0.5
WegT = dhG2
ρgσ
(B.8)
where the only new parameter is σ which is the surface tension of the fluid. All equations
in this correlation are generically defined using diameter D, which is meant to allow the
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
93
==PAGE:102==
user usage of different geometry types. According to the author [46], the correlation works
best when using the hydraulic diameter Dh only for WegT , whereas an equivalent heated
diameter DHP = 4A/PH (PH stands for heated perimeter) can be used for the rest of the
equations for cases where the heat is not uniformly provided. Moreover, using Cavallini’s
definition for Regime I improves the results for microchannel calculations:
αI = αfT
"
1 + 1.128x0.817
ρf
ρg
0.3685 µf
µg
0.2363 
1 −µg
µf
2.144
Prf −0.1
#
(B.9)
Shah (1982)
The work by Shah has not been limited to condensation only. In 1982 Shah [52] published
an evaporation correlation that also remains widely used. The correlation is as follows:
α = Ψαfo
Ψ = max(ΨNcB, ΨCo)
(B.10)
where Ψ stands for dimensionless heat transfer coefficient, the subscripts NcB and Co
refer to nucleate boiling and convective. The definitions to calculate the dimensionless
nucleate boiling and convective heat transfer coefficients are:
ΨCo =
1.8
N∗0.8
ΨNcB =











ΨNcB = 230Bo0.5,
N ∗> 1 & Bo > 0.00003
ΨNcB = 1 + 46Bo0.5,
N ∗> 1 & Bo < 0.00003
ΨNcB = F ∗(Bo)0.5exp(2.74N∗−0.1),
0.1 ≤N∗≤1
ΨNcB = F ∗(Bo)0.5exp(2.47N∗−0.15),
N ∗< 0.1
(B.11)
where N∗and F ∗are two dimensionless parameters, and Bo is the Boiling number. Ad-
ditionally, two more parameters are required called the Convective number Co and the
liquid-total Froude number FrfT . These quantities are defines as:
Bo =
˙q
Ghfg
Co =
1 −x
x
0.8 ρg
ρf
0.5
FrfT =
G2
ρf 2gDh
N∗=
(
Co,
FrfT ≥0.04
0.38(Co)(FrfT )−0.3,
Frf < 0.04
F ∗=
(
14.7,
Bo ≥0.0011
15.43,
Bo < 0.0011
(B.12)
Notice how the Boiling number is driven by the heat flux per unit area ˙q. This parameter
is calculated by dividing the total heat ˙Q with the heated area AH, which helps represent
unevenly heated pipes. Finally, the liquid-only heat transfer coefficient αfo is calculated
through the definition in Equation B.7 and Equation B.1 under a heating process. Interest-
ingly, Gnielinski’s equation is implemented in the Engineering Equation Solver (EES) as
94
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:103==
the main Nusselt number correlation despite explicit usage of other correlations, (e.g. the
usage of the correlation by Dittus-Boelter for two-phase condensation and evaporation by
Shah [51][52]). Usage of Gnielinski’s correlation in low Reynolds scenarios yield convec-
tive heat transfer coefficients that are lower than expected or non-physical (e.g. negative
values). For this reason, all correlations should be implemented using the references the
original authors intended unless proven otherwise.
B.1.4
Fin-and-tube external flow
The equations for heat transfer require heat transfer coefficients for the air-side of cross-
flow radiators. Several authors have studied external flow based on the presence of fins,
and the nature of the fins. In automotive applications it is very uncommon to require
louvered fins, so plain fins are considered.
Grimison (1937)
This correlation was proposed by Grimison in 1937 and reworked by Holman in 1992 [41],
which considers banks of tubes without fins in cross flow. For simplicity purposes only the
case for one streamwise tube and multiple D∗transversal rows of tubes is presented. The
correlation states that the Nusselt number Nu will have the form:
Nu = C∗A∗(ReD,max)B∗,
2 × 103 ≤ReD,max ≤4 × 104
(B.13)
where the subscript D, max refers to the outer diameter dout and the free flow speed Umax
inside the heat exchanger maximum speed location –or smallest cross sectional area–.
This maximum free flow speed can be calculated using mass conservation from the overall
heat exchanger parameters, which are often the provided by CFD softwares:
UmaxAmin = UfullAfull
(B.14)
and where A∗, and B∗are parameters that depend on the transversal spacing Sn, the
outer diameter dout, and the streamwise spacing Sp. Table B.3 shows the values for these
parameters.
Sn/dout
1.25
1.5
2
3
A∗
0.407
0.278
0.112
0.0753
B∗
0.586
0.620
0.702
0.744
Table B.3: Parameters A∗and B∗in Grimison’s (1937) correlation for 10 ≤D∗, and the
lowest Nusselt number combination (Sp/dout = 1.5) [41]
Finally, the multiplier C∗is a parameter proposed by Kays and London via Holman (1992)
[41] that adjusts Grimison’s correlation for cases where less than 10 streamwise rows of
tubes are considered. This multiplier is defined in Table B.4
D∗
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
C∗
0.64
0.80
0.87
0.90
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
0.99
1
Table B.4: Multiplier C∗for Grimison’s (1937) correlation for D∗≤10 [41]
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
95
==PAGE:104==
B.2
Frictional pressure drop
B.2.1
Single-phase laminar flow
Fanning’s friction factor in the laminar regime has been shown to be a function of the
Reynolds number Re and Poiseuille number Po. The latter varies from geometry to ge-
ometry, a similarity that shares with Nusselt numbers within the same regime.
fF = Po
Re
(B.15)
Some sample numbers for the Poiseuille number Po have been reproduced from the
publication by Kandlikar et al. [40] and are presented in Table B.5.
Shape
Circular
Rectangular
lratio
-
1
2
3
4
6
8
∞
Po
16
14.23
15.55
17.09
18.23
19.70
20.58
24.00
Table B.5: Laminar, fully developed, Poiseuille number Po for select geometries
An interesting problem arises with low-Reynolds flows, where Fanning’s friction factor fF
would tend to infinity. This of course is non-physical and represents a limitation of the
correlation. For numerical reasons, the correlation is implemented such that hypothetical
cases of flows beneath this value are limited to a maximum equal to the Poiseuille number
of the geometry fF |Re<1 = Po. The discussion regarding the validity of this assumption
is left to the reader.
B.2.2
Single-phase turbulent flow
Blasius
A commonly known and used correlation for turbulent flow was presented by Blasius [40].
The correlation states that Fanning’s friction factor is:
fF = 0.079(Re)−0.25,
104 ≤Re
(B.16)
Philips (1987)
A second correlation was presented by Philips in 1987 [40]. This correlation requires
the distance over which the pressure drop will happen, but it has a similar structure to
Blasius’s correlation:
fF = A∗(Re)B∗,
104 ≤Re
A∗= 0.09290 + 1.01612Dh
L
B∗= −0.26800 −0.32930Dh
L
(B.17)
Notice that Philips’s definition of the friction factor coefficients may yield scenarios where
the pressure drop of its correlation are smaller or larger than those calculated by Blasius’s
correlation, so a worst-case selection of the correlation must be done iteratively when
sizing the system.
96
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:105==
B.2.3
Two-phase flow
As with the heat transfer coefficient, two-phase pressure drop has been studied through
correlations. In this section, two correlations are presented:
Grönnerud (1979)
This pressure drop correlation [35] introduced a two phase multiplier ϕ∗for the liquid-total
pressure drop:
∂p
∂z = ϕ∗∂p
∂z

fT
(B.18)
The liquid-total pressure drop is calculated with saturated liquid properties, and Equa-
tion 3.21 to Equation B.16 by assuming an immediate transition to turbulent flow imme-
diately at Re = 2300. Additionally, the two phase multiplier ϕ∗is calculated by means
of:
ϕ∗= 1 + ∂p
∂z

FrfT

ρf/ρg
(µf/µg)0.25 −1

(B.19)
where the liquid-total Froude pressure drop ∂p
∂z

FrfT
is calculated from:
∂p
∂z

FrfT
= fFrfT

x + 4(x1.8 −x10fFrfT
0.5)

fFrfT =



1,
FrfT ≥1
FrfT 0.3 + 0.0055

ln
1
FrfT
2
,
FrfT < 1
(B.20)
and where the liquid-total Froude number can be calculated from Equation B.12.
Müller-Steinhagen and Heck (1986)
Instead of using a two-phase multiplier, this correlation [53] uses liquid- and vapor-total
pressure drops and the vapor mass fraction:
∂p
∂z =
"
∂p
∂z

fT
+ 2x
 
∂p
∂z

gT
−∂p
∂z

fT
!#
(1 −x)1/3 + ∂p
∂z

gT
x3
(B.21)
where all the liquid- and vapor-total pressure drops are calculated using Equation 3.21
and Equation B.16 by assuming an immediate transition to turbulent flow at Re = 1187.
B.3
Chattering and smoothing functions
Consider the example of the single-phase Nusselt number correlations described in sub-
section B.1.1 and subsection B.1.2, where the laminar flow is defined to occur below a
Reynolds number of 2300, and where turbulent flow correlations are applicable to values
above 1 × 104. In such situation the correlations are discontinuous and hence may re-
sult in numerical problems such as chattering. Bonilla et al. have described chattering
in two-phase flow models within Modelica when “discontinuities in some thermodynamic
properties of the steam-water heat transfer fluid model cause chattering, which involves
high-frequency oscillation in the numeric integration process reducing the simulation per-
formance” [54].
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
97
==PAGE:106==
According to the authors, one source of chattering in two-phase flows arises from the dis-
continuity between the single-phase and two-phase data for computing the density change
as shown in Equation 3.11. The resulting data presented by Bonilla et al. simulating a
boiler pipe model yields a significant pressure rise from the discontinuous density deriva-
tives, with the flow changing phase multiple times, restarting the numerical solver and
consuming significant computational resources. The authors acknowledge that chatter-
ing can be avoided by implementing a different momentum balance equation which may
introduce new challenges or to implement a smoother property calculation approach for
the transition between single- and two-phase flows. This second approach is implemented
by Bonilla et al. with improved numerical performance, while also being an available op-
tion in the ExternalMedia package while using CoolProp (by Bell et al. [47]) through the
command enable_BICUBIC=1.
On the other hand, the single-phase Nusselt number discontinuity may also lead to nu-
merical problems as it is also present in the transition between single- and two-phase flow
heat transfer coefficient, and the pressure drop in the laminar to turbulent transition zone
and the single- to two-phase transition. For this reason Richter [37] provided a series
of nth differentiable continuous functions based on sines and cosines providing smooth
transitions between different correlations, whereas Kærn [35] retook such functions and
implemented them accordingly. However, a smoothing function of 0th order may be in line
to produce adequate results since the derivatives of heat transfer coefficients or pressure
drop are not present in the governing equations. A smoothing function of this order is:
f(φ) = 1
2[f(φ2) −f(φ1)]sin
π(φ −φ1)
φ2 −φ1
−π
2

+ 1
2[f(φ2) −f(φ1)]
(B.22)
where φ1 and φ2 are the lower and upper transition values (e.g. the Reynolds number,
or the quality), f(φ1) and f(φ2) are the lower and upper values of the functions at the
transition values, and where φ is the desired value within these limits.
Figure B.2: Smoothed heat transfer coefficients for a) 50/50% ethylene-glycol/water mix-
ture per ASHRAE (AEG) at 25°C in a d = 2.54 mm circular pipe, b) evaporation of R410A in
a d = 7.6 mm circular pipe, Tsat = 45 °C, and G = 300 kg/m2s, c) condensation of R410A
in a d = 7.6 mm circular pipe, Tsat = 10 °C, and G = 300 kg/m2s
98
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:107==
Figure B.2 and Figure B.3 show the resulting values implementing single-phase and two-
phase correlations for the convective heat transfer coefficient α and the pressure drop
inside a pipe ∆p for flows under different conditions.
Figure B.3: Smoothed pressure drop for a) 50/50% ethylene-glycol/water mixture per
ASHRAE at 25 °C in a d = 2.54 mm circular pipe with length L = 2.54 mm, b) pressure drop
per unit length for R410A in a d = 7.6 mm circular pipe, Tsat = 10 °C, and G = 300 kg/m2s
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
99
==PAGE:108==
C
Thermal conduction resistances in a
partial cylindrical wall
This section is based on the derivation of the equivalent thermal conduction resistances
by Çengel [39]. The derivations follow an energy conservation approach followed by a
comparison with Fourier’s law, finished with a thermal resistance calculation assuming
steady state and no internal heat generation.
Figure C.1: Partial cylinder schematic
C.1
Radial resistance
Consider a cylindrical element as shown in Figure C.1. The heat flow rates ˙Q through the
element at r and r + ∆r, and the accumulation of heat ∆E can be described as:
˙Qr −˙Qr+∆r = ∆E
∆t
(C.1)
where the accumulation of heat can be written as:
∆E = A∆rρcp(Tt+∆t −Tt)
(C.2)
where A is the area of the heat transfer process defined as ϕrL –where ϕ is the partial
azimuthal angle–, cp is the specific heat capacity of the element, and T is the temperature
of the element. Substituting Equation C.2 in Equation C.1, dividing by A∆r, and taking
the limits ∆r →0 and ∆t →0 it can be shown that the equation becomes:
−1
A
∂
∂r

kA∂T
∂r

= ρcp
∂T
∂t
(C.3)
Finally, substituting the area in Equation C.3, and noting that both the partial azimuthal
angle ϕ and the length of the cylinder L are not functions of the radius, then:
100
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:109==
−1
r
∂
∂r

kr∂T
∂r

= ρcp
∂T
∂t
(C.4)
which is unsteady Fourier’s law with conduction only in the radial direction. To obtain the
thermal resistance consider that ˙Qr = −kA(∂T/∂r), and substitute the heat transfer area:
Z dout/2
din/2
˙Q
ϕrkLdr = −
Z Tout
Tin
dT
(C.5)
Finally, the integral yields that:
˙Q =
ϕkL
ln(dout/din)(Tin −Tout) →Rr = ln(dout/din)
ϕkL
(C.6)
Notice that Equation C.6 reduces to a full cylinder thermal resistance when substituting
the partial azimuthal angle with 2π, as published in heat transfer books like [33][39].
C.2
Azimuthal resistance
Consider the same cylindrical element as shown in Figure C.1, with the difference that
the azimuthal heat flow is under study. The heat equation for the differential element can
be written as:
˙Qϕ −˙Qϕ+∆ϕ = A∆ϕρcp(Tt+∆t −Tt)
∆t
(C.7)
where A is the area of the heat transfer process defined as 1
2(dout −din)L. Dividing Equa-
tion C.7 by A∆r, and taking the limits ∆ϕ →0 and ∆t →0 it can be shown that the equa-
tion becomes:
−1
A
∂
∂ϕ
kA
r
∂T
∂r

= ρcp
∂T
∂t
(C.8)
where the radius r may be approximated to be the mean radius ravg = 1
4(dout −din) of
the section. Applying the same principle as for Equation C.4 the heat conduction can be
calculated as:
Z ϕ
0
˙Q(dout + din)
2kL(dout −din)dϕ = −
Z Tout
Tin
dT
(C.9)
Finally, the thermal resistance is:
Rϕ =
ϕ
2kL
dout + din
dout −din
(C.10)
The thermal resistance of a wall in the azimuthal direction will approach the value of a
plane wall for sufficiently large diameter, and appropriate angle ϕ so that the mean arc
S = 1
2ϕdavg equals the planar wall thickness in the direction where the resistance is being
compared.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
101
==PAGE:110==
D
Vehicle-level data
D.1
Vehicle dimensions
The vehicle modelled in this thesis is a Tesla Model S 2021 model year. The pictures
were taken from Tesla’s electronic manual [55] and further edited. Then, dimensions
were obtained using the web-based plot digitizer [56] with help from the user manual.
Figure D.1 shows the coordinates from which the overall dimensions were calculated.
Figure D.1: Tesla Model S reference point coordinates’ schematic based on the dimen-
sions published by Tesla [55]
where the coordinates are:
Point
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
x
1.46
3.30
3.77
1.42
2.68
3.77
4.54
-
-
-
-
-
y
0.30
0.30
1.00
1.00
1.48
1.39
1.14
0.30
0.30
1.48
1.42
1.00
z
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.72
0.00
0.00
0.54
0.68
Table D.1: Tesla Model S reference point coordinates
The coordinates allow to calculate the areas of the insulated panels (e.g. cabin front dash
panel, side doors, carpeted floor, and the rear seat and trunk), and the glazing areas (e.g.
windshield, side front and back windows, and sunroof). The calculated areas and their
total are as follows:
Insulated
Glazing
Item
Dash
Doors
Floor
Trunk
Total
Windshield
Windows
Sunroof
Total
Area
[m2]
0.97
2.93
2.65
2.28
8.83
1.65
1.49
2.08
5.22
Table D.2: Cabin areas for the different heat conduction paths
Finally, the cabin volume is estimated through the cabin control points and an expected
35 % reduction in space due to the seats and driver. The calculated total cabin volume
(without seats, driver) is 2.92 m3, and the reduced space is 1.90 m3.
D.2
Vehicle mass, frontal area, and drag coefficient
The published mass of this vehicle –Emissions test Weight (ETW)– is m = 2265 kg [55].
Additionally, its frontal area is AF = 2.341 m2, and its drag coefficient is CD = 0.24 [57].
102
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:111==
D.3
Vehicle airflow through the cooling pack
The following airflow was calculated from the raw CFD data related to the cooling pack
flow in a 0.80 m x 0.45 m x 0.016 m condenser equipped with an 800 W fan for a given
automotive product. The flows were modified only at lower speeds using fan affinity laws
to match a battery electric vehicle with a proposed 500 W fan:
Speed [km/h]
0
40
50
72
100
105
120
200
Free stream air velocity [m/s]
2.13
2.78
3.07
3.70
4.90
5.20
5.91
8.92
Table D.3: Calculated cooling pack velocities for an outside heat exchanger equipped
with a 500 W fan
Notice how the values in Table D.3 indicate that there is flow available at idle, which is
possible due to the fan. The benefit of the fan fades away approximately at 100 km/h and
it begins acting as a flow restriction.
D.4
Compressor data
The selected compressor is manufactured by Bitzer, and was selected using its online
tool. The polynomials for such application are shown in Table D.4.
˙Q
˙W
˙m
˙Q
˙W
˙m
c1
26956.6672
1258.4107
557.3612
c6
-0.4993
-0.3106
-0.0082
c2
1106.9485
-63.6666
20.7746
c7
0.09089
-0.0146
0.0016
c3
-246.5026
98.7195
-1.0900
c8
-0.1194
0.0267
-0.0007
c4
16.9109
-1.9933
0.2880
c9
0.0002
-0.0071
0.0000
c5
-9.6023
3.2587
-0.0485
c10
0.0038
-0.0018
-0.0000
Table D.4: Bitzer 3kW 4CES-6Y-40S compressor polynomial coefficients
D.5
Other drive-cycles
Drive-cycles US06 and the Davis Dam (DDam) climb in Arizona, United States were in-
cluded as reference for the reader, and presented for the case without any heating. Addi-
tionally, the Davis Dam climb is a high inclination road presented in detail in SAE’s J2807.
This cycle started with a 20 s acceleration to 75 km/h followed by constant 75 km/h for
18.6 km, however the grade varies along the trajectory. Furthermore, it was considered
that the car was towing a 907 kg trailer (additional to the vehicle mass previously defined)
during this climb. Information of these two cycles is presented graphically in Figure D.2.
Figure D.2: US06 speed trace, and Davis Dam grade trace
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
103
==PAGE:112==
E
Media, UML and connection diagrams
E.1
Medium classes
Key information about the working fluids was required for the project, but such classes
were not coded independently. As such, the definition of different fluids or Mediums used
throughout required two different approaches. The first one was based on ExternalMedia,
which is a package by Casella et al. [58] that communicates Modelica with widely used
external fluid databases such as CoolProp (Bell et al. [47]) or FluidProp. CoolProp was
selected from these two possible databases given its open source nature, and the avail-
ability of the fluids intended for use in the project. The fluid classes used for this project
are included in the following code:
package MyR1234yf "CoolProp model of R1234yf"
extends ExternalMedia.Media.CoolPropMedium(
mediumName = "MyR1234yf",
substanceNames = {"R1234yf|enable_BICUBIC=1"},
ThermoStates = Modelica.Media.Interfaces.Choices.IndependentVariables.ph,
SpecificEnthalpy(start = 4e5));
end MyR1234yf;
package MyAir "CoolProp model of Air"
extends ExternalMedia.Media.CoolPropMedium(
mediumName = "MyAir",
substanceNames = {"Air"},
ThermoStates = Modelica.Media.Interfaces.Choices.IndependentVariables.ph,
SpecificEnthalpy(start = 4e5));
end MyAir;
In addition, ethylene-glycol for the single-phase loop is available within the CoolProp
library.
Nevertheless, its implementation in ExternalMedia v4.0.0 appears to have an
error that doesn’t allow for compiling within Dymola –a paid Modelica language-based
software– but it does allow for the same using OpenModelica –an open source Modelica
software–. For this reason, it was decided to use Modelica.Media.Incompressible.TableBased,
which is the tabular Medium class within Modelica, obtained from CoolProp using Open-
Modelica and the class:
package MyAEG "CoolProp model of Water-EthyleneGlycol"
extends ExternalMedia.Media.IncompressibleCoolPropMedium(
mediumName = "MyAEG",
substanceNames = {"AEG[0.5]"},
ThermoStates = Modelica.Media.Interfaces.Choices.IndependentVariables.pT,
Temperature(start = 0 + 273.15));
end MyAEG;
The tabulated data for ethylene glycol was obtained for a 50/50% in volume mix of ethylene-
glycol and water, at 101325 Pa of pressure, and within a range from -30 °C to 100 °C. The
exact data is not included in this report, but the reader may reproduce it using CoolProp
under the conditions previously mentioned.
104
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:113==
E.2
Battery cell elements
E.2.1
Battery source
The UML class diagram for class BatterySource is provided in Figure E.1. As it can be
seen, the source element requires input SOC from the model.
Figure E.1: UML class diagram for the class BatterySource
E.2.2
Resistors and capacitor
The UML class diagrams for the temperature-dependent resistor R0 and the temperature
and state-of-charge dependent resistor R1 and capacitor C1 are shown in Figure E.2.
Figure E.2: UML class diagram for resistors R0, R1, and capacitor C1
Battery elements R2, and capacitor C2 used only for the Dual-polarization model were
coded using the same definitions as in Figure E.2 and therefore aren’t included explicitly.
E.2.3
Thermal and state-of-charge models
Finally, the UML class diagrams for the battery thermal model BatteryThermal, and the
state-of-charge calculator SOCCalculator are shown in Figure E.3.
Figure E.3: UML class diagram for battery thermal model BatteryThermal, and the state-
of-charge calculator SOCCalculator
Notice how the sensors that provide the quantities VOC, and VCC have not been defined
in this section. The path Modelica.Electrical.Analog.Sensors provides the location for the
electric sensors used for such purpose.
E.2.4
Electric load control elements
As described in subsection 3.2.3 a PI controller is used for the electric circuit power. This
controller is obtained from the standard Modelica library Modelica.Blocks.Continuous.LimPID
and is used with the InitialOutput initialization method, which allows the system to start at
the exact same voltage in the battery source. The controller is fed with a desired time-
input signal using Modelica.Blocks.Sources.CombiTimeTable which is given the desired cir-
cuit power on a cell or bundle level. Finally, the PI’s feedback signal is obtained using
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
105
==PAGE:114==
Modelica’s generic analog power sensor found in Modelica.Electrical.Analog.Sensors. In or-
der to complete the circuit, a current sensor is also required. For this purpose a generic
Modelica sensor is employed, found in the same path as the power sensor.
E.2.5
Unit Equivalent battery cell
The first element to be constructed was a single battery cell using the Equivalent model.
The model BatteryCellEq is composed by one BatterySource model, one temperature-
dependent resistor R0 model, the temperature and state-of-charge dependent R1 and
C1 models, one SOCCalculator model, one BatteryThermal model, and two independent
voltage sensors VOCSensor and VCCSensor models. The class diagram for the unit battery
cell can be found in figure Figure E.4.
Figure E.4: UML class diagram for the model BatteryCellEq
where any input and output relations are given through the dotted arrows. On the other
hand, Modelica’s built-in classes TwoPort and HeatPort are used for electric and thermal
connections, respectively. Thus, the connection diagram for this model is:
Figure E.5: Connection diagram for the model BatteryCellEq
E.2.6
Unit Dual-polarization battery cell
A second element was constructed for the brief demonstration of the validity of the Equiva-
lent model against the more complete Dual-polarization model. The model BatteryCellDual
is comprised by the same elements as BatteryCellEq with the addition of two more tem-
perature and state-of-charge dependant classes called R2 and C2. These new elements
are connected per the schematic in Appendix A, thus no UML or connection diagrams are
provided explicitly.
106
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:115==
E.3
Single-phase fluid elements
Air volume cells described in subsection 3.3.6 are constructed considering that the flow will
not change phase, thus simplifying the calculations (e.g. only single-phase correlations
are required). These elements are described as follows.
E.3.1
Air-side volume cell
As shown in Figure E.6 the first air-side volume control volume cell is simple in its concep-
tion and is called AirCell. Function ExteriorBankTubesNusselt is responsible for handling
the correlation by Grimison (1937) according to geometric constraints in a bank of tubes.
Also notice that the class requires an input of air velocity Uair as this element is designed
for an outside heat exchanger in a vehicle, which will be exposed to ram and fan air in
the cooling pack resulting in a varying value depending on the vehicle speed and fan set-
ting. Finally, CR is the heat capacity of the refrigerant, needed for the effectiveness-NTU
method calculations.
Figure E.6: UML class diagram for the model AirCell
Figure E.7: UML class diagram for the model AirCellPorts
The second variant for this class is AirCellPorts, which does not require the air velocity
input since that will be determined by class Fan. The corresponding UML diagram is
shown in Figure E.7.
E.3.2
Car cabin volume cell, coolant reservoir, and receiver
The class CarCabinAir2HP is very similar to those described in subsection E.3.1. However,
instead of calculating a convective heat transfer coefficient of the air towards the wall, the
value is assumed to be that of natural convection thus only a Medium class is required.
The UML diagram for such element is shown ahead:
Figure E.8: UML class diagram for the model CarCabinAir2HP
Similarly, the coolant reservoir (VolSinglePhaseReservoir) used to impose the pressure onto
the single-phase loop is coded to resemble the model of the cabin, whereas the two-
phase Receiver only requires a Medium definition. As such, the resulting UML schematic
is identical for both cases and therefore not presented explicitly.
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
107
==PAGE:116==
E.3.3
Coolant volume cell
Figure E.9: UML class diagram for the model VolSinglePhaseIncomp
Considering that a two-phase Medium definition would add unnecessary equations and
the problems with ExternalMedia’s incompressible fluids, a unique single-phase incom-
pressible coolant volume cell was included in the code. The resulting UML diagram for
class VolSinglePhaseIncomp is included in Figure E.9. A subvariant of this class includes
a parameter that scales heat and pressure drop for multiple elements at once. This fea-
ture allows to calculate the heat transfer for one battery, and the pressure drop in one
segment, but yielding a Nb times such value at the exiting flow, effectively reducing the
number of equations per battery pack.
E.4
Flow elements
E.4.1
Compressor and expansion valve
Model Compressor requires the desired rotational speed ω and in exchange provides the
compressor discharge pressure pdis and the power consumption ˙W. On the other hand,
the thermostatic expansion valve model TXV requires an input with the desired opening
c. The resulting UML diagrams can be found in Figure E.10.
Figure E.10: Modelica icons and UML class diagrams for the models Compressor and TXV
E.4.2
Ideal fan and liquid pump
The cabin fan is constructed ideally to provide airflow through the cabin heat exchanger
and works in conjunction with class AirCellPorts. Class Fan requires the percentage of
nominal airflow f for a given fan. The UML diagram for this class is shown in Figure E.11.
Model Pump is constructed in a similar fashion, with the difference that the Medium is
restricted to the tabular coolant (AEG).
Figure E.11: Modelica icons and UML class diagram for the model Fan
108
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:117==
E.5
Walls and supporting components
The interaction between fluids would be futile without the walls around them. The different
wall models were coded as to provide interchangeable dynamic wall elements suited for
the application. Their UML diagrams can be redundant, but it is important to show the
difference between solid walls and a fluid wall, used to represent a static fluid. Further-
more, other supporting components are also presented, such as a superheat sensor, a
convective heat sink, a car velocity-to-airflow model, and three different ideal manifold
classes –also referred to as splitters or joiners–.
E.5.1
Planar, cylindrical, partial walls, and liquid walls
All solid walls presented in this document are modelled dynamically, with different geo-
metric and material properties’ inputs fulfilling the equations for thermal resistances and
thermal capacitance. For this reason, these classes neither require interaction with any
fluid class, nor have input/output connections. However, consider a fluid static wall, which
may have varying properties according to the temperature and thus requires the class
Medium. For this reason, a special class of a static wall of a fluid was created. All the
UML diagrams for the walls are shown in Figure E.12:
Figure E.12: UML class diagrams for models WallCyl, WallCyl2D, WallFlat, WallFlat2D,
WallCylPartial, WallCylPartialAzi, and WallCylPartialAziLiquid
E.5.2
Superheat sensor
The thermostatic expansion valve model is controlled via the superheat of the evaporator,
a measure to ensure that the compressor receives gas and therefore reduce the risk
of premature wear. A superheat sensor is not included in within Modelica’s standard
libraries, so it was constructed. A note to the reader: the superheat signal is computed
as −∆Tsh = Tsat −Tevap which ensures direct proportionality to the opening c, making the
control strategy simpler to implement. The UML diagram for the sensor is as follows:
Figure E.13: UML class diagram for the model SensorSuperheat
E.5.3
Convective and Variable temperature sink
Figure E.14: UML class diagram for the model Convection
Modelica.Thermal.HeatTransfer.Components.Convection is a built-in convective class in Mod-
elica, however it uses thermal conductance as an input, rather than the convective heat
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
109
==PAGE:118==
transfer coefficient. For this reason a new model called Convection was coded, with ex-
plicit area and heat transfer coefficient parameters, and an input for the fluid temperature.
The corresponding UML diagram is shown in Figure E.14.
Class Modelica.Thermal.HeatTransfer.Sources.FixedTemperature has similar limitations, as
one might require to vary the fixed temperature in time. The solution comes in the form of
model VariableTemperature which allows for dynamic temperature coming from an input.
E.5.4
Car velocity to airflow
Finally, the cooling pack requires transformation of the car velocity to a cooling pack ve-
locity. This cooling pack velocity is often calculated using CFD tools for a given vehicle
front-end and cooling pack design, which are outside the scope of this project. Instead,
cooling pack airflow data for a similar vehicle architecture and cooling pack is provided
as a function of vehicle speed. This class is referred to as CarSpeedtoAirflow, and is pre-
sented in Figure E.15.
Figure E.15: UML class diagram for the model CarVelocitytoAirflow
E.5.5
Ideal manifolds
Manifolds are models designed to split or join the flow, particularly useful when parallel
channels exist and the distribution of flow, heat, or quality is not of interest. In such cases,
it can be assumed that the flow is strictly divided equally among a certain number of
parallel channels Np. With this in mind, three different ideal manifold classes were coded:
in the single phase regimes, ParallelManifoldSinglePhase, ParallelManifoldAEG, and for the
two-phase regime parallelManifoldTwoPhase. These classes only require Medium as an
input, so their UML diagram is identical to that in Figure E.8, thus they are not included
explicitly.
110
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
==PAGE:119==
Page intentionally left blank
Dynamic modelling of an automotive battery pack thermal management system under cold weather
conditions
111
==PAGE:120==
This thesis examines the energy-related effects of cold ambient temperatures in the usage of au-
tomotive Thermal Management Systems for Battery Electric Vehicles (BEVs). BEVs are viewed as
a potential path towards electrification in the transportation sector, yet they have shown to under-
perform outside ideal thermal conditions, including extreme-cold ambient temperatures. Further-
more, diverse thermal management system designs and constantly-changing battery technologies
create a fragile ground for comparisons of existing products.
Constructing one-dimensional dynamic electro-thermal models for an automotive battery pack and
a proposed heat pump Thermal Management System, this thesis demonstrates that cold ambient
temperatures have a direct negative impact in a BEV range independently of the extent of the usage
of the Thermal Management System. Furthermore, this thesis outlines the effects of different heat
pump control strategies and temperature set-points in an attempt to minimize energy usage in such
conditions.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Koppels Allé, Building 404
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.construct.dtu.dk
