==PAGE:1==
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science
Analysis of the Inter-Array Cable Layout Problem
Master Thesis in Mathematical Modelling and Computation, June 2024
Elisabeth Heegaard, s184000
Supervisor: Eva Rotenberg
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The importance of green energy has become more and more apparent in the last couple
of decades and with it the expansion of offshore wind farms. Offshore wind farms are
becoming bigger and more complex as they are optimized to produce more energy. One
part of an offshore wind farm is the inter-array cables, which connect the turbines and
collect the produced energy to the offshore substation. However, the task of designing
these cable layouts is difficult and it is becoming increasingly tough to optimize it for a
minimum cost.
In this thesis, we analyze the problem and compare it to other known network
problems. We start by comparing it to general network optimization problems. Among
these is the minimum cost flow problem, which can be adapted to fit the inter-array
cable layout problem by a subproblem called the fixed charge problem. Likewise, the
shortest path problem can be adopted by including resource-constraints. However, both
the minimum cost flow problem and the shortest path problem in their general versions
do not approximate our problem well. The vehicle routing problem can be made to fit
the problem if we do not allow for the solution to branch.
In the second part, we analyse different Steiner tree problems and their solution
methods. The 1-Steiner tree problem can be used to find the optimal placement of the
Offshore Substation position if cable capacities are relaxed and the Steiner tree problem
with fixed node positions can be used for avoiding obstacles.
In the third part, we look at the problem as a clustering problem. Here, we analyze
how the problem can be modelled as a facility location planning problem and try to
find a suitable separator that could help solve the problem. No suitable separator was
found.
Through these many different techniques and problems that have been analyzed,
the main problem seemed to be the lack of efficient pruning methods. Many of the
analyzed algorithms relied heavily on these to construct efficient algorithms, and we
would therefore have to define ways to prune layouts efficiently for the problem to
create a new framework for solving it.
i
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
Eva Rotenberg
My thesis supervisor, who dove into this project with an open mind and never let me
leave feeling discouraged.
Digital Innovation at Ørsted
Who has developed my interest in wind farms these past two years, and who helped
form the idea of this thesis.
Jonas Bøttzauw Pedersen
Who has kept me sane by keeping me company at the library these past months.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
i
Acknowledgements
ii
1
Introduction
1
2
The Inter-Array Cable Layout Problem
2
2.1
Offshore Wind Farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
The development of wind farms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Methods for solving the problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
The graph representation of the problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
An overview of the problems considered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5.1
General Network Optimization Problems
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5.2
Steiner Tree Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5.3
Clustering Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Mixed-Integer Linear Programming Approach
12
3.1
Branching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.2
Balanced Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Variable amount of OSSs or their positions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
The problem as general network optimization problems
16
4.1
Minimum Cost Flow-problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.1.1
Balancing and branching constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.2
Fixed-charge problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Vehicle routing problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Shortest path problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.3.1
Shortest-Path problem with
resource constraints
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Summary of Section 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
The problem as a Steiner Tree Problem
27
5.1
1-Steiner tree problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.1.1
The optimal position within a Dirichlet cell . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2
Approximation methods for the general Steiner tree problem
. . . . . .
31
5.3
Exact Solutions to the Steiner Tree Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.4
Fixed Steiner Point positions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.5
Balanced solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.6
Multiple OSS positions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.6.1
Partitioning by removal of the longest edge . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
5.6.2
Number of edges to remove . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
5.6.3
Minimum Perimeter-Sum
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.7
Summary of Section 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
iii
==PAGE:5==
6
The problem as a clustering problem
42
6.1
Brute-force approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
6.2
Graph Tree Partition Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
6.3
Euclidean Separators and their Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3.1
Planar Facility Location Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
6.3.2
Euclidean Traveling Salesman Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
6.3.3
Searching over separators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6.4
Including the OSS
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.4.1
Multiple OSS Positions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.5
Summary of Section 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
7
Discussion
58
8
Conclusion
59
9
Further Work
60
References
61
Appendix
64
A.1 Numerical Experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.2 Derivation of formula for the constructed Steiner tree . . . . . . . . . . .
68
iv
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
In the last decade, more than ever, the importance of green energy has been made clear.
The issue of global warming hangs over our society and threatens to halt our societal
stability and comfort. In the meantime global challenges with war and economic diffi-
culties have severely impacted our supply chain, making the need for local systems gain
attention in the general population. Furthermore, this has catapulted the discussion of
creating flexible and diverse energy systems that can supply green energy continuously
at a minimal cost.
With such systems also comes an increased complexity. Not only are we scaling up
green energy systems to levels yet unseen, we are also implementing new and diverse
technologies each with its constraints and costs.
The combination of utilizing new
specialized technology at a larger scale and the global supply chain issues, has resulted
in the cost of building such systems being immense. Within the last year, the Offshore
Wind industry saw the worst of these issues, which led to the development of offshore
wind slowing down.
Meanwhile, global warming is not decelerating. The three warmest years on record
in Europe were after 2020, with 2023 having a temperature above average for 11 out of
12 months. Simultaneously, many countries experienced record levels of flooding, and
the glaciers in the Alps have lost 10% of their volume within the last two years.[13]
If this development is to be stopped, a lot more green energy systems need to be
built and for that to happen it must be cost-efficient to build them.
Because of the economic pressure on the industry at the current stage, theoretical
and scientific research is easily deprioritized to instead focus on quick cost-saving mea-
sures. Much of the work on these complex systems is instead researched within the
Universities and other knowledge institutions. However, a gap is often seen between the
industry knowledge of the specific problem and the universities’ research as a lot of the
industry knowledge is kept confidential.
This thesis focuses on how to optimize cable layouts of offshore wind farms. This
is only one component of a wind farm but is responsible for more than 5% of the
CAPEX costs.[9] Many studies on this subject have already been published, with many
being joint industry and university projects. In this thesis, we will focus specifically on
bridging the gap between theoretical computational models and the real-world problem
of designing inter-array cable layouts.
1
==PAGE:7==
2
The Inter-Array Cable Layout Problem
The inter-array cable layout (IACL) problem, also called the cable routing problem,
is the problem of minimizing the cost of cables placed between wind turbines in an
offshore wind farm. In its simplest form, this could be considered a minimum spanning
tree (MST) problem if all we wish to do is connect the turbines.
However, many
additional constraints apply which also results in any realistic variation of the problem
being NP-hard. The following rules must be obeyed:
• Every wind farm has at least one collection point, called the Offshore substation
(OSS), from which all the electricity is transported to the shore. Therefore, every
turbine must have a path connecting it to the OSS.
• No cables can cross each other.
• Cables have a capacity for the amount of electricity they can carry. Multiple sized
cables can be considered for a wind farm.
Furthermore, some additional constraints are often imposed, either to reduce cost or
the risk of cable failure.
• Balancing constraint: Each branch ending in the OSS must connect the same
number of turbines in its subtree. This means we can define a number k(i, j),
which is the number of paths going from the OSS to a unique turbine through the
cable (i, j). To impose the constraint we must ensure the number k(s, j) for each
of the cables leaving the OSS, s, are equal.
• Branching constraint: The number of cables connected to a turbine should be
limited or fixed to two.
Some papers also consider looped layouts, where every path is a closed simple cycle
starting and ending in the OSS. We will not consider this in this paper.
Fischetti and Pisinger proved in 2015 that the problem is strongly NP-hard. In
their version, they have included an upper bound on the number of cables that can
connect to the OSS. They prove this by a reduction from the weight-constrained graph
tree partitioning problem.[18] We will return to the complexity of this problem in the
section on the graph tree partitioning problem. For most of this paper, we will only
consider the case where any turbine can connect to any other turbine, though in real
life there may often be obstacles or exclusion zones where cables cannot be placed.
2.1
Offshore Wind Farms
Offshore wind farms are built on shallow water off the coast, preferably far away enough
to avoid being a nuisance to inhabitants but close enough, that the electricity does not
have to travel huge distances, as this will result in a larger electricity loss. To get an
understanding of the different components of a wind farm, you could coarsely split it
into four parts - the turbines, the inter-array cables, the OSS, and the export cable.
The number of turbines, their size and their placement are typically the first things to
be decided, as these determine the size of the maximal electrical output that the wind
2
==PAGE:8==
farm can produce. Both the number and the size of the turbines have increased rapidly
these past years, and we expect this trend to continue for many years to come. In 2020
the average installed offshore wind farm was 788MW which corresponds to between 60
to 130 turbines depending on their size. However, most of the installed wind farms did
not exceed 100 turbines.[36] By 2050 the European Wind Energy Association (EWEA)
predicts that 50% of Europe’s energy production will come from wind energy,[17] while
today it is at around 18%.[36]. Therefore, the sizes of both wind farms and turbines are
expected to increase rapidly.
The inter-array cables are the cables that are placed between wind turbines and
connect them to the OSS. These cables are typically buried a meter or two into the soil
of the ocean floor to protect them and keep them anchored. These cables can be of
different sizes depending on the amount of electricity they need to carry. Smaller cables
are often preferred, as they cost less.
The Offshore substation, also referred to as the OSS, is the offshore connection
point for all the inter-array cables. All the electricity generated by the wind turbines
is collected here before it is transported to the coast. The transportation happens via
the export cable, which is a single large cable connecting the OSS to the shore, where
an onshore substation is placed to become the wind farm’s onshore anchor point. The
placement of the OSS is not necessarily decided at a fixed point during the design of
the wind farm. Modern algorithms try to optimize the placement of the OSS together
with the inter-array cables. Though in some cases the placement of the OSS has been
decided before the placement of the inter-array cables.
Figure 1: Illustration of the components of an offshore wind farm: 1) Wind turbines,
2) Inter-array cables, 3) Offshore substation (OSS) 4) Export cable
More focus in recent years has been on how to optimize the wind farm as a whole.
This means a new approach, where the wind turbines are not necessarily placed as the
3
==PAGE:9==
first thing, but optimized together with the cables and the OSS position. While each
problem is considered NP-hard by itself, there is a benefit in considering them together
as each affects the result of the other significantly. However, the sheer complexity of
doing this means only a few algorithms have been developed, such as the 2023 paper
by Cazzaro, Pisinger and Koza, who developed a heuristic to the problem.[10]
2.2
The development of wind farms
Traditionally offshore wind turbines were placed in a grid pattern. This meant that
each turbine stood on two straight lines crossing each other. That combined with the
relatively small size of wind farms, meant cable layouts were a much easier task than it
is today. Optimizing the layout of cables is a discipline that has developed rapidly in the
last 30 years, as the industry has realized its potential for cutting capital expenditure
(CAPEX) costs.
Nowadays, turbines are placed such that the wake-effect is minimized. The wake
effect is essentially how turbines themselves affect the wind behind them. This means
that a turbine behind another turbine is hit by wind of a lower speed.
Essentially,
this leads to the turbines blocking each other, thereby reducing the possible electrical
output. To avoid this modern optimization algorithms have been developed to place the
turbines to get the maximum electrical output (though in some regions laws regulate
how the turbines can be placed). To the naked eye, these layouts look almost random
with more turbines placed at the perimeter of the wind farm.[17]
As mentioned the number of turbines has also increased significantly and continues
to do so. Not only has the number of turbines increased, but this also means multiple
OSSs might need to be placed. Furthermore, multiple cable thicknesses might have to
be put to use, as more turbines need to be connected. This has led to an increased
complexity for modern methods that struggle to keep up with the large wind farms.
The complexity is often increased by imposing other constraints, such as the bal-
ancing or branching constraints, or taking obstacles on the ocean floor into account,
meaning the cables cannot cross these sections.
Furthermore, one could consider the soil conditions and potential cable failure rates
when creating a layout. However, in this thesis, we will not consider this further.
2.3
Methods for solving the problem
Modern approaches to solving the inter-array cable layout problem utilize mixed-integer
programming (MILP) methods. Heuristics are also commonly explored in literature,
though exact methods tend to be preferred in industry, as the savings are immense.
The approaches focus on branch-and-bound methods or similar to solve the MILP.
Often the MILP formulation itself or heuristic methods tend to be the main focus
of literature. With modern solvers, the MILPs perform well for smaller and medium
instances, but for the larger wind farms of 100+ turbines, the computation time becomes
a limitation, which is also the reason why heuristics are often explored. One of the issues
often presented is that the amount of planarity constraints can be of a size O(|V |4).
The planarity constraints help ensure that no cables cross each other, meaning there is
4
==PAGE:10==
often a constraint for each pair of possible edges. Therefore, as the wind farms grow in
size other methods will be needed to solve the problem.
In an article from 2015 Bauer and Lysgaard explore the problem as a planar open
vehicle routing problem (OVRP). They do not allow for branching and hence each tree
going out from the OSS can be viewed as a route for each vehicle. Since they consider
the open vehicle routing problem rather than simply the vehicle routing problem, the
vehicle does not need to return to the depot, and hence what it does after it has driven
its route is not included in the optimization. Each turbine is given a demand of one
and each vehicle has a capacity of C. Therefore, a route cannot consist of more than C
turbines. They do not consider the instance where each route has to be the same size.
Furthermore, they add planarity constraints to make sure no cables cross. However,
because of the quickly growing size of the number of these constraints, they found that
they could not be passed to the solver. Instead, they end up relaxing these and then
adding violated constraints until none are violated. Their MILP formulation uses hop-
indexes, which let binary variables indicate if an arc belongs on a route, and that it is
the k’th edge on that route. The hop-index formulation is beneficial in this instance
as it can easily be adapted to fit different variations of the problem. They also go on
to consider multiple OVRP heuristics.[5] The OVRP will be further explored in a later
section.
Similarly, Pillai, Chick, Johanning, Khorasanchi, and de Laleu present a different
MILP approach in their 2015 paper. They use heuristics to optimize the placement of
the OSSs and the cables. The OSS positions are decided first by a clustering method
and assigning turbines to each OSS cluster.
Afterward, a MILP model based on a
constrained capacitated minimum spanning tree (CMST) problem is used. This becomes
a two-stage heuristic, as they find a suitable position in the first step, and then in the
second step solve the cable layout for this clustering. In the second stage, they solve
first for the capacity constraints, then they include an extra step that adds the obstacles
and refine the found solution by this.[35]
In Cazzaro, Fischetti, and Fischetti’s paper from 2020 they explore numerous dif-
ferent heuristic approaches. These include vehicle routing heuristics and heuristics for
finding the optimal substation positions, as well as how to find balanced solutions.[9]
When dealing with obstacles the most simple method has been to include Steiner
nodes, which are extra vertices in the graph that the model can choose to use. This way
the program can connect two turbines through these nodes, that otherwise could not
be connected. This, however, tends to be an issue as adding more vertices to the model
increases the complexity, as the number of constraints is dependent on the number of
vertices. If using for example a poor formulation of the branch-and-bound methods, the
complexity can end up growing exponentially with the number of constraints.[23]
Cazzaro and Pisinger explore in their 2022 paper a different approach, for which they
precompute new distances around the obstacles for the points. This includes adding
points to the corner of obstacles and then finding the visibility graph of the points.
From this, they can compute the shortest distance between every vertex corresponding
to a turbine and include these lengths as the new edge lengths in their MILP model.[11]
In this thesis, we explore the problem from a graph algorithmic perspective. Instead
of relying on MILP methods, we consider if any known algorithmic approaches could
be applied to the problem to get an exact solution. This involves analyzing it in the
5
==PAGE:11==
setting of different types of problems and applying known methods within each of these
fields. We assume that the turbines have already been placed, and we have a geometric
point representation of their placements in the plane as the input. The goal would then
be to find a minimum cable layout between these geometric points subject to relevant
constraints.
Furthermore, our primary focus will be on exact methods, rather than
heuristics, as the amount of money that can be saved is substantial.
2.4
The graph representation of the problem
Throughout the thesis, we will consider the graph made from this geometric point
representation. Each turbine is a vertex in our graph, we will denote this set T. Likewise
each OSS will also be a vertex in our graph, and this set will be denoted R. Our vertex
set therefore becomes Vstart = T ∪R. Since we will not consider obstacles, this graph
can be considered complete, i.e. there exists an edge between every pair of vertices. The
weight of each edge is equal to the Euclidean distance between the two points. This
graph G = (T ∪R, Estart) is the input to our problem. The resulting graph should then
have the vertex set Vres = T ∪R ∪S, where S is the set of Steiner points that have
been inserted. We will only allow for the insertion of Steiner points in some cases. If
no Steiner points are inserted, the edge set of the resulting graph should be a subset of
the original graph’s edge set Eres ⊂Estart. In both instances, the resulting edge set,
Eres, should span all vertices, have no edges that cross each other, and have a minimum
cost of all feasible solutions. The cost of an edge equals the length times a multiplier,
which equals the cost of the cable of the specific thickness. We will model the cable
thickness differently throughout the thesis. In some cases, we will use multiple edges in
the starting graph to represent each of the possible cable types, though in many cases
we will either relax this constraint or only allow for the smallest cable to be put to use.
We will only consider the problem in the Euclidean plane, as this represents the
real-life scenario. We will use the term path subgraph to refer to a subgraph, which is a
single simple path. This means that there is a start node and end node with degree 1
and all other vertices have degree 2.
2.5
An overview of the problems considered
This section is meant to provide an overview of the methods that we will consider
throughout the thesis. The thesis is divided into three main sections, each containing a
different set of problems. The three sections are general network optimization problems,
the Steiner tree problem and clustering problems. Each main problem is described below.
6
==PAGE:12==
2.5.1
General Network Optimization Problems
Minimum Cost Flow Problem
Input:
A graph G = (V, E) with edge costs wij, ∀(i, j) ∈E and capacities cij,
∀(i, j) ∈E, as well as the demand/surplus of each node di, ∀i ∈V . It
is assumed the sum of surplus equals the sum of demand with opposite
signs.
Output:
A flow on the graph G, i.e. each edge is associated with an integer 0 ≤
fij ≤cij. The resulting flow satisfies the demand/surplus respectively
and has a minimum cost of all feasible flows.
Variations:
Fixed charge problem, Confluent flow problem
The minimum cost flow problem is a broad category of problems that aims to create
a flow through a graph, subject to some constraints, such that the resulting flow is
the minimum of all feasible flows. A flow is essentially just a number assigned to each
edge, such that this number does not exceed the capacity of each edge. Furthermore,
an equal amount of flow must go into a node as there goes out of a node unless this
node has a nonzero demand/surplus. Then the flow entering the node plus the surplus
must equal the flow going out of the node plus the demand.
We can easily model
the IACL Problem as a flow problem by giving the OSS node a surplus equal to the
number of turbines in the graph and each turbine a demand of one. Each of the different
cables with different capacities and costs can be inserted as multiple edges. However,
for classic flow problems, the cost is dependent on how much flow passes through each
edge, which is not the case for our problem. In our problem, we wish to have a one-time
cost for an edge, which is independent of the amount of flow. This allows us to utilize
edges multiple times without incurring an increased cost. This is a known variation
of the problem called the fixed charge problem. If we have multiple OSS positions or
possible OSS positions this could easily be modelled as well, by inserting a supersource
node containing the total surplus. This node should then connect to each OSS node,
which then has zero surplus/demand. If we wish to impose a balanced solution, i.e.
each outgoing cable from the OSS position connects an equal amount of turbines, this
becomes a simple equal flow problem. If we wish to impose the branching constraint as
well, this becomes a confluent flow problem.
Vehicle Routing Problem
Input:
A set of customers, T, and depots, R, with geometric coordinates and
a fleet of vehicles, G. Each vehicle belongs to a given depot.
Output:
A route for each vehicle, starting and ending in its specified depot.
The resulting combined route should be the minimum in total length.
Variations:
Capacitated vehicle routing problem, open vehicle routing problem
The vehicle routing problem (VRP) is introduced, as it only focuses on how to find
path subgraphs. Therefore, each path found is non-branching providing us a framework
to solve the problem with the non-branching constraints. Furthermore, the problem has
a fixed cost for the edges, as there is only a single cost for a vehicle traversing an edge.
7
==PAGE:13==
The cost is therefore independent of the amount of goods the vehicle is carrying. We
mainly focus on two variations, the first being the capacitated vehicle routing problem,
which imposes an upper limit on the number of customers a vehicle can visit and can
therefore help balance our solution. The second is the open vehicle routing problem,
which does not take into account the distance of the paths’ end nodes back to the
depots. The problem can also be modified to consider possible OSS positions. In this
version, we simply have multiple depots in our depot set, R, and then allow for some
vehicles to not be used. If we impose that all vehicles must be used, we must also know
the exact outgoing degree of the depot node, which is not ideal for our problem, as we
typically do not care to fix the out-degree of the OSS before optimization. The main
difference to our IACL problem is that it does not take cable capacities into account.
This means we cannot easily impose a higher cost if an edge connects more turbines
than the cable’s capacity. If for example a vehicle visits 4 customers on its route, but
our cable capacity is 3 customers, we would need to use a bigger cost for at least one
of the edges. However, we would not change the vehicle to a smaller vehicle halfway
through the route. Therefore, when working with the VRP we will usually limit the
program to only utilize small edges.
Shortest Path Problem
Input:
A graph G = (V, E) with edge distances wij, ∀(i, j) ∈E and a root
node r.
Output:
A spanning tree with root r, such that the distance from r to each
node i ∈V \{r} is the minimum
Variations:
Shortest path problem with resource constraints
The shortest path problem in itself varies a lot from the IACL problem, as it does not
consider cable capacities. Therefore, we could potentially end up connecting too many
turbines into one subtree, as the algorithm does not consider the increased cost of doing
this. Furthermore, since we are in the Euclidean plane and the input graph is complete,
the shortest path would always simply be the edge going directly from the OSS, r, to
the node. However, this can be fixed by including resource constraints. This means we
have a resource that is being used every time an edge is added to the tree. In our case,
the resource would be the number of turbines. Hence, we would limit the path to have
utilized at the most k turbines. With resource constraints, a non-branching solution can
be found such that only smaller cables are utilized. Having branched solutions would
not be possible, as we only count the number of turbines connected in the path directly
from r to the node. We also need to add time windows, which give an interval of how
many resources must have been utilized at a node, to avoid finding a solution where
each node is connected directly to the OSS node. This will provide us with a balanced
solution.
8
==PAGE:14==
2.5.2
Steiner Tree Problems
Steiner Tree Problem
Input:
A set of points, P, with defined distances between them.
Output:
A tree consisting of the vertices V = P ∪S, where S is additional
points inserted. The tree is the minimum of all feasible trees.
Variations:
1-Steiner tree problem, Fixed Steiner point positions
For our problem, we consider the geometric version of the Steiner tree problem. There-
fore, our input is a set of points and their geometric coordinates. The distances are then
calculated from these coordinates by their Euclidean distance. This solution is different
from that of our IACL problem, as we may include new points, and do not consider the
cable capacities. Therefore, once again we can risk having subtrees with too many ver-
tices, for which bigger cables need to be used, when there might exist a better solution
utilizing less of the big cables. We also consider the problem of fixed Steiner tree point
positions, as this can be utilized to find the best route around obstacles. In real-life
cases, there may be many obstacles within the wind farm. When we have fixed Steiner
point positions, the positions of the possible Steiner points are predefined, meaning
they cannot be placed anywhere anymore. Furthermore, we consider the 1-Steiner tree
problem to find the optimal position for the OSS, as this focuses on simply placing one
Steiner node, such that the resulting tree becomes the minimum. These solutions will
however be more expensive than our preferred solution, as avoiding bigger cables is not
written into our minimization.
k-Component Minimum Steiner Forest Problem
Input:
A set of geometric points, P, in the Euclidean plane.
Output:
A partitioning of the set into k disjoint Steiner trees, such that the com-
bined weight of the k Steiner Trees is minimum. The forest will consist of
vertices V = P ∪S, where S is additional points inserted.
The minimum Steiner forest problem is concerned with finding a minimum spanning
Steiner forest of the point set P, i.e. a forest that spans the point set P, and may include
additional Steiner points to make the forest smaller. When we add the k-component it
means that the forest should consist of exactly k components. We consider this problem,
to analyze how we might go about splitting a set of turbines into two or more sets. This
occurs in the case, where we have multiple OSSs and need to decide which OSS each
turbine should be connected to. Therefore, the goal is to find a split such that the
resulting Steiner trees made on each of the splits combined have a minimum cost of all
possible splits.
9
==PAGE:15==
2.5.3
Clustering Problems
Min-Cost Graph Tree Partitioning Problem
Input:
A set of vertices V , a cost between two vertices wij, ∀(i, j) ∈V , an
integer p, and a cost function f(S), for S ⊆V
Output:
A partitioning of the vertices into p disjoint sets, such that the total
cost of the p minimum spanning trees is minimized.
Variations:
Minimum forest problem, well-rooted forest
The graph tree partitioning problem is similar to the k-component minimum Steiner
forest problem. Instead of finding k minimum Steiner trees, we need to find k minimum
spanning trees. The Graph Tree Partitioning problem can be adapted to fit several
additional constraints by which the function f is used. For our case, the f function
enforces the maximum size of a cluster, such that we can enforce a balanced solution
and a solution that only utilizes small cables, as it will never connect more than the
specified capacity. If no constraint on the size of each set is enforced, it reduces to the
minimum forest problem. If on the other hand, we wish to include the connection to the
OSS in our optimization, a set of nodes can be included such that each cluster must be
connected to one. This is called the well-rooted graph tree partitioning problem. While
we can enforce that only small cables are used it is difficult to model it, such that an
extra cost is induced if the solution has a cable that exceeds this capacity.
Planar Facility Location Problem
Input:
A set of customers, T, with their geometric location, a set of depots, R,
with a cost for opening depot r ∈R denoted cr, and a description of how
a depot covers a set of customers.
Output:
A subset of the depots S ⊆R, such that all customers are covered and
the cost of covering them is minimum P
r∈S cr.
Different versions of the facility location problem exist, with the most classic trying
to minimize the cost of servicing every customer plus the cost of opening the needed
depots. Here the cost of servicing a customer t from depot r is defined by the distance
between them. However, as we are not interested in a solution going directly from the
OSS to each node, this version is not efficient without reducing the number of edges
first by, e.g. a triangulation. Instead, we consider the planar facility location problem.
which is concerned with how | S | depots can cover all customers, T, at a minimum
cost P
r∈S cr. All coordinates are defined on the 2-dimensional plane in the case of the
planar facility location problem. How a depot covers a set of customers can be defined
in different ways. Often it is defined by a radius with the depot as the center. However,
in our case, we will need to consider how the vertices covered connect to the depot by
a minimum spanning tree of this subset. Therefore, a customer can be reached by any
depot, though the cost of reaching them would be different. While this can model the
problem perfectly, it does mean that all these possible trees should be precomputed,
which makes the computational complexity too large. This becomes an even bigger
problem, if we do not know the amount of OSSs to be put to use, as we would then
need to calculate all the possible subtrees for all possible sizes.
10
==PAGE:16==
Euclidean Traveling Salesman
Input:
A set of vertices, V , in the Euclidean plane with known coordinates.
Output:
A simple cycle covering all vertices, V , at a minimum cost.
The Euclidean traveling salesman problem also deals with how to minimize a path
between geometric points. However, the constraints on the resulting geometry are very
different from those on the IACL problem. The Euclidean salesman problem results
in an Euler tour, where every node ends up having a single outgoing and ingoing edge
and there exists a path between any set of two vertices. The IACL problem’s resulting
graph is a tree and therefore some nodes will have degree one, while our root node (OSS)
will have a larger degree. We will mostly consider this problem in relation to how the
problem can be divided into subproblems.
Both problems do not have any obvious
independent subproblems, making it more complex to combine two subsolutions into a
proper solution.
11
==PAGE:17==
3
Mixed-Integer Linear Programming Approach
Before we start to consider the main problems of interest, we give a basic mixed-integer
linear programming (MILP) formulation of the problem. This section is meant to give a
short overview of how the problem is modelled in the MILP setting. The model is based
on Bauer And Lysgaard’s model in their 2015 paper.[5] Given a graph G = (T ∪r, E),
where r is a single OSS, and a set of cables C, a number of constants are introduced:
li,j: Length of cable going from vertex i to vertex j.
(1)
pk: Price of cable type k.
(2)
Lk: The maximum load cable k can handle.
(3)
Oi: The maximum output power of turbine i.
(4)
ck
i,j: The cost difference of cable k and cable k −1.
(5)
In this model we only have a single OSS, which will be given index s of our vertex set.
We have |C| cable types that are ordered by size, such that cable type 1 is the smallest,
then type 2 and so on up til type |C|, which is the largest possible cable. The formula
for ck
i,j:
ck
i,j = li,j · (pk −pk−1), ∀(i, j) ∈E and ∀k ∈C\{1}
c1
i,j = li,j · p1, ∀(i, j) ∈E and for k = 1
Furthermore, two types of decision variables are defined.
xk
i,j ∈{0, 1},
∀(i, j) ∈E and ∀k ∈C
(6)
si,j ≥0,
∀(i, j) ∈E
(7)
Our x-variables are binary variables, that serve to specify whether there should be a
cable between vertices i and j. The different superscripts then tell what type of cable
is in use. However, if a bigger cable is in use, we will formulate it such, that both the
decision variable for the biggest cable in use between the two vertices and all smaller
cables are set to one. If for example, we have a solution that uses cable type 3 between
vertex 6 and 7, which is the biggest cable in the scenario. We would have that:
x1
6,7 = x2
6,7 = x3
6,7 = 1
The si,j will record the amount of power running through cable (i, j) at maximum
output.
With this, we can formulate the objective function which simply tries to minimize
the total cost of cables used:
min
X
(i,j)∈E
|C|
X
k=1
ck
i,jxk
i,j
For the constraints, we first define the power going through a vertex.
X
j:(j,i)∈E
sj,i + Oi =
X
j:(i,j)∈E
si,j, ∀i ∈V \{s}
12
==PAGE:18==
This constraint ensures that for each vertex i, the amount of power leaving the turbine
is equal to that going into it, plus its own power production Oi. s is the root node
that all the power must eventually reach. Therefore the power entering and leaving this
node must be modelled with a different constraint.
X
j:(j,s)∈E
sj,s =
X
i∈V \{s}
Oi
Secondly, we need to ensure that the x-variables are activated if their corresponding
cable is used. For the smallest cable type this can be modelled as:
M · x1
i,j ≥si,j, ∀(i, j) ∈E
For the other cables it is defined as such:
M · xk
i,j ≥si,j −Lk−1, ∀(i, j) ∈E and ∀k ∈C\{1}
This constraint ensures that the variable xk
i,j is only forced to be 1 if si,j > Lk−1, which
is when more power is running through the cable than the smaller cable’s maximum
capacity. The power should never exceed the capacity of the largest cable. Hence, we
can use L|C| as our M value. If we assume no edges within E cross each other the
formulation can end here. However, if there are cables that, when put to use cross each
other, these need to be taken care of. For this, we define the set of edges crossing each
other as X. Once defined the following constraints are included:
x1
i,j + x1
j,i + x1
v,u + x1
u,v ≤1, ∀((i, j), (u, v)) ∈X
The amount of planarity constraints needed often far exceeds the amount a solver can
handle. The amount of planarity constraints can be reduced by finding all the maximal
sets of edges crossing each other, (which is the same as finding all maximal cliques) and
defining the constraints from this. However, this is an NP-hard problem. [5]
The full model can be seen here:
min
X
(i,j)∈E
|C|
X
k=1
ck
i,jxk
i,j
(8)
X
j:(j,i)∈E
sj,i + Oi =
X
j:(i,j)∈E
si,j,
∀i ∈V \{s}
(9)
X
j:(j,s)∈E
sj,s =
X
i∈V
Oi
(10)
L|C| · x1
i,j ≥si,j,
∀(i, j) ∈E
(11)
L|C| · xk
i,j ≥si,j −Lk−1,
∀(i, j) ∈E and ∀k ∈C\{1}
(12)
x1
i,j + x1
j,i + x1
v,u + x1
u,v ≤1,
∀((i, j), (u, V )) ∈X
(13)
xk
i,j ∈{0, 1},
∀(i, j) ∈E and ∀k ∈C
(14)
si,j ≥0,
∀(i, j) ∈E
(15)
13
==PAGE:19==
3.1
Branching
Usually, two different versions of the problem are considered - one where branching is
allowed to occur, i.e. each turbine can connect multiple turbines, or one where a single
turbine only receives power from one other turbine. However, even in the branched
case, we often wish to limit the amount of turbines connecting the turbines.[11] This is
often set to two. With this constraint, we add the following to the model.
X
j:(j,i)∈E
xj,i ≤2
∀i ∈V \{s} (16)
X
j:(i,j)∈E
xi,j ≤1
∀i ∈V \{s} (17)
If we wish to work on a completely non-branching solution, the right-hand side, 2, in
equation 16 is simply changed to a 1. This way we are limiting the in- and out-degree
of each vertex.
Note that the non-branching solution space is a subspace of the branching solution
space.
3.2
Balanced Solutions
When building wind farms we often wish to ensure that the amount of power in each
cable going into the OSS is equal. This is what we call a balanced network.[11] Doing
this ensures a reduced cost in maintenance and components. To enforce this, we utilize
our power variables and add the following constraint.
sj,s ≤M · (1 −x1
i,s) + si,s,
∀i, j ∈V, j ̸= i (18)
This way if both the (i, s) and (j, s) cables are in use, we get the two constraints:
sj,s ≤si,s
(19)
si,s ≤sj,s
(20)
However, when the cable is not in use, the constraint becomes inactive in the sense that
it does not restrict the variable.
3.3
Variable amount of OSSs or their positions
If we were to have multiple OSS positions, R, we could instead add a new dummy root
node, which we set as our start node s. We set the capacity of the edges going from this
dummy node to any node, not in R to zero, and the cost of edges going to the dummy
start node is set to zero. Furthermore, the production constant Oi is set to zero for
s, and for all vertices in R. Then the program can choose to utilize a subset of these
positions or not. We would also need to exclude the planarity constraint for the edges
going to the dummy start node, as we do not care whether these cross or not.[3]
This also means that if we wish to have balanced solutions, we now need constraint
21 for every r ∈R:
sj,r ≤M · (1 −x1
i,s) + si,r,
∀i, j ∈V, j ̸= i, ∀r ∈R (21)
14
==PAGE:20==
If we wish to have non-branching solutions, we simply need to exclude all of R and s in
the branching constraints to include this.
Now if we want to enforce a specific number of OSSs, p, another constraint is added
as such:
X
j:(j,s)∈E
x1
j,s = p
where s is the dummy root node inserted. Then the program is forced to open exactly
p OSS positions.
3.4
Complexity
As can be seen, it is quite easy to model the problem as a mixed-integer linear prob-
lem. Apart from the basic model, many modifications can be introduced without issue.
However, it does have its drawbacks.
As has already been mentioned, the planarity constraints tend to be a large factor
in slowing down the program. This is because the amount of planarity constraints tends
to grow with O(|V |4). Furthermore, MILPs cannot handle unspecified point locations
easily. Were we for example to solve the problem as a Steiner tree, it would have to have
the possible positions predefined. Likewise, we cannot optimize for an unknown OSS
position but would have to give the model a set of possible positions. Fixed position
Steiner points are often utilized to avoid obstacles, but this introduces more vertices
and as a result, the program slows down.
Bauer and Lysgaard did not include the planarity constraints directly, as they had
too many for the solver to handle (almost 1.5 million constraints for one wind farm
with 88 turbines). They tried solving different layouts using the CPLEX solver. They
only included planarity constraints if violated. With this, they were able to solve all
instances except their largest within 20 minutes. The largest instance was of 88 turbines
and was abandoned after an hour of running, however, it had an optimality gap of only
0.0004.[5]
Fischetti and Pisinger tested a large number of scenarios on different real-world
locations with different cable sizes available and turbine sizes placed. They tested the
scenarios on a MILP model with a CPLEX solver. A third of their experiments did not
finish within a 10-hour limit. These were all instances containing 80 or 100 turbines.
They did also test instances with 30 turbines, but these were all completed within 2
minutes.[18]
From the experiments in these articles, it is clear that more efficient methods are
needed for modern wind farms, which often contain over 80 turbines.
15
==PAGE:21==
4
The problem as general network optimization problems
We start by considering the problem in the context of classical network optimization
problems. Our problem is in itself a network optimization problem, but in this section,
we will consider how other known problems might be able to solve or approximate it.
4.1
Minimum Cost Flow-problems
Our full problem can quite easily be modelled as a flow problem. For this, we construct
a graph G = (V, E). Our set of vertices, V = T ∪R, consists of the set T, which
corresponds to our turbines, and the set R, which is our OSSs.
For every pair of
vertices, an undirected edge is added with the cost equal to the distance between the
two objects, times the cost of the cable. The distance is calculated as the Euclidean
distance between the two points’ geometric positions.
Assuming first that we know our OSS positions, a super-source vertex that connects
all the vertices in R is added. The weight of these edges should be zero. If we have
multiple cable types, multiple edges are added between the vertices, with a cost defined
by the specific cable’s cost and the distance between the vertices. The super-source node
is given a surplus of flow that equals the amount of turbines. Each turbine is given a
demand of one. The capacities on the edges, going from the super-source vertex to the
OSS vertices, equal the capacity of the OSS, i.e. how many turbines it can connect
to as a maximum. The capacity of cables running between two turbines equals that
of each cable type’s capacity. The objective would then be to minimize the cost while
satisfying the demand. An example of what this would look like, with two OSSs and
four turbines, can be seen in figure 2.
Figure 2: An example of the graph. The solid lines from the R-vertices going to the
T-vertices, as well as the dashed edges between the T-vertices, all have capacity equal
to the cable type’s capacity. The dotted edges from the source to the R-vertices have
a capacity equal to the OSSs capacity. Positive numbers above the node mean it has a
surplus, and negative numbers that it has a demand.
If we further assume, that we do not know the exact positions of the OSS’, but have
a number of possible positions, the above can be adapted to include this. We do this
by simply modelling it as before, with every possible OSS position becoming an OSS
16
==PAGE:22==
node. The weights of the edges going from the super-source node to the OSS positions
are put at a high value. Hence, the problem will aim to reduce the number of these
edges added, and therefore, the number of OSSs used.
4.1.1
Balancing and branching constraints
If we wanted to impose a balanced solution, by having the same amount of turbines
connected in each subtree going out from an OSS, you could model the problem such
as a simple equal flow problem formulated by Ahuja in 1997. In this, we have a subset
of arcs that must have the same amount of flow. For our problem, this subset could
simply be all the edges going out from the OSS.[2] They build an algorithm utilizing
binary search, which results in a polynomial time algorithm. However, the simple equal
flow problem is based on the general minimum cost flow problem, meaning the edge’s
cost is dependent on the amount of flow running through it. Furthermore, this implies
we would have to know the number of outgoing edges from the OSS, as the proposed
modification does not take into account the possibility of some of the arcs having zero
flow.
If we further wanted to impose a condition for the solution to be non-branching, we
could impose a degree constraint, i.e. a constraint enforcing how many outgoing edges a
node is allowed to have. However, this problem is also NP-hard and is therefore, rather
strenuous to solve. Similarly, the problem is at times called the confluent flow problem,
when we impose that the out-degree of a node can be at most one.[16] Most commonly
the confluent transshipment problem or maximum confluent flow problem has been
researched. On the other hand, if we again relax the edge capacity constraints, we get a
degree-constrained shortest path problem. This results in a polynomial time problem,
as it can be solved by an extension of Dijkstra’s algorithm.[28]
4.1.2
Fixed-charge problem
While the described minimum-cost flow problem can be solved in polynomial time if
the edge costs are per unit flow sent through, it is a completely different story if we
impose a start-up cost on the cables. With this, we mean a cost that is only added once
if the edge is used and is then independent of the amount of flow that runs through the
edge. Including this fixed cost transforms the problem to become NP-hard. In fact, the
Steiner tree problem with fixed Steiner nodes can be reduced to what is called the fixed
charge problem, which is as described except the arcs have no capacities.[24] Hochbaum
and Segev present both a MILP model and several heuristics to tackle this problem.
The Steiner tree problem is the problem of finding a minimum spanning tree between
a set of vertices, but we are allowed to insert additional vertices called Steiner nodes
to help reduce the cost. At times the problem is considered with fixed Steiner nodes.
This means instead of being able to place them anywhere, a set of Steiner nodes that
can be used or not have been predefined. This version of the Steiner tree problem is
a well-known NP-hard problem. We will go into detail on the Steiner tree problem in
section 5.
The Steiner tree problem with known Steiner node positions can be reduced to a
minimum cost fixed charge problem. Simply make a complete graph. Add the edge
17
==PAGE:23==
lengths as the fixed charge for each pair of edges. Choose one terminal node that will
serve as our root node, and give this the supply equal to the number of terminal nodes
minus one. The rest of the terminal nodes then get demand one. The solution to this
minimum cost flow problem will be a minimum Steiner tree.[24] An example of a Steiner
tree problem with three turbines and one Steiner node position can be seen in figure 3.
Figure 3: Example of how the Steiner tree problem with fixed Steiner positions can be
solved as a Flow problem. Here the Steiner node has neither demand nor surplus, the
two nonroot turbine nodes demand 1 and the root turbine surplus 2. The edge cost is
equal to their lengths.
It can quickly be proven that a Steiner tree problem with fixed Steiner node positions
can be reduced to a fixed-charge problem by a proof of contradiction: Assume we have
a solution to the fixed charge problem, Ts, with total weight w(Ts), and that at least
one edge can be replaced to make a smaller Steiner tree, Tm, with total weight w(Tm).
Therefore w(Tm) < w(Ts). We assume at least one edge is different. We see that Tm will
also be a solution to the fixed charge problem. For it to be a feasible solution we must
be able to define a flow on it, which satisfies the demand and surplus constraints. We
know all the terminals are connected to the root node as a Steiner tree always spans all
terminal nodes. We can then assign a feasible flow to the tree by traversing backward
from the leaf nodes. The first edges from the leaf nodes are given flow equal to 1. The
next edges are then given flow equal to the sum of its ingoing edges plus 1, unless it is a
Steiner node. If it is a Steiner node the flow of the outgoing edge should equal the sum
of flow on its ingoing edges. This way, the sum of flow going into the root node, will be
exactly equal to the number of terminals, and all demand/surplus constraints will have
been satisfied. Therefore, the Tm is also a feasible solution to the given fixed-charge
problem, and it has a smaller total weight than the found solution. Hence, the found
solution to the fixed charge problem is not optimal, and we have a contradiction.
As the minimum cost flow problem with fixed charges is NP-hard, we could consider
18
==PAGE:24==
how well the simple minimum cost flow problem approximates our solution. When not
using fixed charges the problem has less incentive to reutilize some edges. Therefore
the worst-case scenario would be that it connects all the terminals directly to the root
node, when in fact it would be possible to route it through some of the other nodes. An
example of this can be seen in figure 4.
Figure 4: Approximating the min-cost flow problem to the fixed charge problem. The
red dotted solution is to the fixed charge problem, and the black is to the minimum
cost flow problem.
In this worst-case scenario, we see that the solution to the minimum cost flow prob-
lem is when the root is connected directly to the three other vertices. This is smaller
than the cost of going through the path T1 −T2 −T3 −T4 as we would have to pay for
the T1 −T2 edge 3 times. However, since the fixed charge problem does not pay for the
same edge multiple times, its overall cost becomes smaller. We also see that we could
move the nodes T2, T3 and T4 infinitely close to a straight line T1 −T4, and it would
still be two different solutions. That is until they lie in a straight line. So the total cost
of the minimum cost flow problem in the worst case becomes:
n · Cost of fixed charge optimal solution
Where n is the number of terminal nodes. However, in this worst-case scenario, we have
not considered the effect of having cable capacities. The fixed charge or minimum cost
flow problem can easily be adjusted to include bigger cables. Here we just add more
edges to represent the bigger cables and set the capacities on the edges accordingly.
The worst-case scenario from before is still possible if the smaller cable has a capacity
of n or more turbines. If the capacity of each small cable equals one, we could get the
same solution for the minimum cost flow problem as for the fixed charge problem. This
would be completely dependent on the prices and distances.
Since we are working in the Euclidean plane with Euclidean distances, the min-cost
flow problem without the fixed charges would always utilize the edges going directly to
each node instead of making paths. If we were to make a min-cost flow solution that
was closer to our actual problem, we would have to remove quite a few edges. This
could be done with for example a Delaunay triangulation.
The Delaunay Triangulation is a tool used in many settings to break up surfaces into
triangles. This is usually done to either break down a complex surface into segments
of two-dimensional triangles or to connect a set of points in the Euclidean plane. The
Delaunay triangulation is constructed such that the circumscribing circle of any three
points does not contain any additional points. This also means that the minimum angle
19
==PAGE:25==
of the triangles is maximized. The classic minimum spanning tree is proven to be a
subset of the Delaunay triangulation.[15] Our solution is not guaranteed to be a subset
of the Delaunay triangulation, but would likely share many edges with it. An example
of where the optimal solution is not a part of the Delaunay triangulation can be seen in
figure 5. Similarly, if we had many obstacles our edge set would naturally be reduced,
which could lead to the true solution being closer to the solution made by min-cost flow
algorithms, thereby making it a better fit. However, the result would be completely
dependent on the amount and placement of obstacles. Hence we can not conclude a
better approximation factor.
Figure 5: Example of a case where the optimal solution is not a subset of the Delaunay
triangulation.
The Delaunay triangulation is the solid black lines, and the optimal
solution is the dashed red lines.
To get an idea of how these layouts might vary, two layouts for a wind farm of 12
turbines were made. One of the layouts is the optimal solution to the IACL problem
made with the MILP model. The other layout was found by applying a minimum cost
flow algorithm to the Delaunay triangulation of the points. The points were chosen
randomly within a space. In this, we only utilized a small cable that could hold up to
4 turbines’ power. The optimal solution can be seen in figure 7 and the minimum cost
flow layout in figure 6.
Figure 6: Example of layout found by the
minimum cost flow algorithm utilizing De-
launay triangulation
Figure 7: Example of the optimal layout
for the wind farm.
20
==PAGE:26==
The minimum cost flow problem resulted in a total length of 20501 meters, while the
optimal solution had a total length of 14569 meters. While this is a significant difference,
the optimal solution can actually be found through only 4 swaps of the minimum cost
flow solution:
E2,4 →E3,4
E10,1 →E7,1
E11,6 →E5,6
E0,9 →E11,9
This number would naturally only grow with the number of turbines and is very depen-
dent on the placement of the turbines. However, it does capture some of the geometry
of the wind farm, and therefore might be a good basis for a heuristic method or similar.
4.2
Vehicle routing problem
The vehicle routing problem is a generalization of the traveling salesman problem and
is often described as the problem of how to deliver groceries to customers. Essentially,
in this scenario, we have a store that needs to deliver products to n customers. The
store has g vehicles with a capacity to hold c houses groceries each. The goal is then to
find the minimum overall cost of delivering the groceries to all customers. Classically,
the problem aims to find a route for each of the g available vehicles, such that the
overall total cost is minimized, while the demand is satisfied. However, variations of the
problem also focus on minimizing the number of vehicles needed, or a combination of
the two. If we impose an upper limit on the amount of goods a vehicle can carry, this
is also called the capacitated vehicle routing problem. The vehicle routing problem is
NP-hard. [3]
As mentioned in a previous section, Bauer and Lysgaard examined how to solve the
problem as an open vehicle routing problem with non-branching constraints, though
without considering balancing constraints.[5] Their version was also capacitated, but
would not guarantee a balanced solution unless the number of turbines was divisible by
the cable capacity and the cost of utilizing more vehicles was high.
Solving the open vehicle routing problem will give us a solution that does not branch.
However, as it does not consider the capacity, and in a worst-case scenario it could use
up to n+1-k big cables when in fact none were needed. Therefore, the optimal solution
to the open vehicle routing problem approximates our problem with:
(n + 1 −k) · price of big cables-price of small cables · optimal solution
(22)
The vehicle routing problem is often only considered with one main depot to travel
from.
We would like the option of having multiple depots to choose from as these
would be our OSSs. Here the location routing problem can be considered, which both
tries to route the vehicles and decides on how many depots there should be. It also
decides where the depots should be located from a finite set of possible locations. Many
algorithms solve this simply by considering each possible subset of the locations and
then run the standard vehicle routing problem.
21
==PAGE:27==
Most methods for solving the VRP are within the MILP space and focus on different
branch-and-cut algorithms. Many also utilize column generation, which reduces the
problem, so only a few columns are included in a first iteration. Then more columns are
added in each step. Each iteration creates a subproblem to find which columns should be
added. This subproblem utilizes the dual variables and is often a resource-constrained
shortest-path problem, which we will discuss further in the following sections.[39]
4.3
Shortest path problem
For now let us simplify the problem to something that is not NP-hard. If we assume
the OSS positions have already been found, the next step is connecting them to the
turbines. If we assume that both the OSSs and cables have infinite capacity, we can
add a super-source node, which connects to the OSS nodes, and then utilize Dijkstras
to find an optimal solution as this has reduced to the shortest path problem. If we wish
to add in the criteria that each OSS can only connect to a fixed amount of turbines or
introduce different cable thicknesses, the problem becomes complicated again.
Therefore, like before let us consider how well the shortest path problem approxi-
mates our problem. The main problem is either that it will only utilize paths directly
to each vertex, or that it utilizes too many large cables. In a worst-case scenario, it
could use up to n + 1 −k big cables like the VRP. Therefore, the optimal solution to
the shortest path problem approximates our problem with:
(n + 1 −k) · price of big cables-price of small cables · optimal solution
(23)
or
(n) · optimal solution
(24)
Depending on which is bigger.
Like with the minimum cost flow problem, we can
compare the solution of this, when applied to an instance of a wind farm. Like with
the minimum cost flow problem, we apply it to the Delaunay triangulation, as else we
would simply get the solution, where the root node is connected directly to every other
node. The solution can be seen in figure 8, next to the optimal solution in figure 9.
Figure 8: Example of a layout found by
a shortest path algorithm applied to the
Delaunay triangulation of the point set
Figure 9: Example of the optimal layout
for the wind farm.
22
==PAGE:28==
The total length of this layout was at 20466 meters. In this scenario, we would have
to swap 5 edges to get the correct solution. When comparing it to the minimum cost
flow solution, the minimum cost flow solution seemed a bit more balanced and therefore
might be better suited despite having a slightly smaller total length. Only the shortest
path layout needed a bigger cable in this case, as it has an edge, E0,10, which holds 7
turbines’ power. The minimum cost flow problem layout has no edge, that carries more
than the small cable’s capacity.
4.3.1
Shortest-Path problem with
resource constraints
The basic version of our inter-array cable layout problem consists of several vertex
positions and a fixed OSS position, that needs to be connected. An unbalanced version
is considered, that does not take into account the issue of ensuring the same amount of
power is added to the OSS through each connecting cable. If we do not allow branching,
this can be formulated as a variation of the resource constrained shortest-path problem.
Furthermore, as stated the general resource-constrained shortest path problem often
occurs when solving vehicle routing problems by column generation.
The resource constrained shortest path problem is a shortest path problem subject
to some constraints on their resources. Often this results in both the cost of the edge
and, for example, the time to be considered as a resource, though usually only an upper
bound on the time is considered. A root node is defined, and the goal is then to find
the shortest path from the root node to all other vertices while satisfying the time
constraint. Many variations of this problem have been considered, most famously the
problem including time window constraints on each node, such that the node should
be visited only within the time window. Another version is the elementary problem,
where we are only concerned with finding the shortest elementary path from the root
vertex to a defined destination vertex. By elementary it means that each vertex in the
path can be visited at most once. The resource constrained shortest-path problem is
NP-hard.[27]
A method for solving the elementary resource constrained shortest path problem
is the label-correcting method. This keeps track of the cost of a path, the resources
used, and the vertices visited. These three measures are called a label. In our case,
the resource is the amount of turbines connected in the path up to that vertex. Going
through the graph and finding all these labels, we end up with a large number of them.
Feasible solutions are then made by grouping disjoint paths. The optimal solution is
the smallest of these groupings.[27]
However, the number of labels grows exponentially with the number of vertices. We
can utilize dominance to delete some labels. In the elementary version, both the cost
and resource must be less than the other, and its vertices be a subset of the others
visited vertices to assert dominance. That is:
ci ≤cj, ri ≤rj, Vi ⊆Vj
Must hold for i to dominate j, and thereby label j could be deleted. In the classic
non-elementary problem we would only consider the cost and the resource in order to
assert dominance, as if both the cost is lower and fewer resources are used, the path
23
==PAGE:29==
is better, no matter if they do not share the same subset of vertices. However, when
considering the elementary version, we must also consider the subset of vertices visited.
If we are working with resources that are integers for the non-elementary problem, we
can achieve a time complexity of O(|V |·|E|·T), where T is the size of the label lists.[27]
Now, if we instead wish to consider the overall minimum cost of the paths to all
the vertices while only having path subgraphs from the root node, it is not possible to
remove any labels in this way. Either another dominance criteria should be developed,
or no dominance criteria can be applied. If we were to consider a dominance criteria,
it should be noted first, that while we previously preferred solutions that used fewer
vertices, the opposite is now true. If we have a solution that has a smaller cost and
a bigger set of turbines, it would, in general, be preferred to that of a smaller set.
However, if we utilize the minimum Euclidean distances between two nodes without
any obstacles as our edge costs, we note that there could never exist two sets where one
dominated the other in this way. Say we have a set with label (c1, V1) and another with
(c2, V2). For set 2 to dominate set 1, we must have that:
c2 ≤c1 and V1 ⊆V2
This is not possible, as the triangle equality would hold since we are working in the Eu-
clidean plane. Therefore such a dominance criteria would not help. Instead of defining
it by a subset, since our resource is the number of connected turbines in the path, we
could define it by having a smaller cost and a bigger set of turbines. This means that
label 2 dominates label 1 if:
c2 ≤c1 and t1 ≤t2
As we are not working with an acyclic graph, this could lead to an unbounded solution.
We would therefore also have to impose that the path should be elementary, so no
vertex can be visited twice in a path. We would still need to keep track of the vertices
visited, in order to be able to group them together afterwards. However, even with this
criterion, we risk excluding some labels that are needed to find the optimal graph, as
a less optimal label in one node might lead to a better path later on. This is only the
case because we need to find a disjoint set of paths that span the entire vertex set. The
only pruning criteria we could use with certainty is if the cost of the path is lower, and
the set of vertices is the same for the two sets.
c2 ≤c1 and V1 ≡V2
If we are working from an OSS position in the Euclidean plane, the optimal solution
would always simply be all the edges going directly from the OSS to each vertex. There-
fore, adding a time window constraint would be beneficial. However, as we do not know
the order in which the vertices should be visited, the time window constraint should be
added to a new vertex separately. This vertex should connect to all the turbine vertices
and have a time window of [k + 1, k + 1], where k is the number of vertices in each path
from the root node. With this, we are also imposing a balanced solution, and we would
have to know k before running the algorithm. If we do not know k, multiple of these
nodes could be added with different k values. An example of how the modified graph
with cable capacity 2 would look can be seen in figure 10. Of course in this, we are only
making it possible to use the smaller cables.
24
==PAGE:30==
Figure 10: An example of the modified system, such that the resource-constrained
shortest path problem can be utilized. r is the root node. The lettered nodes in green
represent the turbines, and the blue unlabeled node is the added end node.
The labels we need to group, would then only be the labels of the end node, whose
vertex sets are disjoint.
This framework would not work well if we were to not impose a non-branching
constraint. This means if we wish for the subtrees going out from the OSS to be tree-
shaped and not path subgraphs.
This would be difficult, as we would now have to
consider combining non-disjoint paths, which also means we cannot use the dominance
criteria. For the path subgraph, we can evaluate the resources used by the previous
node, but since our constraint is based on the number of turbines connected, this would
not be possible for a branched solution. Here, it would not be enough to only count the
previous turbines but also those that are connected to the previous turbines through
other branches. Furthermore, we are not necessarily guaranteed to get non-crossing
solutions, but we could include this as a check, after having found all the labels of the
end node.
In algortihm 1 a modified version of the label-correcting algorithm is defined to fit
our problem.
Algorithm 1 Label correcting algorithm for IACL
1: Input: Weight matrix W, Start time matrix A, end time matrix B
2: Li = ∅, ∀i ̸= r
3: Lr = {(0, 0, {})}
4: Q = {r}
5: while Q ̸= ∅do
6:
i = Q[0]
7:
Remove i from Q
8:
for {(i, j) ∈E} do
9:
for (wk, tk, V k) ∈Li do
10:
if j /∈V k and tk + 1 ∈[aj, bj] then
11:
Insert (wk + wij, tk + 1, V k ∪{j}) into Lj
12:
Add j to Q if not in Q and not endnode
13:
for (w, t, V ) ∈Lj do
14:
if V is equal to any other V in Lj then
15:
Delete label with the biggest cost form Lj
25
==PAGE:31==
The algorithm is based on the algorithm on page 48 in [27]. After this, an extra
step is needed, as we need to combine labels that together cover exactly all the vertices.
Note that we also ensure the end node is never added to our set Q. This ensures we
never consider labels going out from our end node. As we can end up with
 n
k

labels,
our time complexity becomes O(nk). The algorithm therefore loses its efficiency, as we
are not able to use any good dominance criteria.
4.4
Summary of Section 4
In this section, we have gone through three problems, that can model different versions
of our problem well. All three are, as expected, NP-hard. The first was the fixed-charge
flow model, which is a flexible model, that could deal with many different modifications
of the problem easily. The second was the open vehicle routing problem, which modelled
non-branching solutions without capacities. Balanced solutions would also be possible,
but we would need to know the sizes of the branches beforehand. The last model we
considered was the resource-constrained shortest path problem.
This also modelled
non-branching solutions without capacity constraints, and like the VRP could model
balanced solutions, but would need to know the size of the branches beforehand.
Furthermore, we looked into how the shortest path problem and general minimum
cost flow problem would approximate the solution. If applied directly to the complete
graph, they would both simply find the solution that connected each vertex directly to
the OSS. If instead, we were to reduce the number of edges, for example by a Delaunay
triangulation, we could get something closer that perhaps could serve as a good base
for a heuristic.
26
==PAGE:32==
5
The problem as a Steiner Tree Problem
The Steiner tree problem revolves around finding a minimum spanning tree, between
terminals by potentially utilizing additional vertices that can be positioned anywhere.
Our resulting vertex set is therefore split into terminals and non-terminal vertices. [25]
Minimum Steiner Trees result in smaller trees than Minimum Spanning Trees, as
we only add a Steiner point if it reduces the weight. In the Euclidean setting, Steiner
Points are only added to minimize the length of connecting three vertices, whose angles
are all less than 120◦. Hence Steiner points in the Euclidean setting always have degree
three. Furthermore, they will always have 120◦between their outgoing edges.[37]
It has been noted by authors before, that adding these Steiner nodes would not be
feasible in Offshore Wind farms with the current technology. When connecting multi-
ple cables, different mechanics are needed such as circuit breakers and junction boxes.
These are all currently designed to be housed in turbines, and therefore the cost of
adding them outside of these, would far exceed the gain of the lowered overall cable
cost.[35] However, we have good reason to study the Steiner tree, as many of the geo-
metric considerations often hold true for our IACL problem as well. You will often find
literature on the IACL problem referencing Steiner nodes as well. Though in this sense
it is used slightly differently than as just explained. Here Steiner nodes are nodes added
in before optimizing the layout to avoid obstacles. Then the algorithm can choose to uti-
lize the Steiner nodes or not, though the positions of these are predefined. Furthermore,
if we assume the OSS position of the system has not been decided beforehand, we could
consider this as a Steiner node that needs to be added. Often in Steiner tree problems
balancing constraints are not considered. We will start by not considering a balanced
solution, and only introduce this later. The Steiner tree problem in its most simple
version, without a balancing constraint, is NP-hard even in the Euclidean plane.[34]
Before starting we need to make some terminology clear: For a complete graph
whose edges satisfy the triangle inequality, each solution tree can be decomposed into
smaller trees, for which every terminal is a leaf node. Each of these small trees is called
a full component, and a Steiner tree is called k-restricted if these components connect at
most k-vertices. The k-restricted Steiner minimum tree is the shortest Steiner tree, that
is k-restricted.[25] On the other hand, the 1-Steiner tree is the Steiner tree problem,
for which only one additional Steiner node is allowed to be placed.[34] The capacitated
Steiner tree has a root node, r, and then ensures that each edge in the tree is utilized
at most k times, for paths between r and terminal nodes.[6]
Two concepts that will be used throughout this section, and should not be confused,
are that of a full topology and a full Steiner tree. A subset of m nodes is called a full
Steiner tree, if it has m−2 Steiner nodes, and their angles meet at 120◦. A full topology
of the same subset is a description of how these m nodes and m−2 nodes are connected.
Often this will be described by an adjacency matrix. The full topology does not describe
the placement of the Steiner nodes, but simply how they could be connected.[37]
For this section, we will consider a few different problems. First, we analyze the
1-Steiner tree problem, then approximation methods of the Steiner tree problem and
afterward exact methods. We will also look into some modifications to the problem -
with fixed Steiner nodes, balanced solutions, and, in the end, if we had multiple OSS
positions.
27
==PAGE:33==
5.1
1-Steiner tree problem
We will first consider the 1-Steiner tree problem, which is as mentioned, the problem
of finding a minimum Steiner tree, while only adding a single Steiner point. While the
general Steiner tree problem is considered NP-hard, the problem of finding a k-Steiner
tree in the Euclidean plane, that is placing exactly k Steiner nodes, has polynomial time
algorithms. In 1984 an O(n2) time algorithm for solving the 1-Steiner tree problem in the
Euclidean plan was proposed by Georgakopoulos and Papadimitriou.[20] The possible
Steiner point positions are not predefined but can be placed anywhere in the geometric
region. Essentially, the algorithm defines regions, for which the Steiner tree construction
is invariant to the placement of the Steiner point. That means the Steiner point could
be placed anywhere within the region, and the spanning tree would not change. They
call these regions isodendral regions.
To define them, they utilize oriented Dirichlet cells. Let T define the set of terminals,
and K(x, θ1, θ2) a cone with its apex at x, and the angles of the two sides of the cone
being θ1 and θ2. Taking the intersection of these two sets, we get the terminal nodes
present within the cone. Our oriented Dirichlet cell of a terminal node, t, is then a
region in the graph, such that every point, x, within this region, is the closest to t of
the points in the set T ∩K(x, θ1, θ2). An example of how the cone is constructed can
be seen in figure 11, and of the corresponding oriented Dirichlet cells in figure 12.
Figure 11:
Example of K(x, 180, 240),
where the orange node is x and the green
nodes the set T. The set T ∩K(x, θ1, θ2),
would then be exactly the two green
nodes.
Figure 12:
Example of two oriented
Dirichlet cells for each of the two termi-
nal points with θ1 = 180 and θ2 = 240
They utilize the fact that a Steiner point in the minimum 1-Steiner tree can be
connected to at most 6 different terminal vertices.
This comes from the fact that
no angle in a minimum spanning tree can be less than 60◦. This means if we define
θ2 = θ1 + 60◦, we are ensured that at most one terminal point is connected to t in each
of these cones going out from t. This occurs because of the definition of the cells, which
is defined by the closest point in T ∩K(x, θ1, θ2), so for each cell, only one point is the
closest for all positions. If we define all the oriented Dirichlet cells and then find the
intersection of any 6 cells, each region will contain at most 6 possible points that the
28
==PAGE:34==
Steiner point could be connected to. The overlaying of the cells happens as 6 different
sets of regions have been made - one for each of the 60◦angles. The regions are then
defined, such that they are the biggest possible, but each region covers at most one cell
from each of the 6 sets.
Figure 13: Example of two partitions overlayed. The first partition colored red, is the
same as was found in figure 12. The second is for K(x, 120, 180). The regions that will
be defined are then the different colored regions in the graph.
It is assumed that the placement minimizing the distance to each point can be found
in constant time for up to 5 points. Therefore, for each region, the optimal placement
is found for all proper subsets of the 6 possible vertex connections. We do not need to
include the full set of 6 vertices, as we can guarantee the solution only has a degree of
a maximum of 5 by small perturbations of the nodes. Having found these points, the
minimum spanning tree is found for each, and the smallest one is chosen of these.[20]
To keep this at O(n2) time, the minimum spanning tree should not be made from
scratch each time, but instead updated for each added point. This can be done by
a preprocessing step, where for each edge, e, that is not contained in the minimum
spanning tree compute a new measure s(i, j). This measure is the shortest edge of the
path traversing the tree from the edge e’s startnode i to its endnode j. For a list of k
decrements to the edges of the graph, the new tree can be computed in O(n2) time. For
the edges decremented, that are not already contained in the minimum spanning tree,
the following steps are done:
• Their s(i, j) are sorted by decreasing order
• If the decremented edge is shorter than its minimum path edge, i.e.
l(i, j) <
l(s(i, j)), then s(i, j) is replaced with (i, j)
• If s(i, j) = s(i, l) for some l ∈T, we replace this with (i, j) or the (j, l) edge,
depending on which is the shortest.
29
==PAGE:35==
• Repeat for all of the decremented edges not already in the MST.
How this is applied to our solution, is by making a minimum spanning tree of the
terminal vertices once, before considering the newly found points in the regions, and
then completing the preprocessing step as described. Say for a subset of vertices, S, in
a cell, we have found a potential Steiner node x. Then the node from s ∈S that lies
the closest to x is chosen. The length between s and all other terminal vertices in S,
{(s, p) : p ∈S\{s}} is lowered by min(0, | xp | −| sp |). If the length of the Steiner
node to the terminal node is not smaller than the length of the path from s to the same
node, then the cost is not lowered. Then the tree can be updated as described. [20]
As stated, the found minimum spanning trees can then be compared and the smallest
one chosen. We need to consider each possible subset of the found regions, as these are
not isodendral regions, but in fact, can overlap up to 31 isodendral regions. Therefore,
we are not guaranteed, that the Steiner point minimizing the distance to all the terminal
points associated with the region, would create the same Steiner tree, as a point placed
somewhere different in the same region. However, we have at most 62 proper subsets,
since P5
k=1
 6
k

= 62, and therefore at most 62 points to consider for each region. We do
not need to consider the whole set of 6 points, since it is possible to ensure the Steiner
tree has a degree of at most 5.[20]
The authors note, that no simple generalization of their methodology can be utilized
to produce algorithms for k-Steiner trees with k > 1. However, in 2013 Brazil, Ras,
Swanepoel and Thomas published an article doing exactly this. Their algorithm, which
allows up to k Steiner points to be inserted, runs in O(n2k) time. Essentially, for each l ≤
k and every possible combination of l regions, they create a minimum spanning tree. The
regions are defined the same way, as the oriented Dirichlet cells were for the 1-Steiner
tree problem. Then like before they choose the smallest of these combinations. This
results in O(n2k) different topologies to be considered, which gives the time complexity.
They also have to use a different approach for updating the minimum spanning tree.
5.1.1
The optimal position within a Dirichlet cell
The algorithm finds the optimal placement within the time by the assumption that for
1 to 5 points, the placement can be found in constant time. For 1 point it is easy to see
that the optimal placement, would be on top of the point itself. For 2 points, it would
be exactly between the two points. 3 points is the first nontrivial case, in which there
are two cases. If no angle is above 120◦in the triangle formed by the three points, the
inserted point must form angles of 120◦for its three angles, which occur when connected
to the three other vertices. If on the other hand, an angle in the triangle is bigger than
120◦, the optimal position lies on top of the vertex with this angle. For 4 points two
cases also occur. If the 4 points make a convex polygon, the point is inserted at the
intersection of the two diagonals. If the polygon is not convex, the point lies on top of
the point, that is within the triangle formed by the other three.[20]
30
==PAGE:36==
Figure 14: Optimal positions for three and four points in the Euclidean plane.
For 5 points no such simple calculation exists, however, the sum of the distances
becomes a convex function in the plane, and can therefore be solved with any nonlinear
solver in constant time.[20]
Realistically, there may be many obstacles limiting the actual amount of positions
that could be used. To include this, we could define the paths between points by their
visibility graph, and then get the shortest distances by the shortest path between them.
If in an overlayed Dirichlet cell, an obstacle exists, this could be bypassed by utilizing
the added nodes around the obstacle instead. However, to get the optimal position in
the region as before, we would have to test multiple combinations of nodes. This could
be done by defining regions of nodes visible to each other and then finding the optimal
position for each of these regions. Therefore, if we have many obstacles this approach
would not succeed, as the number of nodes would grow immensely.
Using a similar technique to decide the OSS position while deciding on the cable
layout could be interesting. However, the current algorithm is not suited to take ad-
ditional constraints into account. We would need to consider if a premade tree could
be updated rather than having to be made by new, when changing the positions of the
possible placements. Furthermore, we would need a different technique to handle OSS
positions with a degree of more than 5.
5.2
Approximation methods for the general Steiner tree problem
In order to solve the general Steiner tree problem, several approximation methods have
been explored. Quite a few of these utilize a greedy algorithm that first finds 1-restricted
or k-restricted Steiner trees, and then iteratively builds the solution.[25] Note that when
we talk about 1-restricted Steiner trees, this is not the same problem as in the previous
section. Here the 1 or k refers to the biggest full component contained in the tree. A
full component is each component that is left when the tree has been decomposed, such
that every terminal is a leaf node. The size is then the number of terminals within the
full component. This also means that the shortest 2-restricted Steiner tree is simply
our minimum spanning tree.
31
==PAGE:37==
One of these methods was developed by Chang in 1972,[12] which in turn is based
on Melzak’s 1961 paper ”On the problem of Steiner”,[33] which gave the first exact
algorithm for finding the Steiner minimum tree. The problem with Melzak’s algorithm
is that it searches all the possible different topologies the solution could have, and this
in turn is a very large number. Therefore, the algorithm becomes impractical for a large
number of terminals.
Changs algorithm finds a minimum spanning tree, and then iteratively improves
this tree, by making Steiner insertions. To describe what a Steiner insertion entails, we
must first define a few different operations and components.[12] A tree is said to have
full Steiner topology, if it satisfies the following criteria:
1. | VS |=| VT | −2 where VT is the terminal node and VS is the Steiner node.
2. No edges intersect each other.
3. Each terminal vertex has at most degree three.
4. Each Steiner point inserted has exactly degree three.
5. Each Steiner point is a Steiner point of a triangle formed by the points, which
directly connect it to the tree.
A Steiner component is a subtree that contains more than two vertices and has a
full Steiner topology. A generalized insertion connects three vertices by introducing a
Steiner point connected to the three vertices, and then removes two edges from the
original tree, to ensure that it remains a tree (see figure 15 for example). Furthermore,
the edges removed must ensure that the vertices, that lie within a Steiner component
in the original tree, remain within a Steiner component in the newly made tree. [12]
A Steiner insertion is essentially a generalized insertion with the additional criteria,
that the length of the two edges removed, l1 and l2 and the three vertices, Vi, Vj and
Vk connected to the inserted Steiner point, S, satisfy:
| l1 | + | l2 | −| ViS | −| VjS | −| VkS |> 0
(25)
Furthermore, this measure is the highest among the possible general insertions. The
created tree after each Steiner insertion is in itself a minimal tree over the entire set
of vertices (Steiner and terminal nodes). The Steiner insertions are proven to result
in a minimal tree with a Steiner topology after having been applied enough times. To
further improve this, the algorithm then performs steinalization, which entails replacing
each Steiner point with a new Steiner point, that minimizes the distance between its
connected nodes. This is necessary, as we might connect multiple Steiner points to-
gether, and their optimal placement can therefore change after insertion. The downside
of this is that for some graphs, we will never reach a point where no more steinalization
can be performed. Therefore, a threshold value for improvement is often considered,
instead of finishing it to perfection. [12]
32
==PAGE:38==
Figure 15: An example of how a Steiner
insertion can be made. In this case, the
dotted lines were the original minimum
spanning tree between the green termi-
nals. These were removed while the new
Steiner point in blue was inserted along
with the solid lines.
Figure 16: An example of a case where
no Steiner insertion can be made from
the minimum spanning tree (dotted lines).
Since all angles are above 120◦, no inser-
tion can be made. However, the solid lines
represent the minimum Steiner tree, we
need to find.
The main downside of this algorithm is, that you can run into graphs, for which no
Steiner insertions can be performed. In the example given by Chang, all degrees between
existing edges are more than 120◦, and therefore no Steiner point can be inserted among
three vertices next to each other, to provide a smaller graph than before (see figure 16).
Furthermore, inserting a Steiner point among vertices that are not adjacent, would not
reduce the length of the graph either, as the distances of the edges removed, would be
smaller than the edges inserted, no matter which edges were removed. In traditional
wind farms, this would most likely not be a problem, as the wind turbines were placed
in grids, and hence there would always be angles of less than 120◦. However, it could
be a problem among modern wind farms. The algorithm can also be adapted to solve
the problem if only a fixed number of Steiner points is allowed to be introduced. Chang
did only test the algorithm on up to 30 terminals but claims it could handle up to 100
terminals. [12]
A significant improvement to the Euclidean Steiner tree problem was made by Arora
in 1996, who proved a (1 + ϵ)-approximation algorithm.[4] Many further improvements
on the precision came after this fact, but few made significant improvements. However,
the implementation of the algorithm was slow, and further improvements have been
made in this direction.
33
==PAGE:39==
5.3
Exact Solutions to the Steiner Tree Problem
The algorithm Melzak gave was an exact solution to the Steiner Tree problem, but
because of the size of the solution space proposed, it is not a practical algorithm.
In 1985 Winter published his GeoSteiner algorithm, which is also an exact algo-
rithm, and is based on Melzaks discoveries. The algorithm is only concerned with the
Euclidean space.[37] Like Melzak, Winters algorithm generates all full topologies from
a subset of the terminals and then combines them to make a set of possible solutions.
This is possible, as it is proven that for each possible full topology, i.e. each possible
adjacency matrix for the subset, at most one full Steiner tree can be found. As a full
Steiner tree must have k−2 Steiner nodes for k terminals, the geometry is more limited.
Not every full topology has a full Steiner tree. From the set of possible solutions, the
smallest is the minimum Steiner tree. For a subset of two terminals, there is only one
full topology, which is when they are connected by an edge. The direct connection is
also the full Steiner tree. For 3 terminals there is also only one full topology, as they
must be connected by a Steiner point. Therefore, the angle between the three points
must be less than 120◦, or the minimum way to connect them would be without the
addition of a Steiner point.
The question is then, where this Steiner point is placed.[33] Here it can easily be
found, as one would find Fermat’s point. This is found by making an equilateral triangle
of two of the terminals and a third point, which is inserted. The third point must lie
on the opposite side of the edge between the two terminals, from where the last unused
terminal is placed. The intersection of the straight line, that is created by the last
terminal not in the triangle and the third inserted point, and the circle circumscribing
the equilateral triangle, is the placement of Fermat’s point, and hence our Steiner point.
Its placement can also be found by creating all three equilateral triangles as described,
Figure 17: An example of how to find the Fermat point. The orange triangles are the
three equilateral triangles created and the blue node is the found Fermat point.
34
==PAGE:40==
and then drawing each of these straight lines going from the triangle’s inserted point to
the unused terminal. The intersection between these three lines is the placement of the
point.[29] A sketch of what this would look like can be seen in figure 17.
If we have more than three terminal nodes in the subset, then it will always have at
least one Steiner node, which is connected to at least two terminals in a full topology.
If the full Steiner tree exists, then the degree between these three nodes must be 120◦,
and the point can be found like in the case of three terminal nodes. Having found the
placement of this Steiner node, we can reduce the Steiner tree by replacing the Steiner
node and the two terminals connected to it, with a single new ”terminal” node. Then
the process can be repeated until all positions have been found for the full topology.
Now the real improvement that Winter proposes is in the pruning of the full Steiner
trees, and hence he reduces the solution space significantly. Rather than generating
all possible topologies for every possible subset, and then finding the full Steiner tree
(FST), Winter already discards some topologies in their creation, by concluding they
do not have any FST. The test can be run before calculating their Steiner points, which
is a big advantage, as most Steiner points are then never calculated.
In 1996 Winter and Zachariasen further improved the GeoSteiner algorithm by
strengthening some of the pruning tests. This resulted in an algorithm that can solve
instances of up to 140 terminal nodes within an hour.[38]
Since this is an exhaustive search, we can include the extra cost for larger cables,
and then choose the minimum from this. Of course, this might mean that we can not
perform as many pruning tests, as we would risk cutting out a better solution. While
the existence of FST tests would not interfere with our solution, the nonoptimality tests
of FSTs might. Further analysis is needed in order to conclude if the optimal solution
would be pruned, and which pruning tests would be the issue.
Likewise, including
obstacles would not be a large issue. Winter and Zachariasen published in 1999 a paper
on the obstacle-avoiding Euclidean Steiner tree problem. Here they state, that with
minor modifications of the pruning tests, their GeoSteiner algorithm can be modified
to work on graphs with obstacles as well.[40]
It is also interesting to note, that this algorithm cannot be adopted to solve problems
like the k-Steiner tree in the Euclidean setting. The main problem is that a Steiner node
may have a degree of 4 or 5 in this problem. As the GeoSteiner algorithm is based largely
on the fact that a Steiner node can only have degree three, it cannot be easily modified
to fit the problem. [8]
While we are not interested in applying the Steiner algorithm directly to our prob-
lem, it does provide some interesting insights into designing an algorithm for geometric
problems. They utilize the rather fixed geometry for the Steiner points to build their
pruning tests. Furthermore, they utilize the fact that each full topology can have at
most one full Steiner tree in order to limit their solution space.
5.4
Fixed Steiner Point positions
Kou, Markowsky and Berman published an approximation algorithm in 1981 that spec-
ifies a fast algorithm to find Steiner trees, where the Steiner points placements are
predefined.[30] We will refer to this algorithm as the KMB-algorithm. Their approach
constructs a complete graph between the terminal nodes. The distances for this graph
35
==PAGE:41==
are then calculated by finding the minimum paths between the terminals in the original
graph. A minimum tree is then found in the complete graph, and a new subgraph from
the original graph is constructed. This subgraph utilizes the paths from the original
graph corresponding to the edges used in the minimum tree of the complete graph. As
this graph is not guaranteed to be a tree, a minimum spanning tree is found from the
newly constructed subgraph. The last step is then to delete any leaf vertices, that are
not terminal nodes. This graph is guaranteed to have a weight that is at most 2(1−1/l)
times bigger than the true minimum Steiner tree. Here l denotes the number of leaf
nodes in the minimum Steiner tree.[30] If we are working in the Euclidean plane with
no obstacles the complete graph’s edge weights will simply be the distance between the
pair of points, as any other route would be larger by definition. The algorithm then
reduces to the minimum spanning tree. Therefore by this, the minimum spanning tree
is at most 2(1−1/l) times bigger than the minimum Steiner tree. While this makes the
algorithm ill-suited to approximate the IACL problem, it could be useful, if there are
obstacles that we wish to avoid.
In 2016, an extension of this algorithm was published by Fujita, Jin’no, and Kimura
to include a measure of edge-betweenness. Edge-betweenness is a measure that quan-
tifies how central an edge is to a network. Essentially, it measures how often an edge
is used in a shortest path between two nodes, and is therefore relevant for our Steiner
tree, as we wish to minimize the overall weight of the tree. Therefore, we need to uti-
lize the same edge for many paths to minimize this cost. They go on to utilize this
edge-betweenness to define a new cost for each edge by subtracting it from the original
cost. Afterward these new costs are then used by the KMB-algorithm as before. For
most problems in the benchmark Steiner tree problems they tested, the new algorithm
performed better with lower error rates.[19] The idea of adding edge-betweenness as a
measure could be interesting to us. Instead of adding edge-betweenness, a measure of
closeness to the OSS could be included, to develop a fast heuristic.
If we were to define the nodes around the obstacles as our Steiner nodes, we could
utilize this algorithm to find the layout. However, this does not take cable capacities
into account. If we wish to take this into account, we essentially have a fixed charge
flow problem, in the step where we simply had to find a minimum spanning tree. After
this has been found, the steps can be continued. However, as we saw earlier the fixed
charge problem is also NP-hard.
5.5
Balanced solutions
Another difficult aspect of the inter-array cable layout problem is the need for balanced
solutions. Quite often we wish to make sure each cable going into the OSS carries the
same amount of electricity. If we wish to find a Steiner tree layout, we would need to
find k Steiner trees of size m, all of which have the OSS node included.
If we already know k, we would know m and vice versa. If we further know which
nodes must be in which tree, the problem is reduced to k instances of the Steiner tree
problem. Furthermore, we do not need to worry about the cable capacities if we know
k and m. Therefore, we could try for all k = {1, .., n}, though most likely, the true
solution would have a k value, that is close to the capacity of the small cable. Assuming
it is possible to test all possible k’s, the main issue becomes how to partition the nodes
36
==PAGE:42==
into each of the k sets.
What could be done is using the GeoSteiner algorithm, but in the construction
phase, only allow constructions that result in k separate Steiner trees. Before evaluating
each tree, we would then connect the OSS to each of them. From these, we can choose
the minimum. As we generate all possibilities, we do not need to know k beforehand,
but if we do, we can reduce the solution space significantly.
The problem of finding a balanced solution is similar to the capacitated Steiner tree
problem. This is also often called the edge-capacitated Steiner tree problem and defines
a constraint for each edge specifying that the number of paths reaching distinct leaf
nodes must be less than a constant k. Even with fixed uniform capacities, this problem
is NP-hard if the lengths of the edges are not zero.[6]
5.6
Multiple OSS positions
An interesting problem arises when multiple OSSs need to be placed. Instead of finding
a single Steiner tree, we must now find two or more disjoint Steiner trees, such that
their total weight is minimum. This is also what we call the k-component Minimum
Steiner Forest problem. However, the terminal set has not been partitioned beforehand,
and therefore we must find a partitioning, such that the resulting Steiner forest is the
minimum. We will only consider how to partition the set into two clusters.
We see for the minimum spanning tree, that the partitioning is easy. To partition
it, we simply need to remove the longest edge from the minimum spanning tree over all
the vertices. This will give us two disjoint trees, which together span the entire vertex
set, and whose total weight is minimum. However, if we are trying to find two Steiner
trees, this is not possible.
5.6.1
Partitioning by removal of the longest edge
Finding the 2-component minimum Steiner forest can not be done by making one min-
imum Steiner tree, and then removing the longest edge. A simple example where this
is possible could be the connection of 4 vertices, as seen in figure 18.
Figure 18: Example of a graph in which removing the longest edge gives you the 2-
component minimum Steiner forest. The light blue nodes are Steiner nodes and light
green terminal nodes.
Here the longest edge is the edge between the two Steiner nodes. If we remove this
edge the two resulting Steiner trees, made for each of the two groups of nodes, have a
37
==PAGE:43==
minimum total weight. The two trees would not include the two Steiner nodes at all.
However, the minimum forest cannot always be found in this way. A similar example
as before can be made, but now the longest edge is not r, but the edge HI, as can be
seen in figure 19.
Figure 19: Example of a graph in which removing the longest edge does not give you a
partitioning, which produces the 2-component minimum Steiner forest. The light blue
nodes are Steiner nodes and light green terminal nodes.
Again the best partitioning in this case would be the two nodes on the left together
and the two nodes on the right. However, the partitioning will group the upper right
node for itself and the rest together.
We can explore this mathematically as well. Assuming all edge distances are one
except for the HI edge, which has the length 1+ϵ. Assume the minimum 2-component
Steiner forest is still the tree where K and L are connected and I and J. We can find
the size of this tree. Since a Steiner point will always place itself, such that the angles
between its outgoing edges are 120◦, and the edges KG and LG both have the length
1, we can use the law of sinus, to get the length of KL:
| KL |= sin(120)
sin(30) =
√
3
For the length of IJ, we can utilize the law of cosine:
| IJ |=
p
1 + (1 + ϵ)2 −2 · (1 + ϵ) · cos(120)
| IJ |=
p
2 + (1 + ϵ)2 + ϵ
So the total weight of the minimum forest is:
√
3 +
p
2 + (1 + ϵ)2 + ϵ
If we remove the longest edge, which in this case is HI, we get a resulting Steiner tree
that connects K, L and J with a new Steiner node M and the I node for itself. We can
calculate the size of the Steiner tree by the formula:
S2 = 1
2(a2 + b2 + c2 +
p
3(a + b + c)(−a + b + c)(a −b + c)(a + b −c))
(26)
38
==PAGE:44==
Where a, b, and c are the side lengths of the KLJ triangle. The formula is derived
by utilizing that the total length is equal to the distance between one of the triangle
corners and the inserted point of the equilateral triangle, which does not share a corner
with the triangle point. We then use simple trigonometric functions, as well as Heron’s
formula for the area of a triangle. The full derivation of the formula can be found in
appendix A.2. We need to find the side lengths of the KLJ triangle. We already have
the length of KL. The length of LJ can be calculated using the trapezoid formed in the
original graph. Then we get the formula:
| LJ |= 1 + 2 · sin(60)
Since we have a 90◦angle, we can use Pythagoras for the last edge:
| KJ |=
p
3 + (1 + 2 · sin(60))2
Evaluating this in the first formula we get:
S = 4.32
So as long as the following holds, this is a counterexample:
√
3 +
p
2 + (1 + ϵ)2 + ϵ < 4.32
which gives us that ϵ < 0.93.
5.6.2
Number of edges to remove
The next we could consider is whether or not it is always a single edge that needs to be
removed. This is true if we were working with the minimum spanning tree, but it does
not necessarily hold true for the minimum Steiner tree. Assume we have a minimum
Steiner tree. Since it is a tree, if we remove one edge we partition the vertex set into
two. We can show that the optimal partitioning, resulting in the 2-component minimum
Steiner forest, will not necessarily be a partitioning, that can be made by removing a
single edge from the optimal Steiner tree.
Assume we can remove two or more edges to create three or more trees, and then
reconnect them to create two trees. We have three sets of vertices A, B, and C. Assume
that there exists a minimum Steiner tree spanning all the vertices within these sets,
which only consists of edges, whose end nodes are within the same set, except for the two
edges eAB and eBC. Now further assume, that the 2-component of our minimum Steiner
forest consists of a Steiner tree made within the set B and a Steiner tree consisting of
the sets A and C with the edge eAC, as the only edge going between the sets. If this is
true, the two optimal Steiner trees have been partitioned by removing two edges from
the original tree, eAB and eBC, and then reinserting an edge that was not in the original
Steiner tree, eAC. This means that the total cost of the Steiner trees made on the AC
partition and B is smaller than the total cost of the Steiner trees made on the AB
partition and C, and smaller than the one made on the BC partition and A. If all the
edges removed connected to terminal nodes, then it would lead to a contradiction, as
we would always be able to create a smaller original graph by utilizing the eAC edge.
39
==PAGE:45==
However, since this might be a Steiner node, it also means that the entire tree within
that set could be different. This can happen if we remove an edge going out from a
Steiner node, as this will then also shift the two other edges going out from the Steiner
node. If this, in turn, is connected to another Steiner node, this node’s edges will be
shifted as well. Hence the weights of the newly created graphs are unknown to us. This
also means that it could be possible to introduce a new edge in the tree to create a
partition that would make the total weight of the forest smaller than if we created a
partition by only removing a single edge from the original tree.
For the same reasons, a Steiner tree cannot be updated in only a few steps, if we were
to reduce some edges costs or similar, as was done in the 1-Steiner tree algorithm. From
the knowledge gathered, it seems once something has been changed in the graph, we
have to find the minimum Steiner tree from scratch, to make sure we have the optimal
solution. However, we cannot exclude, that there might be some methods for updating
the tree, but they would have to be more complex than when updating the minimum
spanning tree.
5.6.3
Minimum Perimeter-Sum
It could now be natural to ask if there exists another way to partition the vertices, to
make sure we get the 2-component minimum Steiner forest. In the article Minimum
Perimeter-Sum Partitions in the Plane the authors explore how to partition a set of
points in the plane into two point sets, such that the sum of the two convex hulls is
minimized.[1] We would then like to know if this partition likewise satisfies our criteria
and produces two Steiner trees of total minimum size.
This is not the case, as a counter-example can be made. For three vertices or less
the partitioning becomes trivial, as you would always simply choose to add the smallest
edge to the graph. This produces the two minimum Steiner graphs, and its perimeter-
sum will be proportional to the edge weight. Therefore, a counter-example must consist
of at least 4 vertices. Since we only have 4 vertices, the construction we are looking for,
forms a partitioning with three vertices in one group and one in the other.
Figure 20: Counterexample: A graph which has a different clustering depending on
whether the goal is a minimum perimeter or a minimum Steiner forest
40
==PAGE:46==
Furthermore, the perimeter-sum partitioning must likewise make a group of three
vertices and one of one vertex. However, they can not be the same vertices as before.
One can quite easily find such a graph simply by trial and error, though the values
always end up lying quite closely to each other in terms of their edge lengths. Such an
example can be seen in figure 20. In this figure, the right-hand side triangle has the
smallest minimum Steiner forest, but the biggest perimeter-sum.
5.7
Summary of Section 5
In this section, we have considered different versions of the Steiner tree problem. We
have gone through some different methods of solving the general Steiner tree problem,
both Chang’s approximation method and Winter’s exact GeoSteiner method. We have
also looked at the Steiner tree problem with fixed Steiner point positions, as this would
be suitable for avoiding obstacles.
Most notably, we spent quite a bit of time on the 1-Steiner tree problem. The method
of determining the one Steiner point to be inserted is interesting when considering how
one might place an OSS in an optimal position. Their use of overlaying Dirichlet cells
and isodendral regions, in general, could be interesting to explore further in the IACL
problem setting.
Lastly, we considered how a set of turbines should be clustered if multiple OSSs need
to be placed, and thereby multiple Steiner trees are produced. For this, we did not find
any good way of clustering. While it is relatively easy for the minimum spanning tree,
for the Steiner tree there was no straightforward approach.
41
==PAGE:47==
6
The problem as a clustering problem
In the following section, we focus on how to solve the balanced problem without adding
Steiner points. The following analysis is motivated by the fact, that we can consider our
inter-array cable problem, as the problem of finding k clusters of equal size, such that
the sum of all cluster MSTs is minimum. We start by considering the problem without
including the position of the OSS but will note how this could be added later.
Now as with any other of our problems, this is considered NP-hard. The decision
version of our problem can be formulated as:
Given a graph G and an integer W, does there exist a spanning k-forest of size at
most W, such that each disjoint subtree contains the same number of vertices?
Naturally, we would allow for each tree to have a size difference of up to 1 vertex, to
allow for uneven numbers. If the decision problem can be solved in polynomial time, we
can solve the main problem in polynomial time as well, as we would need a polynomial
number of W to test. We already know, that an upper limit to this problem would be
the largest weight in the graph, times the number of edges in the resulting graph, which
would be n −k. Similarly, a lower bound would be the smallest edge in the graph times
n −k. A natural step would therefore be to do a binary search on the range of W. This
would slow the complexity by log((n −k) · (max(CG) −min(CG))) if the tolerance is
within an integer. CG is here the set of edge weights.
Given a solution to the decision problem, we can check that it is a valid solution
by counting the vertices in each cluster, ensuring they are the same size and adding
together the total weight, to see if it is below W. This could be done by a breadth-first-
search on each cluster, and then comparing the resulting numbers. Hence this could be
done in O(|V |+2|E|) time or simply O(|V |) time, since we have |E| = |V |−|V |/k edges.
Furthermore, we can reduce the Boolean Satisfiability (SAT) problem to our decision
problem within polynomial time. The SAT problem is concerned with finding a truth
evaluation of a logical formula. If there exists a way to evaluate the formula to true,
the formula is called satisfiable.
Guttmann-Beck and Hassin show that any instance of the SAT problem can be
reduced to an instance of our main problem with weighted edges. They do this by
building an auxiliary graph of the logical formula.[22] This is also what is referred to
as the weighted graph partitioning problem. As mentioned earlier a proof of our IACL
problem being NP-hard, involved proving that the weighted graph partitioning problem
was NP-hard, as it could be reduced to the IACL problem. Therefore, by proving the
weighted graph tree partitioning problem is NP-hard, we are also proving the IACL
problem is NP-hard.
A logical formula consists of variables and clauses. Each clause is a logical formula,
which contains variables and logical operators. Between each clause, a logical AND-
operator sits, which then becomes the entire logical formula. Assume we have n logical
variables and m clauses. The graph they build is of a rather complicated nature with
2(M2 + mM + n) vertices where M = n + m. Furthermore, we set k = 2 and W =
2(M2 + mM + n −1). The goal is then to build a graph, such that the solution to
finding two disjoint partitions of M2 + mM + n vertices each and of total weight W,
indicates a truth assignment, that evaluates the entire formula to true. The following
vertices are constructed:
42
==PAGE:48==
• 2n vertices - 2 for each logical variable xi and xi. Essentially, one indicating the
variable set to true, and the other its negated version set to true.
• Two sets L and E of M2 vertices each.
• A set D of mM vertices.
• m sets Cj with M vertices in each. Essentially we have one set for each clause.
Now on to how we connect them with edges. The following edges are all given weight
1.
• Connect l1 to all other vertices in L and to x1 and x1
• Similarly, connect d1 to all other vertices in D and to xn and xn
• For each set Cj connect c1
j to all other variables ci
j within Cj.
Furthermore,
connect c1
j to each logical variable that occurs in the clause j.
• All vertices in E are then also connected to c1
1
• Lastly, connect each logical variable xi to xi+1 and xi+j and each negated variable
xi to xi+1 and xi+1
To make this complete the rest of the edges are added with length 2 each. To give a
better understanding, the resulting graph for the SAT problem for (x1∨x2)∧(x1∨x2∨x3)
can be seen in figure 21. Here the edges of length 2 have not been drawn. Similarly,
groups of dashed lines indicate that not all outgoing edges from that vertex have been
drawn.
Figure 21: The weighted graph tree partitioning problem graph drawn for the SAT
problem with the logical equation (x1 ∨x2) ∧(x1 ∨x2 ∨x3)
43
==PAGE:49==
We see immediately that a solution can only utilize edges of length 1, as both
spanning trees must together consist of 2(M2 + mM + n) −2 edges, and have a weight
of at most 2(M2 + mM + n −1). From this, we can also conclude, that each tree must
weigh M2 + mM + n −1. We can guarantee this, as if we remove the edges of length
2, we would get a connected graph of 2M2 + 2n + 2mM edges, which all have the same
length. Therefore, any two edges can be removed, and the weight of the resulting graph
would be the same. We would naturally choose to remove the two edges that disconnect
the graph in a way such that we get two connected components. Now a few observations
can be made simply because of the cut-vertices present in the graph:
• All vertices in L must belong to the same tree, just like all vertices in D must
belong to the same tree.
• All vertices in E must belong to the same tree as c1
1.
• All vertices in Cj must belong to the same tree
We call the two trees that need to be found P and Q. We assign all vertices in D to the
tree P. This now has the size mM. We also note that L and E cannot belong to the
same tree as 2M2 > M2 + mM + n. Since E and C1 must belong to the same set, they
cannot belong to P, as they have M2 + M vertices, which combined with the vertices
of D, becomes M2 + M + mM > M2 + mM + n vertices. Therefore, E and C1 belong
to Q, while L belongs to P. Since P now has M2 + mM vertices, only n vertices need
to be added. Therefore, we can also conclude that Cj all belong to Q, as each of these
contains M vertices. The n missing vertices of P are then chosen as a path of x-vertices.
This must be a path for L and D to connect. To construct two disjoint trees, the path
cannot traverse all the x-vertices connecting to c1
j nodes, or the second tree would not
be connected. This means at least one x-vertex connecting to c1
j for each j is in the set
of Q. The tree Q also contains a path of x-variables. Our two sets are:
P = L ∪D ∪Px
Q =
m
[
j=1
Cj ∪E ∪X\{Px}
Where Px is the described path of x-variables and X the entire set of x-variables. If
this is our solution, we can construct the solution to the SAT by utilizing the path of x-
variables in P. For each of these variables, if it is a xi-variable we assign the equivalent
logical variable, i, False, if it traverses a xi we assign the truth value True to i. From
this each c1
j will be connected to at least one variable that has the truth-value True,
as the connected variables will be in the complement of the found path. Hence a truth
value has been assigned to the problem, and the SAT problem has thereby been solved.
[22]
Using the example from earlier, the two sets can be seen coloured red for P and
yellow for Q in figure 22.
44
==PAGE:50==
Figure 22: The resulting partition of the weighted graph tree partitioning problem graph
drawn for the SAT problem with the logical equation (x1 ∨x2) ∧(x1 ∨x2 ∨x3).
In this solution, we get the truth assignment x1 = True, x2 = False and x3 = False.
Which if inserted into the original logical expression, will make the whole expression
evaluate as true.
By this, we can conclude that the decision version of our problem is NP-complete
and the optimization version therefore NP-hard.
A note to make on this problem is that it does not necessarily result in planar
graphs, as we will see when describing different solution methods later on. As we are
only interested in the planar solutions, we will have to take this into consideration, when
considering the different methods.
6.1
Brute-force approach
We consider a brute-force approach’s performance. For this, we consider every possible
combination of subsets for the k-cluster MSTs.
If we have n nodes, and our cable
capacity is k nodes, then we will have to consider partitioning the nodes into n/k sets
of size k each. To start we only consider values of n and k, where n is divisible by k.
The number of different possible sets of k elements are:
n
k

Of these, we could make
 (n
k)
n/k

different combinations of sets. However, these sets are
not all valid, as a combination might include the same nodes in multiple sets. Instead,
we can consider what can be chosen first, then second, and so on. If we have chosen
one set, then k elements of the original set of nodes cannot be chosen. This means we
have n −k choose k, and then after these have been chosen, we have n −2k choose k,
45
==PAGE:51==
and so on. This gives us:
n!
k!(n −k)! ·
(n −k)!
k!(n −2k)! · (n −2k)!
k!(n −3k)! · · · (n −(n/k −1)k)!
k!(n −(n/k)k)!
=
n!
k!n/k
However, each combination here will be repeated n/k! times, which we are not interested
in. This will then be divided to give us:
n!
k!n/k(n/k)!
Since n! is faster growing than k!n/k(n/k)! our growth is still O(nn). However, we
need to check fewer combinations than if we were to check all the
 (n
k)
n/k

combinations.
This brute-force approach might result in a non-planar graph. While before, we could
always get a smaller graph if two edges crossed each other, by simply swapping the
edge’s end nodes, this might result in something unbalanced. Therefore, we would in
most cases, have to swap one of the crossing edges with another edge, that might be
very small, to get a balanced solution. An example of a non-planar optimal solution
can be seen in figure 23, which was made by implementing the brute-force approach.
Figure 23: A non-planar solution to the problem
To apply the brute-force approach, we would need to implement an extra step check-
ing if each solution is planar. When testing this, most solutions ended up planar despite
not being enforced. Therefore, it could be worth implementing the approach, such that
it would only enforce a non-crossing constraint if that constraint was violated in the
found solution. Then we would get an iterative method, that solves the problem multiple
times until the resulting solution is planar.
46
==PAGE:52==
6.2
Graph Tree Partition Problem
In their 2004 paper, Cordone and Maffioli analyzed the complexity of a similar more
general problem: The graph tree partitioning problem (GTPP). This problem concerns
clustering a set of vertices into p sets, subject to different cost functions. Among the
cost functions, they include the min-sum cost function, which minimizes the sum of the
cost of each cluster MST. In the most general version of the problem, no constraint on
the size of each cluster is enforced. This problem is often referred to as the minimum
forest problem. They also consider weight constraints, that limit the total number of
vertices in each cluster to an interval. If we define the interval to a single integer, the
problem reduces to our described problem.
Another constraint they consider is the
root constraint, for which a set of vertices is defined, and each tree must contain one
of these as a root. This could be used to enforce the connection to our OSS position.
The resulting tree is referred to as a well-rooted forest. As we also concluded, they
show that including the weight constraint with a min-sum cost function, makes the
problem NP-hard. Without the balance constraint, the problem can be solved by a
greedy algorithm in polynomial time. Likewise, if we want to solve the rooted problem,
and do not include the balancing constraint, it can be solved in polynomial time by a
greedy algorithm.[14]
For the balanced problem, there exist several approximate algorithms that could be
of use. The best performing algorithm is a greedy algorithm constructed by Goemans
and Williamson, that runs in O(n2 log(n)) time with a guaranteed approximation of
2(1 −1/n).[21] The algorithm is general, in the sense that it can be applied to many
different versions of minimum cost graph covering problems.
They describe it as a
covering problem, as in we must cover the graph by k trees of equal size. However, they
do not just consider trees, but also paths or cycles obeying certain requirements. The
article describes it as an adaptive greedy algorithm, meaning that in every iteration the
edge with the smallest reduced cost is chosen. The algorithm initializes each vertex as
a cluster, and then in each iteration, combines two disjoint clusters by the edge with
the smallest reduced cost. In every iteration the reduced cost is then updated. The
reduced cost is defined as such:
δe = ce −d(i) −d(j)
f(Cp) + f(Cq)
Where each parameter is defined as such:
• ce is the edge cost.
• Cp and Cq are two distinct connected components in the current solution. The
current solution is initialized to being the set of vertices with no edges. A single
vertex is considered a connected component by itself.
• d(i) is a weight on the vertices that is updated iteratively and initialized to 0. The
d weights are updated as such: d(v) = d(v) + δ · f(Cr), for all v ∈Cr. Here Cr is
the newly made connected component i.e. Cr = Cp ∪Cq.
• The function f is any proper function f : 2V →{0, 1} defined before the loop
with the properties: f(∅) = 0, f(S) = f(V \{S}), ∀S ⊆V (symmetry) and for
two disjoint sets A and B: f(A) = f(B) = 0 →f(A ∪B) = 0 (disjointness).
47
==PAGE:53==
The f function is there to enforce our constraints. We have a constraint on the size of
our cluster, which means our f-function might be different, than if another constraint
was imposed. In our case of the graph tree partitioning problem, the following function
is used:
f(S) =
(
1
if | S |̸≡0(mod k)
0
Otherwise
Hence, we are updating each iteration by adding an edge, that will connect two
disjoint components. Because of the defined f function, the connected component will
not be connected to a new component, once it hits the size k. If the size exceeds this, it
will terminate at a size a multiple of k. Of course, the reduced cost δ is only calculated for
edges in components that do not have a multiple of k vertices, or we would be dividing
with 0. Therefore, the algorithm also terminates once all the connected components
reach such a size. To split the components into the correct size, edges are deleted from
each component afterward, such that each has size k.[21]
The approximation factor comes from the fact, that a spanning forest of V vertices
has an average vertex degree of at most (2−
2
| V |). This can be proven by constructing of
graph called H for each iteration of the algorithm. The vertices of H are the components
of the iteration, and the edges are the intersection of edges in the final solution, and
those that are incident to each component.
H = (C, τ(C) ∩F)
Where C is the set of connected components, τ(C) is the outgoing edges of each com-
ponent, and F is the final solution.
All vertices corresponding to isolated inactive
components are deleted from the graph. A component is called inactive if it has a mul-
tiple of k vertices. No leaf nodes in H can be an inactive component. We can see this
by assuming we have an inactive leaf node, v. It has one outgoing edge: ev. We then
partition the graph into N and C −N by the removal of ev. Assume v lies in N. v must
be an isolated vertex in N as we have removed its one edge. Let Ci be all the other
components in N, then f(∪Ci) = 0, since the union would be a set of components from
the solution, and therefore inactive. Therefore f(N) = 0, since v was also inactive.
We also know that the full solution C would be inactive f(C) = 0, therefore by f’s
symmetry property we get: f(C −N) = f(N) = 0. Since both the set C −N and N are
inactive, we could never have an edge ev in the final set, ev ∈F. This happens because
we end the algorithm by splitting up the solution into smaller inactive components.
F has therefore by construction, only edges which if removed would leave at least one
active component. Therefore we have a contradiction, as there would not be an edge in
F between two inactive components. From this, we can consider the degree of all active
components in H:
X
v∈CA
dv =
X
v∈C
dv −
X
v∈CI
dv
Where CA is all active components, and CI is all inactive components. Since H is a
forest, we have a maximum number of edges: |CA|+|CI|−1. Furthermore, isolated inac-
tive components have been removed, and they cannot appear as leaf nodes. Therefore,
48
==PAGE:54==
each inactive component has a degree of at least two. Using this we get:
X
v∈CA
dv ≤2(|CA| + |CI| −1) −2|CI| = 2|CA| −2 = (2 −
2
|CA|)|CA|
Since the active components are always limited by the number of vertices, we get:
X
v∈CA
dv ≤(2 −2
|V |)|CA|
(27)
This proves the upper bound for the graph H’s summed degree, and hence its average
degree for our active components.
This can be utilized to provide an upper bound of the solution by constructing the
dual problem for each iteration. In this, our dual variables yS ≥0 are limited by the
edge cost ce, as these were our weights in the objective function in the primal problem:
X
S:e∈τ(S)
yS ≤ce,
∀e ∈E
Where τ(S) is the set of edges incident to the component S. So the constraint sums all
yS variables, for which its set has e as an outgoing edge. When f(S) = 1 our yS value
will try to become as large as possible, as we wish to maximize the objective function
P
S⊂V f(S)yS, and we see that ce = P
S:e∈τ(S) ys. Therefore:
X
e∈F
ce =
X
e∈F
X
S:e∈τ(S)
ys
The right-hand side’s double sum essentially sums all the ys variables of active sets in
the current iteration, since we are only looking at those, who have outgoing edges in
the final solution. Each variable is summed once for each outgoing edge it has. The
amount of outgoing edges a component has in H is | F ∩τ(S) |. Since no active subsets
S has ys = 0, we can replace the double sum with:
X
e∈F ′
ce =
X
S⊂V
ys· | F ∩τ(S) |
When increasing the solution, this will increase by P
c∈C:f(C)=1 δ|F ∩τ(C)|, as we add
δ to the dual variable of all the active components. We see that:
X
v∈CA
dv =
X
C∈CA
|F ∩τ(C)|
By the definition of which edges to include in H. Therefore, if we multiply our equation
27 from earlier, we get:
δ
X
v∈CA
dv = δ
X
C∈CA
|F ∩τ(C)| ≤δ(2 −2
|V |)|CA|
Since P
c∈C:f(C)=1 δ|F ∩τ(C)| was the iteration’s increase, we see that it is bounded by
δ(2 −2
|V |)|CA|. Therefore, the entire solution must be bounded by this factor.[21]
49
==PAGE:55==
6.3
Euclidean Separators and their Application
In 1979 Lipton and Tarjan proved a tight bound for what is known as the planar
separator theorem. The theorem states, that any planar graph can be partitioned into
two smaller graphs, by removing a small subset of vertices, such that no edge has its
starting vertex in one set and end vertex in the other. Lipton and Tarjan proved that
the separator (the number of vertices removed to separate the graph) is of size O(√n),
where n is the number of vertices in the graph. Furthermore, we can ensure that each
subset created consists of at most 2n/3 vertices. This is extremely useful, as one can
then develop divide-and-conquer methods, using these separators to divide the problem
into subproblems.[31]
Of course, it is not so simple in our case. All our vertices could potentially connect
to each other, making it a non-planar graph. Therefore, the theorem cannot be applied
directly. However, a technique that is often used, is applying the separator theorem to
the Voronoi graph of the points instead. The Voronoi diagram is a partitioning of the
plane into n regions. Each region is defined for a point, p ∈V , such that any point
within this region is the closest to p of all points in V .[15] This graph will by definition
be planar. Furthermore, we need to consider what a good separator is in our problem.
Naturally, this would be a separator, that divided the problem into two independent
smaller problems.
Then the question is whether or not the optimal solution has such a separator at all.
To answer this, we would first like to explore, how separators are used in a few other
problems.
6.3.1
Planar Facility Location Problem
In their 2015 paper, Marx and Pilipczuk explore how to apply the separator theorem
to the planar facility location problem. For the facility location problem, the goal is
to choose a set of depots, that together cover all customers at a minimum cost. Their
main result states that the Disjoint Network Coverage problem, which is a general facility
location problem, can be solved in dO(
√
k)(cn)O(1) time, where d is the number of depots.
This problem consists of finding a family of objects (depots) of size exactly k, such that
the cost is minimized. They then go on to prove, how this result can be applied to
many similar problems.[32] Such as the packing connected sets problem, where G is a
planar graph and D is a family of connected sets of G, or several geometric problems
involved with finding k sets of simple polygons that cover all vertices. They show that
these problems can be reduced to the facility location problem, by making a planar
graph taking each corner of the simple polygon as a vertex in G and every boundary
edge of a polygon as an edge in G. A similar approach could be made for our problem
by precomputing all possible cluster MSTs, and then utilizing these as our connected
sets. However, this would mean the preprocessing step would take O(nn) time, which
makes it no different from the brute-force approach.
Marx and Philipczuk continue to describe an algorithm for the disjoint network
coverage problem. The algorithm is based on the fact, that they can prove the optimal
solution has a guarded separator. A guarded separator is a separator that alternates
between vertices in our depot set, and then vertices in the Voronoi diagram created.
50
==PAGE:56==
Essentially, they prove that there exists a guarded separator, that only consists of
depots belonging to the optimum solution, and can thereby apply a searching-over-
separators strategy, which will be described later.[32] The main reason for the success
of the algorithm, is that they manage to find a set of separators that have less than
(2d)15
√
k elements, where d is the number of depots. Within this set they can guarantee
that there lies a separator, which only includes depots from the true solution. Once
they have a way of creating this set, they have a limited set of separators, such that for
each of them a solution can be found by applying it recursively.
The way they find this group of separators is not simple. They start with a planar
triangulated embedding of the graph G. They then set out to find a set of faces, that
they call important faces.
The number of these important faces is at most d4.
To
construct these faces they construct something they call the Voronoi diagram, but it
is slightly different from the Voronoi diagram previously mentioned. For a subset of
depots F ⊆D, they define first the Voronoi partition MF , with each region denoted
MF (p). This is done as usual, meaning they partition the graph such that each point
lies within a region, p, if the point is closest to that object of all the points in the set F.
It is important that the objects within F are pairwise disjoint, or we would not be able
to define the distances of points in their intersections. Once, the partitioning has been
constructed, they move on to what is called the Voronoi pre-diagram. To construct the
Voronoi pre-diagram they do the following:
1. Construct the dual graph of G.
We call this G∗.
In this case, a dual graph
means that each face from G becomes a vertex, and every edge between two faces
becomes an edge between the corresponding vertices.
2. For each p ∈F construct a tree Tp for the edges in G, such that we start with
an arbitrary tree made up of the points of the object, p, with an arbitrary point
chosen as the center. Then for each v ∈MF (p) we add the unique shortest path
from v to the center.
3. Each edge in our dual graph, which corresponds to an edge in the constructed
tree is removed.
4. Now every vertex with degree 1 is removed until we only have vertices left of
degree 2.
This pre-diagram can be further reduced to our Voronoi Diagram by replacing every
vertex with degree 2, with a direct edge going between its neighbours instead. Then our
Voronoi diagram has degree three. Since we started out with a triangulation it cannot
have a vertex of degree more than three.
Each of these vertices can be defined as a singular face of type-1, -2 or -3. For each
subset F there exists at most 2 singular type-1 faces for a set of triple objects in D, 1
singular type-2 face for a set of triple objects in D and 1 singular type-3 face for a set of
quadruple objects in D. A simplified definition of the three types can be given as such:
As each face corresponds to a vertex with degree 3, they each have three sides, that can
belong to different Voronoi partitions. If all three sides belong to different partitions,
it is a type-1. If two of them belong to the same partition, a type-2 and if all three
51
==PAGE:57==
belong to the same partition it is a type-3 face.[32] Since each of these faces is limited
in number the maximum amount of faces becomes:
|ε| ≤2d(d −1)(d −2) + d(d −1)(d −2) + d(d −1)(d −2)(d −3) = d2(d −1)(d −2) ≤d4
Our separators can then be constructed by choosing an object, p1, in F, then a vertex,
vf1,1, of one of the faces from our group ε, then the face itself f1, then a second vertex
of the same face, vf1,2, and then a new object from F, p2, and so on. When moving
between faces, e.g. vf1,2−p2−vf2,1, these must lie in the same Voronoi partition MF (p).
However, this does not answer how we are sure that at least one of these separators will
have a set F only consisting of depots chosen in the optimal solution.
To show this, they prove that in the constructed set of separators, there exists at
least one balanced separator made by each subset F ⊆D of size k. Since this holds
true for every subset F of size k, we know that at least one of the separators will
consist of only elements in the optimum solution, as this separator will come from an
F, which only contains depots used in the optimal solution. To prove this is true, they
first assert that there exists a balanced noose λ in the constructed Voronoi diagram,
which has a length of at most
p
4.5 | V (H) | ≤3
√
k. A noose in H is a directed closed
curve that only intersects H in its vertices, and visits every face in H at most once.
From such a noose a separator can be constructed as just described by using the visited
faces, and face vertices on the noose. Once the separator has been constructed, we can
further construct a guarded separator, which is simply a set of objects from D, and a
set of objects from V (G), by utilizing the elements from the defined separator. Since we
started with a noose that was limited in size and was balanced, the resulting guarded
separator also became limited in size and balanced.[32]
Our problem cannot be explored in such a way, as we cannot define a suitable
guarded separator. For our problem, it would not be natural to include some of the
turbine vertices in the separator, as we would then exclude these from the sets. We
would need a good strategy for how to merge the separator vertices back into the
solution. We cannot guarantee, that we only have to connect the separator vertex by a
single edge, as the balancing constraint might be violated. Therefore, the cluster MSTs
might have to be completely redone, and no simple general rules for how to update
these, have been formulated. The matter is then further complicated if we consider
that a separator vertex is not guaranteed to be a leaf node in a cluster MST.
In general, merging two found solutions would be difficult in our case unless the found
solution to the subproblem is a cluster by itself in the overall solution, i.e. disjoint from
the vertices in the rest of the graph. Therefore, we would like to find a separator for
the problem that separates the optimum solution, in such a way that no edges cross the
separator. We cannot define a separator as many applications do, where we alternate
between visiting a face and a vertex while ensuring no edges cross the separator and
keeping it below the O(√n) size because of these reasons.
We could consider traversing the edges of the Voronoi diagram to construct our
separator. This will separate the problem in a suitable manner but does not guarantee
to keep the separator of a suitable size. Since we have multiple infinite length edges from
creating our Voronoi diagram, this must first be dealt with. A common approach to this
is adding three extra vertices to the original graph, which are far out enough so that
the created Voronoi diagram only has three infinite edges. These infinite edges become
52
==PAGE:58==
the boundary between the regions of these three points. In our Voronoi diagram, we
then remove these edges and add vertices to every intersection of edges. This defines
the graph on which we would like to apply the separator.[32]
The question still stands, whether or not this separator exists in the optimal solution.
As mentioned, we cannot guarantee its size. If we have an optimal graph of only two
subgraphs spiralling out from the OSS, we get an example, where we do not have a
separator in the optimal graph (figure 24).
Figure 24: Spiral solution for which no O(√n) sized separator divides it into two disjoint
trees.
However, such a graph would most certainly never occur, as the export cable would
also have to spiral to not cross any of the other cables. Furthermore, we would barely
ever have only two subgraphs. As soon as another spiral is added to the optimal solution,
a separator can be found of size O(√n) unless k is very big, which is unlikely. This
does however mean, that we might run into this problem in the subproblem, where the
optimal solution only contains two subtrees. We might not be able to find a separator,
that splits the solution into two sets, where no edges cross the separator. Since the
problem has been reduced significantly by this stage an exhaustive search might be
possible. We might also still be able to create a dynamic program for this instance, but
we would need to consider how to merge the two solutions, which as has been said, is
not simple.
6.3.2
Euclidean Traveling Salesman Problem
The Euclidean Traveling Salesman problem (ETSP) shares many of the same difficulties
as our problem. The ETSP is also NP-hard as proven by Papadimitriou in 1976.[34]
This was proven, despite it having been theorized earlier that the Euclidean version
of the TSP could reduce to something easier. Furthermore, dividing the problem into
separate regions will not give two independent sets, as they must be merged into a single
53
==PAGE:59==
route in the end. However, multiple algorithms for this problem have been developed
utilizing separators.
One of the more recent algorithms was developed in 2018. The main finding of this
paper, was that under the exponential time hypothesis the lowest bound for an exact
algorithm’s time is 2O(n1−1/d).[7] The exponential time hypothesis is a conjecture, that
states that the boolean satisfiability problem cannot be solved in 2O(n) time. Before this,
one of the best algorithms was the one presented by Hwang, Chang and Lee, which ran
in O(n
√n) time. This algorithm will be presented in the next subsection. An algorithm
running at the same time complexity was developed simultaneously but utilized the fact,
that there cannot be too many long edges running close to each other in the optimal
solution. The 2018 algorithm extends this idea and focuses on finding separators, for
which the optimal solution only crosses a limited number of times. They prove that
there exists a separator in the optimal solution, where the total number of potential
subsets crossing the separator is of size 2O(n1−1/d). They prove that for any point set,
a separator can be constructed, such that the number of points in the set within in a
certain distance of the separator, decreases rapidly as the distance decreases. Since we
cannot have many long edges crossing the separator, having few points close to it, limits
the number of possible combinations of long edges that cross the separator.[7]
What is interesting about this approach, is that they utilize the geometry of the
solution to construct a valid separator. Since we are working with planar solutions, we
know that the solution has a valid separator, but we cannot necessarily state anything
about the edge lengths of our optimal solution, as even the longest edge could potentially
be part of our solution. Take for example a set of points lying on a straight line, where
we are only able to connect the turbines to the ones next to it. Assuming we have to
separate it into two clusters of the same size, only removing the middle edge gives a
feasible solution. However, this edge does not have to be the largest. In fact, it could
be the smallest.
6.3.3
Searching over separators
Hwang, Chang and Lee’s paper on solving NP-hard problems in subexponential time,
also describes a method of solving the ETSP using the searching-over-separators strat-
egy.[26] The algorithm finds all simple cycle separators of the correct size and then
calls the algorithm recursively for each split. Unlike before, we now call the algorithm
recursively for all the found separators rather than just a single separator. This strat-
egy is suitable, when we know a separator exists in the solution, but have no good
methodology for finding the correct one.
For the defined separator made up of the Voronoi edges, this is exactly the case. We
know there exists a separator dividing the solution into two disjoint trees, however, we
have no good ways of finding this separator. Therefore, this strategy could be suitable
for our problem. We mentioned earlier, that we could not guarantee the size of the
separator for the problem where two subtrees must be found. But until the problem
has been subdivided into a subproblem of size 2k, we could utilize only separators of
the size O(√n), reducing our solution space.
As mentioned, the ETSP runs in O(n
√n) time and is therefore faster than our
brute-force approach. However, if we apply the brute-force approach to find the last
54
==PAGE:60==
two cluster MSTs, our worst-case running time would remain O(nn). Furthermore, we
see the importance of keeping the separators a suitable size, as this is what limits the
algorithms’ time complexity.
The algorithm can be implemented as in algorithm 2.
Here we only find separators of a maximum size 2
√
2n.
Algorithm 2 Find all simple separators
1: P = ∅
2: for i = {3..2
√
2n} do
3:
Find S = {s|s ∈V and |s| = i}
4:
for each s ∈S do
5:
if they form a simple cycle then
6:
Divide points into two groups Sext and Sint
7:
if |Sext| ≤2n/3 and |Sint| ≤2n/3 then
8:
P = P ∪s
Algorithm 2 generates all separators for our problem. We then need to use this in
our main algorithm.
Algorithm 3 Solving the problem using simple separators
1: C ←∞
2: G ←{}
3: P ←algorithm 1
4: for s ∈P do
5:
Divide points into two groups Sext and Sint
6:
if |Sext| ≤2k + 2 then
7:
Call algorithm– or find the solution
8:
Returns two cluster MSTs G
9:
else
10:
C1, G1 ←algorithm 2 with V = Sext
11:
if |Sint| ≤2k + 2 then
12:
Call algorithm– or find the solution
13:
Returns two cluster MSTs G
14:
else
15:
C2, G2 ←algorithm 2 with V = Sint
16:
if C > C1 + C2 then
17:
C ←C1 + C2
18:
G ←G1 ∪G2
Unlike the brute-force approach, this guarantees us a planar solution, as we are
dividing the graph in the Euclidean space and ensuring each cluster MST is encased
completely in the defined regions. While not using simple cycle separators, the com-
plexity still holds, as the amount of separators in each function call is still bounded by
O(nO(√n)), since we are only searching for separators of size O(√n).
55
==PAGE:61==
6.4
Including the OSS
In the above section, we have ignored that each cluster needs to be connected to the
OSS. We only considered how to cluster the vertices into possible branches, that could
then be connected to the OSS. So the distance from each cluster to the OSS has not
been included when optimizing the cost of the clusters. In the following subsection, we
will give some observations on how this could be included, both when the position of
the OSS is predefined, and when there is a selection of possible positions that can be
chosen. In this part, we only consider the case, where one OSS needs to be placed. We
return to the case of placing multiple OSSs in the next subsection.
If we are doing the brute-force method, we could easily include the position of an
OSS, when creating the individual cluster MSTs. Here we would simply add the length
of the edges from the closest node, of the generated cluster MST instance, to the OSS.
Then the optimal solution would be chosen from a combination of these instances, where
each instance is disjoint except for the OSS node, and the total cost is minimum for all
combinations.
This would not create a lot of increased complexity, as we could do a preprocessing
step, calculating all the distances between the nodes and the different possible OSS
positions. We would then sort this according to the length. Then we would need to
query, which of the possible vertices appear first in the list, and add this to the cluster
MST. If we had multiple possible positions, we would have to try each of them for each
instance, and then choose the minimum combination of all. Then we would also get the
OSS position, which resulted in the smallest tree.
However, as our brute-force algorithm already explodes in complexity, it would be
worth considering a more efficient approach.
We could consider including it in the
searching-over-separators approach. Here we could again simply add the length to the
OSS in the subproblems. If we had multiple possible positions that could be chosen from,
it might create a bit more complexity, as we have to keep track of which solutions belong
to which OSS position, and only combine solutions belonging to the same position.
With regard to the separators, the story might become more complicated. If utilizing
the Voronoi diagram to create the separators, we could ensure that each separator must
include the position of the OSS. This would limit the amount of possible separators in
most cases, but would still cause an issue with proper separation of the problem when
only two clusters are needed. With this approach, we would also have to repeat the
algorithm for each possible OSS position.
6.4.1
Multiple OSS Positions
We get an even more complicated story if we are to include multiple OSSs for the wind
farm. Say we could choose how many OSS positions to utilize, but each opened position
incurs a cost. Each OSS can be connected to a different amount of clusters, but each
tree connected to the same OSS must be of the same size. We assume that the possible
OSS positions have been predefined.
Like before the problem is still NP-hard, as it is simply a generalization of the
previous problem, where the number of possible positions has been reduced to one.
We can still reduce the SAT problem in the same way, we simply have an extra node
56
==PAGE:62==
included, which can connect to any of the other nodes and whose edges have weight
1. This serves as our OSS position, and will not influence how the problem is solved,
except that the overall optimal weight is now +2.
The problem shares many similarities with the facility location problem, but rather
than a fixed number of customers each depot can service, we need to ensure each subtree
going out from the same depot has the same size. We saw earlier that this could be
solved by utilizing separators.[32] However, their result still depends on finding a family
of objects, such that the cost is minimized. For us to adopt a similar approach, we
would need to calculate these objects before running the algorithms, just like we had
to in the simpler case. Having to compute all these different cluster MSTs, would be
computationally too expensive. Normally, the facility location problem can be solved
easier, because each depot’s reach is defined by a shape or similar, rather than mul-
tiple possible cluster MST layouts. Like before finding a good separator is also not
straightforward, as we do not have a good way of merging subsolutions unless they are
completely independent. There seems to be no inherent geometry to suggest such a
separator.
6.5
Summary of Section 6
In this section, we considered how the problem could be solved as a clustering problem.
This was mostly considered in the sense that each branch outgoing from the OSS position
could be considered as its own cluster.
For this, we started by considering a brute-force method and the graph tree parti-
tioning problem, both of which model the problem well. Both methods could also easily
handle balancing constraints, though no efficient solution methods have been found.
Afterwards, most of the section was used for trying to figure out, if there might exist
an Euclidean separator, such that a divide-and-conquer algorithm might be constructed.
However, no such separator could be found. We did consider the usage of the searching-
over-separators strategy, which could solve the problem with a running time of O(n
√n),
if no solutions such as that in figure 24 occurs in its subproblem.
57
==PAGE:63==
7
Discussion
As we transition to green energy, our need for bigger and more flexible energy systems
are needed. This includes offshore wind farms, that have seen a large growth in both
numbers and size. With the increase in complexity of modern wind farm design, new
methods and approaches need to be developed. Therefore, this thesis set out to analyse
the inter-array cable layout problem in the context of other known problems. These
problems and their methods were surveyed, as new methods must be considered to make
efficient cable layouts in the bigger wind farms.
We were unable to develop an algorithm for solving the problem by utilizing the
methods directly. However, there is a lot of knowledge gained from having surveyed
these different approaches, and even more to gain by trying to understand exactly why
the methods could not be applied directly. Quite a few of the methods considered were
originally developed for NP-hard problems, so it is not simply because the problem
is too complex. The overall answer to this lies in the lack of pruning tests and fixed
geometry.
We saw in the shortest path problem with resource constraints, that no suitable
dominance criteria could easily be developed, as we would then risk eliminating the
optimal solution. This seemed to be a consequence of the balancing constraints, that
made it so even if a subsolution was smaller, we could not guarantee the bigger solution
was not needed to make it optimal. The 1-Steiner tree problem had an upper limit on
its vertex degree, and could therefore bound the solution space. However, we cannot
guarantee this for our OSS position, as the optimal solution might connect to more
than 5 vertices. Furthermore, the 1-Steiner tree problem could be solved in polynomial
time, because the tree could be updated efficiently. However, we saw that with little
change in the Steiner tree, the entire Steiner tree might have to change, which limits
the ways to easily update it. For the various Steiner algorithms, we saw that they relied
on Steiner points always having degree three, and thereby being able to find all possible
full Steiner trees - one for each full topology. However, we cannot easily formulate a
similar definition for the IACL problem, and therefore also not prune any topologies
systematically. Similarly for the clusters, we saw that no separator could be found,
that divided the optimal solution into independent sets. Furthermore, no easy way of
merging the subproblems was found, as we could not eliminate any possible connections
between the two sets. This meant that for each separator, every way of merging the
solutions had to be tested, making the problem no better than a brute-force method.
Likewise, for the ETSP we could formulate a separator algorithm because a criteria
could be defined, which stated that the solution would only have a few long edges
running close to each other. Again this was not a criteria we could impose.
This boils down to one important observation: Including cable capacities for the
problem leaves us unable to prune many types of layouts, that would have been pruned
in other circumstances.
Interestingly, while it is often the planarity constraints, that are credited to giv-
ing poor run times in MILP formulations, in our analysis it was the cables capacity
constraints, that caused the most trouble. Therefore, in every section, the capacity
constraint was also relaxed to some degree. The capacity and balancing constraints are
always connected, though with the balancing being more strict than the capacity con-
58
==PAGE:64==
straint. Therefore, we also often simply excluded the capacity constraint, when testing
balanced solutions, as we would fix the length of each branch beforehand. It is also
interesting to note that without the cable capacities, we would always have a planar
solution. So the risk of finding a non-planar layout is introduced with the cable capacity
constraints.
In figure 25 are a few examples of optimal solutions, that could occur here, but
might be excluded in another version of the problem.
Figure 25: Three different optimal layouts, that might not be possible, if we were looking
for a minimum spanning tree. The first two have capacity 2 and the last capacity 1 on
their small cables.
The optimality of all these solutions is dependent on the cost and capacity of the
cables, and would therefore change if these parameters changed sufficiently, despite the
positions of the turbines remaining unaltered. It would be interesting to invest some
time looking into the effect, these parameters have on the layout, as this might help
exclude some geometries.
8
Conclusion
We have gone through quite a few problems, that in one way or another shared proper-
ties with our IACL problem. We started looking into the general network optimization
problems, such as the vehicle routing problem, the shortest path problem and the min-
imum cost flow problem, as well as how these problems may approximate the true
solution. We then went on to analyse the Steiner tree problem, both general methods
of how to solve it, and the 1-Steiner tree problem to analyze how an optimal placement
of the OSS could be decided. We also considered how to cluster the vertices by Steiner
trees, but could not find any system. In the last big section, we considered the problem
as a clustering problem and searched for different strategies using separators to solve it.
When trying to apply the methods to our problem, the main obstacle that we faced,
was the lack of ways to prune our solution space. All algorithms considered utilized
some attribute of the solution to limit the number of feasible solutions to test. We
were not able to formulate such tests and therefore, could not improve much on basic
brute-force approaches.
59
==PAGE:65==
However, the problem is complicated by nature and has many variations and real-life
considerations that have yet to be explored. Within the surveyed articles, there are still
many interesting and useful ideas that could help solve some aspects of the problem.
The theory read will no doubt be useful in creating the next framework, for solving the
problem on the growing wind farms.
We also mainly considered exact solutions to this problem, as industry partners
often wish to find the exact solution. However, as wind farms continue to grow, the
willingness to use approximate methods might also grow.
9
Further Work
Even though this thesis only touched on some methods that could be considered while
developing algorithms for the inter-array cable layout problem, the amount of theory
that could be explored within these fields alone is immense.
With modern MILP solvers and the complexity of the problems we have considered,
it would be a bit unlikely that an efficient algorithm could be formulated, from what
we have researched in this thesis alone.
If so it would be in the heuristic space or
when extra layers are added such as obstacles, which might be ill-suited for the normal
formulations. Both of these topics have been briefly touched on during this thesis, but
there are plenty of more methods, that could be explored.
We have assumed that the wind turbines could be placed anywhere within the farm’s
boundaries, which has meant that the algorithms we searched for should be able to take
any layout into account.
This has been a limiting factor since no geometric truths
can be derived.
However, real-life layouts are not randomly placed, but optimized
according to the wake effect. It has already been noted, that while both optimizing the
wake effect and the cable layouts separately are NP-hard problems, they do affect each
other’s outcome. With holistic wind farm design becoming more researched, it could be
worth analyzing the two problems together. As a first step, it would be very interesting
to see if the wake optimization provided some geometry, which could be used for the
development of more efficient methods for the cable layout optimization.
There is also quite a bit of work still to explore, on how the optimal layout responds
to different variations. With this, I mean analysing if there exists a structure for the
solution that could be updated without having to redo the whole problem when extra
vertices are inserted. It also means exploring if some isodendral regions could be defined
for the OSS positions like in the 1-Steiner tree problem. Furthermore, it could mean
analysing how sensitive the optimal tree is to perturbations of the vertices. If we can
conclude anything from these different concepts, we would be in a much better place
for actually constructing a framework.
Lastly, while we in this thesis explored problems that were similar to the IACL
problem, it could be worth exploring solution methods to problems that shared similar
constraints to that of the cable capacity constraint. As this constraint seemed to be the
biggest reason no pruning could be made, it would be interesting to consider other prob-
lems that shared similar constraints. This would not need to be a problem that could
approximate the IACL problem, but rather problems that shared similar limitations.
60
==PAGE:66==
References
[1]
Abrahamsen, M. et al. “Minimum Perimeter-Sum Partitions in the Plane”. eng. In:
Discrete and Computational Geometry 63.2 (2020), pp. 483–505. issn: 14320444,
01795376. doi: 10.1007/s00454-019-00059-0.
[2]
Ahuja, R. K. “Algorithms for the simple equal flow problem”. eng. In: (1997).
[3]
Ahuja, Ravindra K., Magnanti, Thomas L., and Orlin, James B. Network flows
: theory, algorithms, and applications. eng. Pearson Education, 2014, 846 s., ill.
isbn: 1292042702, 9781292042701.
[4]
Arora, S. “Polynomial time approximation schemes for Euclidean TSP and other
geometric problems”. eng. In: Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science - Proceedings (1996), pp. 2–11. issn: 02725428. doi: 10.1109/SFCS.
1996.548458.
[5]
Bauer, J. and Lysgaard, J. “The offshore wind farm array cable layout problem: a
planar open vehicle routing problem”. eng. In: Journal of the Operational Research
Society 66.3 (2015), pp. 360–368. issn: 14769360, 01605682.
[6]
Bentz, C., Costa, M. C., and Hertz, A. “On the edge capacitated Steiner tree
problem”. eng. In: Discrete Optimization 38 (2020), p. 100607. issn: 1873636x,
15725286. doi: 10.1016/j.disopt.2020.100607.
[7]
Berg, M. de et al. “An ETH-tight exact algorithm for euclidean TSP”. eng. In:
Arxiv 2018 (2018). issn: 23318422. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1807.06933.
[8]
Brazil, M. et al. “Generalised k-Steiner Tree Problems in Normed Planes”. eng.
In: Algorithmica 71.1 (2015), pp. 66–86. issn: 14320541, 01784617. doi: 10.1007/
s00453-013-9780-5.
[9]
Cazzaro, D., Fischetti, Martina, and Fischetti, Matteo. “Heuristic algorithms for
the Wind Farm Cable Routing problem”. eng. In: Applied Energy 278 (2020),
p. 115617. issn: 18729118, 03062619. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115617.
[10]
Cazzaro, D., Koza, D. F., and Pisinger, D. “Combined layout and cable optimiza-
tion of offshore wind farms”. eng. In: European Journal of Operational Research
311.1 (2023), pp. 301–315. issn: 18726860, 03772217. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.
2023.04.046.
[11]
Cazzaro, D. and Pisinger, D. “Balanced cable routing for offshore wind farms with
obstacles”. eng. In: Networks 80.4 (2022), pp. 386–406. issn: 10970037, 00283045.
doi: 10.1002/net.22100.
[12]
Chang, Shi-Kuo. “Generation of Minimal Trees with a Steiner Topology”. und.
In: J Assoc Comput Mach 19.4 (1972), pp. 699–711. issn: 1557735x, 00045411.
[13]
Copernicus Climate Change Service, (C3S). 2024: European State of the Climate
2023, Summary. Accessed 6/6/2024. doi: 10.24381/bs9v-8c66.
[14]
Cordone, Roberto and Maffioli, Francesco. “On the complexity of graph tree par-
tition problems”. eng. In: Discrete Applied Mathematics 134.1-3 (2004), pp. 51–
65. issn: 18726771, 0166218x. doi: 10.1016/S0166-218X(03)00340-8.
61
==PAGE:67==
[15]
De Berg, Mark et al. Computational geometry: Algorithms and applications. eng.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 1–386. isbn: 3540779736, 3540779744, 3642096816,
9783540779735, 9783540779742, 9783642096815. doi: 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 -
77974-2.
[16]
Donovan, P. et al. “Degree-constrained network flows”. eng. In: Proceedings of
the Annual Acm Symposium on Theory of Computing (2007), pp. 681–688. issn:
07378017. doi: 10.1145/1250790.1250889.
[17]
EWEA, European Wind Energy Association. Powering Europe: Wind energy and
the electricity grid. eng. EWEA, 2010.
[18]
Fischetti, Martina and Pisinger, D. Optimizing wind farm cable routing consider-
ing power losses. eng. 2016.
[19]
Fujita, M., Kimura, T., and Jin’no, K. “An Effective Construction Algorithm for
the Steiner Tree Problem Based on Edge Betweenness”. eng. In: Journal of Signal
Processing 20.4 (2016), pp. 145–148. issn: 18801013, 13426230. doi: 10.2299/
jsp.20.145.
[20]
Georgakopoulos, G. and Papadimitriou, C. H. “The 1-Steiner Tree Problem”. eng.
In: Journal of Algorithms 8.1 (1987), pp. 122–130. issn: 10902678, 01966774. doi:
10.1016/0196-6774(87)90032-0.
[21]
Goemans, M. X. and Williamson, D. P. A general approximation technique for con-
strained forest problems. eng. 1992, pp. 307–316. doi: 10.5555/139404.139468.
[22]
Guttmann-Beck, N. and Hassin, R. “Approximation Algorithms for Min-Max
Tree Partition”. eng. In: Journal of Algorithms 24.2 (1997), pp. 266–286. issn:
10902678, 01966774. doi: 10.1006/jagm.1996.0848.
[23]
Hillier, F. S. and Lieberman, G. J. Introduction to operations research. eng. McGraw-
Hill, 2005, 1061 s. +. isbn: 007123828x, 9780071238281.
[24]
Hochbaum, D. S. and Segev, A. “Analysis of a Flow Problem with Fixed Charges”.
eng. In: Networks 19.3 (1989), pp. 291–312. issn: 00283045, 10970037. doi: 10.
1002/net.3230190304.
[25]
Huang, Y. and Wu, W. Steiner Trees. eng. Springer US, 2008, pp. 900–904. isbn:
0387301623, 0387307702, 0387360611, 9780387301624, 9780387307701, 9780387360614.
doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-30162-4_403.
[26]
Hwang, R. Z., Chang, R. C., and Lee, R. C. T. “The Searching over Separators
Strategy to Solve Some NP-Hard Problems in Subexponential Time”. eng. In:
Algorithmica 9.4 (1993), pp. 398–423. issn: 14320541, 01784617. doi: 10.1007/
BF01228511.
[27]
Irnich, S. and Desaulniers, G. “Shortest path problems with resource constraints”.
eng. In: Column Generation 48.4 (2005), pp. 33–65. issn: 14394359, 04156412. doi:
10.1007/0-387-25486-2_2.
[28]
Khuller, S., Lee, K., and Shayman, M. “On degree constrained shortest paths”.
eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science 3669 (2005), pp. 259–270. issn:
03029743. doi: 10.1007/11561071_25.
62
==PAGE:68==
[29]
Kimberling, C. Encyclopedia of Triangle Centers. Used section X(13) which de-
scribes Fermats point. Accessed 27/03/2024. url: https://faculty.evansville.
edu/ck6/encyclopedia/ETC.htmlj.
[30]
Kou, L., Markowsky, G., and Berman, L. “A Fast Algorithm for Steiner Trees”.
eng. In: Acta Informatica 15.2 (1981), pp. 141–145. issn: 00015903, 14320525.
doi: 10.1007/BF00288961.
[31]
Lipton, R. J. and Tarjan, R. E. “A Separator Theorem for Planar Graphs”. eng. In:
Siam Journal on Applied Mathematics 36.2 (1979), pp. 177–189. issn: 1095712x,
00361399.
[32]
Marx, D. and Pilipczuk, M. “Optimal parameterized algorithms for planar facility
location problems using Voronoi diagrams”. eng. In: Lecture Notes in Computer
Science (including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture
Notes in Bioinformatics) 9294 (2015), pp. 865–877. issn: 16113349, 03029743.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-48350-3_72.
[33]
Melzak, Z. A. “On the Problem of Steiner”. eng. In: Canadian Mathematical
Bulletin 4.2 (1961), pp. 143–148. issn: 14964287, 00084395. doi: 10.4153/CMB-
1961-016-2.
[34]
Papadimitriou, C. H. “The Euclidean traveling salesman problem is NP-complete”.
eng. In: Theoretical Computer Science 4.3 (1977), pp. 237–244. issn: 18792294,
03043975. doi: 10.1016/0304-3975(77)90012-3.
[35]
Pillai, A. C. et al. “Offshore wind farm electrical cable layout optimization”.
eng. In: Engineering Optimization 47.12 (2015), pp. 1689–1708. issn: 10290273,
0305215x. doi: 10.1080/0305215X.2014.992892.
[36]
Ramirez, L., Farile, D., and Brindly, G. Offshore Wind in Europe - Key trends
and statistics 2020. Tech. rep. accessed on 22/5/24. Wind Europe, 2021. url:
https://windeurope.org/intelligence-platform/product/offshore-wind-
in-europe-key-trends-and-statistics-2020/.
[37]
Winter, P. “An Algorithm for the Steiner Problem in the Euclidean Plane”. eng.
In: Networks 15.3 (1985), pp. 323–345. issn: 00283045, 10970037. doi: 10.1002/
net.3230150305.
[38]
Winter, Pawel and Zachariasen, Martin. “Euclidean Steiner minimum trees: An
improved exact algorithm”. eng. In: Networks 30.3 (1997), pp. 149–166. issn:
00283045, 10970037. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0037(199710)30:3<149::AID-
NET1>3.0.CO;2-L.
[39]
Wolsey, Laurence A. Integer programming. eng. Wiley, 1998, XVIII, 264 S. (un-
known). isbn: 0471283665, 9780471283669.
[40]
Zachariasen, M and Winter, P. “Obstacle-avoiding euclidean Steiner trees in the
plane: An exact algorithm”. eng. In: Algorithm Engineering and Experimentation
1619 (1999), pp. 282–295. issn: 03029743.
All figures have been created by the author Elisabeth Heegaard.
The front page photo was taken by Martin Larsen Underbjerg, 2023.
63
==PAGE:69==
Appendix
A.1 Numerical Experiments
In the following section, we will go through some of the methods considered to test their
numerical performance against their theoretical.
For these tests, we will utilize the dataset produced by Cazzaro and Pisinger which
contains synthetic instances of wind farms.1 We will utilise the left area of their site
A. A basic version where all the obstacles have been removed and the layout made
convex is utilized with the OSS position fixed. This layout can be seen in figure 26.
The positions of the turbines were chosen randomly from the specified possible turbine
Figure 26: Layout of the left side of site A with no obstacles and fixed OSS position at
the red mark
positions within this layout. The number of outgoing edges from the OSS was also
prespecified.
With regards to the number of outgoing edges from the OSS, it is worth noting what
capacities the cables might realistically have. Cazzaro and Pisinger utilized between 4
and 8 turbines depending on the turbine size with a cheaper one connecting 4-6 and
the bigger 6-8.[11] Bauer and Lysgaard utilized a small cable that could hold up to 5
turbines and a big one that could hold up to 8.[5] This all depends on the turbine size
used. While both these articles use 10-15 MW turbines, Fischetti and Pisinger in their
2016 paper used 2MW turbines resulting in some cables being able to carry up to 14
1Cazzaro, D., Pisinger, D., 2020.
Synthetic instances for large offshore wind farm layout.
http://dx.doi.org/10.11583/DTU.13134731, Dataset on DTU Data
64
==PAGE:70==
turbines’ power.[18]
For the below experiments, we will assume a capacity of between 3 to 12 turbines.
MILP Solver
We solved several scenarios using a mixed-integer linear programming solver. For these
tests, we assume that we have two cable types - one that can connect up to 6 and the
other an unlimited amount. The smallest cable’s cost will be equal to the cable length
and the bigger cable cost equal to 1.5 times its length. We then varied the number of
turbines to connect. We had to pretty quickly switch to a commercial solver as the time
increased too fast and already at 12 turbines it took 43 minutes and at 14 we stopped
the program after a few hours.
n
6
8
10
12
Time [s]
23.0
27.3
27.7
43 min
Table 1: Time for MILP program to solve instances with different amounts of turbines
Therefore, We switched to a commercial solver called CPLEX. This was able to
solve all the instances within a minute, but it did not find an exact solution, though
something very close to the true solution. The results can be seen below.
n
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Cost
9211
16426
16333.4
14553.5
15691.0
21281.5
21060
23374.5
Time [s]
23.0
23.3
23.5
23.2
23.2
25.1
23.7
25.9
Table 2: Time for MILP program with CPLEX solver to solve instances with different
amount of turbines and the corresponding found cost.
Minimum Cost Flow Approximation
As mentioned the minimum cost flow problem would always simply choose the connec-
tion going directly from the OSS to each turbine, since we are in the Euclidean plane.
We further concluded that the optimal solution might not be a subgraph of the Delaunay
triangulation. Since there exist polynomial time algorihtms for the minimum cost flow
problem, we will not be testing the time of the program. Instead, we are going to test
how well it approximates the true solution when applied to the Delaunay triangulation
of the graph. We had to round the distances to integers because of some floating-point
errors that made it unable to terminate.
n
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Optimal
9211
16426
16333.4
14553.5
15691.0
21281.5
21060
23374.5
Min Cost
Flow
16385
27430
26674
31619
28905
37345
37925
35205
Table 3: Total cost of the found solution for the minimum cost flow model applied to
the Delaunay triangulation of the graph compared to the true solution.
65
==PAGE:71==
As can be seen, the difference in optimality only grows with the number of turbines,
which is what is to be expected.
Shortest path with resource constraints
For the implementation of the shortest path with resource constraints, we would like to
test the time complexity. For this, we time the program as it runs 5 iterations for each
value of n. We let n = [6, 8, 10] and k = n/2. Above n = 10 the program became too
time consuming to test within an appropriate amount of time.
n
6
8
10
k
3
4
5
Time [s]
0.000
0.066
12.029
Table 4: Time for the shortest path problem with resource constraints to terminate.
Secondly, we ran the program again but this time we kept k = 4 and instead varied
n such that it was a multiple of k, n =[8,12,16, 20].
n
8
12
16
20
Time [s]
0.065
2.596
68.013
2196.105
Table 5: Time for the shortest path problem with resource constraints to terminate
with fixed k = 4
The last test we did was to keep n = 12 and then vary k such that k=[2, 4, 8].
k
2
4
8
Time [s]
0.000
0.0679
8.547
Table 6: Time for the shortest path problem with resource constraints to terminate
with fixed n = 12
Clustering
To test the performance of the brute force algorithm we ran a number of tests utilizing
different values of k and n. In each instance, n turbine placements were chosen randomly
within the specified zone. The time was only measured for 1% completion of the slower
tests and then multiplied by 100 hence it is an estimate of the total time it would take.
For now, only values of k that n was divisible by were considered.
66
==PAGE:72==
n
12
12
12
14
15
16
16
18
k
3
4
6
7
5
4
8
6
Time [Min]
1,22
0,15
0,00
0,01
6,00
-
0,07
≈4 hours
n
18
20
20
21
22
24
24
k
9
5
10
7
11
6
12
Time [Min]
0,28
-
1,66
-
6,66
-
31,59
Table 7: Approximate time for the brute force clustering method to terminate
As can be seen, the algorithm performs well when k is large relative to n. However,
for even small n-values and k ≤n/3 the program was too slow and could not solve it
within a reasonable time.
In none of these test runs did the planarity become a problem. Therefore, it can be
assumed that the scenario is not very likely.
67
==PAGE:73==
A.2 Derivation of formula for the constructed Steiner tree
The following is the derivation of the formula for the length between the points C and
C’, which is equal to the length of the size of the Steiner tree constructed by the three
points A, B, C and the inserted Steiner point S.
Figure 27: Figure of the triangle with labels.
By the law of cosine:
| CC′ |2= a2 + d2 −2ad cos(B + 60)
Since | d |=| c |:
| CC′ |2= a2 + c2 −2ac cos(B + 60)
By sum formula:
| CC′ |2= a2 + c2 −2ac(cos(B) cos(60) −sin(B) sin(60))
Since cos(60) = 1/2 and sin(60) =
√
3/2:
| CC′ |2= a2 + c2 −ac cos(B) +
√
3ac sin(B)
By the formula for the area of the triangle ∆= 1/2ac sin(B):
| CC′ |2= a2 + c2 −ac cos(B) +
√
32∆
By the law of cosine:
| CC′ |2= a2 + c2 −a2 + c2 −b2
2
+
√
32∆
68
==PAGE:74==
| CC′ |2= 1
2(a2 + c2 + b2) +
√
32∆
Using Heron’s formula ∆=
p
s(s −a)(s −b)(s −c), where s = (a + b + c)/2, we can
formulate the size of the area as such:
∆=
r
a + b + c
2
−a + b + c
2
a −b + c
2
a + b −c
2
∆= 1
4
p
(a + b + c)(−a + b + c)(a −b + c)(a + b −c)
Inserting this into the formula we get:
| CC′ |2= 1
2(a2 + c2 + b2) +
√
3
2
p
(a + b + c)(−a + b + c)(a −b + c)(a + b −c)
| CC′ |2= 1
2(a2 + c2 + b2 +
p
3(a + b + c)(−a + b + c)(a −b + c)(a + b −c))
69
