==PAGE:1==
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm
robot
Master Thesis
Shu-Han Chien
2024
DTU ELECTRO
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
By
(s222458) Shu-Han Chien
Advisor(s)
Supervisor, Associate Professor at the Electrical Engineering and Photonics Department
of DTU
Education
Master Thesis
Programme
Electrical Engineering
Period
01 February 2024 to 1 July 2024
ECTS
30
Copyright:
Shu-Han Chien 2024
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Christian Andersen, 2018
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering,
Elektrovej 326, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.electro.dtu.dk
Remark
This report is submitted as partial fulfillment of the requirements for grad-
uation in the above education at the Technical University of Denmark.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
With the growth of the global population, the need for food increases accordingly, making
agriculture more important. On the other hand, the transition of the agriculture business
implies fewer people willing to engage in it, especially the youth generation. All of these
factors lead to the demand for agricultural improvements, including methods to make them
more efficient, productive, and less labour-consuming. Meanwhile, the research and de-
velopment of robotics and autonomous systems have blossomed in these decades. The
combination of these seems inevitable. Therefore, automation applications in agriculture
were born, especially robotic ones. This thesis aims to develop an autonomous naviga-
tion system for a farm robot whose missions include exploration (mapping), environment
monitoring, and livestock health inspection. In more detail, the navigation system is im-
plemented on the basis of ROS. Therefore, a communication system with the robot and
all the components in the program will be built. Additionally, a perception system is nec-
essary for any autonomous system, including this project, and this will be analyzed in
this thesis as well. The core of this thesis is the implementation of a mapping system,
which collects all the acquired data from the sensors and displays them on the map in
a comprehensive representation, providing a fundamental platform for the ensuing path
planning. Last but not least, some operations and attempts regarding path planning will
be performed in one of the chapters.
ii
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and motivations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Analysis
5
2.1
State of the art . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Decisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Communication
15
3.1
Involved components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3
Delay test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4
Results and summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Perception of environment
21
4.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.2
Sensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Accuracy and correctness evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
5
Mapping
31
5.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
General design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.3
Coordinates transformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.4
Trajectory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.5
Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.6
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.7
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
6
Path planning
47
6.1
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.2
Conditions for path planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6.3
Results
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.4
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
iii
==PAGE:6==
7
System test
59
7.1
Main program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
7.2
Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
7.3
Test results analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
7.4
Achievement assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
7.5
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
8
Conclusion
79
8.1
Positive results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
8.2
Future works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
Bibliography
81
iv
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
This chapter will discuss the background and the motivations of this project. After that, a
number of objectives of this project will be set and explained. Some limitations will also
be mentioned. Last but not least, an outline of this thesis will be presented to give readers
an overview.
1.1
Background and motivations
With the rapid population growth, human beings have an unprecedented demand for food,
meaning the improvement of agriculture is necessary, including the reduction in invested
workforce and the elevation of efficiency.
At the same time, the fast development of
robotics and autonomous systems techniques has shown its value in different fields, and
agriculture is obviously one of them. In 2023, the value of the agricultural robot market
(around the world) was more than double that in 2018 [1], showing a promising future for
this industry.
Agricultural robot technology has been widely utilized in several branches of agriculture,
including crop farming, livestock and poultry farming, and aquaculture, performing tasks
such as phenotyping, monitoring, management, environmental control, mapping, and
health protection [1].
1.2
Project idea
This master’s project also involves robotics applications in agriculture. The primary pur-
pose is to develop an autonomous navigation system for a four-wheel robot specifically
designed to operate on a farm covered by grass, bushes, and branches and with some
woods, performing patrolling, mapping (exploration), and livestock condition inspection
tasks.
Although the ultimate goal is to build a navigation system, considering the duration of the
master thesis, it is not expected to complete the whole system by the end of the period.
Therefore, a mapping system is chosen as a kind of intermediary goal, which can provide
a potential platform for path planning and ensuing navigation systems. The details of this
mapping system will be elaborated on in chapter 5, and the desired effect will be detailed
in the following section.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
1
==PAGE:8==
1.3
Objectives
This section will focus on the objectives of the whole project, and this can also be seen
as the general direction of it.
1.3.1
General performance
The first requirement of the performance is the speed, namely the processing time of
each frame captured by the depth camera. The process here means transferring all the
obtained sensor data (including odometry and camera) into a map. Ideally, this speed
should not be below 2 FPS. If the path-planning system is implemented to some ex-
tent, then the processing time should include the time of path search and corresponding
visualization on the generated map.
Another requirement is the delay. Specifically, the communication system serves a critical
role in this project, and the delay between different components in the system is a concern
and needs to be taken care of. Otherwise, a large delay could lead to a significant error
in the mapping system. The delay should not be bigger than 50 ns.
Last but not least, the error of the equipped sensor is also a consideration. The error
should be contained in a range so that the subsequent mapping system can get the correct
results. Take odometry, for example. The maximum error is 10 % of the total driven
distance.
1.3.2
Expectations of the mapping system
As section 1.2 states, the primary goal is to build a mapping system. In more detail, the
purpose is to investigate how well a single-sensor (depth camera) perception system can
work and contribute to the mapping system and its applicability to the target use case.
The first requirement of the mapping system is the ability to display all the robot’s
essential information, including trajectory, pose, and environmental information, so that
the ensuing operation can be performed on the built map.
The second requirement is the stability of the map. Specifically, the surrounding infor-
mation projected on the map should be stable enough to provide a qualified platform for
subsequent path planning.
Last but not least, the applicability to a highly unstructured environment is also a
concern. This goal could be achieved by applying a filter or finding suitable parameters
in the mapping system (addressed in chapter 5). Considering the time cost, the whole
mapping system will be tested indoors first and then moved outside if everything goes
well in structured surroundings.
1.3.3
Further intents
If the mapping system is robust and precise enough, then path planning can be performed.
Given the limited period of this project, the expectation could only be finding the most
appropriate location for the next stop of the robot. As for the path connecting the
current location and the next stop, it could be implemented if there is still time before the
deadline.
1.4
Thesis outline
The rest of the thesis is organized as follows. Chapter 2 will summarise the state of the
art of all the related techniques potentially applied in this project. Also, the decisions that
will determine the project’s general direction will be addressed. Chapter 3 explains the
structure of the communication system and associated components and an analysis of the
delay in the communication system, which is one of the objectives mentioned in section
2
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:9==
1.3. Chapter 4 presents all the utilized sensors and performs accuracy analysis on each
sensor to complete one of the established objectives.
Chapter 5 implements the core of this project, the mapping system. Chapter 6 elaborates
on the use of the built mapping system and subsequent operation on it, i.e., path planning.
Chapter 7 tests the mapping system and possible path-planning function in both indoor
and outdoor scenarios to see if the outcome fulfils the expectations. Finally, chapter 8
enumerates all the positive products and discusses future work.
Basically, the order of the mentioned chapters follows the structure in figure 1.1, which is
also the workflow of this project.
Figure 1.1: Main workflow of this project
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
3
==PAGE:10==
4
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:11==
2
Analysis
This chapter will mainly discuss the current research on related techniques. Further de-
cisions will be made based on the analysis of the research to determine the technical
direction and all sorts of platforms for the subsequent chapters.
2.1
State of the art
This section will discuss the state-of-the-art techniques potentially used for this master’s
project, including perception systems, mapping, surface detection, and path planning.
2.1.1
Perception system for mobile robot
This subsection mainly investigates the composition of a perception system and the cor-
responding methodologies. First of all, some mainstream sensors used on autonomous
vehicles or mobile robots will be introduced. Then, related data processing and applica-
tions will be presented.
Popular sensors
A tremendous amount of research has been dedicated to environment perception and
modelling over the last decade. For an intelligent vehicle or mobile robot, cameras, RADAR,
LiDAR, and infrared sensors are mostly used to collect data [2]. GPS is also one of the
common sensors employed in this scenario.
A. RADAR (Radio Detection and Ranging)
The RADAR here refers to millimetre wave RADAR, which uses much longer radi-
ation wavelength than LiDAR and camera, and this empowers it with the stronger
ability to penetrate smoke, fog, and dust in the atmosphere. Therefore, RADAR can
be seen as the first choice in complex environments, such as grass areas in the
woods. However, there are still some limitations on millimetre wave RADAR. One
is the relatively low accuracy. The others will be noisy measurements, which need
to be filtered extensively [2] and the difficulty of recognizing the static objects. Re-
cently, 4D millimetre-wave imaging RADAR has caught the attention of researchers.
With the advantages of height detection, ultra-high sensitivity and high resolution, 4D
millimetre-wave imaging RADAR may replace LiDAR as the core sensor for environ-
mental perception in the future [3].
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
5
==PAGE:12==
B. LiDAR
The working principle of the laser Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) system, which is
in a similar fashion to RADAR system, is to release multiple laser beams, receive the
reflected signal of the object, calculate the distance between the sensor transmitter
and the target, and obtain and analyze the reflected energy, spectral amplitude,
spectral frequency and other information on the surface of the object [3]. LiDAR
has the characteristics of wide field-of-view, high range accuracy, little influence by
light, and anti-electromagnetic interference. However, the drawback of high cost
and sensitivity to precipitation constrains the large-scale deployment in the practical
applications [3].
C. Camera
The camera is one of the most primitive sensors applied to autonomous systems.
The current mainstream vision systems include monocular vision, binocular vision
(stereo vision), multi-vision, and panoramic vision. The camera has the upsides of
low cost, high density of raw data, high resolution, and the capability of extracting
semantic information (including texture, shape, and colour). Therefore, it is widely
used to perform object detection, tracking, and identification. However, the down-
side of the vision system is also apparent, and that is the fact that the performance
of the camera is easily affected by surroundings, particularly light. Obviously, dust
and smoke are also factors that can reduce performance considerably.
D. GPS
The Global Positioning System (GPS) is a space-based navigation system that pro-
vides time and location information. However, this system is not available indoors
and has the possibility to fail in an environment where coverage is blocked by trees
[4]. Generally, commercial GPS receivers have a nominal position accuracy of 3 m
[5].
Data fusion
With the above introduction, it is obvious that the single-sensor system is not sufficient for
most of the autonomous systems applications. Therefore, data fusion and multi-sensor
perception systems are required to compensate for the shortcomings of each sensor. To
create a multi-sensor perception system, data fusion is needed. The most common fusion
applications involve vision, LiDAR, and IMU (Inertial Measurement Unit), and the related
algorithms can be approximately divided into the following types [3]: The weighted aver-
age method, Kalman filter method, The Bayesian estimation method, and Artificial
neural network
2.1.2
Mapping
When it comes to mapping in the autonomous system, SLAM (Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping) will probably be the first one that comes to mind. This subsection will mainly
discuss cutting-edge SLAM-related techniques. The primary goal of SLAM is to solve the
problem of localization and map building in the environment simultaneously, which is one
of the mainstream research methods of current mobile robot positioning technology.
Variants of SLAM
The SLAM techniques can be approximately divided into two major categories: filter-
based SLAM and graph-based SLAM. The principle of the graph-based method is to
turn the SLAM problem whole into a graph optimization task. In more detail, the raw
sensor measurements are replaced by the edges of the graph, which means an edge
6
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:13==
between two nodes is labelled with a probability distribution over the relative location of
the two poses, conditioned by their mutual measurements [6].
The upsides of graph-based SLAM include the ability to provide a more globally optimal
solution and the consistency of the estimated trajectory and map over time, while the
downsides could be high computational cost, risk of falling into local minima (due to the
non-linearity), and high memory requirements (due to storing and processing the complete
graph). Given the inherent limitations of the graph-based method, the filter-based one has
been investigated as the alternative. Under this category, EKF (Extended Kalman Filter)
[7] and PF (Particle Filter) [4, 7, 8] are the most famous methods.
On the other hand, according to the number and categories of sensors involved in SLAM,
it can be divided as follows:
A. Uni-sensor SLAM
Although the research on single-sensor SLAM has been relatively mature, this type
of SLAM technique is still too simple to handle complex or unstructured environ-
ments due to the inherent limitations of each sensor. Under this category, vision
SLAM and LiDAR SLAM could be seen as two of the most developed and applied
methods.
B. Multi-sensor SLAM
The limitations of single-sensor SLAM are obvious and already addressed in sub-
section 2.1.1. Typical types include vision and LiDAR SLAM and vision and RADAR
SLAM. Vision-LiDAR-fusion SLAM shows its performance through several proposed
papers and experiments [3]. A robust two-dimensional localization and tracking
method was proposed based on the combination of 2D-LiDAR and RBG-D depth
camera. Another example is a high-precision localization scheme through dynamic
triangulation by the fusion of 3D LiDAR and a camera. In [3], several examples
of using vision-RADAR-fusion SLAM are presented. One is a position recognition
framework called AutoPlace, which has proven its robustness and significant per-
formance gain on nuScenes dataset. Another one is object detection and tracking
using EKF and feature-level fusion of vision and RADAR.
Map structure and representation
A map is a list of objects in the environment and their locations, and it is usually indexed
in one of two ways, namely feature-based and location-based. Common map representa-
tions include octomap, topological, geometric, semantic, occupancy grid, metric, hybrid,
voxel, point clouds, and elevation maps.
Among these, the occupancy grid map is one of the most classic map representations
(location-based). In [9], an overview of the occupancy grid map is given. The idea of this
method is to assign each cell represented by (x, y) a binary occupancy value specifying
whether or not this cell is occupied with an object. The main utility of this representation
is in post-processing since many of the SLAM techniques do not directly generate map fit
for path planning and navigation. Generally, the dimension of each cell is 5 cm to 20 cm
for indoor robot and 15 cm to 50 cm for outdoor robot [10].
Sometimes, only the occupancy information may not be sufficient for users. Therefore,
other information could be added. Geometric maps can also contain terrain information.
One of the practical implementations is that each cell can hold simple statistics of 3D
points falling in the corresponding region [11]. Another similar example is the elevation
map (2.5D), in which each cell only holds the height information of the corresponding
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
7
==PAGE:14==
region. As a result, this type can be seen as a variant of the geometric map.
2.1.3
Surface detection
Surface detection serves an important role in the whole project since the traversable re-
gion could be seen as one of the most critical criteria for determining the path. Specifically,
this surface detection should be performed on the point cloud since the depth camera is
probably the only sensor that can obtain external information in this project.
A method to automatically generate indoor navigable space using point cloud and its scan-
ner trajectory is proposed in [12, 13, 14]. In more detail, this approach is mainly performed
on a voxelized point cloud. With the analysis of trajectory produced simultaneously with
the point cloud, which is also voxelized and projected to the same spatial structure as the
voxelized point cloud, the interior of the building can be classified into three types, namely,
flat, stairs, and slope surfaces, and the whole building can be divided into several walk-
able or navigable regions subsequently. The experiments done in the paper show the
excellent performance of this approach. The interior of a building is perfectly divided into
the categories mentioned before. However, a potential limitation is that this method may
only work well in this kind of highly structured environment.
Another method is to apply the RANSAC (RANdom SAmple Consensus) algorithm on the
point cloud to perform plane segmentation. This technique is relatively mature and has
already been implemented in several libraries, with PCL (Point Cloud Library) as one of
them. PCL encapsulates the RANSAC-based plane segmentation into a package so that
the user can directly call it to use [15].
2.1.4
Path planning
Generally, path planning can be divided into two main categories, which are global path
planning and local path planning [16]. The former performs a search algorithm on a pre-
defined environment model so that it can guide the robot to reach the destination collision-
freely. Therefore, it is also called offline or static path planning. On the other hand, the
local one is partially or barely aware of the surroundings and needs to react to real-time
information returned by sensors. As a result, it is also called online or dynamic path
planning.
In more detail, path planning methods can be split into more refined categories based
on the above definition and the classification is shown in figure 2.1 [17].
The react-
computing method is usually a local planner, and basically, it plans the next immediate
path or manoeuvre to avoid nearby obstacles on an environmental model distinguishing
between the occupancy. The soft-computing method approximates the optimal path
instead of finding an exact one. In general, this method requires users to tune the param-
eters related to the characteristics of the surroundings to function. One of the features of
this method is the ability to deal with dynamic environments or problems with enormous
variables and high degrees of freedom.
The main idea of the C-space-search method is discretization. This method sees the
working space of the path planner as the space of all states or configurations reachable
by the robot called C-space [17]. Furthermore, this method uses a discrete set of samples
from the C-space, containing the initial and goal states, and then performs a searching op-
eration on it to return a subset of the samples connecting the initial and goal states, which
represents the final path. Last but not least, the optimal-control method addresses the
path-planning problem by using an optimal control approach. In conclusion, the represen-
tative algorithm of each category will be shown in the below list.
8
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.1: Classification of path planning methods
• Reactive-computing-based method: Artificial Potential Field (APF), Velocity Ob-
stacle, and Bug (Bug1 and Bug2) algorithms.
• Soft-computing-based method: Genetic and Swarm Optimizers algorithms.
• C-space-search-based method: Dijkstra and A∗algorithms.
Intuitively, the path-planning problem can be described as recursively finding the most
optimal path from the current location to the next intermediary stop, and the collection of
these stops will be the final path leading to the destination. Therefore, if the path planning
is narrowed down to find the most suitable stop for the upcoming manoeuvre, then a
frontier-based approach could be an interesting solution.
Frontiers are the boundary between unexplored and visited regions. If frontiers and corre-
sponding representation (e.g., the centroid of the frontiers) can be found in each iteration
of the navigation operation, then the robot can be guided to that centroid, and the con-
structing map can be expanded as far as it can until there are no frontiers left on the map.
There are many frontier-based techniques, such as WFD (Wavefront Frontier Detector)
and FFD (Fast Frontier Detection) [18].
2.2
Decisions
The decisions being determined here will heavily affect the direction and details of the
whole project. The decisions are made based on two factors. One is the determination
made by my supervisor, Professor Andersen, such as which robot and what kind of sen-
sors are being used. The other one is the research, which has been done in section 2.1.
Knowing the state-of-the-art of all the necessary techniques potentially applicable to this
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
9
==PAGE:16==
project can be valuable in selecting the most suitable scheme, avoiding the waste of time
and making the implementation more efficient and productive.
The decisions can be roughly split into two parts: hardware and platform and software-
aspect solutions. The former elaborates on what type of robot and what sensor are going
to be used and what software platform is chosen for the development. Furthermore, the
choice of test scenes will also be included in this part. The latter will focus on the mapping
and path-planning systems. Specifically, which mapping method and map representation
are selected will be explained. In addition, algorithms for path planning will be determined
as well.
2.2.1
Hardware and platforms
This subsection will primarily introduce two hardware systems, namely, the Capra robot
and the Intel depth robot, the software platform ROS, where the development will mainly
be, and the test scenarios where the main program will be experimented.
Capra robot
A robot called P5-Snapper manufactured by Capra ® Robotics is selected to be the main
hardware platform of this project, determined by Professor Andersen. A brief introduction
to this robot can be seen in table 2.1 and figure 2.2 [19].
Table 2.1: Specifications of Capra robot
Specification
Value
Size (L × W × H)
1106 × 600 × 373 mm
Software
ROS2 & MQTT
Weight
50 kg
Payload
50 kg
Climate conditions
−20 ◦C ∼50 ◦C
Speed
Up to 6 km/h
Wheel diameter
326 mm
Operating time
17.5 h (with 6 batteries)
Range
100 km (with 6 batteries)
Charging time
3 h (with 2 batteries)
Maximum incline
30 %
P5-Snapper is a four-wheel robot equipped with an ultrasonic transducer, wheel odometry,
and GNSS antenna, enabling users to make the map and navigate the robot. From the
mechanical perspective, the wheel design makes it self-stabilized, which means there
are always other wheels on the ground when the robot’s front wheel is lifted because of
obstacles or the rough surface. In fact, the model we use is already out of its life cycle,
meaning it is no longer supported by Capra, especially in the software aspect. As a result,
table 2.1 and figure 2.2 are actually the specifications of the newest model, Hircus. Even
so, due to the high hardware similarity between P5-Snapper and Hircus, their datasheet
should be interchangeable.
Intel RealSense camera
The other major hardware is the Intel RealSense depth camera (D455), which is the only
external sensor installed on the robot. The reason to solely use a depth camera is to
achieve the objective set in chapter 1. The configuration of the camera is shown in figure
2.3a and figure 2.3b. It can be observed that the camera has some translation and is tilted
relative to the centre of the robot in both figures, and this configuration will be taken into
account as a correction performed in chapter 4 to continue the work in chapter 5.
10
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.2: Technical specifications of Capra robot
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.3: Camera configuration. (a) is from the side view. (b) is from the top view.
The brief specifications of the depth camera are shown in table 2.2 [20]. The values of
valid range and minimum depth distance will affect some practical implementations of
point cloud sampling and projection in chapter 5.
One of the reasons for using single-sensor perception is the goal I set in chapter 1. Since
the major objective is to investigate how well a navigation system can do in a single-
sensor case scenario, only the depth camera will be applied in the perception system.
Furthermore, even if we intend to use LiDAR or RADAR supportively with vision, the target
application scenario (highly unstructured) is still not suitable for either LiDAR or RADAR
due to the sparse bushes or leaves.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
11
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.2: Technical specifications of used camera
Specification
Value
Dimension (L × W × H)
124 × 26 × 29 mm
Valid range
0.6 m ∼6.0 m
Depth FOV
87◦× 58◦
Depth output resolution
Up to 1280 × 720
Depth frame rate
Up to 90 FPS
Minimum depth distance at max resolution
∼52 cm
Depth accuracy
< 2 % at 4 m
RGB sensor FOV (H × W)
90 × 65◦
RGB frame resolution
Up to 1280 × 800
RGB frame rate
30 FPS
ROS (Robot Operating System) and necessary packages
The compatible software interfaces include MQTT and ROS (ROS2, Galactic distribu-
tion). Since ROS has an abundant source of support documents and packages for de-
velopers, it is chosen to be the main developing environment, and the Linux operation
system (Ubuntu 20.04) is also selected to cooperate with it. The reason for selecting
Ubuntu 20.04 instead of the latest version is that the Galactic distribution (specified by
Capra [21]) and the customized messages files defined by Capra are only compatible
with the chosen version.
Another reason for choosing Ubuntu is it is highly developer-friendly for having even more
rich sources, meaning there are many packages available in Ubuntu. Those used in this
project can be seen as below:
• OpenCV package: A package to deal with all image processing and computer vi-
sion applications.
• PCL package: A package to deal with the manipulation of 3D point cloud.
• msg package: A built-in message package of ROS2. ROS uses a simplified mes-
sage description language to describe the data values (aka messages) that ROS
nodes publish.
• realsense2 package: Used for Intel depth camera API calling.
Even though ROS is selected as the main developing interface, the MQTT interface is
still partially involved in the implementation of the communication system, which will be
explained in chapter 3.
Test platforms
As mentioned in chapter 1, the main use case of this project is the farm. However, it is a
bit unrealistic to experiment and test the program on a real farm while developing since
it would be too time-consuming and less efficient. Therefore, several outdoor scenarios
in DTU are chosen to simulate the scenes. The biggest difference between these two is
the length of the grass (weeds). Obviously, the grass on the farm is way longer than that
in DTU. Furthermore, the number of trees in test scenarios could be more than those in
the farm recording. Overall, to make the test scenes as similar as possible to the real
use case, three different locations are selected. The details of these test scenarios will
be presented in chapter 7.
12
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:19==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Figure 2.4: Comparison between real farm and test scenarios in DTU. (a) and (b) are the
scenes in the real farm. (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) are the ones from the test scenarios.
2.2.2
Software-aspect solutions
This section will primarily discuss the potential solutions and decisions for software-related
problems, including the general direction of the mapping system implementation, plane
searching in a 3D point cloud, and a partial solution to path planning.
Mapping method and map representation
One focus of this part is the solutions for mapping (chapter 5). First of all, even though
a number of powerful related techniques have been discussed in section 2.1, namely,
the SLAM approach, the final decision is that SLAM will not be used in this project. In-
stead, a customized mapping system will be built. Specifically, given the presentation in
subsection 2.1.1, vision SLAM has several difficulties, especially in outdoor unstructured
environments. Additionally, considering the decision to use a vision sensor solely, the
SLAM method seems not to be applicable to this project.
In more detail, the map representation is chosen as a hybrid type, which combines the
occupancy grid map, elevation map, and geometric map, and this is inspired by the re-
search in subsection 2.1.2. In this case, each cell of the map will contain multiple types
of information, which will be used based on different applications, and this design will be
elaborated on in chapter 5.
As for the localization aspect, it is not the emphasis of this project. However, in order to
perform qualified mapping, a certain degree of localization is still necessary. To this end,
this project will simply use odometry to display the relative pose of the robot on the map,
which is not exactly the definition of localization in autonomous systems and SLAM.
Traversable region searching
Another focus is the solution to find the plane or traversable region in a 3D point cloud.
This project will directly use the height data to filter out those points or regions that are
not navigable. Even though a successful approach is mentioned in subsection 2.1.3, the
applicable scenario does not fit our target. The other potential solution, RANSAC, has
been tested on my own and shown that it has a certain instability even though the robot
is stationary.
Potential path-planning solution
Considering the environment modelling method used in this project, the C-space-search-
based method seems to be the most suitable one. Among all the representative algo-
rithms under this category, A∗algorithm might be the most well-known one, and therefore,
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
13
==PAGE:20==
it is chosen to be the main approach to achieve path-finding. Due to the nature of A∗al-
gorithm and the explanation in subsection 2.1.4, the WFD (Wavefront Frontier Detector)
algorithm is selected to serve a supportive role in the path-planning system. The detail of
the interaction of these two algorithms will be presented in chapter 6.
2.3
Summary
This chapter provides a detailed insight into potential equipment and techniques and de-
termines the general direction for the follow-up works. The major hardware platform is
confirmed to use the Capra robot, and the Intel depth camera is chosen as the only exter-
nal sensor in the perception system. As for the software aspect, the whole development
will be on ROS, installed in Ubuntu OS. Besides, a customized mapping system will be
built to provide a platform for the ensuing frontier searching or even path planning.
14
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:21==
3
Communication
Communication performs a fundamental function in the whole system. It takes responsi-
bility for data exchange between the robot, necessary external hardware, and the threads
in the main program. The entire communication system is built on ROS (Robot Operating
System). Therefore, a ROS node will be a minimal unit in the communication system,
which may subscribe to or publish on multiple topics.
3.1
Involved components
The key components or hardware involved in the communication system that may hold or
require the data are listed below:
• Capra robot
• Intel RealSense camera
• Threads in the main program
The software part of the robot operates on the ROS system, which has several topics
available for users. Among these topics, odometry, GPS, and velocity are needed in this
project. The first two will only be transmitted from the robot to the computer, whereas the
last one, the velocity, will be sent the other way around.
The depth and colour images will be the only two data types transmitted from the camera
mounted on the robot’s top to the computer.
Considering the data exchange and navigation program will be executed simultaneously,
a multithreading method will be implemented. The details will be elaborated on in the next
section. Therefore, the data exchange between threads is also included in the communi-
cation system.
3.2
Design
The structure of the communication system is illustrated in figure 3.1. Users can access
the internal data of the Capra robot through two interfaces: ROS and MQTT topic sub-
scription. Both are used in the system due to some internal issues with the robot itself.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
15
==PAGE:22==
Specifically, the currently available document for developers is actually for a newer version
of the robot, Hircus. However, the one I use is the older module, P5 Snapper. Therefore,
there is some inconsistency between the two modules, especially in the public interface.
For instance, the odometry data can be accessed through both interfaces, according to
the document. However, it can only be acquired through the MQTT interface since there
is a known issue when using the ROS interface, which cannot even be solved with the
support of the Capra because this module is already out of date, and that is the reason I
need to add a transfer program in figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Structure of the communication system
The entire communication system can be divided into three sections: between the Capra
robot and the main program, between the camera and the main program, and within the
main program.
3.2.1
Communication between Capra robot & main program
This section is the focus of the whole system, and the most complicated part will be the
transfer program in the top-right corner in figure 3.1. The purpose of this module is to
address the issue I mentioned above and maintain the consistency of the programming
languages and platforms used. Precisely, due to the known issue, the MQTT interface
was chosen to obtain the odometry data. However, there were some problems with using
C++ to implement an MQTT client, and my supervisor and I both agree that it would be a
waste of time to dig into it. Furthermore, as I mentioned before, the system is expected
to be implemented on the ROS system, and it would be an exception if I stuck to using
the MQTT interface to transmit the data between the robot and the main program. As a
result, a transfer station was needed and implemented. The structure of it can be seen in
figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2 shows that this transfer station literally transfers the odometry data from one
interface to the other without any modification.
The whole transfer program was im-
plemented in Python for the reason I mentioned above. In the transfer program, the
semaphore mechanism synchronised two threads in figure 3.2.
16
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:23==
Figure 3.2: Structure of the transfer program
Specifically, the MQTT thread will have access to the odometry data first, and the semaphore
will not be released until the MQTT client saves the data in the buffer. Once the semaphore
is released by the MQTT thread, the ROS thread will acquire the semaphore, read the
data in the buffer, transfer it, and publish it to a new ROS topic so that the main program
can subscribe to it and obtain the odometry data. With semaphore, the repeated data
reception and delay can be decreased as much as possible. The related analysis will be
presented in the section 3.3.
3.2.2
Communication between camera & main program
This section is the most straightforward in the system since it can be done by directly
calling the Intel API, which is supported with both C++ and Python languages. In this case,
the method with the ROS node and topic will not be used, and therefore, the complexity
of the code should be decreased.
3.2.3
Communication within the main program
The focus of this section is to avoid the conflict of the data accessing by multithreading.
To this end, the mutual exclusion (mutex) mechanism was used. It’s obvious that the data
buffer is shared by both threads in the main program in figure 3.1. By using mutex, it can
be sure that the data will not be altered by the other thread while a thread is using it.
3.3
Delay test
In this section, the analysis of the delay within the transfer program and between the
camera and the main node in the main program is concerned. The former will inspect the
delay between the time the data is acquired by the program and when it is published to a
new ROS node and the repeated rate of data while publishing. The latter will investigate
the delay between the main node, the camera, and the main program. Among those, the
time of the main program (computer time) is used as a reference to see how off the other
two are from the computer clock. The delay should be below 50 ms for both scenarios.
Figure 3.3 shows that with the semaphore mechanism applied, the delay between the
receiving of the MQTT client and the publishing of the intermediary ROS node is nearly
negligible (0.47 ms), although there are still some glitches which may indicate the side ef-
fect from the multithreading. Similarly, the semaphore also reduces the number of missing
data to as low a level as possible, as the lower half of the figure shows. The −1 means
the data was not updated in the next time step, which also means the data was repeatedly
published by the intermediary ROS node.
On the other hand, figure 3.4 illustrates the delay within the main program. Even though
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.3: Delay within the transfer program
Figure 3.4: Delay within the main program
there are three subfigures in it, the middle one (green one) is the most concerning one
since it describes the delay between the time when the images were captured by the
camera and the corresponding data transmitted from the robot. The main program is
designed to always take the camera data first, followed by the robot data. Therefore, the
minus sign in the middle subfigure is correct if the delay time is calculated by the equation
3.1. The other two subfigures just give a rough idea of the relationship between these two
time points and the programme execution time. Figure 3.4 shows that the delay is only
18.5 ms, which is much less than the maximum tolerance (50 ms).
delay = Tcamera −Tnode
(3.1)
18
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:25==
3.4
Results and summary
Figure 3.3 and figure 3.4 show that the delay of the communication system meets the
requirement of delay should not exceed 50 ns set in chapter 1. With the communication
being built, the connection between the perception system and mapping system is avail-
able, and the main application is able to acquire all the necessary data. As a result, the
project can proceed to the next step, the perception system.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
19
==PAGE:26==
20
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:27==
4
Perception of environment
Perception serves an essential role in an autonomous system since it is the only way
the system can obtain information about the environment, understand it, and make cor-
responding decisions or movements. This chapter will present several available sensors
on the robot and analyze the accuracy or correctness of each one.
4.1
Related work
In autonomous systems, specifically the wheeled robot and vehicle, GPS, inertial navi-
gation system (INS), radar, LiDAR, and vision are widely used [2]. Generally, multiple
sensors will be used to build the perception system so that one can make up for the
other’s limitations to increase the accuracy of the whole system. A typical structure of a
perception system should look like figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: Structure of a perception system
However, since the decisions which have been made in chapter 2 choose a single-sensor
model as the perception system in this project, there will be no sensor fusion involved.
4.2
Sensors
Basically, three sensors are primarily used in this project, and each will be introduced
below. Briefly, the odometry will be only used in the mapping system, and the depth
camera will be utilized as the sole source of external information.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
21
==PAGE:28==
4.2.1
Odometry
Odometry is one of the most critical sensors in this project since it is the main source used
to localize the robot in the mapping system. Unlike other robot data directly transmitted by
the main ROS node, the odometry one will go through an intermediary ROS node before
being subscribed by the main ROS node because of the reason that was already explained
in chapter 3. Likewise, due to the design of the communication system (clarified in chapter
3), the update rate of this data cannot be controlled like the others. It will somehow be
constrained by the receiving of the MQTT client. Figure 4.2 shows the update rate, and
the average value is 10 Hz approximately. This value may be raised by the glitches in
figure 4.2 (meaning the actual update rate might be below 10 Hz a little bit), but it is still
quite close to the default setting of the robot. As a result, it can still be seen as fast as
other robot data.
Figure 4.2: Update rate of odometry data
Apart from the transmission of the odometry data, its contents are also a concern. In more
detail, the interested data in the received one includes x, y, and z coordinates (m) and
orientation. The problem is that the representation of the orientation in ROS messages is
a quaternion, which is not as intuitive as the Euler angle (rotation about the axis) to under-
stand and utilize. Therefore, there is a demand to convert the quaternion representation
to the Euler angle, which is typically applied in robotics.
q = w + xi + yj + zk
= [w, x, y, z]
(4.1)
Briefly, the orientation quaternions is a representation that encodes axis-angle rotation in
the 3D space into four digits as equation 4.1 shows. Generally, the unit-quaternion that
indicates no rotation about the x, y, and z-axis is [1, 0, 0, 0].
Compared to the rotation matrix, the quaternion is more efficient and numerically stable.
However, it is still more easy for users to calculate rotation in terms of Euler angle (roll,
pitch, and yaw). As a result, the conversion from quaternion to Euler angles will be used
in this project. To this end, the rotation needs to be converted from quaternion to rotation
22
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:29==
matrix first, followed by the transformation from the rotation matrix to Euler angle. With
the expression shown in equation 4.1, a rotation matrix derived from it can be seen in
equation 4.2.
R =


1 −2(y2 + z2)
2(xy −wz)
2(wy + xz)
2(xy + wz)
1 −2(x2 + z2)
2(yz −wx)
2(xz −wy)
2(wx + yz)
1 −2(x2 + y2)


=


R00
R01
R02
R10
R11
R12
R20
R21
R22


(4.2)
With the derived rotation matrix, the Euler angles are given in equation 4.3.
yaw = atan2 (R10, R00)
(about z-axis)
roll = atan2 (R21, R22)
(about x-axis)
pitch = −asin (R20)
(about y-axis)
(4.3)
In this project, the rotation about the z-axis (yaw) is actually the angle I am interested in,
which is usually called heading in the wheel-robot application. So far, the converted raw
odometry data is ready for use in the mapping system.
4.2.2
GPS
GPS serves a supportive role in the mapping system. It is mainly used to check if the
odometry data is correct by comparing the trajectories plotted by GPS and odometry. The
update rate is set to 10 Hz by the robot internally.
4.2.3
Intel RealSense depth camera
The depth camera is another vital sensor in this project since it is the only source that
can provide exterior information to the mapping system. The corresponding hardware
specifications were already presented in chapter 1. In this project, the frame rate of the
camera is set to 30 FPS for both the colour frame and the depth frame.
4.3
Accuracy and correctness evaluation
Before utilizing sensors’ data in the mapping system, the quality of the performance of
the sensor needed to be assessed. Basically, the performance of three sensors, namely,
odometry, GPS, and depth camera, must be evaluated. The test with a similar idea will be
performed on the odometry and GPS, respectively. As for the camera, there is no need
to validate its performance since it is already stated in the manual. However, due to the
configuration of the camera on the robot demonstrated in chapter 2, compensation needs
to be conducted. Otherwise, the robot will get the wrong environmental information.
4.3.1
Odometry accuracy
This subsection will present the general performance of the odometry equipped in the
robot. The evaluation will be split into two parts. The first test is to demonstrate the
availability and reproducibility of the odometry. The former attribute is fundamental for the
mapping system, proving that the odometry can be used practically. The latter is critical
since it somehow represents the stability of the odometry. The second test shows a more
detailed analysis of the odometry, assessing the accuracy of the odometry.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
23
==PAGE:30==
Figure 4.3: Planned route around B329
Figure 4.3 illustrates the planned route (red line) for the first evaluation. The route starts
from one of the entrances of Building 326, followed by the connection to the asphalt road,
then goes straight to the intersection, taking a right turn to manoeuvre along Building 329.
A U-turn will be taken when the robot reaches the stone road and then drives down to the
intersection again while keeping right on the road (facing the intersection).
This route has enough distance to examine the effect of odometry, involving several sharp
turns and a U-turn, which have a relatively high demand on the odometry’s performance.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.4: Odometry trajectories around Building 329. (a) is the first time, while (b) is the
second time.
In order to demonstrate the reproducibility, two tests were performed, and the results are
shown in figure 4.4a and figure 4.4b. It can be observed that the odometry functions
properly by comparing these two figures to figure 4.3, and it shows that both trajectories
match the planned route. Furthermore, the two trajectories are basically identical, proving
that the odometry has sufficient ability to record the correct data multiple times.
After the fundamental function is proven, a more detailed analysis can be conducted. The
idea is to make the robot manoeuvre by a squared or rectangle route, then compare the
actual trajectory with the specified one, which is a typical approach to assess the accuracy
of the odometry. The dimension of the test route (H × W) is 6.44 × 7.45 m.
Figure 4.5a and figure 4.5b show the results of the square test. First of all, figure 4.5a per-
fectly illustrates a typical error phenomenon of odometry: the end position didn’t overlap
the position where the robot started, which the robot actually did in the real world, though.
There are two types of errors in this test that need to be analysed. The first one is the
24
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:31==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.5: Square test for odometry.
difference between the actual driven distance and that from the odometry. Practically, the
robot has moved 27.78 m in the real world, whereas only 26.4314 m was driven from the
odometry perspective. The error of distance measurement is 4.85 %.
The other type of error is the deviation from the endpoint in the odometry to the actual
position where the robot stopped. It is apparent in figure 4.5b that these two positions did
not coincide. This offset is 0.63 m long, which only accounts for 2.385 % of the total driven
distance.
4.3.2
GPS accuracy
First of all, the general performance of GPS will be evaluated. A test will be performed to
see whether the GPS data can plot the trajectory correctly, regardless of the accuracy. The
same route will be used as an odometry test does (figure 4.3). Due to the nature of GPS,
the trajectory will have the correct direction as the one in figure 4.3, which is the strongest
advantage of it compared to odometry. Figure 4.6a and figure 4.6b show that the GPS
has the potential ability to provide valid location data. However, one obvious drawback is
there was a shift at the beginning of the manoeuvre while the robot was stationary actually,
meaning once the robot started moving, the GPS data shifted. Another drawback is some
zigzags while the robot drove straight forward and some other glitches. The glitches can
be explained by the robot being too close to the building, and it somehow affects the
performance of GPS. All of these may cause some problems when the GPS is actually
utilized in the localization cooperating with the odometry.
Furthermore, the raw data is transformed to the UTM (Universal Transverse Mercator)
coordinate system shown in figure 4.6b. UTM is a map projection system that can convert
conventional GPS coordinates (longitude and latitude) into the coordinates of the location
on the surface of the earth. The unit of UTM is in metres, which is capable of conducting
a more detailed analysis of accuracy. Figure 4.6b extracts the trajectory based on UTM
coordinates. Therefore, the displacement can be observed easily in figure 4.6b, and it
matches the planned route. The accuracy test is conducted by making the robot drive in
a straight line, illustrated in figure 4.7a.
Figure 4.7a shows that the GPS data correctly describes the actual path, which is 30 m
long and straight, even though with some errors or fluctuations. Besides, the shift at the
beginning of the test still appears in figure 4.7a. In order to perform the subsequent error
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
25
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.6: GPS data. (a) is the raw data. (b) is the one converted to UTM coordinate.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.7: GPS data analysis. (a) is the straight-line test. (b) is the GPS curves.
calculation, the actual start point needs to be found. Figure 4.7b displays that the real
initiated point should be where the frame 148 is. The accuracy analysis is performed on
two targets: total driven distance and the deviations along the path. The test route is 30 m
long, and the recorded trajectory is 30.3354 m, having 1.118 % error, which is significantly
qualified.
Figure 4.8: RMS error of straight line test
On the other hand, the deviations along the route are not negligible. Figure 4.8 shows the
26
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:33==
RMS errors along the path. Even though the average error is 0.0136 m, the curve in figure
4.8 still indicates that this error does affect it. This could be worse if the robot drives into
the woods area, which is one of the primary test cases of this project.
4.3.3
Camera coordinate correction
The configuration explained in chapter 2 indicates that there is a need to conduct correc-
tion or composition on the camera, specifically on the 3D point cloud it generates. Since
the environmental information that I want to display on the mapping system should be
from the robot’s perspective, a correction has to be done to make the 3D point cloud pro-
duced by the depth camera look the way the robot sees it. The idea of this correction is
illustrated in figure 4.9.
Figure 4.9: Idea of camera coordinate correction
According to figure 2.3a in chapter 2, there is a small inclination θ (14.42◦) between the
plane looked from the camera and the robot and a translation of 0.15 m forward and 0.65 m
higher (assuming the view of the robot is from the centre of it). A simple homogeneous
transformation matrix can complete the compensation task, which is shown in equation
4.4.
Hbefore
after
=


1
0
0
0
0
cos(θ)
−sin(θ)
0.65
0
sin(θ)
cos(θ)
0.15
0
0
0
1


(4.4)
All the computations in this stage are still within the camera frame. Therefore, there is still
a need to find other homogeneous transformation matrices to project any point from the
camera frame to another.
Figure 4.10: Current scene
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
27
==PAGE:34==
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.11: Point cloud correction. (a) is the point cloud before correction, while (b) is
the one after correction.
The effect of correction is shown from figure 4.10 to figure 4.11. Figure 4.10 presents
the current scene that the robot was facing, and figure 4.11 demonstrates a point cloud
before and after correction. It is apparent that there is an inclination in figure 4.11a, and
some of the points are below the floor (blue axis). On the other hand, the point cloud in
figure 4.11b is in an appropriate perspective of view (the robot’s perspective), and that
can provide the mapping system with the correct position information.
4.4
Results
The analysis of odometry reveals that this sensor is competent for the mapping system.
The error in the square test is only 2.385 %, which is way below the maximum tolerance
(10 %). Besides, the update rate of odometry data is 10 Hz, approximately, which is as fast
as other internal data from the robot, therefore proving that it is compatible with others.
As for the GPS, the accuracy evaluation shows that the equipped GPS sensor is qualified
and quite accurate (1.118 % error in the measured distance), even though the shift in the
initiation and the zigzags along the way exist.
After the correction is performed on the depth camera, the camera is capable of providing
correct height and distance measurements for the mapping system since the generated
3D point cloud is transformed into the robot’s perspective.
4.5
Summary
This chapter thoughtfully examines each potential component in the perception system,
including odometry, GPS, and depth camera. Section 4.3 shows that the odometry is
qualified to be used in the mapping system not only because of its eligible accuracy but
also its applicability to indoor and outdoor scenarios. The latter feature is especially critical
for this project since most tests are conducted indoors for convenience and less time
consumption.
Although the examination of GPS indicates that it is more accurate than odometry while
moving, several downsides still raise concerns about it. The first one is the GPS coor-
dinates shift in the stationary condition. This phenomenon appears repeatedly in figure
4.6a, figure 4.6b, and figure 4.7a, and it seems there is no appropriate and general method
to deal with this problem currently. Another one is the application scenario. Apparently,
GPS is only applicable in wide open and outdoor environments, forcing the tests to be
done in such environments if GPS is involved in the mapping system. Furthermore, even
though the GPS is used as a part of the perception system regardless, the primary test
28
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:35==
case of this project, which is in the woods, will probably compromise the performance of
GPS (considering the glitches in figure 4.6b), jeopardising the positioned function in the
mapping system accordingly.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.12: Comparison between the odometry and GPS data. (a) is the GPS data. (b)
is the odometry data.
However, figure 4.12 reveals that it is promising if those drawbacks can be tackled since
GPS can be helpful to correct the accumulated error of odometry shown in figure 4.12b,
making the position information more accurate and robust in the mapping system.
Last but not least, the correction on the 3D point cloud generated by the depth camera
provides the mapping system with eligible data to work on.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
29
==PAGE:36==
30
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:37==
5
Mapping
Mapping plays an integral role in the project. First of all. It needs to analyze all the raw
data collected by the perception system. In this step, all the gathered data can be divided
into two types: the pose of the robot and the corresponding environment details. The
former helps the user locate the robot on the global map and display other statuses, like
heading, for instance. The transformation between multiple coordinates is involved in this
type of data processing, which will be elaborated on in section 5.3.
As for the latter, the surrounding information is mainly obtained by the depth camera,
including the height and depth information. As a result, this camera functions a little simi-
larly to the distance sensor as well. Two procedures are still involved in this type of data
processing: data filtering and relative localization. Data filtering aims to produce an esti-
mation that is as accurate as possible. To this end, the Kalman filter was applied, and a
number of factors were taken into account to generate a more reliable estimation. The de-
tails will be presented in subsection 5.5.3. On the other hand, relative localization enables
the system to project the processed information to the correct location, and the coordinate
transformation found in section 5.3 will be used in this stage as well. This mapping system
is designed to work online, meaning it will work in a partially known environment.
5.1
Related work
As explained in chapter chapter 2, the SLAM technique will be the first choice when it
comes to localization and mapping for autonomous systems. Many variants of SLAM
techniques have already been deeply researched, experimented with, and applied in nu-
merous papers and applications, such as EKF-SLAM and PF-SLAM. However, none of
those will be used in this project due to the objectives and decisions in chapter 1 and
chapter 2.
5.2
General design
Since the decision to create my own map system has been made, the class My_Map will
be implemented to carry out all the related work. Generally, an RGB image is chosen to
display the map or trajectory, meaning that it is similar to a canvas that can render desired
information. Furthermore, as the decision made in chapter 2 states, the self-defined map
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
31
==PAGE:38==
representation will be a combination of an elevation map, occupancy-gird map, and geo-
metric map. Therefore, each cell in the map will contain a number of attributes, and this
will be presented in subsection 5.5.1.
5.2.1
Configuration
To create an instance of My_Map objects, four arguments will be taken: the size of the
map in two dimensions, the resolution, and the mode.
• Width: The width of the map. (m)
• Height: The height of the map. (m)
• Resolution: The size of each cell of the grid. (pixel/m)
• Mode: Show the trajectory or the map.
No matter which mode is chosen, the region determined by the specified range will be
divided into a grid, which will be saved as a 2D matrix in the program. In order to be
compatible with the final image displayed, this matrix will share the same size as the
image, which is determined by the above parameters, shown in equation 5.1.
Widthpixel = Widthmeter ∗Resolution
Heightpixel = Heightmeter ∗Resolution
(5.1)
For instance, if the robot wants to explore a 10 m by 10 m region with a resolution of
5 pixel/m, then the size of the matrix and the image will be 50 pixel by 50 pixel. This
method can make sure the whole map or trajectory has the right scale. Besides, the
mapping system can directly project each element in the matrix on the corresponding
pixel on the image when performing the map rendering without further transformation or
computation, which means that consistency and efficiency are guaranteed.
As for the mode option, there are two choices: trajectory and map. The former will show
the robot’s trajectory and the current position, including the heading (will be explained in
section 5.4). The latter will display the current location of the robot and the surrounding
information (will be explained in section 5.5). The purpose of setting this mode option is
to avoid messing up the visualization. If everything is put in a single window, it will be less
intuitive for the users to observe the desired information from the windows. Figure 5.1
illustrates the idea.
Figure 5.1: User Interface of mapping system
32
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:39==
5.2.2
Functions
The general function that will be used in both modes is the update of the pose. For each
instance of class My_Map, the poses of three points, start, current, and previous points,
will keep being updated throughout the whole exploration. The pose of a point will be
represented as a self-defined struct Pose shown in the list 5.1.
1
struct Pose
2
{
3
int x_pixel_img = 0;
4
int y_pixel_img = 0;
5
int x_pixel_map = 0;
6
int y_pixel_map = 0;
7
double x_meter = 0.0;
8
double y_meter = 0.0;
9
double roll = 0.0;
// about x-axis.
10
double yaw = 0.0;
// about z-axis.
11
double pitch = 0.0;
// about y-axis.
12
Heading heading;
// as a direction vector.
13
};
Listing 5.1: Pose struct
Since the acquired odometry data will be in meters, it is necessary to round the numbers
when it comes to the transformation from robot frame to map frame or image frame. The
details will be explained in section 5.3. As a result, it is essential to log all the data as the
above list does. Furthermore, the mechanism of relative localization will be explained in
the following section as well.
5.3
Coordinates transformation
Figure 5.2: Relationship between four coordinates involved in the mapping system
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
33
==PAGE:40==
As I explained in chapter 2 and section 5.1, the self-defined map structure and the display
will be used instead of using other existing packages. Therefore, many tedious and com-
plicated things need to be carried out by myself, and coordinate transformation is one of
them. The ultimate goal of the transformation in this project is to project any point in any
coordinate on the image coordinate since the map will be presented as an RGB image.
In this mapping system, four coordinates or frames are involved and listed below. The
relationship of these frames is illustrated in figure 5.2.
• Image frame: Image used to display the trajectory or map, and the unit is in pixels.
• Map frame: Map used to localize the robot and show environmental information.
The unit can be in meters or pixels. Map frame also can be seen as the odometry
frame since the origin of it is actually the odometry data when the entire program is
initiated.
• Robot frame: The unit of the robot frame is in meters.
• Camera frame: The camera frame where the 3D point cloud is generated. The unit
is still in meters.
First of all, these four coordinates can be split into two groups, depending on whether they
are global or local. It is obvious that the image frame and map frame are global, which
means they are all fixed, according to figure 5.2, and the robot frame and the camera
frame are local, meaning that their relative location to the fixed frames keeps changing,
depending on the robot’s current position. The transformations from the local frame to the
global frame and within the local frames are only necessary if the environmental informa-
tion is required for display.
5.3.1
From map frame to image frame
Once the instance of the class My_Map is created, the mapping system will always reset
the odometry data acquired when the whole program is initiated to the centre of the grid
and take it as the origin of the map frame. This method gives the robot the flexibility to
move around instead of being constrained in a specific direction.
According to figure 5.2, the homogeneous transformation matrix from map frame to image
frame is shown in equation 5.2. The assumption of using the below matrix is the consis-
tency of the unit. To this end, if the unit of a point is still in meters, then it is required to
multiply it by the resolution defined at the very beginning so that the unit can be converted
to pixel.
HI
M =


0
−1
0
width
2
−1
0
0
height
2
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
1


(5.2)
If the current pose of the robot is required, algorithm 1 will be performed, and it is clear
that only the transformation from the map to the image frame is used in the computation,
and that is because the odometry frame is actually linked to the map frame. The only
difference between these two is the unit. The unit of the former is in meters, and that of
the latter can be in pixels or meters (pixel is mainly used).
It can be observed from algorithm 1 that the coordinates of the current point are actually
the odometry offset between the current and the start point due to the configuration of
34
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:41==
Algorithm 1 Current pose calculation
1: Inputs:
Get the current odo data
2: Initialize:
poseI ←∅
3: if t ̸= 0 then
4:
offsetM ←currentM −startM
▷The unit here is in m
5:
offsetM ←offsetM · resolution
▷The unit here is in pixel
6:
offsetM ←round (offsetM)
7:
poseI ←HI
M · offsetM
the map frame. Therefore, the method of positioning the robot in this project is not the
same as the conventional localization approach in robotics and autonomous systems. As
a result, the means used in this project will be called relative localization or relative
position.
Even though the homogeneous transformation matrix in equation 5.2 is three-dimensional,
only two dimensions are involved in algorithm 1 since the final demonstration is on a 2D
image.
5.3.2
From robot frame to map frame
This transformation is only needed when something local wants to be projected on the
map, like some points in the 3D point cloud generated from the depth camera, for example.
The corresponding homogenous transformation matrix is shown in equation 5.3
HM
R =


cos(yaw)
sin(yaw)
0
offsetxM
−sin(yaw)
cos(yaw)
0
offsetyM
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1


(5.3)
Still, the consistency of the unit is the most concerned in this transformation. The offset
in equation 5.3 should be in meters first. Therefore, the transformed point should be
multiplied by the resolution defined previously so that the unit can change to pixels and
get the correct location on the map.
5.3.3
From camera frame to robot frame
The homogenous transformation matrix from the camera frame to the robot frame is given
in equation 5.4.
HR
C =


0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1


(5.4)
Theoretically, the translation component in the matrix (the first three elements in the last
column) should not be zero, according to the illustration in figure 5.2. However, the cor-
rection to fix the tilted and the translation problem of the generated 3D point cloud has
been performed in chapter 4. Therefore, there is no need to add these two offsets to the
matrix again. Otherwise, the transformation will be somehow over-corrected and get the
wrong location.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
35
==PAGE:42==
With the three homogeneous transformation matrices given above, if a point PC in the 3D
point cloud needs to be projected on the map, then the equation 5.5 will be used.
[PI
1
]
= HI
M · HM
R · HR
C ·
[PC
1
]
(5.5)
5.4
Trajectory
This is one of the modes in the class My_Map. This mode only shows the trajectory and
the current pose of the robot, including the heading. Basically, this mode only serves the
purpose of showing the movement of the robot and its current status. Since the instance
of class My_Map will always record the previous and the current location of the robot,
it will not be a problem to draw the trajectory. On the other hand, the illustration of the
heading will be a little bit more complex than the trajectory plotting.
x = cos(yaw)
y = sin(yaw)
(5.6)
By using the conversion from quaternion to Euler angles found in chapter 4, the more
straightforward representation is available right now. However, it is still not enough to
show the heading of the robot. As a result, a further conversion is needed. In this project,
the heading I am interested in is actually the yaw, one of the Euler angles converted
from the quaternion, which is the rotation about the z-axis. Equation 5.6 gives a vector
representing the direction where the robot is heading. Specifically, the converted vector
is in the map frame. Therefore, the transformation from map frame to image frame will
not be performed until this vector is added to the current location in the same coordinate
to get the actual heading.
5.5
Map
This is the other mode available in class My_Map, and the most important one since it
will simultaneously generate an info map containing all the information the robot needs
to perform ensuing path planning, which will also be used to render the image displaying
the map eventually. The main difference between these two modes is whether the 3D
point cloud, i.e., environmental information, is involved. If that information is involved,
then the projection of a 3D point cloud to the map is required, and this will be explained
in subsection 5.5.2.
5.5.1
Map structure & data content
Since the map representation is chosen as a hybrid of occupancy-grid and elevation maps,
each cell of the map will contain multiple attributes not only for geometry information but
also for the ensuing Kalman filter implementation.
Once the mode is selected as a map, the instance will generate a blank image and an
empty info map at the same time. The former is a normal RGB image created by OpenCV
library, whereas the latter is just a 2D matrix where each element is a self-defined struct
CellKF, which is given in list 5.2. As a result, the info map can also be seen as a multi-
channel matrix, and each channel holds the data for the implementation of the Kalman
filter mainly, which will be elaborated in subsection 5.5.3.
1
struct CellKF
2
{
36
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:43==
3
double timestamp = 0.0;
4
int iteration = -1;
5
double measurement = 0.0;
6
double est_state = 0.0;
7
double est_cov = 0.0;
8
double gain = 0.0;
9
double pre_state = 0.0;
10
double pre_cov = 0.0;
11
bool isPath = false;
12
};
Listing 5.2: CellKF struct
Essentially, the image and the info map are both a matrix (with the same size), and the
elements with the same index actually correspond to the same location in the real world.
Therefore, the link between these two matrices and the real world is built, and this idea is
illustrated in figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3: Link between real world and mapping system
To better illustrate the data contents stored in the info map, figure 5.4b shows an elevation
map derived from the info map. Specifically, the elevation map is made by selecting only
the height data held by the info map while there are still other details in the info map.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.4: Illustration for data content of the info map. (a) is the original scene. (b) is the
elevation map derived from the info map.
The info map mechanism makes all the following operations more efficient, including
Kalman filter implementation, final map visualization, and path planning.
It can be observed from list 5.2 that each element in the info matrix requires data from the
external sensor, i.e., the depth camera, which means the projection of a 3D point cloud is
needed. Thus, the mapping system will proceed to the next subsection in this stage.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
37
==PAGE:44==
5.5.2
Sampling and projection of 3D point cloud
The general idea of this projection is to divide the point cloud into a 2D grid first. After that,
the mapping system will project the cells in the grid on the info map according to some
criteria by the coordinate transformation found in section 5.3.
To implement the first step, another self-defined class GridAnalysis is created. This
class is mainly responsible for dividing the point cloud into a 2D grid, which is actually a
2D matrix. Each element of this matrix is defined by a customized struct Cell shown in the
below list. Essentially, each cell contains all the necessary statistics of the correspondingly
sampled region.
1
struct Cell
2
{
3
vector <double> height;
4
double X = 0.0;
5
double Y = 0.0;
6
double Z = 0.0;
7
int counter = 0;
8
};
Listing 5.3: Cell struct
There are two parameters of this grid that need to be set. The first one is the size of the
cell of the grid. This parameter will be the invert of the resolution defined when creating
an object of the class My_Map. The reason that the invert of the resolution is taken is
because of the unit. By inverting it, the unit of size will turn into m/pixel so that it can be
compatible with the calculation in equation 5.7. Equation 5.7 shows the main purpose of
this parameter: determine the dimensions of the matrix.
cols = ceil
(lenx
size
)
rows = ceil
(lenz
size
)
(5.7)
The second parameter is a threshold to determine whether this point is flat enough. A
point can be seen as a part of the plane or a traversable region only if its height is within
the threshold. This value depends on where the robot is operating. For example, if the
robot runs indoors, then this value will be low (±0.1 m), whereas if the scenario is outdoors,
the value will be relatively high.
After defining these two parameters, the division can be performed, and the idea is illus-
trated in algorithm 2.
Essentially, the division is a kind of sampling of the point cloud, turning hundreds of thou-
sands of points into only dozens. By applying algorithm 2, each cell in the grid might
contain thousands of 3D points. With the statistics of these points, the centroid can be
computed quickly and used as the representative of that cell, and this is where the name
of the sampling comes from.
The idea and effect of division are illustrated from figure 5.5a to figure 5.5c. The first
observation from these three figures is the correctness of the depth camera. Figure 5.5b
presents the colour scene in figure 5.5a as the 3D point cloud form perfectly.
The second one is the success of the 3D point cloud sampling, which can be confirmed
due to the fact that the details of the point cloud before and after the sampling are matched.
38
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:45==
Algorithm 2 Point cloud division
1: Initialize:
resize the empty Grid
2: for point in pointcloud do
3:
if point in valid range then
4:
check which row & col point is in
5:
Grid[row][col] ←point
6:
else
7:
continue
8: for cell in Grid do
9:
Calculate the statistics
The sampling not only downsizes the point cloud over thousands of times but also per-
forms dimensionality reduction (from 3D to 2D). Each point in figure 5.5c is actually a
self-defined struct Cell shown in list 5.3, plotted by its x and z-coordinate (in camera
frame).
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.5: Illustration for point cloud sampling. (a) is the original scene. (b) is the 3D
point cloud. (c) is the sampled point cloud (2D).
Specifically, the determine statement (line 3) in algorithm 2 checks both upper and lower
bounds, which is 4 m and 0.7 m, respectively (displayed in figure 5.5c). The choice of
upper bound is made because 4 m should be long enough for the robot to make a safe
and correct decision. Besides, the upper bound setting also decreases the size of the data
that needs to be processed. On the other hand, the choice of the lower bound (0.7 m) is
made based on the depth camera’s specifications in chapter 2 (depth range is valid from
0.6 m to 6 m).
Once the point cloud is divided into a grid (the form shown in figure 5.5c), The second
step can be performed, namely, projecting the grid to the info map. According to the list
5.3, each cell in the divided grid contains all the statistics I need. Among these statistics,
the height is actually the environmental information that is being projected on the map by
the coordinates (X, Y, Z in list 5.3) given in the camera frame.
Essentially, the projection is the transformation found in section 5.3, from the camera
frame to the image frame, which is shown in equation 5.5. Furthermore, the projection
of environmental information is not simply delivering the height data, which is from the
measurement from the camera. Indeed, a Kalman filter is embedded in this projection to
produce a better height estimation, and that is the procedure elaborated on in the following
subsection.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
39
==PAGE:46==
5.5.3
Kalman filter
A one-dimensional Kalman filter is embedded in the mapping system, specifically the
projection in subsection 5.5.2, which mainly processes the height data. However, other
data is also taken into account in the design of the filter. In this case, the time span and
the depth are the two considered factors.
First of all, height information is the most concerned data in the mapping system since
it is one of the criteria for determining the path of the robot. However, practically, it is
not accurate enough if the measured height data is merely delivered to the mapping sys-
tem without any processing because of the fluctuation of the measurement returned from
the sensors. Without further data processing, the final map will be too unstable to be
a foundation for the following path planning, and that is the reason the Kalman filter is
applied.
Kalman update equations
Kn =
pn,n−1
pn,n−1 + rn
pn,n = (1 −Kn) × pn,n−1
ˆxn,n = ˆxn,n−1 + Kn (zn −ˆxn,n−1)
(5.8)
The Kalman filter implementation primarily utilises the equations shown in equation 5.8
[22], which are the three state-update equations of the Kalman filter. Specifically, the hat
in the equation means it is the estimation from the filter, and the subscript indicates the
time sequence. The subscript n−1 is the estimation from the output of the filter as the last
time step, which is seen as a prior estimation in the current time step. The more detailed
explanation of variables in equation 5.8 is shown below.
• pn,n−1: The variance of prior estimation ˆxn,n−1.
• rn: Measurement variance. It indicates the measurement error. (m2)
• Kn: Kalman gain. It controls the updated estimation’s dependence on the input
measurement. (dimensionless)
• pn,n: The variance of the current estimation. It indicates the estimation error. (m2)
• ˆxn,n−1: The prior estimation, which is the prediction from the last iteration. (m)
• ˆxn,n: The current estimation. The main output of the Kalman filter. (m)
Specifically, the measurement variance rn is determined by the step function shown in
figure 5.6. Since the value returned from the function shown in figure 5.6 is standard
deviation essentially, the final measurement error will be the squared of the returned value.
40
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.6: Function to determine measurement standard deviation
The values selected for each step are based on the datasheet of the Intel RealSense
camera [20]. The datasheet states that there is a maximum 2 % error at 4 m from the
camera. However, this measurement error should change with the distance, meaning that
the closer the measurement is to the camera, the more precise it should be. Specifically,
the error in the range from 2 m to 4 m is 0.08 m, which is 2 % of 4 m. As for the values for
other intervals, 0.03 m is chosen for interval [2, 3), 0.01 m for [1, 2), and 0.005 m for [0, 1).
These numbers are determined based on some experiential practices.
Kalman predict equations
Each iteration includes updates that have been presented in equation 5.8 and the pre-
diction shown in equation 5.9, which is going to be used in the next iteration as a prior
estimation. This prediction equations vary from case to case, depending on how the target
system is described as a dynamic model or state space model.
ˆxn+1,n = ˆxn,n
pn+1,n = pn,n + qn
(5.9)
In this project, the target environment is modelled as a constant dynamic, meaning the
transition from now to the next time step simply sees the current estimation as the predic-
tion for the next iteration, leading to equation 5.9, and a brief explanation of variables is
shown in the following.
• ˆxn+1,n: The prediction in this iteration. It will be used as a prior estimation in the
next iteration. (m)
• pn+1,n: The variance of the prediction. (m2)
• qn: Process noise. (m2)
This model implies that the environment is static, which means the height of every region
on the map will not change over time, which is not true actually. In order to make up for
the inaccurate modelling, process noise qn is introduced.
The process noise is defined by the piecewise function shown in figure 5.7. It is apparent
that the process noise is the function of time, specifically, the time interval between the
last update time and now. If the interval is not long enough (below 2 s), a small process
noise is added to the covariance prediction. On the other hand, once the interval exceeds
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
41
==PAGE:48==
the threshold, then the noise will keep growing with the rise of the time interval and make
the predicted covariance larger.
Figure 5.7: Function to determine process noise variance
Effect while stationary
The stationary scenario indicates that the target region is measured constantly. Therefore,
the influence of time interval in figure 5.7 will not be shown. However, the outcomes of
this scenario will perfectly illustrate the performance of the Kalman filter.
First of all, the subtitles in figure 5.8a and figure 5.8b are the coordinates of the cell where
the curves plot. Besides, the ground truth in figures is obtained by computing the mean
of the measurements, and these values are meant to demonstrate how the estimations
follow or react to the measurements.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8: Kalman filter curves while stationary.
Both figures display that the estimations correctly follow the ground truth and suppress
the fluctuation of the depth camera measurements, which is critical for the mapping sys-
tem since the fluctuation leads to high instability of the generated map and consequently
compromises the ensuing operation on the map.
Furthermore, the trend of Kalman gain is also intriguing. In the beginning, there will always
be an acceleration of Kalman gain to make the estimation follow the ground truth as fast
as possible. Once the gain drops to an interval (generally below 0.1), the estimations
converge to a stable status and steadily track the ground truth. This phenomenon is
42
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:49==
valuable for suppressing the measurement oscillation because the low Kalman gain drives
the filter to trust the prior estimation heavily (according to equation 5.8). On the other hand,
it also somehow makes the filter neglect the received measurements, meaning that the
ability to respond to environmental changes is compromised.
As a result, the increase of the Kalman gain is demanded to take the gain out of the
stable interval [0, 1], where the gain will force the estimations to track the ground truth, and
therefore, the process noise shown in figure 5.7 is introduced to deal with this problem,
which will be presented in the next part.
Effect while moving
Figure 5.7 implies that the longer before a cell is updated, the higher the probability the
filter will trust the measurements. This effect can be explained by equation 5.8. The last
line in equation 5.8 shows that the increase of Kalman gain will make the filter trust more
on the measurement than the prior estimation, which is the scenario I expect when the
robot revisits a cell that was explored a long time again.
In conclusion, the purpose of introducing process noise is to increase Kalman gain to
enhance the robot’s ability to respond to changes in the environment, making the filter
more dynamically robust and compensating for the insufficiency of the environment model
in the filter accordingly.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.9: Kalman filter curves while moving.
Figure 5.9 perfectly explains the reason why the process noise is necessary. Figure 5.9a
to figure 5.9b are all under the circumstances that the investigated cell hadn’t been ex-
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
43
==PAGE:50==
plored for over a minute since the map was created. Once the cell was visited after that
long time interval, the process noise at that moment would be significantly greater than
usual, leading to a surge in the Kalman gain. In this case, the filter will confidently trust
the measurements.
Furthermore, there was a second period that the cell had not been visited again in figure
5.8b. Once revisited, a rapid growth of gain appeared again, making the estimations follow
the trend of the measurements. This phenomenon is useful if something changes in the
cell, such as a pile of books being moved there. In this case, the height data in that cell
will be updated with the new and correct one.
Another case scenario is illustrated in figure 5.9c and 5.9d. The cells were constantly
measured in the beginning. Then, the robot had left for a while and visited it again. Once
the revisit happened, the time interval added a high process noise on the prediction co-
variance, leading to the same results, the rise of Kalman gain, and forcing the filter to track
the measurements completely.
Generally, the process noise is able to increase the gain to get it out of the interval ([0, 1]),
where usually the estimations converge and are put on a sort of lock.
5.6
Results
The performance of the mapping system can be briefly illustrated by the test conducted
in room 005, shown in figure 5.10. The test was executed under the circumstances that
the robot was initiated in the most left region in room 005 (facing the main door). Then,
the robot manoeuvred to the most right region of the room by first taking a small right
turn followed by going straight until it almost reached the wall. After that, a right turn was
retaken to go down deeper.
Figure 5.10: Indoor test scenario (room 005)
Before discussing the mapping system’s performance, an explanation of its outputs is
required. the map will mark the traversable area as green and red for obstacles. Two
indicators are also used on the map. The blue cross means the initial point, while the
black cross means the current location. As for the trajectory, the blue arrow can show
the heading and the current location of the robot simultaneously. Besides, the recorded
trajectory will displayed as green curves.
Figure 5.11 to figure 5.12 are the maps and recorded trajectories of the test. In the be-
ginning, the robot (a black cross in figure 5.11a) started and inspected the region right in
44
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:51==
front of it, and the heading indicator in figure 5.11b illustrates that the robot was facing
frontally.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.11: Mapping system’s results in frame 0 in room 005. (a) is the map. (b) is the
trajectory.
After a while, the robot reached the destination of the planned route, as figure 5.12a
shows (blue cross means the starting location). Meanwhile, figure 5.12b illustrates that
the trajectory of the robot matched the scheduled path, proving that the trajectory mode
explained in section 5.4 functions. Furthermore, the positions of the heading indicator and
black cross in figure 5.12b and figure 5.12a, respectively, show that the relative localization
implemented by algorithm 1 works.
As for the heading calculation, the arrow in figure 5.12b shows that the robot was facing
in a direction almost opposite to where it initially did. Therefore, combining the heading
indicators in figure 5.11b and figure 5.12b, the heading computation also functions. Over-
all, these four figures reveal that both map and trajectory modes function well in indoor
environments.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.12: Mapping system’s results in frame 191 in room 005. (a) is the map. (b) is
the trajectory.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
45
==PAGE:52==
5.7
Summary
The mapping system is built in this chapter. First of all, the UI is designed to display
the current colour scene, the trajectory, and the map simultaneously so that the users
can have a comprehensive understanding of the operation of the robot. After that, the
transformations between any coordinates are found as the foundation for the subsequent
calculation.
The core of the mapping system implementation involves sampling and projection (3D to
2D) and using a Kalman filter. The first function analyzes (sampling) the 3D point cloud
acquired from the depth camera and builds the link from the sampled grid to the info map
(projection). The projection involves the relative localization in section 5.3.
The latter can be seen as the essence of the mapping system since it stabilizes the map
and provides more accurate height information. With two designed functions used to
determine the measurement covariance and process noise, the implemented Kalman filter
fits the main objectives of this project more. Specifically, the presence of the process
noise enhances the filter’s ability to deal with surrounding changes, which means that the
environment is modelled more dynamically.
46
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:53==
6
Path planning
This chapter can be seen as the extension of the results from the last chapter (chapter 5),
meaning that all the operations in this chapter are performed on the basis of the built
map (2D grid). First of all, related work will be briefly introduced, providing a potential
solution to the path-planning problem. Next are the implementation details, including each
component of the path-planning system. The path-planning system in this project consists
of a WFD-based frontier search, a frontier filter and an A∗-based path planner.
6.1
Related work
As discussed in chapter 2, a number of mature and verified methods are available for the
path-planning problem, such as Bugs, Artificial Potential Field and A∗algorithms. The
decision has been made in the same chapter, choosing A∗as the primary approach to
finding the path. If we narrow down the scope of the path-planning problem, then it can
be briefly described as finding the most optimal next point and corresponding route si-
multaneously for the robot to manoeuvre. Combining with the objectives set in chapter 1,
the frontier-based technique [18] could be a potential solution, also serve as the role of
a goal in A∗algorithm. In conclusion, the A∗algorithm is selected for the first purpose,
path search. As for the second one, the optimal next point, also the temporary destina-
tion for the A∗algorithm, the WFD (Wavefront Frontier Detector) algorithm is chosen. The
interaction of these two algorithms will be elaborated in the following chapter.
6.2
Conditions for path planning
Considering the use of the A∗algorithm as the main approach to addressing the path-
planning problem, it is the best scenario that the start and goal are both available on the
evaluated map. However, this project’s mapping and path-planning systems are expected
to operate online, which means that the robot will mostly work in a partially unknown
environment. Besides, due to the objectives established in chapter 1, the major goal or
the mission of the robot manoeuvre is exploration. It is a bit unrealistic to have a final
destination for the path planner since the whole area is presumed to be unknown initially.
Regarding the above considerations and objectives, the planner is expected only to find
the most optimal path for the current scene and make the robot explore as many regions
as possible. Furthermore, to provide a suitable platform for the A∗algorithm, a temporary
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
47
==PAGE:54==
or intermediate goal at each scene is required. Combining all the requirements, the WFD
algorithm seems to be the most appropriate method to meet the demands. First of all, the
WFD is able to provide as much global information for the planner as possible (because
the frontier search is performed from the global perspective). Besides, the found frontiers
are not only helpful for the purpose of exploration but also serve the role of an intermediate
destination in the A∗algorithm. The workflow of path planning and the interaction between
these two algorithms are shown in figure 6.1.
Figure 6.1: Path planning workflow
The whole path planning can be divided into two parts: frontier searching and correspond-
ing path search, which are the left and right parts of figure 6.1, respectively. The first part,
the frontier search, includes two steps: finding all the frontiers in the global map and fron-
tiers filtering. The most optimal frontier will be available after this part (in the global frame).
Next, the second part can be conducted based on the selected frontier to find the most
optimal path for the current circumstance. The first part will be presented in subsection
6.2.1, and the second one is in subsection 6.2.2.
6.2.1
Intermediate destination
As mentioned in the very beginning of section 6.2, the left part in figure 6.1 contains two
steps. In the first step, the WFD (Wavefront Frontier Detector) algorithm will be performed
on the 2D map produced in the last chapter (chapter 5), which contains all the necessary
numerical and visualization information. Among all the pieces of information, the numeri-
cal one is critical for the following path search. Meanwhile, multiple frontiers will be found
in the first step.
Briefly, a frontier is a set of unknown points that each has at least one open-space neigh-
bour, and WFD is a Breadth-First-Search (BFS) based algorithm using two nested BFS
48
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:55==
to achieve frontier searching. Besides, WFD is suitable to be applied on an occupancy
grid, which is one of the forms of my mapping system. In more detail, the first (outer) BFS
is run on the known region of the current map, collecting all the frontier points. Next, the
second (inner) BFS is performed on the obtained frontier points to extract the final frontier.
To make the visualization more straightforward and concise, only the centre of these fron-
tiers will be displayed. The centre of the found frontier will be calculated as the representa-
tive and can be used as an intermediate goal in the A∗algorithm. Specifically, the centre
is obtained by calculating the median of all the extracted frontier points instead of the
mean because sometimes, the mean point may lie inside the unknown region too deep,
which may lead to a collision with an obstacle. By choosing the median, this phenomenon
can be avoided significantly.
Back to the intermediate goal obtaining. Only the most optimal path is required for each
scene, meaning the most suitable frontier needs to be selected from all the found ones,
and that is the reason for having procedure filtering in figure 6.1. In fact, the A∗algorithm
has been involved in this step as one of the criteria of frontier selection. To enhance
efficiency and maintain the whole operation within the computer’s capacity, two layers of
filtering are performed, whose detail is shown in figure 6.2.
Figure 6.2: Frontier filtering
The first filtering layer is based on the Euclidean distance from the frontier to the robot’s
current position, choosing up to 3 frontiers with minimal distance. The second layer is
based on the A∗distance, which is essentially the total cost of the path from the robot to
the frontier. The experiments showed that the program sometimes crashed without the
first layer. One of the guesses is that the A∗algorithm runs too many times just to find
the most suitable frontier, not to mention that the final path hasn’t been found, and this
phenomenon highlights the necessity of the first layer.
As for the WFD implementation, to ensure that only the explored region is searched, four
indicators are used to classify points, which are shown in the below list [18]. These in-
dicators are critical factors in differentiating this WFD algorithm from the original version,
making it significantly more efficient.
• Map-Open-List: points that have been enqueued by the outer BFS.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
49
==PAGE:56==
• Map-Close-List: points that have been dequeued by the outer BFS.
• Frontier-Open-List: points that have been enqueued by the inner BFS.
• Frontier-Close-List: points that have been dequeued by the inner BFS.
The WFD implementation is shown in algorithm 3. The most significant limitation of this
algorithm is the deactivation when the robot is out of the explored region. Based on the
definition, the WFD can only be initiated when the start cell (pose in algorithm 3) is explored.
However, due to the valid range of the depth camera, there will be a small blind region in
front of the robot. As a result, in some cases, the robot needs to move around to make
itself fall into the explored area to initiate the WFD.
Algorithm 3 Wavefront Frontier Detector [18]
Require: queuem
▷used for detecting frontier points from a given map.
Require: queuef
▷used for extracting a frontier from a given frontier cell.
Require: pose
▷current global position of the robot.
1: queuem ←∅
2: ENQUEUE(queuem, pose)
3: mark pose as ”Map-Open-List”
4: while queuem is not empty do
5:
p ←DEQUEUE(queuem)
6:
if p is marked as ”Map-Close-List” then
7:
continue
8:
if p is a frontier point then
9:
queuef ←∅
10:
NewFrontier ←∅
11:
ENQUEUE(queuef, p)
12:
mark p as ”Frontier-Open-List”
13:
while queuef is not empty do
14:
q ←DEQUEUE(queuef)
15:
if q is marked as {”Map-Close-List”, ”Frontier-Close-List”} then
16:
continue
17:
if q is a frontier point then
18:
add q to NewFrontier
19:
for all w ∈adj(q) do
20:
if w is not marked as {”Map-Close-List”, ”Frontier-Close-List”,
”Frontier-Open-List”} then
21:
ENQUEUE(queuef, w)
22:
mark w as ”Frontier-Open-List”
23:
mark q as ”Frontier-Close-List”
24:
save data of NewFrontier
25:
mark all points of NewFrontier as ”Map-Close-List”
26:
for all v ∈adj(p) do
27:
if v is not marked as {”Map-Open-List”,”Map-Close-List”} and v has at
least one ”Map-Open-Space” neighbor then
28:
ENQUEUE(queuem, v)
29:
mark v as ”Map-Open-List”
30:
mark p as ”Map-Close-List”
50
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:57==
6.2.2
Connection
Once the frontiers are filtered to only the most optimal one left, the final path search for
each scene can be performed. In this case, the A∗algorithm will only run four times (at
most), which is much less than solely using A∗distance to filter out the frontiers, proving
the significance of the first layer of filtering again.
Two indicators are required to implement the A∗algorithm, a bit similar to those in algo-
rithm 3, and shown below.
• Open-List: cells to be evaluated and expanded.
• Close-List: cells that have been evaluated and expanded.
The implementation of A∗algorithm is shown in algorithm 4. Initially, the gScore and
fScore maps (data containers) will be initialized so that every cell in the grid has an infinity
score, except the start cell, which will have a g score of 0 and f score of h (start).
Algorithm 4 A∗path finding
Require: queueO
▷a queue for ”Open_List”
Require: came_from
▷a map to reconstruct the path
1: Inputs:
a start point start
a goal point goal
2: Initialize:
mark start as ”Open_List”
ENQUEUE(queueO, start)
gScore [start] ←0
fScore [start] ←h (start)
3: while queueO is not empty do
4:
search queueO to find the element p with the lowest f score.
5:
p ←DEQUEUE(queueO)
6:
unmark p from ”Open_List”
7:
mark p as ”Close_List”
8:
if p = goal then
9:
return reconstructPath (p)
10:
for all w ∈adj(p) do
11:
if w is marked as ”Close_List” then
12:
continue
13:
gtemp ←gScore [p] + c (p, w)
14:
if gtemp < gScore[w] or w is not marked as ”Open_List” then
15:
gScore [w] ←gtemp
16:
fScore [w] ←gtemp + h (p, w)
17:
came_from [w] ←p
18:
if w is not marked as ”Open_List” then
19:
mark w as ”Open_List”
20:
ENQUEUE(queueO, w)
21: return empty path
In more detail, the g and f scores in algorithm 4 are the main advantages and character-
istics of this algorithm. The A∗algorithm always selects a path that can minimize the f
score calculated as equation 6.1 shows.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
51
==PAGE:58==
f (cell) = g (cell) + h (cell)
(6.1)
Specifically, the h function (heuristic function in lines 2 and 16) in equation 6.1 is the key
component that is able to guide the search, which is the main difference to distinguish it
from Dijkstra’s algorithm, while the g function is the actual cost from the start to the cell.
The heuristic function is essentially an estimation of the distance from the cell to the
goal. Depending on the robot’s movement mode, several distance-calculation methods
are available, such as Manhattan distance (the robot is only allowed to move in four di-
rections), diagonal distance (the robot is allowed to move in eight directions), Euclidean
distance, and Chebyshev distance. Considering the capacity of the Capra robot, the diag-
onal distance is chosen to calculate the heuristic estimation, which is shown in equation
6.2, where D is the length of a cell and D2 is the diagonal length.
h (cell) = D (dx + dy) + (D2 −2D) min (dx, dy)
(6.2)
To make the heuristic approximation match the dimension in reality, these two parameters
are chosen as equation 6.3 shows., where the res is one of the parameter settings in
chapter 5, indicating the size of each cell in the grid map. (pixel/m)
D = res−1
D2 =
√
2
(
res−1)
(6.3)
Besides, the c function in algorithm 4 (line 13) is the function to determine the cost of
moving from the current cell p to the neighbour w. In this project, this cost is chosen to be
the height data of each cell, meaning that the higher the next cell is, the larger the cost the
moving will take. The cost determination function is shown in equation 6.4, where grid [w]
means the access of the height data stored in that cell.
c (p, w) =





0.35,
if w is unexplored
grid [w] ,
if w is within the height threshold
1000 × grid [w] ,
if w is out of the height threshold
(6.4)
Once the path search is successful and completed, the reconstructPath function (line
9) is required to reconstruct and reorder the cells in the found path. The reconstruction
is mainly achieved by the operation in line 17, recording the currently evaluated cell as
the parent cell of its qualified neighbour in came_from. The idea of reconstruction is
illustrated in algorithm 5, where the input end is the last cell found in line 8 in algorithm 4.
6.3
Results
The results will be presented in two parts. The first will display how the WFD algorithm
works and the effects of frontier filtering. The second will show the results of path-finding
based on the filtered frontier. Both parts will include experiments conducted indoors (room
005, as figure 5.10 shows) and outdoors (building 329, as figure 4.3 shows). Most of the
results presented in this section will be positive, illustrating that this system works. A more
thoughtful and comprehensive analysis will be shown in chapter 7.
52
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:59==
Algorithm 5 Path reconstruction
Require: came_from
▷a map recording found cells and their parent cell
Require: path
▷a list to save the reconstructed path
1: Inputs:
end
2: add end to path
3: while end in came_from [keys] do
4:
end ←came_from [end]
5:
add end to path
6: reverse path
▷make the path from start towards goal
To obtain the best visualization effect, some of the map figures are extracted using a
specific ROI from the original map so that the illustration can have an appropriate size for
readers. In this case, some of the figures from the same map may have different centres,
visually. However, they are exactly the same point on the original map.
6.3.1
Intermediate destination search
This subsection will mainly compare before and after frontier filtering. The former can
illustrate that the WFD works properly and how it looks in the mapping system. The latter
still depicts how frontier filtering operates and its outcome.
Indoor
In the indoor test scenario (figure 6.3a), WFD found four frontiers in frame 77 (figure 6.3b).
In this case, it is difficult for the robot to determine which frontier to approach, which is
why frontier filtering is necessary. However, figure 6.3b illustrates that the WFD functions
properly. Each frontier in figure 6.3b meets the definition of a frontier. For example, the
frontier at the top-left corner in figure 6.3b is correct since that region was blocked by a
pile of plastic boxes, causing that area not to be scanned by the depth camera and left
as a blank area. Under this circumstance, the WFD would see that region as unexplored
and worth reaching.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.3: Effect of frontier filter indoors. (a) is the colour scene. (b) is the result before
filtering, while (c) is the one after.
Once the filtering layers are applied, the most optimal frontier was selected as figure 6.3c
shows, and the result is valid and reasonable under that circumstance. The median of the
frontier in figure 6.3c is exactly at the relatively open space in room 005. If the robot follows
the path found by the A∗algorithm, approaching that frontier, then the manoeuvre can not
only guide the robot through an obstacle-free route but also expand the map, achieving
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
53
==PAGE:60==
the objectives set in chapter 1. This proves again that the frontier filter is essential and
valuable for the path-planning system.
Outdoor
The outdoor scenario again shows the necessity of the frontier filter. Frame 148 shows that
five frontiers were found just at the beginning of the whole route, and this number could
be larger (8 or 9, for instance) when the robot went further or entered a more complex
environment. However, in this kind of wide open area, the selected frontier could be right
in the explored area because each pink point in figure 6.4b and figure 6.4c is the median
of all the cells that are contained in a single frontier, though the chosen frontier can still
be the intermediate goal for the A∗algorithm and derive a valid path for exploration.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.4: Effect of frontier filter outdoors. (a) is the colour scene. (b) is the result before
filtering, while (c) is the one after.
6.3.2
Combination
This subsection shows the integration results of frontier search, frontier filter, and path
planning, which can be seen as the primary outcome of this project. Only part of the
result will be presented here, and the major will be discussed in chapter 7, also with a
couple of new test scenarios to provide a more comprehensive examination of mapping
and path-planning systems.
Indoor
Frame 63 to frame 105 (figures 6.5d, 6.5e, 6.5f, 6.6d) show the positive or partially positive
products. Figure 6.5d and figure 6.5e both generate the correct and valid path towards
a frontier, which may be the correct solution derived from a not-that-right base. Actually.
the chosen frontier is at the wall of room 005, and it can be seen as a frontier by WFD
only because of the relatively low quality of environment mapping in that region.
More detailed, that region is relatively far from the robot, causing the error of depth (dis-
tance) estimation from the depth camera to be larger than expected. Besides, the odom-
etry error may make it worse since all the mapping (projection) operations are based on
the odometry data. The above two factors lead to a sort of noise or glitches in the wall
region, and therefore, a frontier is found over there.
However, this phenomenon may not be as terrible as it sounds. In fact, when the robot
approaches that region closer, as it did in frame 104 (figures 6.5c and 6.5f), a more accu-
rate estimation from the Kalman filter makes up for or stitches the noise in that area and
makes it looks like a corner, the way it should be. In figure 6.5f, the path planner again
gives a valid route with a correct frontier. This example shows not only the ability of the
A∗algorithm to avoid untraversable areas and find the best path towards that frontier but
54
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:61==
(a) Scene 63
(b) Scene 64
(c) Scene 104
(d) Path 63
(e) Path 64
(f) Path 104
Figure 6.5: Path-planning system’s results in frames 63, 64, and 104 in room 005.
also the performance of the frontier filter, providing the suitable intermediate goal for A∗
algorithm in each scene.
Frame 105 (figures 6.6a and 6.6d) almost shares the same scenario with the frame 104.
However, the frontier filter selects a different frontier this time, but the corresponding path
is still valid under that circumstance. This phenomenon exposes a potential problem for
the planner: inconsistency or instability. From the path’s point of view, the planner guides
the robot to investigate deeper (the corner on the right side) through the same path for both
scenarios, which is good and meets the expectations. However, for the frontier aspect,
the frontier filter returns different results even in an almost identical scenario.
(a) Scene 105
(b) Scene 117
(c) Scene 119
(d) Path 105
(e) Path 117
(f) Path 119
Figure 6.6: Path-planning system’s results in frames 105, 117, and 119 in room 005.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
55
==PAGE:62==
Frame 117 and frame 119 are the less successful but interesting examples of the plan-
ner’s performance. First, the frontier filter selects the wrong frontier in figure 6.6e, where,
obviously, other more applicable frontiers are available (in the left part of the map). How-
ever, the planner still finds a route towards that point. The found path again demonstrates
the ability and effect of the A∗algorithm. Although the path is not valid in reality, it is still
somehow reasonable, given the limited context of the generated map. The path goes
through an aperture in an area filled with obstacles (a desk, actually), by the unexplored
area (with less expensive cost than directly crossing the red area), and eventually reaches
the frontier. This manoeuvre embodies the concept of the A∗algorithm, finding the least-
costed (best) path, and the only problem causing its failure is the poor quality of mapping
in that region and improper choice from the frontier filter.
On the other hand, the result of frame 119 (figure 6.6c and figure 6.6f) is quite promising
since the planner sees that the robot is already at a dead end and therefore suggests
the robot to turn around to investigate another region, which is actually an area between
two desks. The only problem is still on the chosen frontier, which may not be the most
optimal one in the situation. Another potential risk is the crash along the found route.
Apparently, although the path guides the robot in the correct direction, it is still too close
to the obstacles, and collisions may happen accordingly. This phenomenon somehow
shows the limitation of the A∗algorithm.
Outdoor
The integrated results in the outdoor test scenario are slightly different from those inside
and a bit more meaningful for the whole project since the primary use case or target is
in the grass area (highly unstructured environment), though the areas passed through by
the planned route are still too flat, compared to the objective.
(a) Scene 168
(b) Scene 169
(c) Scene 187
(d) Path 168
(e) Path 169
(f) Path 187
Figure 6.7: Path-planning system’s results in frames 168, 169, and 187 around Building
329.
The results in frames 168 and 160 are both valid under those circumstances, whereas the
results are totally opposite. There are not many differences between these two scenes
(figure 6.7a and figure 6.7b), which can even be seen as identical, nearly. In frame 168,
the returned path points backwards (figure 6.7d), and the selected frontier lies deeply
56
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:63==
inside the explored region. This result seems useless at first glance. However, a new
or more inspiring path might be found after the robot reaches that frontier since there is
actually no specific destination on this map. Following this backward path may guide the
robot to explore the area in the other direction. On the other hand, the result in figure 6.7e
is more in line with the expectation, guiding the robot to move forward.
The result in frame 187, the frontier appearing nowhere for nonsense, happened occa-
sionally, specifically in this kind of wide-open test scenario. Currently, there is no clear
explanation for this phenomenon. One possible guess is something went wrong in the
frontier search and filter.
(a) Scene 227
(b) Scene 268
(c) Scene 294
(d) Path 227
(e) Path 268
(f) Path 294
Figure 6.8: Path-planning system’s results in frames 227, 268, and 294 around Building
329.
Frame 227 shows a similar outcome to frame 169. The found frontier is almost right in
front of the robot, so the path leads directly forward. Although this kind of output coincides
with the planned route of the outdoor test scenario, it rarely happened in the whole test,
frankly.
Frame 268 and frame 294 both give a path pointing to the side boundary of the explored
region. The only difference is the validity. The one in frame 294 will direct the robot
towards the wall, and a collision will happen accordingly. Honestly, this situation happened
quite frequently during the whole test. The reason for this is the missed frames caused
by the rise in process time. More detailed, apparently, the A∗in both frontier filter and
path search costs a lot of memory and time, not to mention that the broad are in outdoor
scenario takes more resource to calculate. As a result, the frame rate can not be as high as
the one without the path-planning system involved (the result in chapter 5), consequently
leading to some missed frames.
The missed frame will lead to the appearance of an aperture in the area where it should
be closed, like the wall in figure 6.8c. It is obvious that the region where the wall should
have been is zigzagged (figure 6.8f), showing a bit of discontinuity, and this makes the
path-planning system think there should be a frontier over there and it is accessible, which
it should not.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
57
==PAGE:64==
6.4
Summary
This chapter utilizes two algorithms to build the path-planning system, namely, WFD and
A∗. The whole system consists of three main components: frontier searcher (only WFD
involved), frontier filter (A∗partially involved), and pathfinding (only A∗involved). The
results in section 6.3 show abundant information about this system and also prove it is
feasible. Some of the results suggest that the system can actually direct the robot to the
correct place to explore more areas. Even though it is already at a dead end, the system
can still guide the robot to turn around and continue the exploration mission, showing the
ability to correctly interpret the map context.
However, other results also reveal the concerns or the potential risks. One is the cost
of algorithm implementation. The experiments have already shown that the A∗algorithm
costs a lot of memory and could be really time-consuming when the evaluated area is too
expansive. The latter will decrease the map quality generated by the mapping system,
making the path-planning performance worse and falling into a vicious circle. Another
one is the limitations of both systems (mapping and path-planning) themselves. As for
the mapping system, the odometry error will compromise the mapping quality to some
degree, leading to some incorrect frontiers being found. For the path-planning system,
the path found by the A∗algorithm may sometimes be too close to the obstacle area,
causing collision concerns.
In conclusion, despite some not-that-ideal results, the general performance of path plan-
ning is still promising. With some supportive approaches, the stability and quality of the
found path can be increased.
58
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:65==
7
System test
Several comprehensive tests will be performed in this chapter to examine the performance
of both mapping and path-planning systems. To this end, a complete program will be built
to do all the test tasks, and this will be presented in section 7.1. The test scenarios
include indoor and outdoor. The indoor test location is mainly in the corridor of Building
326, while the outdoor one contains two parts, one still around Building 329 and the other
one in the grass area approximately 200 m from Building 329 (close to DTU ASTA) to
simulate the actual use case, the farm. The details of the test scenarios, planned route,
and corresponding results will be shown in section 7.2. The result analysis (section 7.3)
includes several scopes, such as time, quality, and the ability to interpret the environment.
7.1
Main program
A main program will be built to integrate all the critical functions to accomplish all the
test tasks and make everything more efficient. Among them, the logging system plays
an essential role since it records all the necessary information for further analysis and
inspection, and the details will be elaborated in subsection 7.1.1. Due to the diversity of
evaluated performance, the main program will contain several sub-programs for selection,
depending on the task contents, and this will be shown in subsection 7.1.2.
7.1.1
Logging function
The most concerned information includes the records of the robot’s internal data (GPS
and odometry), the time spent on each component and the selected program, and all the
outputs from the program. Specifically, the outputs primarily refer to the trajectory records,
the maps, and the corresponding colour images. Basically, one of the main purposes of
the logging system is to provide the necessary data for the replay function, which will be
mentioned in the next subsection. Another one is for the analysis, like time examination,
for instance.
7.1.2
Program selection
Since there are multiple situations and performance evaluations that need to be taken
care of, the main program is designed as figure 7.1 shows, and the primary ones can be
seen in the list below.
• Streaming: The core program in this project. The procedures inside are shown in
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
59
==PAGE:66==
figure 1.1. Briefly, the inputs are collected by the perception system first, go through
the communication system next, and then the processed data enters the mapping
system, generating the map and trajectory. Finally, the path-planning system per-
forms the path search on the results from the last procedure.
• Replay: The function to replay the main results from the streaming program, includ-
ing the colour images, maps and trajectories. Its main application is to efficiently
and roughly examine the performance of the streaming program and also serve the
purpose of debugging.
• Recording: This program will not generate any outputs other than the basic logged
data, which is necessary for the streaming program.
Figure 7.1: Demonstration of program selection
Specifically, the streaming program can operate under two circumstances. One is directly
running while the robot and the depth camera are working (command 1 in figure 7.1),
whereas the other one works on the recorded data from the recording program (command
6 in figure 7.1). The latter mode is more commonly used to make the whole development
more time-efficient.
7.2
Scenarios
This section will present how the test scenarios are structured and planned. Generally,
the test scenes can be divided into indoor and outdoor cases. The former is addressed
in the following subsection, and the latter is in subsection 7.2.2.
7.2.1
Indoor scenario
The indoor test scenes are quite essential for the whole project, especially the develop-
ment period. Although the major use case is the grass areas (farm), it is intuitive to me
that the system is unlikely to work in that complex situation if it is unable to operate in a
highly structured environment (indoor). Besides, testing inside costs far less than outside
in terms of time. Therefore, more than half of the tests are conducted indoors, and the
feedback and phenomenon observed from them are really valuable for the entire devel-
opment, as I expected.
Since the scenario of room 005 and its results have been presented in chapter 5 and
chapter 6, the one with a larger scope will be used, i.e., the interior of building 326, which
can be seen in figure 7.2a and figure 7.2b. Although the interior of building 326 is the
main indoor test scenario, some of the results from room 005 (figure 5.10) could still be
supportive of illustrating some phenomena or effects.
60
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:67==
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.2: Indoor test plan. (a) is the investigated region. (b) is the planned route.
Briefly, the planned route starts from the door of room 005 and then goes straight towards
room 011 (segment 1 in figure 7.2b). Next, go backwards almost down to the end of the
corridor (segment 2). After that, a detour to the space right next to the toilet is taken
(segment 3). Finally, direct to the landing, area D in figure 7.2a (segment 4).
7.2.2
Outdoor scenario
The outdoor scenarios include two regions. One is the area around building 329, where
mentioned in chapter 4 for GPS and odometry validation. Therefore, this scene is sup-
portive in the outdoor tests and the corresponding route is shown in figure 4.3. The other
one, the primary one, is the area around the building ASTA (Autonomous Systems Test
Arena) shown in figure 7.3, where the analysis mainly focuses.
Figure 7.3: Test scene in grass area
Since the route around ASTA is much longer than any used before, it is divided into 3
segments as the three colours in figure 7.3. Therefore, there are three corresponding
recording sequences in the test. Sequence 1 corresponds to the red route, starting from
an entrance with the boom barrier (figure 7.4a) straight up until it reaches the edge of the
grass area (figure 7.4b), driving into the grass area with a bit of orientation. Specifically, a
number of trees can be found in the grass area (figure 7.4c). After that, drive in the grass
area while following the wall of ASTA until the robot reaches a small path (figure 7.4d).
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
61
==PAGE:68==
Finally, take a right turn on that path and go forward until a cornerstone is seen.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 7.4: Scenes in sequence 1.
The blue route represents sequence 2 and starts from where sequence 1 ends. The
route goes towards the Fysikvej, while the first half is actually a slope. Before arriving at
Fysikvej, take a right turn and go straight again to run as a square, as figure 7.3 shows.
Sequence 3 is more complicated than the other two. It goes along a trial first, then drives
into an area filled with bushes, grass, and branches. in this region, the robot will follow a
route which is not structured as the others to investigate as much space as possible, and
this is represented as a small circle in figure 7.3.
7.3
Test results analysis
Several scopes of examination are included in this section. Subsection 7.3.1 will show the
performance of the mapping system mostly, which could be seen as the elemental out-
put of the whole navigation system since it provides a fundamental platform for the path-
planning system. The quality of it heavily affects the performance of the path-planning
system. The outcomes of the path-planning system will be evaluated in subsection 7.3.2,
focusing on the path-planning system’s response to the current map context and the qual-
ity of the found path. Last but not least, since the processing time is also one of the
objectives of this project, the time analysis of the mainly used program (streaming pro-
gram mentioned in section 7.1) will be presented in subsection 7.3.3. Specifically, in all
the maps used in this section, the blue cross indicates where the robot was initiated, while
the black one is the current location of the robot. As for the trajectory, the blue arrow indi-
cator indicates the robot’s heading and position.
7.3.1
Environment interpretation
This subsection will mainly address the performance of the mapping system, showing how
well it can interpret the surrounding information and the robot’s internal status collected
by the perception system to a readable map for both human beings and the path-planning
system. More detailed, the elevation map is introduced again to enhance the visualization
effect. This function will not be activated during normal operation, meaning that it only
serves a supportive role for thesis writing and will not affect the time spent on the program
and corresponding time analysis.
Indoor case
The mapping system’s general performance in the indoor case is shown in figure 7.5. The
information in these figures is abundant. First of all, the majority (contour) highly matches
the details of the investigated area in figure 7.2a, showing that this mapping system is
actually feasible in a structured environment. The recorded trajectory in figure 7.5b is
also in line with the planned route in figure 7.2b. However, it is also apparent that the
generated map has a certain rotation compared to the one in figure 7.2a, and this fully
illustrates the mechanism of the mapping system and the limitations as well.
The orientation of the map depends on the robot’s initial status since the whole mapping
system operates on an odometry basis. Without the support from the GPS, it is unlikely
62
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:69==
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.5: Final map and trajectory of Building 326. (a) is the map, while (b) is the
trajectory.
to acquire the absolute position like figure 4.6a and figure 4.6b did, though this is not a
severe problem in this project. Besides, the position indicators also show that the relative
localization (mentioned in chapter 5) does function. In fact, several phenomena or limita-
tions are revealed in figure 7.5a at the same time. The first one is some stretches on the
map. Most of them, in this indoor test scenario, are caused by the transparency of the
glass doors, which technically is not the problem of the mapping system itself. The capa-
bility of the depth camera is outstanding, and the depth imaging can even go through the
glass. The others are generated by the environment itself. Those stretches in the lower
area are actually the staircase up and down, explaining why they are red on the map.
(a) Scene 102
(b) Scene 250
(c) Scene 387
(d) Map 102
(e) Map 250
(f) Map 387
Figure 7.6: Mapping system’s results in frames 102, 250, and 387.
Another one is the precision of the wall projection. Around the blue cross, it can be seen
that the wall shows a bit of distortion or discontinuity. This phenomenon also appears on
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
63
==PAGE:70==
the other end of the corridor, which is much worse, frankly. All of these are caused by the
odometry error, which will accumulate along the way, and a surge will even appear when
rotation is involved.
If the final map is broken down on the time aspect. the phenomenon mentioned above
can be observed more apparently. Compared to the final map in figure 7.5a, figures 7.6d,
7.6e and 7.6f all present a better quality of environment projection since the robot was way
close to scanned regions at each moment, meaning those regions were updated with the
most accurate and fresh estimation.
The elevation maps shown in figure 7.7a and figure 7.7b perfectly illustrate the mechanism
(info map) behind the mapping system again and the ability for the environment modelling.
The height data in the elevation map is directly derived from the info map mentioned in
chapter 5. With the height threshold (0.1 m for indoor case) specified in the mapping sys-
tem’s initialization, all the maps seen in this chapter can be rendered efficiently from the
info map. Apparently, the mapping system is capable of correctly modelling the environ-
ment.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.7: Elevation maps of Building 326. (a) is the right part, while (b) is the left.
Shortly, the mapping system is capable of depicting the environmental details on the map
and recording the correct trajectory along the travelling. Furthermore, the info map mech-
anism has been proven successful in carrying out all the mapping-related operations. Al-
though some minor flaws exist, the generated map is still competent enough to be the
platform for the ensuing path-planning operation.
Outdoor case
The critical difference between indoor and outdoor test scenarios is the height threshold
parameter (mentioned in chapter 5) in the mapping system. For the indoor scenario, a
highly structured environment, this parameter is set to 0.1 m. On the contrary, the outdoor
scenario is way more complicated than the indoor one, especially the three sequences in
the grass area. Therefore, these two kinds of scenarios cannot share the same parameter.
In this case, this parameter will be set to 0.2 m and 0.3 m, respectively, to investigate which
one is more suitable for the outdoors. Specifically, only sequence 1 will be used to discuss
the choice of height threshold. Once the conclusion is made, the following sequences will
be only tested with the chosen threshold.
Figure 7.8 shows the mapping system’s general performance in an outdoor scenario, es-
pecially the map in figure 7.8b. Two obvious and continuous red boundaries can be seen.
The lower right one describes the iron fence surrounding several pieces of electricity equip-
64
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:71==
ment, whereas the upper left one is the wall of ASTA. Several red dots in the middle of
the explored area indicate the trees in the grass area.
Basically, figure 7.8a and figure 7.8b are nearly identical, except for more red regions at
the explored area’s margin in figure 7.8b, which is caused by the relatively low height
threshold. The trajectory in figure 7.8c roughly matches the planned red route in figure
7.3 despite a little angle difference made by odometry accumulated error.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.8: Final maps and trajectory of sequence 1 (starts from the lower right and ends
at the upper left). (a) is the final map with height threshold = 0.3 m, while (b) is the one
with 0.2 m. (c) is the final trajectory.
As mentioned in subsection 7.2.2, sequence 1 starts from an entrance with a boom barrier
leading to a gravel road, and this is shown in figure 7.9a. Obviously, the map in figure 7.9c
models the boom barrier much better than that in figure 7.9b. Either way, the mapping
system is capable of depicting the surroundings correctly.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.9: Mapping system’s results in frame 188 of sequence 1. (a) is the colour scene.
(b) is the map with height threshold = 0.3 m, while (c) is the one with 0.2 m.
Another example used to validate the environment modelling ability is shown in figure 7.10.
Obviously, a tree is right in front of the robot, though there are actually two others on both
sides, which are out of the current field of view but have been scanned previously. Both
maps in figure 7.10b and figure 7.10c show these three trees (three small red regions
around the black cross). However, the former can only clearly show two of them, while all
three are distinctly described by the latter.
Several extra frames are necessary to examine the choice of height threshold. The first
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
65
==PAGE:72==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.10: Mapping system’s results in frame 566 of sequence 1. (a) is the colour scene.
(b) is the map with height threshold = 0.3 m, while (c) is the one with 0.2 m.
one is shown in figure 7.11. There is a series of electricity units on the right side sur-
rounded by the iron fence, as figure 7.12a shows. Ideally, this region should be pure red,
indicating that the area is fully untraversable, which is exactly what the map in figure 7.11c
did. Contrarily, the one in figure 7.11b can only present that region with some green areas,
which is too sparse and not desired.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.11: Mapping system’s results in frame 400 of sequence 1. (a) is the colour scene.
(b) is the map with height threshold = 0.3 m, while (c) is the one with 0.2 m.
Another example is shown in figure 7.12, which is one of the best examples to illustrate
the effect of the height threshold. Apparently, there are a bunch of dense dead branches
right in front of the robot. Since these branches are so thick and hard, the robot is unlikely
to be able to drive through them. In this case, this area definitely needs to be marked
as untraversable (red on the map). The map in figure 7.12c perfectly labels them as red,
whereas the one in figure 7.12b seems to just ignore those obstacles and see them as a
flat area.
With all the examples (figures 7.8, 7.9, 7.10, 7.11, and 7.12), the height threshold of 0.2 m
is chosen confidently since it can provide a more detailed and competent environment
model than 0.3 m does while making less noise than those made by setting the threshold
to 0.1 m. After selecting 0.2 m to be the height threshold, the tests on sequences 2 and 3
can be conducted as follows.
The general test results of sequence 2 (blue route in figure 7.3) can be seen in figure 7.13.
66
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:73==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.12: Mapping system’s results in frame 778 of sequence 1. (a) is the colour scene.
(b) is the map with height threshold = 0.3 m, while (c) is the one with 0.2 m.
Basically, the recorded trajectory (figure 7.13b) is roughly in line with the planned route
despite the fact that the head and the tail of the trajectory are not fully connected, which
is obviously caused by the odometry error, and this can also be observed on the map in
figure 7.13a, the discontinuity of two upper left red segments, which actually represent
the wall of ASTA.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.13: Final maps and trajectory of sequence 2. (a) is the final map. (b) is the final
trajectory.
To better analyze the performance, several examples are picked. To begin with, it is clear
that there is a linear displacement at the beginning of the trajectory, corresponding to the
area around the blue cross on the map (figure 7.13a), and this is caused by the odometry
error. Figure 7.14 illustrates the situation when this displacement happened. Apparently,
the robot was entirely stationary at that moment, while the odometry perceived that there
was a displacement, which is absolutely incorrect. Fortunately, this kind of disaster only
happened once in this sequence, and the maps in figure 7.14b and figure 7.14c still show
that the mapping system is able to present the surroundings’ details on the map (a cor-
nerstone in front of the robot and the wall of ASTA at the left edge). As time goes by,
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
67
==PAGE:74==
once the upper right region in figure 7.14c was explored again, it would be updated by the
latest estimation and correctly modelled, as figure 7.13a shows. This somehow indicates
that the mapping system is robust enough to deal with minor odometry errors. However,
once the errors are accumulated to some extent, then the whole mapping system will fail
to present the correct environmental information still.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7.14: Mapping system’s results in frames 104 and 105 of sequence 2. (a) is the
colour scene in frames 104 and 105. (b) is the map in frame 104, while (c) is the one in
frame 105.
(a) Scene 659
(b) Scene 722
(c) Scene 847
(d) Scene 963
(e) Map 659
(f) Map 722
(g) Map 847
(h) Map 963
Figure 7.15: Mapping system’s results in frames 659, 722, 847, and 963 of sequence 2.
Positively, figure 7.15 displays how the mapping system works outdoors, and the evolution
of the map can be directly observed. Apparently, an overgrown area is in front of the robot,
which extends to a trail (in figure 7.15b) and lies on the right along the robot’s trajectory.
This was the first sight of this area on the trip, and that area was marked as red as figure
7.15e did, showing again that the mapping system can correctly process and display the
height and position of the objects. In frame 722, which had taken approximately 21 s
since frame 659, the robot stopped by the trail (figure 7.15b), and the overgrown area
was clearly visualized on the map as an intensive red area on the right side of the robot
(facing the path).
In addition, frame 847 shows that the robot started climbing along a trail, which is in the
68
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:75==
middle of some sort of hedges on the left and bushes and a tree on the right, and this
scene was precisely portraited by the mapping system as figure 7.15g did. Furthermore,
when the robot reached a corner of the trail, a mound appeared in front of it, and again,
the mound was depicted correctly around the black cross (most left part in figure 7.15h).
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.16: Final maps and trajectory of sequence 3. (a) is the final map. (b) is the final
trajectory.
The general test results of the last sequence, number 3, are shown in figure 7.16. Similarly,
the recorded trajectory still matches the planned route (green curve in figure 7.3). To
begin with, this area is the most similar to the actual farm, which is the target use case.
The weeds in this area are much higher than those in the other two. Besides, there are
a number of trees here, a container, and a mobile house, making this area the most
complicated one among all the test scenes. Basically, each cluster of red cells in figure
7.16a could be one of those obstacles. Either way, all the obstacles are roughly displayed
on the map.
(a) Scene 139
(b) Scene 271
(c) Scene 351
(d) Scene 600
(e) Map 139
(f) Map 271
(g) Map 351
(h) Map 600
Figure 7.17: Mapping system’s results in frames 139, 271, 351, and 600 of sequence 3.
First of all, several trees are clearly displayed around the current location on the map as
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
69
==PAGE:76==
figure 7.17e shown. After a few frames, the robot stopped by high weeds (figure 7.17b),
and again, they were marked as a large red area at the upper left of the explored area
(figure 7.17f). In frame 351, the robot saw a container (figure 7.17c) with a clump of weeds,
which were all presented on the map as well. Lastly, in frame 600, the robot saw a tree
by the stone-padded road on the way heading to the destination (a small flower garden),
and it was shown in front of the black cross in figure 7.17h.
7.3.2
Path analysis
This subsection mainly analyzes the performance of the path-planning system. As men-
tioned in chapter 6, three critical components are included in this system, namely, frontier
search, frontier filter, and pathfinding. Since the first two have been fully discussed in
chapter 6, the focus of this subsection will be on the final returned path, the outputs from
the last component. The discussion will be split into indoor and outdoor scenarios.
Indoor case
In the corridor of Building 326, the most successful or ideal outcomes of pathfinding are
shown from figure 7.18e to figure 7.18h. All of the paths found on these four maps are
not only valid under each circumstance but also match the planned route or the robot’s
movements, making them the most desired outcomes in this test. The path in figure 7.18e
points directly forward, guiding the robot to keep moving along the corridor, which is the
same as the planned route. As for the one in figure 7.18f, it can be observed that the
robot had turned around and prepared to investigate the other end of the corridor, and the
returned path correspondingly pointed to the same direction.
(a) Scene 117
(b) Scene 193
(c) Scene 200
(d) Scene 233
(e) Path 117
(f) Path 193
(g) Path 200
(h) Path 233
Figure 7.18: Path planning system’s results in frames 117, 193, 200, and 233 of Building
326.
In view of figure 7.18g and figure 7.18h, the robot almost went through the door in figure
7.18g, and actually, there were three available spaces to go further as figure 7.2a shows
(areas B, C, and D). Under this situation, the path planner found the path towards area
C by taking a 90-degree left turn. When the robot went deeper into the junction (figure
7.18d), the returned path still had the same direction as the one in figure 7.18h, showing
that the path planner’s performance can be stable under certain circumstances.
On the contrary, some limitations and drawbacks can still be found in the results. First
of all, the path planner shows a bit of inconsistency or, in a positive perspective, high
70
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:77==
sensitivity, which can be seen from figure 7.19e to figure 7.19h. Given figure 7.19e and
figure 7.19f, the robot was in area A, facing almost the same view. However, the path
planner had totally opposite results for these two scenes; one directed forward, whereas
the other one went backwards. Furthermore, these two results appeared repeatedly from
frame 90 to frame 97, which approximately took 3.2 s in the real world. This phenomenon
is mainly caused by the frontier filter. As explained in chapter 6, Euclidean distance and
A∗cost are two criteria used to filter the frontiers. In fact, from frame 90 to frame 97, two
primary frontiers are available at both ends of the explored region. However, the constant
changes in Euclidean distance and frequent A∗cost calculation make the frontier filter
highly sensitive and frequently chooses the frontier from one of these two main frontiers.
(a) Scene 90
(b) Scene 97
(c) Scene 245
(d) Scene 246
(e) Path 90
(f) Path 97
(g) Path 245
(h) Path 246
Figure 7.19: Path planning system’s results in frames 90, 97, 245, and 246 of Building
326.
This phenomenon is even worse in figure 7.19g and figure 7.19h. These two frames (245
and 246) are nearly identical. However, merely minor changes in the robot’s position give
totally different results. The path in figure 7.19g is way complicated and not valid, while
the other one in figure 7.19h shows an effective result.
Another drawback is the deactivation of the path planner while the whole program is still
running, shown in figure 7.20e. This effect is quite harmful to the navigation system since
the robot will have no idea what to do next for a short time or, in the worst-case scenario,
even be stuck there. This is because the robot was out of the explored region at that
moment, and the WFD algorithm will be deactivated in this case as the explanation in
chapter 6.
Figure 7.20f exposes several concerns. The first one is that the path planner has a ten-
dency to find a path that follows the edge of the obstacle area, which may lead to a
collision if the robot really follows this kind of route. Besides, the found frontier is not ideal
under that circumstance, where apparently other better candidates exist. Similarly, figure
7.20g shows that sometimes the found path would be overly complicated than it should
be, which can also be seen in figure 7.19g. This will make the path not executable for
the robot. Last but not least, figure 7.20h reveals another problem: the dilemma of being
stuck in a fully-explored area. In frame 325, the robot had explored areas B, C, and D,
while area A was still available for further investigation. However, the current design of
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
71
==PAGE:78==
(a) Scene 153
(b) Scene 224
(c) Scene 289
(d) Scene 325
(e) Path 153
(f) Path 224
(g) Path 289
(h) Path 325
Figure 7.20: Path planning system’s results in frames 153, 224, 289, and 325 of Building
326.
the planner is unable to find the path towards area A since the frontiers over there will be
eliminated by the frontier filter. In this case, the robot would just be stuck over there and
keep finding an invalid path.
Outdoor case
(a) Scene 203
(b) Scene 248
(c) Scene 498
(d) Scene 617
(e) Path 203
(f) Path 248
(g) Path 498
(h) Path 617
Figure 7.21: Path planning system’s results in frames 203, 248, 498, and 617 of sequence
1.
As explained in chapter 6, the A∗algorithm highly costs memory and could be really time-
consuming when the processing area (the info map) is too large. Therefore, a regular reset
is used on the map when the path planner is activated. With this method, the outdoor test
site can be accommodated on a map with an acceptable size. The only drawback of this
method is that it makes the generated map lose its global context, though the map is not
the concern in this subsection.
Figure 7.21 shows the path planner’s performance on sequence 1. To begin with, the
72
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:79==
path found in figure 7.21e shows that the planner is capable of avoiding the obstacles
(a boom barrier in figure 7.21a) to reach the destination, though the path is too close to
the obstruction. On the contrary, the result in frame 248 reveals one of the most signifi-
cant risks outdoors, the dilemma of being stuck in the middle of an explored area, where
surrounded by the unknown. More detailed, under the circumstance of frame 248, the
found frontier will just be the whole boundary of the green area, making its median (the
representative of that frontier) lie deeply within the explored area. In this case, the robot
will stay at the same frontier and explore no further space. This kind of dilemma usually
happens in a wide open area, where most of it can be seen as traversable.
Another risk is shown in figure 7.21g. The path leads towards the inside of the building’s
edge. This phenomenon has also been seen in the outdoor scenario (around building
329) in chapter 6, and the reason behind this phenomenon has been explained as well.
This commonly happens in situations where one side is the edge of a building while the
other side is a wide-open area. Figure 7.21h shows the positive result. The returned path
directly points forward and is valid in that situation.
(a) Scene 219
(b) Scene 270
(c) Scene 403
(d) Scene 496
(e) Path 219
(f) Path 270
(g) Path 403
(h) Path 496
Figure 7.22: Path planning system’s results in frames 219, 270, 403, and 496 of sequence
2.
Deactivation appeared again in figure 7.22e, showing that this kind of risk could happen
both indoors and outdoors. The potential damage it may cause has been elaborated
in the indoor scenario. In addition, the result in figure 7.22f indicates the diversity of
path generation. Specifically, a drivable area was right in front of the robot, as figure
7.22b shows. However, the planner chose the path pointing to another direction, which
was also valid under that circumstance. This characteristic is valuable for the exploration
mission, the main purpose of the manoeuvring since it can make the robot move in multi-
direction. The path in figure 7.22g also embodied this characteristic; the path pointed
backwards while the robot was facing forward, and the front area was traversable. The
phenomenon in figure 7.22h is also one of the most concerned risks, a path that is way
more complicated than it should be. Apparently, the found frontier was just right ahead
of the robot, whereas the path planner gave an extremely curved path toward it. Frankly,
this kind of path appears from time to time in any test scenario, and there is currently no
explanation or solution to it.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
73
==PAGE:80==
(a) Scene 84
(b) Scene 115
(c) Scene 163
(d) Scene 278
(e) Path 84
(f) Path 115
(g) Path 163
(h) Path 278
Figure 7.23: Path planning system’s results in frames 84, 115, 163, and 278 of sequence
3.
The results of sequence 3 are shown in figure 7.23. Being surrounded by several trees,
the planner was still able to find a path towards a drivable space between two trees, as
figure 7.23e shows. However, the planner in figure 7.23f found an invalid path because
of an incorrect frontier, a common reason for path searching failure in this project. The
phenomenon in figure 7.23g is still one of the most concerned risks of the path planner,
a path leading to a non-sense frontier appearing far from the explored area. This only
happens in outdoor scenarios so far, and there has not been a specific explanation and
solution to it. Positively, the planner successfully found a valid path ahead, which was a
bit of leaning on the right side, in figure 7.23h.
7.3.3
Time analysis
The time analysis evaluates the processing time for each frame and the time for each
component in the program. More detailed, the components in the program include logging,
pose updates in both map and trajectory, point cloud creation, point cloud filtering (depth-
wise), point cloud sampling, mapping and path planning (if the path planner is activated),
and visualization. Particularly, the programme can be divided into two types: without and
with the path planner activated. The time data used for analysis is taken from the test
of the outdoor scenario, sequence 1, specifically. Theoretically, the processing time is
irrelevant to scenarios, meaning that the programme should have the same processing
time indoors and outdoors.
Without path planner
The main outcomes in this mode include the map and the trajectory generated from the
mapping system. The time analysis while the path planner is deactivated is shown in
figure 7.24. Figure 7.24a shows that each frame averagely takes 0.2 s in this mode, which
is 5 FPS, equivalent to the update rate of the map and the trajectory, basically. This is quite
outstanding, given that the objective is desired to be 2 FPS only. In view of figure 7.24b,
apparently, the point cloud filtering (cyan curve) dominantly takes 130 ms, approximately,
which accounts for over half of the total spent time (purple curve) in each iteration. Logging
and point cloud creation take the second most time (16 ms, roughly), while the rest are
nearly negligible.
74
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:81==
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.24: Time analysis while the path planning deactivated. (a) is the time for each
frame. (b) is the time for each component.
With path planner
When the path planner is activated, the found path will be added to the map generated
from the mapping system, and the corresponding time analysis is shown in figure 7.25.
As mentioned in chapter 6, the critical technique in the path-planning system, the A∗al-
gorithm, is highly memory-costed and time-consuming, and the latter attribute can be
observed in figure 7.25a. Obviously, a surge of processing time can be observed around
frame 200, indicating that the path planner actually started operating (because of the con-
ditions of WFD).
(a)
(b)
Figure 7.25: Time analysis while the path planning activated. (a) is the time for each
frame. (b) is the time for each component.
Compared to figure 7.24a, the average time for each frame climbs from 0.2 s to 0.33 s,
which is about 3 FPS. This may sound acceptable since it still achieves the speed ob-
jective; however, in real streaming, this increase gives the user stronger feelings than
the numbers in figure 7.25a do. While streaming, this growth of processing time leads
to some missed frames, decreasing the mapping quality and causing some pathfinding
errors accordingly. The user can also directly feel the delay caused by the rise to some
extent.
If the analysis is broken down to each component, then the influence of the path-planning
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
75
==PAGE:82==
system can still be seen in figure 7.25b. The time for mapping and path-planning systems
(matcha green curve) overtakes that of point cloud sampling (cyan curve) as the most
time-consuming component of all. By activating the path planner, the matcha green curve
becomes dominant in figure 7.25b while it was negligible in 7.24b. Furthermore, it is
apparent to observe a periodic troughing in both purple and matcha green curves, and the
reason for that is the regular reset mechanism mentioned in subsection 7.3.2. Whenever
the map is reset, the path planner will be deactivated until the conditions of WFD are
fulfilled again.
7.4
Achievement assessment
In this section, all findings and associated analyses in this chapter will be juxtaposed
against the initial objectives outlined in chapter 1. The discussion will be divided into
three key scopes: overall performance, mapping system, and path-planning system.
7.4.1
General performance
The most concerned general performance is the speed, especially the one of processing
each frame from the stream. If this rate is too low, then it is unlikely to deploy this navi-
gation system in practical applications. Normally, the update rate of the mapping system
is about 5 FPS, which is way beyond the expectation, 2 FPS. Even though the activation
of the path planner increases the processing time, implying a decline in FPS, the update
rate of a complete system (3 FPS) is still higher than the desired one (2 FPS). As a result,
this objective can be seen as accomplished confidently.
7.4.2
Mapping performance
The three key requirements for the mapping system are, basically, the ability to interpret
the environment, stability, and applicability to unstructured surroundings. For the first
condition, mediocre could be the best description. To begin with, there is no doubt that
the mapping system is able to precisely generate the trajectory for both indoor and outdoor
scenarios as long as the odometry itself functions. When it comes to the map, although the
mapping system is indeed capable of projecting each obstacle and other environmental
information on the map with the correct location on the first visit, revisiting these explored
areas could compromise their location on the map. More detailed, once the explored
area is revisited, they will be updated with the new height and location data, while the
latter has been compromised by the accumulated odometry errors, meaning that they
cannot be correctly projected on where they were and causing misleading or low-quality
map context. This is the biggest constraint of the mapping system.
As for stability, the implementation of the Kalman filter highly improves it and makes the
map stable enough for further operations. In terms of outdoor applicability, the main limi-
tation mentioned in the last paragraph will be worse when the system operates outdoors
since it is much more unstructured, and there are a lot of obstacles in this kind of en-
vironment, such as trees, clumps of weeds, and buildings. However, with the simple
manoeuvring route (no cross-path), as in sequences 1 and 2, the situation may not be as
bad as with the relatively complicated route.
Furthermore, the observation from figures 7.8,7.13, and 7.16 shows that it has a certain
degree of difficulty for users to understand the outdoor map context directly, compared
the indoor one in figure 7.5. In more detail, the results in figure 7.5 clearly show the
contour and detailed interior of Building 326 as figure 7.2a displays. On the contrary,
the connections from the outdoor maps to the corresponding actual scenes are difficult
to build. Without the real scenes taken along the manoeuvring, it is hard to tell what the
surroundings or what the scenes that the robot was looking at look like. However, from the
76
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:83==
path-planning system’s point of view, either the indoor or outdoor map context is sufficient
for it to find the path.
7.4.3
Pathfinding performance
Although the function of path planning was not expected to be accomplished completely
at the very beginning of this thesis, its final outcomes are still abundant and worth investi-
gating. As a matter of fact, the progress of the path-planning system is indeed beyond my
expectations. The discussion is divided into two categories: positive and negative. Since
the path planner includes three essential components, i.e., frontier search, frontier filter,
and pathfinding, the outcomes could be from one of the components.
Positive
The positive results are listed below.
• Frontier search: This outcome is based on the first component mentioned before.
In each iteration, multiple frontiers are successfully found to serve as the main re-
source for the other two components to achieve the final path search.
• Diversity of path generation: On the basis that the returned path is valid, the
path varies from frame to frame, meaning that the path planner will not always find
the path pointing in a specific direction, and this characteristic is valuable for the
exploration mission. The planner can still have some relatively straightforward paths,
such as the one pointing right ahead or backwards.
• Obstacle avoidance: All the results in subsection 7.3.2 indicate that the planner is
able to find the path while avoiding the obstacles as long as the destination is valid.
However, this effect is not exactly perfect though, and this will be explained in the
negative part.
Negative
The main potential risks of the path planner will be discussed in this part.
• Incorrect final frontier: This phenomenon is majorly caused by the frontier filter,
and several cases are included. To begin with, sometimes, a frontier may appear
far from the explored region, which does not make any sense since the frontier on
the map is actually the median of all the cells in the found frontier. In this case, a
path leading to the middle of nowhere will be returned (figure 7.23g). In addition,
some frontiers may lie deep or behind the obstacles, e.g., the wall, as figures 7.20f,
7.21g, and 7.23f show. The explanation includes the discontinuity of the edge of the
buildings caused by the missed frames, low mapping quality, and the limitation of
the frontier filter itself.
• Extremely complicated path: Sometimes, even though the destination is just ahead
of the robot, an excessively complex path is returned for no reason (figure 7.22h).
This kind of path could happen at any destination.
• Deactivation while operating: Due to the valid range of the depth camera, the
design of the point cloud sampling, and the conditions of WFD, path search is de-
activated while operating once the robot falls out of the explored area. Moving a
bit around to go back to the explored region could fix this problem, but this solution
does not have support from the path planner.
• Dilemma of being stuck: This dilemma contains two cases. One is being stuck
in an explored area, surrounded by wide-open and unexplored space (figure 7.21f).
The other one is being stuck at a fully explored dead end, as figure 7.20h shows.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
77
==PAGE:84==
The latter is caused by the design of the frontier filter since other available frontier
may be too far from the robot and filtered out.
• Risk of collision: As mentioned in the positive part, the planner can avoid the
obstacles to some extent. However, the path will be too close to the obstructions,
leading to the risk of collision. This can be addressed by introducing other algorithms
to replace or support.
• Overly high sensitivity: Due to the mechanism of the frontier filter, a slight differ-
ence in the robot’s position may lead to a completely distinguished path, which could
make the path planner unstable.
7.5
Summary
This chapter performs a series of comprehensive tests on the navigation system. Briefly,
the navigation is mainly made up of a mapping system and a path-planning system. There-
fore, the performance of each element is the most important concern. Besides, the anal-
ysis with respect to time is also necessary for the system to examine the general perfor-
mance.
In view of the mapping system, the main focus of this project, it is competent enough
for the environment modelling, providing a sufficient platform for further operation despite
some flaws. However, those problems can be addressed by introducing other supportive
sensors to enhance the ability to perceive.
From the path-planning system’s perspective, honestly, the performance of the mapping
system is way better than that of the path-planning system. Apparently, the path-planning
system’s drawbacks significantly outnumber the advantages. Sometimes, the path plan-
ner can indeed find the valid and desired paths, but there is more than half a chance that
the planner will return incorrect or not ideal paths. Most of the problems can be managed
if extra time is given. As a result, the current progress could be seen as the best I got,
given the time limitation.
In terms of time, both subsystems performed brilliantly. They are all faster than expected,
while the path planner needs to be further optimized to speed up so that it will not jeopar-
dize the performance of the mapping system.
78
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:85==
8
Conclusion
With all the results and analysis collected by the previous chapters, chapter 8 will make
the overall conclusion for this project. The content contains two parts. First of all, the
positive outcomes of each element will be presented in section 8.1, showing the main
progress of this project. Next, obviously, there is a lot of space for improvement in each
part. Considering the period of the master’s thesis, these improvements can only be made
in the future.
8.1
Positive results
As one of the decisions made in the very beginning, the Capra robot is quite powerful
to operate in all the test scenarios, making the tests smooth and successful, though the
equipped sensors may not be the best. The communication system may seem less impor-
tant than the other subsystems, given the number of pages in this thesis. However, this
subsystem plays a vital role in the whole system since it transmits all the necessary data
between software and hardware, even within themselves. Its design has been proven to
manage the delay of data transmission successfully (18.5 ms, much less than the maxi-
mum tolerance) and the corresponding update rate within the desired range. Furthermore,
the quality of the transmitted data is also guaranteed, making sure that there will be no
missed data, or make the data missing happen as least as possible.
In terms of the perception system, one of the main sensors, the odometry, is validated
to be accurate enough (error of 2.385 %, much lower than the maximum tolerance set in
chapter 1) within the suitable distance range and faster sufficiently (around 10 FPS) to be
compatible with other sensors. In addition, another critical sensor, the depth camera, is
corrected so that it can have the proper perspective of view.
With regard to the mapping system, one of the most important subsystems, several es-
sential requirements are fulfilled. To begin with, with the info map mechanism, point cloud
sampling method, relative localization, and the implementation of the Kalman filter, the
ability to correctly interpret the environmental information (both indoor and outdoor) is
guaranteed, as well as stability. Besides, the outdoor tests in chapter 7 prove that the
mapping system is able to describe the unstructured surroundings properly as long as the
manoeuvring route is not too complicated, indicating that the outdoor applicability is also
achieved to some extent.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
79
==PAGE:86==
Last but not least, the tests in chapter 7 also verify that the path-planning system is capable
of determining the valid path for both indoor and outdoor scenarios sometimes. In more
detail, the WFD-based frontier search can find all the available frontiers on the current
map. In addition, the design (a two-layer mechanism) of the frontier filter significantly
reduces the processing time of pathfinding and is able to provide the most optimal frontier
to some degree.
8.2
Future works
There is no doubt that the tests in chapter 7 show the general progress is positive. How-
ever, the achievement assessment in the same chapter indicates that there is actually a lot
of room for improvement. Starting with the mapping system, if more supportive and com-
petent sensors are used in the perception system, such as GPS and LiDAR, and fused
with the depth camera and the odometry, the quality of the mapping system will definitely
increase immensely. Basically, all the problems mentioned in 7.4 could be resolved by
this approach.
As for the path-planning system, there are many methods to address the mentioned con-
cerns. To start with, an improvement in the path search algorithm is necessary. One way
is to introduce a new algorithm either to replace the A∗or combine it with A∗so that the
enhanced algorithm is able to avoid the obstacles safely and return to the correct path.
Another possibility is to make an improved version of A∗to make it only search the areas
that are worth, i.e., the explored areas and perhaps a thin layer of the unexplored around
them. This should be able to make A∗more time efficient. In addition, a new frontier
filter mechanism is required. The current version cannot always return the most optimal
frontier, leading to an invalid path accordingly.
80
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
==PAGE:87==
Bibliography
[1]
Dilip Kushwaha et al. “Robotics Application in Agriculture”. In: June 2022.
[2]
Hao Zhu et al. “Overview of Environment Perception for Intelligent Vehicles”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 18.10 (2017), pp. 2584–
2601. DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2017.2658662.
[3]
Jiajun Wu et al. “Environment Perception Technology for Intelligent Robots in Com-
plex Environments: A Review”. In: 2022 7th International Conference on Communi-
cation, Image and Signal Processing (CCISP). 2022, pp. 479–485. DOI: 10.1109/
CCISP55629.2022.9974277.
[4]
Jibril Abdullahi Bala, Steve Adetunji Adeshina, and Abiodun Musa Aibinu. “Advances
in Visual Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping Techniques for Autonomous Ve-
hicles: A Review”. In: Sensors 22.22 (2022). ISSN: 1424-8220. DOI: 10 . 3390 /
s22228943. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/22/8943.
[5]
Davide Scaramuzza et al. Perception: Sensors Autonomous Mobile Robots. https:
//ethz.ch/content/dam/ethz/special-interest/mavt/robotics-n-intelligent-systems/asl-
dam/documents/lectures/autonomous_mobile_robots/spring-2015/04_-_Perception_
I_-_Sensors.pdf. Accessed: 2024-05-15. 2015.
[6]
Giorgio Grisetti et al. “A Tutorial on Graph-Based SLAM”. In: IEEE Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems Magazine 2.4 (2010), pp. 31–43. DOI: 10 . 1109 / MITS . 2010 .
939925.
[7]
Douglas Lundgren et al. “A study of EKF-SLAM for vehicle state estimation”. In:
2019. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:215764824.
[8]
Sebastian Thrun. “Particle Filters in Robotics (Invited Talk)”. In: CoRR abs/1301.0607
(2013). arXiv: 1301.0607. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.0607.
[9]
Sebastian Thrun, Wolfram Burgard, and Dieter Fox. Probabilistic robotics. Cam-
bridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2005. ISBN: 0262201623 9780262201629. URL: http:
//www.amazon.de/gp/product/0262201623/102-8479661-9831324?v=glance&n=
283155&n=507846&s=books&v=glance.
[10]
Meng Joo Er, Zi Jing Bay, and Yi Zhou. “Perception of Dynamic Environments
in Autonomous Robots”. In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes 41.2 (2008). 17th IFAC
World Congress, pp. 8226–8231. ISSN: 1474-6670. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3182/
20080706-5-KR-1001.01392. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1474667016402727.
[11]
Simon Lacroix. Building and managing maps for autonomous robots. https://hal.
science/hal-01232107/file/geospatialWeek.pdf. Accessed: 2024-05-25. 2015.
[12]
B. R. Staats et al. “Automatic Generation of Indoor Navigable Space Using a Point
Cloud and its Scanner Trajectory”. In: ISPRS Annals of Photogrammetry, Remote
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences 42W4 (Sept. 2017), pp. 393–400. DOI:
10.5194/isprs-annals-IV-2-W4-393-2017.
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
81
==PAGE:88==
[13]
Bart Staats. “Identification of walkable space in a voxel model, derived from a point
cloud and its corresponding trajectory”. In: (2017).
[14]
R. L. Voûte B. R. Staats A. A. Diakité and S. Zlatanova. “Detection of doors in a
voxel model, derived from a point cloud and its scanner trajectory, to improve the
segmentation of the walkable space”. In: International Journal of Urban Sciences
23.3 (2019), pp. 369–390. DOI: 10 . 1080 / 12265934 . 2018 . 1553685. eprint: https :
//doi.org/10.1080/12265934.2018.1553685. URL: https://doi.org/10.1080/12265934.
2018.1553685.
[15]
Radu Bogdan Rusu and Steve Cousins. “3D is here: Point Cloud Library (PCL)”.
In: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). Shanghai,
China: IEEE, May 2011.
[16]
Lixing Liu et al. “Path planning techniques for mobile robots: Review and prospect”.
In: Expert Systems with Applications 227 (2023), p. 120254. ISSN: 0957-4174. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.120254. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S095741742300756X.
[17]
José Ricardo Sánchez-Ibáñez, Carlos J. Pérez-del-Pulgar, and Alfonso García-
Cerezo. “Path Planning for Autonomous Mobile Robots: A Review”. In: Sensors
21.23 (2021). ISSN: 1424-8220. DOI: 10.3390/s21237898. URL: https://www.mdpi.
com/1424-8220/21/23/7898.
[18]
Anirudh Topiwala, Pranav Inani, and Abhishek Kathpal. “Frontier Based Exploration
for Autonomous Robot”. In: CoRR abs/1806.03581 (2018). arXiv: 1806.03581. URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1806.03581.
[19]
Capra ® Robotics. Specifications of Capra Hircus. https : / / capra . ooo / benefits /
specifications/. Accessed: 2024-05-30.
[20]
Intel ® RealSense TM D400 Series Datasheet March 2024. 337029-017. Rev. 018. In-
tel(R) Corporation. Mar. 2013.
[21]
Capra Robotics. Capra Robotics Support Portal. https://caprarobotics.atlassian.net/
servicedesk/customer/portals. Accessed: 2024-06-15. 2023.
[22]
Alex Becker. Kilman Filter: From the ground up. KalmanFilter.NET, 2023.
[23]
Liang Hong and Guangrong Chen. “The Challenge of Environment Perception Sys-
tem for Mobile Robot Based on Comparison Between Wheeled and Legged Robot”.
In: 2022 China Automation Congress (CAC). 2022, pp. 5513–5518. DOI: 10.1109/
CAC57257.2022.10055148.
[24]
Athanasios Chalvatzaras, Ioannis Pratikakis, and Angelos A. Amanatiadis. “A Sur-
vey on Map-Based Localization Techniques for Autonomous Vehicles”. In: IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles 8.2 (2023), pp. 1574–1596. DOI: 10.1109/TIV.
2022.3192102.
[25]
Kelvin Wong, Yanlei Gu, and Shunsuke Kamijo. “Mapping for Autonomous Driving:
Opportunities and Challenges”. In: IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Maga-
zine 13.1 (2021), pp. 91–106. DOI: 10.1109/MITS.2020.3014152.
82
Navigation in grass area for autonomous farm robot
