==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
DTU Energy - Electrochemical Materials Section (ELM)
Synthesis and characterization of
catalysts for electrosynthesis of
hydrogen peroxide
Author:
Mathias Hommelgaard
Student Number:
s184349
Supervisors:
Yang Hu, Associate Professor, DTU Energy
Rasmus Frydendal, CTO and Co-founder of HPNow
Lisa Seidl, Ph.D Student, DTU Energy
May 28, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The development of catalysts for the electrochemical synthesis of hydrogen peroxide
is imperative for enabling sustainable, environmentally friendly production methods.
The electrosynthesis of hydrogen peroxide through the 2-electron oxygen reduction
reaction is one such method, but requires the improvement of existing catalysts to
become competitive with the market-dominating anthraquinone process. Single atom
catalysts have been shown to display properties favorable for the 2 electron reduction
of oxygen to hydrogen peroxide, primarily a high selectivity through the optimization
of the oxygen reagent interactions with the active sites. Among these, palladium-
based single atom catalysts have shown selectivity to hydrogen peroxide exceeding
99%. However, this selectivity is displayed at low metal loadings, in the range of
0.1 to 1% of the catalyst mass, with increasing metal loadings resulting in particle
agglomeration that impacts both the catalyst selectivity and activity. Herein, a solid
state method is demonstrated for the synthesis of a series of palladium single atom
catalysts with variable metal loadings up to 7.5weight%. The objective of this method
is to reproducibly synthesize well-stabilized single metal atom sites while increasing
the number of active sites through the metal loading. Characterization of the ac-
tive site structure was conducted to confirm the presence of non-metallic palladium
species, dispersed as ions on nitrogen-doped carbon anchoring sites. The electrochem-
ical performance of the catalysts was determined through rotating ring disk electrode
measurements, observing a selectivity above 50% for all the synthesized catalysts,
and above 90% for a 3.5weight% palladium single atom catalyst.
1
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my supervisors, Yang Hu, Lisa Seidl and Rasmus Frydendal for
their help and guidance throughout the course of my thesis. I appreciate the oppor-
tunity given to me by Yang, with his help on both the practical aspects of the project
and his continued advice proving instrumental to the completion of this thesis. My
thanks go to Lisa as well, who was a significant resource for me, always being avail-
able for discussions and guidance. Rasmus dedicating his time to provide feedback
on the thesis writing was greatly appreciated, and provided valuable perspectives to
the further expansion of the project.
Additional thanks go to my officemates and the rest of Team Yang, who have con-
tributed to making this a very enjoyable time at DTU Energy thus far. My sincerest
appreciations also go to the brilliant team of technicians at DTU Energy, especially
Jens Borchsenius and Anders Vang, who always had the time to provide valuable
input and expertise.
2
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
1
Acknowledgements
2
Chapter 1
Introduction
4
1.1
Electrochemical synthesis of H2O2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Motivation and scope of this project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
Chapter 2
Experimental Procedure
8
2.1
Synthesis Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2
Structural Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
X-ray diffraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Transmission electron microscope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.2.3
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3
Electrochemical testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3.1
Methodology for thin-film catalyst testing using rotating ring
disk electrode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.3.2
Calculations and data processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
Chapter 3
Synthesis and characterization of PdNC catalysts for
electrosynthesis of H2O2
22
3.1
Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Physical Characterization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.1
Single atom catalyst with 1.78wt% palladium loading . . . . .
29
3.2.2
Single atom catalyst with 3.38wt% palladium loading . . . . .
33
3.2.3
Single atom catalyst with 7.47wt% palladium loading . . . . .
36
3.3
Electrochemical testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.4
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
Chapter 4
Outlooks and Summary
53
Appendix
59
3
==PAGE:5==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Electrochemical synthesis of H2O2
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) stands as a pivotal compound in various industrial, envi-
ronmental, and biomedical applications, owing to its versatile nature as a strong
oxidizing and disinfecting agent[1].
The conventional methods of producing hy-
drogen peroxide predominantly involve the anthraquinone auto-oxidation process,
which relies heavily on energy-intensive procedures and environmentally hazardous
precursors[2][3].
In light of escalating environmental concerns and the imperative
need for sustainable chemical synthesis routes, the electrochemical production of hy-
drogen peroxide has garnered significant attention.
The electrochemical production of hydrogen peroxide can proceed through the water
oxidation reaction (WOR), also known as the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), or
the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Hydrogen peroxide exists as an intermediate
in the O2/H2O redox system[2], with the reaction pathways to H2O2 being the 2
electron WOR (eq. 1.1) and 2 electron ORR (eq. 1.2).
2e−WOR, E0 = 1.76V : 2H2O ⇀
↽H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e−
(1.1)
2e−OOR, E0 = 0.7V : O2 + 2H+ + 2e−⇀
↽H2O2
(1.2)
The WOR and ORR share similar benefits and drawbacks.
The low cost of the
reagents, environmentally friendly products and potential for on-site production make
them viable alternatives to the anthraquinone process [2]. However, optimizing cat-
alyst materials to selectively undergo these reactions over the thermodynamically
favorable 4 electron pathways (eq. 1.3 and 1.4) while maintaining high catalytic per-
formance is a challenge.
4
==PAGE:6==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
4e−WOR, E0 = 1.23V : 2H2O ⇀
↽O2 + 4H+ + 4e−
(1.3)
4e−OOR, E0 = 1.23V : O2 + 4H+ + 4e−⇀
↽2H2O
(1.4)
The electrochemical reduction of oxygen, the focus of this project, is favored due
to the high overpotential associated with the WOR, making it comparatively more
costly [2][5]. In the case of the ORR, the challenge associated with developing cata-
lyst materials is to ensure a high selectivity for the 2 electron reduction to hydrogen
peroxide, while maintaining the high catalytic activity and stability that ensure a
cost-competitive catalyst.
One of the promising options for achieving the desired characteristics of a hydrogen
peroxide-selective catalyst is the single atom catalyst. Atomically dispersed metal
ions on conductive support materials provide a highly selective reaction pathway to
hydrogen peroxide, favoring the 2 electron ORR over the competing side reactions[6].
This characteristic comes as a result of the optimization of the interaction between
the single atom active sites and the oxygen reagent and intermediates. In single atom
catalysts, the metal atoms each act independently as an active site, significantly
increasing the metal atom efficiency in comparison to nanoparticle catalysts. Addi-
tionally, the single atom dispersion allows for increased tunability of the active sites
through the formation of different complexes or anchoring mechanisms, providing a vi-
able method for creating highly selective active sites to the desired reaction pathways.
While having the potential for high selectivity, maintaining a consistent single atom
dispersion in these materials can be difficult. The decomposition of the dispersion
complexes that maintain the single atom sites often result in the agglomeration to
metal particles that are unfavourable for selective hydrogen peroxide production[7][8].
The common approach then is to synthesize catalysts with low metal loadings[9], re-
ducing the number of active sites but also increasing the ability to maintain the
desired dispersion. This low density of active sites is one of the key parameters af-
fecting the viability of single atom catalysts. A reduction in the number of active
sites directly impacts the activity, reducing the energy efficiency and sustainability
benefits that the electrochemical process should present.
1.2
Motivation and scope of this project
The scope of this project was to synthesize a series of single atom catalysts with
variable metal loadings, specifically looking to increase the activity of the catalysts
5
DTU Energy
==PAGE:7==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
through an increase in the active site density, while maintaining the selective charac-
teristic of a single atom catalyst. The catalysts synthesized were single atom palla-
dium sites, dispersed on a nitrogen-doped carbon support material using a solid state
synthesis method.
While there are a multitude of metals that have good properties for the oxygen reduc-
tion reaction, noble metals like platinum and palladium are favored due to their high
catalytic activity for the reduction of oxygen. Palladium is generally favored over
platinum for catalytic purposes due to its geographic dispersion in the earth, making
it geopolitically easier to obtain [10][11]. The catalytic activity of polycrystalline pal-
ladium is due to the strong adsorption energy of the oxygen reagents, favoring the 4
electron reduction to oxygen [12] as shown in figure 1.1. However, the dispersion of
palladium ions as single atom sites has been shown to affect this adsorption energy
and yield a high selectivity and activity towards the 2 electron reduction to hydrogen
peroxide[13]. Tuning the adsorption energy of oxygen intermediates on the active site
is vital for ensuring the selectivity to the 2 electron reduction of oxygen. Single atom
catalysts have been shown to favor the end-on adsorption that results in the asso-
ciative pathway to hydrogen peroxide, instead of the side-on adsorption that favors
the disassociative splitting of the O-O bond, resulting in the 4 electron reduction to
water[14].
The objective of this thesis is to improve upon the single atom catalysts known to be
highly selective for hydrogen peroxide by increasing their activity through the syn-
thesis of catalysts with a higher number of active sites. Increasing the metal loading
while maintaining a single atom active site structure is a demonstration of a synthesis
technique that can accomplish this.
To reliably connect the metal loading to the active site structure and electrochemical
performance, the consistency of the synthesis, characterization and electrochemical
testing must be controlled. For the synthesis, the focus is on establishing that all
of the catalysts are synthesized in an equal fashion, and the metal loading of the
catalysts can be accurately measured. To determine any variabilities in the catalysts,
a series of characterization techniques are employed to observe any definitive changes
as a direct result of a change in the metal loading. Through X-ray diffraction, the
crystalline nature of the catalysts is observed, to ensure consistency of their struc-
ture and observe a lack of the metal particle agglomeration of concern at high metal
loadings. Further, the binding energies of the active site constituent elements is mea-
sured, to relate the theoretical structure of the catalyst active sites to the synthesized
catalysts. Lastly, an electrochemical characterization is conducted, measuring the
activity and selectivity of these catalysts through the use of the rotating ring disk
6
DTU Energy
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Figure 1.1: Volcano plots for the 2e- and 4e- reduction of oxygen are shown in red
and blue, respectively. The equilibrium potential for H2O2 formation is shown as a
dashed line. [16]
electrode (RRDE) as a comparison to state of the art catalysts for 2 electron selective
ORR. Combining these parameters would allow for the observation of variations in
the active sites, and potentially contribute further to the understanding of the active
site dispersion/density relationship that is a key parameter in single atom catalyst
design.
7
DTU Energy
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Experimental Procedure
This section serves as an in-depth explanation of the methods undertaken in the
various synthesis, characterization and electrochemical testing steps throughout this
project. The theoretical basis, motivation and step-by-step procedure for each of the
techniques is introduced and described, serving as a guide for any potential repro-
duction of the results herein.
2.1
Synthesis Processes
The synthesis method used is referred to as a solid-state method, and involves the
mixing of solid precursors and subsequent heating to yield the desired catalysts. The
impregnation of the metal and nitrogen-rich precursors into the carbon support ma-
terial relies on incipient wetness impregnation, in which a small amount of water is
added to the metal precursor before combination with the support material to form
a capillary pressure difference across them [24]. During the drying step in the tube
furnace, the nitrogen-rich cyanamide precursor either polymerizes to form multiple
C-N compounds throughout the temperature range [25], or can form nitrogen-doped
carbon through the pyrolysis of the precursors [26] [27]. The determination of the
carbon-nitrogen support is difficult to distinguish, but the formation of the polymeric
carbon-nitride would potentially be visible on an XRD measurement of the catalysts
[25]. The metal ions should stay bound to the nitrogen-carbon throughout the for-
mation of the complexes that act as anchoring sites for the metal dispersion.
The following protocol is for a palladium-based catalyst, with a 7.47 weight per-
cent (wt%) loading of the palladium in the catalyst, referred to as 7.47wt% PdNC
throughout the report. Subsequent catalysts synthesized using the same method with
a variation of the metal loadings will be referred to similarly, namely the 1.78wt%
PdNC and 3.38wt% PdNC. The cyanamide precursor has a molar ratio of 30:1 to the
palladium precursor in the 1.78wt% PdNC. An overview of the precursor compositions
used for the different catalysts is given by table 2.1.
8
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
Sample
Precursor Mass (g)
PdCl2
CN2H2
Vulcan 72R (C)
1.78wt% PdNC
0.0162
0.1826
0.3337
3.38 wt% PdNC
0.0305
0.1843
0.3304
7.47wt% PdNC
0.0351
0.2102
0.1722
Table 2.1: Overview of the precursor composition pre-synthesis by mass
First, the precursors are weighed out individually. Then the cyanamide and palla-
dium chloride are added together, with the addition of 50 µL of water to form a
slurry. The mixture is transferred to an agate mortar, where the carbon support is
added and ground until homogeneous.
Following the grinding, the mixture is transferred to a quartz boat with a known
weight, and weighed again. This determines the mass of the precursors before they
enter the furnace.
The heating step in the synthesis is conducted in a tube furnace, visualized in figure
2.1, with sealed connections made in each end so that gasses can be added and the
atmosphere in the oven can be controlled. The heating zone in the center of the
furnace has a length of around 8cm over which the temperature should be consistent.
Subsequently, the sample-containing quartz boat is placed in the tube such that it
aligns with this zone in the center of the furnace.
Figure 2.1: Image of the tube furnace used for the synthesis protocol
The gas input is connected to an argon and hydrogen gas source, controlled by a
Brooks Instrument 0254 power supply. Additionally, a vacuum pump is connected
9
DTU Energy
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
to the inlet gas line. This allows for the maintenance of a vacuum inside the tube
furnace, as well as for argon or hydrogen gas to be added. The general setup of the
connections to the tube furnace are visualized in figure 2.2. Before the start of the
heating step of the synthesis, an inert atmosphere needs to be introduced inside the
furnace. The outlet valve is closed, and the vacuum pump is turned on to remove any
air inside the furnace. The rate at which the vacuum is induced is controlled using
a valve, to slow it down and reduce any precursor from flying out of the boat. Then
the vacuum pump is turned off, and the argon gas is started at a low flow until the
internal pressure of the tube equilibriates. The outlet valve is then opened, and the
gas can flow freely through the tube.
Figure 2.2: Image of the gas and furnace controller setup, as well as the gas
connections to the tube furnace, gas supplies and vacuum pump
After this preparation, the heating step of the synthesis can proceed. The gas flow
of argon is increased to 95ml/min, to make sure the furnace is filled with inert at-
mosphere throughout the synthesis. The temperature program consists of a 20C/min
ramp up to 550C, which is maintained for 2 hours, and then cooled at a rate of
25C/min. The system does not have a built in cooling system, so in reality the rate
of cooling is slower. Following this heating step, the argon gas flow is turned off
and the sample-containing quartz boat is removed and weighed. Care must be taken
to avoid any of the side products that exist inside the tube furnace to fall into the
sample, potentially by scraping the tube walls before removing the sample.
10
DTU Energy
==PAGE:12==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
After the sample is removed from the furnace and weighed, it is placed into a mortar
and ground again using the same principle. This is done to reduce the size of the
particles in the catalyst powder, and make it easier to use in the subsequent testing
and characterization methods.
2.2
Structural Characterization
2.2.1
X-ray diffraction
X-ray diffraction (XRD) is a technique used to analyze the structure of crystalline
materials. It relies on the principle of constructive interference of X-rays scattered
by a crystal lattice. When X-rays interact with a crystal, they undergo scattering
due to interactions with the electrons in the atoms, as depicted in figure 2.3. The
scattered X-rays interfere with each other, producing a diffraction pattern that con-
tains information about the atomic arrangement within the crystal. The constructive
interference of the scattered X-rays is dependent on the distance between the atomic
planes (d) that results in the scattering, following the Bragg law: n·λ = 2·d·sinθ. By
measuring the angles and intensities of the diffracted X-rays, insight can be gained of
the crystal structure and the types of atoms present. For the single atom palladium
catalysts of consideration here, the XRD spectra will primarily give insight to the
presence of the semi-crystalline carbon support, the nitrogen-doped carbon, as well
as any crystalline palladium that could be present.
11
DTU Energy
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
Figure 2.3: Diagram depicting the general principle of the XRD technique
First, the XRD sample holders are cleaned using ethanol and dried, either with tissues
or compressed air. Then the catalyst powder sample is placed onto the recess in the
holder, and compressed using a coverslip to align with the top of the holder. The
catalysts were imaged over the 2θ range of 3 to 90 degrees, at a rate of 4 degrees
per minute. The data from the XRD is visualized as the intensity normalized to the
highest value in the spectra, against the reflection angle 2θ.
2.2.2
Transmission electron microscope
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is an advanced microscopy technique that
allows for high-resolution imaging of materials at the nanoscale. In TEM, a beam
of electrons is transmitted through an ultrathin sample, interacting with its atoms
and producing various signals that can be detected and analyzed. These signals form
an image, providing detailed information about the sample’s structure, including its
morphology, crystallography, and composition. The TEM instrument used here has a
limited resolution, being able to visualize down to a scale of a few nanometers. More
powerful instruments are capable of atomic resolutions, which is beneficial for the
visualization of atomically dispersed metals as is the goal here. With this limitation,
the main observation that can be made from this measurement is a general view of
the catalyst morphology, as well as any agglomerated metal particles that may be
present in the sample.
12
DTU Energy
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
Preparation of the sample for the transmission electron microscope (TEM) involves
the dispersion of the catalyst in ethanol and deposition onto a TEM grid. In this
case, a 4ml vial is filled with ethanol, and a small mass of the catalyst is added, equiv-
alent to lightly dipping a pipette tip into the catalyst powder. The vial is sealed and
sonicated for around 5 minutes to disperse the catalyst throughout the solvent. Five
droplets of this solution are pipetted onto a TEM grid, in this case a lacey carbon
covered copper grid (Agar Scientific, AGS166-3H Lacey Carbon Film 300 Mesh Cu).
Images in the TEM were taken at a variety of magnifications and focuses, optimizing
the visibility of the general support morphology. The primary objective of the TEM
imaging was to determine the presence of metallic palladium particles, and obtain
images of them if present.
2.2.3
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) is a surface-sensitive analytical technique
used to study the chemical composition of materials. In XPS, a sample surface is
exposed to X-rays, causing the ejection of photoelectrons from the outermost atomic
layers of the material. Figure 2.4 shows this interaction on the atomic scale, with
the X-ray exciting an electron from the Pd3d core shell of the palladium. By mea-
suring the kinetic energy and intensity of these emitted electrons, information about
the elemental composition, chemical states, and electronic structure of the sample’s
surface can be obtained. XPS is useful for identifying elements present, determining
their chemical states, and probing surface chemistry. This is especially useful when
attempting to characterize catalysts with unknown properties, such as the interac-
tion between the nitrogen-doped carbon and the palladium metals considered here.
Subsequently, the XPS spectra in this situation can be used to observe the oxidation
state of the palladium metals, giving insight to the nitrogen-palladium bond, as well
as yield information about how the nitrogen-doping interacts with the carbon atoms.
13
DTU Energy
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
Figure 2.4: Diagram depicting the general principle of the XPS technique, in this
case imaged for the ejection of a palladium Pd3d orbital electron
The sample preparation for X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) requires the
preparation of the catalyst powders as a pellet to avoid issues with loose particles or
significant degassing in the high-vacuum environment of the XPS. The powders were
placed into a holder for pellet preparation and compressed under 10Nm of force for
around 5 minutes. A piece of double-sided carbon tape was placed on a small piece
of aluminum foil and pressed onto the formed pellet to adhere it to the surface. The
samples were then lightly shaken to make sure the powder was properly fastened on
the carbon tape.
Following this preparatory step, the samples are mounted onto the sample holder of
the XPS using conductive copper clips. These clips are pressed onto the top of the
surface to maintain a conductive contact between the sample surface and the ground
contact of the XPS holder.
While not necessary for these conductive samples, the flood gun was employed to elim-
inate the possibility of any conductivity issues posing an influence on the recorded
intensities. The measurement of the XPS spectra consisted of a series of scans for
each element known to be in the sample, namely carbon, palladium, oxygen and ni-
trogen, with numerous repetitions to provide a high resolution signal of the peaks.
14
DTU Energy
==PAGE:16==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
2.3
Electrochemical testing
The testing of the catalysts on the rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE) involves the
deposition of the catalyst as a thin film onto the disk electrode surface. The catalyst
is dispersed into an ink, containing catalyst powder, solvent, and a binding agent, and
then drop cast onto the glassy carbon surface of the electrode disk. The following
protocol is the recipe and procedure used for the the RRDE tests in this report.
The inks were prepared using 6.69mg of catalyst powder, 100 µL of MilliQ water,
3300 µL of solvent in the form of formic acid (HCOOH), and 21.6µL of 5wt% Nafion
solution. The catalyst powder was weighed and added into a 4ml vial first, then
wetted using the MilliQ water. The solvent is then added, followed by sonication
of the solution for 5 to 10 minutes. After this sonication the Nafion is added, fol-
lowed by a further 25 to 30 minutes of sonication or until individual particles are no
longer visible in the solution. This recipe for the ink comes as an adaptation of a pre-
vious paper [18], and targets a loading of 0.1 mg/cm2 of the catalyst on the electrode.
Following this is the preparation step for the electrodes. First the removable disk in-
sert of the Pine Instruments E6R1 ChangeDisk RRDE is removed, and the platinum
ring is polished and cleaned. The polishing involves the use of an alumina slurry
(0.1 and 0.05µm Alumina powder with water) on a cloth pad. The ring electrode is
polished using a figure eight motion on the cloth pad, with the alumina slurry of 0.1
and 0.05 µm being used interchangeably until no visible scratches or blemishes can
be observed. The ring electrode is then cleaned using ethanol-soaked cotton balls and
dried with compressed air. Following this, the disk electrode is inserted back into
the RRDE and fastened at a position where it slightly protrudes from the top of the
electrode. The glassy carbon disk is polished and cleaned in the same manner as the
ring electrode, until a smooth mirror-like surface is obtained. The surface is cleaned
with MQ water and examined under direct light to make sure there are no surface
imperfections still remaining. Then the disk electrode is fastened in the RRDE to
align with the top surface.
To prepare the disk electrode for drop casting, the disk is cleaned using ethanol-
soaked cotton balls to remove any impurities still left on the surface. To ensure no
fibers remain from the cotton, an ethanol spray bottle is used to spray ethanol on
the surface. The electrode is then quickly dried using a high-pressure flow of a clean
air supply, in this case using argon gas. After these steps a clean, mirror-like surface
15
DTU Energy
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
should be present, and they can be repeated if necessary to make sure this is the case.
The inks used to drop cast are quickly sonicated and shaken before use. Then a 10
µL pipette is used to drop cast 10 µL of the catalyst ink onto the glassy carbon disk,
forming a small droplet that is contained by the outer PTFE layer. A holder is used
to ensure that the electrode won’t move during drop casting, and an established flat
surface is needed for the electrode to be placed on. After drop casting, the electrode is
not to be moved, and a beaker is placed over it to slow the rate of evaporation for the
solvent. This is to improve the chances for formation of a homogeneous film. After
approximately 40-50 minutes, a homogeneous thin film covering the whole electrode
can be expected.
2.3.1
Methodology for thin-film catalyst testing using rotat-
ing ring disk electrode
The experimental testing of the rotating ring disk electrode involves a few pieces of
key equipment. The first is the rotational instrument where the RRDE is mounted,
which has precise control of the rotational speed and individual connection points for
the ring and disk electrode. The second is the cell in which the RRDE will be tested.
The cell has mounting points for the counter and reference electrodes, a bubbler for
introducing gas into the electrolyte, and a lid with a vertical hole for the RRDE to
be inserted through. The counter electrode used is a graphite rod in a glass vial. The
reference electrode is a reference hydrogen electrode (RHE) consisting of a platinum
wire with a trapped hydrogen gas pot. The reference and counter electrode are both
separated from the bulk electrolyte through the use of a glass frit, which reduces
the ability of bubbles crossing between the individual environments and potentially
affecting the electrodes.
The potentiostat used is a Biologic SP-150e bi-potentiostat. The advantage of a bi-
potentiostat is the ability to apply and measure current and voltage to two working
electrodes simultaneously, which is necessary in this case for the simultaneous oper-
ation of the ring and disk electrodes. The connections from the bipotentiostat are
determined by the bipotentiostat mode, which requires a specific connection of the
two channels to operate correctly.
The protocol for the testing of the RRDE is as follows. The first step is to make
sure the cell and the general system is reliable. The cell is cleaned before testing,
first by rinsing with MilliQ water multiple times, followed by a rinse with ethanol
16
DTU Energy
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
which is subsequently dried. Then the cell is rinsed with clean electrolyte, before
the cell is filled with electrolyte to a level just above the top of the bubbler. The
RHE and a clean platinum wire are inserted into the cell, ensuring contact with the
electrolyte, and connected in two electrode mode on one of the potentiostat channels.
The eletrolyte is bubbled with hydrogen gas for a period of time in order to saturate
it, which is followed by an impedance and open circuit voltage (OCV) measurement.
The impedance is used as a comparison point between tests to make sure the system
is consistent. The OCV is measured to calibrate and determine the accuracy of the
prepared RHE, and in an ideal case would have a value of 0V, since the two platinum
wires should be in an identical environment. An OCV of 5mV or less is targeted for
acceptable testing conditions, and any deviation is often the cause of an improperly
prepared RHE, an unclean cell, electrolyte or platinum wire, or the result of the elec-
trolyte not being saturated with hydrogen gas.
Following the calibration of the RHE, the platinum wire is removed from the cell and
replaced with the graphite counter electrode. The RRDE tip is lowered into the cell,
and the electrolyte is purged with argon gas for a period of at least 20 minutes. This is
done in preparation for the conditioning steps and background current determination,
which requires the removal of the considered reagents (in this case oxygen) from the
electrolyte. The conditioning step is conducted for both the ring and disk electrode
separately.
The conditioning consists of a cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurement
with a scan rate of 50mV/s between the potentials of 1.2V to 0.025V vs. RHE. The
number of cycles depends on the surface material; for metallic platinum like the plat-
inum ring on the RRDE, 50 or more cycles are used until a stable CV is obtained.
For the proposed single atom catalysts, significantly fewer cycles are needed before a
stable CV is obtained, as low as 10 to 20 cycles. The purpose of the conditioning is
to clean the surface of the electrode by repeatedly oxidizing and reducing species at
the surface, either the metal sites themselves or by adsorping and desorbing species
from the electrolyte on and off the surface. Particularly for the platinum ring, the
current measured increases significantly over the cycles, indicating activation of the
surface and active platinum sites. This is important, since the platinum ring plays a
crucial part in collecting the produced hydrogen peroxide, and a low active surface
area would reduce this collection efficiency.
Following the conditioning step, the background current is determined. A CV mea-
surement at a scan rate of 20mV/s is conducted between the potentials of 1.025 to
0.025V vs. RHE, until the measured current stabilizes. These parameters are used
since they match with the ones for the ORR measurement, allowing for the back-
ground current subtraction to be used later. Having a different potential range or
scan rate would result in an inaccurate background current determination. The back-
17
DTU Energy
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
ground current is measured in this way for both the ring and disk electrode.
After the determination of the background current, the electrolyte is removed from
the cell, rinsed with clean electrolyte, and then refilled with clean electrolyte. The
gas being introduced is switched from argon to oxygen, and the RRDE is switched
on to a low rotation rate around 400rpm to help distribute the oxygen throughout
the electrolyte and speed up the saturation. Saturated electrolyte can be validated
through the use of cyclic voltammetry measurements on either the disk or ring elec-
trode; any consistent vertical shift of the current over multiple cycles indicates that
the oxygen in the electrolyte has not reached a saturated level. The electrode rotation
speed is increased to 900rpm, and a performance measurement for the disk and ring
electrodes is conducted. This performance measurement is a CV at a scan rate of
50mV/s between the potential range of 1.025 to 0.025V vs. RHE. The purpose of
this measurement is to get an initial indication of the ORR performance for the two
electrodes, and in the case of the ring electrode, to ensure that it achieves a limiting
current comparable to previous measurements, indicative of the collection efficiency.
If the current on the ring electrode is not comparable to previous tests, a second con-
ditioning step can be conducted here as described previously. The measurement for
determining the activity follows this, using the bipotentiostat mode to conduct a CV
measurement on the disk electrode, and a chronoamperometry measurement on the
ring electrode. On the disk electrode, a scan rate of 20mV/s is used in the potential
range between 1.025V to 0.025V vs. RHE until a series of stable CV measurements
are obtained. On the ring electrode, a potential of 1.2V vs. RHE is applied, and the
current associated with the oxidation of hydrogen peroxide to water is observed.
At the end of the test a series of parameters are measured as an evaluation of the
consistency of the test. The OCV of the RHE is measured again against the platinum
wire, to ensure there has not been significant (≥2mV) drift in the RHE potential.
Two impedance measurements are conducted in the 3-electrode setup, one each for
the ring and disk electrodes, to determine the uncompensated resistance of the two
electrodes.
2.3.2
Calculations and data processing
There are four primary effects that need to be corrected in order to be able to iso-
late the kinetic current associated with hydrogen peroxide production on the catalyst
material. The first is the background current of the electrodes, attributed to side re-
actions or unavoidable interaction between the active sites and other species existing
in the system. The second is the the effect of the uncompensated resistance, denoted
18
DTU Energy
==PAGE:20==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
iR correction, which would have an effect on the value of the applied voltage depend-
ing on the current measured and the resistance itself. The third is the calculation
converting the ring current to peroxide current, and it depends on variations in the
collection efficiency of the ring electrode. Lastly, the mass transfer limitations of the
system which would have a partial influence on the overall current measured need to
be compensated for, to obtain the kinetic current associated with hydrogen peroxide
production.
The first of these, the background current, was experimentally determined. For the
disk electrode, the background current was measured at the same operational con-
ditions as the ORR measurement, and the background current observed at each ap-
plied voltage can be directly subtracted from the measured current to obtain the
background corrected current. For the ring electrode, which was held at a constant
current for the ORR measurement, the background current can be seen from the
measured current at the ring electrode when a high potential is applied to the disk
electrode. Since there are no reactions that should be occurring at the ring electrode
at these potentials, the measured current is naturally low, on the order of 0.1µA.
Subtraction of this value from the ring current would yield the correct background
correction.
The correction for the uncompensated resistance, or the iR correction, uses the resis-
tance values determined for the ring and disk electrodes to observe their impact on
the applied voltages. For each voltage step, the measured current is multiplied by the
resistance value measured, and this is subtracted from the applied voltage. This step
can also be done before the background current, and this would likely result in more
accurate correction - however doing so would cause greater misalignment between the
voltages applied in the ORR and background measurements, and result in a higher
chance of error there. One method that could be implemented moving forward is to fit
a model to the background current, which would allow for more accurate background
current subtraction since it would not be dependent on the individual voltage steps
applied in the background current measurement.
To determine the current that can be attributed to the production of hydrogen per-
oxide, the ring current needs to be corrected using the collection efficiency of the ring.
The collection efficiency of the ring is a variable value since the surface area of the
ring will not reliably be the same from test to test. The collection efficiency stated
for the Pine Instruments E6R1 ChangeDisk RRDE used is 25%, but has been previ-
ously measured through the reversible redox reactions of ferri/ferrocyanide [37] to be
22% for the instrumentation used here. However given the variation in the diffusion
limiting current for the ring electrode, shown in figure 2.5, a deviation of this value
19
DTU Energy
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
can be expected for the measurements. This theoretical collection efficiency of 22% is
subsequently multiplied by the ratio between the diffusion limiting current on the ring
electrode for the test in question, and the highest diffusion limiting current observed
on the ring electrode. This gives an indication of the variance in performance that
can be expected.
Figure 2.5: Comparison of the diffusion limited current for the ORR on the ring
electrode at a rotation rate of 900rpm, as a representation of the collection efficiency
of the electrode
The final correction is to remove the effects of mass transfer limitations from the
system, and directly observe the kinetic current associated with hydrogen peroxide
production. ORR measurements generally have 3 sections with different contributions
to the measured current. Close to the onset potential, where reagents are in excess,
the kinetic current dominates and kinetic limitations can be measured independently.
At high overpotentials, a diffusion limiting current is often observed, where the mass
transfer limitations of the oxygen to the reaction sites provide the limitation for the
reaction and can be observed independently. In between these two areas, contributions
exist from both the kinetic and mass transfer limitations, and a correction must be
made to observe the kinetic current alone. This correction is based on the Koutechy-
Levich equation, which determines the kinetic current as a function of the diffusion
20
DTU Energy
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 2. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE
limiting current and the measured current. Since the diffusion limiting current can not
be observed for these catalysts, the theoretical diffusion limiting current is calculated
instead. For a system with a rotational speed of 900rpm, in 0.1M HClO4, the diffusion
limiting current is calculated as shown in equation 2.1.
Id = 0.62 · n · F · C0 · D2/3
0
· v−1/6 · ω1/2 = 0.423A
(2.1)
The kinetic peroxide current can then be found as:
Ikinetic = Id · I
Id −I
(2.2)
The selectivity of the catalyst is determined by the ratio between the current at-
tributed to hydrogen peroxide production, and the overall current exhibited by the
catalyst on the disk electrode. This is defined in equation 2.3
Selectivity = 200 ·
IH2O2
|Idisk| + IH2O2
(2.3)
The mass activity of the catalyst is determined based on the loading on the elec-
trode and the measured current observed at an applied voltage. The mass activity
is calculated in two ways, specific to the mass of the catalyst and that of the metal.
The electrode loading of the disk was aimed at around 0.1mg of catalyst per square
centimeter, although this varies slightly depending on the ink preparation. The mass
activity is reported as mA/mg, with the current being the previously determined
peroxide current as a function of the mass of catalyst on the electrode. For the cal-
culation with the metal loading considered, the electrode loading of 0.1mg/cm2 is
multiplied by the loading of the catalyst.
21
DTU Energy
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Synthesis and characterization of PdNC
catalysts for electrosynthesis of H2O2
The active site distribution and density of single atom catalysts is one of the most
important optimization parameters in their design. Single atom catalysts are often
kept low in their metal loading, to ensure the proper dispersion of the active sites
and reduce the likelihood of particle agglomeration that would be a detriment to
performance [7] [38]. However this low loading results in a sparsity of active sites,
leading to a high selectivity yet low activity for the catalyst as a whole. The purpose
of this investigation is to synthesize a series of metal loadings for palladium-based
catalysts, in a suggested single atom site configuration, and determine the effect that
increasing the density of these active sites has on the performance of the catalysts.
To isolate the effect of their metal loading, they will be synthesized using an identical
method, and a series of characterization techniques will be employed to determine
the consistency of their structure. Using the rotating ring disk electrode (RRDE),
the selectivity and activity of these catalysts for the 2 electron reduction of oxygen
will be determined and compared.
3.1
Synthesis
The synthesis method employed is a solid state method, in which the metal ions are
uniformly dispersed in a nitrogen-doped carbon network on a carbon substrate. This
method has been used previously for the formation of small, uniformly sized and
dispersed metal particles through the further breakdown of the metal-nitrogen bonds
that maintain the atomic dispersion[25]. The suggested structure for the palladium
single atom sites is visualized in figure 3.1.
22
==PAGE:24==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.1: One of the possible structures of the active site for dispersed palladium
ions, showing the nitrogen anchoring sites for the palladium in the larger network of
nitrogen-doped carbon
Figure 3.1 shows a suggested active site structure for a palladium single atom site
[36]. The palladium is bonded to the nitrogen, in gaps of the otherwise well-ordered
carbon structure. The nitrogen doping can exist in several forms in a graphene sheet
like the one represented, as graphitic, pyridinic or pyrrolic nitrogen, which can act
as anchoring sites for the palladium single atoms. This anchoring of the metal pre-
vents agglomeration to form larger particles, and immobilizes their atomic dispersion
which serves to maintain their selective properties.
This figure shows one of the
structures for palladium dispersion in nitrogen-doped carbon, however the structure
is dependent on the influence of the surrounding nitrogen-doped carbon [30][31]. If
the surrounding structure were to be less ordered, or with the introduction of more
or less nitrogen atoms, this would affect the binding energy of the palladium ions
and the subsequent stability of the structure. An increase in the number of active
sites in these catalysts might introduce interactions between the sites, influencing the
binding energy of the palladium or the favored structure of the active sites.
Alternative structures for the possible active site structure can also be shown. As-
suming the polymerization of the cyanamide to form polymeric carbon nitride, as
has been shown previously [25], the formation of the active site would be more rep-
resentative of figure 3.2. Structures like nitrogen-doped defective graphene or carbon
nitride are also viable suggestions for potential active site interactions between the
palladium, carbon and nitrogen [13].
23
DTU Energy
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.2: Alternative configuration of the active site assuming the formation of
polymeric carbon nitride [25]
Synthesis of this structure proceeds through a solid state impregnation method. Solid
precursors are thoroughly ground together, before being dried at 550C to form an
eggshell structure as shown in figure 3.3. During this heating step, the palladium
ions are impregnated and dispersed into the nitrogen-doped carbon that is anchored
on the carbon support particles.
24
DTU Energy
==PAGE:26==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.3: Diagram depicting the impregnation step of the synthesis method, with
the formation of the palladium ions dispersed in a nitrogen-doped carbon network
The synthesis process for the Pd-based catalysts needs to be consistent and reliable
in order to accurately look at the effects of the metal loading. To verify this, the
synthesis method was first reproduced three times using a platinum-based precursor,
to observe the level of variation to be expected in the synthesis. The primary targets
for this synthesis was to aim for a loading of 15wt% of platinum on carbon (Pt/C),
with a molar ratio of 1:50 between the platinum and cyanamide (CN2H2).
Sample
Post-Synthesis Mass (g)
Yield (%)
Loading (wt%)
Pt
CxNy
BP2000 (C)
14.91 wt% PtNC
0.0296
0.0493
0.1984
46.22
10.67
14.87wt% PtNC
0.0297
0.0416
0.1997
44.92
10.95
15.06wt% PtNC
0.0285
0.0335
0.1893
43.71
11.34
Table 3.1: Parameters for the synthesis of platinum-based catalysts, repeated for
verification of the synthesis protocol
The values shown in table 3.1 detail the outcome of the reproduced synthesis for the
platinum-based catalysts. The sample names refer to the percentage of the catalyst
mass that the platinum is expected to have in the final sample, as a calculation of the
initial precursor ratios. The post-synthesis mass shown is a calculated value based on
the overall mass of the catalyst after the synthesis. It is assumed for the calculation
of the post-synthesis composition that the mass of the metal and the carbon support
remains the same before and after synthesis. The rest of the catalyst mass is thereby
25
DTU Energy
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
associated to the nitrogen-doped carbon, represented by CxNy due to the uncertainty
of the exact structure that it has. Since the reactions during the synthesis should be
identical for each reproduction, a consistent yield between syntheses as seen here is
a good indicator of a reliable synthesis. From the metal loading calculated after the
synthesis, it can be seen that there is a variance from the expected metal loading due
to the nitrogen-doped carbon content. The percentage of the mass that the nitrogen-
doped carbon would be expected to represent was unknown before this synthesis, so
a change in the calculation of the expected metal loading will be made to compen-
sate for this. Based on an average over the three platinum synthesis attempts, the
calculated post-synthesis metal loading has a value of 73.5% of the expected metal
loading, which will be taken into account when conducting the synthesis of the pal-
ladium based catalysts.
For the palladium catalyst synthesis, the same synthesis and calculation methods
were used to synthesize a series of 3 different palladium metal loadings. The change
in the metal loadings is expected to directly link to an increase in the number of
active sites in the catalysts, leading to an increase in the activity but also increasing
the chances of potential destabilization of the metals to form particles. Based on the
precursor ratios, and the adjustment of 73.5% to account for the nitrogen-doped car-
bon content, the expected metal loadings of these catalysts were 1.78wt%, 3.38wt%
and 7.47wt%.
Sample
Precursor Mass (g)
Yield (%)
Loading (wt%)
Pd
CxNy
Vulcan 72R (C)
Pd-NC/C
1.78wt% PdNC
0.0081
0.1118
0.3337
78.64
1.96
3.38 wt% PdNC
0.0152
0.1016
0.3304
75.93
3.40
7.47% PdNC
0.0175
0.0788
0.1722
58.23
6.52
Table 3.2: Synthesis parameters for palladium-based catalysts, using the same
synthesis protocol reproduced earlier.
It should be noted that the palladium loading represented here in the names of the
catalyst samples is an estimation based on the synthesis parameters, and likely has a
high error. The metal loading is an important parameter, since it is the determining
comparison point between these catalysts and serves to describe any changes observed
in active sites of the catalysts. Further verification of this parameter is attempted
through an atomic percent analysis from peak integration of XPS spectra.
26
DTU Energy
==PAGE:28==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Pd 7.47wt%
Pd 3.38wt%
Pd 1.78wt%
Element
Atomic%
Weight%
Atomic%
Weight%
Atomic%
Weight%
Pd
1.03
8.09
0.77
6.15
0.45
3.75
C
77.00
68.29
75.40
67.93
80.40
75.59
N
15.94
16.49
17.98
18.89
14.83
16.26
O
6.03
7.14
5.86
7.03
3.52
4.41
Table 3.3: Determination of the atomic and weight percentages from peak
integration of the PdNC catalysts.
The atomic% of the catalysts were determined through fitting and integration of
the XPS peaks in the Avantage XPS software, and then subsequently converted to
weight%. Table 3.3 shows the results of the calculations, converting the atomic%
into weight percentage as a function of their atomic weights. The atomic and weight
distribution of the elements in the three samples yields some interesting variances.
All three of the samples show a majority of both the atomic and weight percent from
carbon content, as would be expected. The weight percent of the palladium content
for the 1.78 and 3.38wt% catalysts is significantly higher than that calculated from
the synthesis. The use of XPS, notably a surface sensitive technique, could be in-
fluencing this parameter, and the values should not be viewed as representative of
the bulk. These values from the XPS illustrate the further need for verification of
the metal loading. A thermal analysis measurement was attempted, but was not
completed with reliable results at the time of writing. The reader should note that,
while the catalysts will be referred to by their loadings determined from the synthesis
parameter to distinguish them, this is at best an estimation. The calculated maxi-
mum of the palladium loading for each of these catalysts, determined again from the
synthesis parameters, would be 2.5, 5 and 10wt% respectively, giving an indication
of the potential error. Further verification of the metal loadings of these catalysts
is imperative for establishing definitive connections between the theoretical catalyst
structures, and the practical catalyst properties observed throughout the characteri-
zation and electrochemical testing.
The synthesis parameters reveal a number of further investigations that would be
interesting to further develop the understanding of these catalysts. The synthesis
should have been controlled more carefully, as the ratio of cyanamide to metal pre-
cursor and cyanamide to carbon support was not held constant. This would have
an impact on the nitrogen content and subsequently the formation of the nitrogen-
carbon complex that serves as the anchoring point for the palladium ions. Further
insight into the synthesis method would benefit from multiple repetitions synthesizing
the same catalysts, and a deeper understanding of the processes involved could be
27
DTU Energy
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
gained from observing the intermediates at points throughout the synthesis. Addi-
tionally, manipulation of the volume of water solvent used to aid the incipient wetness
impregnation, potentially matching it to the pore volume of the carbon support ma-
terial could benefit the impregnation of the metals into the nitrogen-doped carbon
structure [24] Introducing carbon support materials with different surface areas or
structures could also impact the ability to form single atom sites, as demonstrated
by the ongoing research into carbon-based single atom catalysts with a variety of
support materials [39] [27].
3.2
Physical Characterization
The primary objective for the characterization of these catalysts is the determina-
tion of the active site structure, and relating it to the expected structure introduced
earlier. The active site structure will then consist of palladium ions, dispersed in a
semi-crystalline network of nitrogen-doped carbon on a carbon support. The visual-
ization of these sites can be difficult due to the resolution needed to examine single
atom sites individually, but the characteristics of the catalysts as a whole can be
studied. XRD can be used to observe the crystalline nature of the catalysts, which
should display broad peaks for the semi-crystalline nitrogen doped carbon, and no
peaks for the single atom palladium. TEM can be used to visualize the morphology
of the catalysts, and to observe the lack of particle formation in the size range of a
few nanometers. XPS is used to determine the binding energies of the constituent
atoms, from which the oxidation state of the palladium can be determined. From the
measurements of the nitrogen peaks, the interaction between the carbon and nitro-
gen should be visible, as well as a potential peak assigned to the Pd-N bond. The
expectation is that with a higher metal loading, the density of active sites should
increase, leading to a higher likelihood of particle formation and metallic palladium
being present in the sample. However, the instrumentation used here does have lim-
its on the resolution of the measurements. If the particles are below a size of 1nm,
they would be difficult to spot on the TEM. Likewise, if the particles compose less
than 0.1atomic% of the surface or 0.1weight% of the bulk catalyst they might not be
detected by the XPS [40] and XRD [41] respectively.
The characterization for each of the different palladium metal loadings will be intro-
duced separately, to highlight the variances between the catalysts and the expected
structures, as well as differences between the catalysts as a function of the change in
the metal loading.
28
DTU Energy
==PAGE:30==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
3.2.1
Single atom catalyst with 1.78wt% palladium loading
The 1.78wt% PdNC is expected to have a structure very similar to the one hypothe-
sized, since the low metal loading should lead to a good dispersion of the palladium
metal leading to a majority of single atom sites. The expectation from the charac-
terization is to see no indication of metallic palladium, either as crystal orientations
in the XRD or as metallic palladium in the XPS, as well as to observe the different
bonds that the nitrogen anchoring sites exist in. From the XRD spectra in figure 3.4,
the signal from the 1.78wt% PdNC can be seen, with a comparison made to a refer-
ence palladium XRD pattern on the X-axis[19] as well as to a palladium nanoparticle
catalyst.
Figure 3.4: XRD spectra of the 1.78wt% PdNC with comparison to a reference
XRD pattern for polycrystalline palladium along the X-axis and a palladium
nanoparticle catalyst
The peaks shown in figure 3.4 are associated with the semi-crystalline Vulcan XC72R
carbon substrate [28], with potential contribution from the nitrogen-doped carbon.
As mentioned earlier, there is some doubt about the exact structure that the carbon-
nitrogen complexes form, but the XRD spectra can serve to eliminate some possi-
bilities. No clear peak associated with polymeric carbon nitride can be seen, the
most likely alternative structure associated with the polymerization of the cyanamide
29
DTU Energy
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
precursor[25]. This is not enough information to definitively exclude this as a po-
tential configuration, since the content of the polymeric carbon nitride might not
be high enough to display crystalline properties on the XRD. Further, the relatively
well-ordered nitrogen-doped-graphene-like structure introduced as the expected ac-
tive site structure would likely present as a sharp peak on the XRD at around 26
degrees [33]. While it could be overshadowed by the intensity of the semi-crystalline
peak for the Vulcan XC72R, the contribution from a graphene-indicative peak would
likely be visible, so the structure of the nitrogen-doped carbon can be assumed to be
more amorphous than the one proposed. A comparison is further made to a simi-
larly synthesized palladium catalyst containing palladium nanoparticles, as shown by
the sharp peaks indicative of large, well-ordered crystalline structures at the angles
expected of crystalline palladium. From this comparison, the lack of crystalline pal-
ladium peaks in the 1.78wt% PdNC can be clearly demonstrated.
Further investigation of palladium nanoparticle formation is conducted using the
transmission electron microscope to image the catalyst morphology, as shown in fig-
ure 3.5. With the scale imaged here, the observations from the TEM is primarily
limited to viewing the general catalyst morphology and the observation of particles
in the size range of a few nanometers or larger.
Figure 3.5: TEM images of two different sites on the TEM grid for the 1.78wt%
PdNC catalyst
The general catalyst morphology displayed in figure 3.5 shows the catalyst as being
made of overlaying circular particles, formed by concentric layers. A qualitative ob-
30
DTU Energy
==PAGE:32==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
servation can be made of different formations of the particles, with some regions on
the outer edges of the particles appearing to diverge from the layered circular nature
seen throughout the catalyst. These could be attributed to a more amorphous or
more weakly anchored phase of the nitrogen-doped carbon. The important observa-
tion from these images is the lack of palladium nanoparticles, as would be indicated
by dark spots on the TEM images (Appendix 1A), supporting the information gained
from the XRD. It is known that palladium exists in these images, however it can
not be visualized at the current resolution of the TEM due to its dispersion in the
nitrogen-doped carbon.
From the XPS spectra of the Pd3d core shell, the binding of the palladium can further
be investigated. As seen in figure 3.6, the palladium peaks from the 1.78wt% sample
are compared to palladium metal, with the peaks for the catalyst evident at binding
energies a significant distance from the metallic palladium.
Figure 3.6: Pd3d XPS spectra comparing the 1.78wt% PdNC to the measured XPS
spectra of palladium metal
The comparison of the Pd3d XPS spectra for the 1.78wt% PdNC catalyst to a ref-
erence measurement for palladium metal serves as further confirmation that the pal-
ladium does not exhibit metallic bonding in the catalyst. The binding energies of
palladium in the catalyst shows the representative palladium doublet at a binding
31
DTU Energy
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
energy around 3.5eV higher than palladium metal. This binding energy of the palla-
dium could be indicative of either a 4+ oxidation state [34], or a 2+ oxidation state
with a higher binding energy as a result of interactions with the nitrogen complexes
[29]. For further insight into the interaction between the palladium and the nitrogen-
doped carbon anchoring sites, the N1s XPS spectra can be measured.
Figure 3.7: N1s XPS peak for the 1.78wt% PdNC catalyst showing the potential
contributions from different positions of the nitrogen in the structure
The N1s XPS spectra can give some insight as to the state of the nitrogen in the
sample. Earlier in the expected structure for the active sites, the nitrogen atoms
were introduced as existing in multiple different configurations, as pyridinic, pyrrolic
or graphitic nitrogen. These peaks should be evident, along with a peak for the Pd-N
bond expected. The expected peaks for the graphitic, pyrrolic and pyridinic nitrogen
would appear at 401, 400 and 398.5eV, which could be consistent with the nitrogen
spectra observed here [20]. The contributions associated with each configuration of
the nitrogen in figure 3.7 were manually assigned, and subsequently are an estima-
tion of one way in which the nitrogen peak could be deconvoluted. The Pd-N bond
should exhibit peaks at 397.5eV [20], although this is difficult to distinguish from
the spectra, potentially due to a low nitrogen content that forms this bond. The
intensity of the peak would indicate that the pyridinic nitrogen is the most common
configuration for the nitrogen to exist in, and would be representative of the anchoring
32
DTU Energy
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
nitrogen sites for the palladium coordinated with 4 nitrogen atoms introduced earlier.
3.2.2
Single atom catalyst with 3.38wt% palladium loading
The characterization of the 3.38wt% PdNC catalyst is compared to the 1.78wt%
PdNC to observe the consistency of the dispersion method with more active sites
present, and to compare any differences that might occur in the active site structure
as a result.
Figure 3.8: XRD spectra comparing the 1.78wt% PdNC and the 3.38wt% PdNC
with a library reference for crystalline palladium and a palladium nanoparticle
catalyst.
The crystallographic investigation of the sample shows a very similar structure to
the 1.78wt% PdNC, with the same characteristic peaks representative of the semi-
crystalline carbon support and nitrogen-doped carbon. The sharp peaks represen-
tative of large crystals like palladium particles are still not present, indicating that
the palladium ions are still atomically dispersed as expected. From the similarity of
the XRD spectra between the two catalysts, the TEM measurement of the 3.38wt%
catalyst would be expected to show the same catalyst morphology.
33
DTU Energy
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.9: TEM images of two different sites on the TEM grid for the 3.38wt%
PdNC catalyst
The TEM images in 3.9 show the 3.38 wt% PdNC catalyst at two different scales,
visualizing the clusters that the catalyst particles form on the TEM grid which are
being imaged, as well as a more focused image of the morphology at a higher reso-
lution. The 3.38wt% catalyst displays the same circular particles with visible layers
of the semi-crystalline carbon and nitrogen-doped carbon, without the presence of
palladium particles.
34
DTU Energy
==PAGE:36==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.10: Pd3d XPS spectra comparing the 1.78wt% and 3.38wt% PdNC to a
palladium metal wire
The Pd3d XPS spectra of the 3.38 wt% PdNC in figure 3.10 shows the first subtle
change between the two catalysts. A slight right-ward shift of the palladium binding
energies could represent a difference in the anchoring sites, although the binding ener-
gies themselves are still representative of the same structure observed in the 1.78wt%
PdNC. This could come as a result of interactions between the active sites due to their
increased density, affecting the homogeneity of the structure surrounding the active
sites or favoring a different structure for the bonding between the palladium and ni-
trogen. At higher palladium loadings, it has been shown that the binding energy of
the palladium tends to decrease as a result of palladium bonding to carbon-nitrogen
complexes with lower adsorption energies[29]. Looking at the XPS for the N1s peak
in figure 3.11 could serve to confirm this, as a difference of the nitrogen bonding in
the sample would affect both the C-N bonds and the Pd-N bonds.
35
DTU Energy
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.11: N1s XPS peak for the 1.78wt% and 3.38wt% PdNC showing the
similarity in the nitrogen content between them
The shift in binding energies is less noticeable in the N1s peak, with the peaks indi-
cating a similar structure of nitrogen in the catalyst. This would indicate that there
is not a significant change of the nitrogen bonding present in the sample, but rather
that the peak shift in the Pd3d measurement instead came as a result of a change
in the interaction between the palladium and the nitrogen, potentially favoring a dif-
ferent anchoring structure. The higher metal loading of the 3.38wt% PdNC catalyst
would be expected to show increased contribution from the Pd-N bond on the N1s
spectra, which would appear at an expected binding energy of 397.5 eV [20], however
this is not the case. A likely explanation for this would be that the nitrogen atoms
bonded to palladium compose a small fraction of the overall nitrogen content of the
catalysts.
3.2.3
Single atom catalyst with 7.47wt% palladium loading
The 7.47wt% represents a further increase in the active site density, again almost
doubling the metal loading of the palladium in the sample. The expectation would
be to observe another shift in the Pd3d XPS peak, representing a further weakening
of the Pd-N binding energy. This comes as a result of either some interaction be-
tween the active sites, or the change in the coordination between the palladium and
nitrogen. This shift should happen to a greater extent than in the 3.38wt% PdNC
36
DTU Energy
==PAGE:38==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
sample, and hopefully be visible in the N1s spectra as well.
Figure 3.12: XRD spectra comparing the three different metal loadings of the PdNC
catalysts with a reference XRD pattern for polycrystalline palladium along the
X-axis
The XRD is again representative of the structure expected, with the absence of peaks
representative of metallic palladium. This becomes a concern with higher metal load-
ings, since there would exist a limitation of the available anchoring sites as a function
of the nitrogen to metal ratio. Any palladium without suitable anchoring sites would
instead adsorb to the carbon or unfavourable nitrogen anchoring sites, where the po-
tential for agglomeration to particles is higher.
37
DTU Energy
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.13: TEM images of two different sites on the TEM grid for the 7.47wt%
PdNC catalyst
The TEM images of the 7.47wt% PdNC in figure 3.13 show a similar catalyst mor-
phology to the 1.78 and 3.38 wt% PdNC. Most images of the particle clusters seen in
the TEM exhibit smooth, round features, however as can be seen in the right image
of figure 3.13 there are examples of formations that do not follow this pattern. Being
able to attribute the various structures observed in the TEM to different components
of the catalyst would be a beneficial expansion, potentially through observation of
where the palladium moieties form in the catalyst structure seen in the TEM.
38
DTU Energy
==PAGE:40==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.14: Pd3d XPS spectra comparing the three PdNC catalysts to palladium
in a 2+ oxidation state (PdCl2)
The Pd3d XPS spectra of the 7.47wt% PdNC exhibits palladium peaks with the same
binding energies and peak shapes as the 3.38wt% sample. The peak from the PdCl2
is shown here as a comparison to palladium in a 2+ oxidation state, indicating that
the palladium is likely in a 4+ oxidation state or has an increased binding energy as
a result of the nitrogen-doped carbon interaction, as mentioned earlier. The intensity
of the palladium spectra shows less noise and a more refined signal than the previous
catalysts, likely as a result of the increase in the palladium content. From this observa-
tion, the N1s peak of the 7.47wt% will also likely be the same as the 3.38wt% catalyst.
39
DTU Energy
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.15: N1s XPS spectra comparison of the three PdNC catalysts
The N1s peak for the 7.47wt% sample in figure 3.15 shows a similar peak to the 1.78
and 3.38wt% catalysts, indicating that the structure of the nitrogen in the catalysts
has not changed as a result of the increased palladium content. An increase in the
contribution from Pd-N bonding at low binding energies, as would be expected from
the increase in the metal loading, is also not possible to observe from this spectra.
These results would support the possibility of further increases in the palladium load-
ing being possible without affecting the active site structure of the catalysts.
The observation of slight changes in the binding energies in the XPS, while the XRD
retained an almost identical signal between the catalysts, sets up for significant ex-
pansion of the investigated catalysts. One expansion would be to synthesize catalysts
with an even higher metal loading to observe if there is a critical limit in the ratio
between the metal precursor and the cyanamide at which the dispersion mechanism
begins to fail, and metallic particles can be observed. Further, the use of a TEM
instrument with a higher acceleration voltage would allow for the observation of the
active sites themselves, allowing for the elucidation of how the nitrogen-doped carbon
and the carbon support are reprented in the catalyst morphology. Synthesis of cata-
lysts with a reduction in the overall nitrogen content could also help to deconvolute
the nitrogen content further, allowing for the observation of the Pd-N peak and giving
further insight to the preferred nitrogen structure in the active sites.
40
DTU Energy
==PAGE:42==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
3.3
Electrochemical testing
To determine the performance of the catalysts and relate it to the metal loading, a
series of electrochemical tests are done. The primary measurement uses a rotating
ring disk electrode (RRDE), comprising of a disk electrode with the catalyst drop-
casted as a thin film, and a platinum ring electrode. Using this, the current associated
with the oxygen reduction reaction can be measured on the disk electrode, while si-
multaneously oxidizing hydrogen peroxide on the ring electrode. Subsequently, the
activity of the catalyst attributed to the 2 electron reduction of oxygen to hydrogen
peroxide can be determined from the ring electrode current, and the selectivity as a
comparison of the disk and ring current.
How well the catalyst forms as a thin-film on the disk electrode is hard to quan-
tify, and is primarily investigated through a visual inspection of the electrode. The
RRDE is imaged in a light microscope as shown in figure 3.16, and displays the signif-
icant difference than can occur in the thin-film formation between different catalysts.
The 3.38wt% thin-film appears very homogeneous and even across the electrode, and
would generally be described as a better thin-film overall[23].
Figure 3.16: Comparative image of the disk electrode thin-film for the 1.78wt%
(left) and 3.38wt% (right) PdNC catalysts
The expected outcome of the electrochemical testing is a parameter of both the theo-
rized structure and the characteristics of the catalysts observed throughout the char-
acterization measurements. For an identical active site structure for the three different
catalysts, an increase in the metal loading should result in an increase of the number
of active sites, directly benefiting the activity of the catalysts. The likely observation
would then be that the selectivity between the catalysts stays the same, while the
41
DTU Energy
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
activity would increase from the 1.78 to the 7.47 wt% PdNC. However the observa-
tion of a change in the binding energy of the palladium metal on the 7.47wt% could
indicate the potential for a difference in the electrochemical performance as compared
to the other two catalysts.
Figure 3.17: Comparison of the electrochemical currents observed for the 1.78wt%
PdNC catalyst tested in 0.1M HClO4 at an RRDE rotation rate of 900rpm.
Figure 3.17 shows the experimental measurements for the 1.78wt% PdNC sample.
The ring current has been converted to the peroxide current, which factors in the
collection efficiency of the ring. The onset potential, shown by the dashed line at
0.488V, is defined as the quantitative observation of a current increase on the disk
electrode, as the onset potential itself has a variety of different definitions[17]. For
the purpose of the discussion here, the onset potential will be determined at the point
when the disk electrode exceeds 0.1mA/cm2. This onset potential is comparative to
other single atom catalysts [6], however the disk electrode begins to measure currents
at above the theoretical reduction potential of 0.7V to hydrogen peroxide. This would
indicate that the 1.78wt% PdNC is likely to not contain exclusively single atom sites
that would favor hydrogen peroxide production, despite the characterization to sup-
port it. This factor, along with the lack of selectivity in this catalyst, could be a
result of small palladium particles below the detection limits of the characterization
instruments, which would favour the 4 electron reduction to water. Another possibil-
42
DTU Energy
==PAGE:44==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
ity would be the nitrogen-carbon content of the catalyst being active for the oxygen
reduction reaction, as has been demonstrated for nitrogen-doped carbon materials
[42]. The low selectivity is further evidenced by the peroxide current, which shows
significant deviation from the disk current. The relationship between these two is
used for the calculation of the selectivity for the catalyst. Since the ring electrode is
assumed to only be oxidizing hydrogen peroxide back to water, an ideal, 100% selec-
tive catalyst would have an identical value for the disk and peroxide currents at all
potentials. The deviation of the peroxide current from the disk current then indicates
that there is a secondary reaction occurring at the catalyst surface, most likely the
further reduction of hydrogen peroxide or the 4 electron reduction of oxygen to water.
Figure 3.18: Comparison of the electrochemical currents observed for the 3.38wt%
PdNC catalyst tested in 0.1M HClO4 at an RRDE rotation rate of 900rpm.
The ORR curves for the 3.38wt% PdNC sample show a significantly different story.
The onset potential is at around 0.35V, which is common for similar single atom
catalysts [43].
The peroxide current follows the disk current closely, indicating a
high selectivity for the catalyst. The overall current is lower than would be expected
in comparison to the 1.78wt% sample, and proves a counter to the argument that
higher loading should result in more active sites and higher activity. If this were
the case, the expectation would be that a higher current and activity should be ob-
served for the 3.38wt% PdNC sample as opposed to the 1.78wt% PdNC sample. This
43
DTU Energy
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
conclusion is affected by the observation of the 1.78wt% sample having non-selective
sites, which would contribute to other reactions and result in a higher current overall.
Comparing the two peroxide currents, despite the difference in selectivity, yields an
approximate 2x difference in the peak currents, similar to that of the loading. The
current exhibited on this catalyst reaches around 0.75mA/cm2 at 0.1V, significantly
lower than the comparable Co-N-C (3.5mA/cm2), Mn-N-C (2.4mA/cm2) and Fe-N-C
(3.45 mA/cm2) [44].
Figure 3.19: Comparison of the electrochemical currents observed for the 7.47wt%
PdNC catalyst tested in 0.1M HClO4 at an RRDE rotation rate of 900rpm.
Similar to the 1.78wt% sample, the 7.47wt% shown in figure 3.19 also has a high
divergence between the disk and peroxide current at high overpotentials, indicative
of a low selectivity. The currents measured for the 7.47wt% are the lowest out of the
three catalysts, reaching a maximum value of around 0.068mA for the peroxide cur-
rent, as compared to 0.1mA and 0.19mA for the 1.78wt% and 3.38wt% respectively.
This is further exemplified by the low onset potential, which is shifted significantly
due to the low currents exhibited, and only reaches the onset potential current value
of 0.1mA/cm2 at 0.347V, comparable to the 3.38wt% PdNC. This low activity could
stem from a number of factors. The most likely explanation would be a low catalyst
loading on the electrode, potentially from the contribution of an improper disper-
sion of the catalyst in the ink and/or a bad film on the disk.
The ink was also
visually observed, requiring multiple attempts and further grinding to get a visibly
44
DTU Energy
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
well-dispersed ink. An alternative explanation could be that the structural difference
between the 7.47wt% PdNC and the other two metal loadings seen in the Pd3d XPS
peaks could be less stable, potentially causing a destabilization of the catalyst during
the electrochemical testing. This has been observed previously during the testing
of other similarly synthesized catalysts with high metal loadings, as can be seen in
Appendix B figures 4.2 and 4.3. This destabilization could result in the breakdown
of the dispersion mechanism for the palladium ions, making it easier for them to
agglomerate and represent the low selectivity seen here, however this would still not
explain the overall low currents.
From the electrochemical ORR curves, the activity and selectivity of the catalysts
can be determined as a comparison of the currents exhibited and the characteristics
of the catalyst. Determining the performance of catalysts for hydrogen peroxide pro-
duction is primarily measured on two key metrics; their selectivity and activity. The
selectivity defines the percentage of the overall current exhibited by the catalyst that
contributes to the 2 electron reaction, as can be measured using the ring electrode.
The activity is a parameter that can describe multiple characteristics regarding the
performance of the catalyst. The most common parameters are the current exhibited
by the catalyst at a certain potential, as a function of the electrochemically active
surface area or the mass of the active materials. Another indicator of activity is the
overpotential, defined as the potential difference between the thermodynamic poten-
tial of the reaction and the onset potential. For the single atom catalysts assumed
here, the activity is reported as a function of catalyst mass, not the surface area. This
is because accurate determination of the active surface area for single atom sites is
challenging, and the assumption is made that the entirety of the catalyst is acting in a
comprehensive manner, rather than having individual active particles on a substrate
as is the case with commercial ORR catalysts. The metal loadings of the catalysts is
also taken into account, leading to the calculation of a metal-mass specific activity.
As seen from the ORR curves, the onset potential of the catalysts synthesized here
are not ideal, neither compared to the electrochemical potential of 0.70V in acidic
conditions nor as a comparison to other literature [32]. The overpotential required
to drive a reaction, defined as the difference between the electrochemical potential
and the onset potential, is a critical parameter for catalysts. Higher overpotentials
mean that more energy is needed to drive the same reaction, reducing the energy
efficiency and sustainability aspects meant to be a benefit in electrochemical synthesis.
Looking at the activity exhibited by the catalysts, it can be seen that a high onset
potential, as seen here, results in the current attributed to the reactions shifting
further away from the electrochemical potential, reducing the performance of the
catalysts. The structure of the catalyst active site can have a significant impact on
45
DTU Energy
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
the onset potential and overpotential of a catalyst. The volcano plot showed in figure
3.20 depicts the effect of the overpotential as a function of the adsorption energy of
the *OOH intermediate. It can be observed that there is a significant difference of
almost 1V between structures with similar constituent elements, namely the nitrogen-
doped defective graphene (CN3Pd), carbon nitride (C2NPd) and defective graphene
(C4Pd). This could provide an indication as to how significant an effect the active
site structure might have on the onset potential of the PdNC catalysts.
Figure 3.20: Limiting potentials of H2O2 as a function of the adsorption free energies
of *OOH on different binding environments of palladium single atom catalysts [13]
46
DTU Energy
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.21: The catalyst-mass specific activity as a function of the potential for the
three different PdNC catalysts
In figure 3.21, the mass activity of the catalysts is given as mA/mg of catalyst on the
electrode. It can be seen here that the 3.38wt% sample performs the best, achieving an
activity at 0.05V of almost 17mA/mg(Catalyst), as compared to 8mA/mg(Catalyst)
and 4mA/mg(Catalyst) for the 1.78 and 7.47wt% catalysts respectively. It can also
be seen that the majority of the activity exhibited by these catalysts starts at the
same potential, around 0.3V vs RHE, and increases in a parabolic fashion with in-
creasing overpotential. This indicates that the catalysts are kinetically limited over
the entire potential range, never reaching a state where the diffusion of oxygen to the
catalyst sites would be the limiting factor in the reaction, as is common with RDE
measurements of commercial 4 electron ORR catalysts.
47
DTU Energy
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.22: The metal-mass specific activity as a function of the potential for the
three different PdNC catalysts
The secondary activity determination is shown in figure 3.22 and displays the metal
mass activity. This is essentially the same calculation as the mass activity, but rather
than using the mass of the catalyst on the electrode, the metal mass in the catalyst
is taken into account instead. Since the investigation is into the effect of loading on
the catalysts, it makes sense to account for the metal loading in the activity calcu-
lations. This multiplies the catalyst mass by the percentage loading of the metal in
each catalyst, to obtain a metric of metal mass activity (mA/mg(Pd)). This is similar
to the specific activity used for nanoparticle catalysts for ORR, where the activity is
reported as mA/mg(M) where M is the active metal. The 3.38wt% PdNC and the
1.78wt% PdNC reach values of almost 600mA/mg(Pd) and 500mA/mg(Pd), which
are comparable to the mass-specific activities of platinum nanoparticle catalysts for
the 4 electron reduction of oxygen [18]. This shows the advantage of single atom
catalysts, with the single metal atom active sites leading to a high efficiency of the
utilization of the metals in the catalysts, corresponding to this metal mass specific
activity.
48
DTU Energy
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
Figure 3.23: Selectivity as a function of potential for the three different palladium
metal loadings of the catalysts
The selectivity calculations for the three samples follows the expectations and trends
seen in the ORR curves. The 3.38wt% PdNC has the highest selectivity, maintaining
above 90% selectivity over the entire potential range that it is active, with the highest
selectivity achieved at around 0.2V vs. RHE. The 7.47wt% has a similar shape, with
a maximal selectivity at around 0.2-0.25V vs. RHE, and a slightly decreasing selec-
tivity at lower potentials. The 1.78wt% sample has a significantly different shape,
increasing in selectivity consistently with lower potentials. The differences exhibited
by the catalysts in their selectivity and activity comes as a result of their differences
in structure, with the 1.78wt% and 7.47wt% PdNC showing characteristics of not
exclusively having single atom sites. The result of this selectivity, while synonymous
with the ORR curves, is quite inconsistent with the hypothesis. The selectivity of
the catalyst should be at a maximum when the active sites are atomically dispersed
and no particle agglomeration can occur, a distribution that should be favored at the
lower loading.
The selectivity of the catalysts displayed here, exceeding 70% at high overpotentials,
are high compared to literature of single atom catalysts with similar metal loadings [4].
The 3.38wt% PdNC especially shows comparable selectivity to similarly dispersed Co-
NC catalysts [32]. The activity of the catalysts without considering the metal loading
is the primary issue, and as was discussed earlier, could be a function of either the
49
DTU Energy
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
catalysts themselves or the catalyst thin-film formation on the disk electrode. While
the reported activity of single atom catalysts varies significantly, the highest peroxide
current exhibited at around 1 mA/cm2 at 0.05V vs RHE for the 3.38wt% catalyst is
low compared to similar M-NC single atom catalysts [44]. This is likely as a result of
the low onset potentials for the catalysts, which differ significantly from the reported
onset potentials in the range of 0.5 to 0.69V vs RHE [6]. Further reproduction of
these experiments, and ensuring homogeneity of the thin-film catalyst before testing,
would provide a more valuable comparison between the catalysts considered here.
50
DTU Energy
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
3.4
Conclusion
A series of palladium-based catalysts with high selectivity to the 2 electron reduction
of oxygen to hydrogen peroxide were successfully synthesized. The determination of
the structure of the palladium-base catalysts was carried out through a series of char-
acterization steps to determine their binding energies and crystallographic properties,
revealing their dispersion as ions in a nitrogen-doped carbon support, consistent with
the aim of the synthesis.
The impact of the change in the metal loading of the catalysts on their performance
was significantly different from the expected outcome. The activity of the catalysts
increased with the metal loading between the 1.78 and 3.38wt% palladium loadings,
taken as a function of the active site density increasing, however this trend did not
continue to the 7.47wt% catalyst despite the appearance of a similar catalyst struc-
ture from the characterization steps. Notably, the selectivity performance between the
three catalysts was also misaligned with the expectations, with the 1.78wt% catalyst
that should have the most optimal dispersion and properties for selective hydrogen
peroxide reduction showing properties of being active for the 4 electron reduction of
oxygen. The activity of all three catalysts is significantly below state of the art, both
in terms of the onset potential for the reaction and the mass-specific activity. The
selectivity towards hydrogen peroxide is another matter, with the 3.38wt% PdNC
exhibiting over 95% at 0.2V vs. RHE, comparable to that of Pd-Hg [21] or other
palladium-based catalysts with similar metal loadings [4][22].
There are significant areas of improvement and expansion available for the further
development of this project. For one, the synthesis of a greater range of catalysts,
with consistent precursor ratios and both higher and lower metal loadings, to deter-
mine the limitations of the dispersion method used to create the palladium single
atom sites. The reproduction of these catalysts would also be necessary, both for the
synthesis and electrochemical testing, to verify the overall consistency of the method.
Improving the activity of these catalysts is a metric that needs to be targeted, as
their current attributes are very unfavourable as compared to literature. This could
be attempted through a change in the carbon support material, to use a higher surface
area support like Black Pearls 2000 (BP2000), which in itself could allow for more
active sites to interact with the reagents, but could also allow for a higher active site
density than previously considered.
Improvement of the electrochemical procedure, especially the dispersion of the cata-
lyst in the inks and the thin-film formation on the electrodes is another notable area
51
DTU Energy
==PAGE:53==
CHAPTER 3. SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF PDNC
CATALYSTS FOR ELECTROSYNTHESIS OF H2O2
of improvement. The current method of verification for a well-made thin-film is based
on visual homogeneity, although this does not always lead to a well-performing cat-
alyst electrode. Further insight into this process and experimentation with different
ink solvents for catalyst dispersion, especially at high metal loadings, is needed.
52
DTU Energy
==PAGE:54==
Chapter 4
Outlooks and Summary
This outlook and summary section is meant to highlight improvements on this work,
outline the thought process for further expansion, and serve as my general thoughts
on the work throughout this thesis.
One of the biggest improvements that is necessary for the expansion of this work, and
my efforts continuing forward, is the establishment of a more consistent and reliable
working method. The catalysts synthesized in this thesis have issues beginning from
the synthesis itself, with the precursor ratios and metal loadings not being controlled
and verified reliably. This makes it difficult to establish any reasonable conclusions
from the following measurements. This is a critical point for conducting scientific re-
search, and establishes one of the key learning objectives and points of improvement
for me personally. A greater ability to plan my research and the story lines I wish to
demonstrate is a skill I need to improve on.
As mentioned in the conclusion, reproduction of the results and catalysts syntheses in
this thesis is necessary. The catalyst synthesis should be repeated, both for the cata-
lysts considered herein but also with further changes in the precursors, to investigate
the reliability of this method for the formation of single atom catalysts. The control
of the parameters in the electrochemical testing, especially the thin-film formations
on the rotating disk electrode and ensuring the reliability of the testing environment,
is necessary to elucidate the electrochemical characteristics of the catalysts. Without
the certainty of knowing that the test parameters are well-controlled, multiple repe-
titions for the electrochemical testing are necessary, which were not conducted here.
With the improvement of the aforementioned parameters, the possibility for further
expansion improves. For the catalyst materials investigated here, there are a number
of experiments that can be conducted which could help to improve my understand-
ing. The stability of these catalysts should be determined, either through repeated
cycles of the ORR curves shown earlier or by measuring the current profiles over
time at applied potentials. Investigating the effect of various temperatures on the
53
==PAGE:55==
CHAPTER 4. OUTLOOKS AND SUMMARY
electrochemical testing of the catalyst materials could also prove an important factor
in optimizing their catalytic performance. The development of a flow cell for electro-
chemical testing of the catalysts has progressed within my group, which would enable
testing of the catalyst performance in a configuration closer to industrial applications.
As part of a special course conducted alongside this thesis, the development of a flow
cell for in-operando AP-XPS testing of the catalysts was started. This can serve
to improve the understanding of the catalyst structures during the electrochemical
reactions.
54
DTU Energy
==PAGE:56==
Bibliography
[1] National Library of Medicine, ”Hydrogen Peroxide Compound Summary”, Pub-
Chem, https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Hydrogen-Peroxide, (Ac-
cessed 20-05-2024)
[2] Perry, S. C., Mavrikis, S., Wang, L. et al., ”Future perspectives for the advance-
ment of electrochemical hydrogen peroxide production”, Current Opinion in Elec-
trochemistry, 2021, 100792
[3] Huang, X., Song, M., Zhang, J. et al., ”Recent Advances of Electrocatalyst and
Cell Design for Hydrogen Peroxide Production”, Nano-Micro Lett., 2023, 15, 86
[4] Yu, S., Cheng, X., Wang, Y. et al., ”High activity and selectivity of single palla-
dium atom for oxygen hydrogenation to H2O2”, Nat Commun, 2022, 13, 4737
[5] Na, J., Seo, B., Kim, J. et al., ”General technoeconomic analysis for electrochemi-
cal coproduction coupling carbon dioxide reduction with organic oxidation.”, Nat
Commun, 2019, 10, 5193
[6] Chen, K., Huang, Y., Jin, R. et al., ”Single atom catalysts for use in the selec-
tive production of hydrogen peroxide via two-electron oxygen reduction reaction:
Mechanism, activity, and structure optimization”, Applied Catalysis B: Environ-
mental, 2023, Volume 337,
[7] Liu, L., Chen, T., Chen, Z., ”Understanding the Dynamic Aggregation in Single-
Atom Catalysis”, Advanced Science, 2024, 11, 13
[8] Mart´ın, A.J., Mitchell, S., Mondelli, C. et al., ”Unifying views on catalyst deac-
tivation.” Nat Catal, 2022, 5, 854–866
[9] Xia, C., Qiu, Y., Xia, Y. et al., ”General synthesis of single-atom catalysts with
high metal loading using graphene quantum dots.” Nat. Chem., 2021, 13, 887–894
[10] Lucas, D. ”Decoding Platinum and Palladium”, The Global Citizen, 2023,
https://globalcitizen.world/decoding-platinum-and-palladium/
[11] Fulp, M., ”The ‘quite unusual’ platinum to palladium ratio”, Mining.com, 2018,
https://www.mining.com/web/quite-unusual-platinum-palladium-ratio/
55
==PAGE:57==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[12] Sungeun, Y., Arnau, V. C., Logi, A. et al., ”Toward the Decentralized Electro-
chemical Production of H2O2: A Focus on the Catalysis”, ACS Catalysis, 2018
[13] Wei, Z., Deng, B., Chen, P. et al. ”Palladium-based single atom catalysts for
high-performance electrochemical production of hydrogen peroxide”, Chemical
Engineering Journal, 2022, Volume 428
[14] Zhao, J., Fu, C., Ye, K. et al. ”Manipulating the oxygen reduction reaction
pathway on Pt-coordinated motifs.” Nat Commun, 2022, 13, 685
[15] Tang, X., Li, F., Li F. et al. ”Single-atom catalysts for the photocatalytic and
electrocatalytic synthesis of hydrogen peroxide”, Chinese Journal of Catalysis,
2023, 52: 79-98
[16] Ren X, Dong X, Liu L, et al. ”Research progress of electrocatalysts for the
preparation of H2O2 by electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction.”, SusMat.
2023; 3: 442–470
[17] Batchelor-McAuley C., ”Defining the onset potential”, Current Opinion in Elec-
trochemistry, 2023, Volume 37
[18] Hu, Y., Jensen, J. O., Bretzler, P. et al., ”Revealing the genuine stability of
the reference Pt/C electrocatalyst toward the ORR”, Electrochimica Acta, 2021,
Volume 391
[19] The Materials Project, ”Standard palladium powder X-ray diffraction pattern”,
https://next-gen.materialsproject.org/materials/mp-2/
[20] Miao, J., Wang, J., Lv, Z. et al., ”Single-atom Pd loaded on nitrogen-doped
carbon as a bifunctional catalyst for the electrochemical degradation of 2,4-
dichlorophenol”, Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 2023, Volume
11, Issue 5
[21] Huang, H., Sun, M., Li, M. et al., ”Recent advances in single-atom catalysts
for electrocatalytic synthesis of hydrogen peroxide”, Green Energy and Resources,
2023, Volume 1, Issue 3
[22] Freakley, S. J., He, Q., Harrhy, J. H. et al., ”Palladium-tin catalysts for the direct
synthesis of H2O2 with high selectivity”, Science, 2016, 351, 965-968
[23] Inaba, M., Quinson, J., Bucher, J. R. et al., ”On the Preparation and Testing
of Fuel Cell Catalysts Using the Thin Film Rotating Disk Electrode Method.” J
Vis Exp. 2018
56
DTU Energy
==PAGE:58==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[24] Munnik, P., de Jongh, P. E., de Jong, K. P., ”Recent Developments in the
Synthesis of Supported Catalysts”, Chemical Reviews, 2015
[25] Hu Y., Jensen J. O., Norby P. et al., ”Mechanistic Insights into the Synthe-
sis of PlatinumRare Earth Metal Nanoalloys by a Solid-State Chemical Route”,
Chemistry of Materials, 2021, 33 (2), 535-546
[26] Shi, Q., Zhang, R., Lv, Y. et al., ”Nitrogen-doped ordered mesoporous carbons
based on cyanamide as the dopant for supercapacitor”, Carbon, 2015, Volume 84,
Pages 335-346
[27] Al-Hajri, W., De Luna, Y., Bensalah, N., ”Review on Recent Applications of
Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Materials in CO2 Capture and Energy Conversion and
Storage”. Energy Technol., 2022
[28] de Moura Souza, F., Paniz, F. P., Pedron, T. et al., ”A high-throughput an-
alytical tool for quantification of 15 metallic nanoparticles supported on carbon
black”, Heliyon, 2019, Volume 5, Issue 3
[29] He, Z., Dong, B., Wang, W. et al., ”Elucidating Interaction between Palladium
and N-Doped Carbon Nanotubes: Effect of Electronic Property on Activity for
Nitrobenzene Hydrogenation” ACS Catalysis, 2019, 9 (4), 2893-2901
[30] Wei, Q., Tong, X., Zhang, G. et al., ”Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Nanotube and
Graphene Materials for Oxygen Reduction Reactions.” Catalysts, 2015, 5(3):1574-
1602
[31] Yang, C., Zhao, Z., Wei, H. et al., ”DFT calculations for single-atom confinement
effects of noble metals on monolayer g-C3N4 for photocatalytic applications”, RSC
Adv., 2021, 11, 7, 4276-4285
[32] Wang, N., Ma, S., Zuo, P. et al., ”Recent Progress of Electrochemical Production
of Hydrogen Peroxide by Two-Electron Oxygen Reduction Reaction”, Adv. Sci.
2021, 8, 2100076.
[33] Boeva, Z. A., Milakin, K. A., Pesonen, M. et al., ”Dispersible composites of
exfoliated graphite and polyaniline with improved electrochemical behaviour for
solid-state chemical sensor applications”, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 86
[34] Li, Y., Xiao, L., Liu, F. et al., ”Core-shell structure Ag@Pd nanoparticles sup-
ported on layered MnO2 substrate as toluene oxidation catalyst”, J Nanopart Res,
2019, 21, 28
57
DTU Energy
==PAGE:59==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[35] Palladium Reference XPS Spectra, NIST X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
Database, NIST Standard Reference Database Number 20, National Institute of
Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg MD, 20899, 2000
[36] Wang, N., Zhao, X., Zhang, R. et al., ”Highly Selective Oxygen Reduction to Hy-
drogen Peroxide on a Carbon-Supported Single-Atom Pd Electrocatalyst”, ACS
Catalysis, 2022, 12 (7), 4156-4164
[37] Jia, Z., Yin, G., Zhang, J., ”6 - Rotating Ring-Disk Electrode Method, Rotat-
ing Electrode Methods and Oxygen Reduction Electrocatalysts”, Elsevier, 2014,
Pages 199-229
[38] Dr. Podyacheva, O. Y., Dr. Bulushev, D. A., Suboch, A. N. et al., ”Highly Stable
Single-Atom Catalyst with Ionic Pd Active Sites Supported on N-Doped Carbon
Nanotubes for Formic Acid Decomposition”, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 21
[39] Yang, Y., Yang, Y., Pei, Z. et al., ”Recent Progress of Carbon-Supported Single-
Atom Catalysts for Energy Conversion and Storage”, Matter, 2020, 3, 5
[40] Shard, A. G., ”Detection limits in XPS for more than 6000 binary systems using
Al and Mg K X-rays”, Surf. Interface Anal, 2014, 46: 175-185
[41] Schwartz, D., ”Guideline on Powder X-ray Diffraction (XRD) - General
Overview”, Nuclear Forensics International Technical Working Group, 2015
[42] Kong, F., Cui, X., Huang, Y.,, ”N-Doped Carbon Electrocatalyst: Marked ORR
Activity in Acidic Media without the Contribution from Metal Sites?”, Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed., 2022, 134, e202116290
[43] Ledendecker, M., Pizzutilo, E., Malta G. et al., ”Isolated Pd Sites as Selective
Catalysts for Electrochemical and Direct Hydrogen Peroxide Synthesis”, ACS
Catalysis, 2020 10 (10), 5928-5938
[44] Shen, J., Wen, Y., Jiang H., et al., ”Identifying Activity Trends for the Electro-
chemical Production of H2O2 on M–N–C Single-Atom Catalysts Using Theoreti-
cal Kinetic Computations”, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 2022 126 (25),
10388-10398
58
DTU Energy
==PAGE:60==
Appendix
Appendix A
TEM images taken of a palladium nanoparticle catalyst synthesized through a vari-
ation in the solid state method. Palladium nanoparticles in the size range of 3nm
were observed, and can be seen from the dark spots in figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: TEM images of palladium nanoparticle formation
59
==PAGE:61==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Appendix B
Destabilization of catalysts seen during ORR testing for two independent measure-
ments of a 15wt% PtNC catalyst.
Figure 4.2: Destabilization of catalyst during ORR cycling at 20mV/s scan rate,
900rpm rotation rate, showing significantly different current profiles before and after.
60
DTU Energy
==PAGE:62==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Figure 4.3: Destabilization of catalyst during a measurement of the ORR
performance curves, at 50mV/s scan rate and a rotation rate of 900rpm.
61
DTU Energy
