==PAGE:1==
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
Master Thesis, 30 ECTS
Author:
Esben Rahbek Thuesen, s223102
Supervisors:
Anders Gorm Pedersen, Professor, PhD
Elena Papaleo, Associate Professor, PhD
Morten Nielsen, Professor, PhD
DTU Health Technology
Section for Bioinformatics
DTU Health Technology
Section for Bioinformatics
June, 2024
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Virus evolution is driven by complex interactions ranging from molec­
ular changes to host population dynamics, often conceptualized
as a fitness landscape with peaks and valleys. This study aimed to
define a meaningful measure of viral fitness using computational
simulations of the different fitness variables. With SARS­CoV­2 as
model virus, fitness dimensions of thermodynamic stability and B
and T cell immunogenicity were investigated.
Ancestral sequence reconstruction of viral proteins revealed evo­
lutionary substitutions, which were used to train a Feed Forward
Neural Network to predict the probability of substitutions based on
features including thermodynamic stability, immunogenicity, and
original residue identity combined with a BLOSUM62 probability.
The original residue emerged as the most influential feature, and
the best­performing model utilized only the original residue and
thermodynamic stability.
The model showed promising results, though its evaluation was
challenging due to output nature, and further training and valida­
tion is needed. Comprehensive validation requires datasets from
diverse viruses, beyond the scope of this project.
A generalized fitness model could improve pandemic prepared­
ness by predicting fitness­enhancing substitutions from nucleotide
sequences. This approach could be pivotal in anticipating and
mitigating future viral outbreaks.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
iii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
Conducting this thesis has been a great experience, and I owe some gratitude to those
who have guided and supported me along the way.
First, I would like to thank my main supervisor, Anders Gorm Pedersen, for conceiving
the project idea and providing invaluable guidance throughout.
I also want to thank my co­supervisors, Elena Papaleo and Morten Nielsen, for their
time, expertise, and insightful contributions.
A special thanks to Matteo Tiberti at the DCI for his assistance with MutateX, to Kristine
Degn for her help with PyMOL scripting, PDBminer, and other bioinformatic tools, and
to Joakim Nøddeskov Clifford and my best friend Niels Lorenzen, for their guidance on
the feed­forward neural network model presented in this project.
I would like to thank my colleagues at PandemiX Center, where much of this thesis has
been written, for the stimulating discussions and fresh perspectives.
Finally, I wish to express my heartfelt gratitude to Mette, my life partner, for the emotional
support, patience, and endless amount of bad jokes.
iv
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:5==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Bioinformatics, De­
partment of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial
fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Bioinformatics and Systems Biology.
Declaration on use of generative artifical intelligence
For this Master thesis, generative artifical intelligence tools have been used in the fol­
lowing way:
• ChatGPT 4 and ChatGPT 4o have been used as sparring partners in the writing
process, particularly for making my language more concise, for code debugging,
and for providing quick overviews of new topics.
• GitHub Copilot has been used to more efficiently write Python scripts and add
comments along the way
Esben Rahbek Thuesen ­ s223102
Signature
Date
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
v
21/06/2024
==PAGE:6==
List of abbreviations used
ANN
Artificial Neural Network
ANP
Aggregated NetMHCpan Position­specific score
AUC
Area Under the Curve
BCR
B cell receptor
BLOSUM
BLOCKS Substitution Matrix
Cryo­EM
Cryo­Electron Microscopy
CTL
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes
dANP
Difference in ANP
FFNN
Feed Forward Neural Network
FN
False Negative
FP
False Positive
GTR
Generalized Time Reversible
HLA
Human Leukocyte Antigen
LES
Linear Epitope Score
LM
Language Model
MaCC
Matthews correlation coefficient
MC3
Metropolis­Couples Markov Chain Monte Carlo
MCC
Maximum Clade Credibility
MCMC
Markov Chain Monte Carlo
MHC (I/II)
Major Histocompatibility Complex (I or II)
MSA
Multiple Sequence Alignment
PDB
Protein Data Bank
ROC
Receiver Operating Characteristic
SB
Strong Binder (epitope­MHC I binding)
TCR
T cell receptor
TN
True Negative
TP
True Positive
VOCs
Variants Of Concern
WB
Weak Binder (epitope­MHC I binding)
vi
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
1
Biological background
1
1.1
Virus evolution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Fitness landscapes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Immunity
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Thermodynamic protein stability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Methodological background
4
2.1
Bayesian phylogenetic tree inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Ancestral sequence reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Amino acid substitution matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Protein stability predictions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5
Immunogenicity analysis of protein sequences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.6
Artificial neural networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methods
15
3.1
Phylogenetic analysis and ancestral reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
3.2
Mutational scans of protein structures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.3
Immunoinformatic analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4
Fitness landscape modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.5
Feed Forward Neural Network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4
Results
23
4.1
Phylogenetic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Selection of proteins for further analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3
Protein structures used in this thesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4
∆∆G calculations from deep mutational scans
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5
Immunoinformatics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.6
Fitness landscape model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5
Discussion
45
5.1
Dataset diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.2
Ancestral sequence reconstruction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
5.3
Protein stability predictions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.4
Immunogenicity: B cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
5.5
Immunogenicity: T cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
5.6
FFNN Fitness Landscape model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
5.7
Model benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.8
Fitness elements omitted in the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
vii
==PAGE:8==
5.9
Epistasis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.10 A different approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
6
Conclusion and future perspectives
55
References
57
A Conditional BLOSUM62 probability matrix
63
B SARS­CoV­2 sequence meta data
65
C Substitution model selection
74
D MCC Phylogenetic Tree
75
E
Observed Mutations in Ancestral Sequence Reconstruction
76
F
MutateX Overview
77
G Virus Fitness Landscape
80
viii
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:9==
1
Biological background
This introductory section is split in two; a biological and a methodological introduction.
For this first section, a basic understanding of the viral replication cycle is assumed.
1.1
Virus evolution
Viruses are subcellular biological entities which can be defined as obligate intracellular
parasites, meaning they rely on the cellular machinery of the host they infect for repli­
cation and propagation. Viral infection often has a cost on the host, why a host evolving
in a way that prevent infection may gain competitive advantage over other hosts. Con­
versely, viruses may similarly adapt to the cellular changes. Using cold war lingo, this
has often been termed an evolutionary arms race, and this drives evolution of both the
host and their viruses [1].
The required adaptations arise from genomic mutations (or reassortment or recombina­
tion, which will not be delved further into here). It is important to keep in mind that the
process of genomic mutation is highly stochastic and can be attributed to the fidelity of
polymerase enzymes during genome copying. Here it is of note that the RNA­dependent
RNA­polymerases of RNA viruses, are generally much more error­prone than their DNA
Virus’ and cellular counterparts. As a result, RNA viruses generally display greater ge­
netic diversity and have the potential to evolve more rapidly over short evolutionary
timescales [1].
Whenever a virus infects a cell, a multitude of new virus particles are created, some of
which carry mutations. The many virus particles are in competition, and their success is
measured by how effectively they propagate in neighbouring cells and spread to differ­
ent hosts. This process drives viral evolution, as mutations that confer a reproductive
advantage are more likely to be passed on to subsequent generations [1]. For exam­
ple, such a change could enhance the binding affinity between the virus and its cellular
receptor, thereby improving the virus’s ability to infect host cells, or the change could
enable a viral accessory protein to inhibit host immune responses.
1.2
Fitness landscapes
If, instead, an imaginary single genetic change enhances the virus’s ability of infec­
tion, but simultaneously increases its immunogenicity, opposing effects from a single
change is evident. To cope with this evolutionary complexity, the concept of a fitness
landscape is often introduced. In the context of virology, fitness is typically defined as
the reproductive capacity of a virus, and thus very closely related to the theoretical R0
for epidemiologists [1]. The fitness landscape is a metaphor with peaks and valleys
representing high and low fitness. A three dimensional landscape with fitness on the
y­axis, and sequence space and some fitness parameter on the other two axes would in
most minds resemble something like a topographical map with peaks and valleys. Enter
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
1
==PAGE:10==
the multiplicity of dimensions that affect fitness, and it gets really complicated to visual­
ize, but the idea remains the same. Super­dimensional peaks and valleys suggest the
most favourable evolutionary path of the virus. The fitness landscape has been used in
evolutionary biology since the early 1930s [2] and has its criticism, many of which has
focused on the reduction of evolutionary complexity when a fitness landscape is pre­
sented as three­dimensional graphics [3]. Here, the treacherous path of visualisation is
deliberately omitted, and the strength of the metaphor remain; a conceptual framework
that unifies the heterogeneous forces at play in evolution.
1.3
Immunity
Throughout evolution, defence mechanisms to virus infections have evolved in all type
of hosts. This introduction focuses on a generalised mammalian immune response.
The immune system is a multilayered structure, ranging from the chemical composition
of sweat and general inflammatory responses to highly specialized molecular recogni­
tion and elimination of foreign elements inside cells. Typically, a discussion of immunity
is divided into the intrinsic, innate, and adaptive responses. All three layers have an
important role when considering virus immunity.
Intrinsic immunity includes immediate cellular responses that inhibit virus replication
soon after infection. These mechanisms involve cellular proteins that can recognize
and restrict viral components directly within infected cells, such as RIG­I and MDA5 [1].
Innate immunity encompasses a broader range of responses and is the body’s first line
of defence, activated within hours of infection. It includes physical barriers, phagocytic
cells, natural killer cells, and the complement system, which work together to limit virus
spread and activate the adaptive immune response.
The adaptive immune response is characterized by its two main components, humoral
and cellular immunity:
1.3.1
Humoral immunity
Humoral immunity relies on B cells and generally operates by the binding of B cell re­
ceptors (BCR), to virus particles in the bloodstream and on mucosal surfaces. The
engagement of the BCR on naïve B cells triggers a signalling cascade that leads to cell
division and differentiation. The majority of the progeny mature into plasma cells, which
secrete large quantities of antibodies, which are secreted BCRs, into the environment
to neutralize virus particles through various mechanisms. A much smaller subset of the
progeny matures into memory B cells, which circulate and monitor for similar threats [1].
1.3.2
Cellular immunity
Cellular immunity, on the other hand, is driven by T cells. An important distinction from
humoral immunity is that the T cell receptor (TCR) does not bind directly to virus anti­
gens but instead to epitopes presented on Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC)
molecules on the surface of either infected cells or antigen­presenting cells. Here, the
focus is on infected cells.
2
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:11==
Almost all nucleated cells express MHC class I molecules (MHC I). These present de­
graded peptides from inside the cell. In uninfected cells, they present self­antigens. In
virus­infected cells, some MHC I molecules will display degraded viral peptides. These
foreign peptides cause a structural change in the MHC I, allowing the cell to be recog­
nized as infected by CD8+ T cells, also known as cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL). When
the TCR on CTLs engages with the infected cell, it typically results in the destruction
of the cell, thereby impeding the virus’s propagation. This interaction also triggers the
secretion of interferon­γ, which induces an antiviral state in neighbouring cells [1].
MHC I proteins are encoded in human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes. Each human
individual carries six of these of which a great and important diversity exist; different
allele compositions result in recognition and presentation of different peptides, and thus
in different immune responses between individuals to the same pathogens [1].
1.4
Thermodynamic protein stability
Viral proteins are synthesized in the cellular environment by the cellular ribosomes, why
the same biophysical forces apply to them as to cellular proteins. Proteins consist of
long chains of amino acids joined by peptide bonds forming the backbone, from which
side chains with different biochemical properties, e.g. polar or hydrophobic, protrude.
As soon as the amino acid chain emerges from the ribosome, biophysical restraints
drive the folding of the protein into a low­energy state[4].
Energy in biochemical systems is described using the Gibbs free energy (G) term. In
biochemistry, the change in energy (ΔG) is often of most interest. This can be defined
as:
∆G = Gf −Gi
(1.1)
where Gf and Gi are the Gibbs free energies at the final and initial states of the process,
respectively. In protein folding, this represents the difference in free energy between a
newly synthesized unfolded amino acid chain (Gi) and the folded protein (Gf). If the
folded state has a lower energy than the unfolded peptide, the ΔG value is negative.
A negative ΔG for protein folding indicates that the process is thermodynamically favourable
and occurs spontaneously, leading to a more stable, low energy state. Conversely, pos­
itive ΔG indicates non­spontaneous processes, that require additional energy to occur.
Comparing the effect of changes in conditions, e.g. amino acid substitutions, on the ΔG
is often done using the difference in ΔG, i.e., represented as ΔΔG:
∆∆G = ∆Gmut −∆Gwt
(1.2)
If the ∆Gmut is lower than that of the wildtype, the mutant has the more favourable lower
energy state, indicated by a negative ΔΔG value.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
3
==PAGE:12==
2
Methodological background
2.1
Bayesian phylogenetic tree inference
From a nucleotide sequence alignment, the interrelatedness between the sequences
can be estimated in the form of phylogenetic trees. Various methods are available for
this purpose; some relying on the maximum likelihood principle, such as PAML (Phylo­
genetic Analysis by Maximum Likelihood [5]), while others are built on Bayesian princi­
ples, such as MrBayes[6] and BEAST[7].
Bayesian methodologies incorporate prior knowledge, expressed as priors, to inform
parameter estimation. This process yields posterior distributions for each parameter
within the specified model given the observed data, as formalized in Bayes’ theorem:
P(θ|D) = P(θ) · P(D|θ)
P(D)
(2.1)
Here, θ represents a parameter, P(θ) denotes a prior distribution of the parameter, and
D represents the data.
BEAST works on a Metropolis­Couples Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MC3) algorithm.
Generally, Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is a stochastic algorithm used to empiri­
cally estimate the posterior distribution. MCMC operates by iteratively updating param­
eters of the model, assessing the likelihood of observed data, and accepting or rejecting
parameter mutations based on probability comparisons [8].
It works by gradually mutating the parameters to calculate the probability of the data,
that is P(D|θ), and evaluating the probability of the new position (Px) with that of the
previous position (Py), accepting the change if Px is higher than Py, i.e. Px>Py. If Px<Py
acceptance is a probability reflecting the difference, hence if Px is only a little smaller
than Py, it is more likely to be accepted than if it is much smaller. In this fashion, the
parameters are gradually optimized without getting stuck at any minute local maxima.
In the Metropolis­Coupled implementation of MCMC, the MC3, separate chains are run,
where one, denoted a cold chain, samples as described above, and the other chains,
called heated, allows much larger changes in parameter space. If, in a step, the calcu­
lated probability in the heated chain is higher than the cold chain, they can swap. This
enables the sampler to better escape local maxima [8].
In all applications, the accepted probability is stored (or a subset hereof is stored). These
stored probabilities make up the (sampled) posterior probability distribution for the given
parameter. It usually takes some time for the algorithm to converge, that is, reach the
likelihood maximum, where samples represent random draws. The true probability dis­
tribution reflects samples taken after convergence, why the samples from the initial
4
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:13==
stage are discarded. This is called a burn­in. Identifying the point of convergence is
typically done by inspecting a trace plot, where the stage of convergence is referred to
as a (flat) hairy caterpillar.
In BEAST, the input data is the sequence alignment, and the parameters iteratively
sampled are both the evolutionary model parameters and the phylogenetic tree shape.
Thus, for the purpose of generating a phylogenetic tree, the output of a BEAST analysis
is not a single tree but a series of trees sampled.
2.1.1
Summarizing trees
Summarizing this collection of sampled trees can be done in a few different ways. Often
is the Maximum Clade Credibility (MCC) tree used. In this computation, each clade’s
significance is determined by its frequency across the sampled trees. The MCC tree
is then selected as the tree representing the most credible evolutionary relationships
observed in the sampled trees[9].
2.1.2
Prior selection and nucleotide substitution models
From Bayes theorem, it is apparent that the prior, P(θ), has a substantial impact on
the posterior probability, why selecting a good prior can reduce the time needed for the
MCMC to reach convergence. Choosing an unrepresentative prior, on the other hand,
can introduce bias to the analysis.
For a phylogenetic analysis, the substitution model priors are typically informed by an
analysis of which substitution model best describes the nucleotide or protein alignment.
The parameters fitted to the alignment depend on the chosen substitution scheme,
which varies in complexity. The simplest model is the Jukes­Cantor (1969) nucleotide
substitution model[10]. This model assumes equal base frequencies (i.e., fA = fC =
fG = fT = 0.25) and equal mutation rates, resulting in a single parameter; the substitu­
tion rate.
In contrast, the Generalized Time Reversible (GTR) model represents one of the most
flexible models[11]. The GTR model accommodates individual equilibrium base fre­
quencies for each nucleotide and allows for different substitution rates between all pos­
sible pairs of nucleotides while maintaining the assumption of reversibility (i.e., the rate
from A→T is equal to T→A), resulting in six unique substitution rates. Consequently,
the GTR model involves ten parameters in total, although, in practice, one substitution
rate is typically set to 1, with the remaining rates defined relative to this value.
One limitation of the classic GTR model is that it assumes consistency in evolutionary
pressure across the entire alignment, which does not accurately reflect the evolutionary
process [8]. This can be accommodated by allowing variation in substitution rates across
sites in the alignment, typically by fitting a gamma distribution, and by accounting for a
proportion of sites that remain invariable, i.e., does not undergo substitution.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
5
==PAGE:14==
2.2
Ancestral sequence reconstruction
Assuming coalescence, the tips of a phylogenetic tree represent the observed sequences,
and the internal nodes represent hypothetical ancestral sequences. The sequence of
the internal nodes can be inferred combining the multiple sequence alignment (MSA)
and a phylogenetic tree.
A simplified illustration of ancestral sequence reconstruction is shown in Figure 2.1.
Here, the immediate ancestor of T1 (GEET) and T2 (GEQT), N4, is inferred. Under the
paradigm of maximum parsimony, N4 must be identical to one of the two sequences.
By comparing the tips to T3 (GDQT), which has a Q at the third position, it becomes
evident that GEQT is the most parsimonious sequence for N4. For N3, the immediate
ancestor of T4 (AIQM) and T5 (AIQT), the most parsimonious sequence contains a T at
the fourth position because all other observed sequences do. Estimating the sequence
of N2 becomes more complex, as both D and E are equally parsimonious at position
2. To resolve this ambiguity, we can stray from the maximum parsimony methodology
that only considers number of changes and instead incorporate branch lengths into the
ancestral sequence reconstruction. In Figure 2.1, N4 is closer to N2 in evolutionary
time than T3, making it more likely that N2 resembles N4. The final node to infer is
N1, the ancestor of N2 (GEQT) and N3 (AIQT). With two positions varying and no ad­
ditional nodes for comparison, maximum parsimony alone is insufficient. This scenario
highlights the necessity for more complex methods that can account for various factors
such as substitution probabilities and branch lengths to deduce the sequence of N1 ac­
curately, i.e. in the form of a maximum likelihood framework. Such approach ensures
that the inferred sequences at internal nodes are the most probable given the observed
sequences at the tips, the tree topology, and the chosen substitution model, especially
when multiple solutions are equally parsimonious[12]. In this toy example, it cannot be
determined if an A/G or E/I is most likely. However, longer sequences would typically
provide greater discriminatory power.
Multiple bioinformatic tools have been developed for the purpose of ancestral sequence
reconstruction. One of these is TreeTime[13], which is based on a maximum likelihood
framework, and essentially works by inferring the posterior probability of all possible an­
cestral states at each internal node, given the data, taking into account the tree topology
and branch lengths.
2.3
Amino acid substitution matrices
Originally developed to assign mismatch scores during sequence alignment, BLOSUM
and other amino acid substitution matrices, like PAM, have been around for a long time.
What they have in common is a 20x20 matrix assigning a score, which represents the
log odds ratio of observing an a to b substitution rather than the substitution occurring
by chance.
The BLOSUM matrices (BLOCKS Substitution Matrix) were originally computed by do­
ing pairwise comparisons of trusted protein alignments from the BLOCKS database,
6
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:15==
AEQT
AIQT
AIQT
AIQM
GEQT
GEQT
GEQT
GDQT
GEET
Observed 
sequences
Inferred 
sequences
Direction of inference
(backwards in time)
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
N1
N2
N3
N4
Figure 2.1: Ancestral sequence reconstruction, simplified. The interrelatedness of 5
hypothetical 4­mer peptide sequences (T1­T5) is represented by the phylogenetic tree.
The internal nodes (N1­N4) on the tree represent hypothetical ancestor sequences. The
red amino acid residues indicate the appearance of a substitution in evolutionary time.
See explanation of inference in text.
and counting the frequency of a,b pairs in the sequences and the general frequence of
a and b[14]. These numbers were then converted to a log odds ratio using equation 2.2:
sab = 1
λ log
! Pab
fafb
"
(2.2)
Here, Pab is the probability of observing the a,b pairs in the alignment, fa and fb is the
general frequency of a and b in the alignment. λ is a scaling factor.
From this it follows that the substitution scores will be heavily affected by the similarity
of the sequences used to count a,b pairs. Thus, several BLOSUM matrices were com­
puted using different identity thresholds. The BLOSUM matrix with an identity thresh­
old of 62%, i.e. aligned sequences were only compared if they were 62% identical or
less, known as BLOSUM62, performed best in the seminal paper evaluation[14], and
has since become the standard substitution scoring scheme in protein sequence align­
ment[15].
Though the BLOSUM matrices were originally developed for protein alignment, they
offer applications beyond their initial purpose. Since they were calculated on diverse
sets of protein blocks, BLOSUM matrices can be used as a proxy for general tendencies
in protein sequences. This logic allows the conversion of the log­odds ratios of observing
a,b into the conditional probability of observing b given a, that is P(b|a).
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
7
==PAGE:16==
2.4
Protein stability predictions
As described above, the folding free energy of a protein is important for its thermody­
namic stability. Using different approaches, multiple methods have been developed to
simulate the effect on stability upon introducing amino acid substitutions.
FoldX[16] is one of these simulation tools, which can be used to introduce substitutions
in protein structures and calculate the change in folding free energy. FoldX is based on
an empirical energy function, or forcefield, that considers various biophysical interac­
tions including Van der Waals forces, solvation effects, water bridges, hydrogen bonds,
electrostatics, and entropy terms. The energy function in FoldX can be represented as
follows[17]:
∆G = a·∆Gvdw+b·∆GsolvH+c·∆GsolvP+∆Gwb+∆Ghbond+∆Gel+d·T∆Smc+e·T∆Ssc
(2.3)
Here, ∆Gvdw represents the sum of the van der Waals contributions from all atoms.
∆GsolvH denotes the solvation energy from apolar groups during the transition from the
unfolded to the folded state. ∆GsolvP denotes the polar groups ditto. ∆Ghbond cap­
tures the free energy difference between formation of intra­molecular hydrogen bonds
and inter­molecular hydrogen­bond with the solvent. ∆Gwb accounts for the additional
stabilizing free energy from the formation of water bridges, i.e., water molecules that
forms multiple hydrogen bonds with the protein. ∆Gel represents the free energy of
electrostatic interactions among charge groups. T is temperature, of course, and ∆Smc
is the entropy “cost” of fixing the backbone in the folded state, and ∆Ssc is the entropy
cost of constraining a sidechain into a specific conformation. The small letters (a…e)
each represent a weighting factor applied to the raw energy term. This weighting has
been calibrated to reproduce experimentally determined free energy changes, hence
the “empirical” part of the energy function.
In practice, FoldX takes a solved structure and first relaxes it to fit the FoldX energy func­
tion. This step ensures that the initial structure is in a low­energy state according to the
FoldX model. If this step was omitted, the results would be skewed when applying the
energy function to the mutated version of the protein, potentially leading to inaccurate
predictions. Next, the wild­type side chain is replaced with the desired side chain at the
specified residue. Keeping the backbone fixed, FoldX then adjusts the new side chain
and the side chains of neighbouring residues according to the probable conformations
informed by a backbone­dependent rotamer library. This library contains information on
the frequencies of different rotamers given specific backbone dihedral angles (φ and ψ)
of the residues. Derived from empirical data, the library provides a realistic probability
distribution of possible conformations for a given side chain. By exploring these confor­
mations, and subjecting each to the energy force field, FoldX identifies the rotamer with
the lowest free energy, which is then chosen to represent the mutated protein[18].
The fixed­backbone approach was chosen for its computational efficiency, but it has
8
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:17==
been shown to introduce a bias favouring the prediction of destabilizing mutations [18].
A rigid backbone limits the number of energetically favourable options, whereas a flexi­
ble backbone would accommodate more conformational changes. However, a flexible
backbone significantly increases the number of potential conformations to compute, thus
extending the computation time.
MutateX is a high­throughput implementation of FoldX designed for calculation of the
folding stability in in silico deep mutational scans. It takes one or more protein structures
to which it first employs the FoldX relaxation step. It then performs a saturated muta­
tional scan by introducing all possible natural amino acid substitutions to all residues in
the provided structure. To account for the uncertainty in FoldX calculations, MutateX
runs multiple FoldX simulations of the same mutation and averages the folding stability
results.
2.5
Immunogenicity analysis of protein sequences
2.5.1
B cell epitope prediction
Synthetic antibodies have numerous biotechnological and medical applications, but their
synthesis and evaluation in the laboratory is time­consuming. Thus, reliable in silico
predictions of potential B cell epitopes in proteins is the holy grail of the field, which will
enable cheaper, and potentially better drugs and vaccines. Despite many efforts, further
developments are still necessary[19].
B cell epitopes can be considered into two groups; linear epitopes, where neighbouring
residues in the primary sequence make up an epitope or part hereof, and conforma­
tional epitopes where residues far apart in the primary sequence are brought together
by the folding of the protein antigen. The majority, about 90%, of epitopes fall into the
conformational category, but even within these there are some sequential stretches [20].
To predict B cell epitopes, most tools today require a protein structure. However, in many
instances when studying, i.e. emerging pathogens, no solved structure is available.
Advances has been made in the prediction of B cell epitopes, with the maturation of
protein language models (LM) which take the amino acid sequence alone. One such
implementation is in the program BepiPred­3.0 [20].
BepiPred­3.0 was trained on a dataset containing solved structures containing both anti­
bodies and antigens. Residues of the antigen structure located within 4Å of the antibody
were labelled as epitope residues. The major improvement in version 3.0 compared to
previous versions was the use of Evolutionary Scale Modelling version 2 (ESM­2) [21]
encoding of amino acid residues. ESM­2 is a protein LM trained to predict the identity
of randomly masked amino acids in protein sequences. When using ESM­2 encoding,
each amino acid is represented as a high dimensional vector containing information
about the context of the residue and its neighbours. These encodings were used to
train a Feed Forward artificial Neural Network (see below) to predict B cell epitopes
[20].
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
9
==PAGE:18==
By supplying only the amino acid sequence, BepiPred­3.0 returns a model probabil­
ity of the potential of each residue as a B cell epitope. To account for the fact that a
single residue does not constitute a complete B cell epitope, a refined measure, the
BepiPred­3.0 linear epitope score is computed by applying a rolling mean with a win­
dow size of nine residues to the sequentially neighbouring residues, thereby providing a
smoothened score that better reflects the epitope potential over a contiguous sequence.
This is inherently a prediction of linear epitopes.
2.5.2
T cell epitope prediction
The prediction of T cell epitopes too has important applications and is fortunately more
straight forward than predictions of their B cell counterparts due to the nature of their
presentation. Since MHC binding is essential for the activation of T cells, predicting
strong MHC binding serves as a reliable proxy for identifying potential T cell epitopes.
NetMHCpan­4.1[22] is a tool developed for the purpose of predicting peptide binding
of MHC class I molecules. Taking an amino acid sequence as input, the algorithm im­
itates the biological degradation of proteins in the cell by applying a sliding window of
a specified size to the sequence. Since the peptides bound by MHC I molecules are
typically 9 residues long, this is the default value. NetMHCpan­4.1 then predicts binding
of each peptide against a selection of MHC I molecules using an artificial neural network
model trained on a large experimental dataset comprising data from both affinity binding
assays and the higher through­put mass spectrometry experiments of eluted ligands.
NetMHCpan­4.1 returns an eluted ligand likelihood prediction, that is a predicted like­
lihood of peptide­MHC binding, and a computation where this is compared to a set of
random natural peptides to remove bias. The results of this computation are expressed
as a percentile rank, where a rank below 2% indicated weak binding, and a rank below
0.5% indicated strong binding to the given HLA molecule.
2.6
Artificial neural networks
In machine learning, artificial neural networks (ANNs) are widely used due to their pow­
erful capabilities in recognising non­linear relationships in complex data. The term ”ar­
tificial neural network” is inspired by the structure of the human nervous system, as it
comprises layers of interconnected nodes, or neurons, that mimic the way biological
neurons process information. Different classes of ANNs exist, depending on the archi­
tecture of node connections. The simplest is the feed forward neural network (FFNN),
where each node is connected to all nodes in the previous and subsequent layers, and
information flows unidirectionally from the input to the output layer. Each node applies
an activation function to the weighted sum of its inputs, with each connection charac­
terized by a specific weight [23]. Figure 2.2 illustrates a simple FFNN with four nodes
in the input layer, corresponding to the number of variables, a hidden layer with three
nodes, and an output layer with a single node that returns the final prediction.
10
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:19==
Input Layer
Hidden Layer(s)
Output Layer
Output
Variable #1
Variable #2
Variable #3
Variable #4
Figure 2.2: A simple feed­forward neural network.
2.6.1
General principles of model optimization
For model optimization, the dataset is usually divided into training and validation sets
in approximately a 3:1 ratio. The FFNN is trained on the training subset, and typically
initiated with small random weights on the connections. In an iterative process, these
weights are optimized by passing input data through the network’s layers to generate
predictions. The predicted values are compared to the observed labels, and an error
is calculated using a loss function. This error guides the adjustment of the weights,
and the process is repeated over many cycles, known as epochs, to minimize the error.
After training, the model is evaluated on the validation set to assess its performance on
unseen data[23].
Several parameters can be optimized to improve the model, including the number of
epochs, batch size (the amount of data processed in each epoch), the number of layers,
and the activation functions. To prevent overfitting, a dropout rate is often applied to
the hidden layers, where the model randomly ignores a proportion of the connections
between layers during training.
2.6.2
Model evaluation in binary classification
Typically, when evaluating classification machine learning models, a confusion matrix
carrying information on the proportion of true positive (TP), false positive (FP), true neg­
ative (TN) and false negative (FN) predictions is calculated based on the validation
subset. These values enable the calculation of different evaluation metrics, such as
the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve from which the area under the curve
(AUC) score can be calculated. The ROC curve shows the relationship between the TP
rate and the FP rate. If the line is straight, it indicates that the classifier is no better than
random. In this case, the AUC score is 0.5. The better the classifier is at predicting TPs,
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
11
==PAGE:20==
the faster the ROC curve will increase, and thus the AUC become larger indicating a
better model. The ROC AUC score, however, does not inform about how well the model
classifies the negative values[24]. A common metric to accommodate this is calculating
the accuracy of the model:
accuracy =
TP + TN
TP + FN + TN + FP
(2.4)
Accuracy measures the proportion of correct predictions, considering both the TPs and
TNs of all predictions made. However, accuracy can be misleading in the context of
imbalanced datasets, where one class (either positive or negative) is overrepresented,
potentially inflating the accuracy score despite poor performance of the model on the
minority class[24].
A validation metric which is gaining popularity is the Matthews correlation coefficient
(MaCC) which balances all the four basic values of the confusion matrix[24]:
MaCC =
TP · TN −FP · FN
#
(TP + TN) · (TP + FN) · (TN + FP) · (TN + FN)
(2.5)
2.6.3
Model evaluation in multilabel classification
When the FFNN model is addressing a multiclass or multilabel classification problem,
evaluation becomes more complex, especially when the model returns a probability
distribution of outcomes. This complexity makes it challenging to calculate a confusion
matrix.
Consider a scenario, as depicted in Table 2.1, with ten possible outcomes where the
predicted most probable outcome, D, has a true label of 0 (negative), and the second
most probable outcome, I, has a true value of 1 (positive). If only the outcome with the
highest predicted probability is considered positive, outcome D is evaluated as FP, and
outcome I as a FN. The remaining outcomes would typically be evaluated as TNs.
outcome
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
pred. prob.
0.05
0.03
0.04
0.44
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.05
0.28
0.02
true label
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
Table 2.1: Toy­example of predicted probability distribution with a binary true label,
where 1 indicates ’True’, 0 indicates ’False’.
This approach works when labels represent clear ground truths, such as in multi­label
image classification, where the presence or absence of specific labels is evident. How­
ever, in cases where the ground truth may not be observed or is inherently uncertain,
defining TNs and FPs becomes problematic. In such contexts, traditional confusion
matrix­based metrics are inadequate.
12
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:21==
An alternative model evaluation metric is top­k accuracy, which provides a more flexible
evaluation by considering the model successful if the correct class is among the top­k
predictions. This approach better captures a model’s ability to rank the correct class
highly, even if it is not the single highest probability prediction[25]. However, it does not
explicitly account for negatives, which in some problems can be hard to define.
To evaluate whether a model performs better than random using top­k accuracy, one
must consider the chosen k and the number of outcomes. A random classifier is ex­
pected to score:
top­k accuracy(random) = k
n
(2.6)
Where k is the top­k considered, and n is the number of possible outcomes. If k = 1,
and n = 10, an accuracy of 0.1 is expected from a random classifier. However, selecting
the appropriate k value does not follow a formula and depends on the nature of the
prediction task and the performance expectations to the model. Thus, to get a better
understanding of the predictive capacity of the model, multiple k’s can be considered
simultaneously.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
13
==PAGE:22==
14
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:23==
3
Methods
3.1
Phylogenetic analysis and ancestral reconstruction
3.1.1
Data collection and preprocessing
A dataset comprising 500 SARS­CoV­2 whole genome sequences was constructed us­
ing the NCBI Virus database [26]. The 500 sequences were downloaded as a random
subset of the search results after employing the following criteria:
• Virus taxid: 2697049,
• Sequence Length ≥29,000,
• Ambiguous characters ≤10,
• Nucleotide Completeness: complete,
• Host: taxid: 9606 (Homo sapiens),
• Collection date: From January 1, 2019 to May 1, 2024.
• Release date: From January 1, 2019 to May 15, 2024.
Three out of the five hundred sequences were excluded due to incomplete collection
dates (only the year was provided). These were replaced with three sequences col­
lected early in the pandemic in China: MT019529.1, MN996528.1, and the SARS­CoV­
2 Wuhan­1 reference sequence, NC_045512.2. Sequence metadata was downloaded
along with the sequences. From this metadata, the FASTA headers were programmat­
ically modified to contain only the accession number and date.
3.1.2
Multiple sequence DNA alignment
A multiple sequence alignment (MSA) was generated from the 500 whole­genome se­
quences using mafft (v7.490) [27] in the –auto mode. The alignment was visually in­
spected and deemed reasonable.
3.1.3
Multiple sequence protein alignment
From the DNA MSA, protein alignments were constructed for each of the genes of in­
terest (for how these were selected, see section X.XX below). This was done manually
using AliView (v1.28) in amino acid view­mode by visually identifying the start and stop
codon positions in the reference sequence (NC_045512.2). These protein alignments
were then copied into separate FASTA alignment and inspected for any gaps. Of the
selected proteins, only the S protein alignment contained gaps. To make the amino acid
positions align with the protein structures, columns with gaps in the reference sequence
were removed.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
15
==PAGE:24==
3.1.4
Selection of proteins for further analyses
The SARS­CoV­2 genome encodes a large number of proteins, making it impractical to
include all of them in this study. To identify the proteins under most selective pressure,
dN/dS calculations were attempted using CODEML, a component of the PAML package.
However, the computation of the dN/dS ratio proved, surprisingly, to be exceedingly
time­consuming, even for an alignment of a smaller protein of 222 amino acids, with
the program running for several days, rendering this method impractical. As a result, a
simpler method was adopted to identify the proteins for further analysis.
Fixed substitutions in the WHO­defined variants of concern (VOCs) that dominated the
pandemic – namely Alpha (Pangolin lineage B.1.1.7), Beta (B.1.351), Gamma (B.1.1.28.1),
Delta (B.1.617.2), and Omicron (B.1.1.529 or BA.1) – were identified on a per­gene ba­
sis using data from the ViralZone overview[28]. The number of unique substitutions
present in each protein was normalized by the protein length to calculate a mutation per
residue rate, which for this purpose was considered a ”fixed mutation rate”.
In addition to a high fixed mutation rate, the presence of a well­resolved crystal structure
covering most of the protein was an essential criterion for inclusion.
3.1.5
Model selection using jmodeltest
jModelTest[29] was used to select the best substitution model for the whole genome
DNA MSA. A neighbor­joining tree based on the Jukes­Cantor model was fixed as base
tree and used to evaluate 56 different substitution models allowing for rate heterogeneity
across sites by incorporating gamma distribution (”+G”) and a proportion of invariable
sites (”+I”). The model providing the best fit was selected based on the lowest Akaike
Information Criterion score.
3.1.6
Building phylogenetic trees
To build phylogenetic trees, an XML file was prepared from the whole genome DNA
MSA using Beauti (v2.7.6) [30]. In this, the GTR+I+G model was specified with the pa­
rameters in table 1 for the site model, for which the gamma category count was set to
4 and empirical base frequencies used. A strict clock model with a mean clock rate of
0.001 was enforced. A Coalescent Bayesian Skyline tree prior was employed with stan­
dard settings. The XML file was used to run two independent BEAST (v2.7.6) analyses,
each running for 30 million generations.
The log files of the two runs were inspected using Tracer (v1.7.2). Visually comparing
the trace for the two independent runs showed convergence on most parameters af­
ter 3 million generations, thus a 10% burn­in was selected. Convergence was further
assessed by comparing the marginal density plots of the two independent runs.
3.1.7
Building a maximum clade credibility tree
The trees resulting from the two independent BEAST runs were summarised into an
MCC tree using the sumt software (v 3.8.3) [31] with a burn­in percentage of 0.1.
16
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:25==
3.1.8
Ancestral sequence reconstruction
Each of the four protein alignments were used for ancestral sequence reconstruction
together with the MCC tree. For this, the TreeTime software, which employs a maximum
likelihood method for inferring ancestral sequences, was used. The resulting output
include a multiple­fasta file with all ancestral states, and the phylogenetic input tree,
annotated with node labels referring the ancestral states, and branch labels reflecting
the arising substitutions. From the ancestral sequence reconstruction, a custom python
script was employed to extract the observed amino acid substitutions.
3.2
Mutational scans of protein structures
3.2.1
Protein structure collection
SARS­CoV­2 protein structures were obtained from the RCSB Protein Data Bank (PDB)
[32]. Initially, a systematic approach using PDBminer[33] was attempted. However, this
method faced challenges due to the extensive number of available structures, many of
which were resolved in complex with drugs or contained only partial segments of the
proteins. Additionally, the many ORF1ab­encoded proteins, which has a single UniProt
ID (P0DTD1), posed further complications for PDBminer, which takes only a UniProt IDs
for its search queries.
As an alternative approach, the RCSB’s own COVID­19 resource[noauthor_rcsborgcovid19_nodate]
was utilized to identify high­quality structures for the different viral proteins. Following
this, the ”Find Similar Assemblies” function on the PDB interface was employed to dis­
cover additional related structures. These structures, primarily comprising x­ray crystal­
lography and cryo­electron microscopy (cryo­EM) data, were manually compared based
on several criteria, including resolution, protein completeness, and disregarded if they
were solved in complex with compounds other than their natural ligand, i.e. drugs.
3.2.2
Protein structure preprocessing
Each selected structure was cleaned using PyMOL (v2.5.4) by removing waters, other
solvents, and other molecules. For structures solved as multimers, it was ensured that
all chains were of the same length. If this was not the case, the chains were trimmed to
have identical residues. The cleaned structures were saved in PDB format.
A custom python script was used to ensure that the amino acids and positions of the
protein structures aligned with the positions of the reference sequence. The script took
as input the reference sequence in FASTA format and the PDB file and then extracted the
sequence positions and amino acids of alpha carbon atoms from the PDB file, converted
the three­letter­code to one­letter amino acid code, and compared it to the 1­indexed
position of the FASTA sequence.
3.2.3
ΔΔG calculations from deep mutational scans
The selected PDB structures served as input for mutational scans conducted using Mu­
tateX. FoldX version 5 was utilized to calculate the impact of substitutions on protein
folding stability, expressed as ΔΔG (kcal/mol). The standard setting of five FoldX muta­
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
17
==PAGE:26==
tion runs per mutated residue was employed, returning an average ΔΔG score for each
mutation.
For the three proteins other than Spike, exhaustive mutational scans were performed,
mutating each position to all possible amino acids of both monomers. Due to compu­
tational constraints, the mutational scan for the Spike protein was limited to a single
monomer.
The MutateX output is one datafile per amino acid position, which contains 20 average
ΔΔG values, representing the effect of each mutation.
Experimental evidence suggests that MutateX predictions between ­2 kcal/mol and 2
kcal/mol do not affect protein stability at the cellular level, classifying these as neutral.
ΔΔG predictions exceeding +/­ 3 kcal/mol are indicative of destabilizing or stabilizing
effects, respectively, while values between +/­ 2 and 3 kcal/mol are considered uncer­
tain[18]. For the purposes of this study, this classification scheme was simplified. Pre­
dictions with values greater than 2.5 kcal/mol were categorized as destabilizing, those
with values smaller than ­2.5 kcal/mol as stabilizing, and all values in between were
considered neutral.
3.3
Immunoinformatic analyses
3.3.1
Generation of mutational scan dataset
From the ancestral reconstruction, positions with substitutions, presumed to give the
virus a fitness advantage, were identified. These positions were used to generate two
distinct datasets per protein for subsequent immunoinformatic analysis. The first dataset
was to be used for predicting B­cell epitopes with BepiPred­3.0[20]. It comprised 20
FASTA peptide entries per position of interest, where the specific position was sequen­
tially mutated to each natural amino acid. To minimize computational demands, only
the positions identified in the ancestral reconstruction were mutated. For T­cell epitope
prediction, another dataset was prepared. The mutational logic was the same as for
the B­cell dataset, with 20 entries per position of interest. However, while BepiPred­3.0
considers the entire protein sequence, NetMHCpan­4.1[22] focuses on kmers. Because
only 9­mers were considered in the NetMHCpan­4.1 analysis, and to further reduce
computation time, the sequences were trimmed to include only the position of interest
plus or minus 8 amino acids, ensuring that only the relevant 9­mers were analysed.
3.3.2
Prediction of B cell epitopes
Using the full­sequence FASTA input with introduced substitutions, BepiPred­3.0[20]
was run using the majority voting scheme for prediction returning a consensus prediction
for potential B­cell epitopes per residue or site. BepiPred­3.0 returned two scores per
residue, a ‘BepiPred­3.0’ score and a ‘BepiPred­3.0 linear epitope score’. For the pur­
poses of this analysis, only the BepiPred­3.0 linear epitope scores (LES) were utilized,
as these offer the better representation of potential linear B­cell epitopes. BepiPred­3.0
was also run on the reference sequence without substitutions.
18
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:27==
3.3.3
Prediction of T cell epitopes
The NetMHCpan­4.1 online server[22] was employed to predict MHC I binding. Peptide
size of 9 residues was selected as only size to be considered. Each 9­mer was tested
against 12 super­representative HLA alleles: HLA­A01:01, HLA­A02:01, HLA­A03:01,
HLA­A24:02, HLA­A26:01, HLA­B07:02, HLA­B08:01, HLA­B27:05, HLA­B39:01, HLA­
B40:01, HLA­B58:01, and HLA­B15:01. NetMHCpan­4.1 was run on both the reference
peptide sequences and on the dataset with truncated and mutated sequences.
Postprocessing and ANP score
NetMHCpan­4.1 returns a binding score for the entire 9­mer peptide it considers. How­
ever, for this project, the aim was to assess the effect at a single amino acid level.
Each position within any provided peptide sequence could be present in up to nine dif­
ferent 9­mer peptides. To achieve a position­specific analysis, a custom Python script
was written to iterate over all reported peptides. For each 9­mer identified as a strong
MHC I binder (binding rank < 0.5%), the corresponding 9 amino acid positions were
assigned a score of 1 point. For peptides identified as weak MHC I binders (0.5 ≤bind­
ing rank < 2%), the positions were assigned a score of 0.5 points, and 0 points were
assigned when the binding rank was above 2%. This scoring system was termed the
Aggregated NetMHCpan Position­specific (ANP) score, and although the assigned val­
ues were completely arbitrary, they provided a means to quantify the potential of each
position within a peptide to act as a T­cell epitope based on its presence in strongly or
weakly binding peptides.
3.4
Fitness landscape modelling
3.4.1
Data wrangling and preprocessing
A long dataset was generated containing information on the original residue at a position,
the simulated mutated residue, the BepiPred score, the ANP score, and the predicted
∆∆G score. As ANP scores and BepiPred scores were only calculated as part of the
mutational scan for the positions with observed substitutions, an inner join removed
rows that did not have values in all three variables, leaving only rows for positions with
observed substitutions. A conditional probability matrix BLOSUM62 (Appendix A.1) was
used to add the BLOSUM62­predicted probability of observing a given mutation to each
row. With the list of observed substitutions in the ancestral sequence reconstruction,
the observed and non­observed substitutions were annotated as such. The resulting
long dataset thus contained 20 rows per position with at least one observed mutation
and was in a format as depicted in Table 3.1.
Protein
Position
Orig res
Mut res
BepiPred
ANP score
∆∆G
BLOSUM62
Observed
M
19
Q
G
0.1008
3.0
1.9426
0.0412
0
M
19
Q
E
0.1101
3.0
­0.1308
0.1029
1
M
19
Q
V
0.0964
6.0
1.5569
0.0353
0
Table 3.1: Except of the long data format
The long data format was then prepared for use in a neural network. This included
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
19
==PAGE:28==
normalising the scores. Since the BepiPred scores are relative to the length of the
protein, they were Min­Max normalised, per protein:
xnorm =
x −xmin
xmax −xmin
(3.1)
Here, xmin represents the given BepiPred value of the data point considered, xmin and
xmax are the smallest and largest BepiPred values for the given protein. ANP scores
and ∆∆G scores were Z­normalised across the four proteins:
z = x −µ
σ
(3.2)
Here, x represents a given value of the data point considered, µ and σ represents the
mean and standard deviation of all values of the given variable.
Next, the data frame was converted to a wide format with only one row per position, and a
vector with twenty positions, the indices of which reflects the amino acids in alphabetical
order by the one letter code, per column. The ‘original residue’ and ‘observed’ column
were one­hot encoded. When more than one substitution was observed on the same
position, more than one index was set to 1 in the ‘observed’ column. The resulting wide
data structure has the format illustrated in Table 3.2.
Protein
Position
Orig res
Mut res
(observed)
BepiPred
normalised
ANP score
normalised
∆∆G
normalised
BLOSUM62
M
19
[0,0,0,0,0,
0,0,0,0,0,
0,0,0,1,0,
0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,1,0,
0,0,0,0,0,
0,0,0,0,0,
0,0,0,0,0]
[xA, xC,
(…), xY ]
[xA, xC,
(…), xY ]
[xA, xC,
(…), xY ]
[xA, xC,
(…), xY ]
M
26
[0,0,0,0,1,
0,0,0,0,0,
0,0,0,0,0,
0,0,0,0,0]
[0,0,0,0,0,
0,0,0,0,0,
0,0,0,0,0,
1,0,0,0,0]
[xA, xC,
(…), xY ]
[xA, xC,
(…), xY ]
[xA, xC,
(…), xY ]
[xA, xC,
(…), xY ]
Table 3.2: Except of the wide and one­hot encoded data format
3.5
Feed Forward Neural Network
Pytorch[34] was used as the main engine for making a FFNN model based on the wide
dataset. A model was initiated with an input layer corresponding to the input size (i.e.,
if features: Original residue, BepiPred, ANP, ∆∆G, BLOSUM62 were all included, that
would be 5x20=100). Two hidden layers with 128 and 64 nodes, respectively, was in­
cluded, both followed by a ReLU activation function and a dropout. The output layer
was defined with 20 nodes, corresponding to the number of possible amino acids ob­
served which was followed by a Softmax activator function converting the output logits
to a probability distribution. The observed mutation vector was used as label.
Systematically testing all possible different combinations of fitness parameters (Original
residue, BepiPred, ANP, ∆∆G, and BLOSUM62) and select hyper parameters(batch
20
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:29==
size=[8, 16, 32], training dataset size = [0.7, 0.8], epochs = [100, 500], learning rates =
[0.00001, 0.0001, 0.001], dropout probability = [0.3, 0.4, 0.5]), 3348 combinations in total
were tested, 3 times each. The average top­k accuracy values were returned for k=1,
2, 3, 5, 10. Two metrics were calculated from these values: a sum and a geometrical
mean. The model with both the highest sum and geometrical mean was trained on only
the original residue and the ∆∆G prediction variables. The hyper parameters used was
as follows: batch size=16, learning rate = 0.001, epochs = 500, training dataset size =
0.8, dropout = 0.4. The average predictions from 50 iterations with these model settings
were saved as the fitness landscape.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
21
==PAGE:30==
22
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:31==
4
Results
4.1
Phylogenetic analysis
4.1.1
SARS­CoV­2 whole genome sequence dataset
A total of 500 SARS­CoV­2 whole genome sequences were collected. These sequences
represent samples from six continents and span the entire period of the pandemic. Fig­
ure 4.1 shows the temporal and spatial distribution of the samples. The temporal dis­
tribution reflects the pandemic waves and the global sequencing effort, whereas the
geographical distribution is dominated by sequences originating from the USA. Within
the USA, the sequences are reasonably well distributed across individual states (see
sequence metadata in Appendix B.1).
The nucleotide sequences were aligned and the alignment used as basis for extracting
protein alignments of the select proteins.
4.2
Selection of proteins for further analysis
The number of unique mutations fixed in the five WHO­defined VOCs Alpha, Beta,
Gamma, Delta, and Omicron were counted per protein, and normalized to the protein
length yielding a simple mutation per residue rate, referred to here as a ”fixed mutation
rate” (Table 4.1).
Gene
Unique
mutations
Protein
length (aa)
Fixed
mutation
rate
Good
protein
structure
S
57
1273
0.045
Yes
ORF8
4
121
0.033
Yes
E
2
75
0.027
No
N
11
419
0.026
No
ORF9b
2
98
0.020
No
M
4
222
0.018
Yes
ORF7a
2
121
0.017
No
ORF1ab:Nsp5
4
306
0.013
Yes
ORF1ab:Nsp6
3
290
0.010
No
ORF3a
2
275
0.007
Yes
ORF1ab:Nsp3
12
1945
0.006
No
ORF1ab:Nsp1
1
180
0.006
Yes
ORF1ab:Nsp14
2
527
0.004
Yes
ORF1ab:Nsp13
2
601
0.003
Yes
ORF1ab:Nsp12
2
932
0.002
Yes
Table 4.1: Number of fixed mutations in the five VOCs (alpha, beta, gamma, delta,
omicron) per protein relative to the protein size.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.1: Temporal and spatial distribution of samples in SARS­CoV­2 whole genome
dataset. A: Bar chart illustrating the temporal distribution among the samples in the
dataset. Width of bars correspond to one month. B: Waffle chart illustrating the geo­
graphical distribution of samples on country­level. One square on the chart represents
one sequence in the dataset.
Additionally, a well­resolved crystal structure covering most of the protein was important
for downstream analysis, and thus also a criterion for inclusion. Proteins S, Orf8, M, and
Nsp5 met these criteria while showing the highest fixed mutation rates, and were thus
included in the analysis. Detailed information on the PDB entries for these proteins is
provided in Table 4.4. Below, the structures of proteins with high fixed mutation rates
that were omitted are discussed.
4.2.1
Substitution model selection
Using jmodeltest, GTR+I+G was identified as the best substitution model for the aligned
DNA MSA dataset, out of 56 models (Appendix C.1), with the parameters specified in
Table 4.2.
GTR+I+G model parameters
p­inv
G shape
fA
fC
fG
fT
[AC]
[AG]
[AT]
[CG]
[CT]
[GT]
0.6520
1.0640
0.2992
0.1742
0.1919
0.3347
0.3117
1.3178
0.1728
0.2476
3.9038
1.0
Table 4.2: model parameters for GTR+I+G model as identified by jmodeltest to best fit
the MSA. The proportion of invariant sites is denoted p­inv. The gamma shape parame­
ter is denoted G shape. The empirically estimated base frequencies are denoted fA..fT.
The 6 reversible substitution rate parameters are denoted [AC]…[GT].
4.2.2
Phylogenetic tree
Using the substitution model parameters from table 2, Bayesian phylogenetic trees were
sampled using BEAST in two independent runs. Comparing the marginal density plots
24
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.2: Comparing the two independent BEAST runs. They have converged on
most parameters including the treeLikelihood as displayed here with the two Marginal
Density plots overlaid
from the two runs showed convergence, and effective sample size (ESS) values above
200 on most parameters (except the mutation rates and populations sizes), including
the treeLikelihood (Figure 4.2), which is the most important parameter, as only the trees
are used for downstream analysis.
Based on the BEAST trees, a maximum clade credibility (MCC) tree was computed.
This MCC tree is visualized in Appendix D.1.
4.2.3
Ancestral sequence reconstruction
Ancestral sequence reconstruction was conducted using the MCC tree and four pro­
tein alignments. The TreeTime software generated an annotated phylogenetic tree for
each protein alignment, as exemplified for the M protein in Figure 4.3. Several substi­
tutions were observed to both arise and revert (e.g., D3G and G3D, Figure 4.3B), and
some mutations emerged multiple times (e.g., D3G and D209Y). Additionally, different
substitutions were noted to occur at the same position (e.g., D3G and D3N). Figure
4.3B shows that the substitutions Q19E and A63T appeared twice on closely related
branches, which could suggest limited phylogenetic resolution rather than independent
evolutionary events. However, this did not affect downstream analysis.
A comprehensive list of all unique substitutions identified across the four ancestral se­
quence reconstructions is provided in Appendix E.1. Table 4.3 presents the number of
unique substitutions observed in each protein, based on the ancestral sequence recon­
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
25
==PAGE:34==
0.5
MZ266551.1_2020-12-13
OM844329.1_2022-02-17
ON291496.1_2021-08-05
ON450961.1_2022-04-25
MZ496860.1_2020-10-28
ON071502.1_2022-02-22
MZ828178.1_2021-07-26
MN996528.1_2019-12-30
ON313211.1_2022-02-09
ON286319.1_2020-04-01
ON487684.1_2021-08-28
OL759459.1_2021-11-10
OL887198.1_2021-11-17
OP295746.1_2022-01-14
OL727590.1_2021-11-16
OM270071.1_2021-12-16
MZ376886.1_2021-01-12
OP727088.1_2021-10-12
OL715850.1_2021-11-27
ON195663.1_2021-08-19
ON582244.1_2021-11-13
ON118944.1_2022-01-23
MT750415.1_2020-05-05
MW566538.1_2020-08-21
MW483423.1_2020-10-18
MT528237.1_2020-03-07
ON193947.1_2021-10-07
MZ905718.1_2020-03-26
OQ050494.1_2020-07-27
OX845541.1_2021-10-17
MZ702699.1_2021-04-07
MT451008.1_2020-03-16
ON313428.1_2022-02-17
OL946458.1_2021-11-03
NC_045512.2_2019-12-15
OM039052.1_2021-11-24
OM461568.1_2021-07-07
OX654697.1_2020-11-17
MW863954.1_2020-07-31
OM857866.1_2021-09-29
OA971732.1_2020-03-30
OR905238.1_2020-07-31
MZ896207.1_2021-08-09
OM466713.1_2021-12-08
MZ943461.1_2021-08-02
OP051705.1_2022-06-27
ON925960.1_2021-11-29
OL750289.1_2021-11-16
OL734626.1_2021-11-08
OM259142.1_2021-12-14
PP626787.1_2020-04-14
OL730693.1_2021-11-05
OX589678.1_2020-12-29
MZ824632.1_2020-02-09
MT946871.1_2020-06-20
OL831243.1_2021-12-06
OL727609.1_2021-11-16
OP397313.1_2021-08-18
MT704127.1_2020-04-04
OQ314779.1_2021-08-17
MW993141.1_2021-03-13
G3D
I82T
D3G
D3N
D209Y
A63T
D3G
Q19E,A63T
T30I
I76M
A69V
Q19E
D209Y
D209Y
A
B
Figure 4.3: A: Phylogenetic MCC tree with clades collapsed for improved readability
and branches annotated with amino acid substitutions based on ancestral sequence
reconstruction performed on the M protein. Examples of positions with recurring, re­
verting, and multiple substitutions have been highlighted with different colours. Due to
overlapping annotation, a zoom has been inserted in B to enhance readability. The
figure was created using FigTree v1.4.4.
26
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:35==
struction performed on this dataset. This table also includes a substitution per amino
acid calculation, following the same logic used to determine the ‘fixed mutation rate’
above. From these findings, it is evident that the Orf8 phylogeny exhibits the highest
number of substitutions relative to its size, with the S protein following in second place.
4.3
Protein structures used in this thesis
In Table 4.3 is an overview of the viral protein structures selected for further analysis in
this study.
Protein
Unique substitutions
Protein length (aa)
Unique substitutions per aa
Orf8
43
121
0.355
S
272
1273
0.214
M
23
222
0.104
Nsp5
22
306
0.072
Table 4.3: Overview of number of unique substitutions identified with ancestral se­
quence reconstruction.
4.3.1
Protein Structures included
6VYB – Spike
Of the Spike protein, only the ectodomain has been solved, as seen in Figure 4.4. The
spike is a homo trimer structure. Of the three monomers, one (blue) is in the open
conformation ready to bind ACE2, whereas the other two are in the closed conformation.
294 residues out of the total 1273 residues are missing in the structure. More than a
hundred residues have been omitted from the C­terminal end of the chain, which form
the lower part of the stalk and the membrane anchor. The remaining missing residues
are not commented on in the associated publication[35] and are presumably located in
variable regions that are hard to resolve. The missing residues include the infamous
Furin cleavage site [35]. In addition, the authors identified 22 N­linked glycosylation
sites in the structure.
7JX6 – Orf8
Orf8 is a symmetrical homo dimer. The solved structure covers the majority of the protein
chain (Table 4.4) with residues missing in the N­terminal (1­18) and a gap between
residues 63­78. Unfortunately, many of the observed substitutions are in these regions
(Appendix E.1).
8CTK – M
The membrane protein M is also a symmetrical homo dimer. In Figure 4.4, the trans­
membrane domain of M has been colored yellow. The larger non­membrane­embedded
part (top of Figure 4.4) is facing the inside of the viral envelope, where it interacts with
the N proteins to stabilize the nucleocapsid. The smaller portion on the surface of the
virion (bottom in the figure) is truncated in this structure as it is formed by the first 19
residues, of which only 3 are solved in the structure, and residues 72:79.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
27
==PAGE:36==
Side view
Top view
Spike (6vyb)
ORF8 (7jx6)
M (8ctk)
NSP5 (6yb7)
180°
90°
Figure 4.4: The four selected protein structures. Their RCSB PDB accession number
is indicated in parenthesis. See table 4.3 and the text for details.
28
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:37==
6YB7 – Nsp5
Nsp5 is the most complete of the four structures with only a single residue missing in
the C­terminus. It too is a symmetrical homo dimer. On Figure 4.4, the catalytic dyad
(H41­C145) located in a groove, is highlighted in magenta on both monomers.
Protein
PDB accession
Resolution
Method
Protein length
Coverage
Geometry
S
6vyb
3.20Å
Cryo­EM
1273
294 res missing
Homo trimer
ORF8
7jx6
1.61Å
X­ray
121
18­62, 79­121
Homo dimer
M
8ctk
3.52Å
Cryo­EM
222
17­204
Homo dimer
NSP5
6yb7
1.25Å
X­ray
306
1­305
Homo dimer
Table 4.4: Table showing various properties of proteins, including PDB accession, res­
olution, method, protein length, coverage, and geometry.
4.3.2
Structures omitted from further analysis
For several SARS­CoV­2 proteins, the available protein structures were incomplete or
inconsistent, leading to their exclusion from the analysis. The structure for the envelope
(E) protein (8SUZ) contained only the transmembrane domain, encompassing 30 out of
75 amino acids. Similarly, the available nucleocapsid (N) protein structure (6WZO) in­
cluded only the dimerization domain, covering just 121 out of 419 amino acids. Another
structure of N (8FD5) was solved as the monomer of the full sequence but had a very
poor resolution of 4.57Å. For Orf9b, the existing protein structures were inconsistent
with one another, resulting in ambiguity regarding its 3D conformation, and the protein
was thus excluded. Additionally, the structures available for Orf7a (7CI3) included only
the ectodomain, which comprised 67 out of 121 amino acids. Due to these limitations,
these partial or inconsistent structures were not used in the study despite their high fixed
mutation rate (Table 4.1).
4.3.3
Structure­refseq discrepancies
With a custom python script, the amino acids in the selected protein structures were
compared to those from the reference sequence (NC_045512.2). Discrepancies were
observed in three positions within the 6vyb structure of the S protein, specifically at
positions 607, 986, and 987. The residues at positions 986 and 987 were identified as
prolines (P), introduced to stabilize the spike protein in vitro. At position 607, Glutamic
acid (E) was substituted with Glutamine (Q), presumably for stabilization purposes, as
the authors used the reference coding sequence as a template for protein expression,
but they did not comment specifically on this[35]. These discrepancies had no obvious
impact on the downstream analyses.
4.4
∆∆G calculations from deep mutational scans
The selected protein structures were subjected to a deep mutational scan using Muta­
teX, which returned 20 ∆∆G calculations per position, one for each amino acid. With
MutateX, each position was mutated to all possible amino acids, including to the amino
acid already present at a position. Where this seem redundant, these values can be
used as a sanity check of the structural model provided. By plotting the “self­mutation”
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
29
==PAGE:38==
0
20
40
60
80
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
0.1
ddG
count
M
0
100
200
300
400
500
−0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
ddG
count
S
0
50
100
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
ddG
count
Nsp5
0
10
20
30
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
ddG
count
Orf8
MutateX self−mutation sanity check
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Figure 4.5: Sanity check of self­mutation ∆∆G values from MutateX scan. Values +/­
0.3 kcal/mol have been indicates with ′∗′.
values, on a histogram (Figure 4.5), it is apparent that very few self­mutations score
above/below +/­ 0.3 kcal/mol. The few outliers were noted (identified with ′∗′ in Figure
4.5) but did not impact downstream analyses, as no substitutions were observed on
these positions.
Predicted ∆∆G values below ­2.5 kcal/mol were considered stabilizing, whereas values
above 2.5 were considered destabilizing, and the values in between were considered
neutral. By counting the stabilizing and destabilizing predictions, the stability­based
“mutability” of each position can be inferred. Figure 4.6 illustrates this with upward grey
bars representing the number of destabilizing mutations at each position, and downward
black bars representing stabilizing mutations. As expected, this visualization reveals
that most introduced mutations tend to be destabilizing (or neutral). However, it also
highlights specific positions that appear particularly ”mutable” or ”static” based on the
stability calculations. For instance, in protein M (Figure 4.6), position 89, originally a
Glycine (G), exhibits 12 potentially stabilizing substitutions and only one destabilizing
substitution (proline). This suggests that position 89 is highly amenable with regard to
thermodynamiccaly stabilizing substitutions. Visualizing the same underlying data as a
heatmap, in Figure 4.6B, indicate the ∆∆G values of each substitution, one can deduce
some trends in stability predictions, i.e., the introduction of proline (P) is generally desta­
bilising while the introductions of methionine (M) and leucine (L) primarily are neutral or
stabilizing. To accommodate the uncertainty regarding the stability prediction, the ∆∆G
values were considered categorically (as in Figure 4.6A) and visualised as a categori­
30
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:39==
cal heatmap (Figure 4.6C). With these data, one can also start to grasp a stability­only
based fitness landscape of the protein.
But even with just 222 amino acids, Figure 4.6 is slightly overwhelming. Similar figures
for the other proteins can be found in Appendix F.1­F.3. To visually assess the stabil­
ity prediction on the positions at which observed mutations were identified the dataset
was reduced to contain only those positions. This resulted in readable and categor­
ical heatmaps for the four proteins as depicted in Figure 4.7 and 4.8. By assessing
these figures, where observed substitutions are annotated with an ‘o’, it is apparent that
the majority of observed mutations have been predicted to be neutralizing or destabi­
lizing. This is also clear from Table 4.5 which summarises which category the different
observed mutations fall into stratified by protein. Thus, a preliminary conclusion would
suggest that stability predictions alone are not sufficient to describe a fitness landscape.
Observed number of substitutions that were predicted to be…
Protein
Destabilising
Neutral
Stabilising
Row total
M
1
13
1
15
S
12
120
1
133
Nsp5
11
10
0
21
Orf8
14
13
1
28
Col total
38
156
3
197
Table 4.5: Summary table of the observed substitutions and the predicted effect on
thermodynamic stability as predicted in the MutateX scan.
4.5
Immunoinformatics
4.5.1
Prediction of B cell epitopes
The potential of protein regions as B cell epitopes was evaluated using BepiPred­3.0.
To establish a baseline landscape prior to the introduction of amino acid substitutions,
BepiPred­3.0 was initially applied to peptide reference sequences of the four proteins
under investigation. Figure 4.9 presents the Linear Epitope Scores (LES) for the four
proteins with M and S coloured according to their topology [36, 37].
Considering the M and S protein, the figure clearly illustrates that BepiPred­3.0 tends
to assign relatively low scores to transmembrane domains, indicating its recognition of
these being inaccessible to B cell receptors. For the M protein, BepiPred­3.0 suggests
the large intravirion segment as the better epitope. In the case of the much longer
Spike (S) protein, the highest predicted LESs are found in the region from residues 50
to 600, which includes the receptor­binding domain. Nsp5 is predicted to contain strong
epitopes elements, in contrast to Orf8, which shows a mostly uniform LES across the
length of the protein.
To assess the impact on the LES of each of the 20 possible substitutions at each position,
the difference in LES between WT and variant substitution was calculated. These values
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
31
==PAGE:40==
0
10
20
0
50
100
150
200
# of substitutions with given effect
Predicted effect
on stability
destabilizing
stabilizing
Protein: M
ACDEFGHIKL
MNPQRSTV
WY
0
50
100
150
200
Position
Substituted residue
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
ddG
Heatmap with continous values
Protein: M
ACDEFGHIKL
MNPQRSTV
WY
0
50
100
150
200
Position
Substituted residue
Predicted effect
on stability
destabilizing
neutral
stabilizing
Heatmap with categorical values
Protein: M
MutateX: Overview of protein−wide stability predictions
Figure 4.6: Overview of MutateX predictions for the M protein. Mutations were classified
by the predicted ∆∆G values as follows: stabilizing ≤­2.5 kcal/mol < neutral < 2.5 kcal/­
mol ≤destabilizing. In the top figure, the substitutions deemed neutral were omitted.
In the bottom figure, colours reflect the categorical effect as described in the legend.
Residues missing in the structure result in empty columns. For M missing regions are
0:16 and 205:222.
32
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:41==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
24
25
31
32
36
37
38
45
51
52
60
61
62
79
87
92
95
97
100
106
114
115
117
Position
Substituted residue
orf8
*
*
*
*
* *
*
* *
*
*
*
* *
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
19
26
30
31
63
69
70
76
82
104
107
155
173
197
Position
Substituted residue
M
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
7
15
21
30
37
78
89
90
108
129
132
157
162
169
196
205
241
247
259
260
Position
Substituted residue
nsp5
Predicted effect
on stability
destabilizing
neutral
stabilizing
MutateX predictions at positions where mutations are observed, part1
Figure 4.7: Categorical heatmap illustrating the stability predictions of MutateX on all
possible substitutions on the positions where substitutions have been observed on the
three proteins Orf8, M, and Nsp5. Observed substitutions are indicated with an ’o’.
Original residues are indicated with an ′∗′
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
33
==PAGE:42==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
***
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
**
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
**
*
*
*
**
**
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
oo
o
o
o
o
o
o
oo
o
o
o
oo
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
oo
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
oo
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
oo
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
oo
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
oo
o
o
o
o
o
oo
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
50
59
66
67
68
83
84
94
95
96
98
112
127
138
142
190
208
209
210
213
216
221
222
228
231
242
264
289
307
314
327
330
332
339
346
356
368
371
373
375
376
382
403
405
408
417
419
440
450
452
455
456
460
490
493
496
498
501
505
520
521
547
554
570
572
574
595
613
614
619
641
651
655
658
675
701
704
716
719
730
732
764
793
796
809
813
856
859
879
890
936
939
950
954
957
969
978
981
982
1020
1027
1070
1071
1074
1075
1091
1104
1117
1118
1124
1143
1147
Position
Substituted residue
Predicted effect
on stability
destabilizing
neutral
stabilizing
S
MutateX predictions at positions where mutations are observed, part2
Figure 4.8: Categorical heatmap as Figure 4.7 of the S protein
34
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:43==
0.0
0.1
0.2
0
50
100
150
200
Linear epitope score
M
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0
500
1000
Linear epitope score
S
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0
100
200
300
Linear epitope score
NSP5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0
25
50
75
100
125
Linear epitope score
ORF8
Topology of structural proteins
intravirion
transmembrane
virion surface
BepiPred−3.0 predictions of WT sequences
Figure 4.9: The BepiPred­3.0 predicted LESs of the four proteins. Each bar indicates
the LES score of an amino acid residue on the position as indicated on the x­axis. The
y­axis reflects the LES. Since the score is relative to the protein length, these are not
meaningful to compare between different proteins.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
35
==PAGE:44==
were kept absolute because the relativity of the LES values did not allow for a way of
meaningfully assessing the change in LES values in e.g. a percentile manner (small
changes values in small values would seem to have large impacts).
Figures 4.10 and 4.11 present heatmaps that highlight the positions where substitu­
tions have been observed in the ancestral sequence reconstruction. Negative values
in these heatmaps indicate that the induced substitution lowers the LES, suggesting it
is predicted to be a poorer B cell epitope. This reduction in LES could deter immune
recognition, potentially conferring a fitness advantage to the virus. Conversely, higher
LES scores predict a decrease in viral fitness.
Visual inspection of the heatmaps reveals that the introduction of substitutions on certain
positions are dominated by negative values that suggest a flexibility for change, for
example in protein M (positions 3, 155), Nsp5 (196), Orf8 (38, 45), and S (154, 446). In
contrast, other positions appear more constrained, such as M (7), Nsp5 (78, 89), Orf8
(4, 100, 114), and S (76, 445), where substituted residues generally score higher LES.
The actually observed substitutions on these positions, generally also show increased
LES, whereas most observed substitutions result in a neutral (close to 0.00) or slightly
negative change in the LES score, as identified by visual inspection. This suggests
that BepiPred­3.0 predictions could be useful for estimating viral fitness. However, no
obvious trend is evident in the data, indicating that LES predictions from BepiPred­3.0
alone are insufficient for describing a comprehensive fitness landscape.
4.5.2
Prediction of T cell epitopes
To assess the effect of substitutions on T cell recognition, the affinity of 9­mer peptides
to MHC I molecules was predicted with NetMHCpan­4.1. NetMHCpan­4.1 deems a
peptide a strong MHC I binder (SB), a weak MHC I binder (WB) or not a binder at
all. Since this project aimed to identify fitness on a single­residue level, an Aggregated
NetMHCpan Position­specific (ANP) score was calculated by awarding all residues part
of a SB or WB 9­mer an arbitrary value of 1 or 0.5, respectively, as depicted in Figure
4.12.
An ANP score was calculated on the reference sequences as baseline for subsequent
comparison with introduced substitutions. This also provided an overview of the T cell
epitope landscape across the different proteins, as illustrated in Figure 4.13. This re­
vealed highly T cell immunogenic regions predicted in most proteins. Specifically, high
scoring regions were identified in the M protein (residues 43:47, 171:178), the S protein
(residues 691:695, 1054:1062), and Nsp5 (residues 110:112). In contrast, Orf8 did not
contain any residues with an ANP score above 7.5. It is important to note that while
the ANP score is an arbitrary metric, it is consistent and comparable across different
proteins since each 9­mer peptide is considered independently in the biological con­
text of MHC I binding. A high ANP score is hypothesized to indicate low viral fitness at
specific positions. Therefore, peaks in Figure 4.13 suggest areas of low fitness where
substitutions are likely.
To evaluate the impact of substitutions on T cell epitope potential, the observed muta­
36
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:45==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
2
3
7
19
26
30
31
63
69
70
76
82
104
107
155
173
197
208
209
Position
Substituted residue
−0.04
−0.02
0.00
0.02
LESmut −
LESwt
M
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
7
15
21
30
37
78
89
90
108
129
132
157
162
169
196
205
241
247
259
260
Position
Substituted residue
−0.02
0.00
0.02
0.04
LESmut −
LESwt
nsp5
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
4
10
11
14
16
24
25
31
32
36
37
38
45
51
52
60
61
62
64
65
67
73
75
76
79
87
92
95
97
100
106
114
115
117
119
120
Position
Substituted residue
−0.02
0.00
0.02
LESmut −
LESwt
orf8
Difference in LES between WT and mutated residues at positions with observed mutations, part1
Figure 4.10: Relative effect of substitutions on BepiPred predictions on positions with
observed mutations in the M, Nsp5, and Orf8 protein. Asterisks indicate original residue
at position, and is the reference used for the calculation. ‘o’ indicates the substitution to
be observed in the ancestral sequence reconstruction. Negative values indicate a lower
LES which is predicted to be poorer B­cell recognition, and thus presumably increased
fitness.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
37
==PAGE:46==
*
*
*
* *
*
*
* *
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* * *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
2
3
5
12
13
14
18
19
20
21
25
26
50
59
66
67
68
69
73
75
76
77
80
83
84
94
95
96
98
112
127
138
142
143
144
145
146
147
152
153
154
155
157
158
164
174
181
182
183
184
185
190
208
209
210
213
216
221
222
228
231
242
245
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
257
258
262
264
289
307
314
327
330
332
339
346
356
368
371
373
375
376
382
403
405
408
417
419
440
444
445
446
450
452
455
Position
Substituted residue
S (first half)
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
* *
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* * *
*
*
* *
*
*
*
* *
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
456
460
476
477
478
481
484
486
490
493
496
498
501
505
520
521
547
554
570
572
574
595
613
614
619
621
627
640
641
651
655
658
675
677
679
681
688
701
704
716
719
730
732
764
793
796
809
813
831
844
845
846
852
856
859
879
890
936
939
950
954
957
969
978
981
982
1020
1027
1070
1071
1074
1075
1091
1104
1117
1118
1124
1143
1147
1150
1153
1158
1159
1163
1174
1176
1182
1191
1195
1199
1202
1219
1228
1229
1237
1251
1253
1263
1264
1265
1266
Position
Substituted residue
S (second half)
−0.010
−0.005
0.000
0.005
0.010
...LES
Difference in LES between WT and mutated residues at positions with observed mutations, part2
Figure 4.11: Relative effect of substitutions on BepiPred predictions on positions with
observed mutations in the S protein. Heatmap split in two for enhanced readability.
38
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:47==
0
0.5
0.5
0.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.5
1.0
1.0
1.0
0
H
E
L
P
I
M
T
R
A
P
P
E
D
…
ANP:
Protein 
sequence
WB ⇒ +0.5
SB ⇒ +1.0
All  
possible 
9-mers
Figure 4.12: ANP score calculation.
NetMHCpan­4.1 considers all 9­mers of a fic­
tive peptide sequence and returns which are weak MHC I binders (WB), strong MHC
I binders (SB) or no binding. All residues part of a 9­mer predicted as WB or SB are
awarded 0.5 and 1.0 points, respectively. This process is repeated for all HLA molecules
submitted, and the ANP score is thus an aggregate of both of the overlapping k­mers
and of the different HLAs included in the analysis.
S
ORF8
NSP5
0
25
50
75
100
125
0
100
200
300
0
50
100
150
200
M
0
500
1000
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
position
ANP_score
T cell epitope landscape of WT sequences
Figure 4.13: Baseline T cell epitope landscape (as measured in ANP) of the four proteins
under investigation
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
39
==PAGE:48==
tions were individually introduced into the reference sequence. NetMHCpan­4.1 pre­
dictions and ANP calculations were then repeated for each modified sequence. The
differences in ANP scores (dANP) between the substituted and wildtype residues are
shown for each position in the heatmap in Figures 4.14 and 4.15. The dANP value, indi­
cates a change in virus fitness related to T cell epitopes, with negative values suggesting
increased fitness of the virus. Visual inspection of column trends reveals potential for
changes at a range of specific positions: M (19, 26), Nsp5 (90, 108), Orf8 (31, 73), and
S (59, 84, 209, 210, 213, 248, 505, 1265). Conversely, positions such as Orf8 (37, 119)
and S (228, 796, 1118) appear to be near the fitness peak, as the majority substitu­
tions on these positions predict better T cell epitopes. Visual inspection of these figures
alone, is insufficient to consider if any tendencies regarding dANP changes for the ob­
served mutations exist. Thus, the distribution of these is depicted in Figure 4.16. This
resembles a normal distribution centered around zero, indicating that most observed
substitutions have minimal impact on predicted T cell epitope capacity, and that there
is no clear signal in the data or indication of any fitness advantage related to ANP.
4.6
Fitness landscape model
With the assumption that observed substitutions enhance viral fitness, neither calcula­
tions of protein stability (∆∆G), nor predictions of the capability of B cells (LES) and T
cells (ANP) to recognise certain parts of the viral proteins, seemed sufficient to inform
about fitness on their own. But the fitness landscape is presumed to be multidimen­
sional, hence the next step was to take the different fitness parameters (∆∆G, LES,
ANP) and attempt to join them into a fitness landscape model using a Feed Forward
Neural Network (FFNN).
4.6.1
Feed Forward artificial Neural Network
A FFNN was trained and optimized as described in section X.XX trying all combinations
of fitness parameters and hyper parameters, testing 3348 combinations in total. Each
model returned a probability distribution of the 20 different amino acids for each position
with an observed mutation. To evaluate the models, a top­k accuracy score was calcu­
lated where observed mutations were used as true labels, as a proxy for highest fitness
possibilities. The model that best awarded the observed mutations the highest probabil­
ity scores, was trained only on the original residues and the ∆∆G values. The predictive
capacity of this model is illustrated in Table 4.6. The model performs better at identifying
the observed mutations than what would be expected from a random classifier.
However, other models performing similarly well were trained on different fitness pa­
rameters, or features. To evaluate the importance of the different parameters, the top
5% performing models were extracted, and an evaluation of how often a given fitness
parameter was included in the training of a well­performing model is illustrated in Figure
4.17. From this it seems that the original residue is by far the feature with the strongest
predictive capacity and the ANP score the least.
The entire “fitness landscape”, i.e., the probability predictions of observing different
amino acid substitutions, is stored in appendix 5.
40
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:49==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
2
3
7
19
26
30
31
63
69
70
76
82
104
107
155
173
197
208
209
Position
Substituted residue
M
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
7
15
21
30
37
78
89
90
108
129
132
157
162
169
196
205
241
247
259
260
Position
Substituted residue
nsp5
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
4
10
11
14
16
24
25
31
32
36
37
38
45
51
52
60
61
62
64
65
67
73
75
76
79
87
92
95
97
100
106
114
115
117
119
120
Position
Substituted residue
orf8
−5−4−3−2−10 1 2 3 4 5
dANP
Difference in ANP between WT and mutated resisudes at positions with observed mutations, part1
Figure 4.14: Relative effect of substitutions on ANP calculation (dANP) on positions with
observed mutations in the M, Nsp5, and Orf8 protein. Asterisks indicate original residue
at position, and is the reference used for the calculation. ‘o’ indicates the substitutions
observed in the ancestral sequence reconstruction. Negative values indicate a lower
ANP which is predicted to be poorer T­cell recognition, and thus presumably increased
fitness.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
41
==PAGE:50==
*
*
*
* *
*
*
* *
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* * *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
235
12
13
14
18
19
20
21
25
26
50
59
66
67
68
69
73
75
76
77
80
83
84
94
95
96
98
112
127
138
142
143
144
145
146
147
152
153
154
155
157
158
164
174
181
182
183
184
185
190
208
209
210
213
216
221
222
228
231
242
245
247
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
257
258
262
264
289
307
314
327
330
332
339
346
356
368
371
373
375
376
382
403
405
408
417
419
440
444
445
446
450
452
455
Position
Substituted residue
S (first half)
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
* *
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* * *
*
*
* *
*
*
*
* *
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* *
*
*
*
*
*
*
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
o
o
o
o
o
o o
A
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
K
L
M
N
P
Q
R
S
T
V
W
Y
456
460
476
477
478
481
484
486
490
493
496
498
501
505
520
521
547
554
570
572
574
595
613
614
619
621
627
640
641
651
655
658
675
677
679
681
688
701
704
716
719
730
732
764
793
796
809
813
831
844
845
846
852
856
859
879
890
936
939
950
954
957
969
978
981
982
1020
1027
1070
1071
1074
1075
1091
1104
1117
1118
1124
1143
1147
1150
1153
1158
1159
1163
1174
1176
1182
1191
1195
1199
1202
1219
1228
1229
1237
1251
1253
1263
1264
1265
1266
Position
Substituted residue
S (second half)
−5−4−3−2−10 1 2 3 4 5
dANP
Difference in ANP between WT and mutated resisudes at positions with observed mutations, part2
Figure 4.15: dANP calculations per position for the S protein. As Figure 4.14.
42
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:51==
0
10
20
30
40
50
−6
−3
0
3
6
dANP
count
Distribution of dANP values of observed substitutions
Figure 4.16: Distribution of dANP values on observed mutations. Bin width = 0.5.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Original residue
BLOSUM62
ddG
BepiPred
ANP
Proportion of models using the feature
Features included in the top 5% best performing FFNN models
Figure 4.17: Proportion a top 5% including set feature.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
43
==PAGE:52==
Top­k accuracy
k
Model performance
SD of model performance
Random classifier
1
0.301
0.061
0.05
2
0.503
0.081
0.10
3
0.588
0.084
0.15
5
0.687
0.078
0.25
10
0.810
0.066
0.50
Table 4.6: Table showing top­k accuracy with model performance, standard deviation
(SD) of model performance, and random classifier expected performance.
44
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:53==
5
Discussion
In this study, modelling a viral fitness landscape was attempted from a biological reduc­
tionist perspective, that is, based on molecular simulations, as opposed to population­
based metrics. The fitness parameters used included the simulated effects of substitu­
tions on viral protein stability, and the immunogenicity of the viral proteins, as measured
by their recognition by B and T cells. These parameters were joined in a model, together
with a BLOSUM62 probability of given amino acid change, using a Feed Forward Neural
Network using observed substitution to guide supervised learning.
5.1
Dataset diversity
For the analysis, a dataset was generated with 500 whole genome sequences of SARS­
CoV­2.
These were geographically skewed with almost 90% of samples being se­
quenced in USA. This could suggest a bias in the NCBI database which is hosted by the
United States Government institution NIH. A closer look revealed, however, that the fil­
tering sorted out the vast majority of sequences from Europe. In the sequence collection
the filters “nucleotide completeness” was set to complete, and “ambiguous characters”
was set to maximum 10. Applying these two filters, on top of the rest (see Methods), re­
sulted in a reduction of potential European sequences from 4973602 samples to 50100,
whereas the North American sequence count dropped less drastically from 3615310 to
1116835. This could prompt a discussion on a difference in sequencing protocols on the
two continents that will not be digressed further into here. A more equal geographical
distribution of samples would be preferable, but the argument could be made whether
USA with a multicultural population and large flow of international workers and tourists
(ignoring travel restrictions) would be an adequate sampling pool to represent the global
picture on a pandemic timescale, especially when the main use of the sequences were
to infer substitutions that arose along the evolutionary history be means of ancestral
sequence reconstruction.
5.2
Ancestral sequence reconstruction
In this work, the ancestral sequence reconstruction was used to identify positions with
substitutions as a proxy for positions in the reference strain of the virus that had not
reached peak fitness. However, when identifying these, the custom python scripts did
not only count substitutions arising on internal branches of the phylogeny but also termi­
nal branches leading to an observed virus. This is problematic because the underlying
assumption of improved fitness has not been tested, as there is no way of knowing
whether the sequenced virus would be able to successfully propagate. However, omit­
ting the tip substitutions would also have omitted the NSP5 substitution K90R which
arose independently, as seen all across the tree, six times but only seen in tips of the
phylogeny. It would also decrease the already small dataset, as discussed below.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
45
==PAGE:54==
5.3
Protein stability predictions
The value of a protein stability prediction relies heavily on the protein structure, and the
performance of the simulation. The FoldX algorithm has been shown to be particularly
sensitive to poor­quality protein structures[38], and regarding performance FoldX have
been reported to predict stabilizing vs destabilizing effects with an accuracy of 0.69
and the standard deviation of predicted ∆∆G values has been reported to be between
1.0­1.78 kcal/mol compared to experimental data[38]. The performance metrics seem
reasonable for the task in this study, but the ∆∆G predictions should be considered in
the light of the quality of the structures. Here, the structures of Orf8 (1.61Å) and Nsp5
(1.25Å) are of no worry. The quality of the much larger S protein (3.20Å), and the M
protein (3.52Å) structures used used are much more dubious, which should reflect the
evaluation of ∆∆G predictions. Another limitation of the FoldX algorithm is that it does
not handle glycans, though these may have important impact on protein folding. 22 N­
linked glycosylation sites have been identified in the S protein[35], and the glycans were
removed from the structure prior to the FoldX analysis.
Most observed substitutions were predicted to have a neutral effect on the protein sta­
bility. Approximately 19% were predicted to have a destabilizing effect, and only 1.5%
was predicted to have a stabilizing effect. This result could be explained by the fact that
FoldX has been shown to be biased in favor of destabilizing substitutions[18]. Never­
theless, under the assumption that lower free energy correlates with increased fitness,
by proxy of observed mutations, the obtained results were not the expected.
However, protein folding has impact on many aspects of protein function, why only con­
sidering the thermodynamic stability is clearly an omission of many different aspects of
protein biology. Thermodynamic stability is, however, the most general property across
functionally very different proteins. But thermodynamic predictions and different protein
properties can influence molecular fitness in opposing ways, i.e., if the same substitution
favours certain conformations due to thermodynamic stability while decreasing binding
efficiency. One speculative example of this could be the S protein. The spike trimer is a
dynamic structure, in which each monomer changes between open and closed confor­
mation. The open conformation, while less stable, binds the receptor better, and primes
the spike for fusion rearrangement[39], both very important aspects of infection. Thus,
focusing solely on stability predictions may favor the closed conformation. This is also
why this was the conformation of the monomer structure chosen for ∆∆G calculations.
However, a stabilizing mutation could lock the monomer more tightly in the closed state,
potentially affecting the efficiency of infection, consequently reducing fitness.
5.4
Immunogenicity: B cells
When considering the biological context in which B cells encounter virus particles, the
most intuitive targets for good B cell epitopes are the structural proteins located on the
surface of the virus particle. While the S protein has been widely reported to be the
main immunogenic target[35], antibodies targeting both the M protein[40, 41] and the
non­structural protein Orf8[41, 42] have also been retrieved from patient sera and in vitro
46
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:55==
Linear Epitope Score for S as predicted by BepiPred-3.0
Linear Epitope Score for S as experimentally reported in Li et al (2020)
Figure 5.1: Comparison of the linear B cell epitope landscape as predicted in this study
by BepiPred­3.0 (top) and reported in an experimental investigation[44] using coales­
cent serum and portions of Spike as peptides (bottom).
studies. Notably, M has a small segment exposed on the surface of the virus, whereas
Orf8 has been reported to be secreted into circulation from infected cells[43]. For this
study, no reports of antibodies targeting Nsp5 were identified, and it could thus be ar­
gued that the BepiPred­3.0 predictions for Nsp5 should be omitted from the model. For
M, the strongest epitope, as reported in one study[41], is located in the very N­terminus
(res1:24). Many substitutions were observed on these positions: A2V, D3G, D3H, D3N,
T7I, and Q19E, which could indicate viral evolution away from this epitope. However,
most of these residues were not resolved in the protein structure used, why only infor­
mation on Q19E was eventually included in the fitness model. Multiple experimental
studies have identified linear epitopes of the S protein. One such study[44] identified
linear epitope hotspots within the ranges of residues 487­498, 553­684, 764­829, 884­
895, 1148­1159, 1256­1273. Of these, only 487­498 and 1256­1273 remotely resemble
the predictions made with BepiPred­3.0, and the experimental linear epitope landscape
looks markedly different from the predicted, as seen in Figure 5.1. This of course raises
a concern about the quality of BepiPred­3.0 predictions.
The relative nature of the LES, complicates the comparison of raw LES values between
proteins. As is evident from Figure 4.9, all the LES scores of the S protein are lower
than for the remaining proteins which does not align with the reports identifying S as the
major B cell immunogenic target. Thus, in this study, the LES was Min­Max normalised
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
47
==PAGE:56==
before using the data to train the model. This did not solve the problem, however, and
it created a different one. Following the normalisation all four proteins have a residue
with an LES score that maximizes to 1, which would suggest they are equally good
epitopes, but we have no evidence nor gut feeling to suggest this is the case. However,
data normalisation is a crucial preprocessing step when training FFNN, why it seemed
the lesser of two evils.
This study focused exclusively on linear B cell epitopes, and ignored conformational epi­
topes despite the availability of prediction methods such as Discotope­3.0. This method
bases the epitope prediction on a protein structure, why to evaluate the effects of a
deep mutational scan, would require inducing the 20 different possible substitutions
into the structure on each position of interest. Reliably introducing a substitution into a
three­dimensional protein structure is more laborious than introducing it into a FASTA
sequence. However, this process was already performed in the MutateX pipeline during
each FoldX step, making the mutated structures available. However, due to algorithmic
stochasticity in the FoldX pipeline, the process is repeated 5 times in total, and the mean
∆∆G is reported. A similar approach could have been used to determine the conforma­
tional epitope score, by calculating it for each of the five structures, per substitution,
and using the average result. However, this was omitted from the analysis due to time
constraints.
5.5
Immunogenicity: T cells
Contrary to B cell epitopes, the presentation of T cell epitopes is ignorant of whether viral
proteins are structural or non­structural. Proteasomal degradation of any intracellular
viral protein yields short peptides, some of which are 9 residues long and transported
into the endoplasmic reticulum where they can be loaded onto MHC I molecules which is
then exported to the cell surface where the peptides are presented to CD8+ T cells who
then induce the killing of the infected cell to prevent viral spread[45]. MHC I molecules
are encoded by the HLA genes, of which a large diversity exists in the human popula­
tion. In this study, NetMHCpan­4.1 tested each 9­mer against 12 HLA supertypes, fol­
lowing which the CD8+ T cell epitope potential of each individual position was estimated
with a home­made metric, the Aggregate NetMHCpan­4.1 Position­specific (ANP) score
which revealed most observed substitutions to have no or close to no effect on the T
cell epitope potential. The ANP was calculated with an equal weight on the different
HLAs. Considering the diversity in HLA allele prevalence could potentially reveal dif­
ferent patterns than the generalized analysis that is presented in this study. One could
speculate if the USA­biased dataset would reveal stronger adaptation signals had the
HLA alleles been curated to reflect e.g. USA subpopulations who were most at risk in
the pandemic. However, despite the small changes in epitopeness in observed substi­
tutions, which could suggest that the ANP calculation is not a sound way to consider the
NetMHCpan­4.1 output, comparing the ANP­based T cell epitope landscape to experi­
mental data reveals a remarkable alignment. In Figure 5.2, the T cell epitope landscape
as summarized by different experimental studies[46] is compared to the ANP predicted
T cell epitope landscape of proteins S and M.
48
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:57==
Experimentally reported T cell epitope landscape by Grifoni et al (2021)
Predicted T cell epitope landscape by NetMHCpan-4.1
Figure 5.2:
Comparison of the T cell epitope landscape for the S and M protein
as reported in a review of experimental investigations (top) 11 and predicted using
NetMHCpan­4.1 in this study (bottom). Transparent green boxes was drawn to high­
light agreement between the two landscapes.
Viruses are obligate intracellular pathogens, and when degraded inside infected cells,
their peptides are presented on MHC I molecules to CD8+ T cells. In contrast, CD4+
T cells recognize viral peptides when presented on MHC II molecules on the surface of
professional antigen presenting cells. These predominantly encounter circulating virus
and initiate an antibody response. Thus, the CD4+ T cells plays a more indirect role in
the immune response than does the CD8+ T cells, why the selective pressure on CD8+ T
cell epitopes is assumed to be higher. Therefore the simplified fitness model presented
in this study focused on MHC I presentation, though the CD4+ T cell response is not
irrelevant, and MHC II presentation ought to be included in a more elaborate fitness
model of virus evolution.
5.6
FFNN Fitness Landscape model
The predictive performance of the FFNN model presented in this study was surprisingly
good, particularly given the low number of fitness parameters used for training the final
model, and the low sample size. But whereas the top­k accuracy evaluation metric pro­
vides an intuitive performance indicator on positive predictions, it does not fully capture
the model’s performance on negative predictions or more generally the distribution of
errors classes, which may be important to consider. However, computing other metrics
was challenging given the nature of the output being a probability distribution.
This challenge arises because assigning true negatives (TN), false negatives (FN), or
false positives (FP) is not straightforward when dealing with a fitness landscape de­
scribed by a probability distribution. Strictly categorizing observed and non­observed
mutations ignores the stochastic nature of how mutations occur. Consider a scenario
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
49
==PAGE:58==
where an Arginine (R) substitution has the highest fitness at certain position, predicted
and biologically, but the observed substitution is a Histidine (H). Should R be considered
a TP because it has the highest predicted fitness, a TN because it wasn’t observed, or
a FP because it scored high but wasn’t observed (yet)? This problem in part arises
because fitness intuitively is a continuous value, but in the lack of any better labels for
training, observed mutations, a discrete value, were used converting the model into a
classification model rather than a regression model.
Typically, machine learning models are trained on large amounts of data. Here, only 173
positions, across four proteins, had observed mutations and just these were selected
for training and validating the model. The few observed substitutions can be attributed
to the short time span since the start of the pandemic, and the slow evolution of coro­
naviruses compared to other RNA viruses[47]. One could have decided to include the
remaining positions, all those without observed substitution, but this would have led to an
even more class­imbalanced data set. Class­imbalance is undesirable because it can
lead to biased model training, where the model optimises to predict the majority class,
in this case unobserved substitutions. This dataset is already class­imbalanced, as the
majority of substitutions concerned are unobserved, typically only 1/20 possible substi­
tutions are observed on any given position. Adding more than thousand datapoints with
0/20 substitutions observed would skew this even further.
Of the fitness parameters simulated in this work, for the model, ∆∆G was included in
most of the high­scoring models. The model was trained on the raw ∆∆G score, despite
the uncertainty of the prediction. It would have been interesting to see the performance
of the model, had ∆∆G been included in training as a discrete variable of either stabiliz­
ing, destabilizing, or neutral.
The ANP score was the fitness parameter included in least of the best evaluated mod­
els. This in spite of the predictions aligning well with experimental data. It could be
interesting to see the model effect if the arbitrary weights of 2:1 for strong and weak
binders, respectively, were changed. One interpretation could be that the T cell epitope
landscape is not a strong driver of SARS­CoV­2 evolution.
Interestingly, predicting observed substitutions based on the original residue alone was
almost as good as including any other parameter. What the model has achieved some­
what resembles the capability of a substitution matrix. This is highly surprising, with
the sparse amount of data, in particularly when no structural context was included in
the encoding. A different approach could be to encode any position as the center of
a kmer. This would include the neighboring context of the residue for the training and
could perhaps improve performance. A step further could be to use a language model
embedding for the original residue, such as the ESM­2 model[21] used in BepiPred­3.0.
5.7
Model benchmarking
Different models have been developed to predict fitness landscapes. Two of these are
DeMaSk[48] and EVEscape[49]. Based on the protein sequence alone, DeMaSk pre­
50
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:59==
dicts the impact of amino acid substitutions using a linear model combining a direc­
tional amino acid substitution matrix, computed on experimental deep mutational scans,
with two measurements from a homology alignment: site conservation and variant fre­
quency. EVEscape is based on the EVE model[50], a variational autoencoder trained on
evolutionary sequences to predict disease variants. For SARS­CoV­2 predictions with
EVEscape, EVE was (re)trained on pre­pandemic coronavirus S protein sequences.
The retrained EVE model was combined in EVEscape with a position­specific antibody
accessibility metric, based on the same protein structures used for this study, and a
dissimilarity metric considering difference in charge and hydrophobicity between the
original and the variant residue at a given position.
As both DeMaSk and EVEscape are trained on more diverse data, these models are
of a more generalist nature than the model presented in this study. Both DeMaSk and
EVEscape also score mutations at different positions in a comparable manner, whereas
in the FFNN model presented in this study, each position is considered independently in
the fitness landscape, returning only a probability distribution of changes amino acids.
This is a limitation of the FFNN model.
To compare the model performances, DeMaSk and EVEscape predictions were re­
trieved. DeMaSk predictions were calculated on their webserver, and only requires
the peptide FASTA sequence[48]. The people behind EVEscape, continuously update
predictions for SARS­CoV­2 VOCs, including the original Wuhan strain, as has been
used in this study, and distribute the data on their website[51]. Both of these model
scores were processed using a SoftMax function to yield probability distributions.
From this data, a top­k accuracy was calculated on all the positions with observed mu­
tations in the dataset. The performance of the model presented in this work (here called
‘FFNN’) is compared to the performance of DeMaSk, EVEscape, and the BLOSUM62
conditional probability substitution matrix alone in Table 5.1. From this it is apparent that
the FFNN model performs best at predicting the observed mutations. DeMaSk performs
second best at all lower k’s, whereas EVEscape performs better than BLOSUM62 when
k is low, and BLOSUM62 better than EVEscape when k is high.
Top­k accuracy comparison of 4 different models
k
FFNN (sd)
DeMaSk
EVEscape
BLOSUM62
Random classifier
1
0.301 (0.061)
0.232
0.226
0.0
0.05
2
0.503 (0.081)
0.353
0.281
0.165
0.10
3
0.588 (0.084)
0.442
0.324
0.321
0.15
5
0.687 (0.078)
0.613
0.423
0.539
0.25
10
0.810 (0.066)
0.827
0.736
0.802
0.50
Table 5.1: Top­k accuracy comparison of four different models.
However, to conclude the FFNN is a better predictor than DeMaSk and EVEscape ig­
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
51
==PAGE:60==
nores the head­start given by the training data being more closely related to the valida­
tion data, and the limited value of the top­k accuracy metric in itself. To truly evaluate
the usefulness of the model, it would be interesting to test the performance of the model
on different coronavirus proteins.
5.7.1
A cautious note from the author
The performance of the model presented in this study is surprisingly high considering
the limited data it was trained on. Often, when results seem too good to be true, they
are. I suspect my limited experience with machine learning to be the culprit, though
despite double and triple checks of the code, and how to use the different functions, I
did not manage in time to identify where the code was wrong.
5.8
Fitness elements omitted in the model
The primary determinant of virus tropism, i.e., the range of cells a virus is able to infect,
is the receptor­binding capability. This is a major part of the viral fitness landscape.
For SARS­CoV­2, the cellular receptor is ACE2, and the receptor­binding­domain is
located on the S protein. In this study, receptor­binding was not included as a separate
fitness parameter because it would only be informative for a small subset of the tested
positions. But whereas strong binding to human ACE2 would indicate more efficient
transmission in humans, it might simultaneously reduce the receptor­binding efficiency,
and thus fitness, in the wider animal population. This hypothesis could be investigated
by comparing the sequences of SARS­CoV­2 infecting different hosts and modeling the
binding of Spike with the observed substitutions onto different host receptors.
Similarly, modelling ligand interactions could be of interest for Nsp5. Nsp5 is the main
protease responsible, together with Nsp3, for cleaving the Nsp1ab polyprotein into func­
tional nonstructural proteins. As discussed above, the stability measure relays little in­
formation about functionality of the protein, i.e., the processivity of an enzyme. For ex­
ample, a stabilizing substitution in Nsp5 could also induce steric hindrance in the active
site (see Figure 4.4), making it less accessible to the polypeptide cleavage site. In such
a scenario, the stabilizing substitution would likely lower fitness rather than increase it,
a factor not considered in this study.
Simulating both receptor­binding efficiency of different Spike variants, and the effect
of Nsp5 substrate binding and accessibility to the active site could be achieved using
docking software[52, 53], provided the protein structure with induced substitution and
the substrate structure, or except hereof. Simulating the actual effect on biochemical
processivity of changes in the active site would require more sophisticated tools for
biochemical simulations, the existence of which the author is unaware.
In addition to processing the polyprotein, Nsp5 exhibits anti­antiviral activity by cleaving
the cellular NEMO, an important component of the activation pathway of intrinsic immu­
nity sensor RIG­I[54]. In this study, immunogenicity was considered only in the context
of adaptive immunity. SARS­CoV­2 and other positive sense RNA viruses induce the
formation of double­membrane vesicles in which viral proteins and certain host factors
52
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:61==
needed for efficient replication are concentrated, while double­stranded RNA replica­
tion intermediates are concealed from intrinsic immunity sensors such as RIG­I and
MDA5[55]. The SARS­CoV­2 proteins primarily involved in the formation of DMVs are
Nsp3 and Nsp4, none of the proteins considered in this study, but not irrelevant for the
fitness landscape.
5.9
Epistasis
Through the course of evolution, the virus accumulates several mutations, as is evident
from the ancestral sequence reconstruction. In this context, epistasis may influence
evolutionary trajectories. Epistasis occurs when the combined effect of two or more
mutations is not equal to the sum of their individual effects[56]. In this study, the effects of
mutations have only been considered individually and independently, potentially omitting
epistatic effects.
Considering the evolutionary path, the fitness landscape changes every time a new mu­
tation is acquired. Thus, the ultimate goal of a modelling exercise as attempted here, is
a truly dynamic fitness landscape where, following the introduction of each single mu­
tation, the entire landscape is reevaluated. This approach necessitates the predictions
of new protein structures that progressively would diverge from those experimentally
observed, thus increasing uncertainty. Recent advances in the field of protein structure
prediction, spearheaded by AlphaFold[57], offer potential to solve part of this problem.
However, conducting a truly exhaustive search of all possible combinations of fitness
landscapes is an exponential computational problem and, even for small proteins, in­
feasible.
5.10
A different approach
Each viral protein plays a unique role in the infection, and thus each viral protein in­
fluences the fitness landscape in distinct ways. In this study, only metrics that could
be applied across all proteins were used. However, modeling the proteins individually,
focusing on their specific biological functions could provide a more accurate represen­
tation of their fitness. Though in theory the better approach, the bioinformatical tools for
all these analyses are not available, and complementing experimental data is scarce.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:63==
6
Conclusion and future perspectives
Virus evolution is essentially based on nucleotide mutations, which in turn results in
amino acid substitutions of the viral proteins. The success of such change, i.e., how well
the descendent viruses with the mutations propagate, is the result of a large range of dif­
ferent factors pulling in multiple direction. Thus, virus evolution has been metaphorized
in the form of a multidimensional fitness landscape with peaks of high fitness and val­
leys of low fitness that a virus ventures through, less likely to successfully propagate if
random mutations find it at the bottom of a valley than at the top of a peak.
This study set out on the challenging task of modeling such a multidimensional fitness
landscape, a task that turned out to be complex indeed. The few dimensions of the
landscape attempted modeled here was the thermodynamic stability, and the B and
T cell immunogenicity, of viral proteins. Given the abundance of SARS­CoV­2 protein
structures and sequences available, this virus was chosen as the model virus.
An ancestral sequence reconstruction was performed on a subset of the sequences on
a selected subset of viral proteins showing high degree of evolution. This reconstruc­
tion highlighted substitutions observed during virus evolution, which were in turn used
as proxies for high­fitness substitutions, and as labels to train a Feed Forward Neural
Network aimed at predicting the probability distribution of observing a substitution.
The FFNN was trained using the predictions of thermodynamic stability, B and T cell
immunogenicity, and a conditional BLOSUM62 probability matrix. The original residue
at each given position was also included as a training feature. Interestingly, the original
residue emerged as the most important feature for classifying substitutions, evidenced
by a model trained solely on this feature which performed nearly on par with the best
model. The best model was trained with the original residue and thermodynamic stability
as the two only features.
However, evaluating the model accurately posed significant challenges due to the nature
of the output. A thorough assessment of the generalization of the model would require
a dataset prepared from different viruses, which was beyond the scope of this project’s
timeframe. Future work should focus on creating such datasets for validating the model,
but also for expanding the training to diverse viral species which would hopefully yield
a more generalist model, thus enhancing its applicability and robustness in predicting
viral fitness landscapes.
Virus evolution continues to affect public health. A generalized fitness model holds great
potential for informing pandemic preparedness. With advances in protein structure pre­
dictions, one can just start to imagine a model that only requires a nucleotide sequence
to predict the fitness enhancing substitutions. Such a model would be powerful in com­
bination with environmental sampling of viruses from wild and farmed animals, from
where the next novel virus outbreak is likely to originate.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:65==
References
[1]
S.J. Flint et al. Principles of Virology, Volume 2: Pathogenesis and Control. ASM
Books. Wiley, 2020. ISBN: 978­1­68367­285­2. URL: https://books.google.dk/
books?id=KH1czQEACAAJ.
[2]
S. Wright. “The Roles of Mutation, Inbreeding, crossbreeding and Selection in
Evolution”. In: Proceedings of the XI International Congress of Genetics 8 (1932),
pp. 209–222.
[3]
Stefan Petkov. “The Fitness Landscape Metaphor: Dead but Not Gone”. In: Philosophia
Scientae 19­1 (Mar. 2015), pp. 159–174. ISSN: 1281­2463, 1775­4283. DOI: 10.
4000/philosophiascientiae.1050. URL: http://journals.openedition.org/philosophiascientiae/
1050 (visited on 06/21/2024).
[4]
David L. Nelsin and Michael M. Cox. Lehninger, Principles of Biochemistry, 7th
ed. Chapter 13: Bioenergetics and Thermodynamics. 7th ed. W. H. Freeman and
Company, 2017. ISBN: 978­1­4641­2611­6.
[5]
Z. Yang. “PAML 4: Phylogenetic Analysis by Maximum Likelihood”. en. In: Molec­
ular Biology and Evolution 24.8 (Apr. 2007), pp. 1586–1591. ISSN: 0737­4038,
1537­1719. DOI: 10.1093/molbev/msm088. URL: https://academic.oup.com/mbe/
article-lookup/doi/10.1093/molbev/msm088 (visited on 06/21/2024).
[6]
John P. Huelsenbeck and Fredrik Ronquist. “MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of
phylogenetic trees”. en. In: Bioinformatics 17.8 (Aug. 2001), pp. 754–755. ISSN:
1367­4811, 1367­4803. DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/17.8.754. URL: https://
academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article/17/8/754/235132 (visited on 06/21/2024).
[7]
Alexei J Drummond and Andrew Rambaut. “BEAST: Bayesian evolutionary anal­
ysis by sampling trees”. en. In: BMC Evolutionary Biology 7.1 (2007), p. 214.
ISSN: 1471­2148. DOI: 10.1186/1471- 2148- 7- 214. URL: http://bmcevolbiol.
biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2148-7-214 (visited on 06/05/2024).
[8]
Dan Graur, Amy Kathererine Sater, and Tim F. Cooper. Molecular and genome
evolution. Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates, Inc, 2016. ISBN: 978­
1­60535­469­9.
[9]
Alexei J Drummond and Andrew Rambaut. Summarizing posterior trees. URL:
http://beast.community/summarizing_trees#maximum-clade-credibility---mcc-tree
(visited on 06/05/2024).
[10]
Thomas H. Jukes and Charles R. Cantor. “Evolution of Protein Molecules”. en. In:
Mammalian Protein Metabolism. Elsevier, 1969, pp. 21–132. ISBN: 978­1­4832­
3211­9. DOI: 10.1016/B978-1-4832-3211-9.50009-7. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/B9781483232119500097 (visited on 06/11/2024).
[11]
Simon Tavaré. “Some probabilistic and statistical problems on the analysis of DNA
sequence”. In: Lecture of Mathematics for Life Science 1986.17 (), pp. 57–86.
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
57
==PAGE:66==
[12]
Federico Scossa and Alisdair R. Fernie. “Ancestral sequence reconstruction ­
An underused approach to understand the evolution of gene function in plants?”
en. In: Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 19 (2021), pp. 1579–
1594. ISSN: 20010370. DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.03.008. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2001037021000805 (visited on 06/13/2024).
[13]
Pavel Sagulenko, Vadim Puller, and Richard A Neher. “TreeTime: Maximum­likelihood
phylodynamic analysis”. en. In: Virus Evolution 4.1 (Jan. 2018). ISSN: 2057­1577.
DOI: 10.1093/ve/vex042. URL: http://academic.oup.com/ve/article/doi/10.1093/
vex042/4794731 (visited on 06/21/2024).
[14]
S Henikoff and J G Henikoff. “Amino acid substitution matrices from protein blocks.”
en. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 89.22 (Nov. 1992),
pp. 10915–10919. ISSN: 0027­8424, 1091­6490. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.89.22.10915.
URL: https://pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.89.22.10915 (visited on 06/05/2024).
[15]
Sean R Eddy. “Where did the BLOSUM62 alignment score matrix come from?”
en. In: Nature Biotechnology 22.8 (Aug. 2004), pp. 1035–1036. ISSN: 1087­0156,
1546­1696. DOI: 10.1038/nbt0804-1035. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
nbt0804-1035 (visited on 06/05/2024).
[16]
Joost Schymkowitz et al. “The FoldX web server: an online force field”. eng. In: Nu­
cleic Acids Research 33.Web Server issue (July 2005), W382–388. ISSN: 1362­
4962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gki387.
[17]
Raphael Guerois, Jens Erik Nielsen, and Luis Serrano. “Predicting Changes in the
Stability of Proteins and Protein Complexes: A Study of More Than 1000 Muta­
tions”. en. In: Journal of Molecular Biology 320.2 (July 2002), pp. 369–387. ISSN:
00222836. DOI: 10.1016/S0022-2836(02)00442-4. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S0022283602004424 (visited on 06/15/2024).
[18]
Matteo Tiberti et al. “MutateX: an automated pipeline for in silico saturation muta­
genesis of protein structures and structural ensembles”. en. In: Briefings in Bioin­
formatics 23.3 (May 2022), bbac074. ISSN: 1467­5463, 1477­4054. DOI: 10.1093/
bib/bbac074. URL: https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/doi/10.1093/bib/
bbac074/6552273 (visited on 06/05/2024).
[19]
Gabriel Cia, Fabrizio Pucci, and Marianne Rooman. “Critical review of conforma­
tional B­cell epitope prediction methods”. en. In: Briefings in Bioinformatics 24.1
(Jan. 2023), bbac567. ISSN: 1467­5463, 1477­4054. DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbac567.
URL: https://academic.oup.com/bib/article/doi/10.1093/bib/bbac567/6972295
(visited on 06/21/2024).
[20]
Joakim Nøddeskov Clifford et al. “BepiPred￿3.0: Improved B￿cell epitope predic­
tion using protein language models”. en. In: Protein Science 31.12 (Dec. 2022),
e4497. ISSN: 0961­8368, 1469­896X. DOI: 10. 1002/ pro .4497. URL: https: //
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pro.4497 (visited on 06/08/2024).
[21]
Zeming Lin et al. “Evolutionary­scale prediction of atomic­level protein structure
with a language model”. en. In: Science 379.6637 (Mar. 2023), pp. 1123–1130.
ISSN: 0036­8075, 1095­9203. DOI: 10.1126/science.ade2574. URL: https://www.
science.org/doi/10.1126/science.ade2574 (visited on 06/10/2024).
58
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:67==
[22]
Birkir Reynisson et al. “NetMHCpan­4.1 and NetMHCIIpan­4.0: improved predic­
tions of MHC antigen presentation by concurrent motif deconvolution and integra­
tion of MS MHC eluted ligand data”. en. In: Nucleic Acids Research 48.W1 (July
2020), W449–W454. ISSN: 0305­1048, 1362­4962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa379.
URL: https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/48/W1/W449/5837056 (visited on
06/16/2024).
[23]
Rene Y. Choi et al. “Introduction to Machine Learning, Neural Networks, and Deep
Learning”. eng. In: Translational Vision Science & Technology 9.2 (Feb. 2020),
p. 14. ISSN: 2164­2591. DOI: 10.1167/tvst.9.2.14.
[24]
Davide Chicco and Giuseppe Jurman. “The Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC)
should replace the ROC AUC as the standard metric for assessing binary classi­
fication”. eng. In: BioData Mining 16.1 (Feb. 2023), p. 4. ISSN: 1756­0381. DOI:
10.1186/s13040-023-00322-4.
[25]
Caixia Yan et al. “Top­k multi­class SVM using multiple features”. en. In: Informa­
tion Sciences 432 (Mar. 2018), pp. 479–494. ISSN: 00200255. DOI: 10.1016/j.ins.
2017.08.004. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0020025517308642
(visited on 06/19/2024).
[26]
Eneida L. Hatcher et al. “Virus Variation Resource – improved response to emer­
gent viral outbreaks”. en. In: Nucleic Acids Research 45.D1 (Jan. 2017), pp. D482–
D490. ISSN: 0305­1048, 1362­4962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkw1065. URL: https:
//academic.oup.com/nar/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/nar/gkw1065 (visited on
06/17/2024).
[27]
K. Katoh and D. M. Standley. “MAFFT Multiple Sequence Alignment Software
Version 7: Improvements in Performance and Usability”. en. In: Molecular Biology
and Evolution 30.4 (Apr. 2013), pp. 772–780. ISSN: 0737­4038, 1537­1719. DOI:
10.1093/molbev/mst010. URL: https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article-lookup/doi/
10.1093/molbev/mst010 (visited on 06/21/2024).
[28]
ViralZone: SARS­CoV­2 circulating variants. May 2024. URL: https://viralzone.
expasy.org/9556 (visited on 05/01/2024).
[29]
Diego Darriba et al. “jModelTest 2: more models, new heuristics and parallel com­
puting”. en. In: Nature Methods 9.8 (Aug. 2012), pp. 772–772. ISSN: 1548­7091,
1548­7105. DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.2109. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
nmeth.2109 (visited on 06/21/2024).
[30]
Alexei J. Drummond et al. “Bayesian Phylogenetics with BEAUti and the BEAST
1.7”. en. In: Molecular Biology and Evolution 29.8 (Aug. 2012), pp. 1969–1973.
ISSN: 1537­1719, 0737­4038. DOI: 10 . 1093 / molbev / mss075. URL: https : / /
academic.oup.com/mbe/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/molbev/mss075 (visited on
06/21/2024).
[31]
Anders Gorm Pedersen. sumt: a command­line program for computing consensus
trees and other phylogenetic tree summaries. Nov. 2023. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.
10148693. URL: https://github.com/agormp/sumt.
[32]
H. M. Berman. “The Protein Data Bank”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 28.1 (Jan.
2000), pp. 235–242. ISSN: 13624962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/28.1.235. URL: https:
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
59
==PAGE:68==
//academic.oup.com/nar/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/nar/28.1.235 (visited on
06/17/2024).
[33]
Kristine Degn et al. PDBminer to Find and Annotate Protein Structures for Com­
putational Analysis. en. May 2023. DOI: 10.1101/2023.05.06.539447. URL: http:
//biorxiv.org/lookup/doi/10.1101/2023.05.06.539447 (visited on 06/17/2024).
[34]
Adam Paszke et al. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High­Performance Deep Learn­
ing Library. Pages: 8024–8035 Publication Title: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 32. 2019. URL: http://papers.neurips.cc/paper/9015-pytorch-
an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library.pdf.
[35]
Alexandra C. Walls et al. “Structure, Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS­CoV­2
Spike Glycoprotein”. en. In: Cell 181.2 (Apr. 2020), 281–292.e6. ISSN: 00928674.
DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.058. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0092867420302622 (visited on 06/10/2024).
[36]
UniProt. UniProt, S (P0DTC2). June 2024. URL: https : / / www . uniprot . org /
uniprotkb/P0DTC2/entry (visited on 06/15/2024).
[37]
UniProt. UniProt, M (P0DTC5). June 2024. URL: https : / / www . uniprot . org /
uniprotkb/P0DTC5/entry (visited on 06/15/2024).
[38]
Oliver Buß, Jens Rudat, and Katrin Ochsenreither. “FoldX as Protein Engineer­
ing Tool: Better Than Random Based Approaches?” en. In: Computational and
Structural Biotechnology Journal 16 (2018), pp. 25–33. ISSN: 20010370. DOI:
10.1016/j.csbj.2018.01.002. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S2001037017301186 (visited on 06/17/2024).
[39]
Donald J. Benton et al. “Receptor binding and priming of the spike protein of
SARS­CoV­2 for membrane fusion”. en. In: Nature 588.7837 (Dec. 2020), pp. 327–
330. ISSN: 0028­0836, 1476­4687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2772-0. URL: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-2772-0 (visited on 06/18/2024).
[40]
Philipp Jörrißen et al. “Antibody Response to SARS­CoV­2 Membrane Protein
in Patients of the Acute and Convalescent Phase of COVID­19”. In: Frontiers in
Immunology 12 (Aug. 2021), p. 679841. ISSN: 1664­3224. DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.
2021.679841. URL: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fimmu.2021.
679841/full (visited on 06/15/2024).
[41]
Anna S. Heffron et al. “The landscape of antibody binding in SARS­CoV­2 infec­
tion”. eng. In: PLoS biology 19.6 (June 2021), e3001265. ISSN: 1545­7885. DOI:
10.1371/journal.pbio.3001265.
[42]
Asmaa Hachim et al. “ORF8 and ORF3b antibodies are accurate serological mark­
ers of early and late SARS­CoV­2 infection”. en. In: Nature Immunology 21.10
(Oct. 2020), pp. 1293–1301. ISSN: 1529­2908, 1529­2916. DOI: 10.1038/s41590-
020-0773-7. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41590-020-0773-7 (visited on
06/15/2024).
[43]
Xiaohui Wang et al. “Accurate Diagnosis of COVID­19 by a Novel Immunogenic
Secreted SARS­CoV­2 orf8 Protein”. eng. In: mBio 11.5 (Oct. 2020), e02431–20.
ISSN: 2150­7511. DOI: 10.1128/mBio.02431-20.
60
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:69==
[44]
Yang Li et al. “Linear epitopes of SARS­CoV­2 spike protein elicit neutralizing
antibodies in COVID­19 patients”. en. In: Cellular & Molecular Immunology 17.10
(Oct. 2020), pp. 1095–1097. ISSN: 1672­7681, 2042­0226. DOI: 10.1038/s41423-
020-00523-5. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41423-020-00523-5 (visited
on 06/17/2024).
[45]
Kenneth L. Rock, Eric Reits, and Jacques Neefjes. “Present Yourself! By MHC
Class I and MHC Class II Molecules”. en. In: Trends in Immunology 37.11 (Nov.
2016), pp. 724–737. ISSN: 14714906. DOI: 10.1016/j.it.2016.08.010. URL: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1471490616301004 (visited on 06/18/2024).
[46]
Alba Grifoni et al. “SARS­CoV­2 human T cell epitopes: Adaptive immune re­
sponse against COVID­19”. en. In: Cell Host & Microbe 29.7 (July 2021), pp. 1076–
1092. ISSN: 19313128. DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2021.05.010. URL: https://linkinghub.
elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1931312821002389 (visited on 06/18/2024).
[47]
Stanley Perlman and Paul S. Masters. Fields Virology, 7th ed, Volume 1: Emerging
Viruses. Chapter 10. Coronaviridae: The Viruses and Their Replication. 7th ed.
Vol. 2021. Wolters Kluwer. ISBN: 978­1­975112­54­7.
[48]
Daniel Munro and Mona Singh. “DeMaSk: a deep mutational scanning substitution
matrix and its use for variant impact prediction”. en. In: Bioinformatics 36.22­23
(Apr. 2021). Ed. by Jinbo Xu, pp. 5322–5329. ISSN: 1367­4803, 1367­4811. DOI:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btaa1030. URL: https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/
article/36/22-23/5322/6039113 (visited on 06/19/2024).
[49]
Nicole N. Thadani et al. “Learning from prepandemic data to forecast viral escape”.
en. In: Nature 622.7984 (Oct. 2023), pp. 818–825. ISSN: 0028­0836, 1476­4687.
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06617-0. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-
023-06617-0 (visited on 06/19/2024).
[50]
Jonathan Frazer et al. “Disease variant prediction with deep generative models of
evolutionary data”. en. In: Nature 599.7883 (Nov. 2021), pp. 91–95. ISSN: 0028­
0836, 1476­4687. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-04043-8. URL: https://www.nature.
com/articles/s41586-021-04043-8 (visited on 06/19/2024).
[51]
EVEscape Score and Viral Tracking Data Downloads. June 2024. URL: https:
//evescape.org/data (visited on 06/19/2024).
[52]
Samuel DeLuca, Karen Khar, and Jens Meiler. “Fully Flexible Docking of Medium
Sized Ligand Libraries with RosettaLigand”. en. In: PLOS ONE 10.7 (July 2015).
Ed. by Yang Zhang, e0132508. ISSN: 1932­6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0132508. URL: https://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0132508 (visited on
06/18/2024).
[53]
Marine Bugnon et al. “SwissDock 2024: major enhancements for small­molecule
docking with Attracting Cavities and AutoDock Vina”. en. In: Nucleic Acids Re­
search (Apr. 2024), gkae300. ISSN: 0305­1048, 1362­4962. DOI: 10.1093/nar/
gkae300. URL: https://academic.oup.com/nar/advance-article/doi/10.1093/nar/
gkae300/7660078 (visited on 06/18/2024).
[54]
Jiyao Chen et al. “SARS­CoV­2 nsp5 Exhibits Stronger Catalytic Activity and Inter­
feron Antagonism than Its SARS­CoV Ortholog”. en. In: Journal of Virology 96.8
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
61
==PAGE:70==
(Apr. 2022). Ed. by Tom Gallagher, e00037–22. ISSN: 0022­538X, 1098­5514.
DOI: 10.1128/jvi.00037-22. URL: https://journals.asm.org/doi/10.1128/jvi.00037-
22 (visited on 06/18/2024).
[55]
Philippe Roingeard et al. “The double­membrane vesicle (DMV): a virus­induced
organelle dedicated to the replication of SARS­CoV­2 and other positive­sense
single­stranded RNA viruses”. en. In: Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 79.8
(Aug. 2022), p. 425. ISSN: 1420­682X, 1420­9071. DOI: 10.1007/s00018- 022-
04469-x. URL: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00018-022-04469-x (visited on
06/18/2024).
[56]
Tyler N. Starr and Joseph W. Thornton. “Epistasis in protein evolution”. en. In:
Protein Science 25.7 (July 2016), pp. 1204–1218. ISSN: 0961­8368, 1469­896X.
DOI: 10.1002/pro.2897. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pro.2897
(visited on 06/19/2024).
[57]
John Jumper et al. “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold”.
en. In: Nature 596.7873 (Aug. 2021), pp. 583–589. ISSN: 0028­0836, 1476­4687.
DOI: 10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-
021-03819-2 (visited on 06/19/2024).
62
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:71==
A
Conditional BLOSUM62 probability
matrix
(Table on next page)
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
63
==PAGE:72==
A
R
N
D
C
Q
E
G
H
I
L
K
M
F
P
S
T
W
Y
V
A
0.2901
0.031
0.0256
0.0297
0.0216
0.0256
0.0405
0.0783
0.0148
0.0432
0.0594
0.0445
0.0175
0.0216
0.0297
0.085
0.0499
0.0054
0.0175
0.0688
R
0.0446
0.345
0.0388
0.031
0.0078
0.0484
0.0523
0.0329
0.0233
0.0233
0.0465
0.1202
0.0155
0.0174
0.0194
0.0446
0.0349
0.0058
0.0174
0.031
N
0.0427
0.0449
0.3169
0.0831
0.009
0.0337
0.0494
0.0652
0.0315
0.0225
0.0315
0.0539
0.0112
0.018
0.0202
0.0697
0.0494
0.0045
0.0157
0.027
D
0.041
0.0299
0.069
0.3974
0.0075
0.0299
0.0914
0.0466
0.0187
0.0224
0.028
0.0448
0.0093
0.0149
0.0224
0.0522
0.0354
0.0037
0.0112
0.0243
C
0.065
0.0163
0.0163
0.0163
0.4837
0.0122
0.0163
0.0325
0.0081
0.0447
0.065
0.0203
0.0163
0.0203
0.0163
0.0407
0.0366
0.0041
0.0122
0.0569
Q
0.0559
0.0735
0.0441
0.0471
0.0088
0.2147
0.1029
0.0412
0.0294
0.0265
0.0471
0.0912
0.0206
0.0147
0.0235
0.0559
0.0412
0.0059
0.0206
0.0353
E
0.0552
0.0497
0.0405
0.0902
0.0074
0.0645
0.2965
0.035
0.0258
0.0221
0.0368
0.0755
0.0129
0.0166
0.0258
0.0552
0.0368
0.0055
0.0166
0.0313
G
0.0783
0.0229
0.0391
0.0337
0.0108
0.0189
0.0256
0.5101
0.0135
0.0189
0.0283
0.0337
0.0094
0.0162
0.0189
0.0513
0.0297
0.0054
0.0108
0.0243
H
0.042
0.0458
0.0534
0.0382
0.0076
0.0382
0.0534
0.0382
0.355
0.0229
0.0382
0.0458
0.0153
0.0305
0.0191
0.042
0.0267
0.0076
0.0573
0.0229
I
0.0471
0.0177
0.0147
0.0177
0.0162
0.0133
0.0177
0.0206
0.0088
0.271
0.1679
0.0236
0.0368
0.0442
0.0147
0.025
0.0398
0.0059
0.0206
0.1767
K
0.0445
0.0243
0.0142
0.0152
0.0162
0.0162
0.0202
0.0213
0.0101
0.1154
0.3755
0.0253
0.0496
0.0547
0.0142
0.0243
0.0334
0.0071
0.0223
0.0962
K
0.057
0.1071
0.0415
0.0415
0.0086
0.0535
0.0708
0.0432
0.0207
0.0276
0.0432
0.2781
0.0155
0.0155
0.0276
0.0535
0.0397
0.0052
0.0173
0.0328
M
0.0522
0.0321
0.0201
0.0201
0.0161
0.0281
0.0281
0.0281
0.0161
0.1004
0.1968
0.0361
0.1606
0.0482
0.0161
0.0361
0.0402
0.008
0.0241
0.0924
F
0.0338
0.019
0.0169
0.0169
0.0106
0.0106
0.019
0.0254
0.0169
0.0634
0.1142
0.019
0.0254
0.3869
0.0106
0.0254
0.0254
0.0169
0.0888
0.055
P
0.0568
0.0258
0.0233
0.031
0.0103
0.0207
0.0362
0.0362
0.0129
0.0258
0.0362
0.0413
0.0103
0.0129
0.4935
0.0439
0.0362
0.0026
0.0129
0.031
S
0.1099
0.0401
0.0541
0.0489
0.0175
0.0332
0.0524
0.0663
0.0192
0.0297
0.0419
0.0541
0.0157
0.0209
0.0297
0.2199
0.082
0.0052
0.0175
0.0419
T
0.073
0.0355
0.0434
0.0375
0.0178
0.0276
0.0394
0.0434
0.0138
0.0533
0.0651
0.0454
0.0197
0.0237
0.0276
0.0927
0.2465
0.0059
0.0178
0.071
W
0.0303
0.0227
0.0152
0.0152
0.0076
0.0152
0.0227
0.0303
0.0152
0.0303
0.053
0.0227
0.0152
0.0606
0.0076
0.0227
0.0227
0.4924
0.0682
0.0303
Y
0.0405
0.028
0.0218
0.0187
0.0093
0.0218
0.028
0.0249
0.0467
0.0436
0.0685
0.0312
0.0187
0.1308
0.0156
0.0312
0.028
0.028
0.3178
0.0467
V
0.07
0.0219
0.0165
0.0178
0.0192
0.0165
0.0233
0.0247
0.0082
0.1646
0.1303
0.0261
0.0316
0.0357
0.0165
0.0329
0.0494
0.0055
0.0206
0.2689
Table A.1: Conditional BLOSUM62 probability matrix. To be read as the P(aarow | aacol)
64
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:73==
B
SARS­CoV­2 sequence meta data
Accession
Pangolin
Geo location
Collection date
Length
Ns
OM259142.1
AY.3
USA: IA
2021­12­14
29847
0
OM195703.1
BA.1.15
USA: Michigan
2021­12­28
29873
1
OM696395.1
BA.1.1
USA: Washington
2022­02­01
29751
0
OM889151.1
BA.1.20
USA: Illinois
2022­02­17
29792
0
OL863958.1
AY.39
USA: Pennsylvania
2021­12­01
29890
0
OQ084154.1
AY.26
Mexico
2021­12­09
29804
0
OM461568.1
AY.3
USA: Arkansas
2021­07­07
29702
6
OR480837.1
XBB.2.3.3
USA: Washington
2023­08­12
29685
0
ON484105.1
AY.100
Mexico
2021­09­14
29819
1
OM246617.1
AY.47
USA
2021­10­16
29839
0
OL869073.1
AY.20
USA: Ohio Columbus
2021­10­26
29766
0
OL881483.1
AY.100
USA: New Mexico
2021­11­28
29638
0
ON771199.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: New York
2022­05­31
29661
1
OM270071.1
AY.103
USA: Colorado
2021­12­16
29787
0
ON486532.1
AY.26
Mexico
2021­07­21
29845
0
OL931150.1
AY.113
USA
2021­11­29
29807
0
MZ579046.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Pennsylvania Lancaster
2021­04­08
29884
0
ON810288.1
BA.1.1
USA: Washington Snohomish County
2022­01­19
29801
0
OL831243.1
AY.3
USA: California
2021­12­06
29840
3
MZ702699.1
B.1.617
India
2021­04­07
29795
0
MZ316315.1
B.1.526
USA: Florida
2021­05­09
29797
0
OR864992.1
GJ.1.2
USA: Ohio
2023­10­20
29723
0
OL909285.1
AY.39
USA: Massachusetts
2021­12­06
29844
8
ON830683.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: California
2022­06­07
29724
0
OM280966.1
AY.44
USA
2021­12­17
29792
0
OP182416.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: South Carolina
2022­07­24
29718
0
MZ085868.1
B.1.526
USA: New Jersey
2021­04­08
29845
0
MZ579512.1
B.1.1.7
USA
2021­02­24
29817
1
OM322127.1
BA.1.18
USA: FL
2021­12­15
29752
0
OP690644.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: FL
2022­08­29
29718
0
OP738167.1
BQ.1.6
USA
2022­10­02
29734
0
OL715850.1
AY.25.1
USA: California
2021­11­27
29812
3
OR318788.1
B.1
USA
2020­06­17
29821
0
ON239025.1
BA.1.1.18
USA
2022­03­22
29675
2
ON523854.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Ohio
2022­04­29
29724
0
OP319641.1
BA.5.6
USA: California
2022­08­11
29829
0
OQ660838.1
CK.1.3
USA: Michigan
2023­03­06
29621
0
OX845541.1
AY.43
United Kingdom:England
2021­10­17
29810
0
OQ063513.1
BQ.1
USA: Indiana
2022­11­30
29844
0
ON790209.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Connecticut
2022­06­04
29693
0
OP417233.1
BF.10
USA: New Jersey
2022­08­30
29718
0
OP118850.1
BE.3
USA: New York
2022­07­18
29592
0
ON346677.1
BA.2.3
USA: Florida
2022­04­04
29850
0
ON486737.1
AY.26
Mexico
2021­06­30
29831
0
MZ055246.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Minnesota
2021­04­06
29871
9
MZ538151.1
B.1.526
USA: Tennessee
2021­06­13
29772
0
OM038358.1
AY.39.1
USA
2021­12­08
29764
0
MZ069925.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Oklahoma
2021­04­15
29695
0
OP229369.1
BA.4.1
USA: Illinois
2022­08­01
29709
0
ON474085.1
AY.103
USA: Arizona Coconino
2021­12­07
29823
4
ON336505.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Ohio
2022­04­11
29724
0
OM849102.1
BA.1.1
USA: New York
2022­02­14
29795
3
OM854580.1
BA.1.1
USA: Texas
2022­02­15
29802
0
MW863954.1
B.1.340
USA
2020­07­31
29838
0
Continued on next page
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
65
==PAGE:74==
Accession
Pangolin
Geo location
Collection date
Length
Ns
ON487886.1
AY.26
Mexico
2021­09­14
29844
0
MZ496860.1
B.1.2
USA: California Los Angeles County
2020­10­28
29816
0
OP146919.1
BA.4
USA: Louisiana
2022­07­18
29835
0
MZ363091.1
B.1.1.7
USA
2021­05­08
29817
9
MZ028816.1
B.1.1.7
USA: LA
2021­03­26
29848
0
MW969415.1
P.1
USA: New Jersey
2021­03­24
29895
5
OP504469.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: Georgia
2022­09­08
29842
1
OQ113085.1
BQ.1.1
USA: Ohio
2022­12­01
29718
0
ON546205.1
BA.2
USA: Pennsylvania
2022­05­06
29850
0
OP661639.1
BA.4.6
USA: Virginia
2022­09­28
29583
0
ON949827.1
BA.4.4
USA: California
2022­06­27
29575
0
OP148478.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: West Virginia
2022­07­24
29844
0
OM894775.1
BA.1.1
USA: Pennsylvania
2022­02­13
29747
0
ON680164.1
BA.2
USA: Missouri
2022­05­16
29724
0
OP305332.1
BA.2.12.1
USA
2022­07­08
29724
0
OP083515.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: Nevada
2022­07­08
29718
0
ON896064.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: District of Columbia
2022­06­16
29694
0
OP387697.1
BA.5.6
USA: West Virginia
2022­08­25
29721
0
PP223255.1
BA.4.1
USA
2022­06­19
29778
0
ON145547.1
BA.2.9
USA: Illinois
2022­03­25
29763
0
OM292284.1
BA.1.15
USA
2021­12­30
29752
6
OM264316.1
B.1
USA: New Mexico
2020­07­27
29714
9
OM857866.1
AY.6
South Africa
2021­09­29
29763
0
OL923659.1
AY.44
USA: Illinois
2021­11­15
29809
0
ON222208.1
BA.1.1.18
USA
2022­01­16
29747
0
MZ225702.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Maine
2021­04­28
29763
0
ON487684.1
AY.3
Mexico
2021­08­28
29820
0
MZ266551.1
B.1.36.8
India
2020­12­13
29802
0
OQ132316.1
BQ.1.1
USA: Minnesota
2022­12­16
29844
0
OQ205153.1
CK.1.3
USA: California
2022­12­24
29715
0
ON710731.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: North Carolina
2022­05­26
29726
0
ON071502.1
BA.1.1
USA
2022­02­22
29737
0
OP910862.1
XBB.1
USA: Texas
2022­11­10
29805
0
OM039052.1
AY.25.1
USA: Minnesota
2021­11­24
29764
0
PP316867.1
JN.1.6
USA: New York
2024­01­24
29690
0
PP160341.1
BA.1.15
USA
2022­01­05
29814
8
PP127001.1
JN.1.4.2
USA: New York
2023­12­29
29690
0
MT451008.1
B.1
Australia: Victoria
2020­03­16
29812
1
ON017382.1
B.1.1.28
Paraguay
2021­01­31
29838
0
ON318561.1
BA.2.3
USA: MP
2022­03­08
29796
0
OP332694.1
BA.4.6
USA: Virginia
2022­08­14
29678
0
MZ501118.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Alaska Gulf Coast
2021­05­05
29826
0
MZ201610.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Pennsylvania
2021­04­28
29810
0
MZ278227.1
B.1.1.7
USA: SD
2021­05­06
29849
21
OQ524826.1
BA.1
Brazil
2022­01­17
29788
0
PP608822.1
B.1.637
USA
2021­03­24
29733
7
ON005738.1
BA.1.1.18
USA
2022­02­04
29752
9
MZ228387.1
B.1.526
USA: Indiana
2021­04­27
29797
0
OM277435.1
BA.1.20
USA: California Los Angees County
2021­12­22
29684
0
MW638872.1
B.1.2
USA: West Virginia
2021­01­08
29714
0
OP780410.1
BA.5.2
USA: Texas
2022­10­17
29718
0
MW483423.1
B.1.2
USA: CA Orange County
2020­10­18
29813
0
ON695592.1
BA.2
USA: Florida
2022­05­25
29848
0
ON546967.1
BA.2
USA: Michigan
2022­05­09
29848
2
OP706921.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: Rhode Island
2022­10­05
29720
0
ON040291.1
BA.1.1.18
USA
2022­01­15
29762
2
MZ499374.1
B.1.637
USA: West Virginia
2021­05­04
29831
0
ON331418.1
BA.2
USA: Maryland
2022­04­08
29718
0
OP506027.1
BA.5.2
USA: California
2022­09­13
29798
0
ON771555.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Maryland
2022­06­01
29598
0
Continued on next page
66
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:75==
Accession
Pangolin
Geo location
Collection date
Length
Ns
ON143633.1
BA.2
USA: Massachusetts
2022­03­20
29850
0
OQ156661.1
BQ.1.1
USA: Illinois
2022­12­12
29718
0
MZ193846.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Minnesota
2021­04­20
29817
1
OP754120.1
BA.5.2
USA: Washington
2022­10­17
29718
0
ON867815.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: Illinois
2022­06­09
29718
0
ON821551.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Connecticut
2022­06­09
29727
0
OP554022.1
BA.5.2.37
USA: Michigan
2022­09­16
29806
0
ON874846.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Maryland
2022­06­10
29724
0
OM639232.1
BA.1.1
USA: Kansas
2022­01­24
29747
0
OP116999.1
BA.5.1
USA: Illinois
2022­07­10
29718
0
ON463194.1
BA.2.3.4
USA: California
2022­04­22
29724
0
OP767803.1
BF.5
USA
2022­08­21
29739
0
OL750289.1
AY.25
USA: Tennessee
2021­11­16
29813
0
OR309124.1
B.1.399
USA
2020­07­10
29826
0
OP379951.1
BA.5.2.36
Pakistan: Karachi
2022­08­15
29782
0
OM122687.1
BA.1.18
USA: District of Columbia
2021­12­22
29648
0
OL946458.1
AY.25
USA: Minnesota
2021­11­03
29823
0
OX824999.1
BA.1.1
United Kingdom:England
2022­01­13
29788
0
OM261537.1
AY.119
USA: West Virginia
2021­12­27
29805
0
OR302137.1
B.1.1.453
USA
2020­09­02
29822
0
MW796195.1
B.1.1.519
USA: Montana Gallatin County
2021­02­10
29782
5
ON313211.1
BA.1.1
USA
2022­02­09
29780
0
OQ206519.1
BQ.1.1.51
USA: North Carolina
2022­12­30
29687
0
ON336568.1
BA.2
USA: California
2022­04­11
29724
0
OM699465.1
BA.1.1
USA: Georgia
2022­02­01
29873
1
ON480555.1
BA.2
USA: New York
2022­04­24
29824
4
OQ712795.1
BQ.1.1
USA: Oklahoma
2023­03­14
29718
0
ON188552.1
BA.1.1
USA
2022­02­12
29775
0
ON695178.1
BA.2
USA: Florida
2022­05­25
29817
1
MZ213760.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Oregon
2021­04­12
29882
6
OQ265008.1
BQ.1.1
USA: Missouri
2022­12­26
29718
0
OP383466.1
BA.5.1.2
USA: New York
2022­08­17
29625
0
ON447698.1
BA.2.26
USA: Maine
2022­04­14
29724
0
OP397313.1
AY.25
USA
2021­08­18
29870
0
ON690464.1
BA.2
USA: New Mexico
2022­05­13
29724
0
ON761319.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: New Jersey
2022­05­29
29724
0
OA971732.1
B.1.93
United Kingdom:England
2020­03­30
29782
0
MW184010.1
D.2
Australia: Victoria
2020­07­29
29819
0
PP380329.1
BA.5.2.1
China
2022­06­11
29724
0
ON917413.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: Kentucky
2022­06­21
29720
2
OM126629.1
AY.103
USA: Wisconsin
2021­12­16
29809
0
OP670043.1
BQ.1.11
USA: New Jersey
2022­09­27
29687
0
MZ433506.1
P.1.10
USA: Texas
2021­06­07
29777
0
MZ943461.1
B.1.617.2
USA: Illinois
2021­08­02
29740
0
OR858424.1
JN.1
USA: New York
2023­11­09
29721
0
ON195663.1
AY.103
USA
2021­08­19
29711
0
OP438723.1
BA.5.5
USA: North Carolina
2022­08­31
29720
0
OQ183965.1
BF.10
USA: Virginia
2022­09­10
29718
0
ON254257.1
BA.1.1.18
USA: FL
2022­01­31
29684
0
OM455535.1
BA.1.1
USA: California
2022­01­07
29752
0
OQ774814.1
BA.5.5
USA: Michigan
2022­05­24
29718
0
OP416004.1
BA.5.2
USA: Florida
2022­08­26
29718
0
MW904469.1
B.1.526
USA: Pennsylvania
2021­03­15
29817
0
ON291496.1
AY.43
France
2021­08­05
29689
1
MZ444289.1
B.1.2
USA
2020­12­22
29842
0
MW778560.1
P.2
USA: Indiana
2021­02­21
29873
6
OQ587384.1
BQ.1.14
USA
2022­11­22
29658
0
MZ500811.1
B.1.2
USA: West Virginia
2021­01­25
29821
0
ON917781.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: California
2022­06­22
29726
1
MZ287865.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Illinois
2021­05­05
29763
0
Continued on next page
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
67
==PAGE:76==
Accession
Pangolin
Geo location
Collection date
Length
Ns
OK549367.1
B.1.609
Mexico: Baja California Tijuana
2020­12­01
29598
0
OL953770.1
AY.44
USA
2021­11­01
29816
0
PP293145.1
BA.2.12.1
USA
2022­05­20
29792
8
ON657382.1
BA.2.3
USA: West Virginia
2022­05­18
29693
0
MW783139.1
B.1.2
USA: Georgia
2021­03­01
29903
0
ON118944.1
BA.1
USA
2022­01­23
29772
0
OP868988.1
BA.5.1
USA: California
2022­11­03
29718
0
OM927797.1
BA.1.1
USA: Virginia
2022­01­20
29789
0
ON174937.1
BA.1.1
USA: Massachusetts
2022­03­23
29871
1
OP370759.1
BA.5.2.21
USA: Colorado
2022­08­18
29842
0
ON766557.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Florida
2022­05­28
29724
0
OP773494.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: New Jersey
2022­10­10
29718
0
ON132737.1
BA.1.1.18
USA: Colorado
2022­03­17
29770
0
OR040159.1
AY.26
USA
2021­09­03
29769
0
PP253620.1
BA.2.12.1
USA
2022­05­30
29793
0
OP858430.1
BA.5.1.22
USA: Texas
2022­11­01
29718
0
OQ140408.1
BA.5.2.34
USA: Pennsylvania
2022­12­06
29718
0
OP411340.1
BA.4.6
USA: Ohio
2022­08­26
29709
0
MZ896207.1
B.1.617.2
USA: Minnesota
2021­08­09
29813
0
ON440465.1
AY.42
France
2021­07­26
29683
0
OP194703.1
BA.4.1
USA: Colorado
2022­07­22
29709
0
OP721917.1
BA.5.2
USA: New Jersey
2022­10­11
29718
0
PP159717.1
BA.1
USA
2022­01­06
29814
8
ON145137.1
BA.2
USA: Minnesota
2022­03­23
29758
0
ON336424.1
BA.2.3
USA: New York
2022­04­10
29724
0
ON343909.1
B.1.2
USA
2020­12­09
29849
0
ON742982.1
BA.2
USA: New York
2022­06­02
29850
0
OQ204599.1
BQ.1.1.18
USA: Washington
2022­12­26
29666
0
OL729523.1
AY.100
USA: Missouri
2021­11­03
29815
0
MW667004.1
B.1.1.519
USA: Louisiana
2021­01­25
29782
0
MZ144354.1
P.1
USA: California
2021­04­18
29777
0
ON925960.1
AY.3
USA: WI
2021­11­29
29854
0
OP230243.1
BK.1
USA: Illinois
2022­08­01
29718
0
OM564664.1
BA.1
USA: Virginia
2022­01­23
29804
0
OP146956.1
BA.5.2.20
USA: California
2022­07­18
29842
0
ON362565.1
BA.2
USA: Indiana
2022­04­07
29724
0
ON690998.1
BA.2.9
USA: Florida
2022­05­14
29724
0
PP122414.1
B.1.429
USA
2021­02­15
29846
0
OR308319.1
B.1.1
USA
2020­06­24
29818
0
ON656171.1
BA.2
USA: Arizona
2022­05­22
29850
0
ON176464.1
AY.100
USA: Virginia
2022­01­01
29769
0
OX629296.1
BA.1.17.2
United Kingdom:England
2022­01­05
29784
1
ON769425.1
BA.2.18
USA: Illinois
2022­05­25
29693
0
OX654697.1
B.1.177
United Kingdom:England
2020­11­17
29903
0
OL771323.1
B.1.2
USA: Virginia
2020­11­09
29777
0
OL714688.1
AY.103
USA: Colorado
2021­11­04
29787
0
ON286319.1
B.1.1.254
France
2020­04­01
29703
0
OP701768.1
AY.118
USA: Nebraska
2021­09­13
29701
0
MZ908815.1
B.1.2
USA: Arizona Maricopa Co.
2020­12­16
29841
1
OP061921.1
BA.5
USA: North Carolina
2022­07­11
29839
0
ON262367.1
BA.1.1.18
USA: Virginia
2022­01­06
29767
0
OM998470.1
BA.1.1
USA: Florida
2022­02­23
29747
0
MT972276.1
D.2
Australia: Victoria
2020­06­28
29848
0
ON340121.1
B.1.2
USA
2020­12­10
29855
0
ON450961.1
BA.2
USA: Virginia
2022­04­25
29542
1
OL970201.1
AY.103
USA: Missouri
2021­12­06
29813
0
MT831365.1
B.1.1.26
USA: Washington Yakima County
2020­06­08
29872
0
OP607555.1
BA.5.2
USA: California
2022­09­23
29805
1
OR320994.1
BA.1
USA
2022­01­26
29795
3
MW968366.1
B.1.427
USA: Nebraska
2021­03­25
29896
0
Continued on next page
68
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:77==
Accession
Pangolin
Geo location
Collection date
Length
Ns
OX860030.1
BA.1.1
United Kingdom:England
2022­01­10
29783
0
ON068631.1
BA.1.1
USA
2022­02­24
29784
0
OP111773.1
BA.4
USA: California
2022­07­10
29709
0
OQ590299.1
BQ.1.3.2
USA: Illinois
2023­02­13
29715
0
OQ510540.1
BQ.1.9
USA: Kentucky
2023­02­09
29592
10
OL743670.1
AY.44
USA: MT
2021­11­10
29836
0
OL774413.1
AY.26
USA: Orange County CA
2021­10­24
29800
4
OQ274648.1
BQ.1
USA: New York
2023­01­02
29715
0
OP656932.1
BE.1.1
USA: Rhode Island
2022­09­20
29688
0
MZ187956.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Iowa
2021­04­19
29883
6
MT704127.1
B.40
USA: MD
2020­04­04
29901
4
MW184015.1
D.2
Australia: Victoria
2020­07­28
29810
0
PP349020.1
JN.1.4
USA: Pennsylvania
2024­01­29
29721
0
ON316085.1
BA.1.20
USA
2021­12­30
29821
0
OQ347539.1
BQ.1.1
USA: California
2023­01­12
29718
0
OL951102.1
AY.44
USA: Wisconsin
2021­11­08
29810
0
OP092660.1
BF.26
USA: California
2022­07­15
29625
3
MZ217357.1
B.1.1.7
USA: California
2021­04­23
29763
0
OQ113875.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: Illinois
2022­12­04
29718
0
OM854284.1
BA.1.1
USA: Kansas
2022­02­14
29788
0
ON739375.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Illinois
2022­05­23
29724
0
ON274756.1
AY.4
France
2021­12­18
29689
0
OQ314779.1
AY.25
USA: Montana
2021­08­17
29796
0
OP261777.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: California
2022­08­02
29718
0
OL925287.1
AY.44
USA
2021­10­25
29813
1
OL939693.1
AY.20
USA: New York
2021­11­23
29816
1
MW717677.1
B.1.1.7
Finland
2020­12­18
29824
0
MZ034628.1
B.1.637
USA: New Jersey
2021­04­12
29869
9
MZ376886.1
B.1.1.329
USA
2021­01­12
29836
0
ON633811.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Michigan
2022­05­09
29724
0
OP569713.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: Maryland
2022­09­17
29718
0
OL734626.1
AY.3
USA: New Mexico
2021­11­08
29766
0
OP514610.1
BA.5.1.22
USA: Illinois
2022­09­12
29718
0
OM408059.1
BA.1.18
USA: Nevada
2022­01­05
29686
0
OK511320.1
P.1
USA: Texas
2021­06­02
29709
0
OM235714.1
BA.1.1.18
USA: Michigan
2021­12­30
29871
0
OL923741.1
AY.44
USA: Pennsylvania
2021­11­17
29816
0
MZ069021.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Vermont
2021­04­22
29855
0
OM915307.1
BA.1.1.18
USA: New Mexico
2022­02­17
29621
0
MZ153738.1
P.1.10
USA: Florida
2021­04­19
29831
0
MW994104.1
B.1.2
USA: Tennessee
2021­03­14
29869
4
ON824048.1
BA.2
USA: California
2022­06­03
29630
0
PP579829.1
JN.1
USA
2024­02­02
29706
0
OM226011.1
BA.1.1
USA: South Carolina
2021­12­28
29653
0
BS001215.1
B.1.1.7
Japan:Shizuoka west
2021­04­28
29817
0
MZ278216.1
B.1.1.7
USA: SC
2021­05­04
29848
17
OP418822.1
BA.5.6
USA
2022­07­05
29761
0
OP281920.1
BF.28
USA: Ohio
2022­08­04
29625
0
ON764064.1
BA.2.12.1
USA
2022­05­15
29634
0
ON880333.1
BA.4.1
USA: Indiana
2022­06­13
29709
0
OP520222.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: Kentucky
2022­09­12
29657
2
OQ158497.1
BQ.1.1.3
USA: New York
2022­12­19
29624
0
MZ059940.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Florida
2021­04­08
29812
0
OP130322.1
BF.21
USA
2022­07­05
29757
0
OM170058.1
AY.44
USA
2021­12­13
29764
0
OP399219.1
BA.5.5
USA: Michigan
2022­08­25
29842
0
ON851301.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Pennsylvania
2022­06­06
29850
0
ON215592.1
BA.1.1
USA
2022­02­25
29684
0
MZ259841.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Texas
2021­03­12
29877
10
OR655846.1
GJ.1.2
USA: New York
2023­08­24
29721
0
Continued on next page
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
69
==PAGE:78==
Accession
Pangolin
Geo location
Collection date
Length
Ns
OM562736.1
BA.1.18
USA: LA
2022­01­14
29834
3
OP608916.1
BA.5.5
USA: Arkansas
2022­09­22
29704
0
OQ778419.1
BA.5.1.22
USA: Michigan
2022­09­27
29718
0
OR225737.1
HH.1
USA: Texas
2023­06­14
29723
0
OM280200.1
BA.1
USA: North Carolina
2022­01­07
29800
0
OR300551.1
B.1.2
USA
2020­11­10
29818
0
OP472228.1
BA.5.5
USA: Virgina
2022­08­19
29794
5
ON577141.1
P.1.14
Brazil
2021­07­01
29829
0
ON063251.1
BA.1.18
India: New Delhi
2021­12­12
29771
0
OK570943.1
B.1.1.7
USA: FL
2021­07­07
29800
0
OP334726.1
BA.4.1
USA: Virginia
2022­08­17
29642
0
PP615095.1
B.1.2
USA
2021­01­30
29746
0
OP624712.1
BA.5.2
USA: Florida
2022­09­23
29718
0
ON766625.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: California
2022­05­29
29724
0
ON582244.1
AY.43.7
Brazil
2021­11­13
29809
0
OP505306.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: Texas
2022­09­11
29844
0
ON489361.1
BA.2.3
USA: Oregon
2022­04­19
29724
0
OP051705.1
BA.2.12.1
USA
2022­06­27
29749
0
MW702187.1
B.1.427
USA: CA Santa Clara County
2020­12­24
29855
3
MW696643.1
B.1.1.519
USA: Florida
2021­02­16
29782
0
OL727590.1
AY.103
USA: Michigan
2021­11­16
29888
1
ON135680.1
AY.103
USA: New Mexico
2021­12­08
29764
0
OM941406.1
BA.1.1.18
USA: District of Columbia
2022­02­21
29654
0
OP093026.1
BA.5.2
USA: California
2022­07­15
29720
0
ON141170.1
BA.1.1
USA: Ohio
2022­03­20
29793
0
MZ065138.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Texas
2021­04­06
29706
0
MW454726.1
B.1.1.316
USA: Massachusetts
2020­11­14
29903
5
OM930848.1
BA.1.1
USA: Oregon
2022­02­16
29747
0
OQ085294.1
BQ.1.1.51
USA: North Carolina
2022­11­29
29718
0
MZ905718.1
B.1
USA: Arizona Coconino Co.
2020­03­26
29903
5
OP334778.1
BE.1
USA: District of Columbia
2022­08­17
29720
0
OR212097.1
BA.5.2.1
USA
2022­09­10
29659
0
OM356095.1
BA.1.20
USA: Illinois
2021­12­27
29745
0
OP732382.1
BA.5.1.5
USA: Illinois
2022­10­03
29845
0
OP543046.1
BA.4.6
USA: Texas
2022­09­12
29709
0
ON634177.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Texas
2022­05­09
29724
0
OM671145.1
AY.39
USA: Indiana
2022­01­26
29888
0
OM998266.1
BA.1.1
USA: Florida
2022­02­22
29747
0
OP849160.1
BQ.1.1.3
USA: California
2022­11­03
29835
0
MZ579156.1
B.1.526
USA: Pennsylvania Upper Darby
2021­04­26
29893
0
OL933931.1
AY.44
USA: Massachusetts
2021­12­08
29857
0
OQ580630.1
BQ.1.18
USA: Illinois
2023­02­12
29715
0
OP571496.1
BA.5.1.22
USA: South Carolina
2022­09­16
29718
0
OY937818.1
B.1.1.7
United Kingdom:England
2021­01­23
29884
0
MZ187840.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Tennessee
2021­04­23
29884
8
ON578580.1
AY.99.2
Brazil
2021­08­04
29823
0
OQ327144.1
BQ.1.12
USA: California
2023­01­13
29844
0
MW749659.1
B.1.2
USA: Texas
2021­02­25
29779
0
PP184045.1
BA.1.1
USA
2022­01­18
29818
8
ON311351.1
BA.2
USA: Illinois
2022­04­03
29724
0
ON837735.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Arizona
2022­06­12
29694
0
ON728788.1
BA.2.9
USA: Virginia
2022­05­27
29726
0
OQ091141.1
BA.1.1
Mexico
2022­02­20
29818
5
OX589678.1
B.1.177
United Kingdom:England
2020­12­29
29903
0
OM066941.1
AY.75
USA: TN
2021­12­03
29833
0
OL727609.1
AY.103
USA: Minnesota
2021­11­16
29890
0
MT750415.1
B.1.320
USA: CA
2020­05­05
29806
1
ON695214.1
BA.2.3
USA: Illinois
2022­05­25
29841
0
OM466713.1
AY.103
USA
2021­12­08
29815
0
OP394825.1
BE.3
USA
2022­07­09
29695
0
Continued on next page
70
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:79==
Accession
Pangolin
Geo location
Collection date
Length
Ns
OX794227.1
BA.1
United Kingdom:England
2022­01­09
29769
0
MZ228563.1
B.1.526
USA: Florida
2021­04­28
29653
0
PP122203.1
B.1.429
USA
2021­02­02
29845
0
OP367366.1
BA.4.1
USA: South Carolina
2022­08­21
29709
0
MT528237.1
B.1
Italy: Lazio
2020­03­07
29834
0
MZ037243.1
B.1.429
USA: Maryland
2021­04­01
29714
0
OL759459.1
AY.25
USA: Maine
2021­11­10
29816
0
OP090783.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Connecticut
2022­07­09
29727
0
OP350493.1
BF.10
USA: Indiana
2022­08­17
29721
0
OP009561.1
BA.5.5
USA
2022­07­01
29718
2
MW795890.1
B.1.429
USA
2021­01­26
29904
0
OM962513.1
BA.1.1
USA: Connecticut
2022­02­24
29747
0
OR905238.1
B.1.1.192
USA
2020­07­31
29864
0
ON446701.1
AY.98.1
France
2021­12­06
29689
0
OP813580.1
BA.5.2.9
USA: Nevada
2022­10­29
29718
0
OP238340.1
BA.5.1
USA
2022­06­18
29773
1
MZ083180.1
B.1.1.222
USA: New Mexico
2021­04­04
29900
7
OP468305.1
BA.4.6
USA: New Jersey
2022­09­03
29709
0
PP160225.1
BA.1.20
USA
2022­01­05
29813
8
MZ193768.1
B.1.526
USA: Minnesota
2021­04­20
29826
0
PP144439.1
B.1.2
USA
2021­02­08
29845
8
OP111444.1
BA.5.6
USA: Michigan
2022­07­09
29718
0
ON458542.1
BA.2
USA: California
2022­04­18
29724
0
OP370302.1
BE.1.1.2
USA: Georgia
2022­08­16
29811
1
OM161584.1
AY.103
USA: Kansas
2021­12­17
29769
0
MW769718.1
B.1.1.7
Spain
2021­01­13
29818
0
MW913524.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Nevada
2021­03­12
29695
1
OM787564.1
BA.1.1
USA: Texas
2022­02­07
29654
0
MW967067.1
B.1.429
USA: Indiana
2021­03­18
29901
7
OM844329.1
BA.2
Bahrain
2022­02­17
29763
8
ON875501.1
BA.2.12.1
USA
2022­06­09
29767
0
OP295746.1
BA.2.10
India
2022­01­14
29757
0
MW901959.1
B.1.2
USA: West Virginia
2021­03­15
29738
0
OM724664.1
BA.1.15
USA: Arizona
2022­02­02
29718
0
OM199331.1
AY.103
USA: Michigan
2021­12­23
29815
0
ON708564.1
BA.2
USA: North Carolina
2022­05­23
29693
0
PP603078.1
B.1.526
USA
2021­04­27
29772
0
MW731765.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Minnesota
2021­02­08
29796
0
OQ204982.1
BQ.1
USA: California
2022­12­23
29718
0
OM227929.1
BA.1.1
USA: New York
2021­12­30
29653
0
OP126976.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: California
2022­07­15
29724
0
OP708713.1
BQ.1.1.5
USA: Michigan
2022­10­09
29718
0
MZ341630.1
P.1
USA: New York
2021­05­18
29709
0
PP626787.1
B.1.320
USA
2020­04­14
29762
0
OP828314.1
BA.4.6
USA: California
2022­11­04
29583
0
PP225463.1
BE.3
USA
2022­08­25
29674
0
OQ052735.1
BA.1.1
Nigeria
2021­12­11
29779
2
OP731589.1
BA.2.75.2
USA: North Carolina
2022­09­28
29821
0
OQ049475.1
BQ.1.28
USA: California
2022­11­30
29669
0
OM195193.1
BA.1.1
USA: Florida
2021­12­26
29873
0
ON670926.1
AY.39.1.1
New Zealand
2021­08­17
29713
1
ON313428.1
B.1.1.529
USA
2022­02­17
29774
0
OP659661.1
BF.25
USA: New Jersey
2022­09­25
29657
2
MW086903.1
B.1.2
USA: Minnesota
2020­09­16
29855
0
OM628021.1
BA.1.1
USA: South Carolina
2022­01­27
29716
0
ON448962.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: New York
2022­04­18
29727
0
ON295644.1
BA.2
USA: Illinois
2022­04­06
29726
0
OR154677.1
BA.5.6
Mexico
2022­07­22
29753
0
OP448715.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: California
2022­08­30
29844
0
ON193947.1
AY.25
USA
2021­10­07
29702
0
Continued on next page
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
71
==PAGE:80==
Accession
Pangolin
Geo location
Collection date
Length
Ns
OM450231.1
BA.1
USA: New Mexico
2022­01­13
29792
0
MZ434679.1
B.1.2
USA: Louisiana SLIDELL
2021­01­13
29830
0
MW816259.1
B.1.517
USA: Connecticut
2021­03­09
29782
0
MZ068986.1
B.1.526
USA: Vermont
2021­04­22
29841
4
PP205434.1
BA.1.1.2
USA
2022­01­08
29805
8
OQ058733.1
BQ.1.10.1
USA: Florida
2022­11­28
29718
0
ON946164.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: California
2022­06­18
29724
0
ON848020.1
BA.2
USA
2022­05­20
29724
1
MZ012626.1
B.1.1.7
USA: New Jersey
2021­03­27
29846
7
MT946871.1
B.1
USA: Washington
2020­06­20
29833
0
OK193658.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Florida
2021­03­26
29810
0
OQ580015.1
BQ.1.1.32
USA: California
2023­02­09
29715
0
OP816036.1
BA.4.6
USA: Arizona
2022­10­30
29804
0
ON487228.1
AY.26
Mexico
2021­08­22
29745
0
OM120762.1
BA.1
USA: Arizona
2021­12­13
29686
0
OM958274.1
BA.1.1
USA: Kentucky
2022­02­23
29653
0
MW763749.1
B.1.2
USA: Massachusetts
2021­02­25
29782
0
OM225785.1
BA.1.20
USA: California
2021­12­28
29653
0
OL823880.1
AY.39.1
USA: California
2021­12­02
29845
3
ON690830.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Virginia
2022­05­14
29724
0
PP206967.1
BA.1.15
USA
2022­01­03
29793
8
OP737030.1
BA.5.1.5
USA: Hawaii
2022­10­14
29687
0
OL730693.1
AY.25
USA: Texas
2021­11­05
29801
0
OL709132.1
AY.44
USA: Texas
2021­11­13
29769
0
OP360188.1
BA.5.6
USA
2022­08­11
29753
0
OP987714.1
BQ.1.12
USA: California
2022­11­23
29844
0
MZ242664.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Texas
2021­04­30
29707
0
OM935120.1
BA.1
USA: California Los Angees County
2022­01­30
29684
0
OQ187297.1
BQ.1.1
USA: Kansas
2022­12­19
29592
0
ON615418.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Virginia
2022­04­15
29756
0
ON498389.1
BA.2.3
USA: Hawaii
2022­04­28
29727
0
ON295796.1
BA.2
USA: Connecticut
2022­04­06
29727
0
MW993141.1
C.37
USA: New Jersey
2021­03­13
29843
8
ON205471.1
BA.1.1
USA
2022­01­24
29789
0
MZ828178.1
B.1.617.2
USA: FL
2021­07­26
29842
1
MW341809.1
B.1.2
USA: Wisconsin Dane county
2020­10­05
29782
2
OP867149.1
BA.5.2.1
USA: Indiana
2022­10­03
29592
2
OM121022.1
AY.103
USA: Wisconsin
2021­12­13
29767
0
OM903943.1
BA.1.1
USA
2022­02­24
29684
0
OL992423.1
AY.103
USA: Utah
2021­12­06
29767
0
ON735071.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Michigan
2022­05­17
29724
0
OP306217.1
BE.1
USA: Illinois
2022­08­08
29687
0
OP727088.1
AY.122
USA
2021­10­12
29701
0
OQ050494.1
B.1
Nigeria
2020­07­27
29835
0
ON836539.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Rhode Island
2022­06­09
29850
0
MW968313.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Pennsylvania
2021­03­25
29860
7
OY953834.1
B.1.617.2
United Kingdom:England
2021­06­22
29884
2
MW566538.1
B.1.369
USA: NC
2020­08­21
29782
0
OL826140.1
B.1.2
USA: Michigan
2020­11­08
29811
1
MZ342281.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Virginia
2021­05­19
29632
0
OP715260.1
BA.4.6
USA: Virginia
2022­10­14
29634
0
OM194836.1
BA.1.20
USA: Georgia
2021­12­26
29839
0
ON590940.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Florida
2022­05­10
29727
0
OP392891.1
BE.3
USA
2022­08­02
29627
0
MZ363716.1
B.1.2
USA: Illinois
2020­11­02
29797
0
OM767730.1
BA.1.1
USA: Florida
2022­02­02
29873
0
OX600913.1
AD.2
United Kingdom:England
2020­10­12
29903
0
MZ636100.1
B.1.1.518
USA: California Los Angeles County
2021­01­13
29903
0
MZ228425.1
B.1.1.7
USA: Illinois
2021­04­27
29812
0
OL887198.1
AY.103
USA: Illinois
2021­11­17
29816
0
Continued on next page
72
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:81==
Accession
Pangolin
Geo location
Collection date
Length
Ns
MZ233768.1
P.1
USA: Ohio
2021­05­10
29906
0
OL789706.1
AY.62
USA: North Carolina
2021­11­27
29769
0
ON449305.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: New York
2022­04­20
29727
0
ON140122.1
BA.2.9
USA: New Jersey
2022­03­19
29724
0
OK191777.1
B.1.1.7
USA: North Carolina
2021­03­24
29811
0
OP468908.1
BA.5.1.25
USA: Texas
2022­09­04
29718
0
OL785476.1
AY.44
USA: California
2021­11­30
29847
3
OP772009.1
BA.5.2.20
USA: Florida
2022­10­11
29718
0
MW738212.1
B.1.2
USA: CA Orange County
2020­12­15
29806
0
OP970089.1
BQ.1.13
USA: Texas
2022­11­22
29718
0
OP955547.1
BQ.1
USA: District of Columbia
2022­11­26
29720
0
OM962270.1
BA.1.1
USA: Massachusetts
2022­02­22
29747
0
MW583348.1
B.1.1.316
USA: Ohio
2021­01­12
29885
6
BS004741.1
BA.2
Japan:Shizuoka Hamamatsu
2022­05­29
29728
0
ON628560.1
BA.1.1.18
USA
2022­01­02
29747
0
ON253193.1
BA.2.12.1
USA: Rhode Island
2022­04­05
29724
0
OM088679.1
BA.1.1
USA: California
2021­12­22
29786
3
MW484831.1
B.1.298
USA: MD
2021­01­04
29856
0
OM227457.1
BA.1.1
USA: New York
2021­12­29
29621
0
OP858505.1
BQ.1.3.2
USA: Illinois
2022­11­02
29718
0
OP111099.1
BF.8
USA: California
2022­07­08
29718
0
OQ073369.1
BQ.1.1
USA: California
2022­12­07
29681
1
OP982775.1
BQ.1.1
USA: New York
2022­11­18
29718
0
NC_045512.2
B
China
2019­12
29903
0
MN996528.1
B
China: Wuhan
2019­12­30
29891
0
MZ824632.1
B
China
2020­02­09
29902
0
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
73
==PAGE:82==
C
Substitution model selection
Figure C.1: Results from jmodeltest after AIC calculations.
74
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:83==
D
MCC Phylogenetic Tree
0.5
OP051705.1_2022-06-27
OM903943.1_2022-02-24
OP399219.1_2022-08-25
OR225737.1_2023-06-14
MW778560.1_2021-02-21
OP468305.1_2022-09-03
ON188552.1_2022-02-12
OP867149.1_2022-10-03
OP370759.1_2022-08-18
OM927797.1_2022-01-20
ON446701.1_2021-12-06
PP603078.1_2021-04-27
ON498389.1_2022-04-28
OP543046.1_2022-09-12
OM461568.1_2021-07-07
OR154677.1_2022-07-22
MZ579046.1_2021-04-08
PP615095.1_2021-01-30
MZ341630.1_2021-05-18
MZ213760.1_2021-04-12
OQ206519.1_2022-12-30
OP083515.1_2022-07-08
OP182416.1_2022-07-24
ON633811.1_2022-05-09
OR040159.1_2021-09-03
ON739375.1_2022-05-23
OX794227.1_2022-01-09
MW993141.1_2021-03-13
ON848020.1_2022-05-20
ON790209.1_2022-06-04
MZ278227.1_2021-05-06
ON336505.1_2022-04-11
ON656171.1_2022-05-22
ON695592.1_2022-05-25
ON336424.1_2022-04-10
OM854284.1_2022-02-14
MZ444289.1_2020-12-22
OQ132316.1_2022-12-16
ON766625.1_2022-05-29
PP160341.1_2022-01-05
MW969415.1_2021-03-24
OK193658.1_2021-03-26
OM066941.1_2021-12-03
MZ905718.1_2020-03-26
OX654697.1_2020-11-17
OP397313.1_2021-08-18
OQ187297.1_2022-12-19
MZ068986.1_2021-04-22
MZ702699.1_2021-04-07
MW763749.1_2021-02-25
MZ153738.1_2021-04-19
OP715260.1_2022-10-14
ON295796.1_2022-04-06
ON761319.1_2022-05-29
MZ065138.1_2021-04-06
OP608916.1_2022-09-22
MZ069021.1_2021-04-22
OM126629.1_2021-12-16
OM724664.1_2022-02-02
OP061921.1_2022-07-11
OP418822.1_2022-07-05
OP659661.1_2022-09-25
ON336568.1_2022-04-11
OM277435.1_2021-12-22
ON313428.1_2022-02-17
ON343909.1_2020-12-09
OL727590.1_2021-11-16
OM857866.1_2021-09-29
ON766557.1_2022-05-28
MZ579512.1_2021-02-24
MT750415.1_2020-05-05
OM767730.1_2022-02-02
ON262367.1_2022-01-06
OP146956.1_2022-07-18
OP448715.1_2022-08-30
MZ316315.1_2021-05-09
ON487228.1_2021-08-22
MZ059940.1_2021-04-08
OP230243.1_2022-08-01
MZ187956.1_2021-04-19
PP225463.1_2022-08-25
MZ228563.1_2021-04-28
OR480837.1_2023-08-12
OP148478.1_2022-07-24
OL923741.1_2021-11-17
MW913524.1_2021-03-12
ON447698.1_2022-04-14
ON141170.1_2022-03-20
PP579829.1_2024-02-02
OQ073369.1_2022-12-07
ON313211.1_2022-02-09
OM849102.1_2022-02-14
OX589678.1_2020-12-29
OP093026.1_2022-07-15
MW863954.1_2020-07-31
MW783139.1_2021-03-01
ON670926.1_2021-08-17
OM121022.1_2021-12-13
MT946871.1_2020-06-20
ON318561.1_2022-03-08
OM696395.1_2022-02-01
MW796195.1_2021-02-10
OM280200.1_2022-01-07
OM194836.1_2021-12-26
ON239025.1_2022-03-22
OM628021.1_2022-01-27
OL923659.1_2021-11-15
ON331418.1_2022-04-08
PP626787.1_2020-04-14
ON657382.1_2022-05-18
MZ201610.1_2021-04-28
MW696643.1_2021-02-16
OM264316.1_2020-07-27
OK191777.1_2021-03-24
OM038358.1_2021-12-08
OP392891.1_2022-08-02
PP160225.1_2022-01-05
OL881483.1_2021-11-28
OP261777.1_2022-08-02
MW967067.1_2021-03-18
OQ091141.1_2022-02-20
OL939693.1_2021-11-23
ON458542.1_2022-04-18
OL785476.1_2021-11-30
MW086903.1_2020-09-16
OQ265008.1_2022-12-26
OP754120.1_2022-10-17
ON487684.1_2021-08-28
ON489361.1_2022-04-19
OP670043.1_2022-09-27
OP238340.1_2022-06-18
ON590940.1_2022-05-10
OQ590299.1_2023-02-13
ON735071.1_2022-05-17
ON810288.1_2022-01-19
OL887198.1_2021-11-17
OP305332.1_2022-07-08
OP813580.1_2022-10-29
OQ660838.1_2023-03-06
ON145547.1_2022-03-25
MW341809.1_2020-10-05
OM280966.1_2021-12-17
OX860030.1_2022-01-10
ON135680.1_2021-12-08
MZ259841.1_2021-03-12
ON523854.1_2022-04-29
ON143633.1_2022-03-20
PP608822.1_2021-03-24
MW968313.1_2021-03-25
MZ242664.1_2021-04-30
MW904469.1_2021-03-15
OQ052735.1_2021-12-11
OP118850.1_2022-07-18
ON764064.1_2022-05-15
PP206967.1_2022-01-03
ON316085.1_2021-12-30
BS001215.1_2021-04-28
PP127001.1_2023-12-29
ON837735.1_2022-06-12
OQ774814.1_2022-05-24
ON448962.1_2022-04-18
OM122687.1_2021-12-22
OM356095.1_2021-12-27
OQ205153.1_2022-12-24
OP727088.1_2021-10-12
ON291496.1_2021-08-05
OM322127.1_2021-12-15
OP858430.1_2022-11-01
MZ037243.1_2021-04-01
ON132737.1_2022-03-17
PP205434.1_2022-01-08
ON680164.1_2022-05-16
MT704127.1_2020-04-04
OL727609.1_2021-11-16
ON340121.1_2020-12-10
OL863958.1_2021-12-01
OL826140.1_2020-11-08
ON867815.1_2022-06-09
ON710731.1_2022-05-26
MZ500811.1_2021-01-25
MZ342281.1_2021-05-19
ON628560.1_2022-01-02
OM935120.1_2022-01-30
PP159717.1_2022-01-06
ON474085.1_2021-12-07
MZ579156.1_2021-04-26
MW184010.1_2020-07-29
ON728788.1_2022-05-27
MZ896207.1_2021-08-09
OP987714.1_2022-11-23
MW769718.1_2021-01-13
OP116999.1_2022-07-10
OX824999.1_2022-01-13
OM270071.1_2021-12-16
ON690998.1_2022-05-14
ON193947.1_2021-10-07
ON440465.1_2021-07-26
OM199331.1_2021-12-23
OP868988.1_2022-11-03
ON546205.1_2022-05-06
ON205471.1_2022-01-24
OP571496.1_2022-09-16
OM292284.1_2021-12-30
OR308319.1_2020-06-24
OP656932.1_2022-09-20
OP379951.1_2022-08-15
OQ113875.1_2022-12-04
OM844329.1_2022-02-17
OP332694.1_2022-08-14
OM562736.1_2022-01-14
OL823880.1_2021-12-02
OQ204982.1_2022-12-23
OM450231.1_2022-01-13
OP858505.1_2022-11-02
ON286319.1_2020-04-01
OX845541.1_2021-10-17
OP772009.1_2022-10-11
OM246617.1_2021-10-16
MZ434679.1_2021-01-13
ON118944.1_2022-01-23
OP773494.1_2022-10-10
ON946164.1_2022-06-18
OQ524826.1_2022-01-17
ON874846.1_2022-06-10
OM226011.1_2021-12-28
OL951102.1_2021-11-08
OP383466.1_2022-08-17
MW184015.1_2020-07-28
OX629296.1_2022-01-05
OR309124.1_2020-07-10
OA971732.1_2020-03-30
ON582244.1_2021-11-13
OP731589.1_2022-09-28
ON311351.1_2022-04-03
OM962513.1_2022-02-24
ON005738.1_2022-02-04
OP607555.1_2022-09-23
MZ034628.1_2021-04-12
MZ228425.1_2021-04-27
OP009561.1_2022-07-01
OL714688.1_2021-11-04
ON917413.1_2022-06-21
OP514610.1_2022-09-12
ON040291.1_2022-01-15
ON071502.1_2022-02-22
MZ376886.1_2021-01-12
OR864992.1_2023-10-20
OQ778419.1_2022-09-27
ON925960.1_2021-11-29
OR212097.1_2022-09-10
OM962270.1_2022-02-22
ON577141.1_2021-07-01
OM639232.1_2022-01-24
OP319641.1_2022-08-11
OM854580.1_2022-02-15
OQ085294.1_2022-11-29
OP111444.1_2022-07-09
MT451008.1_2020-03-16
ON880333.1_2022-06-13
OP367366.1_2022-08-21
OQ058733.1_2022-11-28
PP253620.1_2022-05-30
MZ085868.1_2021-04-08
OP955547.1_2022-11-26
ON450961.1_2022-04-25
NC_045512.2_2019-12-15
ON254257.1_2022-01-31
OL709132.1_2021-11-13
ON017382.1_2021-01-31
OM455535.1_2022-01-07
MW667004.1_2021-01-25
OP732382.1_2022-10-03
OL869073.1_2021-10-26
ON836539.1_2022-06-09
OP126976.1_2022-07-15
OP624712.1_2022-09-23
OP690644.1_2022-08-29
ON821551.1_2022-06-09
OM894775.1_2022-02-13
OM998266.1_2022-02-22
OL831243.1_2021-12-06
OM161584.1_2021-12-17
OP849160.1_2022-11-03
OQ204599.1_2022-12-26
MW484831.1_2021-01-04
OL789706.1_2021-11-27
PP184045.1_2022-01-18
MT972276.1_2020-06-28
OP350493.1_2022-08-17
ON917781.1_2022-06-22
ON346677.1_2022-04-04
ON690830.1_2022-05-14
OQ113085.1_2022-12-01
OQ510540.1_2023-02-09
ON195663.1_2021-08-19
OP970089.1_2022-11-22
OP394825.1_2022-07-09
OR302137.1_2020-09-02
OP706921.1_2022-10-05
OP738167.1_2022-10-02
MW454726.1_2020-11-14
ON824048.1_2022-06-03
ON634177.1_2022-05-09
OM235714.1_2021-12-30
OM998470.1_2022-02-23
MZ083180.1_2021-04-04
OP416004.1_2022-08-26
ON771199.1_2022-05-31
OR320994.1_2022-01-26
OM466713.1_2021-12-08
MZ433506.1_2021-06-07
OQ712795.1_2023-03-14
OP281920.1_2022-08-04
MW994104.1_2021-03-14
PP316867.1_2024-01-24
OR905238.1_2020-07-31
ON486737.1_2021-06-30
OM958274.1_2022-02-23
OP721917.1_2022-10-11
ON830683.1_2022-06-07
OM225785.1_2021-12-28
MW738212.1_2020-12-15
OP370302.1_2022-08-16
OL729523.1_2021-11-03
ON295644.1_2022-04-06
MZ287865.1_2021-05-05
MZ055246.1_2021-04-06
MZ193846.1_2021-04-20
OP737030.1_2022-10-14
PP380329.1_2022-06-11
MZ266551.1_2020-12-13
OY937818.1_2021-01-23
OL743670.1_2021-11-10
MZ217357.1_2021-04-23
OP661639.1_2022-09-28
OQ314779.1_2021-08-17
OP387697.1_2022-08-25
OM261537.1_2021-12-27
OP708713.1_2022-10-09
MZ228387.1_2021-04-27
OM120762.1_2021-12-13
OP417233.1_2022-08-30
MW731765.1_2021-02-08
OL774413.1_2021-10-24
MW717677.1_2020-12-18
ON578580.1_2021-08-04
MW749659.1_2021-02-25
OQ063513.1_2022-11-30
OP504469.1_2022-09-08
OP910862.1_2022-11-10
OP111099.1_2022-07-08
ON695178.1_2022-05-25
OL715850.1_2021-11-27
ON949827.1_2022-06-27
OM787564.1_2022-02-07
OM170058.1_2021-12-13
OQ084154.1_2021-12-09
OP306217.1_2022-08-08
MW566538.1_2020-08-21
ON484105.1_2021-09-14
OQ587384.1_2022-11-22
PP349020.1_2024-01-29
OP146919.1_2022-07-18
PP293145.1_2022-05-20
ON769425.1_2022-05-25
OM699465.1_2022-02-01
ON690464.1_2022-05-13
MZ187840.1_2021-04-23
OP701768.1_2021-09-13
ON174937.1_2022-03-23
MW702187.1_2020-12-24
OR655846.1_2023-08-24
OL750289.1_2021-11-16
OP229369.1_2022-08-01
ON615418.1_2022-04-15
OP506027.1_2022-09-13
ON546967.1_2022-05-09
MZ363091.1_2021-05-08
MZ233768.1_2021-05-10
OL953770.1_2021-11-01
OM227457.1_2021-12-29
OM941406.1_2022-02-21
OP411340.1_2022-08-26
OQ158497.1_2022-12-19
OM915307.1_2022-02-17
OP982775.1_2022-11-18
ON896064.1_2022-06-16
OP092660.1_2022-07-15
OP816036.1_2022-10-30
ON274756.1_2021-12-18
OK511320.1_2021-06-02
MZ225702.1_2021-04-28
MZ496860.1_2020-10-28
MZ069925.1_2021-04-15
OL970201.1_2021-12-06
ON063251.1_2021-12-12
OK570943.1_2021-07-07
PP223255.1_2022-06-19
OL771323.1_2020-11-09
OP828314.1_2022-11-04
OR858424.1_2023-11-09
ON176464.1_2022-01-01
MZ908815.1_2020-12-16
MW583348.1_2021-01-12
MW968366.1_2021-03-25
OP360188.1_2022-08-11
ON145137.1_2022-03-23
ON487886.1_2021-09-14
ON742982.1_2022-06-02
MZ501118.1_2021-05-05
OR318788.1_2020-06-17
OM227929.1_2021-12-30
OL909285.1_2021-12-06
MZ144354.1_2021-04-18
OQ580015.1_2023-02-09
OM564664.1_2022-01-23
ON486532.1_2021-07-21
MZ193768.1_2021-04-20
OM930848.1_2022-02-16
MZ499374.1_2021-05-04
OP554022.1_2022-09-16
OP090783.1_2022-07-09
OQ156661.1_2022-12-12
MW483423.1_2020-10-18
ON068631.1_2022-02-24
OP334726.1_2022-08-17
OP472228.1_2022-08-19
MZ028816.1_2021-03-26
MT831365.1_2020-06-08
OL925287.1_2021-10-25
MZ012626.1_2021-03-27
MZ363716.1_2020-11-02
ON695214.1_2022-05-25
ON449305.1_2022-04-20
ON480555.1_2022-04-24
ON463194.1_2022-04-22
ON851301.1_2022-06-06
OM408059.1_2022-01-05
MZ828178.1_2021-07-26
OP780410.1_2022-10-17
OM259142.1_2021-12-14
MZ636100.1_2021-01-13
MZ278216.1_2021-05-04
OP130322.1_2022-07-05
MW816259.1_2021-03-09
OM039052.1_2021-11-24
OP520222.1_2022-09-12
OR300551.1_2020-11-10
OM671145.1_2022-01-26
ON362565.1_2022-04-07
OY953834.1_2021-06-22
MW901959.1_2021-03-15
OM889151.1_2022-02-17
ON708564.1_2022-05-23
OP111773.1_2022-07-10
OM195193.1_2021-12-26
ON222208.1_2022-01-16
PP122414.1_2021-02-15
OP569713.1_2022-09-17
OP438723.1_2022-08-31
OP505306.1_2022-09-11
OP468908.1_2022-09-04
MW638872.1_2021-01-08
OQ140408.1_2022-12-06
PP122203.1_2021-02-02
OQ580630.1_2023-02-12
OL931150.1_2021-11-29
MZ824632.1_2020-02-09
OM195703.1_2021-12-28
OL730693.1_2021-11-05
MN996528.1_2019-12-30
OM088679.1_2021-12-22
ON771555.1_2022-06-01
PP144439.1_2021-02-08
OL734626.1_2021-11-08
MT528237.1_2020-03-07
OQ274648.1_2023-01-02
MZ943461.1_2021-08-02
OL992423.1_2021-12-06
ON875501.1_2022-06-09
OX600913.1_2020-10-12
OQ347539.1_2023-01-12
OK549367.1_2020-12-01
OP767803.1_2022-08-21
OL946458.1_2021-11-03
OQ183965.1_2022-09-10
ON215592.1_2022-02-25
OP194703.1_2022-07-22
OQ049475.1_2022-11-30
BS004741.1_2022-05-29
OP334778.1_2022-08-17
OL759459.1_2021-11-10
ON140122.1_2022-03-19
OP295746.1_2022-01-14
ON253193.1_2022-04-05
OQ050494.1_2020-07-27
OQ327144.1_2023-01-13
MW795890.1_2021-01-26
MZ538151.1_2021-06-13
OL933931.1_2021-12-08
Figure D.1: Maximum Clade Credibility tree based on 2 independent BEAST runs of
30M chains, with 500 whole genome SARS­CoV­2 samples. Scale bare represent half
a year. Figure was prepared with FigTree v1.4.4
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
75
==PAGE:84==
E
Observed Mutations in Ancestral
Sequence Reconstruction
Protein
n
Substitutions observed in ancestral sequence reconstruction
M
23
A2V, D3G, G3D, D3H, D3N, T7I, Q19E, F26S, T30I, T30A, W31L, A63T,
A69V, V70F, I76M, I82T, A104V, R107H, H155Y, S173K, S197N, T208I,
D209Y
S
272
F2L, V3G, L5F, S12F, I13S, S13I, Q14H, L18F, T19R, T19I, I19L,
T20N, R21T, P26S, P26L, S50L, F59Y, H66R, A67V, I68T, T73I,
G75V, G75S, T76I, K77T, D80G, V83A, L84I, S94F, T95I, E96Q,
E96D, S98F, S112L, V127F, D138Y, D138H, D142G, G142D, Y145H,
H146N, H146Q, H146L, H146Y, K147E, K147N, W152C, W152R, M153I,
E154K, S155R, F157S, F157L, R158L, R158G, N164K, N164I, P174S,
G181R, G181V, G181E, K182N, Q183E, G184V, N185D, R190K, R190S,
T208M, P209S, I210V, G213E, V213G, L216F, S221L, A222V, V222A,
A222S, D228G, I231T, L242F, H245Y, H245N, Y248D, P251L, G252S,
G252V, D253G, S254Y, G257S, W258L, A262S, A264D, V289I, T307I,
Q314K, V327I, P330S, I332V, D339G, D339H, G339D, R346K, K346R,
R346T, K356T, L368I, S371P, L371S, S371L, S371F, P373S, S373P,
F375S, S375F, T376A, V382L, R403K, D405N, S408R, R408S, K417T,
K417N, N417T, N417K, A419T, N440K, K440N, K444T, K444N, V445H,
V445P, V445A, G446V, G446S, N450D, R452L, L452R, L452Q, L452W,
L455F, L455W, L455S, F456V, N460K, G476S, S477N, N477S, N477K,
T478K, K478T, K478R, N481K, E484Q, E484K, A484E, A484K, E484A,
S486P, F486S, F486V, F490S, R493Q, Q493R, G496S, R498Q, Q498R,
N501T, N501Y, Y501N, H505Y, Y505H, A520S, P521S, T547K, E554K,
E554D, A570D, A570V, T572I, D574Y, V595I, Q613H, D614G, E619Q,
P621S, D627N, S640F, N641S, I651V, H655Y, N658S, Q675H, Q677H,
N679K, P681R, P681H, H681R, A688V, A701V, A701S, S704L, T716I,
T719I, S730F, T732S, T732A, K764N, N764K, P793S, D796Y, P809S,
S813N, A831V, I844V, A845V, A846V, A852S, N856K, T859N, A879S,
A879V, A890V, D936Y, S939F, D950N, D950H, Q954H, Q957R, N969K,
N978S, L981F, S982A, A1020S, T1027I, A1070S, A1070V, Q1071H,
Q1071L, S1074N, N1074S, F1075S, R1091H, V1104L, T1117I, D1118H,
G1124V, P1143L, S1147L, E1150Q, D1153Y, N1158S, H1159Y, D1163Y,
A1174V, V1176F, E1182Q, K1191N, E1195Q, D1199N, E1202Q, E1202G,
G1219V, V1228L, M1229T, M1237I, G1251E, C1253F, P1263L, P1263Q,
V1264L, L1265F, K1266R
Nsp5
22
A7T, G15S, T21A, T21I, L30I, Y37H, I78T, L89F, K90R, P108L, A129V,
H132P, P132H, V157L, M162I, T169S, T196M, L205V, P241S, I259L,
A260V
Orf8
43
L4P, I10V, T11I, A14S, A14V, F16L, S24L, C25Y, Y31F, V32L, P36S,
P36L, C37F, P38S, W45C, A51V, A51S, A51T, R52I, L60F, C61F, V62L,
E64K, E64D, A65S, A65V, A65D, S67F, Y73C, D75N, I76V, Y79C, T87I,
E92K, L95V, S97I, V100L, E106A, E106D, E106Q, V114I, R115C, V117F
76
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:85==
F
MutateX Overview
0
10
20
0
100
200
300
# of substitutions with given effect
Predicted effect
on stability
destabilizing
stabilizing
Protein: nsp5
ACDEFGHIKL
MNPQRSTV
WY
0
100
200
300
Position
Substituted residue
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
ddG
Heatmap with continous values
Protein: nsp5
ACDEFGHIKL
MNPQRSTV
WY
0
100
200
300
Position
Substituted residue
Predicted effect
on stability
destabilizing
neutral
stabilizing
Heatmap with categorical values
Protein: nsp5
MutateX: Overview of protein−wide stability predictions
Figure F.1: Overview MutateX predictions for Nsp5
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
77
==PAGE:86==
0
10
20
0
25
50
75
100
125
# of substitutions with given effect
Predicted effect
on stability
destabilizing
stabilizing
Protein: orf8
ACDEFGHIKL
MNPQRSTV
WY
0
25
50
75
100
125
Position
Substituted residue
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
ddG
Heatmap with continous values
Protein: orf8
ACDEFGHIKL
MNPQRSTV
WY
0
25
50
75
100
125
Position
Substituted residue
Predicted effect
on stability
destabilizing
neutral
stabilizing
Heatmap with categorical values
Protein: orf8
MutateX: Overview of protein−wide stability predictions
Figure F.2: Overview MutateX predictions for Orf8
78
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:87==
0
10
20
0
500
1000
# of substitutions with given effect
Predicted effect
on stability
destabilizing
stabilizing
Protein: S
ACDEFGHIKL
MNPQRSTV
WY
0
500
1000
Position
Substituted residue
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
5
ddG
Heatmap with continous values
Protein: S
ACDEFGHIKL
MNPQRSTV
WY
0
500
1000
Position
Substituted residue
Predicted effect
on stability
destabilizing
neutral
stabilizing
Heatmap with categorical values
Protein: S
MutateX: Overview of protein−wide stability predictions
Figure F.3: Overview MutateX predictions for S
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
79
==PAGE:88==
G
Virus Fitness Landscape
The table was too big to fit on A4. The probability fitness landscape can instead be
found by following this LINK, or with the QR code below.
80
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
==PAGE:89==
Modelling viral fitness landscapes
81
==PAGE:90==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
