==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind
Exploring EV charging pools as a resource for 
grid frequency control
Mathias Botoft Hansen 
DTU Wind-M-0775
June 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0775
June 2024
Project period: 
January 2024- June 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisor(s): 
Mattia Marinelli
Francesso Pastorelli
Mattia Secchi
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Jeppe Arnsdorf Pedersen 
Clever 
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy 
Systems Frederiksborgvej 399
Author: Mathias Botoft Hansen
Title:
Exploring EV Charging pools as a resource for grid 
frequency control
DTU Wind and Energy Systems is a department of the 
Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind and 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities and 
technology for the global and Danish exploitation of 
wind and energy. Research focuses on key technical-
scientific fields, which are central for the development, 
innovation and use of wind energy and provides the 
basis for advanced education.
==PAGE:3==
Aknowledgements
Working on this thesis has been a meaningful and fulfilling experience, in which i have had the
good fortune to receive guidance, advice, sparring, and help from a large group of people.
Therefore, i would like to thank my supervisors at DTU: Mattia Marinelli, Francesso Pastorelli
and Mattia Secchi for their help. Whenever i had a question, needed someone to critique my
directions for the thesis, or help with the minutia of such a large project they were quick to
provide it. I would also like to thank them for the open and pleasant atmosphere we have had at
our meetings, it always felt like a discussion among equals. Furthermore, the work in this thesis
has been supported by the research projects EV4EU (Horizon Europe grant no. 101056765)
and by the research project FLOW (Horizon Europe grant no. 101056730)
I would like to extend a thanks to the team extraordinaire, the ancillary service guys from
Clever, for being such great company and allowing me the flexibility to work on the thesis at
the Clever office. So to Esben, Simon, Johannes, Mads, Andreas and Mikkel a big thanks for
helping me with data, programming and general discussion. A special thanks goes to Jeppe
Pedersen, my supervisor from Clever, who was there for all my stupid questions and ready with
crisp feedback regarding market rules or refining some very rough plots.
I want to give my parents and brothers a tight hug, whom with their patience and interest in
what i have been working on these last five months have kept me going. Your love and help
with the report is always appreciated and never forgotten.
Finally i would extend a tight hug and a huge thank you to my girlfriend Emilie Muff. For the
proofreading, feedback, discussion and love you showed me throughout this whole process. I
would not have made it to the end with the same calm composure, without your help.
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
The electrical grid’s stability has gained an increased focus due to the increased share of renew-
able energy sources in electricity production. This report investigates how electric vehicles, can
be used as a flexible resource to provide ancillary services from the perspective of an electric
vehicle aggregator.
This thesis investigates which Danish ancillary services are suitable for electric vehicles. The
frequency containment reserve - disturbance (FCR-D) Up and automatic Frequency Restoration
Reserve (aFRR) Up and Down services in DK2 are selected after considering the reaction time
requirements, market conditions, and price-setting dynamics. The potential of participating in
these services is analysed with a bidding model developed as a mixed integer program. It aims
to maximise daily profits by considering electricity costs and ancillary service revenues while
allowing for consumption shifting. The model uses real-life hourly aggregated consumption
data from 10,000 domestic charging points supplied by the electric vehicle aggregator Clever.
This is coupled with price data for the ancillary services and electricity costs gathered from
Energinet for 2023. The model is run with perfect foresight regarding prices and it was assumed
that 70% of the consumption could be forecasted and controlled.
The results show that multi-market bidding across all three markets is the most profitable
strategy. The average yearly electrical cost per vehicle in 2023 was 950 to 920 euros, which
decreases as the model’s ability to shift consumption increases. By utilising a multi-market
bidding strategy and selling flexibility in the ancillary service markets the average cost per
vehicle could be decreased by 160 to 210 EUR. The aFRR down market is shown to be the
most profitable single market in 2023. Since the FCR-D Up prices have fallen in 2024 compared
to 2023, the preference for the aFRR Down market will likely continue. To understand the
price developments for the aFRR down market in Denmark when Energinet joins the European
aFRR energy activation framework PICASSO, the German aFRR market is analysed. It shows
that the capacity prices are likely to remain stable, while the energy activation prices could
experience large increases in the short term until the new market dynamics are established.
Furthermore, local grid conditions could enable actors to utilise local flexible capacity to require
high prices for their activation.
These findings must be considered in the light of three limitations:
1 The model optimises each day individually, missing opportunities to plan consumption
for the lowest cost over multiple days.
2 The model does not consider how long individual EVs are plugged in during charging.
Instead, the model uses three arbitrary consumption shifting blocks where consumption
can be shifted within each block (morning, midday, evening), but not between them.
3 The 2023 price data used for FCR-D Up service are significantly higher than the prices
observed in 2024 as of June. Therefore the market outcome and potential profits from
ancillary services are too high if 2024 prices were considered.
i
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Preface and Acknowledgement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Contents
ii
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vi
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Topic Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Introduction to Case Aggregator - Clever . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical Background for Ancillary Services
5
2.1
The Context of Ancillary Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
The Danish Electrical Grid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.2
Types of Ancillary Services
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
How to Differentiate Ancillary Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Ancillary Services Procured in Denmark
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Expected Market Rule Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.3
State of the Art: EVs and Ancillary Services . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Data Collection
16
3.1
Data Gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Data Creation or Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Final Ancillary Service Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4
Bidding Strategies
22
4.1
Input from Literature and Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.2
Purpose of Bidding Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Description of Bidding Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3.1
Model Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.4
Testing Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5
Results and Discussion
32
5.1
Results with Varying tCapacityShift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.1.1
Seasonal Differences
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5.2
Results from Varying tDownShift
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5.3
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.4
Development of aFRR Down in PICASSO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Page ii of 66
==PAGE:6==
5.4.1
PICASSO’s Impact on German aFRR Prices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
6
Conclusion
53
Bibliography
55
A Figures
59
B Full determistic MIP
63
C Results
65
iii
==PAGE:7==
Outline
This section gives a brief explanation of each Chapter in the report.
Chapter 1: Introduction
The importance of having a stable electricity grid is explained in light of more renewable
energy production and uncertainty regarding natural gas in Europe. As a potential source of
grid stability, the flexibility potential of electric vehicles is the main focus of this thesis.
Chapter 2: Theoretical Background for Ancillary Service
Chapter two gives an overview of how the electrical grid’s stability is ensured through ancillary
services. Specifically, it provides an overview of the requirements for providing the different
services. Furthermore, the chapter provides an overview of the current scientific literature on
electric vehicles and ancillary services.
Chapter 3: Data Collection
In Chapter Three, the data collection method is presented.
The chapter is split into two
sections, the first describing the data available and section two describes what calculations are
needed to fill in any missing data points.
Chapter 4: Bidding Strategies
Chapter four describes the bidding model used to analyse the market outcomes for 2023. First,
the literature used as an inspiration for developing the model is presented, then the model itself
and finally the methodology for using it is described.
Chapter 5: Results and Discussion
In chapter five, the results from running the model are shown. This includes the results from:
bidding outcomes depending on charging time flexibility, sensitivity analysis of price data, and
finally an analysis of the aFRR Down market development based on Germany. The results are
presented as they are discussed continuously.
Chapter 6: Conclusion
In chapter six, the overall methodology and results are briefly summarised and concluded before
the recommendations are presented.
iv
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Explanation
EV
Electric vehicle
EAM
Energy Activation Market
DK1
Bidding zone for west Denmark
DK2
Bidding zone for east Denmark
RG
Regional group (an electrical grid area synchronised to the same frequency)
RG-N
Regional group Nordic (DK2, Sweden, Norway and Finland)
RG-CE
Regional group Continental Europe (North Africa to Poland, including DK1)
FCR
Frequency Containment Reserve
aFRR
automated Frequency Restoration Reserve
mFRR
manual Frequency Restoration Reserve
FCR-D
FCR-Disturbance
FCR-N
FCR-Normal
FFR
Fast Frequency Reserve
DA
Day Ahead
EUPHEMIA
Common European DA market optimisation algorithm used to maximise social
welfare
NEMO
Nominated Electricity Market Operators, the actors whom run EUPHEMIA
PICASSO
Framework for European cooperation of aFRR energy activation
AR6
6th Assessment Report on Climate Change
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
DKK
Danish Kroner
MW
Mega Watt (also uses kilo Watt)
MWh
Mega Watt hour (also uses kilo or terra Watt hour)
h
hour
TSO
Transmission System Operator
DSO
Distribution System Operator
V2G
Vehicle to Grid - Chargers allowing EVs to discharge their battery
Dx
Days removed from the operation day. D0 = Operation day, D-1 the day before
D0, and D1 the day after D0
Table 0.0.1: Explanation of the abbreviations used in the report.
v
==PAGE:9==
Nomenclature
The mixed integer problem in this report contains sets, parameters and decision variables which
are described below.
Sets
T D0
Hours during operation day D0,
T D0 = {t1, t2, ..., t24}
(Index)
T D1
Hours available for imbalance
handling in the morning after
the operation day (D0),
T D1 =
{0, 1, .., tIBMax −1}
(Index)
T extend
Hours from 00:00 on D0 until
tIBMax on D1,
T extend = T D0 ∪T D1
(Index)
T DownShift
How many hours after the
current hour t, where
consumption can be sold as
aFRR Down capacity.
T DownShift =
{1, ..., tDownShift}
(Index)
M
Available ancillary service
markets, FCR-D Up, aFRR Up,
and aFRR Down,
M = [FC, aU, aD]
(Index)
Parameters
tCapacityShift
How many hours consumption in hour t can be shifted
forwards and backwards in time.
(Integer number)
tDownShift
How many hours before hour t flexible consumption
can be sold as aFRR Down capacity.
(Integer number)
tIBMax
Latest hour in D1 that can be used to handle
imbalances from the day of operation.
(Integer Number)
sBase
Binary matrix,
sbase
t1,t2 = 1|0 < abs(t1 −t2) ≤tCapacityShift else 0.
If sbase
t1,t2 = 1 then consumption can be shifted from hour
t1 to t2.
(Matrix, shape
|T D0| × |T D0|)
sDown
Binary matrix, where
sDown
t1,t2
= 1|0 < t1 −t2 ≤tDownShift else 0.
If sDown
t1,t2
= 1 is 1, then consumption from hour t2 can
be sold as aFRR Down capacity in hour t1
(Matrix, shape
|T D0| × |T D0|)
maxForecast
big M value used in this report.
maxForecast = 0.7 · max(consumptiont
∀t ∈T D0)
(Matrix, shape
|T D0| × |T D0|)
vi
==PAGE:10==
Decision variables
xbids
xbids
t,m indicates how many minimum bids have been sold
for market ”m” in hour ”t”.
(Integer Matrix, shape
|T D0| × |M|)
xsold
xsold
t,m is how much capacity given in MW has been sold
in market ”m” in hour ”t”.
(Matrix, shape
|T D0| × |M|)
xaDP
xaDP
t1,t2 is how much capacity from hour t2 is allocated to
the aFRR Down market in hour t1.
(Matrix, shape
|T D0| × |T D0|))
capavail
capavail
t
is the available capacity which can be sold
across the three markets in M for each hour t.
(Vector, shape |T D0)
yaDLim
yaDLim
t,n
is 1 if hour t has the highest capavail within the
window allowed for aFRR Down market participation
(Binary Matrix, shape
|T D0| × |T DownShift|))
xshift
xshift
t1,t2 is how much consumption is shifted from hour t1
to t2.
(Matrix, shape
|T D0| × |T D0|))
xIBPlus
xIBPlus
t
is how much excess consumption there is in
hour t.
(Vector, shape |T D0|)
xIBMinus
xIBMinus
t
is how much consumption there is missing
from hour t.
(Vector, shape |T D0|)
xV storPlus
xV storPlus
t
is how much excess consumption there has
not been assigned to an hour by the model at hour t.
(Vector, shape |T D0|)
xV storMinus
xV storMinus
t
is how much missing consumption there has
not been assigned to an hour by the model at hour t.
(Vector, shape |T D0|)
xIBPlusF
xIBPlusF
t
is how much excess consumption the model
chooses to place in hour t from xV storPlus.
(Vector, shape |T D0|)
xIBMinusF
xIBMinusF
t
is how much missing consumption the model
chooses to place in hour t from xV storMinus.
(Vector, shape |T D0|)
vii
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Throughout the last century, humanity has become exponentially more prosperous as the av-
erage productivity has increased[1]. This has been achieved through an exponential growth
in energy consumption[2], which has reduced production costs by replacing manual human
labour and allowed for fast and cheap communication spurring innovation[1]. As productivity
has increased the importance of ensuring a stable energy supply has likewise increased. Heat
for homes, gasoline for transportation, and electricity to power machines have become part of
everyday life in the Western world. People living in the USA or Europe have come to expect
that gasoline is always available and that the light always turns on when the switch is flicked[1].
This stability has relied on the consumption of fossil fuels, which is no longer a viable long-term
strategy as the challenges of climate change have become evident[3]. The 6th Assessment Re-
port from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reaffirmed that mitigation
strategies are required to combat climate change. One of the key pathways the IPCC showcased
is the need to transition towards renewable energy sources and away from fossil fuels [3].
To allow for continued growth in energy consumption while reducing humanity’s dependency on
fossil fuels to combat climate change investment in renewable energy production is needed[4].
The International Energy Agency expects that increases in solar and wind power production
from around five terra Watt hours (TWh) in 2022 to more than 45 TWh by 2050 are required
to reach the net zero emissions goals required by [3]. This must be supported by the decarbon-
isation of other sectors, such as the transportation sector, where the growth of electric vehicles
(EVs) is expected to drive decarbonisation. However, the stability of the electricity supply will
be reduced as the capacity to produce renewable electricity increases. Therefore methods must
be developed which allow power systems to become more flexible, and handle instability drivers
such as changing weather patterns[4].
To investigate how renewable electricity production can be increased, while developing flexible
power systems, Europe is interesting to consider. The European Union has set a CO2 emissions
reduction goal of 55% by 2030, which partly relies on decarbonising its electricity production[5].
Furthermore, the Russian full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 has forced the Euro-
pean Union to rid itself of its dependency on Russian gas. As a response, the European Union
committed to accelerate the green transition through the REPowerEU plan[6]. Thus a massive
expansion of renewable energy production is to be expected. This expansion should lead to
increased grid instability [7].
Page 1 of 66
==PAGE:12==
1.1. RESEARCH TOPIC SELECTION
22-06-2024
The problem of grid instability is compounded by the expected decrease in inertia1, which his-
torically has been provided by coal, gas and oil-driven power plants[8]. With less inertia in the
electrical grid and more expected disturbances, new flexible assets must be employed to ensure
a stable electrical grid in Europe[8].
Figure 1.0.1: A charging EV, Source Clever
Some of these assets must be able to react
quickly to imbalances between supply and de-
mand to counteract the lack of inertia. Mean-
while, other assets must be capable of chang-
ing their consumption or production level
and maintaining that change for long periods
of time to account for disturbances such as
variation in wind speeds or incoming cloud
cover[9].
Electric vehicles are one potential asset, which
can fulfil both of these criteria[10]. In tech-
nical terms, the fast response is referred to
as the primary reserve, while the continuous
change in production level is called the sec-
ondary reserve[9]. These reserves are under the purview of the transmission system operators
(TSOs), who are responsible for the high voltage grids in Europe[11].
1.1
Research Topic Selection
Due to EVs’ ability to provide both primary and secondary reserves, it is interesting to inves-
tigate their flexibility. A search on ”Web of Science” with the words ”Ancillary Services” and
”Electric Vehicles” yielded 825 results, where the majority were published after 2015. The same
search on DTU’s library function Findit yielded 1209 articles published from 1997 to May 2024
with the majority published after 2014. The earliest paper found, which considered EVs, [12]
was published in 2002 and explored the value of utilising battery-driven vehicles when they are
not driving to provide ancillary services. The most cited papers in the Web of Science search
covered topics such as:
- How EVs can be utilised as flexible consumption to handle high capacity for renewable
energy production and the resulting disturbances[13].
- Theoretical considerations of which ancillary services EVs charging and discharging with
vehicle to grid (V2G) technologies can provide [14].
- How different control structures and strategies can be employed by EV aggregators to
optimise charging/discharging with V2G and minimise loads on the distribution grids[15].
1Inertia comes from the momentum of large rotating masses such as turbines, which spin at the same
frequency as the electrical grid. Any imbalances between electricity supply and demand will cause the frequency
to change. This change means that the rotating masses must physically accelerate or slow down, which takes
time and therefore ensures that frequency changes happen slower than they otherwise would.[8]
Page 2 of 66
==PAGE:13==
1.2. INTRODUCTION TO CASE AGGREGATOR - CLEVER
22-06-2024
- Field validation of which ancillary services a series produced EV can provide[10].
- Bidding and control strategies for electric vehicles participating in ancillary services fo-
cusing on revenue maximisation and electricity cost minimisation [16].
There is a prevalent focus on controlling EVs through an aggregator or considering the theo-
retical potential of EV flexibility in the most cited papers. There is a smaller focus on bidding
strategies for the aggregator or analysing real-life data. When extending the search require-
ments on Web of Science to ”Ancillary Services”, ”Electric Vehicles”, ”bidding”, and ”real
life” only the papers [17] and [18] were yielded. Both considered EV flexibility through V2G
chargers and the potential yield from participation in the ancillary service markets. However,
it seems that the topic ”bidding strategies for EVs without V2G” has not been investigated
with real-life data.
Using real consumption data from the EV aggregator Clever this report will investigate how
such an aggregator can act on the ancillary service markets by answering the following research
questions:
1 What is the best strategy for an aggregator to participate in the ancillary service markets
with electric vehicles without V2G?
2 What is the future potential for grid frequency control with electric vehicles without V2G?
1.2
Introduction to Case Aggregator - Clever
The company Clever is one of the largest EV aggregators in Denmark[19], and their mission
statement is ”to further the green transition by enabling people to choose an EV ” [20]. This is
done by investing in a public charging network and providing various charging services. Most of
these services are based on a subscription model, where the customer loans a Keba P30 charger
for domestic use, pays a monthly fee of 799 Danish kroner and charges for free[21]. When such
a customer charges at home, they pay the initial cost of charging through their electricity bill
and Clever reimburses them for the EV consumption every month.
The reimbursement each customer receives is the product of their EV’s electricity consumption
from home charging and an average reimbursement level which is updated monthly.
This
reimbursement level assumes that the customer charges when it is cheapest. Therefore, it is
calculated based on the average cost of electricity during the night from 23:00 until and not
including 06:00 in Denmark[21].
The reimbursement calculation is shown in Equation (1.2.1) with the following variables:
- RI is the reimbursement level given in Euro per Mega Watt hour [euros/MWh]
- The set D is the days in the month considered
- The set T night = (23,0,1,2,3,4,5) is the relevant hours of the night
- CDA
d,t is the day ahead price for electricity in [euros/MWh]
Page 3 of 66
==PAGE:14==
1.2. INTRODUCTION TO CASE AGGREGATOR - CLEVER
22-06-2024
- CNet,Tariff is Energinet’s net tariff [euros/MWh], which covers the cost of using the high
voltage grid.
- ST is the sales tax in Denmark which is 25%
- CElec,Tax is an extra tax for electricity given in [euros/MWh]
- CDSO,Tariff is the average tariff homeowners, must pay the distribution system operators
for being connected to the low voltage grid in [euros/MWh]
Furthermore, in the equation, # means the number of elements in the set, so #T night is 7,
usually.2
RI = (
P
d∈D
P
t∈T night CDA
d,t
#D · #T night
+ CNet,Tariff + CDSO,Tariff) · ST + CElec,Tax
(1.2.1)
As mentioned above, all Clever’s customers have to pay the actual cost of electricity for charging
through their electricity bill. This cost is defined by Equation 1.2.2, where CElectricity
t
is the
cost of electricity per hour t.
CElectricity
t
= (CDA
t
+ CNet,Tariff + CDSO,Tariff
t
) · ST + CElec,Tax
(1.2.2)
Due to the difference between the reimbursement level and the electricity cost customers can
experience that they are either overcompensated or undercompensated compared to their ex-
penses from charging their EV at home. Overcompensation leads to satisfied customers, but
undercompensation is a potential source of customer dissatisfaction and should be avoided.
Furthermore, a select group of Clever customers use Clever as their power company, enabling
Clever to skip the average reimbursement calculation and take on their charging costs directly
[21]. For these customers, Clever has a clear incentive to minimise charging costs from home-
charging, by scheduling charging when the electricity costs are low.
Thus, there is a purpose to minimising electricity costs for both segments of Clever customers.
Clever does this through their intelligent charging service, which schedules home-charging cus-
tomers to charge when there are low CO2 emissions and low electricity prices[22].
Due to
renewable energy’s low marginal electricity costs, it has been shown that attempting to min-
imise CO2 emissions leads to low electricity costs as the cheapest electricity producers are solar
panels and wind turbines[23]. Therefore Clever can prioritise reducing their customers’ elec-
tricity costs while ensuring that they are reducing CO2 emissions. This scheduling must be
considered when utilising the EV flexibility for ancillary services as the economic benefit from
providing these services can be counteracted by the economic loss of having to charge at more
expensive, and more CO2 intensive times.
As mentioned above, Clever loans their customer a charging station for domestic use. This
charging station is the Keba P30 11 kW charger. The Keba P30 is not a V2G charging station,
therefore Clever can only control when and with how much power an EV can charge.
2Except for nights when Denmark changes between summer and winter time.
Page 4 of 66
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background for Ancillary Services
This chapter consists of three sections, which provide the background for how ancillary services
keep the electrical grid stable and how EVs can participate in the ancillary services. The first
section contextualises how ancillary services stabilise the grid in Denmark. The second section
describes which ancillary services that are procured in Denmark. Finally, the third section
highlights some state-of-the-art projects of how EVs can provide ancillary services.
2.1
The Context of Ancillary Services
Electricity differs from other commodities, as the supply and demand must be equal at all
times[24].
This is necessary to avoid blackouts or frequency deviations due to imbalances
between supply and demand. To ensure this equality between supply and demand, a three-step
process is employed to plan the consumption of electricity:
1 The Day Ahead (DA) market provides a rough outline for the electricity demand and sup-
ply in each hour[11]. The DA market auction closes at 12:00 on D-1[25], which is one day
before the day of operations D0. In the DA auction, producers bid their expected hourly
production in MWh and the minimum price they require in euro/MWh. Consumers do
the same but bid their expected consumption and maximum price. After the auction
closes, one of the European Nominated Electricity Market Operators(NEMOs)[26], runs
an algorithm called EUPHEMIA, which clears the electricity market while maximising
social welfare across Europe[27][28]. In Denmark, trading occurs through the power mar-
kets facilitated by the NEMOs Nord Pool or EPEXSpot[26]. At no later than 14:00 on
D-1, the hourly DA electricity prices are published for D0, alongside the prices the market
participants receive their accepted consumption and/or production schedules for D0.[25]
2 The intraday market allows stakeholders to adjust their production or consumption sched-
ule from the DA auction, as forecasts updates or unforeseen events occur[11]. On the in-
traday market, electricity can be sold or bought for each hour[11], where trading happens
continuously from 14:00 on D-1 until 1 hour before the operation hour T on D0[29].
3 Thirdly, when the operation hour T is reached, ancillary services are ready to act on the
realised imbalances between supply and demand[30]. A timeline of when the different
markets and ancillary services are procured will be discussed in Section 2.2.
The NEMOs facilitate the DA and intraday market, but ancillary services are the responsibility
of the TSOs[24].
To understand how the ancillary services are procured, it is relevant to
investigate how the Danish electrical grid is configured.
Page 5 of 66
==PAGE:16==
2.1. THE CONTEXT OF ANCILLARY SERVICES
22-06-2024
2.1.1
The Danish Electrical Grid
The electrical grid in Europe consists of five large synchronous areas: Ireland, The United
Kingdom, the Nordics, Continental Europe and the Baltics[31].
Each synchronous area is
characterised by the frequency, which is the same across the entire grid. The Danish electrical
grid is unique as it is the only European country, where the grid is split between two synchronous
areas: the regional group (RG) Continental Europe and RG Nordic[31]. Therefore, the Danish
TSO Energinet must procure ancillary services in two synchronous areas with very different
behaviours. This split is seen in Figure 2.1.1.
Figure 2.1.1: Map of Denmark, with the two
grid areas DK1 and DK2 shown sourced from [11].
The Eastern part of Denmark is designated as
DK2 and is part of RG Nordic. The Nordic
synchronous area is small, and the high share
of renewable electricity production has meant
that many conventional power plants have
been decommissioned, leading to less iner-
tia. As a result frequency deviations are hap-
pening more often and with larger deviations
above 200 mHz[32]. In response, the Nordic
TSOs have developed a dynamic system of an-
cillary services [24].
The Western part of Denmark from the North
Sea to the Great Belt is designated as DK1
and is part of RG Continental Europe. This
synchronous area is the largest in Europe and
there is a large amount of inertia in the elec-
trical grid. This results in a more stable fre-
quency compared to RG Nordic[32][30]. The
majority of TSOs in RG Continental Europe
have not yet seen the need to develop a scheme of ancillary services which accommodates
flexible production and aggregated portfolios of small-scale units due to its size and inherent
stability.[32]
2.1.2
Types of Ancillary Services
When procuring ancillary services, TSOs focus on ensuring that they can stabilise the electrical
grid through balancing, frequency, and flexibility services[9].
Balancing services focus on securing the adequacy of supply and enabling the TSO to adjust
production or demand levels to match them. Thus, the TSOs must keep a reserve of adjustable
actors in the electricity market, which can be activated if needed. The balancing services also
handle local imbalances and overloading of specific connections in the electrical grid[30].
Frequency services keep the frequency stable by reacting quickly when there are frequency
deviations. In RG Continental Europe and RG Nordic the frequency is kept stable around
50 Hz [33][24]. Traditionally frequency services are split into three types called the primary,
Page 6 of 66
==PAGE:17==
2.1. THE CONTEXT OF ANCILLARY SERVICES
22-06-2024
secondary and tertiary reserve. Energinet, however, uses a different scheme referring to fre-
quency stabilisation, frequency restoration and balancing for the three reserves, respectively
[30]. Throughout this report, the terms used by Energinet will be used. The role of the three
services is to stop developing deviations from 50 Hz and provide the controllable production
or consumption needed to balance supply and demand again. Here frequency stabilisation is
responsible for reacting directly to a change in the frequency and halting the deviation to min-
imise the irregularity. When the frequency deviance has been halted the frequency restoration
serves as a stopgap to keep the frequency stable. Finally, if there is an underlying imbalance
between supply and demand, the balancing reserve can be activated to fix it[34]. This three-
step process is subject to change as renewable electricity is replacing traditional power plants
and the stability provided by their inertia is lost, due to the rotating masses in the generators.
This is prevalent in RG Nordic due to its smaller scale and therefore new frequency stabilisation
services have been introduced[33]. Inside Energinet’s terminology, there is an overlap between
the balancing assets in the ”tertiary” reserve and traditional balancing services, as Energinet
uses the same power production/consumption units for both purposes.
Flexibility services refer to the different issues that can arise at a local level such as voltage
drops, congestion, or reactive power issues[9]. However, the flexibility services are not procured
through a market structure as of May 2024 and will therefore not be considered in this thesis[24].
2.1.3
How to Differentiate Ancillary Services
Due to the difference between their synchronous areas, the frequency and balancing services
in DK1 and DK2 are procured under different market rules[24]. As a way to distinguish the
ancillary services, four things could be considered:
1 Reaction time requirements:
How fast a participant must be able to activate their assets and for how long participants
are required to keep their assets activated.
2 Symmetric or asymmetric markets:
The electrical grid can be imbalanced in two ways. If it is missing electricity, the frequency
will drop below 50 Hz and more electricity must be provided through the ancillary services
in the upwards direction. Alternatively, if there is too much electricity in the grid the
frequency grows above 50 Hz and electricity must be removed by ancillary services in the
downward direction.[30]. In symmetric markets, a participant must be able to deliver
both up and down-regulation, while in asymmetric markets up and down-regulation is
procured separately.
3 Bidding period length:
The bidding period length specifies how long an ancillary service participant must be able
to provide their service. If the bidding period is one hour, participants must provide their
service for that whole hour. If the bidding period is one week, then the participant must
be able to provide the service with the same capacity for the whole week[30].
4 Market payment schemes:
How participants are compensated for providing their service.
Page 7 of 66
==PAGE:18==
2.2. ANCILLARY SERVICES PROCURED IN DENMARK
22-06-2024
All the points above can provide some challenges for EV aggregators:
First and foremost, the EV aggregator must ensure that their EVs can participate in the ancil-
lary service they are considering. This is especially relevant when considering symmetric mar-
kets since the EVs have to handle reaction time requirements in both up and down-regulation.
Internal testing done by Clever on their hardware showed that the EVs Clever control re-
sponds faster to signals that interrupt or lower the power draw of a charging session, compared
to restarting a charging session from standby or increasing the power draw. Thus, for those
ancillary services that require fast and precise reactions, the EVs might not adhere to the re-
quirements, when they have to increase their power consumption to provide down-regulation.
This would make the EVs unable to participate in the symmetric ancillary service markets. As
a note the aggregated EV fleet must be controlled differently depending on whether it must act
in the upwards or downwards direction. For the upward direction, electricity must be released
to the grid. This can be achieved by pausing EVs that are currently charging. In the downward
direction, electricity must be removed from the grid. This can achieved by starting EVs that
are plugged in but not charging because they are expected to charge at some later hour.
Considering the bidding period, the issue is one of consumption scheduling. The capacity for
flexibility Clever can bid is based on when their customers charge their EVs. Since a bidder in
the ancillary service market must supply the same amount of capacity throughout the bidding
period, the lowest capacity for Clever during a bidding period is the amount of capacity they
can sell[24]. Long bidding periods lead to less sold capacity and lower profits. A potential
solution is to schedule the expected consumption of EVs through the DA and intraday markets
to increase the minimum capacity. For example, if the forecast for a four-hour service period is
[6 MW, 10 MW, 10 MW, 10 MW], rescheduling 1 MW from each of the three later hours to the
first-hour results in an expected charging level of [9 MW, 9 MW, 9 MW, 9 MW]. This increases
the capacity available for the service period from 6 MW to 9 MW. However, such rescheduling
creates a conflict between customer satisfaction, electricity prices, and the market value of the
ancillary service. This balancing of factors will be explored in more detail in section 4.1.
As a final consideration, the ancillary services markets can be considered through a comparison
of their payment schemes, where Energinet uses two different ones: In ”pay as bid” markets
all bidders set their price and they receive this price if selected. The alternative is ”pay as
cleared” or ”marginal pricing”, where bidders set a minimum price for their service, but all
bidders are paid the minimum price of the most expensive bid required to fulfil Energinet’s
needs.[30]. Generally, marginal pricing is seen as preferable for flexible assets with near zero
marginal costs such as EVs, since they can allow themselves to be price takers and benefit from
other assets to set market prices at which they will earn a profit[35].
2.2
Ancillary Services Procured in Denmark
An overview of all ancillary services procured by Energinet in Denmark split between DK1 and
DK2 is shown in Table 2.2.1. There is a total of eight different types. Four of these serve
to stabilise the frequency, where the Frequency Containment Reserve (FCR) is the only one
in DK1. In DK2 the Fast Frequency Reserve (FFR), FCR - Disturbance (FCR-D) and FCR-
Normal (FCR-N) serve the same purpose of frequency stabilisation. For frequency restoration
Page 8 of 66
==PAGE:19==
2.2. ANCILLARY SERVICES PROCURED IN DENMARK
22-06-2024
Energinet procures automated Frequency Restoration Reserves (aFRR) in both DK1 and DK2,
however, the market demands are different between the two bidding areas. This is the same
case for the balancing service, the manual Frequency Restoration Reserve (mFRR). The general
difference between DK1 and DK2 is that the markets in DK2 are stricter in terms of reaction
time demands, which is shown in the ”Activation demands” and ”Deactivation demands” rows
in Table 2.2.1. However other criteria such as the bidding period length and the minimum bid
size in MWs are stricter in DK1, which is shown in the relevant rows at the top of Table 2.2.2.
Frequency Stabilisation:
Typically the frequency stabilisation markets have been investigated for EV flexibility purposes
in the literature in articles such as [36], [9], and [37], due to the strict reaction time requirements
which batteries usually can adhere to.
Of the four frequency stabilisation markets available in Denmark, Clever sees the FCR-D mar-
ket as the most suitable for EV flexibility. The FCR-D market in DK2 is asymmetrical[24],
meaning that an EV aggregator can choose to only participate in the FCR-D upwards market,
where EVs have to lower or interrupt a charging session when activated. This is preferable as
internal testing at Clever has shown that EVs response times are the fastest in this direction.
Furthermore, the minimum bid size is 0.1 MW, the bidding period is one hour and the capacity
auction is marginally priced. The primary drawback is that EVs will be categorised as static
assets since they cannot be deactivated in the same pattern as the activation pattern. The
distinction between static and dynamic can be seen in Table 2.2.1. The static categorisation
can limit the amount of capacity EV aggregators can sell in the FCR-D upwards market as En-
erginet only allows up to 50% static assets in the activation pool at all times[38]. Furthermore,
the FCR-D market is procured by Energinet through an early and late auction. The largest
capacity volumes are procured in the early auction with stable prices, while the later auction
has seen larger volatility in the prices with small procured volumes in the 20-50 MW range.
This small volume can lead to instances of paradoxical bidding, meaning that the cheapest bids
are not always accepted to maximise social welfare. An example could be if Energinet needs 20
MW FCR-D Up capacity and three actors participate: Actor one bids 5 MW at 10 euros/MW,
actor two bids 10 MW at 15 euros/MW and actor three bids 20 MW at 30 euros/MW as one
block. In this case, Energinet will choose actor three’s bid since there is not enough capacity
in the alternative bids with the lower price to fulfil Energinet’s demands.
The FFR market in DK2 is not an available market for EVs, as testing at Clever has shown
that EVs cannot adhere to the reaction time requirements. The FCR and FCR-N markets are
both semi-suitable for EVs. In both markets, EVs can adhere to the market requirements, but
there are specific disadvantages that make the markets less attractive for EV aggregators. Both
markets are symmetric, but the reaction time requirements are slower compared to the FCR-D
market allowing EVs to participate. The FCR-N market’s disadvantage is that the activation
rate is high compared to FCR-D, in Table 2.2.1 the FCR-D market has 8500 hours with an
activation rate of less than 10 % compared to only 1700 hours in the FCR-N market[32]. Thus
participation in the FCR-N market leads to significantly more disturbances to charging EVs
which could affect the customer experience.
For the FCR market in DK1 the disadvantage is the long bidding period of four hours and the
Page 9 of 66
==PAGE:20==
2.2. ANCILLARY SERVICES PROCURED IN DENMARK
22-06-2024
minimum bid size of one MW. The minimum bid size means that capacity can only be sold in
fulfilled chunks of one MW, meaning that if an aggregator had 2.9 MW available it can only
sell two MW. When coupling this with the long bidding period in the FCR market, the market
rules limit how much capacity can be sold and thus the potential profits in the FCR markets.
It is however the only frequency stabilisation market available in DK1 and should therefore be
considered to utilise flexibility in DK1.
Frequency Restoration:
Energinet procures frequency restoration through the aFRR market in both DK1 and DK2.
The main difference between aFRR and the frequency stabilisation markets is the expected
activation rate and the activation length. As the ”Activation rate” rows in Table 2.2.1 show,
the aFRR markets have more hours with an activation rate above 10% compared to FCR, FFR
and FCR-D. Therefore actors participating in the aFRR markets receive compensation for the
energy they provide when activated on top of the payment from the capacity market. This
energy activation price is defined by the tender and calculated by Energinet, which reimburses
the market participants after the day of operation[24]. In DK2, the aFRR market is asymmetric,
procured daily with a bidding period of 1 hour, marginally priced, and has a reaction time
requirement of 5 minutes[24]. This market is quite interesting for EV aggregators as the yearly
average capacity prices in 2023 are 35 euros/MW and 23 euros/MW for the down and upwards
directions respectively[39]. The aFRR market in DK1 on the other hand is symmetric, pay-
as-bid priced, with week-long bidding periods and ramping constraints of up to 15 minutes.
However, market participation is well paid with capacity prices at 113 [euros/MW], which
corresponds to 56.5 [euros/MW] in each direction. Due to the week-long bidding periods, the
aFRR market in DK1 is less interesting than the market in DK2, despite the high prices.
Balancing:
In their overview of which technologies are suited for the different ancillary services markets,
Energinet considers that the mFRR markets are not suited for EVs[32]. They prefer that assets
slower than EVs should participate in this market
Both the mFRR market in DK1 and DK2 have 15-minute reaction time requirements and only
capacity in the upward activation direction is procured. In the subsequent energy activation
market, both upward and downward bids can be accepted.
The capacity is procured with
hourly bidding periods in DK1, with DK2 having both an auction for hourly and monthly
bidding periods. The average price in the mFRR capacity market is 4.3 and 18.7 euros/MW
for upwards capacity in DK1 and DK2 respectively[39] and thus lower than the aFRR markets
in both DK1 and DK2.
2.2.1
Expected Market Rule Changes
In Energinet’s report ”Outlook for Ancillary Services”, they highlight their expected changes to
the current market rules for ancillary services. This includes changes to the aFRR market due
to Energinet’s entry in the European aFRR cooperation framework PICASSO by the fourth
quarter (Q4) of 2024 [40][41], and the mFRR market due to Energinet’s entry to the European
mFRR cooperation framework MARI. For this thesis, the PICASSO framework is of interest as
it changes the rules for the EV-suitable aFRR markets. The PICASSO framework establishes a
Page 10 of 66
==PAGE:21==
2.2. ANCILLARY SERVICES PROCURED IN DENMARK
22-06-2024
Table 2.2.1: Overview of ancillary services procured in DK1 and DK2 [[24],[32], [43], [44], [45]]
DK1
DK2
FCR
aFRR
mFRR
FFR
FCR- D
FCR-N
aFRR
mFRR
Function
Frequency
stabilisation
Frequency
restoration
Balancing
Frequency
stabilisation
Frequency stabilisation
Frequency
stabilisation
Frequency
restoration
Balancing
Technical specifications
Activation
ramping
demands
React ≤2s
50% ≤15s
100% ≤30s
100% ≤15
min
100% ≤15
min
100% ≤0.7s
or
100% ≤1.0s
or
100% ≤1.3s
React ≤2.0s
86% ≤7.5s
Deliver energy =
3.2s · Ptarget ≤7.5s
63% ≤60.0s
95%
≤
180.0s
100%
≤
5
min
daily:
100% ≤15
min
monthly:
100%
≤90
min
Deactivation
ramping
demands
Same as acti-
vation
-
-
-
Dynamic : Deactivate like
activate
Static : Deactivate within 15 min
-
-
-
Droop
± 20 to 200
mHz around
50 Hz
-
-
100%
acti-
vation
at
set
frequency
1.3s →49.7Hz
1.0s →49.6Hz
0.7s →49.5Hz
Up: droop from 49.9 to 49.5
Hz
Down: Droop from 50.1 to
50.5 Hz
± 0 to 100
mHz around
50Hz
-
-
How
acti-
vated
Droop based
on
bidders’
frequency
measure-
ment
Energinet
activation
through
Scada
con-
nection
Energinet
activation
via
manual
request
Full
reac-
tion
based
on
bidders
frequency
measure-
ment
Droop based on bidders
frequency measurement
Droop based
on
bidders’
frequency
measure-
ment
Energinet
activation
through
Scada
con-
nection
Energinet
activation
through
manual
re-
quest
Activation
rate
≤
10%
in
2022[hours]
8100
1800
2800
8700
8500
1700
2900
3950
Activation rate ≤
10% in 2022[%]
92%
21%
32%
99%
97%
19%
33%
45%
FCR = Frequency Containment Reserve, aFRR = automatic Frequency Restoration Reserve, mFRR = manual Frequency Restoration Reserve,
FFR = Fast Frequency Reserve, FCR-D = Frequency Containment Reserve - Disturbance, FCR-N = FCR-Normal
Page 11 of 66
==PAGE:22==
2.2. ANCILLARY SERVICES PROCURED IN DENMARK
22-06-2024
Table 2.2.2: Overview of ancillary services procured in DK1 and DK2 - Continued
FCR
aFRR
mFRR
FFR
FCR- D
FCR-N
aFRR
mFRR
monthly/daily
Market specifications
Min bid size
1 MW
1 MW
5 MW
0.3 MW
0.1 MW
0.1 MW
1 MW
5 / 1 MW
Max bid size
-
50 MW
50 MW
-
-
-
50 MW
100/ 50MW
Market size
123 MW
100 MW
300 MW
0-45 MW
624 MW Up
318 MW Down
258 MW
Varies
600 MW
60% / 40%
Bidding
period
4 hours. 00-
04, 04-08 etc
1 Week, from
Friday 0000
capacity
1
hour
EAM 15 min
1 hour
1 hour
1 hour
capacity
1
hour
capacity
1
month
/
1
hour,
EAM
15 min
How
pro-
cured?
Down
and
Upregulation
symmetri-
cally
Down
and
Upregulation
symmetri-
cally
Upregulation
only
Upregulation
only
Down and Upregulation
asymmetrically
Down
and
Upregulation
symmetri-
cally
Down
and
Upregulation
asymmetri-
cally
Upregulation
only
Auction
deadline
d(-1) 0800
w(-1)
Wednes-
day 1000
d(-1) 0730
d(-1) 1500
d(-1) 0030 (early auction)
d(-1) 1800 (late auction)
d(-1)
0030
(early) d(-1)
1800 (late)
d(-1) 0730
m(-1) on the
25th 1000
d(-1) 0730
Capacity
market
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Capacity
payment
Marginal
price
Pay as bid
Marginal
price
Marginal
price
Marginal price 1
Pay as bid
Marginal
price
Marginal
price
Energy activa-
tion market
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Energy activa-
tion payment
-
DA price ±
100
DKK
MWh or
regulating
power price
Regulating
power price
-
-
Regulating
power
price
2
Regulating
power price
Regulating
power price
EV practical
Semi
Semi
No
No
Yes
Semi
Semi
No
1As per February 2024 [45]
2Energy from FCR-N Upward i MWh settled as Upward regulating power price, likewise Downward settled with Downward.
Page 12 of 66
==PAGE:23==
2.2. ANCILLARY SERVICES PROCURED IN DENMARK
22-06-2024
common trans-European platform for an aFRR energy activation market (EAM). The purpose
behind this trans-European EAM is to increase social welfare by allowing European TSOs to
activate cheap flexible electricity in other countries to account for imbalances in their national
power systems[42].
To make the aFRR markets compatible with the PICASSO framework Energinet will change
the market requirements in the following way:
1 A pay-as-bid priced EAM market will be introduced for both DK1 and DK2.
2 The capacity market in DK1 will be made asymmetrical.
3 The capacity market in DK1 will change from pay-as-bid pricing to marginal pricing.
4 The bidding period in DK1 will change to one hour and the auctions will be held daily.
Therefore the auction closure time will be moved to 07:30 like the aFRR market in DK2.
5 The reaction time requirement in DK1 will be lowered to five minutes.
With these changes, the aFRR markets in DK1 and DK2 will operate under the same rules,
and the aFRR market in DK1 should become very interesting for EV aggregators.
Figure 2.2.1: Timeline of market closure time for the Danish electricity and ancillary services
markets. Notice how most capacity bids have to be made without knowledge of the day ahead prices.
Thus, actors relying on the day ahead price as a price indicator must use on forecasting[24][29][25].
Furthermore, the introduction of the EAM could have implications for how EV aggregators
choose to place their bids, due to the timeline of the auctions. In Figure 2.2.1 the auction clo-
sures for the different markets under the current and coming PICASSO rules are shown. These
closure times can be found in the row ”Auction deadline” in Table 2.2.2. When considering
the bidding strategy, there are opportunity costs associated with choosing to participate in one
market instead of another. Therefore aggregators will have to design systems that consider the
value of bidding with the current information or waiting for improved forecasts.
Generally, ancillary service auctions are held before the DA auction, to ensure that ancillary
service capacity is available for all hours of the day[24]. This means that an EV aggregator must
Page 13 of 66
==PAGE:24==
2.3. STATE OF THE ART: EVS AND ANCILLARY SERVICES
22-06-2024
make a scheduling decision based on a forecast of DA prices and prices for the ancillary service
capacity markets. However, this is not the case for the aFRR EAM market introduced with
PICASSO as the auction closure time for this market is 25 minutes before the operation hour
begins[41]. Therefore, EV aggregators could choose to only participate in the EAM market
to reduce their dependence on forecasting ancillary service market prices or participate in the
EAM market with potential extra flexibility, which has not been included in the forecast.
2.3
State of the Art: EVs and Ancillary Services
Throughout the scientific literature, EVs have been considered for use in ancillary services.
Most articles focus on two main areas: showcasing the potential of EVs in ancillary services
through bidding strategies and simulations, or validating whether EVs can perform various
ancillary services using a small number of individual cars. This section will highlight some
examples from the literature and discuss the current strategy used by Clever.
Clever: As an EV aggregator Clever is in the FCR-D upwards ancillary service market[46].
When bidding in the ancillary service market, Clever bids their expected consumption based
on the consumption schedule created by Clever’s Intelligent Charging. Therefore, participation
in the ancillary service market is a secondary objective in Clever’s strategy as the primary
purpose is to minimise the electricity costs and CO2-emissions. Technically, Clever activates
cars by interrupting and pausing charging sessions. This means that cars charge at full power
when there is no activation and the power consumption from their aggregated vehicles can be
sold as flexible capacity.
Symmetric ancillary services in the Pacific Northwest: [16] Showed poten-
tial earnings from providing ancillary services in a symmetric market based on the US Pacific
Northwest. They presented three strategies focused on reducing the cost of electricity, charging
when the load on the grid was low, or maximising the revenue gained from ancillary services.
Furthermore, [16] showed that EV aggregators could maximise their profits from ancillary
services, while the average electricity costs saw minor increases from 0.084 to 0.09 $/kWh.
They also showcased that due to forecasting errors and uncertainties, simpler strategies can be
preferable to more sophisticated strategies, which rely on uncertain forecasts.
FCR-N in DK2: [37] Investigated how potential V2G chargers could be used to provide
FCR-N in DK2. Based on real-life driving data and an optimisation model, it was showcased
that the average earnings in 2019 would be 1194 euros per EV. The optimisation model max-
imised profits by participating in the FCR-N market, selling electricity at high prices, and
buying at low prices. These earnings could be increased to 1528 euros by scheduling the EVs
optimally so that the hourly bidding periods in the FCR-N market could be matched. The bid-
ding strategy assumed that EVs would be active at all times when plugged in either providing
the FCR-N service, selling, or buying electricity.
Overnight flexibility in Italy: [47] Analyses how profitable it is for EVs to provide
an ancillary service equal to aFRR during the night. The article showed that compared to
minimising electricity costs it is possible to earn revenue from the aFRR markets equal to 0.3%
to 30% of the electricity costs. The expected savings were larger when including the option of
Page 14 of 66
==PAGE:25==
2.3. STATE OF THE ART: EVS AND ANCILLARY SERVICES
22-06-2024
V2G or when the charging point considered was non-domestic as the potential aFRR earnings
increase when more power can be charged. They also showcased that taxes and tariffs on the
electricity price have a non-negligible impact on the optimisation.
Parker Project: [48] tested FCR-N participation with V2G chargers using the CHADEMO
plug, which is a Japanese plug type that is fading in use in Europe[49]. The tests were conducted
at Frederiksberg Forsyning in DK2 and showed average yearly earnings of 1860 euros/year per
car with the worst and best case being -955 and 2304 euros/year respectively.
This study
verified V2G functionality for the following cars Nissan Leaf, Nissan Evalia, Peugeot iOn and
Mitsubishi Outlander PHEV with reaction times through an aggregator of 5-6 seconds. Gen-
erally, the report found that the value system and market for V2G implementation is ready,
but the business case is not certain and there is no clear indication that customers are ready to
adopt V2G technology. Furthermore [49] showed that V2G ancillary services can be delivered
without damaging the lifetime of the battery.
Summary:
There are several cases where EVs providing FCR services have been modelled such as [16] or
verified under market conditions such as [48]. [47] showed the potential value of participating
in the aFRR markets. There has not been a case studying the potential earnings from multi-
market bidding with EVs, however, [33] showed the potential economic benefits from multi-
market bidding using a battery[33] for the frequency stabilisation markets. The further work
in this report will explore the potential for multi-market bidding for an EV aggregator. Due to
disclosed tests and data analysis performed by Clever and recommendations by Energinet[30]
the FCR, FCR-D upwards and aFRR markets will be considered for the analysis. Since the
ancillary services are separated between DK1 and DK2 the market options are FCR and aFRR
in DK1 and FCR-D Up, aFRR Up, and aFRR Down for DK2.
Page 15 of 66
==PAGE:26==
Chapter 3
Data Collection
This section consists of two parts. The first part describes the data gathering done in this
report. The second part covers the data validation and explains how missing data has been
replaced to analyse the five selected ancillary services. Table C.0.2 in Appendix C summarises
this chapter and shows all the data sources while providing a brief description of the validation
needed for the different sources.
3.1
Data Gathering
To analyse multi-market bidding for an EV aggregator, a bidding model can be used like in [33].
This bidding model will require information on expected EV consumption, electricity costs, and
prices for ancillary services. To supply this the following data has been gathered:
EV consumption:
The consumption of 10000 domestic charging points aggregated in MWh per hour for one
unknown sample year has been provided by Clever. These 10000 charging points are owned
by customers who have been active customers throughout the whole year. Furthermore, they
represent a mix of customers using intelligent charging and those who do not. The charging
pattern is presented in Figure 3.1.1 as a boxen plot of the hourly consumption for each of the
24 hours in the day. The boxes drawn for each hour represent the distribution of consumption
observations for that hour.
The widest innermost box contains approximately 50% of the
observations with the median being drawn as the middle line. From this median of the entire
sample, each subsequent smaller plot is drawn until the median of the remaining sub-sample.
For example for hour 0, the median is 11.5 MWh, while the medians of the lower and upper sub-
sample of the dataset are the edges of the widest middlebox at 8.5 and 15.6 MWh. Subsequently,
the median of the observations smaller than 8.5 MWh is 6.7 MWh and the second widest box
truncates here.
Analysing the trend in Figure 3.1.1 the consumption peaks at night, when the prices and
especially the tariffs are lower. The observed maximum for all hours was 30.67 MWh. A weekly
example of the consumption from Sunday to Sunday and a boxplot of the daily averages can
be seen in the appendix on Figures A.0.1 and A.0.2, respectively. The total consumption for
the sample year is 38.2 GWh or 3.82 MWh per charging point. Assuming that driving one km
requires 0.2 kWh’s it corresponds to an average of 19100 km driven per customer.
Ancillary service capacity prices:
The capacity prices for the aFRR, FCR-D Up, and FCR markets have been gathered from
Page 16 of 66
==PAGE:27==
3.1. DATA GATHERING
22-06-2024
Figure 3.1.1: Boxenplot of aggregated hourly consumption for one year from 10000 domestic
charging points used as a baseload for this report. Notice the large peak just after midnight and the
general lows from 08:00 to 11:00 and 17:00 to 20:00.
Energinet through Energi Data Service or the aFRR in DK1 website. The prices are available
in euros/MW on an hourly basis, except for the aFRR market in DK1 which has weekly prices
given as an average euros/MW and the FCR-D where the data is averages of pay as bid market
results until February 2024. The prices have been gathered for 2023 for use in the bidding
strategy.
Ancillary service EAM prices:
The energy activation prices for the aFRR markets are not published by Energinet. Instead,
they are specified in the tender [24], and therefore these prices are calculated based on the DA
electricity price and the regulating power prices. The calculation is shown in Section 3.2.
aFRR activated capacity:
To calculate the average activation rate for the aFRR markets, the activated capacity in each
hour for DK1 and DK2 in both activation directions is gathered. This data is available on an
hourly basis through Energi Data Service and is gathered for 2023.
DA electricity costs:
The DA electricity costs are publicly available for DK1 and DK2 on an hourly basis through
Energi Data Service. The data is gathered for 2023.
Tariffs and electricity taxes:
The TSO level tariff is set by Energinet and is found through them. The DSO level tariff and
the electricity tax are supplied by Clever. All the tariffs are sourced from 2023.
Regulating power price:
When imbalances occur in the electrical grid the cost of handling these imbalances must be
paid by the responsible actor[30]. The prices these actors face are the regulating power prices,
Page 17 of 66
==PAGE:28==
3.2. DATA CREATION OR VALIDATION
22-06-2024
which can be subdivided into the specific prices for each imbalance direction. These prices are
required for modelling imbalances caused by aFRR activation and for calculating the aFRR
EAM price. They are available in euros/MWh on an hourly basis and gathered for the year
2023.
German aFRR price data:
The German aFRR capacity and energy activation prices have been gathered through [50] from
the 1st of January 2022 until the 24th of May 2024. The purpose of this data is for analysing the
impact of the PICASSO market on the German prices to understand the potential implications
for the Danish markets.
3.2
Data Creation or Validation
To create all the data required for the bidding strategy, some calculations or validation of data
is required.
Electricity Prices:
The first calculation is for the electricity prices. The electricity price is calculated for both DK1
and DK2 as described in equation 1.2.2. The 2023 DA prices CDA
t
are sourced from Energi Data
Service as described above, with average hourly spot prices at 86.82 and 81.25 euros/MWh for
DK1 and DK2, respectively. The CDSO,Tariff is an average of Danish DSO C-level tariffs, which
changes monthly but the average value is 42.42 euros/MWh. Energinet’s Net Tariff is 17.44
euros/MWh based on Clever’s calculation, while the sales tax in Denmark is 25%. Thus the
average hourly electricity prices facing the customer in 2023 are 285.3 and 278.4 euros/MWh
for DK1 and DK2 respectively.
Energy Activation Prices:
The energy activation price for both DK1 and DK2 was calculated based on the formula specified
in the ancillary services tender [24]. For DK1 the calculations are:
P EAM−Up = max(CDA + 100DKK
MW , Upward Regulating Power Price )
(3.2.1)
P EAM−Down = min(CDA −100DKK
MW , Downward Regulating Power Price )
(3.2.2)
where P EAM−Up and P EAM−Down are the hourly price for energy activation for the aFRR Up
and aFRR Down market, respectively. CDA is the DA cost of electricity and the upwards and
downwards Regulating Power Price is gathered from Energi Data Service. The DK2 calculation
is the same without the ± 100 DKK/MW. Example prices for the sixth week in 2023 are shown
in Figure A.0.3 in Appendix A. Due to the calculation P EAM−Up ≥CDA and P EAM−Down ≤
CDA. This ensures that the owner of the aFRR asset does not incur an economic loss due to
being activated. In DK1, the bonus of 100 DKK/MW further ensures that the asset owner can
generate a profit from being activated.
FCR-D Capacity prices:
The capacity prices for the FCR-D Up market are sourced by Energinet, but before February
2024, all the prices are averages of the previous pay-as-bid market instead of the current and
Page 18 of 66
==PAGE:29==
3.2. DATA CREATION OR VALIDATION
22-06-2024
Figure 3.2.1: Comparison of FCR-D Up capacity prices and bought capacity volume from
February through May in the years 2022 (light green), 2023 (brown) and 2024 (dark green). The
capacity bought is the sum of both the early and late auctions, and the price is the average cost per
MW capacity across both auctions. The average price in the capacity markets is 34.09, 46.15 and
17.95 euros for 2022, 2023 and 2024 respectively.
future marginally priced market[51].
To avoid changing market dynamics in the data, the
average price for the FCR-D Up market for 2023 is used. To verify this choice, a comparison
of the market size and prices for the FCR-D Up markets is shown with daily averages for 2022,
2023, and 2024 in Figure 3.2.1. On the left plot, the y-axis shows the sold capacity in MW.
The size of the markets is very similar between 2023 and 2024 in Figure 3.2.1 and much larger
than the 30 MWh maximum from the consumption data. The right plot shows the capacity
prices on the y-axis in euros/MW. In this figure, the 2024 prices are lower by a factor of 2 to
3 compared to previous years. For the three years visualised the 2023 prices are the highest,
despite this they will be used in this report, but the choice will be evaluated in a sensitivity
analysis.
Activation rates:
The activation rates for the two aFRR markets had to be calculated for both the upward and
downward directions. This was done as described in Table C.0.2 by the calculation ”activation
rate = activated capacity / procured capacity”, which results in activation rates which are the
same for whole hours. In reality, aFRR EAM participants might have to adapt their power
production or consumption level multiple times during one hour. However, there is no data
with a higher resolution than one hour available for aFRR activation rates and therefore this
simplification is used as a placeholder. In DK1 the average activation rate is 22.7% and 11%
for down and upwards regulation, respectively. For DK2 they are 13.5% and 11.4% for down
and upwards regulation, respectively. The hourly activation rates are shown as boxenplot in
Figure A.0.4, in Appendix A.
Page 19 of 66
==PAGE:30==
3.3. FINAL ANCILLARY SERVICE SELECTION
22-06-2024
3.3
Final Ancillary Service Selection
With the data gathered it is possible to compare the market size and prices for the FCR, FCR-
D Up, and aFRR ancillary services, which is done in Table 3.3.1. In DK1, the aFRR market
is four times larger than the FCR market at 100 MW against 25 MW in the FCR market,
furthermore, the aFRR prices in DK1 are nearly 10 times higher compared to the FCR market.
In DK2, the capacity market prices range from 40.8 euros in the FCR-D Up late auction to 23.9
euros for the aFRR Up markets. When considering both the capacity and energy activation
markets, the average aFRR earnings per MW increase to 34.7 euros/MW for aFRR Up and
44.9 euros/MW for aFRR Down. Thus the prices for the ancillary service markets are very
similar in DK2.
DK1
DK2
Market
FCR
aFRR
Up
aFRR
Down
FCR-D
Up Early
FCR-D
Up Late
aFRR
Up
aFRR
Down
Capacity pro-
cured
[MW]
25
100∗
100∗
489.9 ∗∗
90.6 ∗∗
175.2 ∗∗
139.5∗∗
Capacity
price
[euros/MW]
12.8
113.0∗
113.0∗
36.8
40.8
23.9
35.5
Energy
acti-
vation price
[euros/MWh]
-
111.1
65.2
-
-
94.8
69.6
Activation
rate
[%]
-
11.0
22.7
-
-
11.4
13.5
Table 3.3.1: Hourly average market characteristics for selected∗ancillary services in 2023. The FCR
and FCR-D are frequency stabilisation markets, while the aFRR is frequency restoration markets.
∗The procured capacity for aFRR in DK1 is the same due to the current symmetric market.
∗∗The procurement levels for the aFRR markets in DK2 are not the full Nordic market, but the
amount procured at the same prices as DK2.
Instead of considering the yearly averages an example of hourly procured capacity and capacity
prices for week 6 in 2023 is shown in Figure 3.3.1(a) and Figure 3.3.1(b). Regarding the procured
capacity Figure 3.3.1(a) shows that the FCR and aFRR markets in DK1 have the same market
size for all hours. This is in contrast to the fluctuating markets in DK2. Notably, there is
no procured aFRR capacity in DK2 from 01:00 to 04:00, the period where EV consumption
is the highest as shown in Figure 3.1.1. Thus, the EV aggregator must shift EV consumption
to other hours to participate in the aFRR markets with the majority of their consumption.
Furthermore, FCR-D Up late auction has small market sizes which could be problematic to
model due to paradoxical bidding.
The capacity prices in Figure 3.3.1(b) show that the aFRR prices for DK2 vary from around
20 euros/MW to peak above 80 euros/MW. The FCR and FCR-D late auction vary less, while
the FCR-D early action is very steady, and the aFRR prices in DK1 are the same for the whole
week due to the weekly bidding period.
Page 20 of 66
==PAGE:31==
3.3. FINAL ANCILLARY SERVICE SELECTION
22-06-2024
(a) Bought Capacity for the ancillary services during
week 6 in February 2023
(b) Capacity Prices for the ancillary services during
week 6 in February 2023
Figure 3.3.1: Overview of hourly bought capacity in MW and the capacity prices in euros/MW for
the ancillary services FCR-D Up, FCR, and aFRR Up and Down in both DK1 and DK2. The full
lines are markets in DK2 and the dashed lines are markets in DK1. Notice that the aFRR markets
in DK2 are inactive from 01:00 until 05:00 at night and that the aFRR markets in DK1 are
symmetric meaning they plot on top of each other.
When comparing the price volatility and market size dynamics between the available markets
in DK1 and DK2 it is clear that the DK2 markets are more competitive. An analysis of multi-
market bidding in DK1 seems uninteresting since the aFRR market should be preferred for
most if not all hours. This is due to the limiting market rules mentioned in Section 2.2, and
the 10-factor difference between prices. Following the implementation of PICASSO, this topic
could be revisited.
Thus, only the DK2 markets are relevant to analyse the value of multi-market bidding. Here
the FCR-D Up late auction could be problematic due to the possibility of paradoxical bids,
which are hard to model. To simplify the analysis only the FCR-D Up early auction and the
aFRR markets will be considered for future work in this report.
Page 21 of 66
==PAGE:32==
Chapter 4
Bidding Strategies
In this chapter, the bidding model and its five different strategies are presented and discussed.
This includes the literature which was used to design the bidding model, and the model’s
upsides and downsides. Finally, the testing methodology for using the model will be described.
4.1
Input from Literature and Considerations
Based on the cases presented in Section 2.3 it was decided to investigate the economic potential
that multi-market bidding with EVs has. The paper [33] found an upper limit for the value
of multi-market bidding for a battery in the Nordic frequency stabilisation markets based on
price data from 2017 to 2021 using a bidding strategy with perfect foresight. Furthermore, [33]
assumed that all bids placed were accepted. Using a similar approach in this work means that
EV aggregators seeking to replicate the bidding strategy require forecasting for all the data
points used as input in the bidding strategy with 100% accuracy. As forecasting improves it
might become more feasible to achieve earnings close to this upper limit. To provide a more
realistic assessment of the potential earnings it will be assumed that the bidding model has
perfect foresight regarding electricity cost and ancillary service prices, but that its consumption
forecast can only accurately describe 70% of the consumption. Furthermore, the assumption
that all bids are accepted is reasonable as the largest hourly consumption for the dataset was
30 MW and the FCR-D Up early auction and aFRR markets are a factor of 10 larger (see table
2.2.2).
Regarding the bidding model, [52] proposed a mixed integer problem (MIP) which considered
bidding in the frequency regulation markets and electricity cost minimisation across one day
through a single-stage algorithm. This approach, where the model maximises the objective
function, which is a sum of the negative electricity costs and the positive ancillary service
earnings, will be utilised in the bidding model in this report.
To ensure that the daily charging requirements for all 10,000 customers in the consumption
data are met all deviations to the scheduled consumption plan resulting from aFRR activation
will be handled as imbalances modelled based on [53]. [53] proposed a multistage model for
renewable energy producers bidding in the DA market considering the potential earnings from
renewables. In the model, a method for clearing imbalances in single price conditions like DK1
and DK2[54] is used. Single price conditions refer to having a single imbalance price used to pay
all imbalances. This means that actors which have an imbalance in the opposite direction of
the grid’s imbalance can earn a profit, and such an imbalance is called a positive imbalance[54].
Page 22 of 66
==PAGE:33==
4.2. PURPOSE OF BIDDING MODEL
22-06-2024
An example could be an EV aggregator, which consumes two MWh more than planned through
the DA and intraday markets in a given hour t. The EV aggregator has to purchase the two
MWh at the imbalance market price. If there is excess power in the system for hour t, the
imbalance price for the two MWh will be cheaper than the price in the DA market. Due to
the model’s perfect foresight, it can choose to always handle imbalances in hours where it is
possible to generate positive imbalances. This is unrealistic but will be used as an alternative
way of modelling the potential profits an aggregator can gain from the intraday market.
Finally, one of the cases from Section 2.3 [47] showed the potential for minimising electricity
costs by scheduling when EVs could charge. Therefore the bidding model will be allowed to
shift the forecasted consumption, eg.
the aforementioned 70% of the baseload supplied by
Clever, to optimise both ancillary service revenue and the electricity cost.
4.2
Purpose of Bidding Model
The purpose of the bidding strategy is to minimise the cost of purchasing electricity for EV
charging while maximising the profits from participating in the ancillary service markets. To
carry out this optimisation the model can shift forecasted consumption from one hour to an-
other.
The bidding Model is made to be adjusted based on four input parameters, which
are:
1 tCapacityShift is the maximum number of hours forecasted consumption from hour t can be
moved. If tCapacityShift = 1 then consumption planned for 12:00 can be shifted to 11:00 or
13:00. To ensure that consumption is not shifted to an hour, where it is unlikely that the
same EV is plugged in, 3 shifting blocks have been introduced. These blocks are from 00:00
to 07:00, 08:00 to 15:00 and 16:00 to 23:00. Within one block consumption can be shifted
to all hours allowed by tCapacityShift, but it will be impossible to shift consumption between
blocks. The parameter essentially models over how long periods the EV aggregator can
plan their customer’s consumption.
2 tDownShift is the number of hours between when an EV is plugged in and when it starts
charging that can be used for aFRR Down bidding. If tDownShift = 2 then aFRR capacity in
hour t can be sold based on how much power the cars are expected to charge within hour
t+1 and t+2. The parameter essentially sets the maximum amount of hours a plugged-in
EV could be waiting before starting to charge, and therefore provide flexibility in the
aFRR Down market.
3 tIBMax is how many hours from the next day can be used to handle imbalances created by
aFRR activation. If tIBMax = 6, then the six hours from 00:00 until 05:00 of the following
day (D1) can be used to handle imbalances.
4 MaxBids is a three-element vector describing the maximum capacity in MW the model can
bid in the FCR-D Up, aFRR Up, and aFRR Down markets for each hour. If MaxBids =
[0, 1000, 1000] then the model cannot bid in the FCR-D Up market, but both aFRR
markets are available since the maximum hourly consumption is 30 MWh. Thus this
vector is used to regulate which markets are active.
Page 23 of 66
==PAGE:34==
4.3. DESCRIPTION OF BIDDING MODEL
22-06-2024
By changing the MaxBids vector, five different market combinations can be created which are:
1 Base: Only minimising electricity costs, and not allowing the model to participate in any
ancillary services.
2 Base+FCR-D Up: Minimising electricity costs and selling capacity in the FCR-D Up
market.
3 Base+aFRR Up: Minimising electricity costs and selling capacity in the aFRR Up market
4 Base+aFRR Down: Minimising electricity costs and selling capacity in the aFRR Down
market.
5 Combined: Minimising electricity costs and selling capacity in all 3 markets.
All five market combinations will be analysed to investigate what the cost of electricity is
and how much profit can be gained from ancillary service participation.
Furthermore, the
parameters tCapacityShift and tDownShift are varied for all five market combinations to analyse
the impact of different operating conditions on the bidding outcome.
4.3
Description of Bidding Model
The strategy itself revolves around maximising the daily profit which is defined by the objective
function:
Max(Profit) = RCap + REAM −RElec + RIB
(4.3.1)
Where the 4 components to be maximised are:
1) The revenue from selling flexible capacity in the daily auctions:
RCap =
X
t∈T D0
X
m∈M
xsold
t,m · pcap
t,m
(4.3.2)
where xsold
t,m is the amount of capacity in MW sold in hour t in market m. This is multiplied
with pcap
t,m the price for capacity in that ancillary service market defined in euros/MW. Finally, t
is attached to the set of hours in a day T = {1, 2, .., 24} and m is attached to the set of available
markets M = {FC, aU, aD} which are the FCR-D Up, aFRR Up and aFRR Down ancillary
services.
2) The revenue from being activated in the energy activation market for the aFRR services is
REAM =
X
t∈T D0
(xsold
t,aU · actaU
t
· pEAM
t,aU + xsold
t,aD · actaD
t
· pEAM
t,aD )
(4.3.3)
where actaD
t
is the hourly activation rate defined as the ratio of the bought capacity which is
activated in the aFRR Down market for hour t. The variable actaU
t
is the same for aFRR Up,
pEAM
t,m
is the price for selling energy in the energy activation market given in euros/MWh.
3) The cost of buying electricity for the customer is defined by
RElec =
X
t1∈T D0
CElec
t1
· (ct1 +
X
t2∈T D0
−sbase
t1,t2 · xshift
t1,t2 + sbase
t2,t1 · xshift
t2,t1 )
(4.3.4)
Page 24 of 66
==PAGE:35==
4.3. DESCRIPTION OF BIDDING MODEL
22-06-2024
where CElec
t1
is the cost for electricity in hour t1 given in euros/MWh, while ct1 is the expected
consumption in hour t1. The second sum defines how much electricity consumption has been
shifted from or to hour t by the xshift
t1,t2 variable. This variable is always positive and contains
how much electricity consumption has been shifted from hour t1 to hour t2.
The parameter sbase
t1,t2 is binary and decided by sbase
t1,t2 = 1|0 < abs(t1 −t2) ≤tCapacityShift else 0.
Essentially if sbase
t1,t2 is 1 then consumption can be shifted from hour t1 to hour t2 and if sbase
t1,t2 = 0
then consumption cannot be shifted. Thus the elements inside the parenthesis can be under-
stood as the electricity in MWhs bought on the day ahead market in hour t.
4) The revenue from handling imbalances created by aFRR activation is defined by
RIB =
X
t∈T extend
xIBPlus
t
· pIBPlus
t
−xIBMinus · pIBMinus
t
(4.3.5)
where T extend is the 24 hours in D0 plus the hours in D1 from midnight until and not including
tIBMax. xIBPlus is the amount of excess power in hour t compared to the bought quantity in the
DA market, while xIBMinus is the amount of deficit power. pIBPlus and pIBMinus is the cost of
balancing energy in the excess or deficit direction, respectively. aFRR Up activations produces
a deficit of electricity, while aFRR Down produces an excess. These differences are summarised
hourly.
The objective function described in equation 4.3.1 is limited by the set of constraints shown in
Equations 4.3.6 to 4.3.33. They enable the model to shift the expected consumption, limit the
amount of capacity sold in the different capacity markets and ensure that all imbalances from
aFRR activation must be assigned to an hour.
For each ancillary service market there is a minimum bid size and bid resolution specified in
the tender for ancillary services [24]. The xsold variable is enforced to adhere to the minimum
bid sizes by setting it equal to the integer variable xbids multiplied by the minimum bid size for
each market.
xbids
t,m · minBidSizem = xsold
t,m
∀t ∈T D0, m ∈M
(4.3.6)
Then the capacity sold in each market m is constrained by the size of that market in hour t for
all hours of D0,
xsold
t,m ≤marketSizet,m
∀t ∈T D0, m ∈M
(4.3.7)
It is also constrained by the Maxbids vector to enable the shift between the five market com-
binations:
xsold
t,m ≤MaxBidsm
∀t ∈T D0, m ∈M
(4.3.8)
The sum of capacity sold in hour t for the three markets cannot exceed the planned power
consumption capavail
t
in that hour. However, capacity sold in the aFRR Down market is special
as it requires a knowledge of consumption in the following hours.
This is represented by
allocating capacity from hour t1 to a selling hour t2 using the xaDAlloc
t1,t2
variable representing how
much electricity consumption is allocated from hour t1 to be sold in hour t2 where t2 < t1.
xsold
t1,FC + xsold
t1,aU +
X
t2∈T D0
sDown
t1,t2
· xaDAlloc
t1,t2
≤capavail
t1
∀t1 ∈T D0
(4.3.9)
Page 25 of 66
==PAGE:36==
4.3. DESCRIPTION OF BIDDING MODEL
22-06-2024
sDown
t1,t2
is a binary parameter which is 1 if electricity can be allocated from hour t1 to be sold in
hour t2. It is governed by this formulation sDown
t1,t2
= 1|0 < t1 −t2 ≤tDownShift else 0. Thus the
constraint above ensures that the capacity allocated from each hour is limited by the expected
electricity consumption in that hour.
The capacity allocated by the xaDAlloc
t2,t1
variable must be connected to xsold
t1,aD. This is done by
setting the amount of aFRR Down capacity sold in hour t1 by the xsold
t1,aD variable equal to the
allocated capacity xaDAlloc
t2,t1
to hour t1 from subsequent hours t2.
xsold
t1,aD =
X
t2∈T D0
sDown
t2,t1
· xaDAlloc
t2,t1
∀t1 ∈T D0
(4.3.10)
Since the capacity sold in the aFRR Down market is constrained by the available capacity
from subsequent hours a constraint is introduced to limit the xsold
t1,aD variable to the maximum
available consumption capavail
t2
within the tDownShift window. This window is defined by the
hours t2 which are part of the following set t2 ∈[t1 + 1; t1 + tDownShift]. The idea is that EVs
which are expected to charge at hour t + tDownShift, will be plugged in but on standby in the
hours from t to t + tDownShift. This constraint is only introduced when tDownShift > 0 else the
bidding model becomes unfeasible, and it is written below in a non-linear form.
xsold
t1,FC + xsold
t1,aU + xsold
t1,aD ≤max(capavail
t2
∀t2 ∈[t1 + 1; t1 + tDownShift])
∀t1 ∈T D0
To allow the MIP to utilise this constraint it must be linearised, which is done using a big M
approach. The big M approach consists of establishing several constraints, where only one of
them should be influencing the model at any time. This is achieved by including the product
of a big value often called M and a binary variable in all the equations. This product ensures
that the inequality is always true for all but one of the constraints in which the binary variable
is one.
The big M value used in this model is called maxForecast and it is the maximum hourly
consumption from the baseline.
The binary variable yaDLim
t,n
is introduced and it is one if
capavail
t2
in hour t2 = t + n is the maximum value of capavail within the tDownShift window for
hour t. The binary variable is created for all hours t ∈T D0 and n ∈T DownShift, where the set
T DownShift = {1, .., tDownShift}. The yaDLim
t,n
variable is activated by the constraint below, which
states that the xsold
t,aD variable for the aFRR Down market cannot be larger than zero, except
when at least one of the binary yaDLim
t,n
variables is equal to 1.
xsold
t,aD ≤0 + maxForecast ·
X
n∈T DownShift
yaDLim
t,n
∀t ∈T D0
(4.3.11)
Furthermore, there can only be one of the binary yaDLim
t,n
variables which each equal to 1 for all
hours.
X
n∈T DownShift
yaDLim
t,n
≤1
∀t ∈T D0
(4.3.12)
This allows for the constraint below, which is not limiting except for the hour t2, where capavail
t2
is the highest within the bidding window since the overall maximisation will attempt to allow
Page 26 of 66
==PAGE:37==
4.3. DESCRIPTION OF BIDDING MODEL
22-06-2024
the highest amount of sold capacity when possible. The xsold
t,FC and xsold
t,aU variables are already
constrained from equation 4.3.9 therefore the increase in available capacity can only be utilised
by the xsold
t,aD variable.
xsold
t1,FC + xsold
t1,aU + xsold
t1,aD ≤capavail
t2
+ maxForecast · (1 −yaDLim
t1,(t2−t1))
∀t1 ∈T D0, t2 ∈{t1 + 1; min(hoursInDay, t1 + tDownShift)}
(4.3.13)
The capavail variable is the sum of 70% of the baseload in hour t and the sum of consumption
shifting to and from hour t.
capavail
t1
= 70% · (ct1 +
X
t2∈T D0
−sbase
t1,t2 · xshift
t1,t2 + sbase
t2,t1 · xshift
t2,t1 )
∀t1 ∈T D0
(4.3.14)
Essentially the capavail calculation above is the same equation as the RElec formulation in (4.3.4).
The difference is that the model can only control the forecasted consumption and therefore only
70% of the baseload ct1 is included.
The amount of electricity consumption which can be shifted away from the hour t is limited by
the forecast for that hour.
X
t2∈T D0
sbase
t1,t2 · xshift
t1,t2 ≤70% · ct1
∀t1 ∈T D0
(4.3.15)
Furthermore, capavail
t
must be constrained so that the model does not place all consumption
in the cheapest hour.
Therefore capavail
t
must be constrained by the maximum forecasted
consumption in the hours t2 that hour t1 can shift consumption with.
capavail
t1
≤max(70% · ct1, sBase
t1,t2 · 70% · ct2
∀t2 ∈T D0)
∀t1 ∈T D0
(4.3.16)
With the constraints from Equation 4.3.6 to 4.3.16 specified above, the model can minimise
electricity costs, bid in the ancillary service markets, and shift consumption while considering
capacity and energy activation prices. To include imbalances the next set of constraints must
be included.
The imbalances must be handled with regard to both excess and deficit power. These imbalances
are named in reference to the bought consumption in the DA market. Excess imbalances refer
to having bought more electricity than is consumed in the DA market and deficit imbalances
are the opposite. The only source of imbalances is the activation of aFRR. For example, assume
that one MW aFRR Up capacity has been sold at 19:00, where the activation rate is 10%. This
results in two deviations from the DA consumption:
First, there is excess electricity equal to 0.1 MWh at 19:00, since some EVs have been paused.
This deviation is not seen as an imbalance as the aFRR activation is accounted for in the
eventual imbalance settlement calculation. Secondly, the remaining 0.1 MWh must be charged
during some later hour resulting in deficit power. The deviations from aFRR Down activation
are the same but with deficit power in the hour where capacity has been sold and excess power
Page 27 of 66
==PAGE:38==
4.3. DESCRIPTION OF BIDDING MODEL
22-06-2024
to be handled as an imbalance at some later hour. It is assumed that all imbalances that result
from activation in hour t, can be handled in the interval from t+1 until tIBMax in D+1.
The imbalances are modelled using a storage (st−1 and st), production (pt) and withdrawal
(wt) constraint like st−1 + pt −wt = st. The variables xV StorPlus and xV StorMinus are the storage
variables, which track the amount of imbalance which has yet to be handled in a given hour.
The production of imbalances is represented by xsold · act and the withdrawal from the storage
is represented by the xIBPlusF and xIBMinusF variables.
xsold
(t−1),aD · actD
t−1 + xV StorPlus
t−1
−xIBPlusF
t
= xV StorPlus
t
∀t ∈(1 + T D0)
(4.3.17)
xsold
(t−1),aU · actU
t−1 + xV StorMinus
t−1
−xIBMinusF
t
= xV StorMinus
t
∀t ∈(1 + T D0)
(4.3.18)
During D+1, there is no new production, so the constraints are simply
xV StorPlus
t−1
−xIBPlusF
t
= xV StorPlus
t
∀t ∈T D1 \ 1
(4.3.19)
xV StorMinus
t−1
−xIBMinusF
t
= xV StorMinus
t
∀t ∈T D1 \ 1
(4.3.20)
To link the imbalance variables xIBPlus
t
and xIBMinus
t
from the objective function to the storage
constraints they are set equal to the withdrawal variables xIBPlusF and xIBMinusF. The excess
and deficit variables are subtracted to allow them to cancel each other out.
xIBPlusF
t
−xIBMinusF
t
= xIBPlus
t
−xIBMinus
t
∀t ∈T Extend
(4.3.21)
xIBPlus and xIBMinus must be constrained by the withdrawal variables for all hours. This is
introduced with the two constraints below.
xIBPlus
t
≤xIBPlusF
t
∀t ∈T D1
(4.3.22)
xIBMinus
t
≤xIBMinusF
t
∀t ∈T D1
(4.3.23)
Furthermore, there must be an upper limit to how much imbalance there is handled in one
single hour, as there should never be a larger imbalance handling than the maximum forecast
for that day.
xIBPlus
t
≤maxForecast
∀t ∈T extend
(4.3.24)
xIBMinus
t
≤maxForecast
∀t ∈T extend
(4.3.25)
Finally, all imbalances created by aFRR activations must be handled. Thus the sum of the
aFRR activation for the day is set equal to the sum of their respective imbalance for the day:
X
t∈T D0
xsold
t,aD · actD
t =
X
t∈T D0
xIBPlus
t
(4.3.26)
X
t∈T D0
xsold
t,aU · actU
t =
X
t∈T D0
xIBMinus
t
(4.3.27)
Page 28 of 66
==PAGE:39==
4.3. DESCRIPTION OF BIDDING MODEL
22-06-2024
As the model optimises for a single-day time horizon, the storage variables must be zero at the
beginning and end of the optimisation window. Since the storage is empty, then the withdrawal
variable must also be zero in the first hour.
xV StorPlus
0
= 0
(4.3.28)
xIBPlusF
0
= 0
(4.3.29)
xV StorPlus
t
= 0|t = HourDay + tIBMax
(4.3.30)
xV StorMinus
0
= 0
(4.3.31)
xIBMinusF
0
= 0
(4.3.32)
xV StorMinus
t
= 0|t = HourDay + tIBMax
(4.3.33)
Finally, the variables must be declared and except for xbids and yaDLim which are positive
natural numbers and binary, all the variables are positive real numbers. First, the variables
connected with selling capacity are declared:
xbids
t,m ∈N+
∀t ∈T D0, m ∈M
(4.3.34)
xsold
t,m ∈R+
∀t ∈T D0, m ∈M
(4.3.35)
xaDP
t1,t2 ∈R+
∀t1, t2 ∈T D0
(4.3.36)
yaDLim
t,n
∈0, 1
∀t ∈T D0, n ∈T DownShift
(4.3.37)
Then the variables connected with shifting electricity consumption and assigning the hourly
forecasted consumption:
xshift
t1,t2 ∈R+
∀t1, t2 ∈T D0
(4.3.38)
capavail
t
∈R+
∀t ∈T D0
(4.3.39)
Finally, the variables associated with the imbalances
xIBPlus
t
∈R+
∀t ∈T extend
(4.3.40)
xIBMinus
t
∈R+
∀t ∈T extend
(4.3.41)
xIBPlusF
t
∈R+
∀t ∈T extend
(4.3.42)
xIBMinusF
t
∈R+
∀t ∈T extend
(4.3.43)
xV StorPlus
t
∈R+
∀t ∈T extend
(4.3.44)
xV StorMinus
t
∈R+
∀t ∈T extend
(4.3.45)
An overview of the model without verbal descriptions can be found in Appendix B.
4.3.1
Model Limitations
The model described above allows for daily optimal scheduling of consumption and selection
of bids in the ancillary service markets. This means that the model is limited in the following
ways:
The model optimises each day individually, and therefore it cannot take advantage of medium-
term price variations.
With a one-day window, the model has fewer options to select the
Page 29 of 66
==PAGE:40==
4.4. TESTING METHODOLOGY
22-06-2024
most profitable charging hours compared to longer windows. The ability to plan charging and
bidding based on longer windows depends on the EV aggregator’s knowledge of their customers’
charging requirements. If the aggregator knows a customer always needs a minimum SOC of
30% or always charges 15 kWh each night, they can meet these needs on some nights while
maximising consumption during more profitable or cheaper periods on other nights. Such long-
term considerations can further reduce electricity costs and increase revenue from ancillary
services.
The second issue is simplification at the aggregated level, which ignores the nuances of individual
EV behaviour.
Precise knowledge of individual EV behaviour would allow the aggregator
better control over shifting consumption within a specific day or bidding in the aFRR Down
market based on expected consumption in later hours. The model’s shifting blocks (morning,
midday, evening) are a simplification, as most EVs charge once or twice during a 24-hour period,
typically from 17:00 after work until 07:00 the next morning, and possibly a shorter period at
work. A better understanding of individual EV charging behaviour provides more options for
shifting production or utilising aFRR Down bids, as indicated by high values of tCapacityShift
and tDownShift.
Lastly, the model uses the imbalance market as a placeholder for intraday trading. The be-
haviour of the intraday market has not been investigated in this thesis, making it unclear if
this approximation is appropriate.
4.4
Testing Methodology
To analyse each of the five market combinations the bidding model is run on the 2023 data
described in chapter 3. Each of these yearly runs is called a scenario which is identified by
the parameters, tCapacityShift, tDownShift, the market combination chosen, and potentially the
sensitivity parameters applied.
For example, a scenario could be to run the model, while
allowing it to bid in all three markets with tCapacityShift = 2 and tDownShift = 3.
The first set of scenarios is run for the parameter tCapacityShift ∈0, 1, .., 8 with tDownShift = 2
for all five market combinations. This set of scenarios is marked as the tCap set.
The second set of scenarios is run on changing values of tDownShift ∈1, 2, .., 6 for tCapacityShift ∈
1, 4 for all five market combinations. This set of scenarios is called the tDown set and it is
run to complement the tCap results and enable an understanding of which parameter between
tCapacityShift and tDownShift is the most important for flexibility. Preliminary testing revealed
that varying the tIBMax variable had a minimal impact on the bidding model’s decision making
and this variable was thus not considered in the final analysis.
To compare the performance of each scenario the following metrics are tracked:
• Aggregated profits: The yearly sum of electricity costs and revenue from the ancillary
services markets calculated as P
All days in 2023(profits).
• Average electricity price: The average price of 1 MWh electricity calculated as
P ct
P Relec.
Page 30 of 66
==PAGE:41==
4.4. TESTING METHODOLOGY
22-06-2024
• Shifted consumption: The ratio of the consumption which is shifted compared to the
forecast, calculated as
P xshift
P 0.7·ct .
• Utilised capacity: How much of the flexibility from the forecast is sold in the ancillary
service markets, and in which markets are they sold? It is calculated as
P
t∈T D0
P
m∈M xsold
t,m
P
t∈T D0 0.7·ct
• Income streams: Analysis of where the profits from the ancillary services come from.
• Peak consumption: How much of the scheduled consumption, is from 17:00 to 21:00
compared to the forecast? It is calculated as
P
t∈{18,..,22} capavail
t
P
t∈{18,..,22} ct
due to 00:00 being equal
to t1.
Following the results from the tCap set and the tDown set, a representative value for those two
parameters must be selected before a sensitivity analysis of the price data can be carried out.
After that selection, the methodology of the sensitivity analysis is to change one price data at
a time by scaling it from 50% to 150%. Specifically for the electricity cost a scale of 0% is also
investigated. The model is rerun for all of 2023 for each scale for each price shown in the list
below:
1. The electricity cost
2. The FCR-D Up capacity prices
3. The aFRR Up capacity prices
4. The aFRR Down capacity prices
5. The energy activation price for aFRR Up
6. The energy activation price for aFRR Up
7. The imbalance price used for imbalance settlement
The price data is tested one segment at a time, due to two considerations: First and foremost,
the model implementation is linear with no dependencies between the variables. Therefore,
scaling the price data associated with one variable can only affect the other variables when
the scaling changes which prices are the highest or lowest. Secondly, conclusions drawn from
analysing the model’s sensitivity towards one price data source are additive. For example, the
sensitivity analysis could show that increasing the electricity cost leads to lower profits under
one scenario, while another scenario shows that decreasing the FCR-D capacity prices leads to
lower profits. Then If the electricity cost and price developments simulated in the two examples
scenario happened simultaneously it stands to reason that the resulting profits would be lower
compared to the individual scenarios.
Page 31 of 66
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 5
Results and Discussion
This chapter presents the results of running the bidding model shown in Section 4.3 based on
the methodology presented in Section 4.4. The results will be interpreted and discussed as they
are shown. The chapter itself is divided into four parts, covering:
1 The yearly and seasonal results from varying the tCapacityShift parameter, i.e. the number
of hours before and after the current hour t, that consumption can be moved to.
2 The yearly results from varying the tDownShift parameter, i.e. the maximum amount of
hours a plugged-in EV could be waiting to start charging, and therefore provide flexibility
in the aFRR Down market.
3 The results from the sensitivity analysis on price data run for the combined market
combination.
4 The findings of an analysis of the aFRR Down market in DK2, and a comparison with
the German aFRR market.
5.1
Results with Varying tCapacityShift
When varying tCapacityShift from 0 to 8 with a set value of tDownShift = 2, nine different scenarios
are created which are tested for all five market combinations. This corresponds to investigating
how much value an EV aggregator can gain from having more control of when their EVs can
charge. To investigate all five market combinations for each of the nine scenarios the daily
bidding model is run 5 · 9 · 365 = 16425 times.
Figure 5.1.1(a) shows the aggregated yearly profits, i.e. the sum of the objective function in
equation 4.3.1 for each market combination on the y-axis. The x-axis is how many hours ear-
lier or later the model can shift consumption represented by the tCapacityShift parameter. The
aggregated profits are negative for all market combinations, due to the cost of electricity and
are shown numerically in Table 3.3.1 in Appendix C. The market combination ”Base” (orange
line) is the pure electricity cost in Figure 5.1.1(a), and this cost is also included in the four
other market combinations. The electricity cost in the ”Base” market combination decreases
from 9.6E6 euros to 9.2E6 euros as the model’s ability to shift consumption increases. This
corresponds to an average yearly electricity cost per EV of 960 to 920 euros. Of the three single
market combinations, the least profitable market is the ”Base+aFRR Up” (grey line), followed
by ”Base+FCR-D Up” (green line) and finally ”Base+aFRR Down” (red line). The ”combined”
market combination (blue line) has the highest total profits from electricity costs and ancillary
Page 32 of 66
==PAGE:43==
5.1. RESULTS WITH VARYING tCapacityShift
22-06-2024
(a) The aggregated profits for 2023 are shown for
each of the five market combinations. These profits
are the sum of the electricity cost, the revenue from
the capacity markets, the energy activation markets,
and the imbalance handling.
(b) The customer’s hourly average electricity cost in
2023 for each of the five market combinations is
shown as a function of increasing scheduling
flexibility.
Figure 5.1.1: The x-axis for both figures is tCapacityShift which is how many hours consumption from hour
t can be shifted forwards or backwards in time. The five lines correspond to the following market
combinations: Orange ”Base” that only minimises electricity costs, grey ”Base+aFRR Up” which allows
bidding in the aFRR Up market, red ”Base+aFRR Down” where bidding in the aFRR Down market is
allowed, green ”Base+FCR-D Up” where bidding in the FCR-D Up market is allowed, and blue ”combined”
where bidding in all three markets is allowed.
services revenue ranging from -7.9E6 to -7.1E6 euros. This corresponds to an increase in profits
per EV of 170 to 210 euros per year. The total costs decrease as tCapacityShift increases for each
of the markets. The largest decreases in costs come initially when tCapacityShift is increased
from zero to three or four.
Furthermore, the decrease is larger for the ”Base+aFRR Up”,
”Base+aFRR Down” and the ”combined” market combinations compared to ”Base+FCR-D
Up” and ”Base”. The green ”Base+FCR-D Up” curve seems to follow the same trajectory as
the orange ”Base” curve only with overall decreased costs. This indicates that the model only
shifts capacity to minimise electricity costs in both the ”Base+FCR-D Up” and ”Base” market
combinations. For the three other market combinations shifting is also done to maximise the
available capacity in the most profitable hours.
This consideration is supported by Figure 5.1.1(b), where the average electricity cost per MWh
is the y-axis. The green line for the ”Base+FCR-D Up” market combination has almost the
same average electricity costs as the orange ”Base”. However, the other three market combina-
tions deviate, underlining that for some cases shifting capacity to an hour with high electricity
costs can be offset by the revenue earned from the aFRR markets.
The bidding model’s utilisation of the ability to shift consumption is shown in Figure 5.1.2(a).
The ratio on the y-axis is calculated as the daily sum of shifted consumption from the xshift
variables divided by the sum of the forecasted consumption. On the x-axis in Figure 5.1.2(a)
tCapacityShift is shown for both negative and positive x values.
The results to the left of
tCapacityShift = 0 show the ratio of forecasted consumption from an hour t1 that has been
shifted to an earlier hour t2 where t2 < t1.
To the right of tCapacityShift = 0, the ratio of
consumption shifted to hours later than t1 is shown. When running the model, tCapacityShift is
Page 33 of 66
==PAGE:44==
5.1. RESULTS WITH VARYING tCapacityShift
22-06-2024
(a) The daily average ratio of consumption shifted
from an hour t1 to a later or earlier hour t2 is shown
as a function of increasing flexibility based on 2023
prices.
(b) The daily average ratio of consumption during
peak hours from 17:00 to 21:00 over the forecast in
the same hours is shown as a function of increasing
flexibility based on 2023 prices.
Figure 5.1.2: Legend explained in Figure 5.1.1
symmetrical as tCapacityShift = 2 allows shifting consumption to both earlier and later hours.
From Figure 5.1.2(a) it can be seen that all five market combinations shift around 30% of the
forecasted consumption to earlier hours, while some 55% is shifted to later hours. If the ratio
of consumption shifted to earlier and later hours is added together, then it is above 0.8 for all
five market combinations when |tCapacityShift| ≥2. The model shifts approximately the same
amount of consumption when tCapacityShift = 2 as compared to when tCapacityShift = 6. However,
higher values of tCapacityShift allow the model to shift consumption over longer periods of time
and concentrate more consumption in the cheapest hours.
One period of time, where the model is likely to shift consumption away from is the peak hours
from 17:00 to 21:00, due to the high tariffs in this period. Since the late shifting block is from
16:00 until 23:00 the model can only shift consumption to one hour before the peak hours,
but to several hours after. The models planned peak consumption is shown in Figure 5.1.2(b),
where the ratio of peak consumption compared to forecast is the y-axis, and it is calculated as
P
t∈{18,..,22} capavail
t
P
t∈{18,..,22} ct
.1 For all five market combinations, consumption is moved away from this
period, which has the highest tariffs, and more consumption is shifted as tCapacityShift increases.
The higher ratio of consumption in the peak hours for the ”Base+aFRR Up”, ”Base+aFRR
Down” and ”combined” market combinations can be part of the explanation for their higher
average electricity prices shown in Figure 5.1.1(b).
How much the model chooses to participate in the ancillary service markets is shown in Fig-
ure 5.1.3(a), with the utilised capacity ratio as the y-axis. This ratio is the amount of shifted
consumption compared to the forecast and it is calculated as
P
t∈T D0
P
m∈M xsold
t,m
P
t∈T D0 0.7·ct
.
For all
market combinations except ”Base” the ratio of utilised capacity increases as tCapacityShift in-
creases. The aFRR market combinations have a lower ratio of utilised capacity compared to
1The 24 hours of the day are counted from 1 until 24, this means that 00:00 corresponds to t1 and 17:00 to
t18
Page 34 of 66
==PAGE:45==
5.1. RESULTS WITH VARYING tCapacityShift
22-06-2024
(a) The ratio of sold capacity in the ancillary service
markets for 2023 against the forecast is shown for
each of the five market combinations.
(b) Market preference for the ”combined” market
combination from Figure 5.1.3(a). The bar elements
are the FCR-D Up (green), aFRR Up (grey) and
aFRR Down (red) ancillary services.
Figure 5.1.3: The x-axis for both figures is tCapacityShift which is how many hours consumption from hour
t can be shifted forwards or backwards in time.
”Base+FCR-D Up” and ”combined” which almost utilises all the forecasted capacity. This is
probably caused by the larger 1 MW minimum bid sizes in the aFRR markets compared to
the 0.1 MW in the FCR-D Up market. In the ”combined” market combination the FCR-D Up
market is likely used to bid the excess capacity which could not fit the 1 MW bids required
for the aFRR markets. Finally, there is a utilisation rate of zero for ”Base” since it cannot
participate in any ancillary service markets but only minimises the electricity costs.
In Figure 5.1.3(b) the market preference between the FCR-D Up (green), aFRR Up (grey), and
aFRR Down (red) markets for the ”combined” market combination is shown. Depending on
the value of tCapacityShift the two preferred markets are FCR-D Up and aFRR Down. When
tCapacityShift is close to zero the FCR-D Up market is preferred and this preference changes
towards aFRR Down as tCapacityShift goes towards eight. The reason for the changing preference
could be the required 1 MW bids for the aFRR Down market. When tCapacityShift is close to
zero, the ”excess” capacity is sold in the FCR-D Up market with its lower 0.1 MW bid size.
Then, as tCapacityShift increases matching the available capacity to the 1 MW bids for the aFRR
market becomes easier, and the market share for the aFRR Down market increases.
This
analysis is supported by the share of aFRR-Up which only marginally changes. Furthermore,
it can be seen that there is a minor difference in market preference between tCapacityShift equals
4,5,6,7 and 8 highlighting that more than 4 hours of freedom for scheduling consumption is
unnecessary in terms of having a large impact on the bidding model’s market preference.
The revenue gained from the ancillary services in the ”combined” market combination is shown
in Figure 5.1.4. The y-axis shows the average daily earnings in euros. The bar in Figure 5.1.4
consists of the following elements listed from the bottom. FCR-D Up (green), aFRR Up (black)
and aFRR Down (red) capacity market earnings, then aFRR Up (grey) and aFRR Down (pink)
energy activation earnings and finally earnings from positive imbalances (blue). The largest
Page 35 of 66
==PAGE:46==
5.1. RESULTS WITH VARYING tCapacityShift
22-06-2024
source of revenue is aFRR Down capacity and positive imbalances. Thus, aFRR Down is the
most profitable market since the earnings from the positive imbalances come from selling excess
consumption, and the excess consumption is a result of activation in the aFRR Down market.
This is supported by considering Figures 5.1.3(b) and 5.1.4. When tCapacityShift ∈{0, 1, 2} the
FCR-D Up market has the highest market share as seen in Figure 5.1.3(b), but the average
earnings for the aFRR Down capacity shown in Figure 5.1.4 are still larger than those for
FCR-D capacity.
Figure 5.1.4: The daily average revenue from ancillary services
in 2023 is shown as tCapacityShift increases for the ”combined”
market combination. The legend and stack elements are shown in
reverse order, meaning that the first element in the legend the
FCR-D Up Capacity is the lowest-placed element in the stack.
A summary of the results of vary-
ing tCapacityShift is that increasing
the parameter leads to further flex-
ibility.
This flexibility has a large
impact in terms of decreasing elec-
tricity costs and shifting capacity
to participate in the hours with
the most profitable ancillary ser-
vice prices.
Since the model was
intended to have perfect foresight,
the risk associated with faulty fore-
casts in choosing one market over
another is not considered. An exam-
ple could be to bet that the aFRR
Down prices will be high and there-
fore charge during the peak hours
incurring a larger electricity cost, which is hopefully offset by earnings in the aFRR Down
market. Furthermore, the amount of flexibility used in the model might not be feasible for an
EV aggregator to obtain, due to a lack of information regarding the individual EVs state of
charge, sudden needs to use the car or other customer behaviour.
5.1.1
Seasonal Differences
A common occurrence for the electricity and ancillary service markets is that the prices vary
seasonally.
To investigate the importance of this variation on the market selection Figure
5.1.3(b) is recreated for each quarter of 2023 in Figure 5.1.5. There is some variation in the
preferred markets between the four quarters. For all four quarters, FCR-D Up is preferred for
low values of tCapacityShift, which changes towards the aFRR markets as tCapacityShift increases.
The highest preference for FCR-D Up is in the first quarter of the year, while the lowest
preference is during the third quarter. Interestingly the share of aFRR Up seems larger by a
factor of 2 or more during the third and fourth quarters compared to the first half of the year.
This is due to the ancillary service prices, where the aFRR Up market prices increased and the
prices decreased for the FCR-D Up and aFRR Down markets. A time series of the ancillary
services prices from December 2022 to May 2024 is shown in Figure A.0.5 in Appendix A, which
shows this development. The preference for the aFRR Down market is the highest during the
second and third quarters of 2023.
Page 36 of 66
==PAGE:47==
5.1. RESULTS WITH VARYING tCapacityShift
22-06-2024
Figure 5.1.5: The seasonal impact on the market selection for the ”combined” market combination
between the FCR-D Up, aFRR Up, and aFRR Down ancillary services is shown for each of the 4 quarters in
2023. The x-axis is tCapacityShift which is how many hours consumption from hour t can be shifted forwards
or backwards in time.
Figure 5.1.6: The daily average revenue from ancillary services for the ”combined” market combination is
shown per quarter for 2023. The x-axis for both figures is tCapacityShift which is how many hours consumption
from hour t can be shifted forwards or backwards in time.
Page 37 of 66
==PAGE:48==
5.2. RESULTS FROM VARYING tDownShift
22-06-2024
The seasonal impact on the revenue streams from Figure 5.1.4 is shown in Figure 5.1.6. The
most profitable quarter is the second quarter, followed by the third and the first quarter. This
matches Clever’s expectations of the ancillary service market, where the highest prices are
seen during the spring. The aFRR Down and FCR-D Up markets most likely have higher
than average prices in the second quarter as the aFRR Up market share is very small, as
seen in Figure 5.1.5. The largest source of revenue variation seems to be the aFRR Down
capacity, which is higher than 1000 euros for all quarters except Q4, where it is below 500
euros. However, it seems that all revenue sources increase and decrease based on the quarter.
Investigating whether all ancillary service prices follow the same seasonal trend is outside the
scope of this thesis, it is however an important question for a potential EV aggregator.
The fact that there are seasonal variations in the ancillary service markets, should not impact
the operation of an automated bidding service. Still, it requires considerations in the design
part of the automated strategy and the forecasting it requires.
5.2
Results from Varying tDownShift
The second input parameter which adjusts the bidding model is tDownShift. This parameter
controls the maximum number of hours the EV is assumed to be plugged in before it begins to
consume electricity. In these hours the EVs are on standby and have the ability to suddenly
start charging, which can be sold as flexible capacity in the aFRR Down market. To investigate
the importance of this parameter the model is run for values of tDownShift from 1 to 6. Since
increasing tDownShift allows the bidding model more flexibility with the profitable aFRR Down
market, two values of tCapacityShift are used. This allows for an analysis of the importance of the
aFRR Down bidding window when there is low consumption flexibility with tCapacityShift = 1
and high consumption flexibility with tCapacityShift = 4. The analysis is shown for the ”com-
bined” and ”Base+aFRR Down” market combinations since they allow bidding in the aFRR
Down market. The ”Base” option is also included as a baseline for the electricity cost.
The impact of changing tDownShift on the aggregated profits is shown in Figure 5.2.1(a). The
dashed lines are the market combinations with tCapacityShift = 1, while the full lines assume
tCapacityShift = 4 instead.
The profit increases for both the ”combined” and ”Base+aFRR
Down” market combinations as tDownShift increases.
The yearly profit for the ”combined”
scenario with tCapacityShift = 4 ranges from -7.3E6 to -6.9E6 euro. This 400,000 euro increase
in profits is comparable to the profit increase when tCapacityShift goes from 1 to 4, as seen in
Figure 5.1.1(a). Thus, increasing the maximum window for aFRR Down bidding is an important
adjustable parameter.
When comparing the aggregated profits for the scenario where tCapacityShift = 1 (dashed lines)
against the scenario with tCapacityShift = 4 (full lines), the development of the lines is similar.
For example aggregated profits for the ”Combined” market combination with tCapacityShift = 1,
increase with 0.4E6 euro from -7.6 to -7.2 E6 euro as well. To understand why both scenar-
ios have similar increases in profits the average electricity prices for the customer shown in
Figure 5.2.1(b), can be considered.
For the tCapacityShift = 4 scenario, decreasing electricity costs could explain the growth in profits
Page 38 of 66
==PAGE:49==
5.2. RESULTS FROM VARYING tDownShift
22-06-2024
(a) The aggregated yearly profits shown as a function
of tDownShift with 2023 prices.
(b) The daily average electricity cost in 2023 as a
function of varying tDownShift.
Figure 5.2.1: The x-axis on both Figures is tDownShift, which is the number of hours an EV is assumed
plugged-in but on standby before charging commences. The Figures show three combinations ”Combined”
(blue), ”Base + aFRR Down” (red), and ”Base” (orange). These are shown with tCapacityShift = 1 on the
dashed lines, and tCapacityShift = 4 on the full line
as the full lines in Figure 5.2.1(b) show a fast decrease in average electricity costs as tDownShift
goes from 1 to 4. This is not the case for the tCapacityShift = 1 scenario (dashed lines), as
there only is a small decrease in average electricity costs for the ”Combined” and ”Base+aFRR
Down” market combinations as tDownShift increases. Instead, the increasing value of tDownShift
probably allows the model to match more of the 1 MW bids required to participate in the aFRR
Down markets, increasing the share of the most profitable market, which drives the increase in
profits.
The impact of tDownShift on the amount of consumption shifted is shown in Figure 5.2.2(a).
There is a marginal increase in the ratio of consumption which is shifted as tDownShift increases.
This effect is largest for the tCapacityShift = 1 scenario. Even though tDownShift only has a small
impact on the total amount of consumption shifted, there is an effect on how much of that
consumption happens during peak hours. This is shown in Figure 5.2.2(b), where it is clear
that as tDownShift increases it allows the model to decrease the consumption while bidding in
the profitable aFRR Down market during the peak hours. For an EV aggregator, this is an
interesting finding as most people, will have returned from work and plugged in their EV for the
night at 17:00. Depending on the customers’ charging pattern, the aggregator could potentially
increase the aFRR bidding window to 14 hours or the entire period from 17:00 until 07:00 the
next day. This would allow the model to maximise any profitable aFRR Down hours during the
peak period. To fully utilise this flexibility, it would require a bidding model which considered
a multi-day period, which is outside the scope of this thesis, but the possibility is intriguing for
future studies.
The effect of increasing tDownShift on the ratio of capacity which is sold in the ancillary services
markets is shown in Figure 5.2.3(a). The effect is very minor for both the combined and aFRR
Down market combinations compared to the effect of tCapacityShift.
Page 39 of 66
==PAGE:50==
5.2. RESULTS FROM VARYING tDownShift
22-06-2024
(a) The daily average ratio of consumption shifted
from an hour t1 to a different hour t2 as a function
of increasing tDownShift. The negative values of
tDownShift refer to shifting consumption to an earlier
hour, while positive values refer to shifting
consumption to a later hour.
(b) The daily average ratio of consumption during
peak hours from 17 until 21 is shown as a function of
tDownShift. For all scenarios, the consumption ratio
decreases as tDownShift increases.
Figure 5.2.2: See legend description in Figure 5.2.1, both plots are based on 2023.
Increasing tDownShift increases the share of the aFRR Down market, as shown in Figure 5.2.3(b),
and it seems that it is the FCR-D Up share which is reduced to achieve this. This supports
the conclusion that as flexibility increases it is easier to match the 1 MW bids in the aFRR
market, and therefore there is less excess consumption to bid in the FCR-D Up market.
Generally, increasing tDownShift increases flexibility, which leads to larger earnings, while it
(a) The daily average ratio of utilised capacity as a
function of tDownShift.
(b) The market selection for the combined market
combination is shown in the full bar for
tCapacityShift = 1 and in the transparent one for
tCapacityShift = 4, with as a function of tDownShift.
Figure 5.2.3: The x-axis on both Figures is tDownShift, which is the number of hours and EV is assumed to
be plugged-in, but on standby before charging commences. Data is from 2023
Page 40 of 66
==PAGE:51==
5.3. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
22-06-2024
decreases the cost of electricity. Compared to tCapacityShift, varying tDownShift only influences
one of the three markets. But it is an important parameter to consider since the aFRR Down
market is the market which generates the highest profits.
5.3
Sensitivity Analysis
The results presented in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 are based on bidding with perfect foresight of
the 2023 prices. To test the bidding model and understand how different prices would affect
the market selection, a sensitivity analysis is conducted for the combined market scenario. The
methodology used is thoroughly described in section 4.4 and it is conducted with the parameters
tDownShift = 2 and tCapacityShift = 4. These parameters were chosen to represent a conservative,
but realistic level of EV control for the aggregator. Essentially, the sensitivity analysis consists
of considering every price used in the model and scaling them from 50% to 150%, one at a
time, to understand the impact on the aggregated profits, market selection, and consumption
shifting behaviour. The bidding model is run for the entire year of 2023, for each scale for every
price.
The first metrics investigated are the aggregated profits and the average electricity price. This
is shown in Figures 5.3.1(a) and 5.3.1(b). These plots are split into sections to zoom in on
the part of the y-axis where the effect of varying the ancillary service prices is shown. This is
needed, as the impact of changing the electricity price shown on the orange lines is much larger
than the other prices. The x-axis is the scale value used to change the price in that scenario.
For all other figures in this section, the x-axis is the same and some of the plots will also zoom
in on interesting sections.
In Figure 5.3.1(a), the sensitivity of the aggregated profits is the y-axis shown for each of
the seven prices. When electricity prices increase the aggregated profits decrease as shown
on the orange curve since the aggregator pays a higher fee to procure the required electricity.
Conversely, profits increase when ancillary service and imbalance prices increase. The most
sensitive prices other than the electricity prices are the aFRR Down capacity prices (red line
with full triangles) and the imbalance prices (blue line), as they provide the largest profits
for this combination of tCapacityShift and tDownShift, as shown in Figure 5.1.4. In general, the
impact on the aggregated profits matches the average daily earnings for each segment shown
in Figure 5.1.4.
In Figure 5.3.1(b), the sensitivity of the average electricity cost per MWh is the y-axis shown
as a function of price changes on the x-axis. The only ancillary service price input which leads
to a lower average electricity cost when increasing is FCR-D Up. This matches the results
from varying tCapacityShift, where aFRR participation incentivised the model to charge in hours
with higher electricity prices. As the bidding model’s preference for FCR-D Up increases due
to higher FCR-D Up capacity prices, the preference for aFRR is lowered and thus the reason
to accept higher electricity prices is removed. When scaling the aFRR and imbalance prices
the average electricity costs increase with the prices. This reinforces the finding that aFRR
participation adds a competing objective to minimising the cost of electricity, which the model
considers when shifting consumption.
Page 41 of 66
==PAGE:52==
5.3. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
22-06-2024
(a) The sensitivity of the aggregated profits,
where the changes are shown on a line for each of
the 7 scaled prices. Notice the different powers of
10 on the broken y-axis. different powers of 10.
(b) The impact of varying data points for the
average electricity price is shown here.
Figure 5.3.1: The figures above show the model’s sensitivity for the seven prices - electricity prices on the
orange line, FCR-D Up capacity prices on the green line, aFRR Up capacity prices on the purple line with the
full squares, aFRR Down capacity prices on the red line with the full triangles, aFRR Up energy activation
prices on the purple line with the hollow squares, aFRR Down energy activation prices on the red line with
the hollow triangles, and the imbalance prices on the blue line. The x-axis is the scale the prices have been
changed to.
The sensitivity of consumption shifting towards the changing prices is shown in Figure 5.3.2(b)
where the y-axis is the ratio of unchanged consumption from the baseline. It is calculated as one
minus the ratio of the sum of the absolute difference between the forecast and the resulting con-
sumption for each hour divided by the sum of the forecast, specifically 1−
P abs(capavail−0.7·c)
P 0.7·c
.
The overall impact is small for all scaled prices except the electricity price. When the elec-
tricity price is scaled to zero only 16.6% of the forecasted consumption is not shifted. This
happens because the baseload consumption is planned by Clever to minimise the electricity
cost, but when the electricity is free, the model can shift consumption to maximise the revenue
from ancillary services without incurring higher electricity costs. When the FCR-D Up price is
increased, it increases the ratio of unshifted consumption.Indeed, the FCR-D Up market par-
ticipation prioritises minimising the electricity cost, since the forecasted consumption is based
on a strategy to lower the electricity cost. When the other ancillary service prices are increased,
the consumption is shifted further away from the forecast.
The peak consumption is another metric, which is interesting to understand due to the high
electricity prices in those hours. The sensitivity analysis for it is shown in Figure 5.3.2(a),
where it is clear that the largest impact comes from decreasing the electricity prices. When
they are lowered, the model shifts less consumption away from the peak hours. This happens
because the model ignores the cost of electricity at scale= 0%, so it shifts more consumption
towards the peak hours where there are higher ancillary services prices for the aFRR markets.
Furthermore, there are higher average activation rates for aFRR Down during the peak hours,
this can be seen from Figure A.0.4 in Appendix A and from the fact that when the imbalances
prices are scaled up (blue line) the peak consumption increases.
The aFRR Down energy
Page 42 of 66
==PAGE:53==
5.3. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
22-06-2024
(a) Sensitivity analysis on the consumption in
the peak hours.
(b) The ratio of forecast which is not shifted, described
by equation 1 −
P abs(capavail−0.7·c)
P 0.7·c
is shown on the
y-axis as a result of changing prices.
Figure 5.3.2: The figures above show the model’s sensitivity for the seven prices - electricity prices on the
orange line, FCR-D Up capacity prices on the green line, aFRR Up capacity prices on the purple line with the
full squares, aFRR Down capacity prices on the red line with the full triangles, aFRR Up energy activation
prices on the purple line with the hollow squares, aFRR Down energy activation prices on the red line with
the hollow triangles, and the imbalance prices on the blue line. The x-axis is the scale the prices have been
changed to.
activation prices (red line - hollow triangles) follow the same trend as the imbalance prices,
furthering the conclusion that the activation rate in the peak hours is high.
When changing the ancillary service prices it would be expected that the market preferences
change as well. Therefore the sensitivity of the market selection is shown in Figure 5.3.3, where
the share between the three possible markets is the y-axis and the scaling is the x-axis for all
seven prices. There are 3 major findings to be drawn from Figure 5.3.3.
1. The first finding relates to the sensitivity to electricity prices changes, shown in the top-
left ”Electricity price” plot. As electricity prices decrease, the share of the aFRR markets
increases, since the most profitable hours for selling flexibility in aFRR often coincide with
high electricity prices. Thus, lower electricity prices remove the barrier to participating in
aFRR, making them preferable over FCR-D Up. Conversely, as electricity prices rise, the
FCR-D Up share increases due to the model shifting consumption to minimise costs and
not prioritising 1 MW aFRR bids. Consequently, ”excess” capacity becomes available,
which is bid in the FCR-D Up market. Energinet joins the PICASSO framework, this
”excess” capacity could also be considered for bidding in the energy activation market.
2. The second point is that the model behaves logically when the capacity prices are scaled
shown in the top-right plot and second row in Figure 5.3.3. In all three plots the relevant
market increases and decreases in share following the scaled price. For example, the FCR-
D Up share on the top right FCR-D Up plot is very low when the FCR-D capacity prices
are scaled to 50% of the nominal price and it significantly increases when they are scaled
to 150%.
Page 43 of 66
==PAGE:54==
5.3. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
22-06-2024
3. Thirdly, the sensitivity for the aFRR markets secondary revenue streams shown in the
plots on the third and fourth rows varies for aFRR Up and Down. The preference for the
aFRR Down market only marginally increases with higher aFRR Down energy activation
prices (shown on the ”aFRR Down energy activation” plot) and imbalance prices (shown
on the ”Imbalances” plot).
Conversely, higher energy activation prices for aFRR Up
increase its market share at the expense of both aFRR Down and FCR-D Up.
This
suggests that the aFRR Down market’s favorability could be challenged if high energy
activation prices are ensured for the aFRR Up market. This is something to consider
for EV aggregators as they set their energy activation prices for aFRR in the coming
PICASSO framework.
The revenue streams’ sensitivity to the different input prices is shown in Figure 5.3.4, where
the price data scaled corresponds to the section of the bar which is highlighted. The average
income increases when the electricity cost decreases, as shown in the top-left DA figure in
Figure 5.3.4. This increase in income comes from the model choosing the more profitable hours
for ancillary services, which normally are sub-optimal due to higher electricity costs. For all
other segments, it seems that they behave logically, as they increase or decrease based on the
scaled parameter in question. The largest revenue increases come from increasing the aFRR
Down capacity price, and the imbalance price. This is logical as these two segments are the
largest from the original optimisation run shown in Figure 5.1.4 when tCapacityShift = 4 which
is shown when the scale on the x-axis is 100 in Figure 5.3.4. Interestingly the average earnings
increase with almost the same amount from 6052 euro to 6345 and 6372 euro when scaling the
aFRR Up capacity and energy activation price with 150% respectively. This is in contrast to
the market share, which increases with 6% more for aFRR Up when the capacity price is scaled
as shown in the aUCap plot in Figure 5.3.3. Therefore it is likely that the earnings from the
aFRR Up energy activation markets are gathered from a few hours with high activation rates.
However, identifying these hours high a degree of uncertainty through forecasting will be very
difficult. In conclusion, the sensitivity analysis showed that:
1. The model behaves logically and the results are robust to price deviations within ± 50%.
2. The large preference for the FCR-D Up and aFRR Down markets means that changes in
these markets will affect the results in this report the most.
3. For the aFRR Up market to be preferred, its prices must increase by more than 50%, or
similar decreases in prices for the other markets should happen.
4. The sensitivity analysis verified that, when bidding in the FCR-D Up market, minimising
electricity costs governs when EVs should charge.
5. For the aFRR markets, there are conflicting priorities when shifting consumption as the
peak hours with high electricity costs also generate high revenue.
6. Changing the capacity prices had the largest effect on which markets the model preferred.
Page 44 of 66
==PAGE:55==
5.3. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
22-06-2024
Figure 5.3.3: The effects from the sensitivity analysis are shown for each varied parameter. The
elements on the bar chart are market shares of: green - FCR-D Up, black - aFRR Up, and red -
aFRR Down. Nnote that the largest impacts on market selection come from changes to the
electricity cost shown on the ”Electricity Prices” plot and to the capacity prices shown on plots
”FCR-D Up”, ”aFRR Up Capacity ” and ”aFRR Down Capacity”.
Page 45 of 66
==PAGE:56==
5.3. SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
22-06-2024
Figure 5.3.4: Effects of sensitivity investigation on the revenue streams, shown as the average daily
earnings from the revenue streams. The elements in each bar are: green - revenue from FCR-D Up
capacity, black - aFRR Up Capacity, dark red - aFRR Down capacity, pink - aFRR Up energy
activation, red - aFRR Down energy activation and blue is revenue from imbalances, which are
positive due to perfect foresight. The x-axis shows the scale of the current input data point is scaled
to for the sensitivity analysis, and the 100 value is the nonscaled results, which are the same across
all plots.
Page 46 of 66
==PAGE:57==
5.4. DEVELOPMENT OF AFRR DOWN IN PICASSO
22-06-2024
5.4
Development of aFRR Down in PICASSO
DK1 and DK2 are expected to enter the PICASSO cooperation sometime during the fourth
quarter of 2024[40]. This entry will mark the beginning of the aFRR energy activation market
in DK1 and DK2 and the hourly asymmetric capacity market in DK1. To understand how this
could change the market dynamics it is relevant to consider if there are any correlations between
the aFRR prices used in the model and other data points. If this is the case, then these patterns
might continue under the new PICASSO pricing scheme, and allow for an understanding of how
the prices could develop.
Due to the model’s preference for choosing aFRR participation during the peak hours, it is
relevant to consider the correlation between the DA electricity prices and the aFRR Down
capacity, energy activation, and excess imbalance price.
These scatter plots are shown in
Figure 5.4.1. The x-axis on all three plots is the DA electricity prices, while the y-axis is the
three components of the aFRR revenue stream mentioned above.
Figure 5.4.1: Scatter plot of the DK2 DA electricity cost plotted against: 1. The aFRR Down
capacity price, 2. the aFRR Down energy activation price and 3. the excess imbalance price. The
data is plotted for all hours in 2023.
It seems that there is no clear correlation between the capacity prices for a given hour and the
DA electricity prices, as shown in the leftmost plot. The middle and rightmost plots show a
linear correlation between the electricity prices and the energy activation as well as the excess
imbalance prices. Since both instances are derived from the DA electricity cost, this cannot be
expected in the future due to the new market rules.
When considering the future aFRR energy activation prices two hypotheses could be relevant
to consider: The first is that the actors on the aFRR market are used to being compensated for
their activation at the prices set by [24], and therefore the current rules for the energy activation
Page 47 of 66
==PAGE:58==
5.4. DEVELOPMENT OF AFRR DOWN IN PICASSO
22-06-2024
price will set the baseline for the actors in the future as well. The second alternate hypothesis
is that the energy market participants with lower marginal activation costs will underbid the
current prices to place themselves in the front of the activation queue.
These hypotheses can be considered through the historical developments in Germany, by in-
vestigating how the PICASSO market has affected German aFRR prices since its activation in
June 2022.
5.4.1
PICASSO’s Impact on German aFRR Prices
The German aFRR market has been operating within the the PICASSO framework since June
2022 [42]. Therefore there are two years of price data which can be considered, to understand
what price changes implementing PICASSO in DK1 and DK2 could bring. This data is sourced
from [50]. Before the PICASSO implementation, the aFRR market in Germany was an asym-
metric market, where both the capacity price and energy activation price had to be set by the
bidder[55]. Thus adapting to the PICASSO framework did not change the bidding rules in the
German market[23], unlike what will happen in DK1 and DK2. The marginal capacity and
minimum energy activation prices are shown in Figure 5.4.2 and Figure 5.4.3, respectively.
Figure 5.4.2: The marginal capacity price for each four-hour auction slot is shown for the German
aFRR Down and Up capacity markets from January 2021 until May 2024. The y-axis is cut off, as
the highest price observed is 1979 (euros/MW)/h.
The marginal capacity price for both aFRR directions is shown in Figure 5.4.2. In the figure,
the y-axis is the marginal capacity price given in (euros/MW). The dots show the capacity
price for each four-hour bidding slot, while the drawn line is the weekly average. Comparing
the two stretches before and after the go-live date of PICASSO, it seems that the market after
PICASSO has become more volatile but that the overall price level is stable. The reasons for
Page 48 of 66
==PAGE:59==
5.4. DEVELOPMENT OF AFRR DOWN IN PICASSO
22-06-2024
Figure 5.4.3: The daily average of the minimum prices in the German aFRR market is plotted
from January 2021 until May 2024.
the increased volatility could be a result of the PICASSO market, or other factors possibly the
Russian invasion of Ukraine.
The energy activation prices support the idea that something increased the volatility of the
market. In Figure 5.4.3 the average daily minimum price for each activation direction is shown.
The minimum energy activation price is plotted as the alternative data available was the aver-
age or marginal prices and these data sources are skewed. The reason is that there are certain
actors in the German aFRR market which always bid the maximum allowed 15000 euros/MWh.
For reference when considering the prices in Figure 5.4.3 the average Danish activation prices
were 111.1 and 65.2 euros/MWh in DK1, and 94.8 and 69.6 euros/MWh for aFRR Up and
Down, respectively. Before the go-live date of PICASSO, there is a large increase from Septem-
ber 2021, which spikes for the aFRR Up market with minimum energy activation prices above
700 euros/MWh after the go-live date of PICASSO. Perhaps some market participants bene-
fited from the general uncertainty as a result of the Russian invasion to set very high prices.
After this period the prices return to a level close to the first half year of 2021, but with more
fluctuations. This could indicate that the energy activation prices in Denmark would remain
close to the current prices in the long term, but with potentially abnormal prices immediately
after the go-live date of PICASSO, as the market participants learn how to operate in the
market.
Another way to consider the future aFRR prices in Denmark comes from ACER (European
Union Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators), the organisation behind PICASSO.
ACER published a report investigating the KPIs for PICASSO after one year of operation. In
this report, it is clear that the German market is the biggest of the three active countries, with
an available energy activation capacity close to 2000 MW in both directions, which is 10 times
Page 49 of 66
==PAGE:60==
5.4. DEVELOPMENT OF AFRR DOWN IN PICASSO
22-06-2024
larger than the same markets in Austria and the Czech Republic. For all three markets, the
average monthly activation rate was 10%.
Most importantly, the KPI report reveals that the assets bidding the minimum prices shown
in Figure 5.4.3 are activated the most, but that in very specific cases bids with the maximum
allowed activation price of 15000 euros/MWh are activated.
This shows that some actors
can utilise specific local conditions of their electrical grid to require high energy activation
prices. Such specific geographic requirements for high energy activation prices should be a
focus for EV aggregators as their fleet is dispersed, and thus it is likely that some part of
it might be geographically situated in an area where high energy activation prices can be
selected for activation. Before requiring high prices EV aggregators should consider the ethical
implications of such strategies. Clever’s mission statement —”to further the green transition
by making everyone choose an EV ”— may conflict with exploiting extreme prices. Therefore,
EV aggregators should carefully evaluate their strategies to avoid potential backlash, similar
to that faced by electricity traders who profited from market failures following the Russian
invasion of Ukraine [6].
Since PICASSO allows for international activation of energy, it is relevant to compare the
Danish energy activation prices directly to the German ones. This is done for DK2 against
Germany in Figure 5.4.4, for both the up and down directions, based on 2023 prices.
On
this plot, it is the minimum energy activation price which is shown for Germany, as a way to
consider the worst-case impact international aFRR trade could have on DK2 and DK1 2. This
worst-case outcome would be that Energinet would cover its aFRR requirements by purchasing
aFRR energy activation from Germany.
The top-left plot in Figure 5.4.4 shows that the prices for aFRR Up EAM are higher than
aFRR Down EAM in Germany, and this is the same for DK2, which is shown on the bottom
right figure. This is logical when considering opportunity costs for power-generating market
participants. When delivering Up regulation a market participant has decided not to sell their
power production in the DA market and therefore expects a higher price to compensate them
for gambling on being activated. Likewise, the aFRR Down market participants have already
sold their power production in the DA market and therefore can reduce their output at a lower
cost.
On the top right plot in Figure 5.4.4 it can be seen that the minimum German Up prices
are higher than the average Danish Up prices. This would mean that German TSOs should
be interested in purchasing Danish aFRR Up energy activation which could serve to increase
the Danish prices. On the contrary, the average Danish downward prices are higher than their
minimum German counterparts, which is shown on the bottom left plot in Figure 5.4.4. Since it
is average against minimum prices it might not affect the Danish market, but in the worst-case
scenario, more Danish assets could choose the German minimum prices to increase the chance
of being activated.
2The energy activation price in DK1 and DK2 are both created from the DA price, however, DK1 has a
bonus of 100 DKK/MWh.
Page 50 of 66
==PAGE:61==
5.4. DEVELOPMENT OF AFRR DOWN IN PICASSO
22-06-2024
Figure 5.4.4: Scatter plot of Danish DK2 daily average and German daily average of minimum
energy activation prices for the year 2023. The top left and bottom right plots show Up vs. Down
prices in Germany and Denmark (DK2). The top right and bottom left plots show the international
comparison for Up and Down prices respectively, instead.
Making direct comparisons between the German aFRR market’s reaction to the introduction of
PICASSO and the expected Danish reaction is difficult. This is due to the differences between
the two nations in terms of electrical grid dynamics and market rules. With this in mind, there
are several conclusions which can be drawn.
1. Firstly, one can expect the capacity prices to remain steady in DK2 despite the introduc-
tion of PICASSO since there is no change to the bidding rules. For a market participant
considering aFRR Down in DK2, this is relevant, since the primary source of revenue from
the aFRR Down market is the capacity auction. For DK1, big changes can be expected
as the bidding period is reduced to one hour and it becomes asymmetrical, therefore it
is very difficult to consider the potential prices in that market. For EV aggregators, it
should nevertheless become a net gain, since the current long bidding periods make aFRR
participation in DK1 impractical.
2. Secondly, the high German prices in the Energy activation market can become a benefit for
Danish actors since the PICASSO framework allows for cross-border energy activation. If
Danish actors can present a viable alternative to German aFRR participants, the German
TSOs might consider purchasing Danish aFRR Up activation.
3. Thirdly, it is likely that entry into PICASSO will allow some actors, whose assets are
placed in locations with specific issues in the electrical grid, to leverage such local issues
to increase their profits. An example could be Western Jutland in DK1, where the high
Page 51 of 66
==PAGE:62==
5.4. DEVELOPMENT OF AFRR DOWN IN PICASSO
22-06-2024
amount of wind power production and bottlenecks in the transmission grid often lead to
local overproduction [56]. This can be utilised by setting high prices for the ability to
increase consumption with for example EVs. However, the majority of participants will
not be able to profit from specific local needs.
4. Fourthly, but tied with the third point EV aggregators should be able to take advantage
of high local energy activation prices. The inherently decentralised nature of EV fleets
will likely ensure that it becomes very difficult to take advantage of local imbalances on
a large scale with the whole fleet. However, by segmenting their fleet of EVs based on
geographical location, EV aggregators should be able to ensure that some portions of the
fleet can benefit from very high potential prices.
Page 52 of 66
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This thesis aims to investigate the potential of electric vehicles (EVs) as a resource for grid
frequency control by answering the following two questions:
1 What is the best strategy for an aggregator to participate in the ancillary service markets
with electric vehicles without V2G?
2 What is the future potential for grid frequency control with electric vehicles without V2G?
Regarding question 1, when considering the ancillary services FCR-D Up, aFRR Up and aFRR
Down in eastern Denmark (DK2) the most profitable strategy for an EV aggregator is to
participate in multiple markets. The three ancillary services considered were selected out of
the eight ancillary services procured by Energinet in Denmark. The selection was done based
on information from the scientific literature, knowledge from the EV aggregator Clever, and
Energinet’s recommendations.
Regarding question 2, this thesis showed EV aggregators can expect meaningful profits from de-
livering ancillary services in the future. This is due to the stability of the aFRR markets, where
the prices are likely to remain stable after Energinet joins the European aFRR corporation
framework PICASSO.
Results from Varying Model Flexibility:
Generally, increasing the model’s ability to shift consumption allows for higher ancillary service
profits and lower electricity costs. The average yearly cost of electricity in 2023 was 950 to
920 euros per EV. By participating in the ancillary service markets, an EV aggregator could
decrease these costs by 170 to 210 euros per EV per year. A similar decrease in cost can be
achieved by increasing the number of hours between when EVs are plugged in and when they
start to charge. This allows the model more flexibility to participate in the profitable aFRR
Down market.
Regarding market selection, the model prefers the markets that maximise profits. When the
model has low flexibility FCR-D Up is preferred, and aFRR Down is preferred when flexibility
increases. The aFRR Up market is the least profitable and the model’s least preferred market.
Since FCR-D Up prices are stable throughout the day, the model shifts consumption to minimise
electricity costs when bidding in the FCR-D Up market. In contrast, the aFRR Up and Down
prices vary more, therefore the model shifts consumption to both maximise the earnings from
ancillary service participation and minimise the cost of electricity. These two objectives are
often contradictory, as there are high aFRR prices in hours with high electricity costs i.e. the
peak hours from 17:00 to 21:00, when the electricity tariffs are the highest.
Page 53 of 66
==PAGE:64==
22-06-2024
Model Robustness and Limitations:
The sensitivity analysis shows that the overall results are robust against price deviations of
± 50% for individual ancillary services. Furthermore, the high prices in the FCR-D Up and
aFRR Down markets means that price variations greater than ± 50% of the 2023 prices are
required for the model to choose the aFRR Up market most of the time. This scenario might
occur during 2024, as the prices in the FCR-D Up market have decreased by a factor of 2 to 3
in 2024 compared to 2023. Finally, it was concluded that changing the capacity prices has the
largest impact on the model’s market preference. This is interesting, as it could mean that a
simpler bidding model can be employed by EV aggregators.
These results must be interpreted considering three limitations:
1. The model considers consumption planning over a 24-hour period, meaning that it cannot
utilise electricity cost variation across multiple days
2. The model’s decision-making regarding ancillary service selection and consumption shift-
ing is done at an aggregated level. Therefore the control strategies for the individual EV
have not been considered, but it would be an interesting future research topic.
3. The imbalances are the second largest revenue stream in the model, but the imbalances
are used as a simplified intraday market. Due to data constraints, it was not possible to
model an intraday market where excess and deficit consumption could be traded. Thus, it
was not possible to compare imbalance prices to intraday prices and evaluate the validity
of the simplifaction.
The Future of the Preferred Market - aFRR Down:
The market with the highest potential for profits is aFRR Down, which benefits from three
revenue streams: capacity, energy activation, and imbalance markets. The rules governing this
market are expected to change when Energinet joins the PICASSO aFRR cooperation during
the fourth quarter of 2024. To consider the future prices for aFRR in Denmark, an analysis
of German aFRR capacity and energy activation prices before and after the implementation
of PICASSO was performed. This analysis reveals that capacity prices are likely to remain
stable, whereas energy activation prices, specifically for the upward direction, could increase
significantly in the short term, and then stabilise in the long term.
Furthermore, there is
potential for an EV aggregator to utilise local grid conditions to earn high prices in the energy
activation market. This can be done by grouping the aggregator’s EVs based on geographical
areas and bidding in each area separately.
Recommendations:
When considering the two research questions, it is recommended that EV aggregators pursue
a multi-market bidding strategy to increase profits and reduce risks from single-market price
fluctuations.
Furthermore, it is recommended that EV aggregators pursue both frequency
stabilisation like FCR-D and frequency restoration ancillary services like aFRR in the future,
as both market types are profitable. The expected stability in the aFRR Down market means
that participating in the ancillary services with EVs should remain a profitable business in the
future, which hopefully incentivises EV aggregators to help ensure a stable electricity supply.
Page 54 of 66
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1] J. Rifkin, The Zero Marginal Cost Society. Palgrave Macmillian, 1st ed., 2014.
[2] H. Ritchie, P. Rosado, and M. Roser, “Energy Production and Consumption,” 2020.
[3] K. Calvin, D. Dasgupta, G. Krinner, A. Mukherji, P. W. Thorne, C. Trisos, J. Romero,
P. Aldunce, K. Barrett, G. Blanco, W. W. Cheung, S. Connors, F. Denton, A. Diongue-
Niang, D. Dodman, M. Garschagen, O. Geden, B. Hayward, C. Jones, F. Jotzo, T. Krug,
R. Lasco, Y.-Y. Lee, V. Masson-Delmotte, M. Meinshausen, K. Mintenbeck, A. Mokssit,
F. E. Otto, M. Pathak, A. Pirani, E. Poloczanska, H.-O. P¨ortner, A. Revi, D. C. Roberts,
J. Roy, A. C. Ruane, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, R. Slade, A. Slangen, Y. Sokona, A. A.
S¨orensson, M. Tignor, D. van Vuuren, Y.-M. Wei, H. Winkler, P. Zhai, Z. Zommers, J.-C.
Hourcade, F. X. Johnson, S. Pachauri, N. P. Simpson, C. Singh, A. Thomas, E. Totin,
A. Alegr´ıa, K. Armour, B. Bednar-Friedl, K. Blok, G. Ciss´e, F. Dentener, S. Eriksen,
E. Fischer, G. Garner, C. Guivarch, M. Haasnoot, G. Hansen, M. Hauser, E. Hawkins,
T. Hermans, R. Kopp, N. Leprince-Ringuet, J. Lewis, D. Ley, C. Ludden, L. Niamir,
Z. Nicholls, S. Some, S. Szopa, B. Trewin, K.-I. van der Wijst, G. Winter, M. Witting,
A. Birt, and M. Ha, “IPCC, 2023: Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. Contribution
of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, H. Lee and J. Romero (eds.)]. IPCC,
Geneva, Switzerland.,” tech. rep., Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 7 2023.
[4] IEA, “World Energy Outlook 2023,” tech. rep., IEA, Paris, 2023.
[5] European Commision, “Fit for 55,” 4 2024.
[6] European Commision, “REPowerEU Plan,” 2022.
[7] K. Schmietendorf, J. Peinke, and O. Kamps, “The impact of turbulent renewable energy
production on power grid stability and quality,” The European Physical Journal B, vol. 90,
p. 222, 11 2017.
[8] P. Denholm, Trieu Mai, Rick Wallace Kenyon, Ben Kroposki, and Mark O’Malley, “Inertia
and the Power Grid: A Guide Without the Spin,” tech. rep., National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, 2020.
[9] K. Sevdari, L. Calearo, P. B. Andersen, and M. Marinelli, “Ancillary services and electric
vehicles: An overview from charging clusters and chargers technology perspectives,” 10
2022.
[10] K. Knezovic, S. Martinenas, P. B. Andersen, A. Zecchino, and M. Marinelli, “Enhancing
the Role of Electric Vehicles in the Power Grid: Field Validation of Multiple Ancillary
Page 55 of 66
==PAGE:66==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
22-06-2024
Services,” IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification, vol. 3, pp. 201–209, 3
2017.
[11] Energinet, “INTRODUKTION TIL ELMARKEDET Kort introduktion til engros-og de-
tailmarkedet,” tech. rep., Energinet, 2024.
[12] A. Brooks, “Integration of electric drive vehicles with the power grid-a new application
for vehicle batteries,” in Seventeenth Annual Battery Conference on Applications and Ad-
vances. Proceedings of Conference (Cat. No.02TH8576), p. 239, IEEE, 2002.
[13] P. D. Lund, J. Lindgren, J. Mikkola, and J. Salpakari, “Review of energy system flexibility
measures to enable high levels of variable renewable electricity,” Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, vol. 45, pp. 785–807, 5 2015.
[14] S. S. Ravi and M. Aziz, “Utilization of Electric Vehicles for Vehicle-to-Grid Services:
Progress and Perspectives,” Energies, vol. 15, p. 589, 1 2022.
[15] T. U. Solanke, V. K. Ramachandaramurthy, J. Y. Yong, J. Pasupuleti, P. Kasinathan, and
A. Rajagopalan, “A review of strategic charging–discharging control of grid-connected
electric vehicles,” Journal of Energy Storage, vol. 28, p. 101193, 4 2020.
[16] E. Sortomme and M. A. El-Sharkawi, “Optimal Combined Bidding of Vehicle-to-Grid
Ancillary Services,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 3, pp. 70–79, 3 2012.
[17] A. Thingvad, C. Ziras, and M. Marinelli, “Economic value of electric vehicle reserve pro-
vision in the Nordic countries under driving requirements and charger losses,” Journal of
Energy Storage, vol. 21, pp. 826–834, 2 2019.
[18] S. Faddel, A. Aldeek, A. T. Al-Awami, E. Sortomme, and Z. Al-Hamouz, “Ancillary Ser-
vices Bidding for Uncertain Bidirectional V2G Using Fuzzy Linear Programming,” Energy,
vol. 160, pp. 986–995, 10 2018.
[19] Transportministeriet, “Notat: Udvikling i ladeinfrastruktur og bestand af el- og plug-in-
hybridbiler,” tech. rep., Transportministeriet, 2023.
[20] “Clever Sustainable Mission,” 2024.
[21] Clever, “CleverReimbursement,” 2024.
[22] Clever, “Clever Intelligent Charging,” 2024.
[23] S. Krauter and L. Zhang, “Correlation of grid-frequency, electricity prices, share of renew-
able, and CO ¡sub¿2¡/sub¿ —contents in the German electricity grid to enable inexpensive
triggering of Demand—Side—Management,” in 2020 47th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists
Conference (PVSC), pp. 1672–1674, IEEE, 6 2020.
[24] Energinet, “Ancillary services to be delivered in Denmark Tender conditions,” tech. rep.,
Energinet, 11 2023.
[25] NordPool, “Day-ahead market,” 2024.
[26] ACER, “NEMO List,” 2024.
Page 56 of 66
==PAGE:67==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
22-06-2024
[27] NordPool, “Euphemia Overview,” 2024.
[28] EPEX Spot, “Euphemia Presentation,” 2024.
[29] Nord Pool, “Market Times for intraday trading - NordPool overview,” tech. rep., Nord
Pool, 2024.
[30] Energinet, “introduktion-til-systemydelser-januar-2024,” tech. rep., Energinet, 2024.
[31] ENTSO-E, “Entsoe Regional Groups,” 2018.
[32] Energinet, “outlook-for-ancillary-services-2023-2040,” tech. rep., Energinet, 2023.
[33] A. Thingvad, C. Ziras, G. L. Ray, J. Engelhardt, R. R. Mosbæk, and M. Marinelli, “Eco-
nomic Value of Multi-Market Bidding in Nordic Frequency Markets,” in 2022 International
Conference on Renewable Energies and Smart Technologies, REST 2022, Institute of Elec-
trical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2022.
[34] Y. G. Rebours, D. S. Kirschen, M. Trotignon, and S. Rossignol, “A Survey of Frequency
and Voltage Control Ancillary Services—Part I: Technical Features,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Systems, vol. 22, pp. 350–357, 2 2007.
[35] S. Nielsen, P. Sorknæs, and P. A. Østergaard, “Electricity market auction settings in a
future Danish electricity system with a high penetration of renewable energy sources – A
comparison of marginal pricing and pay-as-bid,” Energy, vol. 36, pp. 4434–4444, 7 2011.
[36] A. Thingvad, C. Ziras, J. Hu, and M. Marinelli, “Assessing the energy content of system
frequency and electric vehicle charging efficiency for ancillary service provision,” in 2017
52nd International Universities Power Engineering Conference, UPEC 2017, vol. 2017-
January, pp. 1–6, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 12 2017.
[37] P. Tsagkaroulis, A. Thingvad, M. Marinelli, and K. Suzuki, “Optimal Scheduling of Electric
Vehicles for Ancillary Service Provision with Real Driving Data,” in 2021 56th Interna-
tional Universities Power Engineering Conference (UPEC), pp. 1–6, IEEE, 8 2021.
[38] Energinet and L. K. Arndal, “FCR-D Dynamic Static,” 2024.
[39] Energinet, “Energinet,” 2024.
[40] Energinet, “Energinet PICASSO Implementering,” 2024.
[41] Energinet, “implementation-guide-afrr-eam-ver-1-0-0 Picasso,” tech. rep., Energinet, 2023.
[42] ACER, “PICASSO Purpose,” 2024.
[43] Energinet, “VEJLEDNING TIL FORSKRIFT C2 BALANCEMARKED OG BAL-
ANCEAFREGNING,” tech. rep., Energinet, 4 2023.
[44] Energinet, “forskrift-c2,” tech. rep., Energinet, 2023.
[45] Statnet, Energinet, Fingrid, and Svenska Kraftn¨at, “BSP-Implementation Guide Fifty
Nordic MMS-FCR capacity market Business process: FCR capacity market,” tech. rep.,
Energinet, 2023.
Page 57 of 66
==PAGE:68==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
22-06-2024
[46] Clever and Emilie Linders, “Clever Ancillary Services Start,” 1 2023.
[47] S. Canevese and A. Gatti, “Optimal Energy Bidding for the Italian Balancing Service by
EVs: a Sensitivity Analysis,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Environment and
Electrical Engineering and 2020 IEEE Industrial and Commercial Power Systems Europe
(EEEIC / I&CPS Europe), pp. 1–7, IEEE, 6 2020.
[48] P. B. Andersen, S. Hashemi Toghroljerdi, T. M. Sørensen, B. E. Christensen, J. C. M. L.
Høj, and A. Zecchino, “The Parker Project: Final Report,” tech. rep., Technical University
of Denmark., 2019.
[49] European Alternative Fuels Observatory, “Recharging systems,” 2024.
[50] Regelleistung.net, “Regelleistung.net Data ,” 2024.
[51] Energinet, “Energinet, FCR-D marginal pricing,” 2024.
[52] S. Gao, R. Dai, W. Cao, and Y. Che, “Combined Provision of Economic Dispatch and
Frequency Regulation by Aggregated EVs Considering Electricity Market Interaction,”
IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification, vol. 9, pp. 1723–1735, 3 2023.
[53] A. V. Ntomaris, I. G. Marneris, P. N. Biskas, and A. G. Bakirtzis, “Optimal participation
of RES aggregators in electricity markets under main imbalance pricing schemes: Price
taker and price maker approach,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 206, p. 107786, 5
2022.
[54] Esett, “Esett Handbook,” tech. rep., Esett, 2024.
[55] M. Merten, F. R¨ucker, I. Schoeneberger, and D. U. Sauer, “Automatic frequency restora-
tion reserve market prediction: Methodology and comparison of various approaches,” Ap-
plied Energy, vol. 268, p. 114978, 6 2020.
[56] Energinet, “Behovsanalyse for eltransmission 2023 - Energinets langsigtede udviklingsplan
2024,” tech. rep., Energinet, 2023.
Page 58 of 66
==PAGE:69==
Chapter A
Figures
An example of the aggregated consumption per hour is plotted for a week in February on
Figure A.0.1.
Figure A.0.1: example of the consumption in a Sunday to Sunday week of February 2023.
Page 59 of 66
==PAGE:70==
22-06-2024
The variation of consumption across the seven weekdays is plotted as a boxenplot on Fig-
ure A.0.2. There is variation, with the lowest consumption being during Sundays and Mondays
and peaking sometime midweek.
Figure A.0.2: Boxplot of the daily average consumption, the small variation is an example of
intelligent consumers that charge when the cost of electricity is low. 1 = Monday, 7 = Sunday
The average energy price for DA and energy activation markets for DK1 and DK2 is shown for
week six of February 2023 on Figure A.0.3.
Figure A.0.3: Energy prices for Day Ahead and aFRR energy activation markets during week 6 in
February 2023. Notice that aFRR up EAM DK2 and DK1 overlap for most of the time periods.
Page 60 of 66
==PAGE:71==
22-06-2024
Figure A.0.4: Activation rates for aFRR through 2023
The activation rates for the four aFRR energy activation markets are shown in Figure A.0.4.
DK1 is the two leftmost plots, while DK2 is the two rightmost plots. It can be seen that there
is a high average aFRR Down activation in DK1.
Page 61 of 66
==PAGE:72==
22-06-2024
The daily average price in the capacity prices for aFRR Up and Down plus FCR-D Up in DK2
is shown in Figure A.0.5. It can be seen that prices in 2023 are high for the FCR-D Up market
compared to previous and later years.
Figure A.0.5: Price developments for the three investigated ancillary services markets after 2023
Electricity price developments in DK2 from December 2022 to May 2024 are shown in Fig-
ure A.0.6. It can be seen that the prices are stable except for the gas price scare in December
2022.
Figure A.0.6: Overview of the DK2 DA electricity prices
Page 62 of 66
==PAGE:73==
Chapter B
Full determistic MIP
Objective function
Max(Profit) = RCap + REAM −RElec + RIB
Fully expressed with
RCap =
X
t∈T D0
X
m∈M
xsold
t,m · pcap
t,m
REAM =
X
t∈T D0
(xsold
t,aU · actaU
t
· pEAM
t,aU + xsold
t,aD · actaD
t
· pEAM
t,aD )
RElec =
X
t1∈T D0
CElec
t1
· (ct1 +
X
t2∈T
−sbase
t1,t2 · xshift
t1,t2 + sbase
t2,t1 · xshift
t2,t1 )
RIB =
X
t∈T extend
xIBPlus
t
· pIBPlus
t
−xIBMinus · pIBMinus
t
Subject to these constraints, first constraining sold capacity
xbids
t,m · minBidSizem = xsold
t,m
∀t ∈T D0, m ∈M
xsold
t,m ≤marketSizet,m
∀t ∈T D0, m ∈M
X
m∈M
xsold
t,m ≤MaxBids
∀t ∈T D0
xsold
t1,FC + xsold
t1,aU +
X
t2∈T D0
sDown
t1,t2
· xaDAlloc
t1,t2
≤capavail
∀t1 ∈T D0
xsold
t1,aD =
X
t2∈T D0
sDown
t2,t1
· xaDAlloc
t2,t1
∀t1 ∈T D0
xsold
t,aD ≤0 + maxForecast ·
X
n∈T DownShift
yaDLim
t,n
∀t ∈T D0
X
n∈T DownShift
yaDLim
t,n
≤1
∀t ∈T D0
xsold
t1,FC + xsold
t1,aU + xsold
t1,aD ≤capavail
t2
+ maxForecast · (1 −yaDLim
t1,(t2−t1))
∀t1 ∈T D0,
t2 ∈{t1 + 1; min(hoursInDay, t1 + tDownShift)}
Page 63 of 66
==PAGE:74==
22-06-2024
Then constraining shifting and planned capacity
capavail
t1
= 70% · (ct1 +
X
t2∈T
−sbase
t1,t2 · xshift
t1,t2 + sbase
t2,t1 · xshift
t2,t1 )
∀t1 ∈T D0
X
t2∈T D0
st1,t2 · xshift
t1,t2 ≤70% · ct1
∀t1 ∈T D0
capavail
t1
≤max(70% · ct1, sBase
t1,t2 · 70% · ct2
∀t2 ∈T D0)
∀t1 ∈T D0
Imbalances
xIBPlusF
t
−xIBMinusF
t
= xIBPlus
t
−xIBMinus
t
∀t ∈T extend
xIBPlus
t
≤xIBPlusF
t
∀t ∈T extend
xIBMinus
t
≤xIBMinusF
t
∀t ∈T extend
xsold
(t−1),aD · actD
t−1 + xV StorPlus
t−1
−xIBPlusF
t
= xV StorPlus
t
∀t ∈(1 + T D0)
xsold
(t−1),aU · actU
t−1 + xV StorMinus
t−1
−xIBMinusF
t
= xV StorMinus
t
∀t ∈(1 + T D0)
xV StorPlus
t−1
−xIBPlusF
t
= xV StorPlus
t
∀t ∈T D1 \ 1
xV StorMinus
t−1
−xIBMinusF
t
= xV StorMinus
t
∀t ∈T D1 \ 1
xIBPlus
t
≤maxForecast
∀t ∈T extend
xIBMinus
t
≤maxForecast
∀t ∈T extend
X
t∈T D0
xsold
t,aD · actD
t =
X
t∈T D0
xIBPlus
t
X
t∈T D0
xsold
t,aU · actU
t =
X
t∈T D0
xIBMinus
t
Initial states of Imbalances variables
xV StorPlus
0
= 0
xIBPlusF
0
= 0
xV StorPlus
t
= 0|t = HourDay + tIBMax
xV StorMinus
0
= 0
xIBMinusF
0
= 0
xV StorMinus
t
= 0|t = HourDay + tIBMax
Declaring variables
xbids
t,m ∈N+
∀t ∈T D0, m ∈M
xsold
t,m ∈R+
∀t ∈T D0, m ∈M
xaDP
t1,t2 ∈R+
∀t1, t2 ∈T D0
yaDLim
t,n
∈0, 1
∀t ∈T D0, n ∈T DownShift
xshift
t1,t2 ∈R+
∀t1, t2 ∈T D0
capavail
t
∈R+
∀t ∈T D0
xIBPlus
t
, xIBMinus
t
, xIBPlusF
t
, xIBMinusF
t
, xV storPlus
t
, xV StorMinus
t
∈R+
∀t ∈T extend
Page 64 of 66
==PAGE:75==
Chapter C
Results
Market
Combination
DA
FCR-D Up
aFRR Up
aFRR Down
Combined
tCapacityShift
tDownShift
Total
Costs
[M
EUR]
AS
revenue
[M
EUR]
Total
Costs
[M
EUR]
AS
revenue
[M
EUR]
Total
Costs
[M
EUR]
AS
revenue
[M
EUR]
Total
Costs
[M
EUR]
AS
revenue
[M
EUR]
Total
Costs
[M
EUR]
AS
revenue
[M
EUR]
0
2
-9.55
0
-8.64
0.91
-9.13
0.41
-8.33
1.22
-7.86
1.69
1
2
-9.39
0
-8.47
0.92
-8.90
0.53
-8.00
1.43
-7.52
1.90
2
2
-9.31
0
-8.39
0.92
-8.76
0.62
-7.81
1.57
-7.34
2.02
3
2
-9.27
0
-8.35
0.92
-8.66
0.70
-7.67
1.72
-7.23
2.14
4
2
-9.25
0
-8.33
0.92
-8.60
0.78
-7.59
1.83
-7.17
2.21
5
2
-9.23
0
-8.31
0.92
-8.57
0.81
-7.53
1.92
-7.12
2.26
6
2
-9.22
0
-8.30
0.92
-8.54
0.83
-7.49
1.95
-7.09
2.28
7
2
-9.20
0
-8.28
0.92
-8.52
0.84
-7.46
1.97
-7.07
2.30
8
2
-9.20
0
-8.28
0.92
-8.52
0.84
-7.46
1.97
-7.07
2.30
Table C.0.1: Total costs and revenue for bidding under different market combinations and scenarios, where AS = ancillary services.
Page 65 of 66
==PAGE:76==
22-06-2024
Table C.0.2: Overview of the ancillary services data used in this report.
Data type
Description
Data structure
Treatment
Source
Day ahead prices
Electricity prices exclud-
ing tariffs and taxes
One
price
per
bidding
zone per hour
None
Energy data service
Tariffs
Extra cost for electricity
One number per month
None
Clever
Aggregated EV availabil-
ity
Forecast of EV consump-
tion in MWh for 10000
EVs
MWh consumption per
hour
Dates scrabbled, but sea-
sonality is kept
Clever
FCR-D Upwards Capac-
ity Prices
Average price of Pay as
Bid market [euros/MW]
Hourly
prices
for
the
early and late auction
Validated
against
marginal price
Energi Data Service
FCR-D Upwards Bought
Capacity
Bought
capacity
in
[MW/hour]
MW/hour for all hours of
the year for both auctions
None
Energi Data Service
FCR Capacity Prices
Marginal
price
in
the
FCR market [euros/MW]
Hourly
prices
which
change every four hours
starting from 00:00
None
Energi Data Service
FCR Bought Capacity
Bought
capacity
[MW]
per hour for symmetric
market
Same hourly value for all
of 2023
Hourly
value
adjusted
from 23 to 25 MW based
on Entsoe requirements
for DK1
Energi Data Service &
calculated based on [24]
aFRR DK1
Capacity Bought
Bought
capacity
[MW]
per hour for both sym-
metric market
No data
Hourly capacity specified
based on current weekly
procurement
of
±
100
MW
Tender requirements for
ancillary services
aFRR DK2
Capacity Bought
Bought
capacity
[MW]
per hour for the upwards
and downwards markets
Hourly bought capacity
in each Nordic bidding
zone per hour and direc-
tion
For
each
direction
the
sum of bought capacity
on
bidding
zones
with
price equal to DK2 price
is used.
Energi
Data
Service
-
Calculated
aFRR DK1
Capacity Price
Price for providing 100
MW symmetric aFRR ca-
pacity for one week
[euros/MW]
Average price for capac-
ity in [euros/MW] given
for one week
Assumes that the weekly
prices can be interpolated
to hourly prices for when
the hourly capacity mar-
ket is introduced.
Energinet - Calculated
aFRR DK2
Capacity Price
Price per MW
[euros/MW] for DK2
Marginal price for capac-
ity across bidding zones
with DK2 per hour
None
Energi Data Service
aFRR DK1 EAM
activation rate
The ratio of the bought
capacity which is acti-
vated, given as a static
hourly value.
Activated
capacity
&
bought capacity per hour
in DK1
activation rate = Acti-
vated capacity / bought
capacity per hour
Energi Data Service - cal-
culated
aFRR DK2 EAM
activation rate
Same as Above
Activated
capacity
in
each bidding zone in the
Nordics per hour
Same as above
Contact with Energinet -
calculated
aFRR DK1 EAM Prices
Price per MWh delivered
energy [euros/MWh]
Combination
of
Day
Ahead dataset and Im-
balance dataset
Calculated based on best
price of ± 100 DKK/MW
Day Ahead and regulat-
ing price
Energi Data Service
+ Tender Conditions
aFRR DK2 EAM Prices
Price per MWh delivered
energy [euros/MWh]
Same as above
Calculated based on best
price from Day Ahead
and regulating price
Energi Data Service
+ Tender Conditions
German aFRR capacity
prices
Capacity prices in
[euros/MW]
for
Ger-
many before and after
PICASSO entry
Average price given in
four hour chunks for up
and downwards market
None
Regelleistung.net
German
aFRR
EAM
prices
EAM prices in
[euros/MWh]
for
Ger-
many before and after PI-
CASSO entry
Minimum
price
in
the
market for both direc-
tions in 15 minute inter-
vals
None
Regelleistung.net
Page 66 of 66
