==PAGE:1==
Setting Targets Aligned with the
Paris Agreement Based on
Human Needs Fulfillment
DTU Sustain
Solène Boivent
Supervisors: Michael Zwicky Hauschild and Teddy Serrano
Master’s thesis
==PAGE:2==
Setting Targets Aligned with the Paris Agreement Based on Human Needs
Fulfillment
Master’s Thesis
June, 2024
By
Solène Boivent
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Byg-
ningstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Staying within a safe operating space where total human impacts do not exceed the
Earth’s carrying capacities is essential. This entails rationing resources and environ-
mental budgets and allocating them with sharing principles among activities. Current
sharing principles for products are often considered unfair or inconsistent because
they do not address how products meet societal needs. This study develops a region-
alised target-setting method for final-consumer products, the National Need Approach
(NNA), based on their contribution to humans’ needs fulfilment, for climate change.
Final-consumer products are grouped by activities fulfilling the same function (e.g.,
mobility in person.km/yr), and a carbon budget is calculated for each from 2022 to 2050.
This process starts with a global budget downscaled to country using the Equal Per
Capita principle, and then to activities using a new sharing principle, the Exemplary
Households (EHH). It uses the distribution among activities of households currently
living below 2.5 tCO2eq/year. In parallel, activity levels are projected to 2050 under
two scenarios: Business as Usual (BAU) based on current consumption, and Sufficiency,
based on Decent Living Standards. The ratio between budget (kg CO2eq/yr) and
activity level (e.g. pkm/yr) defines an activity’s intensity target (e.g. kg CO2eq/pkm)
acting as a sustainability threshold, for each year. An absolute environmental sustain-
ability assessment is then performed on a product by comparing its impacts (calculated
by LCA) to the intensity target for the activity its supports.
The method is applied to the food and transport sectors in Denmark. Results show
that in the Sufficiency scenario, more products stay below the intensity targets than
in the BAU scenario. A comparison with the Grandfathering (GF) sharing principle
is conducted: the GF allocates a small share to food products, causing basic food
to exceed the target, whereas the EHH distribution allows more food products to
stay below the threshold. However, this entails smaller budgets for other sectors
e.g. transport, causing more transportation modes to exceed the target. This shows
the necessity to prioritize activities in a world under constrained environmental budgets.
The NNA shows potential despite its limitations, primarily due to data availability
issues. Further refinement is necessary to accurately assess the fulfillment of human
needs in heterogeneous sectors such as healthcare. The NNA holds promise for ex-
tending to other global environmental impacts e.g. ocean acidification. Moreover,
integrating prioritarianism could enhance the NNA by addressing justice concerns such
as historical responsibility and distribution of resources. Additionally, future efforts
should concentrate on integrating assessments for business-to-business products as
well as entire companies. This study attempts to set intensity target based on the
final utility of products. It is insightful for companies to assess the relevance and
compatibility of their products with a world aligned with the Paris Agreement, and for
policymakers to understand the need for sufficiency and consumption-behavior changes
to meet this target.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgment
I would like to thank greatly my supervisor, Teddy Serrano, who has been present at
every step of the way. I consider myself very lucky to have been supervised by someone
so interested and involved in the subject. Thank you for our enlightening talks, for
the time and effort you invested in my supervision, and for always believing I could
achieve more than I thought.
I extend my thanks to Michael Hauschild and Anders Bjørn, for their valuable feed-
back and constructive suggestions, which significantly improved the quality of this thesis.
On a personal note, I want to thank my workmates and friends who were also working
on their theses at the same time as me. Thank you for our common work sessions that
helped me stay focused and motivated on this long-term project. Finally, a special
thanks to Théo Balanza, for his endless support, both personally and academically.
This thesis would not be nearly as complete without his encouragement and assistance.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Table of Contents
Abstract
ii
Acknowledgment
iii
Abbreviations, Acronyms & Technical Terms
vi
1
Introduction
1
2
Methodology
5
2.1
Overall methodological framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Global budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.2
Regional budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.3
Activity budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.3
Activity level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.3.1
Business as usual scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.3.2
Sufficiency scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4
Intensity targets and products’ impact intensity . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3
Results
16
3.1
Regional budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Sectoral budget . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
Activity level
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4
Final results in Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.1
Food sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.4.2
Mobility sectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.5
Sensitivity analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5.1
Influence of the choice of region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.5.2
Influence of the choice of sharing principle . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Discussion
27
4.1
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
Data availability and representativeness . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.2
Heterogeneous activities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
4.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.1
Prospective LCA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2.2
Development of the method for other Planetary Boundaries
. .
29
4.2.3
Extension of the allocation principles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4.2.4
Intermediary products and companies assessment . . . . . . . .
31
5
Conclusion
31
6
References
33
iv
==PAGE:6==
Appendices
37
A
Consumption categories and activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
B
Comparison of global emission pathway with current measured emissions 37
C
Exiobase characteristics and calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
C.1
Exiobase characteristics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
C.2
Consumption-based emissions calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
D
Concordance matrices with Exiobase
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
D.1
Concordance matrix between Exiobase products and consumption
categories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
D.2
Concordance matrix between Exiobase products and activities .
39
E
Construction of the Exemplary Households sharing principle . . . . . .
39
F
Activity levels . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
F.1
Sufficiency activity level calculations for transportation . . . . .
44
G
LCA process used for the LCA of products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
v
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations, Acronyms & Technical Terms
ACA
Absolute convergence approach (target-setting method)
AESA
Absolute environmental sustainability assessment
BAU
Business as usual
CO
Cost optimisation (sharing principle)
COICOP
Classification of individual consumption by purpose
CR
Capacity to reduce (sharing principle)
DLS
Decent Living Standards
EHH
Examplary households (sharing principle)
EPC
Equal per capita (sharing principle)
EPU
Equal per unit (sharing principle)
FCE
Final consumption expenditure (sharing principle)
GF
Grandfathering (sharing principle)
GHG
Greenhouse gas
GMRIO
Global multi-regional input-output
HD
Historical debt (sharing principle)
IPCC
Intergovernmental panel on climate change
LCA
Life cycle assessment
PB
Planetary Boundary
PO
Physical output production (sharing principle)
SBTi
Science-based Targets initiative
SDA
Sectoral decabornization approach (target-setting method)
SOS
Safe operating space
SoSOS
Share of safe operating space
vi
==PAGE:8==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
1
Introduction
Staying within a safe operating space (SOS) where total human impacts do not exceed
the Earth’s carrying capacities must be a priority, such as the Planetary Boundaries
(PB) framework aims to illustrate (Richardson et al., 2023; Steffen et al., 2015). The
PBs are a set of boundaries for human impacts on nine key biophysical processes that
regulate the stability of the Earth system. If these limits were significantly and persis-
tently transgressed, it is very likely that the Earth would enter a state different from
that of the Holocene, a state that would be far less conducive to human development
and prosperity.
As six of nine of the PBs are currently transgressed, planning of the resources allocation
is needed. The carrying capacities are translated into environmental budgets, that must
then be allocated among human activities to avoid transgression. This distribution
is done through sharing (or allocation) principles, that can be defined as sets of rules
to assign a share of the natural carrying capacities to anthropogenic systems (Bjorn,
Chandrakumar, et al., 2020). Various sharing principles have been developed, taking
their roots in distributive justice, a philosophical field where one wonders how to dis-
tribute benefit and burdens among e.g. a group of individuals, companies, or products
(Ryberg et al., 2020). Different ethical perspectives lead to numerous distributive
justice theories, the more widely used for the construction of sharing principles being
egalitarianism, utilitarianism and prioritarianism (Bjorn, Chandrakumar, et al., 2020).
Box 1 details distributive justice theories and their link with sharing principles.
Box 1: Sharing principle and distributive justice
Egalitarianism considers that it is unjust for individuals to be worse than others; from
that ethical consideration comes the most commonly applied sharing principle Equal
per Capita (EPC) (Bjorn, Chandrakumar, et al., 2020; Ryberg et al., 2020), consisting
in assigning the same share for all individuals. Though this sharing principle is very
useful to downscale from global to regional scale, it must be used in combination with
others for sectors and companies’ assessments. The Convergence principle also stems
from an egalitarian perspective: the idea behind it is that over time, the per capita
consumption and environmental impact of different regions, sectors, or individuals
should converge to a sustainable level. Utilitarianism holds that the maximum
of social welfare should be maximized. The main sharing principles resulting are
Economic Value Added (EPC), Final Consumption Expenditure (FCE), Physical
Output Production (PO) or Cost Optimisation (CO). Those are usually used to
distribute carrying capacities among industries (Ryberg et al., 2020). Prioritarianism
picks up on utilitarianism in that it states a social welfare should be maximized,
but this time the welfare is prioritarian-weighted: the worse the situation of an
individual, the greater the value of their benefice. The sharing principles Capability
to Reduce (CR) and Historical Debt (HD) are based on prioritarianism. Another
theory, sufficientarianism, stating that what matters is that everyone has enough,
raises interests to create more fair sharing principles, such as the Fulfilment of
Human Needs (FHN) developed in Heide et al., 2023. Finally, another widespread
sharing principle is the grandfathering principle (GF): though it is not based on any
distributive justice theory but on the acquired rights principle (Ryberg et al., 2020),
its facility to use (due to data availability) makes it very convenient and popular.
1 of 47
==PAGE:9==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
Impact of human activities can then be compared to their assigned share, by performing
an absolute environmental sustainability assessment (AESA), which has a basis in
life cycle assessment (LCA) (Bjorn, Chandrakumar, et al., 2020). If the comparison
results in a higher impact than permitted by its allocated share, the system is declared
environmentally unsustainable. Contrary to traditional LCA where impacts from
human activities are assessed relatively to a reference activity or compared with one
another, AESA compares the activities’ impacts to an absolute threshold defined by
the environment capacities. Bjorn, Chandrakumar, et al. (2020) give the example
of transportation to illustrate the two approaches: while in a relative assessment an
electric train can be identified as more environmentally sustainable than a diesel car,
its impacts might exceed the threshold defined by the sharing principle used and be
unsustainable from an absolute perspective. It is worth noting than the choice of
sharing principle can strongly influence the threshold value and thus, the conclusions
reached (Sandin et al., 2015).
At the level of companies/products and for climate change, the Science-based Targets
initiative (SBTi) is the leading organization approving the alignment of the mitigation
pathways proposed by businesses with the Paris Agreement (Bjorn, Lloyd, et al., 2021).
Box 2: Paris Agreement
The Paris Agreement is a legally binding international treaty on climate change
adopted in 2015, aiming at containing “the increase in the global average temperature
to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels” and pursuing efforts “to limit the
temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.” through the reduction of
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change, 2015). Those two goals are less ambitious than the Climate change PB that
establishes the limit of the CO2 concentration at 335ppm (Richardson et al., 2023),
but they have been identified by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC) to be critical thresholds: crossing them would drastically increase the risks
of facing very severe climate change impacts such as frequent and severe droughts,
heatwaves and rainfall (IPCC, 2021).
Through the years, SBTi developed up to seven target-setting methods for scope 1 and
2 emissions of companies (Bjorn, Lloyd, et al., 2021). A target-setting method can
be defined as a structured approach used by organizations to define and implement
specific, measurable, and time-bound objectives for reducing their environmental impact,
particularly greenhouse gas emissions. Currently, the SBTi recommends using either
the Sectoral decarbonization approach (SDA) or the Absolute convergence approach
(ACA), without stating clearly the reasoning behind this recommendation (Bjorn,
Lloyd, et al., 2021). The ACA method uses the Grandfathering principle, stating that
company’s allowed emissions in year y is proportional to the company’s current share
of emission (Bjorn, Lloyd, et al., 2021). The SDA method is more complex as it uses
about four different sharing principles. Figure 1 illustrates the SDA framework.
2 of 47
==PAGE:10==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
Figure 1: SDA target-setting method framework for homogeneous sectors. CO = Cost-Optimisation;
EPU = Equal per Unit; PO = Physical Output production.
Figure 1 highlights steps that are debatable and discussed in the literature. A major
shortcoming of the SDA is that it does not take human needs into account when
allocating emissions. This is induced by the use of the CO principle (problematic step
n°1 in Figure 1), that tries to find the cheapest way of allocating emissions without other
concerns such as social justice or the necessity of products. This lack of human-needs
focus is also caused by the choice of sectors (problematic step n°2), and the choice of
activity indicators for those sectors that are used for the EPU1 principle (problematic
step n°3). The SDA uses sectors defined by the International Energy Agency (IEA) in
the Energy Technology Perspective (SBTi, 2015). Those sectors are at industry level
(e.g. iron and steel), and not at "individual human beings" level, and their chosen
indicators (e.g. tons of steel) are not linked with human final needs. Several studies
advocate that emissions allocation should always be done in connection with final user
i.e. human being, that industry share should always be decided upon how much people
benefits from the industry (Ryberg et al., 2020). This is very much linked with another
weakness of the SDA: its focus on eco-efficiency alone, instead of eco-effectiveness.
Hauschild (2015) argues that products should not only be eco-efficient (lowering the
environmental impact of one-unit physical output) but also "eco-effective, in the sense
of fulfilling needs in a manner that is in accordance with the overall conditions that
must be met by a sustainable society", where conditions could be for example the
Planetary Boundaries. Thus, before assessing the environmental performances of a
technology to produce a physical output, the question would be to decide what is the
"right" output to produce. The SDA does not address this concern, since it uses pre-
made industrial sectors (problematic step n°2), measures performance through industry
indicators rather than indicators of human needs (problematic step n°3), and applies
Business as usual activity projections (problematic step n°4). Indeed, by using the IEA
pre-established scenarios with continuous economic and consumption growth, no room
is left for questioning the quantity of production, even though this is an essential lever
for sustainability. For instance the IPCC presents solutions including sufficiency policies
and demand-side mitigation (IPCC, 2022a), and several studies mention the need for
more sustainable consumption model to meet environmental constraints, involving
1Equal per unit (EPU) is the name given here of the sharing principle that consists of giving an
equal share of emission per unit of output produced (similarly to the Equal per capita principle that
allocates an equal share of emission per person). In the literature, this sharing principle is never made
explicit.
3 of 47
==PAGE:11==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
reduction in luxury consumption or waste habits (Millward-Hopkins et al., 2020).
Finally, working with sectoral budget from the IEA (problematic step n°2) implies
working at a global scale, without any regional perspective. This results in missing all
regional-variation such as climate, current development or energy-mix, that can have a
significant impact on technical capability of environmental performance (Li et al., 2020).
New target-setting methods should be developed to ensure a just and fair transition
to a sustainable society. Heide et al. (2023) paves the way by developing a sharing
principle determining the Share of Space Operating Space (SoSOS) assigned to a sector
or product based on the importance of the need that the sector or product meets for
the users. This paper is a first attempt to evaluate the product’s impact in a more fair
way than previously cited sharing principles. However, it relies mostly on imitating
"exemplary countries" (chosen based on their environmental performance as well as
social indicators) to define a sustainable consumption model and derive an "exemplary"
allocation of environmental budgets. This model succeeds in addressing some of the
challenges cited previously, but it lacks of taking into account regional variations.
Moreover, it is presented as a new sharing principle, and is suited to calculate the
performance of products one by one, but it lacks of a systematic framework to be
identified as a Target-setting method. It particularly misses one of the three major
components of a target setting method identified by SBTi (SBTi, 2020), namely an
emissions scenario ("defining the magnitude and timing of emissions reductions").
The purpose of this master thesis is to introduce a regionalised target-setting method
for GHG emission reduction, called the National Need Approach (NNA). The NNA
introduces a dynamic absolute threshold for final-consumer products, based on their
ability to fulfil the need they are designed for. The targets will be calculated for these
final activities and will be addressed using units measuring human needs. For instance,
the mobility sector will not be split between modes as done in the SDA method (that
separates transportation by air, road or rail). Instead, it will be aligned with human
mobility needs: daily mobility and long-distance mobility. This categorization focuses
on the purpose and frequency of travel. It does not assume which mode should be used,
but rather focuses on fulfilling the need itself, thereby highlighting the most relevant
transportation modes for each function. By using indicators measuring human needs,
the method helps to determine whether reduction efforts should focus on technological
improvements (e.g. optimizing a vehicle), changes in technology usage (e.g. switching to
a different type of vehicle), or if adjustments in usage patterns is needed (e.g. reducing
the total distance traveled per person). In addition, one of the main features of NNA
is that it acknowledges regional variability, both when allocating emissions between
sectors and when estimating the level of activity.
The NNA method is currently destined for scientific research, but it is intended to
evolve into a target-setting method that can be utilized by businesses and policymakers.
After designing the methodological framework, the method is applied to the food and
mobility sectors in Denmark and Spain. Those countries are chosen for their differences
in terms of size, density (respectively 146 pers/km2 and 95 pers/km2), climate and
culture, all these factors having an impact on final needs.
4 of 47
==PAGE:12==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
2
Methodology
2.1
Overall methodological framework
The NNA is targeted at final products, which are in this study defined as goods or
services that can be used by final consumers such as households. Those final products
satisfy an activity (also referred as function in this study), defined as the fulfilment of
a human need (e.g. the need to move around). The NNA method is inspired by the
functional unit principle of LCA.
As described in Figure 2, the method relies on three main pillars, that will be detailed
in the next parts of the methodology. Firstly, a climate impact budget for each activity
in kgCO2eq/year, also referred as GHG budget or carbon budget, is calculated in Section
2.2. The budget is calculated through several steps (from global to regional to activity)
using different sharing principles. In parallel, the activity level is calculated in Section
2.3, representing the estimated demand from final-consumers for the activity (expressed
e.g. in person.km/year). Two scenarios are explored to represent different consumption
patterns: a Business as usual scenario and a Sufficiency scenario. In the last part of the
method (Section 2.4, the intensity target is first determined by division of the budget
with the activity level (expressed e.g. in kgCO2eq/pkm). The AESA of final products
is completed by comparing their impacts (calculated by LCA and expressed in e.g.
kgCO2eq/pkm) to the intensity target for the activity they support. This intensity
target can be seen as a threshold assessing if products deliver the wanted activity at
the right environmental cost.
Figure 2: Flowchart of the methodology.
This study will apply the methodology to four activities:
• In the food category, the activities "Provide energy (in kcal)" and "Provide
protein (in grams of protein)".
5 of 47
==PAGE:13==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
• In the mobility category, the activities "Daily mobility (in pkm)" and "Long-
distance mobility (in pkm)".
Food and mobility are among the sectors with the highest share of emissions, and they
are particularly interesting as they represent different levels of human needs. Obviously
food is a vital need, but a lack of mobility is very limiting as it can lead to social
exclusion, and restrict opportunities to participate in society (Rao et al., 2018).
Regarding the temporal aspect, the NNA is a dynamic method, which intents to draw
targets from a base year until a target year. In this study, it is developed for the period
from 2022 to 2050. The base year is chosen to be 2022 because most of the available
data to date are from 2022. The target year is set to 2050 as the IPCC projections
go until this year (IPCC, 2022a). It is also a common target year for countries pledge
(including Denmark2), and matches with SBTi long-term targets (SBTi, 2015). The
methodology could be adapted to another time-frame when the 2050 target will be
too short for instance. If extended to another carrying capacity which data are not
available for 2022, the base year could also be changed.
2.2
Budget
2.2.1
Global budget
The first components to build a target-setting method is to determine a carbon budget
and emissions scenario (SBTi, 2020). Any emissions scenario that could lead to the
respect of the Paris Agreement can be applied to the NNA, as long as all global
emissions are considered.
Application
The NNA is illustrated with an emissions scenario derived from the
median of one of the IPCC modelled pathways considered by the Working Group (WG)
III in their 6th Assessment Report (AR6), namely "Limit warming to 2°C (>67%) or
return warming to 1.5°C (>50%) after a high overshoot, NDCs until 2030", displayed
in Figure 3 (IPCC et al., 2022). This pathway includes the "GHG emissions until 2030
associated with the implementation of Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)
announced prior to COP263, followed by accelerated emissions reductions" (IPCC,
2022a). It is likely that following this pathway would limit the global warming to well
below 2°C, and it might lead to a return at 1.5°C after a high overshoot. This scenario
is thus consistent with the respect of the Paris Agreement. Lastly, this particular
scenario was chosen for the method illustration because since the release of the AR6, it
is the modelled pathway leading to compliance with the Paris Agreement that is the
most aligned with current measured emissions, that were of 53.79 GtCO2eq in 2022
according to the Emissions Database for Global Atmospheric Research4).
2IAE Denmark Executive Summary, available at https://www.iea.org/reports/denmark-2023/
executive-summary, accessed on the 14/06/2024
326th UN Climate Change Conference held in Glasgow in 2021
4The EDGAR is a joint project of the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre and the
Dutch Environmental Assessment Agency, which among other things estimates global GHG emissions
using the latest IPCC guidelines. https://edgar.jrc.ec.europa.eu/report_2023, accessed on the
16/06/2024.
6 of 47
==PAGE:14==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
Figure 3: Global carbon budget projection from 2022 based on a median modelled pathway of the
IPCC AR6 WGIII. Values were given every 5 years, a linear interpolation has been done for the years
in between.
Box 3: Comparison of the chosen global emission pathway.
Comparison with the Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSP) considered by the
IPCC WGI in the AR6: the modelled pathway ranges within the same category as
the SSP1-2.6 (IPCC, 2022a), that represents a scenario leading us to a radiative
forcing of 2.6 W.m2 in 2100.
Comparison with SBTi SDA: for data availability reasons (Krabbe et al., 2015),
SBTi uses the IEA’s 2DS scenario, which they prove to be "in close alignment"
with the RCP2.6, the AR5 version of the SSP1-2.6. The SDA considers only CO2
emissions and not all GHG like the NNA, preventing for further comparison.
2.2.2
Regional budget
One of the main features of the NNA is the regional downsizing to take account of
local variations in human needs. Physical characteristics such as density, climate,
weather, relief, etc, can impact the importance of activities, e.g. warmer climate will
probably require less heating demand but more cooling demand than a cooler climate,
but also cultural characteristics (religion can influence diet, traditional recipe may need
particular type of food and cooking device...). The smaller the region, the more precise
and relevant the results.
The GHG budgets in the base year are drawn from a global environmentally extended
multi-regional input-output (GMRIO) database, using consumption-based emissions.
Due to globalization and the expansion of international trade, the impacts of a country’s
consumption increasingly occur abroad. Tukker, Giljum, et al. (2018) deem GMRIO
to be the most pertinent tool "to provide a consistent accounting framework" for
the analysis of countries environmental footprint. For the base year, the country’s
share of the global budget is equal to the country’s consumption-based emissions share
calculated with the GMRIO. The global budget calculated with the GMRIO might not
correspond exactly with the global budget determined in Section 2.2.1: for instance,
variations due to differences in emission coefficients can occur. Thus, to harmonise the
7 of 47
==PAGE:15==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
previous global budget with GMRIO results, Equation 1 must be used.
Br(yb) = BGMRIO,r(yb)
BGMRIO,W(yb) · BW(yb)
(1)
where:
• Br: carbon budget of region r in tCO2eq
• yb: base year
• r: region (can be a country, a continent...)
• W: World
• BW: global carbon budget determined in Section 2.2.1
For the target year yt, the Equal per Capita (EPC) principle is applied: the allocated
share of carbon emissions is equal to the country’s share of global population in 2050
(see Equation 2). It is the sharing principle suggested by Ryberg et al. (2020) in their
short-term recommendations to distribute from global to regional, based on several
justifications. The first reason they invoke is that it is very controversial to try to
define equality without isolationism5. Then, if we accept isolationism, no other sharing
than Equal per Capita is justifiable. The second reason is that it is very convenient
since the only data it requires is population number. Finally, this allocation principle is
one of the most common used in the literature, indicating a "general acceptance among
AESA researchers". However, this choice and especially the implication of isolationism
will be discussed later in section 4.
Br(yt) = popr(yt)
popW(yt) · BW(yt)
(2)
For the years in between, the Convergence principle is used. The equation is based
on the SDA convergence equation (see Equation 3 derived from Krabbe et al., 2015),
where the "industry sector" is replaced by a "region" and the "activity" is defined as
the population of the region. It ensures no imbalance: every emission is attributed to
a region.
Br(y) = popr(y) · (dr · i(y) · Pr(y) + BPCW(y))
(3)
where
• BPC: carbon budget per capita in tCO2eq/cap
• dr: current performance of the region
dr = BPCr(yb) −BPCW(yb)
• i(y): decarbonization index
i(y) = BPCW (y)−BPCW (yt)
BPCW (yb)−BPCW (yt)
• Pr(y): change in the population share
Pr(y) = popr(yb)/popW (yb)
popr(y)/popW (y)
5Isolationism states that we should distribute the right to impact the climate isolated from other
concerns of distributive justice, such as economic inequality or access to resources.
8 of 47
==PAGE:16==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
Application
For data availability reasons, the NNA will be illustrated with a regional
downsizing at the country scale. Most of the NNA steps rely on emission models, con-
sumption patterns, and other data that are generally available only at the national level
through surveys and databases. This scale will be discussed in the discussion Section
4.1.1. For the application of the Equal per Capita principle, population projections are
based on the United Nation medium fertility variant scenario (United Nations et al.,
2022).
The GMRIO Exiobase is chosen for the method illustration. It was deemed the most
relevant GMRIO for the NNA because of its very extensive range of products (200
products, as well as direct emissions), while remaining quite detailed at regional level
(44 countries and 5 Rest of the World regions). The database characteristic and
calculations to extract the consumption-based footprint are available in Appendix C.
Equation 1 has to be used due to a slight difference in the IPCC 2022 global budget
and the one calculated with Exiobase. This variation may be due to the difference in
the emissions coefficients used by the two methods: Exiobase uses the IPCC GWP100
coefficients of 2007, whereas the global budget derived from AR6 uses updated GWP100
coefficients from 2021.
2.2.3
Activity budget
The last step of the NNA budget construction is to distribute the budget across human
needs. To do so, the anthropogenic system (as defined in Bjorn, Chandrakumar, et al.,
2020) is divided in activities fulfilling final needs. As illustrated in Figure 4, a first
division of the whole human economy is performed before reaching the level of final
activities, in order to facilitate the parting process and improve understanding and
visualization. This broader classification corresponds to the consumption categories:
they are based on the COICOP first level, and slightly modified for the convenience of
the study. In total, eleven categories are determined such as food, mobility, housing,
healthcare or education. Appendix A describes them all.
Figure 4: Diagram illustrating the decomposition of the anthropogenic system in two steps. The first
layer is a broad classification (e.g. mobility, food...), while the second layer is focused on human needs
(e.g. Daily mobility, Long-distance mobility).
Then, each consumption category is sub-divided into the final activities used by the
NNA (see Figure 4). Those final activities are inspired by the Decent Living Standards
dimensions (Rao et al., 2018; Grubler et al., 2018; Millward-Hopkins et al., 2020).
This framework intends to translate human needs into universal material requirements.
When the level of detail proposed by the DLS framework was not considered sufficient,
9 of 47
==PAGE:17==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
other subdivisions were conducted (Poore et al., 2018 for the food consumption category,
Tukker, Huppes, et al., 2006 for diverse consumption categories). Appendix A gives
more information about the construction of the activities. The proposed framework is
a suggestion, which could evolve if a better conception is found. Some of the proposed
activities might be to complicated to study (e.g. due to lack of data) or are not enough
focused on human needs, and could benefit from further refinement. Comprehensive
research has only been conducted for defining the activities in the food and mobility
consumption categories, as these will be the focus of the proof-of-concept. There are
two types of activities that can be distinguished:
• Homogeneous activities, that can be described with a physical indicator, and
in which case the activity level will be calculated in the suitable physical unit
(e.g. kcal for food providing energy, person.km for mobility needs...). There
are the most suited activities for the application of the NNA because using
physical indicators ensures that the assessment is based on tangible, measurable
aspects of human needs. This approach reduces the subjectivity inherent in
monetary evaluations and provides a clearer, more objective basis for determining
sustainability thresholds.
• Heterogeneous activities (no physical indicator can describe it, or the data can not
be found) are evaluated with monetary unit. These activities should only be used
if it is impossible to define a homogeneous activity, as monetary indicators do
not always reflect the best need prioritization. Indeed, they can overestimate the
budget of expensive products compared to cheaper products fulfilling the same
need (Girod et al., 2010; Ivanova et al., 2020), leading to a skewed perception of
what is necessary.
Once the activities are defined, the regional budget calculated in Section 2.2.2 can be
distributed among them. For the base year, the budget distribution across activities
follows that of the chosen GMRIO. A concordance matrix M is built to link the
GMRIO products to the consumption categories. Then, for each consumption category
c, another matrix Nc is constructed to link the GMRIO products to the category’s
activities. Equation 4 is used to calculate the 2022 budget of (i) a consumption category
and (ii) an activity, using the following elements:
• P: Set of GMRIO products.
• C: Set of consumption categories (12 categories including "No final expenditure").
• Ac: Set of activities of the consumption category c.
• M = [mp,c]p∈P,c∈C the concordance matrix between GMRIO products and con-
sumption categories.
• Nc = [np,a]p∈P,a∈Ac the concordance matrix between GMRIO products and activ-
ities in consumption category c.
(i)
For c ∈C,
Bc,r(yb) = P
p∈P
Bp,r,MRIO(yb) · mp,c
(ii)
For c ∈C, for a ∈Ac,
Ba,r(yb) = P
p∈P
Bp,r,MRIO(yb) · mp,c · np,a
(4)
10 of 47
==PAGE:18==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
For the target year, a new sharing principle called Exemplary Household (EHH) is used
to calculate the budget distribution. This approach aims to allocate the limited carbon
budget across various activities by prioritizing those that meet fundamental human
needs. The principle also considers regional disparities such as climate and population
density. To operationalize this, it is assumed that households currently living in a
given region with low environmental pressure exhibit a consumption pattern meeting
the criteria. Those so-called exemplary households are considered to be a model of a
human population living within environmental budgets, and their consumption pattern
provides a pointer on how to allocate environmental budget across activities to fulfill
all basic needs. For each activity a, Equation 5 is applied, where sa,r,EHH is the budget
share (in %) of activity a allocated by exemplary households living in region r.
Ba,r(yt) = Br(yt) · sa,r,EHH(yb)
(5)
For the years in between, a linear interpolation is done between the base year with
the current activity share sa,r(yb), and the target year with the wanted activity share
sa,r(yt) = sa,r,EHH(yb).
Application
As mentioned earlier, the chosen GMRIO for the application is Exiobase.
The concordance matrix between Exiobase products6 and the consumption categories
M is available in Appendix D. For the concordance matrices between Exiobase prod-
ucts’ and NNA’s activities, only the matrices of the proof-of-concept sectors have been
defined, namely NFood and NMobility, also displayed in Appendix D.
Figure 5: Diagram explaining the steps used to
operationalize the EHH principle.
To operationalize the EHH principle, the
budget distribution among activities of
exemplary households must be found. In
this study’s illustration of the NNA, the
EHH is built first through an allocation at
consumption category level, and then at
activity level, but this is not mandatory
if an exemplary distribution at activity
levels is found directly (see Figure 5). In
their study, Ivanova et al. (2020) combine
the use of Exiobase and household bud-
get surveys to calculate the carbon foot-
print of European households per coun-
tries and consumption categories (food,
housing, clothing, services, manufactured
products, land and air travel), and sepa-
rate households by emitters levels. They
find that the bottom 5% of emitters have
a carbon footprint below 2.5 tCO2eq/cap,
that is their climate target to reach by 2030 to limit global warming to 1.5°C (IPCC,
2022b; Ivanova et al., 2020). Their results will constitute the basis of the EHH in our
6200 original products as well as direct emissions separated in two new products, "Direct emission
from vehicles" and "Direct emission from heating", thus 202 products.
11 of 47
==PAGE:19==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
proof-of-concepts applications, by using the carbon footprint distribution across sectors
of the bottom 5% emitters as exemplary distribution across consumption categories,
as described in Figure 5. Appendix E details the method and its robustness with a
consistency check. Then, for the allocation of budget for activities inside the food
category, a vegetarian diet is used as the exemplary consumption model, as it has been
demonstrated to generally perform better environmentally compared to a standard
diet (Goldstein et al., 2016). For the mobility category, in the absence of studies on
exemplary “transportation consumption pattern” that compile both Daily and Long-
distance mobility (the two activities of the category), the GF principle is used as a
proxy to allocate GHG emissions between these two activities. Appendix E details all
steps and calculations.
2.3
Activity level
The activity level represents the society demand of the activity. Two scenarios are
investigated: a Business as Usual scenario (BAU), based on current consumption
patterns, in which the activity level per capita of a region is assumed to remain con-
stant, and a Sufficiency scenario, based on the Decent Living Standards (DLS) (Rao
et al., 2018; Millward-Hopkins et al., 2020). The BAU scenario represents a realistic
case, particularly in developed countries where standards of living remain relatively
stable, upon which companies should based their assessment. However, it is widely
recognized that our current lifestyle is detrimental to the environment. Many scientists
are increasingly warning about the impacts of our present consumption levels. To
address these concerns, even the IPCC discusses the concept of sufficiency in their
reports (IPCC, 2022a) through sufficiency policies7 as well as demand side mitigation.
In response, a Sufficiency scenario is proposed, where consumption patterns tend to a
Sufficiency level, which means a consumption level delivering human well-being for all,
but not more, in order to try to stay within the planetary boundaries. The Sufficiency
consumption level is not to be mistaken with the Exemplary Households principle (see
Box 4 for a clarification).
Box 4: Difference between Sufficiency and Exemplary Household
EHH principle (used for the budget construction Section 2.2): focus on the GHG
budget distribution across activities of exemplary consumption patterns. That does
not prevent these households to consume "too" much. E.g. a person with a vegetarian
diet (which is here considered as an exemplary diet because it optimizes the carbon
budget for the food consumption category) can nonetheless eat "too much".
Sufficiency level (used for the activity level construction Section 2.3): focus on the
minimum level of an activity to be healthy and achieve well-being, but without
assuming how this activity is fulfilled and how much of the budget should be allocated
to it. E.g we calculate the minimum amount of calories and protein a population
must have access to, without stating if they are animal or plant-based, and therefore
without assuming how much they should emit.
7"Sufficiency policies are a set of measures and daily practices that avoid demand for energy,
materials, land and water while delivering human well-being for all within planetary boundaries."
(IPCC, 2022a)
12 of 47
==PAGE:20==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
2.3.1
Business as usual scenario
The BAU activity level assumes that the activity level per capita (LPC) of a region
r stays constant from the base year until the target year. The level of an activity
a is therefore just proportional to the region’s population projection, as shown in
Equation 6.
LBAU
a,r (y) = popr(y) · LPCa,r(yb) = popr(y)
popr(yb) · La,r(yb)
(6)
Application
For the food category, current consumption of calories and proteins
are taken from the FAOSTAT database (Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations, 2021). For the mobility category in Denmark, two surveys were
used: the "The Danish National Travel Survey: Denmark 2022 Annual: Statistical
Report" (Christiansen et al., 2023) for Daily mobility, indicating an average of 36.6
km/day/capita, and the "TU 3-month Overnight Survey" (L. Christensen, 2014) for
Long-distance mobility. Although data from the latter dates from 2010-2011, it was the
only survey available for Danish long-distance transportation patterns using person-
kilometer as a unit. For Spain, the BAU activity level for Daily mobility is taken as
32.7 km/day/capita (L. ; Christensen et al., 2013).
2.3.2
Sufficiency scenario
Sufficiency scenarios are designed to take into account the current per capita consump-
tion levels of a region in the base year. These levels are then adjusted linearly to reach
a defined Sufficiency level per capita by 2050. The total regional consumption is then
projected by multiplying these per capita figures by the region’s population projections.
Application
When the activity and the unit of its function matches with one of
the DLS dimensions, the Sufficiency activity level can be taken as the "Default level"
calculated by Millward-Hopkins et al. (2020) (e.g. for the "Clothes" activity, the
sufficient level is calculated to be 4kg of new clothing/year). When the NNA activity
does not match with a DLS dimension, other sources can be explored. For example
for the activity "providing energy" in the food category, the Average Dietary Energy
Requirement (ADER), defined by FAO, is generally accepted as a good sufficiency level
(Rao et al., 2018; Porkka et al., 2013). The calculation of the ADER for one person is
based on different characteristic such as their gender, age and activity level. However,
at the scale of the NNA and with the uncertainties we are dealing with, it was not
considered pertinent to calculate the ADER projections for 2050 for each country based
on these characteristics: a global average value of 2500 kcal/pers/day was calculated.
For the activity "Providing protein", a global average has also been calculated. Knowing
that for an adult the safe protein requirement is 0.83 g protein/kg/day, the average
protein requirement for an adult of an average weight of 70 kg is about 58 grams
protein per day. For the mobility category, using the DLS default level method based
on countries density, a minimum of 7070 pkm/year was determined for Denmark (see
calculation in Appendix F.1). However, the DLS dimensions do not separate daily
mobility from long-distance mobility, as the NNA does. The current ratio in terms of
distance achieved between the two activities was then applied as an estimation. BAU
13 of 47
==PAGE:21==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
and Sufficiency projections for the four activities studied in Denmark are detailed in
Appendix F.
2.4
Intensity targets and products’ impact intensity
The principle of the NNA is to assess a product sustainability based on its capacity to
deliver 1 unit of the action it is designed for, and compare it with the actual budget
permitted for this unit. The two last steps are thus much intertwined, since they are
the two pillars for assessing the product’s sustainability:
• The activity budget divided by the activity level to become a "unit budget", which
is in fact the Intensity target, using the invented "Equal per Unit" utilitarian
principle (based on the EPC principle).
• The product must also be "downscaled" to the activity unit: it is in fact its
ability to produce one unit that is assessed, not the product as a whole. It follows
the same logic as the functional unit in LCA. It has the advantage, compared
to a regular AESA like the one proposed in Heide et al. (2023), to allow simple
comparison between products fulfilling the same need.
The steps to assess a product’s impact are the following:
1. Look at the list of activities (Appendix A), and identify the one that fits the
best for the product. The commentaries and sources in the concordance matrices
between Exiobase products and consumption categories/activities can be used to
understand where the product belongs.
2. Perform an LCA using the activity unit as functional unit (e.g. person.km for a
transportation mode).
- If the product presents a double-function: as prescribed by the ISO 14044,
allocation should be avoided by sub-division of the product between the
two (or more) activities fulfilled. The sustainability assessment will then be
performed for all activities.
3. Use the latest IPCC method to calculate the GWP100 to date to perform the
Life Cycle Impact Assessment.
Application
For the proof-of-concepts, products’ LCA are done using the LCIA
method IPCC 2021 GWP100 on SimaPro. Processes and data used are available in
Appendix G.
Table 2 is a summary of all of the terms used in the methodology.
14 of 47
==PAGE:22==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
Term
Meaning
Comments
Sets
P
Set of the GMRIO products
In this study: 202 products
from Exiobase
C
Set of consumption categories
In this study: 12 categories
including "No final expendi-
ture"
Ac
Set of activities of the consump-
tion category c
E.g.
for c=mobility: Daily
and Long-distance mobility
Parameters
yb
Base year
In this study: 2022
yt
Target year
In this study: 2050
y
Year in [2022,2050]
-
r
Region
When r = W: world. In this
study: Denmark, Spain
popr(y)
Population of region r in year y
In this study:
Projection
from the UN
dr
Current performance of region r
in year y
dr = BPCr(yb) −BPCW(yb)
M
=
[mp,c]p∈P,c∈C
Concordance matrix between GM-
RIO products and consumption
categories
In this study: see Appendix
D
Nc
=
[np,a]p∈P,a∈Ac
Concordance matrix between GM-
RIO products and activities in
consumption category c
In this study: see Appendix
D
Variables
B(y)
GHG emission budget in year y
In tCO2eq
BPC(y)
GHG emission budget per capita
In tCO2eq/cap
i(y)
Decarbonization index in year y
i(y) = BPCW (y)−BPCW (yt)
BPCW (yb)−BPCW (yt)
Pr(y)
Change in the population share of
region r in year y
Pr(y) = popr(yb)/popW (yb)
popr(y)/popW (y)
La,r(y)
Activity level of activity a in re-
gion r in year y
Unit depends on a
LPCa,r(y)
Activity level per capita of activity
a in region r in year y
Unit depends on a
Table 2: Summary of the terms used in the methodology
15 of 47
==PAGE:23==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
3
Results
3.1
Regional budget
Figure 6 and 7 illustrate an application of the regional downsizing using the Convergence
principle to achieve the Equal per capita principle in 2050, on a continental scale for
visibility purposes. Since this is just an illustration, the consumption-based emissions
were not extracted from a GMRIO to facilitate the process, but from a database8.
Denmark and Spain curves of Figure 6 use Exiobase results.
Figure 6: Evolution of the GHG budget per capita using the Convergence principle to achieve the
EPC principle in 2050. Results for continents, Denmark (DK) and Spain (ES).
Figure 6 represents the effects of the method on per capita budget. Region starting
with the highest emissions per capita will have to considerably abate emissions in order
to reach the ambitious level of around 1.76 tCO2eq/cap in 2050. The higher a region
begins, the steeper must be the reduction. For instance in Northern America, the
average person’s carbon footprint should be divided by more than 10. Denmark, with
an average footprint in 2022 of 14.44tCO2eq/cap, belongs to the highest emitters when
comparing with the global average of 6.90 tCO2eq/cap.
Although the EPC and Convergence principle are both derived from a distributive
justice theory, egalitarianism, that is generally accepted by AESA researchers (see
Section 2.2.2), they do not consider other aspects of equality such as access to resources
or infrastructures. Indeed, if our goal is to achieve overall equality, then the least
8Jones et al. (2024) – with major processing by Our World in Data. “Share of global greenhouse
gas emissions” [dataset]. Jones et al., “National contributions to climate change 2024.1” [original
data]. Accessed on https://ourworldindata.org/co2-and-greenhouse-gas-emissions on the
16/06/2024.
16 of 47
==PAGE:24==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
developed regions (in terms of infrastructures for transportation, energy, access to
water...) should be allocated an extra carbon budget to build those infrastructures
necessary to meet their needs that other regions may already have. It is very clear on
the Figure that this is not the case: for instance, while 33 of the 54 African countries
are listed by the United Nations as Least Developed Countries9, using the EPC and
Convergence principles imply to only decrease the average carbon footprint in Africa.
Further discussion and alternative of the use of those principles will be presented in
Section 4.2.3.
Figure 7: Evolution of the total GHG budget at continent scale, using the Convergence principle to
achieve the EPC principle in 2050.
Figure 7 represents continental GHG budget in absolute terms. First of all, it illustrates
that using the Convergence principle ensures no emission imbalance: this method
guarantees that every emission is allocated to a region, and the sum of all emissions
matches global emission determined in Section 2.2.1. Looking at each continent’s budget,
three major trends are observed: firstly, Northern America, Europe and Oceania will
have to drastically reduce their total emissions, with a reduction of respectively 91%,
83% and 87%. This is due to two reasons: a slight reduction of their share of the global
population and, as highlighted with Figure 6, very high current emissions. Then come
Asia and Southern America, that also need to reduce their emissions to respect their
budget, but to a lower (though still significant) extent of 69%. Finally, absolute GHG
emissions from Africa will "only" have to be reduced by 10%: it can be explained by
the fact that its average carbon footprint is already close to the convergence point, and
by its demographic expansion (in 2050, 26% of the global population should live in
Africa, against 18% in 2022).
9UN list of least developed countries, https://unctad.org/topic/least-developed-countries/
list, accessed on the 16/06/2024.
17 of 47
==PAGE:25==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
3.2
Sectoral budget
Figure 8 illustrates the application of the Exemplary household principle for sectoral
downsizing in Denmark. It highlights the difference between the average share of GHG
budget allocated by Danish consumers to food and mobility, and the share allocated by
EHH. It is striking to see how, for those two very different categories, the shares shift.
It may means that a balance to prioritize fundamental needs has been found. Indeed,
although both categories participate to well-being to a certain extent, food is vital,
and consequently should always be prioritized, which is confirmed here with the EHH
principle. It seems plausible, assuming an impact per unit of food produced constant,
that the food budget would eventually reach a limit: the amount of food an individual
can eat is limited. Then by not paying attention to their total emissions and keeping
emitting (which can be a way of seeing the average current consumption model), the
food share would take a smaller and smaller share. On the other hand, the mobility
sector acts differently: by travelling always further and more often, an individual can
continue to increase its mobility emission. This results is very clearly observed by
Ivanova et al. (2020), where between the groups Middle 40% emitters and Top 1%
emitters, the food sector emissions are only increased by a factor 1.4 (confirming that
nutrition is a finite need) while emissions linked to transportation increases by a factor
11. The EHH principle seems to act like a cap for the mobility need: to stay below a
sustainable emission threshold, a limit must be draw.
Figure 8: Allocated share of the GHG budget of DK for the consumption categories food and mobility.
The shares in 2022 are the current shares calculated with Exiobase. In 2050, they are equal to the
exemplary households shares (corresponding to Ivanova et al., 2020 Bottom 5% emitters). A linear
interpolation is used for the years in between.
18 of 47
==PAGE:26==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
3.3
Activity level
Table 3 sums up the main differences between per capita activity levels used for the
BAU and the Sufficiency levels in Denmark. Appendix F provides the final results
applied through the period 2022-2050. Current level of consumption in Denmark are
way above calculated sufficiency level for the four studied activities, meaning that
a reduction of the consumption of these activities could be carried out without a
substantial loss of well-being.
Activity
Current activity level
Sufficiency level
Reduction
per capita in DK
per capita in DK
Providing energy (kcal)
3 584
2 500
30%
Providing protein (g prot)
113
58
49%
Daily mobility (pkm)
13 359
4 479
66%
Long-distance mobility (pkm)
7 726
2 591
66%
Table 3: Activity levels for BAU and Sufficiency levels per capita in Denmark, for two food activities
(providing energy and protein) and the two mobility activities (Daily and Long-distance).
3.4
Final results in Denmark
3.4.1
Food sector
Figure 9 and Figure 10 show the final intensity target for two food activities (namely
"Providing energy" expressed in kcal and "Providing protein" in g proteins). Intensity
targets resulting from both BAU and Sufficiency scenarios are displayed for comparison.
A note on the significance of the threshold should be made. This target represents on
average at what cost each unit of activity should be fulfilled. This explains why some
currently used technologies exceed the current target: the current level of activity is
met with a mix of all technologies.
The first comment to these results is that the target implies a strong reduction of
the impact intensity. In Figure 9, it appears that most of current products will not
remain below the intensity target until 2050. This imply that food production have
to considerably reduce its emissions for food products to remain below the intensity
targets. This could be done through a change of the consumption habits: e.g. basmati
and non-basmati rice have a significant different impact, with basmati rice emitting
more than twice than non-basmati rice. Additionally, the dynamic curve of the impact
intensity reveals that e.g. non-basmati rice, wheat flour and potatoes have impacts
currently under the threshold, which will exceed it respectively in 2042, 4047 and 2048.
This timeframe allows producers to adapt their agricultural methods in order to try to
reduce their current impact and remain below the threshold in the future.
19 of 47
==PAGE:27==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
Figure 9: Intensity targets for BAU (business as usual) scenario and Sufficiency scenario, for the
activity "Providing energy" in Denmark, and comparison with food products impacts.
The Sufficiency scenario offers a positive outlook on sufficiency, which is often viewed
negatively as a form of regression, mainly due to the loss aversion theory10 and the
confusion between degrowth and recession11 (Büchs et al., 2019). Indeed, in developed
countries such as Denmark where BAU activity levels generally exceed sufficiency,
since the Intensity target is calculated as the activity budget divided by the activity
level, this "lower-demand" scenario increases the allowed impact per activity (see
Figure 9 and 10). The threshold to be absolutely sustainable is higher than in the
BAU case, enabling more products to remain below the threshold. For instance, the
the food product "Potatoes" remains under the threshold (meaning assessed absolutely
sustainable) for the whole studied period in the Sufficiency scenario, while it exceeds it
in 2047 in the BAU scenario. Consequently, this scenario should be used very carefully,
because it leads to a looser target. Its use by companies should be very overseen
carefully, as they may use it as an excuse to relax their efforts in improving efficiency
and reducing overall environmental impact. It should be mainly used for studies aimed
at policy-makers who are investigating the potential impacts and benefits of adopting
sufficiency measures.
10"Loss aversion theory states that adaptation to loss is likely to be less successful than adaptation
to gain." (Büchs et al., 2019)
11Both recession and degrowth share a decrease of material living standards, but when recession
is due to an involuntary phase of material decline, degrowth would be accompanied by institutions
(Büchs et al., 2019).
20 of 47
==PAGE:28==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
Figure 10: Intensity targets for BAU (business as usual) scenario and Sufficiency scenario, for the
activity "Providing protein" in Denmark, and comparison with food products impacts.
The analysis on high-protein products Figure 10 reveals that protein coming from
legume generally remain under the intensity targets (e.g. peas, lentils). On the contrary,
animal-based protein are either already exceeding the target (e.g. red meat, pork), or
will exceed it in the next decades if there is no emission reduction in their production
(e.g. chicken and trout in 2040 according to the BAU scenario).
3.4.2
Mobility sectors
Figure 11 and Figure 12 show the final intensity target for the two mobility activities
(namely "Daily mobility" expressed in pkm and "Long-distance mobility" in pkm).
Intensity targets resulting from both BAU and Sufficiency scenarios are displayed for
comparison.
Results clearly show that car is a transportation mode that emits a significantly larger
amount of GHG than permitted by the target to the fulfil the need. Current car
occupation for daily travels is of 1.3 persons per vehicle (Christiansen et al., 2023).
With that occupancy rate, the car’s impact exceeds the 2022 targets and an impact
reduction of about 30% is necessary. Moreover, as the target goes down fairly quickly
until 2050 (from 171 gCO2eq/pkm to only 11 gCO2eq/pkm, meaning 11 times less),
cars as they are used nowadays appear like an impossible products to stay below
the absolute threshold, even with tremendous technology efficiency improvement. A
different use of cars might offer a way out of this assessment: shifting to an occupation
21 of 47
==PAGE:29==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
of 4 persons per car reduces easily and effectively the impact intensity, while still
providing the same service, thus fulfilling the need. All in all, Figure 11 illustrates that
some solutions e.g. bikes or urban trains provide the same service at a much lower
environmental cost. Bike and urban train (as well as walking, not represented on the
graph) appears to be the best solutions to fulfill the activity "Daily mobility", even if
they themselves exceed the threshold from 2047 in the BAU scenario. Once again, the
Sufficiency scenario appears like a desired option since this consumption scenario allows
two current solution, namely urban trains and bike, to remain absolutely sustainable
until the end of the studied period.
Figure 11: Intensity target for the activity "Daily mobility" in DK, and comparison with transportation
modes impacts.
According to Figure 12, the same comment as above about car occupancy (that is
of 1.8 persons per car for long-distance trips12) applies here: sharing vehicles would
be an easy and efficient way to keep cars under the threshold, that is exceeded from
2027 in the BAU case and 2032 in the Sufficiency case. When accounting for non-CO2
radiative forcing13, planes score the worst to provide Long-distance mobility, having an
impact higher than the 2022 target. However since those non-CO2 effects have only
been studied for a relatively short time, the impact of plane just accounting for GHG
emission is also displayed. With an impact intensity of around 100 gCO2eq/pkm, a
medium haul plane trip will exceed the threshold from around 2030.
12https://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/ENVISSUENo12/page029.html, accessed on the
17/06/2024.
13Contrail cirrus, which consist in linear contrails and the cirrus cloudiness arising from them, are
the largest contributor to positive effective radiative forcing (i.e. having a warming effect on the
climate) from airplanes . Non-CO2 impacts comprise about two-thirds of the net radiative forcing
(Lee et al., 2021).
22 of 47
==PAGE:30==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
Figure 12: Intensity target for the activity "Long-distance mobility" in DK, and comparison with
transportation modes impacts.
As mentioned earlier, the intensity targets represent the average environmental cost at
which each unit of activity should be fulfilled. The question is then to know what could
companies and policy-makers do with these intensity targets. Usual target-setting
methods like SDA focus on giving a precise target-number to reach for an industrial
activity.
The NNA method, on the other hand, intends to give trends and help
companies and policy-makers understand that to respect ambitious and vital targets
such as the Paris Agreement while covering society’s needs, a reflection on products
and solutions is necessary. The NNA answers to questions such as:
• Are the company’s mains products compatible with a world respecting the Paris
Agreement? E.g. if a travel company only offers deals involving a flight, they
should explore more options to steer their business towards offers implicating
other modes.
• Which type of activity should the company develop? E.g. the EHH principle
allocate only few shares to mobility, indicating that this sector is not a priority
to fulfil human needs.
• Which type of solutions should policies prioritize? E.g. subsidies may be given in
priority to technologies proving they can fulfil needs while respecting the intensity
targets, such as train or bike infrastructures.
23 of 47
==PAGE:31==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
3.5
Sensitivity analysis
3.5.1
Influence of the choice of region
One of the key features of the NNA is to differentiate needs according the regional
specificity. Thus, a comparison is conducted between Denmark and Spain.
Figure 13: Current and EHH allocation of the carbon budget, for Denmark and Spain. The current
average distribution is calculated with Exiobase, while the EHH allocation is taken as the distribution
of the Bottom 5% emitters of each country, based on Ivanova et al. (2020).
Figure 13 displays the current and EHH allocation of the carbon budget, for Denmark
and Spain. It can be seen than the current average distribution of the two countries is
very similar. However, exemplary households do not use their limited budget in the
same way in Denmark and Spain: a shift is observed between the Service category for
Denmark, allocating 16% of its budget against half of that in Spain, and the mobility
category. In Denmark, this category is very marginal in the EHH distribution with
only 5% of the allocated budget, while in Spain it still represents 12% (despite a visible
reduction from the current average situation). This can be explained by the fact that
Spain is a larger country14, with a much lower density than Denmark, leading to more
need for transportation. This category will be further analysed.
Figure 14 compares the intensity targets for the activity "Daily mobility" in Denmark
and Spain. Currently, Denmark has a higher carbon footprint than Spain (see Figure 6)
and they allocate a similar share of their budget to mobility, which explains why in
2022 Denmark’s budget for the activity is higher. However, since exemplary households
do not prioritize mobility the same in each country, a trend is observed: Spain’s Daily
mobility target decreases at a lower speed than Denmark’s, and in 2033 the Spanish
target exceeds the Danish one. This trend continues and in 2050, the BAU intensity
14Around 506 000 km2 (Spain) against 43 000 km2 for Denmark according to the EU (https:
//european-union.europa.eu/, accessed on the 20/06/2024).
24 of 47
==PAGE:32==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
target in Spain is high enough for currently low-carbon transportation modes such as
bicycles and urban train to remain below it, while their current impact exceeds the
Danish targets. This example underlines the difference in need prioritization inherent to
regions particularities, leading to different targets from the NNA method, and different
assessment for a same technology used in different environments.
Figure 14: Intensity targets for the activity "Daily mobility" in Denmark and Spain, following the
BAU scenario.
3.5.2
Influence of the choice of sharing principle
As numerous studies have shown, the choice of sharing principle has a strong influence
on AESA results (Bjorn, Chandrakumar, et al., 2020; Sandin et al., 2015). Thus, the use
of the EHH sharing principle will be challenged, by comparing it to the Grandfathering
principle and the Exemplary Country principle.
The Grandfathering principle consists in keeping the same carbon budget distribution
(here: across activities) that in a reference year (here: the base year, 2022). Even
though this allocation principle is generally considered unjust (Caney, 2009), its ease
of application makes it much popular and much used in studies (Ryberg et al., 2020;
Bjorn, Chandrakumar, et al., 2020) as well as for regulatory treaties, such as in the
Kyoto Protocol where emission reduction targets were defined with respect to emissions
levels in 1990 (Caney, 2009).
25 of 47
==PAGE:33==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
The Exemplary country principle, used by Heide et al. (2023) as one of the steps of
their Fulfilment of Human Needs principle (FHN)15, is interesting because, like the
EHH, its distribution across sectors intends to represent human needs and sustainable
consumption. It assumes that, "if an absolute sustainable country exists both in terms
of the social and environmental sustainability dimension, the consumption pattern
in that country could provide an allocation key reflecting the relative importance of
different need fulfilment for a human population living within the biophysical limits of
the planet." (Heide et al., 2023).
(a) EHH principle
(b) EC principle
(c) GF principle
Figure 15: Allocated GHG emissions budget of Denmark for the consumption categories food and
mobility. The budgets in 2022 are determined from current emissions using Equation 4 (i), and in
2050 using the stated principle.
Figure 15 displays the allocated carbon emissions for Denmark of the consumption
categories food and mobility, according to the sharing principle used for the sectoral
downsizing. The same trend is observed between the EHH and EC curves, where the
food budget exceeds the mobility budget, but it happens slightly later in the EC case (in
2034 against 2030 with the EHH principle). On the contrary, with the grandfathering
approach that does not take into account human needs, the mobility budget remains
higher than the food one.
Figure 16 illustrates the biggest shortcoming of the GF principle: the GF intensity
target of the nutrition activity ’Providing energy" is lower than using the EHH principle,
causing basic food products such as rice to exceed the threshold as early as in 2036, or
15Heide et al do not explicit the use of this principle, the Exemplary Country (EC) name is given
as a suggestion.
26 of 47
==PAGE:34==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
potatoes in 2044. By failing to account for human needs, the GF approach inadequately
addresses the essential requirements of nutrition and mobility. The EHH and EC
principles, by contrast, align more closely with human needs and therefore allocate
budgets in a manner that better reflects actual consumption patterns and necessi-
ties. The comparison between the sharing principles demonstrates the importance of
incorporating human needs into carbon budget allocation.
Figure 16: Intensity targets for the activity "Providing energy" in Denmark, following the BAU
scenario, for different sharing principles.
4
Discussion
4.1
Limitations
4.1.1
Data availability and representativeness
The country granularity is assumed to be narrow enough to take local disparities into
account, even if a smaller scale would, of course, offer more precise results instead of a
national average. This is a limitation that could be explored in future research. By
focusing on smaller administrative units such as regions, or distinguishing urban and
rural areas, the method could better capture local variations in environmental impacts
and needs. Moreover, it could enhance the accuracy of the allocation of resources
and the setting of targets, reflecting the true diversity within a country. The biggest
challenge in moving to a finer scale is data availability. Obtaining detailed, high-quality
data at a regional or local level can be difficult and resource-intensive. As of now,
GMRIO only provides emissions at country scale at the finest. Moreover, given that the
method is already subject to various uncertainties, increasing the level of detail could
27 of 47
==PAGE:35==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
potentially amplify these uncertainties, making the results less reliable. Therefore,
while a more granular approach could theoretically improve precision, it may also
introduce significant challenges that need careful consideration.
On the same note, the Exiobase GMRIO includes only 44 countries, meaning that the
majority of countries are grouped in one of the five broad Rest of Word categories,
which prevents an optimal use of the NNA for those countries. The method can still be
applied at an aggregated region scale, provided that population projections and activity
levels are available, but the results will be less relevant because based on large averages.
This entails to work for more detailed GMRIO. Exiobase is one of the GMRIOs with the
finest granularity in terms of products represented, with 200 products plus direct emis-
sions. This being said, some of its products are still pretty vague and some assumptions
must have been made while creating the concordance matrix with NNA activities, e.g.
the product "Paper and paper products" that, according to the NACE classification
(Eurostat, 1996) includes products as diverse as hygienic paper (belonging to the
consumption category Hygiene), wall-paper (Fournitures and manufactured products),
sheets of paper (Communication & Recreation and culture) or food packaging (food).
This inevitably leads to some uncertainties in the sectoral budget distribution, that
should be explored with sensitivity analysis on the concordance matrix M and Na in
the future. An improvement of Exiobase documentation would be useful to avoid these
estimates. Moreover, as explained in Section 2.2, the 2022 data are estimates based on
projections of some macro-economics indicators. As such, the data is likely good for
global analysis, and country level estimates, but the uncertainty relative to official data
at transaction level would be considerably higher. Thus, the budgets calculated from
Exiobase should be carefully interpreted. New data incorporating a full update for all
Supply-Use Tables to 2020 is expected soon16. The NNA method should be updated
with the new data as soon as available.
Finally, the operationalization of the EHH principle is also facing some limitations due
to data availability. For the application to products, the EHH relied on the distribution
shares find by Ivanova et al. (2020) of the bottom 5% emitters of each counties, across
categories. However the non-concordance of their categories with the NNA activities
led to additional steps to find the correct shares for each activity (see Section 2.2.3). To
be more systematic and easy to implement, the method created by Ivanova et al. (2020)
should be re-applied but with the NNA concordance matrices. This homogenization
would reduce the uncertainties associated with the sharing principle. Additionally, the
Household Surveys used in their study are from 2010, which means the data is over
10 years old. Therefore, an update with more recent consumer expenditure data is
necessary to enhance the accuracy and relevance of the findings. Lastly, this method
has only been applied to EU countries, indicating a need for broader application to
ensure wider applicability and robustness.
4.1.2
Heterogeneous activities
The proof-of-concepts presented in this study focused on homogeneous activities,
meaning that a physical indicator was identified to assess these activities. However,
16https://zenodo.org/records/5589597, accessed on the 20/06/2024.
28 of 47
==PAGE:36==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
defining such indicators is not always easy or feasible for all types of activities. For
instance, in the health sector, the diverse range of drugs designed to treat various
conditions makes it difficult to find a common physical indicator. Consequently, it
is currently proposed to measure drug-related activities using monetary indicators,
despite their limitations. For some products, it is even complicated to properly define
an activity linked to a human need. Products such as households furniture, though
we understand they are valuable, are hard to link with anything else than just being
furniture. This challenge of linking a product to an activity and a suitable unit for
comparison is very comparable with the challenge of defining the right functional
unit in LCA, a concept that inspired the construction of the NNA. Moreover, the use
of monetary indicators can sometimes hide the true utility of a product. Expensive
products may be given a lower impact than cheaper alternatives that serve the same
need, leading to biased assessments (Girod et al., 2010; Ivanova et al., 2020). This
issue is also problematic when calculating the sufficiency level, as monetary values do
not always accurately represent the minimum requirement to meet human needs. For
example, the sufficiency level for a basic necessity might be overestimated if based
on high-cost items, leading to an inaccurate activity level for the Sufficiency scenario.
Therefore, further refinement is needed to address the challenges associated with
identifying appropriate activities and dealing with heterogeneous activities where a
common physical indicator is not readily available. This is crucial to ensure that the
NNA accurately reflects human needs and product utility. Future work should focus
on developing more nuanced indicators and methods for these complex activities to
enhance the accuracy and applicability of the NNA framework.
4.2
Future work
4.2.1
Prospective LCA
To ensure alignment with the dynamic assessment of the budget, it is advisable to
conduct a prospective LCA up to the target year. This approach will allow for a
forward-looking evaluation of environmental impacts, incorporating anticipated changes
and advancements in technology, production processes, and consumption patterns. By
matching the temporal scope of the LCA with the target year, the assessment will
provide a more accurate and relevant analysis of the potential environmental outcomes.
This dynamic approach will enable the determination of the evolving impact intensities
of products over time, leading to better conclusions regarding their sustainability. For
instance, the food product rice (non-basmati) whose current impact exceeds its intensity
target only from 2042, could see its production process change to reduce its carbon
footprint, thereby keeping its impact below the target. Integrating such improvement
through a prospective LCA would enhance the rice sustainability assessment with the
NNA method. Consequently, the robustness and credibility of the NNA results will
be significantly enhanced, providing a more comprehensive and realistic evaluation of
products’ sustainability.
4.2.2
Development of the method for other Planetary Boundaries
Currently, the NNA method is designed solely to calculate targets for climate change.
However, climate change is just one of many environmental challenges, as highlighted
29 of 47
==PAGE:37==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
by the PB framework (Steffen et al., 2015). The method has potential to be extended
to other global environmental indicators, thereby providing a more comprehensive
approach to sustainability. Possible extensions could include indicators such as ocean
acidification, stratospheric ozone depletion, or abiotic resource use. These indicators,
like climate change, have global implications and would fit well with the method’s
reliance on the allocation of a global budget, as long as modelled global pathways are
available. Adapting the NNA method to regional environmental indicators, such as the
flow of phosphorus from fertilizers to erodible soils within the Planetary Boundaries
framework, would require substantial modifications. The inherent regional variability
and the need for localized data would complicate the method’s current structure, which
is designed around global allocations. Specifically, since the NNA covers consumption-
based impacts, if a product is not produced where it is consumed, its allowed phosphorus
emissions would not be as straightforward as for a global indicator. The methodology
would necessitate an additional step and careful consideration of the relationships
between consumption, production, and impact location. Nevertheless, exploring ways
to incorporate these regional indicators in the future could enhance the method’s
applicability and relevance.
4.2.3
Extension of the allocation principles
The method combines several distributive justice through the use of different sharing
principles, as Table 4 makes explicit. The EHH mimics the consumption pattern of
individuals living currently within their allocated environmental budgets, assuming they
are an example of a distribution fulfilling basic needs. However, there is no measure
confirming whether these households achieve desired levels of well-being. Ivanova
et al. (2020) further connects lower European emitters with lower-income households,
highlighting the lack of assurance regarding their well-being. This raises questions
about whether these "exemplary" households indeed maintain a desired well-being
level. Nevertheless, even if they do not, it does not invalidate the assumption that
those households give priority to their needs in general and, consequently, when in
comes to carbon footprint, even if it is not by choice butdue to a lack of resources.
Stage
Sharing principle
Distributive justice theory
Global to region
Equal per capita (EPC)
Egalitarianism
Convergence
Egalitarianism
Region to activity
Exemplary households (EHH)
Sufficientarianism
Activity to unit
Equal per unit (EPU)
Utilitarianism
Table 4: Sharing principles used in the method.
An improvement of the method could be to use a more ethical sharing principle for the
regional downsizing (from global to region), such as Historical Debt (HD), relying on the
distributive justice theory prioritarianism (Bjorn, Chandrakumar, et al., 2020). This
principle firstly relies on the idea that it is fair for those who have caused more harm
to contribute more to the solutions, as compensation for, or retribution of, previous
wrong doings (Sandin et al., 2015). But maybe even more importantly, GHG emissions
remain in the atmosphere for years, contributing to long-term climate change. Since
these emissions accumulate over time, it is essential to consider historical emissions
30 of 47
==PAGE:38==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
when addressing climate change. The HD principle thus states that some countries
have already drawn on their carbon budget to develop to a certain level of well-being,
benefiting its future residents as well. Therefore, less developed regions should now
be given the opportunity to catch up, so that their future residents can also benefit
from the same level of comfort (Sandin et al., 2015). Thus, the HD principle could
substitute the EPC and Convergence combination when downsizing to regional budgets.
Moreover, as previously mentioned in Section 2.2.2, the use of the EPC is justifiable when
accepting isolationism. However, Ryberg et al. (2020) argues that the distribution of
the safe operating space should not be performed in isolation of other concerns of justice,
or else overall equality will not be reached. As pointed out in the discussion around
Figure 6, some regions may be advantaged compared to other, and sharing principles
such as Capability to Reduce, also relying on the prioritarianism distributive justice
theory (Bjorn, Chandrakumar, et al., 2020), should be investigated. A development
of the NNA could therefore be the implementation of prioritarianism in the budget
allocation, by using sharing principle like Capacity to Reduce and Historical Debt.
4.2.4
Intermediary products and companies assessment
One promising direction for future work involves expanding the NNA to include interme-
diary products and assessing companies based on their contributions to final-consumer
products. This expanded methodology would focus on evaluating the sustainability
of intermediary products -or business to business products- by examining their role
in the production of final-consumer goods. If the final-consumer products meets the
absolute intensity target, it can be inferred that the intermediary products contributing
to their creation are also sustainable. This approach maintains the principle that all
human activities, regardless of how indirectly they appear to fulfill human needs, should
ultimately be designed with this goal in mind. Indeed, every product and process
should contribute to human well-being and needs (Ryberg et al., 2020). This view
reinforces the idea that companies, products, and even countries must ultimately serve
individual needs. Therefore, companies would be assessed based on how each product
of their portfolio contributes to absolute sustainable final solutions. This assessment
would provide a clearer picture of their overall impact on sustainability, encouraging
businesses to prioritize practices and products that support the long-term well-being of
individuals and the environment. To effectively implement this expanded approach, it
would be necessary to develop a robust assessment scale. This scale would quantify
the contribution of intermediary products to final products below and above their
intensity targets. It would provide a standardized method for evaluating and comparing
the sustainability performance of companies and their products. This addition would
greatly enhance applicability of the NNA, supporting its evolution into a comprehensive
tool for sustainability assessment.
5
Conclusion
In this study, a new method for setting regionalized targets for GHG emission reduction
is developed, aiming to reveal trends and insights into which solutions are sustainable
enough to fulfill human needs while respecting the Paris Agreement. Unlike traditional
31 of 47
==PAGE:39==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
target-setting methods, the NNA framework separates the anthropogenic system into
activities that fulfill human needs rather than industrial activities. This shift in focus
enables companies and policy-makers to reflect on the environmental viability of cur-
rent and future products, to open a discussion about eco-effectiveness instead of the
traditional emphasis on eco-efficiency.
The NNA provides a new dynamic indicator, the intensity target, to identify the most
relevant strategies for emissions reduction. These strategies can rely on technical
advancement, e.g. lowering the carbon footprint of rice through process changes. The
NNA also allows to measure the impact from changes in technology usage, e.g. increas-
ing car occupancy. Additionally, the method accounts for reduction strategies based on
adjustments in consumption patterns, by exploring sufficiency or comparing different
products fulfilling the same activity at different environmental cost such as getting
protein with plant-based products instead of animal-based one.
The comparison of the continuation of current consumption levels (BAU scenario) and
a scenario aimed at achieving sufficiency revealed a significant potential for easing the
intensity targets. Sufficiency targets are higher than BAU ones, thereby reducing the
pressure on companies to lower their product emissions. Although this scenario should
be used cautiously to avoid underestimating the necessary efforts, it provides a positive
perspective on the potential benefits of sufficiency.
The NNA also introduces a new sharing principle, the EHH, which puts the sufficien-
tarianism distributive justice theory into practice. This principle reveals a carbon
footprint distribution that reflects a regionalized prioritization of needs. Compared to
the commonly used grandfathering principle, by considering the relative importance of
vital needs over others, the EHH allows for higher targets for activities such as food
production, making it possible for more food products to be assessed as absolutely
sustainable.
The NNA is subject to some limitations, mainly due to data availability and the
handling of heterogeneous activities. It offers promising potential for expansion to other
planetary boundaries, particularly for other global impacts such as ocean acidification,
stratospheric ozone depletion, or abiotic resource use. Additionally, the NNA could
benefit from the implementation of prioritarianism, another distributive justice theory
to address issues such as historical accountability and distribution of resources and
burdens. Additionally, future efforts should concentrate on integrating assessments for
business-to-business products as well as entire companies.
Providing companies and policymakers with the right tools to understand the challenges
and solutions of climate change is crucial to meeting vital targets like those set by the
Paris Agreement. The NNA aims to offer a new perspective in this direction.
32 of 47
==PAGE:40==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
6
References
Bjorn, Anders, Chanjief Chandrakumar, Anne Marie Boulay, Gabor Doka, Kai Fang,
Natacha Gondran, Michael Zwicky Hauschild, Annemarie Kerkhof, Henry King,
Manuele Margni, Sarah McLaren, Carina Mueller, Mikołaj Owsianiak, Greg Peters,
Sandra Roos, Serenella Sala, Gustav Sandin, Sarah Sim, Marcial Vargas-Gonzalez,
and Morten Ryberg (2020). “Review of life-cycle based methods for absolute en-
vironmental sustainability assessment and their applications”. In: Environmental
Research Letters 15.8. issn: 17489326. doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/ab89d7.
Bjorn, Anders, Shannon Lloyd, and Damon Matthews (2021). “From the Paris Agree-
ment to corporate climate commitments: evaluation of seven methods for setting
’science-based’ emission targets”. In: Environmental Research Letters 16.5. issn:
17489326. doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/abe57b.
Büchs, Milena and Max Koch (2019). “Challenges for the degrowth transition: The
debate about wellbeing”. In: Futures 105, pages 155–165. issn: 00163287. doi:
10.1016/j.futures.2018.09.002.
Caney, Simon (2009). “Justice and the distribution of greenhouse gas emissions”.
In: Journal of Global Ethics 5.2, pages 125–146. issn: 17449634. doi: 10.1080/
17449620903110300.
Christensen, L ; and N Vázquez (2013). “Post-harmonised European National Travel
Surveys.” In: Trafikdage på Aalborg Universitet. issn: 1603-9696. url: http://www.
trafikdage.dk/artikelarkiv.
Christensen, Linda (2014). “Long distance travel ’today’ Definition of long distance
travel”. In: Trafikdage. issn: 1603-9696. url: www.trafikdage.dk/artikelarkiv.
Christiansen, Hjalmar and Oana Baescu (2023). The Danish National Travel Survey
- Annual Statistical Report 2022. Technical report. DTU Center for Transport
Analytics. doi: 10.11581/dtu:00000034. url: www.tudata.dk.
Eurostat (1996). NACE Rev. 1 : Statistical classification of economic activities in the
European Community. Technical report.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2021). FAOSTAT. url:
https://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/FBS.
Girod, Bastien and Peter de Haan (2010). “More or Better? A Model for Changes
in Household Greenhouse Gas Emissions due to Higher Income”. In: Journal of
Industrial Ecology 14. url: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
56071257.
Goldstein, Benjamin, Steffen Foss Hansen, Mickey Gjerris, Alexis Laurent, and Morten
Birkved (2016). “Ethical aspects of life cycle assessments of diets”. In: Food Policy
59, pages 139–151. issn: 03069192. doi: 10.1016/j.foodpol.2016.01.006.
Grubler, Arnulf, Charlie Wilson, Nuno Bento, Benigna Boza-Kiss, Volker Krey, David L.
McCollum, Narasimha D. Rao, Keywan Riahi, Joeri Rogelj, Simon De Stercke,
Jonathan Cullen, Stefan Frank, Oliver Fricko, Fei Guo, Matt Gidden, Petr Havlík,
Daniel Huppmann, Gregor Kiesewetter, Peter Rafaj, Wolfgang Schoepp, and Hugo
Valin (2018). “A low energy demand scenario for meeting the 1.5 ◦c target and
sustainable development goals without negative emission technologies”. In: Nature
Energy 3.6, pages 515–527. issn: 20587546. doi: 10.1038/s41560-018-0172-6.
Hauschild, Michael Z. (2015). “Better - but is it good enough? On the need to consider
both eco-efficiency and eco-effectiveness to gauge industrial sustainability”. In:
33 of 47
==PAGE:41==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
Procedia CIRP. Volume 29. Elsevier B.V., pages 1–7. doi: 10.1016/j.procir.
2015.02.126.
Heide, Mia, Michael Z. Hauschild, and Morten Ryberg (2023). “Reflecting the impor-
tance of human needs fulfilment in absolute sustainability assessments: Development
of a sharing principle”. In: Journal of Industrial Ecology 27.4, pages 1151–1164.
issn: 15309290. doi: 10.1111/jiec.13405.
IPCC (2021). “Summary for Policymakers”. In: Climate Change 2021 – The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Edited by V. Masson-Delmotte, P.
Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb,
M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. LonnoyJ.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T.
Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, and B. Zhou. Cambridge University Press, pages 3–32.
doi: 10.1017/9781009157896.001. url: https://www.cambridge.org/core/
product/identifier/9781009157896%23pre2/type/book_part.
— (2022a). “Summary for Policymakers”. In: Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of
Climate Change Working Group III Contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report of
the IPCC. Edited by Priyadarshi R Shukla, Jim Skea, Andy Reisinger, Raphael Slade,
Roger Fradera, Minal Pathak, Alaa Al, Khourdajie Malek, Belkacemi Renée Van
Diemen, Apoorva Hasija, Géninha Lisboa, Sigourney Luz, Juliette Malley, David
Mccollum, and Shreya Some. Cambridge University Press. isbn: 9789291691609.
url: www.ipcc.ch.
— (2022b). “Summary for Policymakers”. In: IPCC Special Report: Global Warm-
ing of 1.5◦C. Edited by V Masson-Delmotte, P Zhai, H-O Pörtner, D Roberts,
J Skea, P.R. Shukla, A Pirani, W Moufouma-Okia, C Péan, R Pidcock, S Con-
nors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y Chen, X Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E Lonnoy, T Maycock,
M Tignor, and T Waterfield. Cambridge University Press, pages 1–24. doi: 10.
1017/9781009157940.001. url: https://www.cambridge.org/core/product/
identifier/9781009157940%23prf2/type/book_part.
IPCC, Elmar Kriegler, Volker Krey, and Edward Byers (2022). “Data for Figure SPM.4”.
In: Summary for Policymakers of the Working Group III, Contribution to the IPCC
Sixth Assessment Report. doi: https://doi.org/10.48490/ys3e-mq98.
Ivanova, Diana and Richard Wood (2020). “The unequal distribution of household
carbon footprints in Europe and its link to sustainability”. In: Global Sustainability
3. issn: 20594798. doi: 10.1017/sus.2020.12.
Krabbe, Oskar, Giel Linthorst, Kornelis Blok, Wina Crijns-Graus, Detlef P. Van Vuuren,
Niklas Höhne, Pedro Faria, Nate Aden, and Alberto Carrillo Pineda (2015). “Aligning
corporate greenhouse-gas emissions targets with climate goals”. In: Nature Climate
Change 5.12, pages 1057–1060. issn: 17586798. doi: 10.1038/nclimate2770.
Lee, D. S., D. W. Fahey, A. Skowron, M. R. Allen, U. Burkhardt, Q. Chen, S. J.
Doherty, S. Freeman, P. M. Forster, J. Fuglestvedt, A. Gettelman, R. R. De León,
L. L. Lim, M. T. Lund, R. J. Millar, B. Owen, J. E. Penner, G. Pitari, M. J.
Prather, R. Sausen, and L. J. Wilcox (2021). “The contribution of global aviation
to anthropogenic climate forcing for 2000 to 2018”. In: Atmospheric Environment
244. issn: 18732844. doi: 10.1016/j.atmosenv.2020.117834.
Li, Mo, Thomas Wiedmann, and Michalis Hadjikakou (2020). “Enabling Full Supply
Chain Corporate Responsibility: Scope 3 Emissions Targets for Ambitious Climate
34 of 47
==PAGE:42==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
Change Mitigation”. In: Environmental Science and Technology 54.1, pages 400–411.
issn: 15205851. doi: 10.1021/ACS.EST.9B05245.
Millward-Hopkins, Joel, Julia K. Steinberger, Narasimha D. Rao, and Yannick Oswald
(2020). “Providing decent living with minimum energy: A global scenario”. In: Global
Environmental Change 65. issn: 09593780. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.
102168.
Poore, J. and T. Nemecek (2018). “Reducing food’s environmental impacts through
producers and consumers”. In: Science 360.6392, pages 987–992. issn: 10959203.
doi: 10.1126/science.aaq0216.
Porkka, Miina, Matti Kummu, Stefan Siebert, and Olli Varis (2013). “From food insuf-
ficiency towards trade dependency: A historical analysis of global food availability”.
In: PLoS ONE 8.12. issn: 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082714.
Rao, Narasimha D. and Jihoon Min (2018). “Decent Living Standards: Material Prereq-
uisites for Human Wellbeing”. In: Social Indicators Research 138.1, pages 225–244.
issn: 15730921. doi: 10.1007/s11205-017-1650-0.
Richardson, Katherine, Will Steffen, Wolfgang Lucht, Jørgen Bendtsen, Sarah E Cornell,
Jonathan F Donges, Markus Drüke, Ingo Fetzer, Govindasamy Bala, Werner Von
Bloh, Georg Feulner, Stephanie Fiedler, Dieter Gerten, Tom Gleeson, Matthias
Hofmann, Willem Huiskamp, Matti Kummu, Chinchu Mohan, David Nogués-Bravo,
Stefan Petri, Miina Porkka, Stefan Rahmstorf, Sibyll Schaphoff, Kirsten Thonicke,
Arne Tobian, Vili Virkki, Lan Wang-Erlandsson, Lisa Weber, and Johan Rockström
(2023). Earth beyond six of nine planetary boundaries. Technical report. url:
https://www.science.org.
Ryberg, Morten W., Martin Marchman Andersen, Mikołaj Owsianiak, and Michael Z.
Hauschild (2020). “Downscaling the planetary boundaries in absolute environmental
sustainability assessments – A review”. In: Journal of Cleaner Production 276. issn:
09596526. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.123287.
Sandin, Gustav, Greg M. Peters, and Magdalena Svanström (2015). “Using the planetary
boundaries framework for setting impact-reduction targets in LCA contexts”. In:
International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment 20.12, pages 1684–1700. issn:
16147502. doi: 10.1007/s11367-015-0984-6.
SBTi (2015). Sectoral Decarbonization Approach (SDA): A method for setting corporate
emission reduction targets in line with climate science. Technical report.
— (2020). Science-Based Target Setting Manual Version 4.1. Technical report.
Steffen, Will, Katherine Richardson, Johan Rockström, Sarah E. Cornell, Ingo Fetzer,
Elena M. Bennett, Reinette Biggs, Stephen R. Carpenter, Wim De Vries, Cynthia
A. De Wit, Carl Folke, Dieter Gerten, Jens Heinke, Georgina M. Mace, Linn M.
Persson, Veerabhadran Ramanathan, Belinda Reyers, and Sverker Sörlin (2015).
“Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet”. In:
Science 347.6223. issn: 10959203. doi: 10.1126/science.1259855.
Tukker, Arnold, Stefan Giljum, and Richard Wood (2018). “Recent Progress in Assess-
ment of Resource Efficiency and Environmental Impacts Embodied in Trade: An
Introduction to this Special Issue”. In: Journal of Industrial Ecology 22.3, pages 489–
501. issn: 15309290. doi: 10.1111/jiec.12736.
Tukker, Arnold, Gjalt Huppes, Jeroen Guinée, Reinout Heijungs, Arjan de Koning,
Lauran van Oers, Sangwon Suh, Theo Geerken, Mirja Van Holderbeke, Bart Jansen,
and Per Nielsen (2006). Environmental Impact of Products (EIPRO): Analysis of
35 of 47
==PAGE:43==
Technical University of Denmark
21st of June, 2024
the life cycle environmental impacts related to the final consumption of the EU-25.
Technical report. European Commission, Joint Research Centre - Institute for
Prospective Technological Studies - European Science and Technology Observatory.
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, and Population Di-
vision (2022). World Population Prospects 2022, Online Edition. url: https :
//population.un.org/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/.
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (2015). “Adoption of the
Paris Agreement”. In: url: https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/
eng/l09r01.pdf.
36 of 47
==PAGE:44==
Technical University of Denmark
Appendix B
Appendices
A
Consumption categories and activities
Figure 17: Proposed consumption categories and activities for the operalization of the NNA. The
activities and function in italic are only suggestions, that could change if a better conception is found.
B
Comparison of global emission pathway with current mea-
sured emissions
Figure 18 illustrates the median of two IPCC modelled pathways:
• "Limit warming to 2°C (>67%) or return warming to 1.5°C (>50%) after a high
overshoot, NDCs until 2030", the scenario chosen to illustrate the NNA.
• "Limit warming to 2°C (>67%)", another modelled pathway that would also lead
to compliance with the Paris Agreement. This pathway is
37 of 47
==PAGE:45==
Technical University of Denmark
Appendix C
Figure 18: Global GHG emissions of median of two IPCC modelled pathways and measured 2022
global emissions.
C
Exiobase characteristics and calculations
C.1
Exiobase characteristics
The dataset "IOT_2022_pxp" of Exiobase v3.8.2 (released in September 2021) was
used. Those data are estimates for 2022 based on the now-casting procedure and
projections of GDP and aggregate trade of the International Monetary Fund. The last
real data points are from:
• 2019 for macroeconomic data from UN and Taiwan,
• 2015 for energy,
• 2019 for all GHG (non fuel, non-CO2 are nowcasted from 2018),
• 2013 for material,
• 2011 for most others (Input-Output tables...), land, water.
C.2
Consumption-based emissions calculation
The module pymrio is used to extract the GMRIO data on Python. The consumption-
based emissions for given region Br are calculated using Equation 7.
Br = S · L · Yr + FYr
(7)
Where S is the "Direct stressor/impact coefficients" matrix, which gives the direct
background impacts of the products (sorted by country). Yr is the final demand in
region r. In the case of the present study. FYr represents the direct impacts of the
38 of 47
==PAGE:46==
Technical University of Denmark
Appendix E
final use of the products. In this study it is used as the addition of two new products,
"Direct emission from heating "and "Direct emission from vehicles". The distribution
of emissions between the two products is taken from the IAE and displayed below. L
is the Leontiev inverse, which modelizes the interactions between the various products,
that is equal to (I −A)−1, where A is the matrix with the inter-industry coefficients.
Region r
Share "heating"
Share "vehicle"
Denmark
14.16%
85.84%
Spain
15.50%
84.50%
Table 5: Distribution of the direct emissions FYr between the new products "Direct emission from
heating "and "Direct emission from vehicles", for Denmark and Spain.
D
Concordance matrices with Exiobase
D.1
Concordance matrix between Exiobase products and consumption
categories
See Excel file.
D.2
Concordance matrix between Exiobase products and activities
See Excel file.
E
Construction of the Exemplary Households sharing principle
At consumption categories level.
A concordance matrix has been developed
(Figure 19) to fit the NNA categories into the ones of Ivanova et al. (2020), by
examining their own Exiobase concordance matrix. A consistency check is performed,
revealing that the categories are coherent (Figure 20).
Figure 19: Concordance matrix between consumption categories of the NNA and Ivanova et al., 2020.
39 of 47
==PAGE:47==
Technical University of Denmark
Appendix E
Figure 20: Comparison of GHG emission distribution across consumption categories between NNA
and Ivanova et al., 2020.
Some differences can be seen between the 2022 Exiobase results and the 2010 Ivanova
and Wood results for average Danes (such as the share of mobility, respectively 29%
and 35%), that can be explained by several factors. First of all, the 12 years gap
can be an explanation: consumption patterns might have changed a bit. This is also
supported by the fact that 2022 results of Exiobase are estimations from projections.
Finally, Ivanova et al. (2020) only accounts for households expenditures while the NNA
also accounts for expenditures from e.g. the government and NGOs. However, these
discrepancies are assumed to be small enough to presume that both of the distribution
are consistent.
Since this study focuses only the consumption categories Food and Mobility to provide
proof-of-concepts, only those two were investigated for the EHH. They fit pretty closely
to the Ivanova and Wood consumption categories "Food" and the sum of "Land Travel"
and "Air travel", that are taken as a basis.
At activity level - Food.
For the Food category, it has been proved that a vegetarian
or vegan diet generally perform better environmentally compared to a standard diet
(Goldstein et al., 2016), in particular in Denmark, with an average carbon footprint of
2.2 kgCO2/day against 4.3kgCO2/day. Thus, the EHH principle applies the same GHG
budget distribution across food activities that it is for a vegetarian diet. Figure 21 is a
concordance matrix linking each food category of Goldstein et al. (2016) to one or more
activities within the NNA consumption category Food. It is performed by using the
study’s Supplementary information giving a list of food product considered, and the
concordance matrix between Food activities and Exiobase products AFood previously
made (Appendix D).
40 of 47
==PAGE:48==
Technical University of Denmark
Appendix E
A consistency check is performed. Since Goldstein et al. (2016) do not include Beverage
and Tobacco products in their study, the share of those activities are assumed to be
the same as with the Exiobase current share, and the share for the rest of the activities
are reduced proportionally to reach 100% in total.
Figure 21: Concordance matrix between activities of the NNA consumption category Food and
Goldstein et al., 2016.
A earlier, a consistency check is performed with the omnivorous diet of the study,
representing the average Danish diet. The figure indicates a difference between the
contribution of food products providing energy and protein. This result can comes
from the fact than Exiobase’s share are estimations from projections, and the fact
that the NNA account for households, governmental and NGOs consumption, while
the average diet is focused on individuals. On the other hand, the distribution for a
vegetarian diet, shows some clear distinction with the two others. The share allocated
to vegetables and fruits is about three times higher than for both other cases, and the
share allocated to high-protein food is much lower. The vegetarian distribution is then
supposed to be representative of an exemplary distribution.
41 of 47
==PAGE:49==
Technical University of Denmark
Appendix F
Figure 22: Comparison of GHG emission distribution across between activities of the NNA consumption
category Food and Goldstein et al., 2016.
At activity level - Mobility.
For the Mobility category, in the absence of studies
on exemplary “transportation consumption pattern” that compile both Daily and Long
distance mobility (the two activities of the category), the GF principle is used as a
proxy to allocate GHG emissions between these two activities.
42 of 47
==PAGE:50==
Technical University of Denmark
Appendix F
F
Activity levels
Figure 23: Activity level for BAU and Sufficiency scenario in Denmark, for the activity "Providing
energy"
Figure 24: Activity level for BAU and Sufficiency scenario in Denmark, for the activity "Providing
protein "
43 of 47
==PAGE:51==
Technical University of Denmark
Appendix G
Figure 25: Activity level for BAU and Sufficiency scenario in Denmark, for the activities "Daily
mobility" and "Long distance mobility"
F.1
Sufficiency activity level calculations for transportation
Based on Millward-Hopkins et al. (2020), the sufficient mobility expressed in km per
person per year for a region r can be calculated with Equation 8 (a weighted average
between urban and rural population is added compared to the original formula).
Mobr = (Mobbase,urban·%popurban+Mobbase,rural·%poprural)·(ffixed+fvar· LDbase
LDr
) (8)
where the Lived Density LD is calculated as:
LDr = pop density ·
Total land area
Agriculture land area + Urban land area
(9)
Table 6 resumes the parameters value, sources, and the results for this calculations.
DK
ES
Unit
Source
Pop density
146
95
pers/km2
World bank
Total land area
40000
500000
km2
World bank, rounded
Agricultural land area
26000
260000
km2
World bank, rounded
Urban land area
2500
20000
km²
World bank, rounded
% pop urban
88%
81%
%
World bank
Mobbase,urban
7000
7000
km/pers/an
Millward-Hopkins et al (2020)
Mobbase,rural
10000
10000
km/pers/an
Millward-Hopkins et al (2020)
ffixed
0.5
0.5
-
Millward-Hopkins et al (2020)
fvar
0.5
0.5
-
Millward-Hopkins et al (2020)
LDbase
189
189
pers/km2
Millward-Hopkins et al (2020)
LDr
205
170
pers/km2
Results of Equation 9
Mobr
7070
8000
km/pers/an
Results of Equation 8
Table 6: Parameters and results for the sufficiency activity level of the Mobility activities.
44 of 47
==PAGE:52==
Technical University of Denmark
Appendix G
G
LCA process used for the LCA of products
Activity
Product
Ecoinvent 3 process
Providing energy
Rice (basmati)
Rice, basmati {GLO}| market for rice, basmati | Cut-
off, U
Rice (non-basmati)
Rice, non-basmati {GLO}| market for rice, non-
basmati | Cut-off, U
Wheat flour
Wheat flour {RoW}| market for wheat flour | Cut-off,
U
Potatoes
Potato {UA}| potato production | Cut-off, U
Providing protein
Tofu (soya paste)
Tofu {RoW}| production | Cut-off, S
Peas
Protein pea, Swiss integrated production {CH}| mar-
ket for protein pea, Swiss integrated production |
Cut-off, U
Lentil
Lentil {GLO}| market for lentil | Cut-off, U
Chickpea
Chickpea {GLO}| market for chickpea | Cut-off, U
Red meat
Red meat, live weight {GLO}| market for | Cut-off,
U
Trout (fish)
Trout {GLO}| market for trout | Cut-off, U
Chicken
Chicken for slaughtering, live weight {GLO}| market
for | Cut-off, U
Pork
Swine for slaughtering, live weight {GLO}| market
for | Cut-off, U
Daily mobility
Car
Transport, passenger car, medium size, petrol, EURO
5 {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U
Bike
Transport, passenger, bicycle {CH}| processing | Cut-
off, U
E-bike
Transport, passenger, electric bicycle {CH}| process-
ing | Cut-off, U
Train (urban)
Transport, passenger train {CH}| urban | Cut-off, U
Long-distance mobility
Car
Transport, passenger car, medium size, petrol, EURO
5 {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U
Train (regional)
Transport, passenger train {CH}| regional | Cut-off,
U
Train (Long distance)
Transport, passenger train {CH}| long-distance | Cut-
off, U
Plane (medium haul)
Transport, passenger aircraft, medium haul {GLO}|
transport, passenger aircraft, medium haul | Cut-off,
U
Table 7: Ecoinvent 3 processes used to calculate the impact intensity of products.
45 of 47
==PAGE:53==
Technical University of Denmark
Appendix G
Product
Characteristic
Rice (basmati and non-basmati)
3480 kcal/kg
Wheat flour
3450 kcal/kg
Potatoes
740 kcal/kg
Tofu (soya paste)
137 g prot/kg
Peas
222 g prot/kg
Lentil
251 g prot/kg
Chickpea
208 g prot/kg
Red meat
184 g prot/kg
Trout (fish)
217 g prot/kg
Chicken
196 g prot/kg
Pork
170 g prot/kg
Car, Daily use
1.34 pers/vehicle
Car, long distance use
1.80 pers/vehicle
Table 8: Product characteristics necessary for the impact intensity calculation
46 of 47
==PAGE:54==
Danmarks 
Tekniske 
Universitet 
Bygningstorvet
Bygning 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.sustain.dtu.dk
