==PAGE:1==
==PAGE:2==
Predictive Modeling for Personalized Tinnitus Treatment
Master Thesis 22 January 2024 - 21 June 2024 (30 ECTS)
By:
Laura Casanovas i Buliart [s222798@dtu.dk]
DTU Supervisors:
Torsten Dau, Hearing Systems, Building 352 [tdau@dtu.dk]: Main supervisor
Mie Jørgensen, Hearing Systems, Building 352, Room 121 [mielj@dtu.dk]: Co-Supervisor
Niels Overby, Hearing Systems, Building 352, [niov@dtu.dk]: Co-Supervisor
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the
customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Plads, Building 345C,
DK-2800, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark Denmark
https://www.healthtech.dtu.dk/research/research-sections/
section-hearing-systems
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
5
2.1
Tinnitus pathophysiology
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Tinnitus risk factors and comorbidities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
Tinnitus distress: the psychological models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Tinnitus diagnose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Current Treatments for Tinnitus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5.1
Sound therapy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.5.2
Mobile phone applications (apps) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.5.3
Other treatments under research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.6
Brain activity in EEG data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Machine Learning in Healthcare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.7.1
Machine Learning using EEG data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Methodology
13
3.1
Method overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Data availability
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
EEG Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4
Data Pre-processing and Feature Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.1
Statistical Features . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.4.2
Power Images . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.5
Development of Classification Models for Sound Therapy Response Prediction 17
3.5.1
Traditional Machine Learning Models: SVM and LDA . . . . . . . .
18
3.5.2
CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.5.3
Multi-input Neural Network model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5.4
EEGNet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.5.5
Training procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.6
Pilot Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3
==PAGE:5==
3.6.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6.2
Participants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.6.3
EEG data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6.4
Sound therapy used
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.6.5
Participant Informed Consent and Data Usage Authorization . . . .
25
4
Results
27
5
Discussion
37
6
Conclusions
41
Appendix A Recognized Risk Factors for Tinnitus
43
Appendix B Understanding the foundations of supervised learning
45
B.1
Foundations of DL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
B.2
Performance evaluation methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
Appendix C Signal Processing Techniques for EEG Analysis
49
C.1 ICA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
C.2 Welch Method and Fast Fourier Transform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Appendix D Electrode Displays and EEG Data
51
Appendix E Model Coefficients and Performance Metrics
53
Bibliography
66
==PAGE:6==
i
CONTENTS
Acronyms
AI
Artificial Intelligence
AUC Area Under the Curve
CBT Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
CI
Cochlear Implants
CMS Common Mode Sense
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
DFT Discrete Fourier Transform
DL
Deep Learning
DNN Deep Neural Network
DRL Driven Right Leg
EEG Electroencephalography
FFT
Fast Fourier Transform
FN
False Negatives
FP
False Positives
FPR False Positive Rate
ICA
Independent Component Analysis
LDA Linear Discriminant Analysis
MEG Magnetoencephalography
ML
Machine Learning
NFB Neurofeedback
NN
Artificial Neural Network
PCA Principal Component Analysis
PNES Psychogenic Non-Epileptic Seizures
PSD
Power Spectral Density
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
ii
REST Reference Electrode Standardization Technique
ROC Receiver Operating Characteristic
rTMS Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
SVM Support Vector Machine
tES
Transcranial Electrical Stimulation
THI
Tinnitus Handicap Inventory
TMNMT Tailor-Made Notched Music Training
TPR True Positive Rate
TSCHQ Tinnitus Sample Case History Questionnaire
==PAGE:8==
Abstract
Predicting tinnitus treatment response accurately remains a significant challenge. This
study evaluates the use of electroencephalography (EEG) data as tinnitus biomarker and
the ability of machine learning and deep learning to discern between patients with tinnitus
that will respond to sound therapy and the ones that will not, using EEG data. For that, a
set of classification models were trained using existing baseline EEG data from participants
that had underwent tinnitus treatment. A pilot study was then conducted to collect addi-
tional data for evaluating the models with new data. In the first session baseline EEG data
from participants with tinnitus was collected as well as their Tinnitus Handicap Inventory
(THI) score. The participants underwent sound therapy over one month. The difference
on the THI score before and after sound therapy was used as indicative on whether the
participant responded to the treatment. Next, a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) was
implemented following two different methodologies. In the first case, good metrics were
achieved, but it was due to improper split of training and testing data. In the second case,
the methodology was more rigorous and it demonstrated the CNN’s inability to generalize
properly, suggesting that the model had learned non-representative patterns. To increase
model performance, a Multi-Input Neural Network incorporating tinnitus characteristics of
the participants was developed, but this approach failed to yield significant improvements.
Moreover, an EEGNet model was tested, giving the worst metric performance. Simpler
models, such as Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA),
also performed poorly, indicating that the problem likely lies in the data rather than the
model complexity. Finally, the results from the sound therapy pilot did not show THI
score improvements but the participants feedback was positive, reinforcing the possible
benefits of using sound therapy for tinnitus management. Overall, this research underlines
the limitations of using EEG data for predicting tinnitus treatment outcomes and suggests
that future studies should further explore how to improve these models, even consider
using another type of biomarker to improve prediction accuracy. The findings call into
question previous studies with overly optimistic results and emphasize the need for robust
data handling practices in clinical machine learning research.
Keywords: tinnitus distress, sound therapy, electroencephalography, ma-
chine learning, deep learning.
iii
==PAGE:9==
Acknowledgements
This work represents the final academic part of my studies at DTU. Upon concluding this
journey I realize it has only been possible thanks to incredible people I have met along the
way. I chose a thesis in tinnitus and machine learning research motivated by the idea of
gaining a deeper understanding of the area and contributing to its advancement, and I am
extremely happy to have enjoyed the actual work it entailed.
First, I would like to express my deepest appreciation to Torsten Dau, for giving me this
opportunity and for granting me the courage and confidence I needed during our mentoring
sessions. His positive feedback enabled me to carry out the project more methodically and
with renewed energy. I would also like to extend my most sincere gratitude to my super-
visors Mie Jørgensen and Niels Obervy for believing in me and giving me the opportunity
to develop this thesis and learn so much. Thanks, Mie, for all your time and dedication,
for teaching me so many new things, especially everything about the lab, and for always
ensuring I was doing well. Thanks, Niels, for your counseling in all the technical aspects,
and for always coming up with the most relevant questions that were key to improving
the project. And thank you both for the valuable advice and guidance you provided me
during this process. Special thanks to Rikke Sørensen, for her help in the administration
process and, particularly, for conducting all the audiograms needed. A debt of gratitude
is also owed to all the participants in the study, without whom this work would have not
been possible, especially, to Henrik Hvidberg, for being participant zero and having the
patience to participate in my first session ever in the lab.
I’m extremely grateful to my friends here and abroad, especially to Anna, Marlies,
Laura, Nathalie, Llu´ıs and Eric, without whom it would have been impossible to get though
the whole semester and ending up achieving this thesis in such a good mood. Thanks for
your help, your support, our talks, the games, and above all, for all the laughs.
Finalment, gr`acies David, per la paci`encia que tens amb mi, per escoltar-me sempre i
ajudar-me fins i tot en les coses m´es avorrides, i sobretot per fer-me totes les abra¸cades
que necessito en cada moment. I gr`acies papa, mama, Mery, Eloi, Juju, Loli i iaia per
tot. Tot i estar a tants quil`ometres, seguiu donant-me tot el suport que necessito amb els
vostres missatges, trucades, i visites, aqu´ı o all`a, que sempre s´on d’all`o m´es refrescants i
que sempre em carreguen d’energia.
iv
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Tinnitus is the conscious perception of sound when no external sound source is present,
which is a frequent medical symptom that can cause distress to people suffering it. Nonethe-
less, the underlying mechanisms of this condition remain elusive. Hence, despite the ex-
tensive ongoing research into mechanisms and treatments, no effective pharmaceutical
treatments exist yet (Simoes et al., 2021).
In European countries, the average prevalence of tinnitus is 14.7%, with rates ranging
from 8.7% in Ireland to 28.3% in Bulgaria (Biswas et al., 2022). Epidemiological data
available is mainly from Western Europe, the USA, and Australia, for which prevalence
studies often show that there is a high variability between them because of the different
assessment methodologies and definitions (McCormack et al., 2016).
This condition is associated with cognitive deficits, increased stress, sleep difficulties
(Cr¨onlein et al., 2016), hearing loss, depression (Salazar et al., 2019), concentration diffi-
culties, head trauma, use of ototoxic medications, anxiety (Pattyn et al., 2016) and reduced
quality of life (Nondahl et al., 2007; Weidt et al., 2016).
Tinnitus has been historically related to damage to the cochlea, but new theories arised
as there are tinnitus patients with normal hearing. Schaette and McAlpine (2011) presented
the Central Gain Theory by proving that tinnitus may arise from an attempt from the brain
to compensate for changes in auditory nerve activity by altering the activity of neurons
in the central auditory system. They observed that in people with tinnitus and normal
hearing tests, there is a decrease in the electrical signals produced by the primary auditory
nerve fibers, which are the ones carrying sound information to the brain. Hence, a person
could have normal hearing but these nerve fibers might not be sending as much information
to the brain as they are supposed to, to which the brain might try to compensate by keeping
other parts of the auditory system responding normally.
This study will focus on tinnitus distress, which is the negative emotional reaction to
tinnitus (further explained in section §2.3). Fortunately, the number of people who are
distressed by tinnitus and report that it has at least some effect on their lives is under half
of people with tinnitus (McKenna et al., 2014). While patients may feel that the perceived
1
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
2
loudness or other features of their tinnitus are causing their distress, scientific evidence does
not strongly support a direct relationship between these psycho-physical characteristics and
the emotional distress experienced by individuals with tinnitus (McKenna et al., 2014).
Surgical interventions linked with ear problems may alleviate tinnitus in some condi-
tions, but the presence of tinnitus may persist (Baguley et al., 2013). Treatment options
include sound therapy, psychology-based interventions, mobile phone applications for tin-
nitus management, pharamacotherapy, non-invasive neurostimulation and combinations of
those. In section §2.5 these are explained in more detail. In this project sound therapy
is employed, as it is non-invasive and pleasant for the patients. When referring to sound
therapy, only the prevalence of sounds such as music and noise will be considered, which
does not include amplification. Nonetheless, the heterogeneity among tinnitus patients has
difficulted both basic science and treatment research (Simoes et al., 2021).
Studies that used magnetoencephalography (MEG) or EEG, discovered that the oscilla-
tory activity in tinnitus patients was different from the ones without tinnitus (Weisz et al.,
2005; Schlee et al., 2014). This means that neuronal oscillations might be a biomarker for
tinnitus and could be employed to objectively assess the impact of sound therapy. Nonethe-
less, there is disagreement on whether neuronal oscillations can be used as a biomarker for
tinnitus, Jørgensen et al. (2023) showed that there was no correlation between changes in
power activity and changes in tinnitus-related distress after sound therapy, which dimin-
ishes the effectiveness of using oscillatory activity as a biomarker for assessing the impact
of sound therapy treatment.
Nowadays, it is still hard to determine the probability of treatment response, which
leads patients to having to try different treatments until they find a suitable one.
A
potential tool to solve this is artificial intelligence (AI), which might help professionals
prescript tinnitus treatments to patients by predicting which interventions are most likely
for the patient to respond to.
The use of AI models would alleviate patient distress
and improve clinical effectiveness. Some studies have used EEG data to train machine
learning (ML) models to diagnose tinnitus or to determine the most relevant features
related to tinnitus (Allgaier et al., 2021; Hong et al., 2023; Manta et al., 2023; Lin et al.,
2023). Furthermore, Doborjeh et al. (2023) used EEG data to develop an AI-based digital
prognostic system. Specifically, they trained a CNN to classify patients as responders or
non-responders to sound therapy.
However, Doborjeh et al. (2023) does not provide a comprehensive detailed explana-
tion of the methodology and architecture used for the trained CNN model. Hence, it is
needed a transparent description of a CNN model that predicts sound therapy outcomes
and performs as well as the one they created. As well as, a detailed explanation of the
methods such as the data collection, preprocessing, model architecture, and model train-
ing, to ensure that replication by an external researcher is possible. Furthermore, other
ML methods with other features from EEG data should be developed to validate that EEG
data is actually a biomarker for tinnitus sound therapy outcomes.
The goal of this thesis is to develop a CNN model trained with baseline EEG data
==PAGE:12==
3
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
that is able to predict whether a tinnitus patient will benefit from sound therapy or not,
and expose all methods used in detail to achieve it, to ensure that an external researcher
can replicate the study. Furthermore, two simpler ML models will be trained to validate
the CNN model. These models will be developed following the methodology of Varone
et al. (2020), as they achieved very good results to perform binary EEG data classification
of psychogenic non-epileptic seizures (PNES) EEG segments and healthy ones. The two
models that achieved the best results in their study will be trained to classify EEG data
from tinnitus participants between responders and non-responders to sound therapy. Given
that Doborjeh et al. (2023) achieved accuracies ranging from 98% to 100%, indicating that
the complex CNN model can perfectly identify patterns in the data, it is expected that
the simpler models will also be able to detect some patterns. Finally, another complex
deep learning (DL) model, called EEGNet, which has successfully already been applied
for EEG data classification, will be generated, using a different feature extraction method,
to further validate the CNN model. This model is a compact CNN proposed by Lawhern
et al. (2018).
It is tailored for a minimal number of learnable parameters.
Therefore,
it reduces the need for techniques to deal with limited data. Moreover, it requires less
feature extraction when pre-processing the data before training the model, as the early
layers of the model can be considered as a way to learn a feature representation instead of
using traditional methods of filtering signals into different frequency bands. In Hong et al.
(2023) they used EEGNet to classify patients with tinnitus and patients without it and
they achieved remarkable results. Hence, a similar procedure to train the EEGNet will be
followed in this study. The success of these models would imply that EEG data can be
used as biomarker for tinnitus sound therapy outcome prediction.
This study hypothesizes that high accuracies will be achieved by training a CNN model
with power images, consistent with the results obtained by Doborjeh et al. (2023). To
validate these findings, the study will also employ two simpler machine learning models
and one more complex model, which are expected to yield similarly good results.
The outline of this thesis is as follows. Firstly, some background and related work on
tinnitus research is introduced. Secondly, the data acquisition, its pre-processing and the
development of the ML models are explained. Then, the pilot study design and its exe-
cution is described. Afterwards, the results are presented. First, the model performances
during the training phase are shown. Later, the performance of the models on the pilot
study data is analyzed. Next, a discussion section is included analyzing the results accord-
ing to the literature, presenting the main limitations and giving some directions for future
research. Finally, the conclusions of this project are exposed, summarizing the study and
outlining the most relevant outcomes.
==PAGE:13==
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
4
==PAGE:14==
Chapter 2
Theoretical Background
In this chapter, the main concepts to understand the tinnitus condition are introduced,
as well as the main concepts to understand the study. First, the tinnitus risk factors and
comorbidities are revealed. Later, the current understanding of tinnitus pathophysiology
is exposed and the psychological models to explain tinnitus distress are presented. Next,
how to diagnose tinnitus and how to determine its severity is explained, as well as, the
existing treatments for tinnitus. Then, it is explored how EEG data reflects brain activity
and its relevance to tinnitus. Finally, some previous studies on EEG data and healthcare
using ML classification are discussed.
2.1
Tinnitus pathophysiology
Tinnitus is the conscious perception of sound when no external sound source is present
(Baguley et al., 2013).
However, its pathophysiology is complex and involves multiple
factors, which makes it a major obstacle in understanding the neural basis of the condition
and making effective treatments (Simoes et al., 2021). Although some pathologies, such as
those impacting hearing, might be related to tinnitus (Baguley et al., 2013), the presence
of shared pathophysiological pathway for the manifestation of tinnitus remains uncertain
(Simoes et al., 2021).
Evidence suggests that the genetic inheritance of tinnitus is not only dictated by one
gene but involves the interaction of diverse genetic elements and environmental factors
(Lopez-Escamez et al., 2016), which poses a challenge to further expand genetic research
on tinnitus.
Consistent with the Central Gain Theory, this phantom sound perception is usually
related to neuroplasticity, which means that the brain tries to fill in the missing sensory
information by generating phantom sounds (Baguley et al., 2013). When hearing loss in
the cochlea, the nerve activity sent to the brain decreases, which can affect the inhibitory
processes in the auditory cortex leading to the possibility of developing tinnitus. Hence,
a possible reason for tinnitus is exposure to loud noises, which can prompt hearing loss
5
==PAGE:15==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
6
and therefore might induce a neural reorganization, where neurons adjust to imitate those
located in the surroundings of the affected region (Baguley et al., 2013).
However, as
proven by the Central Gain Theory, tinnitus is not only related to inner ear damage, as
even if the connection between the ear and the brain is removed, the phantom sounds can
still be heard (Baguley et al., 2013). This might be due to changes in neural activity, for
example, when the brain is not receiving the expected amount of information from the
nerve fibers. Concretely, if neurons start firing more often without any external sound
stimuli, it could lead to the sensation of tinnitus (Baguley et al., 2013). Nevertheless, the
explanation of how changes in the brain directly cause tinnitus and why tinnitus might
start abruptly in certain situations is still unclear (Baguley et al., 2013).
2.2
Tinnitus risk factors and comorbidities
The main risk factor of this condition is hearing loss, but this connection is not always direct
as some people with bothering tinnitus do not have hearing loss and, inversely, most people
with hearing loss do not suffer from tinnitus (Baguley et al., 2013). Furthermore, people
exposed to loud noises on their daily lives or for recreational purposes are more likely to have
tinnitus (Baguley et al., 2013). Other possible risk factors that might have connection with
tinnitus are alcohol consumption, smoking, previous head injuries, hypertension, history
of arthritis, and obesity (Baguley et al., 2013). Moreover, some findings suggested a minor
genetic predisposition (Baguley et al., 2013) and the trigger of tinnitus by some drugs
such as aminoglycoside antibiotics, quinine, salicylates, and platinum-based drugs (Baguley
et al., 2013). It has also been found that tinnitus can happen in connection with various
otological diseases (Baguley et al., 2013). Refer to table A.1 in the appendix A for more
examples on this.
Additionally, depression and anxiety are common mental comorbidities, linked with tin-
nitus distress (McKENNA et al., 1991). Nonetheless, the link with the condition comprises
complex neural mechanisms, which needs to be further studied.
Due to the little understanding on the underlying mechanisms of the condition and
the lack of objective measurements, researchers have focused on the phenotypic traits that
vary among tinnitus patients, including attributes related to perception and influence to
the affected people. Hence, tinnitus has been found to be related with some comorbidities
such as hearing loss and hyperacusis. Hyperacusis, which is the aversion to loud sounds,
has been seen in 40% of patients with tinnitus and 86% of patients who note hyperacusis
also indicate experiencing tinnitus (Anari et al., 1999).
2.3
Tinnitus distress: the psychological models
While tinnitus itself is a sensory symptom, tinnitus distress comprises the negative emo-
tional reaction to tinnitus. Distressing tinnitus prevalence usually increases with age, even
though, there are studies showing that after the age of 70 years it decreases (Baguley et al.,
==PAGE:16==
7
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
2013). Prevalence is similar in both women and men (Baguley et al., 2013). It is challeng-
ing to estimate the prevalence in children, but some studies show that tinnitus studies is
common among children, with similar statistics to adults (Baguley et al., 2013). However,
children appear to be less likely to be bothered by the condition (Baguley et al., 2013).
Psychological models pose that tinnitus distress is related to the emotional meaning
and relationship patients have with their tinnitus. One of the most influential psychologi-
cal perspectives is the Hallman’s Habituation Model (Hallam et al., 1984), which defends
patients can habituate to their tinnitus over time but when they experience high levels
of arousal or stress, they struggle to disregard tinnitus-related signals. When they focus
on tinnitus there exists a reciprocal feedback loop that could heighten arousal, thereby
impeding the habituation to tinnitus process. Consequently, the more awareness the more
difficult is getting used to it. Similarly, a novel Cognitive-Behavioral Model was proposed
by McKenna et al. (2014), in which they support that when a patient holds too many
negative thoughts about tinnitus, tinnitus distress is provoked and a reciprocal feedback
loop is created. This motivate the patient to maintain factors such as selective attention,
monitoring, and counterproductive safety behaviors, which result in the overestimation
of the intensity and complexity of tinnitus. Hence, patients gain a distorted perception
of tinnitus, which indeed causes more negative thoughts of tinnitus, starting an endless
loop. Psychological models have been useful for the development of tinnitus treatments
which focus on interventions targeting negative thoughts and behaviors, as well as relax-
ation techniques to alleviate tinnitus distress. In section §2.5 some of the most common
treatments for tinnitus are presented.
2.4
Tinnitus diagnose
There is a huge heterogeneity among tinnitus patients, which makes it challenging to find
effective treatments (Cederroth et al., 2019). This heterogeneity becomes evident in many
aspects of how patients experience tinnitus. The intensity of the perceived sound can vary.
However, for many people, the intensity clearly increases with stress. The sensations of
the sound are generally of an elementary nature, this is patients hear a hissing, a sizzling,
or a ringing sound. Nonetheless, in some cases, more complex sounds such as distorted
and meaningless voices or music are perceived (Baguley et al., 2013). Tinnitus can be
subjective or objective; rhythmical or pulsatile; constant or intermittent; abrupt, meaning
that it can start suddenly and without warning, or insidious, which happens in most of the
cases, meaning that that its harmful effects manifest gradually or subtly; and localized to
one ear, both ears or centrally within the head (Baguley et al., 2013).
Due to this heterogeneity it is also challenging to have an objective way of diagnos-
ing tinnitus. Nowadays, no objective test is currently available for most cases of tinnitus
(Simoes et al., 2021). Generally, diagnosis is mainly based on medical history and the
impact of tinnitus on the patient and their family (Simoes et al., 2021). Usually, tinnitus
patients undergo an audiological evaluation, comprising pure-tone audiometry and tympa-
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
8
nometry, which can be useful, especially for patients complaining of a blocked sensation in
the ears (Simoes et al., 2021). Furthermore, assessment of tinnitus includes the evaluation
of the impact on sleep and concentration (Baguley et al., 2013).
A common way of determining the tinnitus severity is through health questionnaires
(Simoes et al., 2021). The most frequently used is the THI questionnaire (Newman et al.,
1996), which contains 25 items grouped into three subscales: functional, emotional and
catastrophic. The total score ranges from 0 to 100, where the highest score represents the
maximum severity of tinnitus. The grading system determined by the British Association
of Otolaryngologists, Head and Neck Surgeons, is used for organizing tinnitus severity into
four different groups: very mild (score 0-16), mild (score 18-36), moderate (38-56) and
severe (58-76) (McCombe et al., 2001). Using questionnaires to evaluate related symptoms
such as hyperacusis and psychological distress can be beneficial as well (Khalfa et al., 2002).
Finally, the Tinnitus Sample Case History Questionnaire (TSCHQ) is commonly used to
gather descriptive information such as tinnitus perception, pitch and loudness (Langguth
et al., 2007).
Therefore, clearer definitions for tinnitus and standardized diagnostic approaches are
still needed.
2.5
Current Treatments for Tinnitus
In this section the most common treatment approaches for tinnitus are explored. These
treatments usually focus on managing tinnitus by reducing the precept and the related
trouble, not in removing it (Simoes et al., 2021). The heterogeneity of tinnitus and its
subjective nature makes it challenging to find universally effective treatments. There are
two main categories of treatments: sound-based and psychology-based mediation (Simoes
et al., 2021).
Furthermore, tinnitus, neurofeedback and non-invasive neurostimulation
mobile applications are being developed.
Pharmacological interventions are also being
researched, even though there is no approved medication for tinnitus yet (Simoes et al.,
2021).
2.5.1
Sound therapy
Sound therapy is a common element of standard treatment, which involves the use of sound
generators, hearing aids (Baguley et al., 2013) and cochlear implants (Simoes et al., 2021).
On the one hand, sound generators offer a nicer background sound to try to turn tin-
nitus silent (Simoes et al., 2021). The underlying processes and their success in masking
and interacting with tinnitus, or influencing cognitive factors such as stress or attention
management, are still to be fully understood (Simoes et al., 2021). Tailor-made notched
music training (TMNMT) is a sound-therapy technique that filters out the frequencies
around the tinnitus pitch by long-term exposure to music. TMNMT is thought to coun-
teract negative or harmful adaptations in auditory cortical regions (Simoes et al., 2021).
==PAGE:18==
9
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Pure tones (Li et al., 2019a), white noise randomly mixed with pure tones, white noise
mixed with high frequency sounds (Herraiz et al., 2006a), nature sounds and broadband
noise have also been shown to be beneficial (Barozzi et al., 2016a). Although many studies
show that sound generators can help reduce tinnitus distress, only a few have included a
placebo condition and many included additional therapeutic elements (Sereda et al., 2018),
which makes it hard to evaluate the precise effect of sound generators themselves.
On the other hand, hearing aids are used for management of tinnitus, but as in the case
of sound generators the fundamental mechanisms are still to be comprehended. Possible
explanations of its success are that they might have physiological effects on brain activity,
possibly reducing neuronal response gain (Sereda et al., 2018) or reversing dysfunctional
neuroplasticity (Sereda et al., 2018). The benefit in people with both hearing loss and
tinnitus could also rise from the masking and distraction effects (Sereda et al., 2018). In
spite of the fact that hearing aids have been used since the 1940s (Sereda et al., 2018),
there is limited evidence that supports its effectiveness, with a lack of high-quality evidence
and variability in clinical guidelines (Sereda et al., 2018).
Additionally, combination of both sound generators and hearing aids can also be ben-
eficial for alleviating tinnitus (Sereda et al., 2018).
Nonetheless, there is not enough proof that holds that any of the sound therapy options
aforementioned is better than another (Sereda et al., 2018).
Finally, in the case of severe or profound hearing loss, cochlear implants (CI) can be
beneficial (Simoes et al., 2021). As in the other cases of sound therapy, many studies have
been carried out to explore the benefits of CIs (Simoes et al., 2021). However, mechanisms
involved remain unclear (Simoes et al., 2021). A substantiated claim is the neural plastic-
ity prompted by the electrical stimulation provided by the implant, but this is not fully
substantiated either as there are studies that show that when the implant is turned off,
the tinnitus returns, even some cases report worsened or induced tinnitus (Simoes et al.,
2021).
2.5.2
Mobile phone applications (apps)
Nowadays, apps for tinnitus management are widely used (Mehdi et al., 2024), and the
number of apps is increasing, even though there is still people not using them due to lack
of awareness of their existence (Sereda et al., 2019). These apps comprise different areas of
tinnitus management such as cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), neurofeedback (NFB)
or sound generator therapy (Mehdi et al., 2020). Nonetheless, the medical quality criteria
is not standardized for these apps, which would be needed to ensure scientific evidence and
integrity (Simoes et al., 2021). According to (Sereda et al., 2019) some of the most popular
apps are Beltone Tinnitus Calmer 1, Tinnitus Aid 2, Tinnitus Balance 3 and ReSound Relief
1https://www.beltone.com/en-us/products/apps#tinnitus
2https://apps.apple.com/us/app/tinnitus-aid-ringing-relief/id891630056
3https://www.phonakpro.com/il/en/resources/apps-for-your-clients/tinnitus-balance-
app.html
==PAGE:19==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
10
4.
2.5.3
Other treatments under research
Psychotherapeutic approaches are a key factor for managing tinnitus distress (Simoes
et al., 2021).
These approaches include counseling and CBT, which involve relaxation
and psychoeducation and its goal is to reduce tinnitus disability by modifying emotional,
behavioural and cognitive responses to it. It has been used for tinnitus management with
positive results like tinnitus impairment reduction, or the mitigation of the negative influ-
ence of tinnitus in life quality, and it has been recommend it as a top-tier treatment for
tinnitus (Simoes et al., 2021). Nevertheless, access to CBT is not always granted to those
who need it, leading to the development of internet-based CBT (iCBT) to raise accessibility
(Simoes et al., 2021).
Various therapeutic drugs have been explored for relieving tinnitus, but the effectiveness
of many remains limited and none has been approved for tinnitus management (Simoes
et al., 2021).
Non-invasive neurostimulation techniques, which aim to change the nervous system
activity without having to make use of invasive procedures or surgery, have been ap-
plied for treating tinnitus too. Some studies have shown the possible benefits of tradi-
tional low-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS), which has been
demonstrated to potentially reduce hyperactivity of the auditory cortex related to tinnitus
(Simoes et al., 2021). Nonetheless, the conclusions in diverse reviews are varied and thus,
the efficacy of rTMS for tinnitus management is still uncertain (Simoes et al., 2021). Other
studies have explored transcranial electrical stimulation (tES), which aims to modify neural
processing by applying weak current to the scalp, and have found that a large number of
participants with tinnitus were responsive to the treatment (Simoes et al., 2021). Finally,
NFB, which aims to improve psychological well-being by providing real-time feedback, has
also been able to improve tinnitus distress and loudness, but its uncomprehended underly-
ing mechanisms and the fact that only a subpopulation benefits from it, are still unresolved
aspects (Simoes et al., 2021). To date, there is no definite proof for the advice of this type
of therapy in clinical routine (Simoes et al., 2021).
Combinations of diverse therapeutic interventions have been tested for tinnitus and
have shown promising results, however these need to be further investigated (Simoes et al.,
2021).
2.6
Brain activity in EEG data
To oversee neural activity and identify diverse brain disorders neuroimaging approaches
have been widely applied (Filipek, 1999). Concretely, one of the most used methods is
EEG, which measures the electrical activity of the brain and reports it, as it provides
4https://www.resound.com/en-us/hearing-aids/apps/relief
==PAGE:20==
11
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
understanding of the temporal neuro-dynamics. It has a very good temporal resolution,
as well as good portability, and it is relatively inexpensive to set up compared to other
neuroimaging approaches (Bell and Cuevas, 2012). Basically, electrodes connected to an
EEG machine, which detect electrical signals produced by the electrical impulses of neurons
communicating, are placed on the scalp of the patient. The EEG signal is the electrical
difference between a pair of electrodes on two different parts of the brain created as a result
of clusters of pyramidal neurons being excited and inhibited (Niedermeyer and da Silva,
2005). There are different ways to pair up the electrodes such as common reference montage
or bipolar montage (Acharya and Acharya, 2019). These signals are then amplified and
displayed as waves representing the frequency of the signal, which can be categorized in
five bands according to their frequency (Niedermeyer and da Silva, 2005).
It has been demonstrated that tinnitus holds significant relevance within the clinical
neuroscience domain (Neff et al., 2021). Therefore, evaluating abnormal neural activity
through EEG signals could assist in diagnosing tinnitus and serve as an objective means
to assess or anticipate its symptoms (Ibarra-Zarate and Alonso-Valerdi, 2020). Indeed, the
use of EEG data has led studies to be effective in identifying neural activity that predicts
tinnitus therapy success (Kim et al., 2016), to be able to identify the specific areas in the
brain responsible for the abnormal activity that tinnitus generates (Moazami-Goudarzi
et al., 2010), as well as to reveal distinctive patterns in brain activity for individuals with
chronic tinnitus (Meyer et al., 2014). However, other studies that used EEG data as a
biomarker for tinnitus did not find any conclusive results (eg. Jørgensen et al. (2023)).
2.7
Machine Learning in Healthcare
AI, which is the technique of enabling a machine to mimic human behaviour, is a growing
field that has been applied to many areas, including healthcare (eg. Keane and Topol
(2018); Shaban-Nejad et al. (2018); Fogel and Kvedar (2018)).
ML is a branch of AI that is nowadays widely used due to the large amount of data
that is generated, which can be hard and time-consuming to analyze by hand. It works
similarly to how organic life learn, relying on examples to refine its understanding. In
other words, ML is the process of training a program to execute tasks without explicit
programming, allowing it to discern patterns and execute tasks properly. ML models can
be categorized as supervised or unsupervised learning models. On the one hand, supervised
learning involves a series of functions that maps an input to an output based on a series of
examples input-output pairs. They can be divided into regression models, which aims to
find the relationship between a dependent variable and an independent one and its output
is continuous, and classification models, which aim to classify in groups and its output is
discrete. On the other hand, unsupervised learning is used to draw inferences and find
patterns from input data without references to the labeled outcome. The main methods
used in unsupervised leaning are clustering and dimensionality reduction.
Furthermore, today it is very common the usage of a subset of ML named deep learning
==PAGE:21==
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
12
(DL), which is inspired by the structure of the human brain.
This structure is called
artificial neural network (NN) and it selects the relevant features of the input data without
human intervention. Hence, it has great potential in revealing hidden relationships and
patterns within the data and in efficiently processing unstructured data.
There are numerous applications in treatment prediction using a huge range of different
ML techniques and diverse data types to assist clinicians. Some successful applications are
the treatment outcome prediction of oral cancer (Chu et al., 2020), thyroid disease trat-
ment prediction (Aversano et al., 2021) and prediction of treatment outcome in depression
(Chekroud et al., 2016).
The ML methods used in this thesis are detailed in section §3.5. For basic concepts
and methodologies used in this thesis regarding ML, DL and evaluation metrics, refer to
Appendix B.
2.7.1
Machine Learning using EEG data
EEG patterns are hard to detect by the human eye, however, studies have shown that the
application of ML approaches to EEG data can expose solid insights (Hosseini et al., 2020).
Concretely, the majority of ML studies using EEG data in tinnitus have used resting-state
EEG recordings (Hong et al., 2023).
Feature selection approaches are usually used to remove irrelevant patterns when mod-
eling high-dimensional EEG data. This way the complexity of the ML model is reduced as
less data features are used. By applying feature selection techniques the learning perfor-
mance of the ML model is improved and it can be useful for preventing overfitting (Pereira
et al., 2018; Washington et al., 2019; Liu and Shi, 2022). Subsampling EEG signals into
different domains is a technique commonly used for feature extraction (eg. (Subasi et al.,
2005; Morabito et al., 2017; Gasparini et al., 2018; Ieracitano et al., 2019)). Statistical
features from EEG time series like mean, standard deviation and skewness have been ex-
tracted to train traditional supervised learning models, which showed strong results in the
classification of PNES EEG segments (Varone et al., 2020).
Moreover, time series EEG data has been used to fed an EEGNet to diagnose tinnitus
(Hong et al., 2023). Specifically, they used broadband EEG signals and they analyzed
the EEGNet convolutional kernel feature maps, which showed that alpha activity could be
very important when diagnosing tinnitus.
Frequency domains extracted from EEG data have also been employed to train a CNN,
which aimed to predict patients’ responses of sound-therapy (Doborjeh et al., 2023). In-
deed, they achieved amazing results, being the highest accuracy 99,52%.
Although there is a high amount of successful EEG-based ML methods in the health
field, there remains a lack of studies focusing on using EEG data for tinnitus treatment
responses.
==PAGE:22==
Chapter 3
Methodology
First, the necessary EEG data was gathered (section §3.3) and pre-processed using stan-
dard methods, including referencing, filtering, bad channel detection and removal, data
interpolation, artifact detection and removal, epoching, and bad epochs removal. Feature
extraction was performed using statistical elements computed from band power values and
images built from band power values (section §3.4). Subsequently, various models were de-
veloped, including two simple supervised methods, a convolutional neural network (CNN),
a multi-input neural network model, and an EEGNet (section §3.5). For the deep learning
models, certain pre-processing steps were skipped as they might contain relevant informa-
tion for the models. Finally, a pilot study was conducted to verify the performance of the
developed ML models with new, unseen data (section §3.6).
3.1
Method overview
In figure 3.1 a typical work flow is presented of how the final predictions from the ML
models were achieved.
13
==PAGE:23==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
14
Figure 3.1: Method pipeline. The blue highlighted area underlines the steps that will only
be performed for the simple ML methods.
3.2
Data availability
All code used for this study can be found in the GitHub repository: https://github.
com/s222798/predicting_modeling_tinnitus_treatment. The data is available upon
reasonable request.
==PAGE:24==
15
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3.3
EEG Data Collection
The raw data used to train the ML models was obtained from the study Jørgensen et al.
(2023).
They gathered 20 participants with tinnitus, and provided them with Widex
Evoke Passion 440 hearing aids (HA) with instant open ear tips which included sound
therapy treatment. The participants were asked to use them for at least 3-4 hours a day
for two months. In the first session they were asked to fill out the TSCHQ and the THI
questionnaire. Moreover, they recorded baseline resting-state continuous EEG data in an
electrically shielded soundproof booth, where the participants were seated in an armchair
during four minutes. They were asked to stay awake but keep their eyes closed.
For the EEG recordings the Biosemi ActiveTwo system was used, the signals were
recorded at a sampling rate of 2048 Hz and were pre-processed after the session using
Python code techniques. A Biosemi 64 electrode head cap was put on the participants and
64 active Ag/AgCl electrodes were placed on it according to the standard international
10–20 system applying SignaGel electrode gel to increase conductivity.
Moreover, the
Driven Right Leg (DRL) electrode was placed over C2 and the Common Mode Sense
(CMS) electrode was placed over C1.
After the sound therapy, another session took place and the participants were asked
to fill out the THI questionnaire again. To assess whether the participants benefited from
the sound therapy the difference between pre- and post-treatment THI scores was used. A
reduction of more than 7 points (Zeman et al., 2011) suggested a positive effect of therapy,
thus categorizing the participants as positive responders.
3.4
Data Pre-processing and Feature Extraction
3.4.1
Statistical Features
Based on the promising results of Varone et al. (2020), a very similar procedure was followed
to extract statistical characteristics from the EEG time series.
Firstly, the external channels were eliminated as they were not relevant for the study.
Later, the montage was set to ’standard 1020’ and the reference electrode standardization
technique (REST) (Yao, 2001) was applied, as it according to Yao et al. (2019) it is the best
approach for providing a consistent and reliable criterion, offering better data accuracy, and
making it easier to compare and reproduce EEG study results across different laboratories,
compared to other methods. Following Varone et al. (2020), the data was down-sampled
to 256 Hz, it was filtered with a high pass filter at 1 Hz to remove any direct current offset
and drifting and a low pass filter at 70 Hz to attenuate high frequency noise, as well as a
notch filter at 50 Hz to remove noise from potential nearby electrical appliances, so that it
would include the most relevant frequency bands (Delta (1- 4 Hz), Theta (4-8 Hz), Alpha
(8-14 Hz), Beta (14-30 Hz) and the entire band (1-30 Hz)).
Furthermore, to remove artifacts Independent Components Analysis (ICA) was em-
ployed. ICA is a signal processing method to decompose a set of random variables into
==PAGE:25==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
16
statistically independent components (Comon, 1994).
It extends the idea of Principal
Component Analysis (PCA), by imposing statistical independence among components
apart from decorrelation the outputs, allowing for a richer representation of the under-
lying structure of the data (Comon, 1994). Once the components were extracted, the ones
that did not represent brain signals but instead they were clearly muscle movement were
dropped from the data. Nonetheless, the model did not achieve better results when ar-
tifacts were removed. Therefore, the study continued without removing any artifacts. In
Figure D.3 in Appendix D some clear examples of components representing artifacts are
displayed. Furthermore, in Appendix C section §C.1 the exact ICA procedure used for this
study is detailed.
Finally, the data was divided into non-overlapping epochs of 5 seconds each.
The feature extraction method used was the Welch’s method (Welch, 1967) and sliding
Hamming window (Harris, 1978) for Power Spectral Density (PSD) estimation (PSD de-
scribes how the power of a signal is distributed over different frequencies), with the length
of both the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) (Cooley and Tukey, 1965) and the Hamming
window set to the time points per epoch, and with 50% overlap.
For each epoch and each electrode the PSD was calculated within each of the afore-
mentioned frequency bands using the Welch method. In section §C.2 from the Appendix
C a complete explanation of this procedure can be found.
Finally, the mean, standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis were calculated for the
obtained PSD values, and stored in an array. The features array was later reshaped to
combine all features into a single vector per epoch, which was the input for the ML models.
3.4.2
Power Images
Based on the promising results of Doborjeh et al. (2023), a very similar procedure was
followed to extract frequency domain characteristics from the EEG time series to obtain
32 × 32 multispectral images of brain topology. The use of images to train a ML model
is beneficial due to the ability of images to provide a stable and reliable representation of
the data.
Initially, the data was down-sampled to 256 Hz, REST was applied and it was segmented
into 1s duration epochs. Secondly, a 32×32 grid was created using the electrode coordinates
by getting evenly spaced numbers over the interval between the minimum coordinate value
and the maximum one both for x and y axes. The electrode coordinates were also used
to compute a Delaunay triangulation (Delaunay et al., 1934), which was used to delineate
the spatial relationships between electrodes. An example of Delaunay triangulation for 64
electrodes can be found in Figure D.2 in the Appendix D.
The following procedure was done for each epoch. Hence, we got a 32 × 32 image for
each segment of the data.
For each electrode FFT was performed onto the epoch data to get the corresponding
frequencies.
==PAGE:26==
17
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
After getting the frequency array, each electrode was categorized into one of the dom-
inant frequency bands (theta (4-8 Hz); alpha (8-14 Hz); beta (14-30 Hz) or gamma (30-50
Hz)), determined by taking the frequency for which the FFT coefficient was maximum.
Then, the mean value of the absolute value of the power array at that electrode was
computed, yielding the average power measured at that electrode.
Later, for each band, each electrode coordinate was given the computed average power
value. Then, all coordinates were interpolated using the Delaunay triangulation and the
previously established grid. The output of this interpolation was a 32 × 32 power image
for each band. The interpolated data for each band was stored in an array and later the
average of the 3 different power images inside the array was computed, getting a final
32 × 32 image for each epoch. An example of this can be seen in Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Power band images of each frequency band achieved by interpolation on Delau-
nay triangulation and final 32 × 32 image achieved by averaging the separated frequency
images.
3.5
Development of Classification Models for Sound Ther-
apy Response Prediction
This section describes the architecture and procedures used to train and evaluate the
machine learning models used in this study, which are SVM, LDA, CNN, Multi-input
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
18
Neural Network, and EEGNet.
3.5.1
Traditional Machine Learning Models: SVM and LDA
Firstly, a SVM model (Vapnik et al., 1996) was trained with the same parameters as in
Varone et al. (2020) (kernel = radial, degree = 3, gamma = 0.01, coef = 0 and epsilon =
0.1). SVM aims to classify data by identifying the optimal decision boundary, this is line
in a binary classification task or a hyperplane in a N-classification class (where N > 2),
by maximizing the margin between the closest data points of opposite classes within the
N-dimensional space.
Then, a LDA (Fisher, 1936) model was trained using the LDA model structures given
by sklearn Python library with default settings was employed. LDA is a dimensionality re-
duction technique that when used to classify data its goal is to identify a linear combination
of characteristics that optimally isolates two or more classes within the data.
3.5.2
CNN
In Figure 3.3 the CNN model for this study is shown. The model was compiled using Adam
optimizer, which is an adaptive learning rate optimization algorithm that is well-suited for
training neural networks (Kingma and Ba, 2014), and a sparse categorical cross-entropy
loss function. Furthermore an L2 regularization penalty (Hoerl and Kennard, 1970) of
0.01 was applied to all convolutional and dense layers, except from the last dense layer, to
prevent overfitting.
Figure 3.3: CNN architecture
==PAGE:28==
19
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
3.5.3
Multi-input Neural Network model
To improve the results from the CNN model a Neural Network model that could receive two
different input data was developed, as seen in Figure 3.4. The model is a combination of the
CNN model we previously developed, explained in section §3.5.2, which would receive the
power images, and a simple feed-forwad model composed of three dense layers, which would
receive some linear data extracted from the TSCHQ responses. TSCHQ responses were
used because they offer insights into the persons’ tinnitus characteristics, which lead to the
assumption that they can add value to the model. Nonetheless, before using the TSCHQ
answers as input data for this new model, we implemented a Linear Regression model as a
validity check, to make sure that the answers were correlated with the improvement or not
of the THI scores of the people. The performance of the model is explained in Appendix
E and the coefficients of the model’s output can be found in Figure E.1 in Appendix E.
The data used from the TSCHQ was the participant’s age, gender, their tinnitus duration
(in years), tinnitus location, tinnitus loudness, tinnitus percept, tinnitus pitch, tinnitus
masking, initial THI score and their tinnitus etiology, as all of them demonstrated to be
at least slightly correlated with the sound therapy response.
All categorical data was
parsed into numerical data. The aim of this, was to provide the model with more relevant
information that could have helped to find patterns in the data. A detailed list of the
numerical values corresponding to each categorical value can be found in Appendix E in
Table E.1.
3.5.4
EEGNet
EEGNet has great potential as it aims to avoid having to extract features from EEG data
by manual feature extraction techniques. Instead it employs a series of convolutional layers
that try to implement relevant filtering and feature extraction automatically. The EEGNet
architecture is described in Figure 3.5.
3.5.5
Training procedure
In all cases except for the first CNN model, participants were randomly divided into training
and testing groups with an 8:2 ratio.
For training the SVM and LDA models, the procedure was identical for both. Training
and testing data were divided into 1-second epochs, and statistical features for each par-
ticipant and epoch were extracted as described in section §3.4.1. These arrays were used
to train and test the models.
For the first CNN model, the methodology from Doborjeh et al. (2023) was followed.
Features were extracted before splitting participants into test and train sets using the
feature extraction procedure from section §3.4. Once power images for each epoch were
created, they were divided into training and testing sets with an 8:2 ratio, without consid-
ering which samples corresponded to each participant. Therefore, this model suffered from
==PAGE:29==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
20
Figure 3.4: Multi-input neural network flow. It receives power band images which are fed
into a CNN model and categorical and numerical data, which is transformed into numerical
data, and is fed into a simple feed-forward neural network. They are then concatenated
and passed into two dense layers and a flatten layer.
*The architecture of the CNN model is detailed in Figure 3.3
data leakage, which is why their accuracies were extremely high, as the proper methodol-
ogy was not followed. Which sample corresponded to each participant should have been
considered to avoid data leakage. Hence, a second CNN model was then trained with the
proper participant split, and the 1-second power images were obtained using the feature
extraction procedure from section §3.4, which were used as input to train the model.
For the Multi-Input Neural Network, a similar procedure was followed. After splitting
participants, the CNN model was trained with 1-second power images for each participant,
and the simple NN was trained using the categorical attributes corresponding to each
image.
To train the EEGNet model, the training and testing data were divided into 5-second
epochs. The time series of EEG data for each epoch, with shape = (nchannels, ntimepoints),
was retrieved and used as input for the model.
All deep learning models were trained for 100 epochs. Additionally, the models were
trained twice. Each one with data taken from two different electrode configurations, 64
and 32 electrodes. All models that used CNNs contained 4836 samples of training data. To
train EEGNet, 4560 training samples were employed. For SVM and LDA models, 12096
samples were used to train the models trained with 64 electrode data, and 6048 in the case
of 32 electrodes.
==PAGE:30==
21
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Figure 3.5: EEGNet architecture visualization. The model contains three main layers: a
standard 2D convolution layer, which acts as a temporal filter; a depth-wise convolution
layer, which acts as a spacial filter for each frequency band; and a separable convolution
layer, which summarizes each output individually and optimally merges them.
All 2D
convolutional layers have one-dimensional kernels.
Finally, a dense layer with softmax
activation function is used for binary classification. This figure is adapted from (Lawhern
et al., 2018). The specific parameters can be found in the GitHub code.
Finally, k-fold cross-validation with k = 10 was applied in all cases.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
22
3.6
Pilot Study
This section of the thesis explain the study that was conducted to gather broader data to
evaluate if the ML model could predict the proper output using data gathered in another
batch.
3.6.1
Design
The study followed a similar design to the one where the training data was extracted from
for consistency matters.
It was composed of two sessions. In the first one they were required to fill in a consent
form, the THI questionnaire and the TSCHQ, which collects the descriptive characteristics
of the tinnitus perception, loudness and pitch of the participants. Then, their head was
measured and the proper cap was fit. Secondly, they were placed in a sound proof booth
in which the EEG electrodes were connected to the participant’s scalp using conductive
gel. Then, they were requested to be in a comfortable position and get relaxed during 7
minutes, while resting-state continuous EEG was being recorded.
3.6.2
Participants
12 chronic tinnitus participants were recruited, but 3 of them dropped the study before
the end. Hence, in the study 9 chronic tinnitus participants (3 women and 6 men) aged
between 25 and 75 years (56.6 ± 14.5 years) were included. Only the participants with
THI scores above 18, which is categorized as mild tinnitus (McCombe et al., 2001), in the
first session were asked to continue in the study. Participants with very mild tinnitus were
not recruited due to time constraints as it would have been hard to see the improvement
in such a short amount of time.
The study took place at the Hearing Systems Section at the Department of Health
Technology, DTU. People participating in this study were recruited though advertisement
response or from the local volunteer database at the Hearing Systems Section at the Tech-
nical University of Denmark (DTU).
An overview of the tinnitus perception of the participants is described in Table 3.1.
Audiometry
Pure-tone audiometry was performed within a soundproof booth using a standard clinical
audiometer (AS216 model, Interacoustics A/S, Middlefart, Denmark) and HD200 head-
phones (Sennheiser GmbH & Co. KG, Wedermark, Germany), covering frequencies from
250Hz to 8kHz. In Figure 3.6 the average hearing thresholds of all participants and their
standard errors for the each ear across different frequencies is displayed. It shows that
the average hearing thresholds are higher for higher frequencies, which means that there
==PAGE:32==
23
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Table 3.1: Description of Tinnitus perception for each participant. The tinnitus etiology
is self-reported.
Tinnitus location: BE, Both ears equally; BE/L, Both ears, worse in
left ear; LE, Left ear; IH, Inside head. Tinnitus pitch: VHF, Very High-frequency; HF,
High-frequency. Tinnitus Masking: DK, Does not know. Tinnitus etiology: LS, Loud
sound; CH, Change in hearing; S, Stress; LS/W, Loud sound/Whiplash; LS/CH, Loud
sound/Change in hearing.
ID Tinnitus
Duration
(years)
Tinnitus
Location
Tinnitus
Loudness
(%)
Tinnitus
Percept
Tinnitus
Pitch
Tinnitus
Masking
Initial
THI
Score
Tinnitus
Etiology
1
34
BE
40
Tone
VHF
DK
52
LS
2
29
BE
68
Tone
HF
DK
38
LS/W
3
20
BE/L
50
Tone
HF
Yes
38
Other
4
20
IH
35
Tone
HF
DK
46
Other
5
10
LE
55
Tone
HF
Yes
60
CH
6
10
BE
4
Tone
HF
DK
26
S
7
6
BE/L
50
Tone
HF
No
20
Other
8
20
BE/L
80
Noise
NA
Yes
36
Other
9
5
BE/L
70
Tone
HF
Yes
18
LS/CH
is a greater hearing loss at higher frequencies. These are consistent with typical audiomet-
ric profiles of individuals with tinnitus, who often experience high-frequency hearing loss
(Simoes et al., 2021).
3.6.3
EEG data collection
To collect the EEG recordings the Biosemi ActiveTwo system was used, they were pre-
processed off-line and the signals were recorded at a sampling rate of 2,048Hz. The partic-
ipants wore a Biosemi 64 electrode head cap and using SignaGel electrode gel was applied
to increase conductivity, 32 active Ag/AgCl electrodes were placed on it according to the
standard international 10–20 system (see figure D.1 in Appendix D). The CMS electrode
was used as a reference and the DRL electrode was used as ground.
3.6.4
Sound therapy used
For the sound therapy ReSound Tinnitus Relief app by GN Hearing A/S was used, which
is one of the most popular and effective as explained in section §2.5.2. It provides a wide
range of sounds to be used as sound therapy and new ones can be created. Furthermore,
it is available in different languages, which was helpful for the participants as not everyone
was fluent in English. Finally, it has a detailed tracker included, which was very useful as
the participants did not need to think about keeping track of the time they were using the
==PAGE:33==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
24
Figure 3.6: Pure Tone Average of all participants in the pilot study
app.
The predefined sounds in the app were nature sounds and mixes of pure tones, which
has been shown to be beneficial (Barozzi et al., 2016b; Li et al., 2019b). They were the
following:
• At the beach
• Evening Forest
• Underwater
• Fire and Rain
• Peaceful Morning
Moreover, during the first session, the participants were requested to create new sounds
of the app, which were based in past results that showed improvement for tinnitus patients
(Herraiz et al., 2006b; Barozzi et al., 2016b; Li et al., 2019b):
• Custom sound 1: High percentage of white noise mixed with a low percentage of
birds sound.
==PAGE:34==
25
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
• Custom sound 2: High percentage of white noise mixed with a low percentage of
crickets sound.
• Custom sound 3: Brown noise.
• Custom sound 4: White noise.
• Custom sound 5: Pink noise.
• Custom sound 6: Violet noise.
As aforementioned, the participants were asked to listen to the sounds in the app for at
least two hours a day during at least a month. According to Sereda et al. (2018) there is no
proof that one type of sound therapy works better than another. Hence, the participants
were allowed to choose the sounds that they felt more comfortable with from the list of
customized sounds and the predetermined ones. Moreover, they were advised to adjust the
volume of the sound until they find the level that is most soothing to them (Henry et al.,
2010).
3.6.5
Participant Informed Consent and Data Usage Authorization
Written informed consent was provided by the participants to take place in this study and
use the data gathered. All documents and procedures used can be found on the GitHub
repository.
==PAGE:35==
CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
26
==PAGE:36==
Chapter 4
Results
Model performances
in this section the model performances achieved during the traning phase for each model
are shown. For the exact values of the metrics achieved with each model refer to Table E.2
in the Appendix E.
When using 64 or 32 electrodes to train the model, the performances of SVM and
LDA do not show significant differences, as can be seen on Figure 4.1. On the one hand,
both SVM models perform poorly, failing to correctly identify samples, leading to high
false positive and false negative rates, which can be clearly seen in Figure 4.2 a) and
c), where ideally the left top square and the right bottom square would be coloured in
darker-purple colors and the other two squares in light yellow (like matrix e)), however,
the opposite is happening in this case. On the other hand, both LDA models struggle
with high false positive and false negative rates, which lowers their effectiveness.
The
AUC scores are relatively low, which means that these models are only slightly better than
random guessing. Hence, all models have significant issues with misclassification, which
makes them useless for classifying between responders and non-responders.
As it can be observed in Figure 4.1 the CNN model that suffers from data leakage
achieves great results, while the CNN model trained with the proper participant split
shows very poor ones. In this second case, the discrepancy between the high AUC and
low accuracy/F1 score during training suggests potential overfitting or issues with data
distribution. The model might be fitting well to certain patterns in the training data but
not generalizing well overall.
In Figure 4.3 the learning curves for both the CNN model trained with the incorrectly
partitioning the participants and the CNN model trained with the correctly partitioning
the participants. On the one hand the model shown in Figure 4.3 a) was trained with
data including the same participants in both the training and validation sets. It can be
observed that both training and validation loss decrease and stabilize rapidly, and training
and validation accuracy increase and stabilize fast too. However, the learning curves for
validation and training are very similar, which is a clear sign of data leakage. In a well
27
==PAGE:37==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
28
Figure 4.1: Model performance averages comparison after k-fold cross validation (k=10)
(64: trained with data containing information from 64 electrodes; 32: trained with data
containing information from 32 electrodes).
generalized model, some more noticeable difference between training and validation metrics
is expected. Moreover, the validation accuracy is very high and shows little fluctuation,
which suggests that the model has seen similar data during training. On the other hand,
the model displayed in Figure 4.3 b) was trained with a proper partition of the participants.
The training loss decreases and stabilizes rapidly, but the validation loss does not show any
significant decrease and fluctuates a lot remaining relatively high. The training accuracy
increases and stabilizes, but the validation accuracy does not show a significant increase
and also fluctuates a lot, indicating poor performance compared to training accuracy. Al-
though this model has lower and fluctuating validation performance, a significant difference
between training and validation metrics indicates a more realistic and honest evaluation
of the model’s generalization ability. Hence, since this model is trained with the proper
participant split, the validation performance reflects the true generalization capability of
the model, which indicates that the model is not being able to learn generalizable patterns
due to the inherent variability in EEG data across different participants.
Figure 4.1 also shows that the CNN model with the proper participant split with 32
==PAGE:38==
29
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Figure 4.2:
Comparison confusion matrices when training models after 10-fold cross-
validation.
electrodes performs better overall than the one trained with 64 electrodes. Despite the
64-electrode trained model having a higher AUC score, the accuracy, F1-score, recall, and
precision are higher in the 32-electrode trained model. Nonetheless, both models perform
very poorly and worse than SVM and LDA, which enhances the ability of the simpler
models to generalize and yield better performance for classifying between responders and
non-responders overall.
The performance metrics for the Multi-Input Neural Network, which included partici-
pant characteristics, can be observed in Figure 4.1 and show that the model often predicted
the same class for all inputs. Hence, the AUC score could not be computed, which indi-
cated a lack of variability in the predictions and potential overfitting.
In general, the
prediction probabilities were around 0.5 for all samples, making it hard to decide whether
the sample should have been classified as 0 or 1. A possible reason why this happened is
due to the small variability in the TSCHQ participant responses, as many participants had
similar responses. Nonetheless, the model seems to perform slightly better when trained
with 32 electrodes instead of 64, which supports the theory that fewer electrodes might be
sufficient for these models.
EEGNet was also trained using both 64 and 32 electrodes. However, the results were
the same for both configurations. Given that the pilot data consisted of 32 electrodes and
that the training and evaluation data needed to have the same input shape, the decision was
made to focus solely on the 32-electrode configuration, discontinuing further exploration
with 64 electrodes. For EEGNet with 32 electrodes, the metrics can be seen in Figure 4.1.
These results indicate that EEGNet struggled significantly to classify samples between
reponders and non-responders, always predicting all samples as non-responders, which led
==PAGE:39==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
30
Figure 4.3: Comparison of training and validation performance between CNN model train-
ing methodology. a) Model with mixed participant data. b) Model with proper participant
partitioning.
to poor performance and an inability to generalize to new data. Hence, the model was
probably not able to learn meaningful patterns.
Model performances on pilot study data
Once the models where trained and tested with data provided by Jørgensen et al. (2023),
the same architecture models were trained but using all data to train and none to test.
Later, these trained models were tested on the data gathered in the pilot study. All deep
==PAGE:40==
31
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
learning models were trained for 100 epochs. All models that used CNNs were tested with
3469 samples from the pilot study. To test the EEGNet 2061 samples from the pilot study
were employed. For SVM and LDA models, 21888 samples were used to test the models
with the data from pilot study.
For the exact values of the metrics for each model when tested in the pilot data please
refer to Table E.3 in the Appendix E.
Figure 4.4: Model performances comparison when tested on pilot data (64: trained with
data containing information from 64 electrodes; 32: trained with data containing infor-
mation from 32 electrodes; b: tested with balanced dataset; unb: tested with unbalanced
dataset).
Since the pilot study data was unbalanced, the most promising models, which were
both CNNs trained with 32 and 64 electrodes respectively, were also tested with a balanced
subset of the pilot study data. The results of this can be seen in Figure 4.4, which shows the
metrics for each model after testing it on the pilot data. Interestingly, most of the models
when tested on the new pilot data performed better than during their training phases or
remained very similar. Indeed, the CNN models performances increased significantly. This
could probably be due to the unbalance on the training data. Although, the simplicity of
the new data, which uses only 32 electrodes and does not include external electrodes for
detecting eye blinks and other artifacts, could also be that it is more representative of the
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
32
Figure 4.5: Comparison confusion matrices when testing models on pilot study data.
true underlying distribution.
Even though the model that has the highest accuracy is the CNN trained with data from
64 electrodes and tested on the unbalanced pilot study data, its recall is very low, meaning
that the model is not predicting well the reponders samples. For a clearer understanding of
this, by looking at Figure 4.5 k), it is clear that the model is predicting most of the samples
as 0s (non-responders). Moreover, the multi-input neural network model trained with data
from 32 electrodes achieves a recall of 1.0, meaning that there are no false negatives in the
predictions. However, the false positives rate is high, as it can be seen in Figure 4.5 f),
which means that the model is not learning properly and categorizes most of the samples
as responders. The CNN models trained with 32 electrodes are not learning properly how
to distinguish between the two classes, even though their accuracies are not bad and the
one tested with the balanced dataset has high precision, looking at the Figure 4.5 h) and
i) it is clear that the models are predicting most samples as non-responders. Finally, the
model that has the highest overall scores is the CNN trained with data from 64 electrodes
when tested on the balanced pilot data, which supports the conjecture that the simplicity
of the new data might help the model find patterns more easily. The rest of the models,
even though they perform slightly better in general than during the training phase, their
performance is still very poor.
In summary, the CNN model trained with data from 64 electrodes and tested on a
balanced subset of the pilot data shows the best potential for generalization, although
significant improvements are still needed. EEGNet and traditional machine learning models
like SVM and LDA performed much worse than the rest, highlighting the need for more
sophisticated approaches to handle the complexity of EEG data.
==PAGE:42==
33
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Pilot study outcomes
The participants used the app an average of 35.7 ± 3.8 days, and an average of 1.23 ± 0.58
hours per day.
To determine whether the participant benefited from sound therapy, the THI score
required a reduction of more than 7 points to be clinically significant. The pre-treatment
and post-treatment scores can be seen in Figure 4.6, where the violet color shows the
pre-treatment THI scores and the yellow color shows the post-treatment THI scores. The
visualization shows marked by green vertical dashed lines the participants who presented a
clinically significant improvement in their THI scores, which are P6 and P9. The red ver-
tical dashed line shows that participant P7 presented a clinically significant worsening in
his/her THI score. The rest of the participants show little to no change post-intervention.
Overall, the sound therapy had varying effects on participants, with some showing im-
provement in THI scores, others showing worsening scores, and most of them remaining
unchanged.
Figure 4.6: THI Scores before and after sound therapy. Worsedned or improved conditions
are only considered when the THI score difference is larger than 7.
==PAGE:43==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
34
In Figure 4.7 the relationship between app usage and the THI score improvement for
each participant is shown through a linear regression. It can be observed that there is
no strong linear relationship between the time participants spent using the app and their
improvement in THI scores. The trend line is relatively flat and the R2 value is 4%, which
is very low, as it means that only 4% of the variability in THI score improvement can be
explained by the time spent using the app.
Figure 4.7: Relationship between app usage and THI score improvement through linear
regression. The yellow trend line represents the best linear fit for the data, and R2 indicates
how well the data fits the linear regression model.
After the sound therapy treatment, participants were asked to describe their expe-
riences. Overall, the feedback was positive, even though many did not see a change in
their THI scores. Most participants indicated they would continue using the app occasion-
ally. They found it relaxing, helpful for concentration, useful for sleeping, and effective
in masking tinnitus for a some time a day. However, some participants reported expe-
riencing louder tinnitus immediately after each session with the app, although long-term
effects were either a reduction in tinnitus or no change. Moreover, one participant noted a
positive impact on their blood pressure, which they monitor daily. Despite these benefits,
the requirement to use the app for approximately 2 hours a week caused frustration for
some, making them more aware of their tinnitus. Opinions varied on this awareness; some
==PAGE:44==
35
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
viewed it as beneficial, while others did not. Many believed that removing this constraint
would enhance the app’s effectiveness. In Figure 4.8 the most frequent words or sets of two
consecutive words1 are displayed. The most common are will, keep, using, good, relaxing,
good mask, good bad and will try. Words like nice and feel or the set added noise were
also common. This highlights that most participants had a favorable view of the sound
therapy impact on their relaxation and daily routines, despite of the challenges with its
usage requirements.
Figure 4.8: Percentage frequency word clouds. a) word cloud representing the most fre-
quent words within the comments the participants made. b) word cloud representing the
most frequent bigrams (two words appearing next to each other) within the comments the
participants made.
1Note that stopwords, which include connectors, were removed.
==PAGE:45==
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
36
==PAGE:46==
Chapter 5
Discussion
The model that showed better generalization was the CNN model with proper participant
split, whereas the other CNN model suffered from data leakage. Overall, the performance
of SVM, LDA and EEGNet was poor and they showed high misclassification rates. When
testing with data from the pilot study, the CNN model trained on data using 64 electrodes
and tested on a balanced subset of the pilot study data showed that it could find patterns
in new, similar data. The pilot study showed that two participants improved their THI
score, one worsened it, and for the rest of the participants it remained unchanged after
sound therapy. Nonetheless, participant feedback was in general positive. The app usage
and THI score improvement did not have a strong correlation between them.
On the one hand, SVM and LDA models performed as expected. Their performance
was worse than for the majority of the models, however, they still performed better than
a than a random classifier.
Compared to the results from Varone et al. (2020), which
showed very high accuracies, the metrics achieved here were considerably lower. However,
the task performed in their study was probably less challenging, as they were diagnosing
PNES using EEG data, for which there are already established diagnostic methodologies.
Classifying tinnitus patients as responders or non-responders to sound therapy treatment
is a more complex task because there is no established diagnostic framework. Therefore,
it is understandable that the metrics in this study are lower, which exposes the need for
more complex models to address this task effectively.
On the other hand, the EEGNet model did not perform as expected, as it failed com-
pletely to achieve to classify between responders and non-responders. Instead, all samples
were labelled as non-responders. In Hong et al. (2023) they achieved to identify patients
with tinnitus using the EEGNet model applied to EEG signals with high level of accuracy
in differentiating between tinnitus patients and healthy controls during an active odd-
ball task. In this case, the task was also probably simpler than the one here, as it is a
clearer classification problem. Moreover, they used controlled auditory cognitive tasks,
which made the task even clearer. Hence, it is more challenging to predict sound therapy
treatment response as the data is more random and more varied.
37
==PAGE:47==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
38
The main goal of this study was to develop a CNN model trained with EEG data that
was able to classify between responders and non-responders to sound therapy for tinnitus
patients, based on the results achieved in Doborjeh et al. (2023). Following their method-
ology, this thesis managed to reproduce very similar results, but the only way to achieve
results anywhere close to theirs was to include data from same participants into the testing
and training set. However, following this methodology, the model developed suffered from
data leakage. Consequently, the model likely overfit to recognize individual participants
rather than general patterns, enabling it to determine responses to sound therapy accu-
rately. When new data from different participants is introduced, the model is unable to
generalize and perform as well. Hence, it is very important to make sure that when claim-
ing a model’s robustness after performing k-fold cross-validation, the validation should be
done before pooling the epochs from the participants, thus preventing the individuals from
the validation set to be present in the training set, instead of performing cross validation
after pooling the epochs from every participant, for which the results will not be licit. By
following this, one might realize that the model might not be as robust as initially thought.
Moreover, it could also provide insights to find defects in the methodology. Being able to
achieve an accuracy of a 100% when performing a task so complex is very unlikely, which
indicates that there might be some problems in the methodology followed. Later, the same
model was developed using the correct participant split. Even though, the CNN model did
not achieve as high metrics as the previously seen, it still worked much better than the
SVM, LDA, and EEGNet models in terms of generalization.
As aforementioned, the CNN model trained on data using 64 electrodes showed that
it was able to generalize when tested with new data. However, during the training phase
the results were not as good. A reason why this might happen is because when training
with 64 electrodes the feature space created is larger, which means that it is more probable
that it contains noise and irrelevant information. Hence, this can generate that the model
is overfitting the training data, which could be a reason to achieve poor performance on
testing data from the same distribution. However, when this overfitted model is tested on
the pilot data, which is simpler and contains only 32 electrodes, it might perform better
because the simpler data probably contains less noise and irrelevant features. Therefore,
the model can take advantage of the complex patterns it learned without being confused
by noise. Thus, the 64-electrode training data might include patterns that are not that
effective when used within the same complex data, but could be useful when the data
is simplified to 32 electrodes, as seen when testing with the pilot data. Moreover, using
64 electrodes might make it hard for the model to converge properly, which can result in
worse performance when training and testing on the same dataset. On the contrary, when
using 32 electrodes for the training data, it might be more representative or less noisy,
which makes the model to perform better when both training and testing on the same
dataset. Hence, the model’s complexity might be more appropriate to handle the smaller
feature space of 32 electrodes during both training and testing. Nonetheless, training with
64 electrodes provides a richer feature set, even though it includes irrelevant information.
==PAGE:48==
39
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
Hence, the model might be learning more complex patterns that help it generalize better
to new data, which is why some valuable information might be lost when training the
model with 32 electrodes.
Because while data from 32 electrodes can capture enough
information in the pilot study case, during training, the model benefits from the additional
data provided by the 64 electrodes.
Further investigation is needed, as none of the tested models perform especially well,
but some show potential. Hence, if more rigorous methodologies are tested with more data,
which is better or clearer, an improvement on the metrics of the models might be achieved.
Moreover, depending on one’s priorities, one of these models could already be a good choice
to work on. For instance, if one aims to minimize the false negative rate and does not mind
having many non-responders incorrectly tagged as responders but wants to ensure that no
potential responder is missed, even if it means giving sound therapy treatment to many
non-responders, the Multi-input NN could be a proper choice. But, if the goal is to ensure
that the treatment is given only to actual responders, the CNN trained with 64 electrodes
would be the best choice, even though some work would need to be done to improve it.
Even so, it cannot be definitively stated that EEG data can serve as a biomarker for
classifying tinnitus patients as responders or non-responders to sound therapy using AI
models. But with further research, the results indicate that it could be that EEG signal
analysis through AI models is able to achieve the task with better metrics. Hence, more
sophisticated deep learning models need to be trained using a larger dataset of EEG data
from tinnitus patients, which ideally contain minimal noise. Additionally, by selecting the
EEG channels that are most related with tinnitus and the effect sound therapy has on
tinnitus distress, it is likely that the models performances increase significantly. Thus,
further research on this would be relevant.
The pilot study outcomes were consistent with the hypothesis given in Sereda et al.
(2018), which states that any sound therapy treatment is as valid as any other sound
therapy treatment. The type of sounds used by participants did not influence the results,
which indicates that indeed the specific nature of the sound therapy is not that important.
Moreover, in general the participants did not know about the app’s existence, which is why
they had not been using it, a finding that aligns with Simoes et al. (2021). Although their
THI scores did not decrease, most participants found the app helpful and relaxing in general
and wanted to continue using it. Furthermore, it would probably have been beneficial to
include other types of questionnaires apart from the THI questionnaire, because more input
on the tinnitus distress of the participants would have been gathered, which would have
increased the understanding of it and hence, the classification methodology might have
been slightly more accurate.
The main limitation of this study was the short amount of time available to conduct
the pilot study. The fact that participants in the pilot could only use the app for one moth,
made it harder to improve the THI scores. Probably, with more time, more participants
would have had a decrease in their THI scores. Hence, as only two participants had had
a clinically improvement on their THI scores the final dataset from the pilot study was
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION
40
imbalanced, which made it harder to validate the models with it. Another limitation was
the sample size of the training data, which was not too large. The findings would be more
reliable if a larger amount of participants from both responder and non-responder groups
would have been used.
To sum up, future studies should try to use larger and more varied dataset, contain-
ing participants with diverse tinnitus severities.
This would help increase the models’
ability to generalize to new data and they would be more reliable. Moreover, applying
more advanced EEG techniques would help reduce noise in the data. Furthermore, other
complex models could be explored such as the Spiking Neural Network Kasabov (2014) or
transformer-based models which could be more effective in capturing temporal dynamics
in EEG data. Although, the multi-input neural network developed in this study did not
achieve great results, deeper investigation on these kind of models should be developed
with more accurate linear data that is for sure correlated to the fact of whether someone
will respond or not. Additionally, as previously mentioned, conducting studies to deter-
mine the optimal number and placement of electrodes for capturing relevant EEG features
for tinnitus response to sound therapy could be beneficial for improving models metrics.
For instance, an analysis could be carried out to determine which are the most important
electrodes when training with 64 electrodes data, later some models with different subsets
of 32 electrodes could be trained based on their importance ranking, to see if the subset
helps to improve the performance of the model. Ultimately, this study emphasizes the
need to explore other biomarkers that might provide more valuable insights to the model
and improve its performance.
==PAGE:50==
Chapter 6
Conclusions
In this study, the main goal was to develop a CNN model that was able to predict the
response of tinnitus patients to sound therapy using EEG data and to explain in detail all
methodology used to ensure replication is possible. Moreover, this study aimed to validate
it by developing and evaluating other AI models that sought to achieve the same task,
which included traditional machine learning approaches like SVM and LDA, as well as
more advanced deep learning models such as Multi-Input Neural Networks and EEGNet.
Moreover, this thesis aimed to validate these models with new data gathered in a pilot
study.
The main conclusions can be summarized as follows:
1.
The results from Doborjeh et al. (2023) could only be replicated when
following their methodology which did not use a proper split when dividing
between training and testing data.
When correcting the split using K-fold cross-
validation across participants the performance of the models dropped substantially.
2. AI models showed potential in classifying tinnitus patients into responders
and non-responders to sound therapy using EEG data. The CNN models showed
potential for generalizing with new data, specially when trained with data from 64 elec-
trodes. However, these models also faced significant challenges to achieve the task. When
tested on the simpler pilot data with 32 electrodes, the models performed better, which
suggests that reducing the feature space can mitigate noise and improve generalization.
Simpler models like SVM and LDA, although not highly effective, performed better than
random classifiers. This means that while they can provide some level of classification,
their performance is limited by the complexity of the EEG data used. Therefore, further
exploration of EEG data as a biomarker for predicting sound therapy response in tinni-
tus patients is highly desirable. Additionally, investigating other types of biomarkers that
originate from deeper brain structures may provide improved performance.
3. The use of an app for sound therapy for tinnitus management can be ben-
eficial for a tinnitus patient, even though the THI score do not vary.
The
41
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 6. CONCLUSIONS
42
pilot study revealed that sound therapy’s effectiveness varied among participants, with
two showing significant improvement in their THI scores, one worsened, and the others
remained the same. Participants generally found the sound therapy app helpful, even if
their THI scores did not change, which indicates that subjective benefits might not always
align with objective measures like THI scores.
In conclusion, while the use of EEG data to predict tinnitus treatment response seems
to be promising, the findings of this study suggest that there are still significant challenges
to overcome.
More sophisticated models and better data handling practices would be
needed to develop reliable models. Even other type of data might be better to be used
as biomarker for predicting tinnitus treatment response. This research provides a helpful
foundation for future studies that aim to improve tinnitus management with personalized
sound therapy.
==PAGE:52==
Appendix A
Recognized Risk Factors for
Tinnitus
Tinnitus Duration Specific diseases or conditions
Otological, infectious
Otitis media, labyrinthitis, mastoiditis
Otological, neoplastic
Vestibular schwannoma, meningioma
Otological, labyrinthine
Sensorineural hearing loss, M´eni`ere’s disease, vestibular ver-
tigo
Neurological
Meningitis, migraine, multiple sclerosis, epilepsy
Traumatic
Head or neck injury, loss of consciousness
Orofacial
Temporomandibular joint disorder
Cardiovascular
Hypertension
Rheumatological
Rheumatoid arthritis
Immune-mediated
Systemic lupus erythematosus, systemic sclerosis
Endocrine and metabolic
Diabetes mellitus, hyperinsulinaemia, hypothyroidism, hor-
monal changes during pregnancy
Psychological
Anxiety, depression, emotional trauma
Ototoxic medications
Analgesics, antibiotics, antineoplastic drugs, corticosteroids,
diuretics,
immunosuppressive drugs,
non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Table A.1: Table extracted from Baguley et al. (2013), which shows the recognized risk
factors for developing tinnitus and conditions associated with tinnitus symptoms
43
==PAGE:53==
APPENDIX A. RECOGNIZED RISK FACTORS FOR TINNITUS
44
==PAGE:54==
Appendix B
Understanding the foundations of
supervised learning
Supervised learning is a subcategory of ML, which uses properly labeled data to train the
model. Supervised ML algorithms seek to uncover patterns in data, to then use them to
make predictions for new unseen data. To develop a ML model a training and a testing
set of data are required. The training set contains data used to teach the model, while
the testing set comprises new, unseen data used to evaluate the model’s performance. To
effectively train a model, large amount of data is required to discern meaningful patterns.
To ensure fairness in classification performance, in all cases, the participants were
randomly divided into training and testing groups and the same number of participants
samples were randomly selected for both the respondents and non-respondents in both
cases. Moreover, to verify the models worked with new data, we re-trained the models
with all data from Jørgensen et al. (2023) and tested them with the data gathered in the
pilot study.
B.1
Foundations of DL
In this study, DL models were used. Hence, in this section the basic foundations of DL
are explained.
Deep learning’s base unit are deep neural networks (DNNs), which are
computing systems based on the neurons that compose the human brain. DNNs are trained
using a forward and backward propagation approach to learn patterns within the input
data. The main goal of DNNs is to predict outputs for unseen samples of similar data.
DNNs consist of layers of artificial neurons, forming the backbone of the network. These
neurons comprise an input layer, which receives input, and an output layer, responsible for
predicting the output. Additionally, hidden layers, facilitating intermediate computations,
are composed of artificial neurons. Each hidden layer is associated with a bias term, and
connections between layers, known as channels, are assigned numerical weights. Subse-
quently, the resulting value is passed to an activation function, determining whether the
45
==PAGE:55==
APPENDIX B. UNDERSTANDING THE FOUNDATIONS OF SUPERVISED
LEARNING
46
neuron is activated.
Specifically, in this work, mainly CNNs are used. A CNN is a type of feed-forward DNN
architecture (LeCun et al., 1988; Krizhevsky et al., 2012), which respond to surrounding
units and works very well for image processing as their specialization is on pattern detection
and characterization. It comprises a first fully-connected layer, one or more convolutional
layers, which are the core building blocks of the CNN model, and some pooling and corre-
lational weights layers. Specifically, the convolutional layers are composed by filters with
concrete sizes, which are the responsible of detecting patterns. In the first layers the de-
tected patterns are simpler such as edges or shapes, but the deeper the network goes, the
more sophisticated these filters become, being able to achieve pattern detection of complex
objects. A nxn filter slides over each nxn set of pixels from the input image, giving each
set a numeric score. This score is computed using a convolution operation between the set
of pixels and the filter matrix and the single output number is stored in a feature map.
This is done until the last set of pixels of the entire image. This sliding is referred to as
convolving. Finally, the outputs of the filters in a layer are passed into the pooling layer,
which reduces their dimensionality while preserving important information. The resulting
feature maps are then passed to the next layer. In order to improve, the CNN learns the
best values for the filter weights to achieve the given task by means of backpropagation
and optimization algorithms.
B.2
Performance evaluation methods
There are several methods to evaluate the algorithms’ performance.
In this study the
accuracy, the F1 score and the Area Under the Curve (AUC) score are used as evaluation
metrics. Furthermore, the confusion matrix, which is a summarized representation of the
actual predictions B.1, is used for clearer understanding on the model’s performance.
Accuracy is the percentage of samples that have been correctly classified.
F1 score is defined by Eqn. B.1, which computes the Harmonic Mean between precision
that is the amount of positives are right from the predictions (Eqn. B.2) and the true
positive rate (TPR) (Eqn. B.3). Hence, F1 score considers false positives (FP) and false
negatives (FN) with the same weight.
F1 =
TP
TP + 1
2(FP + FN)
(B.1)
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
(B.2)
TPR =
TP
TP + FN
(B.3)
The AUC score represents the area beneath the Receiver Operating Characteristic
(ROC) curve, as detailed in Hanley and McNeil (1982).
This curve is constructed by
==PAGE:56==
47
APPENDIX B. UNDERSTANDING THE FOUNDATIONS OF SUPERVISED
LEARNING
Figure B.1: Confusion Matrix
plotting the TPR against the False Positive Rate (FPR) across various threshold settings.
Consequently, the AUC provides insight into the capacity of the model to distinguish
between different classes.
Therefore, if these three metrics are high, it indicates that the model is performing
well. Moreover, to obtain reliable metrics for the models, cross validation was used. Cross
valdation is a method to evaluate how the results from a statistic analysis are generalized to
a set of independent data. Concretely, in this research k-fold cross validation (Refaeilzadeh
et al., 2009) has been used with k = 10 as it is a common choice (McLachlan et al., 2005).
==PAGE:57==
APPENDIX B. UNDERSTANDING THE FOUNDATIONS OF SUPERVISED
LEARNING
48
==PAGE:58==
Appendix C
Signal Processing Techniques for
EEG Analysis
C.1
ICA
Given a random vector x with N components, ICA aims to find a linear transformation
matrix A such that the transformed vector y = Ax contains components that are as
independent from each other as possible (Comon, 1994). Hence, ICA is sensitive to higher
order structure in multidimensional data such as EEG data and it is useful to isolate evident
artifactual EEG components from other sources (Makeig et al., 1995). In this study infomax
ICA (Bell and Sejnowski, 1995) algorithm is used, as it has been shown to work best in
artifact detection in EEG data (Delorme et al., 2007). Infomax ICA effectively extracts
independent components from the observed datat hrough an iterative optimization process
where the transformation matrix F is updated to minimize the redundancy between the
components and maximize their statistical independence. In simple terms, the procedure
of infomax ICA is as follows:
1. First, the transformation matrix F, which will be updated iteratively, is defined
2. The transformation matrix F is applied to the observed data y to obtain the estimated
independent components z = F −1y.
3. Then, a sigmoif function is applied to transform each component of z individually.
This nonlinearity function introduces the non-Gaussianity needed to extract inde-
pendent components.
4. Next, the estimated data is reconstructed ˆy = Fz, where the F matrix is the updated
one.
5. Finally, the ˆy is compared with y and the error is computed, which is later used to
update F again in a way that reduces the error and increases the independence of
49
==PAGE:59==
APPENDIX C. SIGNAL PROCESSING TECHNIQUES FOR EEG ANALYSIS
50
the components.
6. Steps 2 to 5 are repeated iteratively until convergence.
C.2
Welch Method and Fast Fourier Transform
When using the Welch method to compute the PSD, the signals were divided into time
windows and each snippet was tapered using the Hamming window function. This was
done so that the beginning and the end of the snippet were going to zero, in order to
make sure there were no artifacts created in further steps. By tapering, some valid data
might be lost, hence, to tackle this the Welch’s method introduces an overlap between time
windows.
Then, the FFT was used to compute the power spectrum of each snippet. FFT is an
efficient algorithm for computing the DFT and its inverse. The DFT provides the frequency
domain representation of a time signal, which is useful to understand in an easier manner
the frequency makeup of a signal.
The DFT is given by Eqn C.1, where X(k) is the
transformed frequency domain signal, Xn is the discrete time domain signal and k is the
given frequency. Hence, essentially what the DFT does is multiplying the time signal by a
sine and cosine signal of a particular frequency and summing the result. This summation
is done for different frequencies to get the whole signal DFT.
X(k) =
N−1
X
n=0
xn · e−2πi
N kn =
N−1
X
n=0
xn · (cos(2π
N kn) + i sin(2π
N kn))
(C.1)
Next, this was done for the next snippet of the signal. The last step of the Welch’s
method was to average the power spectrums for all snippets to get the power spectrum of
the whole signal corresponding to the current epoch. Welch’s method is used instead of
directly applying FFT to the whole signal because it gives a much smoother spectrum.
==PAGE:60==
Appendix D
Electrode Displays and EEG Data
Figure D.1: 32 electrode display according to standard international 10-20 system.
51
==PAGE:61==
APPENDIX D. ELECTRODE DISPLAYS AND EEG DATA
52
Figure D.2: Delaunay triangulation using electrode positions, for 64 electrodes.
Figure D.3: ICA components of EEG data for artifact detection. a) Eye-blink artifact: It
can be observed a strong frontal distribution in the topographic map and a momentary
peak corresponding the blinking activity in the time-series data. b) Muscle artifact: The
activity on the topographic map is focused on a side of the brain and the time-series data
exhibit high-frequency oscillations, which are consistent with muscle activity. c) Cardiac
artifact (ECG): The focal distribution on the topographic map and the rhythmic patterns
on the time-series data, consistent with the heart rate, often correspond to cardiac artifacts.
==PAGE:62==
Appendix E
Model Coefficients and
Performance Metrics
In Figure E.1 the coefficient values of the attributes used to train a Logistic Regression
model to determine whether the attributes were related to the labels or not is shown. The
model achieved an accuracy of 0.75, a precision of 0.83, a recall of 0.75 and an AUC score
of 0.75. The features with larger absolute values of coefficients have a stronger influence
on the outcome. In this case Tinnitus percept has the largest negative coefficient, which
suggests that higher values of Tinnitus percept are associated with a lower likelihood of
the outcome being the positive class 1, hence of being a responder. Age has a moderately
large positive coefficient, which indicates that the higher its values the more probability of
being responder.
53
==PAGE:63==
APPENDIX E. MODEL COEFFICIENTS AND PERFORMANCE METRICS
54
Figure E.1: Standardized coefficients for each feature of a Logistic Regression model. Fea-
tures with negative coefficients decrease the likelihood of the outcome, while features with
positive coefficients increase the likelihood. The color gradient indicates the magnitude of
the coefficients, with darker colors representing stronger effects.
==PAGE:64==
55
APPENDIX E. MODEL COEFFICIENTS AND PERFORMANCE METRICS
Table E.1: Mappings of categorical values to numerical values for the TSCHQ responses
Dataset
Categorical Value
Numerical Value
MLJørgensen
Male
0
MLJørgensen
Female
1
MLJørgensen
Unknown
2
MLJørgensen
Both ears
0
MLJørgensen
Inner head
1
MLJørgensen
Both ears (mainly left) and inner head
2
MLJørgensen
Left ear
3
MLJørgensen
Both ears (mainly right)
4
MLJørgensen
Left ear and both ears (mainly left)
5
MLJørgensen
Both ears and inner head
6
MLJørgensen
Right ear
7
MLJørgensen
Both ears (mainly right and inner head
8
MLJørgensen
Tone
0
MLJørgensen
Noise
1
MLJørgensen
Tone and Noise
2
MLJørgensen
Very high-frequency
0
MLJørgensen
High frequency
1
MLJørgensen
Very high-frequency to high frequency
3
MLJørgensen
High frequency to low frequency
4
MLJørgensen
No
0
MLJørgensen
Yes
1
MLJørgensen
Head injury
0
MLJørgensen
Etiology not known
1
MLJørgensen
Change in hearing
2
MLJørgensen
Very loud sound
3
MLJørgensen
After a cold
4
MLJørgensen
Stress
5
MLJørgensen
Menieres
6
Pilot study
Male
0
Pilot study
Female
1
Pilot study
Very high frequency
0
Pilot study
High frequency
1
Pilot study
-
2
Pilot study
Both ears
0
Pilot study
Both ears (mainly left)
1
Pilot study
Inner head
2
Pilot study
Left ear
3
Pilot study
Tone
0
Pilot study
Noise
1
Pilot study
Does not know
0
Pilot study
Yes
1
Pilot study
No
2
Pilot study
Parents
0
Pilot study
Children
1
Pilot study
Siblings
3
==PAGE:65==
APPENDIX E. MODEL COEFFICIENTS AND PERFORMANCE METRICS
56
Table E.2: Model performance averages after k-fold cross validation (k=10).
Model
Electrodes
Accuracy
F1-score
AUC
score
Recall
Precision
SVM
64
0.36
0.36
0.45
0.36
0.36
LDA
64
0.39
0.29
0.46
0.50
0.42
SVM
32
0.38
0.38
0.47
0.37
0.38
LDA
32
0.38
0.27
0.46
0.51
0.41
CNN suffering
from data
leakage
64
0.87
0.87
0.96
0.87
0.88
CNN properly
trained
64
0.23
0.06
0.88
0.05
0.07
CNN properly
trained
32
0.53
0.22
0.59
0.24
0.56
Multi-input
neural network
64
0.40
0.36
-
0.50
0.33
Multi-input
neural network
32
0.68
0.43
-
0.32
0.33
EEGNet
32
0.50
0.00
0.50
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:66==
57
APPENDIX E. MODEL COEFFICIENTS AND PERFORMANCE METRICS
Table E.3: Model performances when tested on pilot data.
Model
Electrodes
Accuracy
F1-score
AUC
score
Recall
Precision
SVM
64
0.44
0.26
0.44
0.43
0.18
LDA
64
0.67
0.14
0.47
0.12
0.17
SVM
32
0.44
0.25
0.44
0.43
0.18
LDA
32
0.61
0.15
0.45
0.16
0.15
CNN
(unbalanced)
64
0.80
0.43
0.80
0.33
0.61
CNN
(balanced)
64
0.67
0.72
0.88
0.87
0.62
CNN
(unbalanced)
32
0.71
0.16
0.52
0.12
0.22
CNN
(balanced)
32
0.57
0.22
0.40
0.12
0.95
Multi-input
neural network
64
0.78
0.00
-
0.00
0.00
Multi-input
neural network
32
0.54
0.45
0.49
1.00
0.33
EEGNet
32
0.22
0.00
0.50
0.00
0.00
==PAGE:67==
APPENDIX E. MODEL COEFFICIENTS AND PERFORMANCE METRICS
58
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
Jorge Piano Simoes, Elza Daoud, Maryam Shabbir, Sana Amanat, Kelly Assouly, Roshni
Biswas, Chiara Casolani, Albi Dode, Falco Enzler, Laure Jacquemin, et al. Multidisci-
plinary tinnitus research: challenges and future directions from the perspective of early
stage researchers. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 13:647285, 2021.
Roshni Biswas, Alessandra Lugo, Michael A Akeroyd, Winfried Schlee, Silvano Gallus,
and DA Hall. Tinnitus prevalence in europe: a multi-country cross-sectional population
study. The Lancet Regional Health–Europe, 12, 2022.
Abby McCormack, Mark Edmondson-Jones, Sarah Somerset, and Deborah Hall. A sys-
tematic review of the reporting of tinnitus prevalence and severity. Hearing research,
337:70–79, 2016.
Tatjana Cr¨onlein, Berthold Langguth, Maximilian Pregler, Peter M Kreuzer, Thomas C
Wetter, and Martin Schecklmann. Insomnia in patients with chronic tinnitus: Cognitive
and emotional distress as moderator variables. Journal of psychosomatic research, 83:
65–68, 2016.
James W Salazar, Karl Meisel, Eric R Smith, Aaron Quiggle, David B McCoy, and
Matthew R Amans.
Depression in patients with tinnitus:
a systematic review.
Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 161(1):28–35, 2019.
T Pattyn, F Van Den Eede, S Vanneste, L Cassiers, DJ Veltman, P Van De Heyning, and
BCG Sabbe. Tinnitus and anxiety disorders: a review. Hearing research, 333:255–265,
2016.
David M Nondahl, Karen J Cruickshanks, Dayna S Dalton, Barbara EK Klein, Ronald
Klein, Carla R Schubert, Ted S Tweed, and Terry L Wiley. The impact of tinnitus on
quality of life in older adults. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology, 18(03):
257–266, 2007.
Steffi Weidt, Aba Delsignore, Martin Meyer, Michael Rufer, Nicole Peter, Natalie Drabe,
and Tobias Kleinjung. Which tinnitus-related characteristics affect current health-related
quality of life and depression? a cross-sectional cohort study. Psychiatry research, 237:
114–121, 2016.
59
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
60
Roland Schaette and David McAlpine. Tinnitus with a normal audiogram: physiological
evidence for hidden hearing loss and computational model. Journal of Neuroscience, 31
(38):13452–13457, 2011.
Laurence McKenna, Lucy Handscomb, Derek J Hoare, and Deborah A Hall.
A scien-
tific cognitive-behavioral model of tinnitus: novel conceptualizations of tinnitus distress.
Frontiers in neurology, 5:196, 2014.
David Baguley, Don McFerran, and Deborah Hall.
Tinnitus.
The Lancet, 382(9904):
1600–1607, 2013.
Nathan Weisz, Stephan Moratti, Marcus Meinzer, Katalin Dohrmann, and Thomas Elbert.
Tinnitus perception and distress is related to abnormal spontaneous brain activity as
measured by magnetoencephalography. PLoS medicine, 2(6):e153, 2005.
Winfried Schlee, Martin Schecklmann, Astrid Lehner, Peter M Kreuzer, Veronika
Vielsmeier, Timm B Poeppl, Berthold Langguth, et al. Reduced variability of audi-
tory alpha activity in chronic tinnitus. Neural plasticity, 2014, 2014.
Mie Lærkeg˚ard Jørgensen, Petteri Hyv¨arinen, Sueli Caporali, and Torsten Dau. Effect of
sound therapy on whole scalp oscillatory brain activity and distress in chronic tinnitus
patients. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 17, 2023.
Johannes Allgaier, Patrick Neff, Winfried Schlee, Stefan Schoisswohl, and R¨udiger Pryss.
Deep learning end-to-end approach for the prediction of tinnitus based on eeg data.
In 2021 43rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine &
Biology Society (EMBC), pages 816–819. IEEE, 2021.
Eul-Seok Hong, Hyun-Seok Kim, Sung Kwang Hong, Dimitrios Pantazis, and Byoung-
Kyong Min. Deep learning-based electroencephalic diagnosis of tinnitus symptom. Fron-
tiers in Human Neuroscience, 17:1126938, 2023.
Ourania Manta, Michail Sarafidis, Winfried Schlee, Birgit Mazurek, George K Matsopou-
los, and Dimitrios D Koutsouris. Development of machine-learning models for tinnitus-
related distress classification using wavelet-transformed auditory evoked potential signals
and clinical data. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 12(11):3843, 2023.
Chieh-Te Lin, Sanjay Ghosh, Leighton B Hinkley, Corby L Dale, Ana CS Souza, Jennifer H
Sabes, Christopher P Hess, Meredith E Adams, Steven W Cheung, and Srikantan S
Nagarajan. Multi-tasking deep network for tinnitus classification and severity prediction
from multimodal structural mr images.
Journal of neural engineering, 20(1):016017,
2023.
Maryam Doborjeh, Xiaoxu Liu, Zohreh Doborjeh, Yuanyuan Shen, Grant Searchfield,
Philip Sanders, Grace Y Wang, Alexander Sumich, and Wei Qi Yan.
Prediction of
==PAGE:70==
61
BIBLIOGRAPHY
tinnitus treatment outcomes based on eeg sensors and tfi score using deep learning.
Sensors, 23(2):902, 2023.
Giuseppe Varone, Sara Gasparini, Edoardo Ferlazzo, Michele Ascoli, Giovanbattista Gas-
pare Tripodi, Chiara Zucco, Barbara Calabrese, Mario Cannataro, and Umberto Aguglia.
A comprehensive machine-learning-based software pipeline to classify eeg signals: A case
study on pnes vs. control subjects. Sensors, 20(4):1235, 2020.
Vernon J Lawhern, Amelia J Solon, Nicholas R Waytowich, Stephen M Gordon, Chou P
Hung, and Brent J Lance. Eegnet: a compact convolutional neural network for eeg-based
brain–computer interfaces. Journal of neural engineering, 15(5):056013, 2018.
Jose A Lopez-Escamez, Thanos Bibas, Rilana FF Cima, Paul Van de Heyning, Marlies
Knipper, Birgit Mazurek, Agnieszka J Szczepek, and Christopher R Cederroth. Genetics
of tinnitus: an emerging area for molecular diagnosis and drug development. Frontiers
in Neuroscience, 10:202611, 2016.
LAURENCE McKENNA, RICHARD S HALLAM, and RONALD HINCHCLIFFEf. The
prevalence of psychological disturbance in neuro-otology outpatients. Clinical Otolaryn-
gology & Allied Sciences, 16(5):452–456, 1991.
Mart Anari, Alf Axelsson, Anette Eliasson, and Lennart Magnusson. Hypersensitivity to
sound: questionnaire data, audiometry and classification. Scandinavian audiology, 28
(4):219–230, 1999.
RS Hallam, S Rachman, RJCTMP Hinchcliffe, et al. Psychological aspects of tinnitus.
Contributions to medical psychology, 3:31–53, 1984.
Christopher R Cederroth, Silvano Gallus, Deborah A Hall, Tobias Kleinjung, Berthold
Langguth, Antonello Maruotti, Martin Meyer, Arnaud Norena, Thomas Probst, R¨udiger
Pryss, et al. Towards an understanding of tinnitus heterogeneity. Frontiers in aging
neuroscience, 11:446253, 2019.
Craig W Newman, Gary P Jacobson, and Jaclyn B Spitzer. Development of the tinnitus
handicap inventory. Archives of Otolaryngology–Head & Neck Surgery, 122(2):143–148,
1996.
A McCombe, D Baguley, R Coles, L McKenna, C McKinney, and P Windle-Taylor. Guide-
lines for the grading of tinnitus severity: the results of a working group commissioned
by the british association of otolaryngologists, head and neck surgeons, 1999. Clinical
Otolaryngology & Allied Sciences, 26(5):388–393, 2001.
S Khalfa, S Dubal, E Veuillet, F Perez-Diaz, R Jouvent, and L Collet.
Psychometric
normalization of a hyperacusis questionnaire. Orl, 64(6):436–442, 2002.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
62
Berthold Langguth, R Goodey, A Azevedo, A Bjorne, A Cacace, A Crocetti, L Del Bo,
D De Ridder, I Diges, Thomas Elbert, et al. Consensus for tinnitus patient assessment
and treatment outcome measurement: Tinnitus research initiative meeting, regensburg,
july 2006. Progress in brain research, 166:525–536, 2007.
Ying Li, Guodong Feng, Haiyan Wu, and Zhiqiang Gao. Clinical trial on tinnitus patients
with normal to mild hearing loss: broad band noise and mixed pure tones sound therapy.
Acta oto-laryngologica, 139(3):284–293, 2019a.
C Herraiz, I Diges, P Cobo, G Plaza, and JM Aparicio. Auditory discrimination therapy
(adt) for tinnitus managment: preliminary results. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 126(sup556):
80–83, 2006a.
S Barozzi, L Del Bo, A Crocetti, O Dyrlund, S Passoni, A Zolin, E Panicucci, A Mancuso,
M Kaur, and GD Searchfield. A comparison of nature and technical sounds for tinnitus
therapy. Acta Acustica united with Acustica, 102(3):540–546, 2016a.
Magdalena Sereda, Jun Xia, Amr El Refaie, Deborah A Hall, and Derek J Hoare. Sound
therapy (using amplification devices and/or sound generators) for tinnitus. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, (12), 2018.
Muntazir Mehdi, Franz J Hauck, Ruediger Pryss, and Winfried Schlee.
Mobile health
solutions for tinnitus. In Textbook of Tinnitus, pages 731–738. Springer, 2024.
Magdalena Sereda, Sandra Smith, Kiri Newton, David Stockdale, et al. Mobile apps for
management of tinnitus: users’ survey, quality assessment, and content analysis. JMIR
mHealth and uHealth, 7(1):e10353, 2019.
Muntazir Mehdi, Constanze Riha, Patrick Neff, Albi Dode, R¨udiger Pryss, Winfried Schlee,
Manfred Reichert, and Franz J Hauck. Smartphone apps in the context of tinnitus:
systematic review. Sensors, 20(6):1725, 2020.
Pauline A Filipek. Neuroimaging in the developmental disorders: the state of the science.
The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 40(1):113–128,
1999.
Martha Ann Bell and Kimberly Cuevas. Using eeg to study cognitive development: Issues
and practices. Journal of cognition and development, 13(3):281–294, 2012.
Ernst Niedermeyer and FH Lopes da Silva. Electroencephalography: basic principles, clin-
ical applications, and related fields. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
Jayant N Acharya and Vinita J Acharya. Overview of eeg montages and principles of
localization. Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology, 36(5):325–329, 2019.
==PAGE:72==
63
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Patrick Neff, J Sim˜oes, Stamatina Psatha, Amarjargal Nyamaa, Benjamin Boecking,
L Rausch, J Dettling-Papargyris, C Funk, Petra Brueggemann, and Birgit Mazurek.
The impact of tinnitus distress on cognition. Scientific reports, 11(1):2243, 2021.
David Ibarra-Zarate and Luz Mar´ıa Alonso-Valerdi. Acoustic therapies for tinnitus: The
basis and the electroencephalographic evaluation.
Biomedical Signal Processing and
Control, 59:101900, 2020.
Shin Hye Kim, Ji Hye Jang, Sang-Yeon Lee, Jae Joon Han, Ja-Won Koo, Sven Vanneste,
Dirk De Ridder, and Jae-Jin Song. Neural substrates predicting short-term improvement
of tinnitus loudness and distress after modified tinnitus retraining therapy. Scientific
reports, 6(1):29140, 2016.
Morteza Moazami-Goudarzi, Lars Michels, Nathan Weisz, and Daniel Jeanmonod.
Temporo-insular enhancement of eeg low and high frequencies in patients with chronic
tinnitus. qeeg study of chronic tinnitus patients. BMC neuroscience, 11:1–12, 2010.
Martin Meyer, Matthias S Luethi, Patrick Neff, Nicolas Langer, Stefan B¨uchi, et al. Disen-
tangling tinnitus distress and tinnitus presence by means of eeg power analysis. Neural
Plasticity, 2014, 2014.
Pearse A Keane and Eric J Topol. With an eye to ai and autonomous diagnosis. NPJ
Digital Medicine, 1(1):40, 2018.
Arash Shaban-Nejad, Martin Michalowski, and David L Buckeridge. Health intelligence:
how artificial intelligence transforms population and personalized health. NPJ digital
medicine, 1(1):53, 2018.
Alexander L Fogel and Joseph C Kvedar. Artificial intelligence powers digital medicine.
NPJ digital medicine, 1(1):5, 2018.
Chui S Chu, Nikki P Lee, John Adeoye, Peter Thomson, and Siu-Wai Choi.
Machine
learning and treatment outcome prediction for oral cancer. Journal of Oral Pathology &
Medicine, 49(10):977–985, 2020.
Lerina Aversano, Mario Luca Bernardi, Marta Cimitile, Martina Iammarino, Paolo Emidio
Macchia, Immacolata Cristina Nettore, and Chiara Verdone. Thyroid disease treatment
prediction with machine learning approaches. Procedia Computer Science, 192:1031–
1040, 2021.
Adam Mourad Chekroud, Ryan Joseph Zotti, Zarrar Shehzad, Ralitza Gueorguieva, Mar-
cia K Johnson, Madhukar H Trivedi, Tyrone D Cannon, John Harrison Krystal, and
Philip Robert Corlett.
Cross-trial prediction of treatment outcome in depression: a
machine learning approach. The Lancet Psychiatry, 3(3):243–250, 2016.
==PAGE:73==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
64
Mohammad-Parsa Hosseini, Amin Hosseini, and Kiarash Ahi. A review on machine learn-
ing for eeg signal processing in bioengineering. IEEE reviews in biomedical engineering,
14:204–218, 2020.
Telma Pereira, Francisco L Ferreira, Sandra Cardoso, Dina Silva, Alexandre De Men-
don¸ca, Manuela Guerreiro, Sara C Madeira, and Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Ini-
tiative. Neuropsychological predictors of conversion from mild cognitive impairment to
alzheimer’s disease: a feature selection ensemble combining stability and predictability.
BMC medical informatics and decision making, 18:1–20, 2018.
Peter Washington, Kelley Marie Paskov, Haik Kalantarian, Nathaniel Stockham, Catalin
Voss, Aaron Kline, Ritik Patnaik, Brianna Chrisman, Maya Varma, Qandeel Tariq, et al.
Feature selection and dimension reduction of social autism data. In Pacific Symposium
on Biocomputing 2020, pages 707–718. World Scientific, 2019.
Jingfang Liu and Mengshi Shi. A hybrid feature selection and ensemble approach to identify
depressed users in online social media. Frontiers in Psychology, 12:802821, 2022.
Abdulhamit Subasi, M Kemal Kiymik, Ahmet Alkan, and Etem Koklukaya. Neural net-
work classification of eeg signals by using ar with mle preprocessing for epileptic seizure
detection. Mathematical and computational applications, 10(1):57–70, 2005.
Francesco Carlo Morabito, Maurizio Campolo, Nadia Mammone, Mario Versaci, Silvana
Franceschetti, Fabrizio Tagliavini, Vito Sofia, Daniela Fatuzzo, Antonio Gambardella,
Angelo Labate, et al. Deep learning representation from electroencephalography of early-
stage creutzfeldt-jakob disease and features for differentiation from rapidly progressive
dementia. International journal of neural systems, 27(02):1650039, 2017.
Sara Gasparini, Maurizio Campolo, Cosimo Ieracitano, Nadia Mammone, Edoardo
Ferlazzo,
Chiara Sueri,
Giovanbattista Gaspare Tripodi,
Umberto Aguglia,
and
Francesco Carlo Morabito. Information theoretic-based interpretation of a deep neu-
ral network approach in diagnosing psychogenic non-epileptic seizures. Entropy, 20(2):
43, 2018.
Cosimo Ieracitano, Nadia Mammone, Alessia Bramanti, Amir Hussain, and Francesco C
Morabito. A convolutional neural network approach for classification of dementia stages
based on 2d-spectral representation of eeg recordings.
Neurocomputing, 323:96–107,
2019.
Florian Zeman, Michael Koller, Ricardo Figueiredo, Andreia Aazevedo, Marcello Rates,
Claudia Coelho, Tobias Kleinjung, Dirk De Ridder, Berthold Langguth, and Michael
Landgrebe. Tinnitus handicap inventory for evaluating treatment effects: which changes
are clinically relevant? Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery, 145(2):282–287, 2011.
==PAGE:74==
65
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dezhong Yao. A method to standardize a reference of scalp eeg recordings to a point at
infinity. Physiological measurement, 22(4):693, 2001.
Dezhong Yao, Yun Qin, Shiang Hu, Li Dong, Maria L Bringas Vega, and Pedro A
Vald´es Sosa. Which reference should we use for eeg and erp practice?
Brain topog-
raphy, 32:530–549, 2019.
Pierre Comon. Independent component analysis, a new concept? Signal processing, 36(3):
287–314, 1994.
Peter Welch. The use of fast fourier transform for the estimation of power spectra: A
method based on time averaging over short, modified periodograms. IEEE Transactions
on audio and electroacoustics, 15(2):70–73, 1967.
Fredric J Harris. On the use of windows for harmonic analysis with the discrete fourier
transform. Proceedings of the IEEE, 66(1):51–83, 1978.
James W Cooley and John W Tukey. An algorithm for the machine calculation of complex
fourier series. Mathematics of computation, 19(90):297–301, 1965.
Boris Delaunay et al. Sur la sphere vide. Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, Otdelenie Matematicheskii
i Estestvennyka Nauk, 7(793-800):1–2, 1934.
Vladimir Vapnik, Steven Golowich, and Alex Smola. Support vector method for func-
tion approximation, regression estimation and signal processing.
Advances in neural
information processing systems, 9, 1996.
Ronald A Fisher. The use of multiple measurements in taxonomic problems. Annals of
eugenics, 7(2):179–188, 1936.
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
Arthur E Hoerl and Robert W Kennard. Ridge regression: Biased estimation for nonorthog-
onal problems. Technometrics, 12(1):55–67, 1970.
S Barozzi, L Del Bo, A Crocetti, O Dyrlund, S Passoni, A Zolin, E Panicucci, A Mancuso,
M Kaur, and GD Searchfield. A comparison of nature and technical sounds for tinnitus
therapy. Acta Acustica united with Acustica, 102(3):540–546, 2016b.
Ying Li, Guodong Feng, Haiyan Wu, and Zhiqiang Gao. Clinical trial on tinnitus patients
with normal to mild hearing loss: broad band noise and mixed pure tones sound therapy.
Acta oto-laryngologica, 139(3):284–293, 2019b.
C Herraiz, I Diges, P Cobo, G Plaza, and JM Aparicio. Auditory discrimination therapy
(adt) for tinnitus managment: preliminary results. Acta Oto-Laryngologica, 126(sup556):
80–83, 2006b.
==PAGE:75==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
66
James Henry, Tara L Zaugg, Paula J Myers, and Caroline J Kendall. How to manage your
tinnitus: A step-by-step workbook. Plural Publishing, 2010.
Nikola K Kasabov. Neucube: A spiking neural network architecture for mapping, learning
and understanding of spatio-temporal brain data. Neural Networks, 52:62–76, 2014.
Yann LeCun, D Touresky, G Hinton, and T Sejnowski. A theoretical framework for back-
propagation. In Proceedings of the 1988 connectionist models summer school, volume 1,
pages 21–28, 1988.
Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classification with deep
convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems, 25,
2012.
James A Hanley and Barbara J McNeil. The meaning and use of the area under a receiver
operating characteristic (roc) curve. Radiology, 143(1):29–36, 1982.
Payam Refaeilzadeh, Lei Tang, and Huan Liu. Cross-validation. Encyclopedia of database
systems, 5:532–538, 2009.
Geoffrey J McLachlan, Kim-Anh Do, and Christophe Ambroise. Analyzing microarray
gene expression data. 2005.
Scott Makeig, Anthony Bell, Tzyy-Ping Jung, and Terrence J Sejnowski. Independent
component analysis of electroencephalographic data. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 8, 1995.
Anthony J Bell and Terrence J Sejnowski. An information-maximization approach to blind
separation and blind deconvolution. Neural computation, 7(6):1129–1159, 1995.
Arnaud Delorme, Terrence Sejnowski, and Scott Makeig. Enhanced detection of artifacts in
eeg data using higher-order statistics and independent component analysis. Neuroimage,
34(4):1443–1449, 2007.
==PAGE:76==
