==PAGE:1==
Master of Science
Master thesis in Civil Engineering
Title: Diagnosis of Structural Condition based
on Vibration Recordings
Author: Umair Abid Mughal
==PAGE:2==
Supervisor: Ass. Prof. Evangelos Katsanos
Co-supervisors: Luigi Caglio
DTU Construct
Department of Civil Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Ørsteds Plads
Building 118
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis presents a methodology using Bayesian Inference and Finite Element (FE)
Modeling to estimate unknown structural parameters under operational conditions
with unknown input excitations. Two output-only methods, the Augmented Kalman
Filter (AKF) for joint input-state estimation and Operational Modal Analysis (OMA),
were used to calibrate structural properties from observational measurements. OMA
provided a broad prior probability distribution function (PDF) for the parameters,
which was refined using Bayesian Inference and a Kalman-Filter algorithm.
An FE model was created based on design documentation, with simulated dam-
age and ambient excitation responses used for calibration. Sensitivity analysis identi-
fied critical structural members influencing dynamic behavior and structural columns
were identified as critical dynamic behavior influencing members.
Moreover, the
Bayesian Inference framework, incorporating a Kalman-Filter inspired likelihood func-
tion, achieved high precision in parameter estimation, though it yielded narrow param-
eter distributions, indicating insuﬀicient uncertainty representation and for higher-
dimensions, the method was liable to providing false estimates due to limitation of
single-chain MCMC methods.
To address computational challenges, an initial Bayesian Inference using modal
properties-based likelihood function was performed, narrowing the parameter PDFs
and reducing the computational burden for the subsequent Kalman-Filter based infer-
ence. This dual-step approach improved eﬀiciency and accuracy in structural health
monitoring, demonstrating the method’s effectiveness in precise parameter estima-
tion.
Keywords: Bayesian Inference, Finite Element Model updating, Structural Health
Monitoring, Augmented Kalman Filter, Parameter Estimation, Modal Properties
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Preface
I would like to extend my heartfelt gratitude to my two supervisors, Evangelos Kat-
sanos and Luigi Caglio, whose invaluable guidance, consistent support, and profound
theoretical insights have been irreplaceable throughout my Master’s thesis journey.
Their dedication and mentorship have played a pivotal role in the progress of this
study. I deeply appreciate their constructive feedback, encouragement, occasional
light-hearted banter and commitment to our weekly meetings, which were crucial in
shaping the final outcome. Their readiness to address all my inquiries, whether the-
oretical or technical, was instrumental in achieving the completion of this work. In
particular, I wish to extend a special thanks to Luigi for his patience and constant
assistance in practical matters such as navigating OpenSees, and understanding the
Kalman-Filter and the Bayesian Inference framework. I would also like to acknowl-
edge ChatGPT as a tool for debugging of minor coding related issues in python,
especially for formatting of figures and also in refincement of some of the dialouge
presented in this report.
Lastly, I would like to acknowledge my family for their unwavering support through-
out my educational journey and my friends for supporting me in tough and stressful
times, particularly by cooking healthy and tasty meals. Their love and encourage-
ment have been a constant source of motivation that sustained me throughout the
thesis period. From the depths of my heart, I extend my heartfelt thanks to all.
Kongens Lyngby, 16th June 2024
Umair Abid Mughal
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations
List of Abbreviations
RC
Reinforced Concrete
2D
Two dimensional
3D
Three dimensional
FE
Finite Element
FEM
Finite Element Method
FEMU
Finite Element Model Updating
DOF
Degree-of-Freedom
SDOF
Single Degree-of-Freedom
MDOF
Multiple Degree-of-Freedom
EOM
Equations of motion
SHM
Structural Health Monitoring
KF
Kalman Filter
AKF
Augmented Kalman Filter
SSI
Stochastic Subspace Identification
FTT
Frequency Fourier Transform
FRF
Frequency Response Function
SVD
Singular Value Decomposition
FDD
Frequency Domain Decomposition
PSD
Power Spectral Density
OMA
Operational Modal Analysis
MAC
Modal Assurance Criteria
LF
Likelihood Function
==PAGE:8==
vi
Abbreviations
MLE
Maximum Likelihood Estimation
NLL
Negative Log Likelihood
NLLF
Negative Log Likelihood Function
MCMC
Markov Chain Monte Carlo
MH
Metropolis Hastings
RAM
Robust Adaptive Metropolis
RBF
Radial Basis Function
PDF
Probability Distribution Function
GP
Gaussian Process
MAC
Modal Assurance Criteria
TRAC
Time Response Assurance Criteria
BI
Bayesian Inference
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
iii
Abbreviations
v
Contents
vii
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
9
2.1
Bayesian Inference in Structural Health Monitoring and FE model up-
dating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Application of Kalman-Filters in Structural Health and Bayesian In-
ference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
Theoretical Background
13
3.1
Structural Dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1.1
Damping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2
Operational Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2.1
State Space Formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.3
Kalman Filter for state estimation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3.1
Augmented Kalman Filter for Joint Input-State Estimation . .
26
3.4
Bayesian Inference for Structural Parameter Estimation . . . . . . . .
28
3.5
Monte Carlo Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.6
Surrogate modelling using Radial Basis Function . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4
Methodology
39
5
Structural Modelling
45
5.1
Structural Model Setup
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.2
Material Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
5.3
Member Cross-Sections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.4
Finite Element Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
5.5
Damaged Realization of Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
6
Structural Bench-marking
55
6.1
Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
==PAGE:10==
viii
Contents
6.2
Dynamic Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Kalman Filter Load and Response Estimation Results . . . . . . . . .
58
6.3.1
Generating measurement response for parameter estimation . .
60
6.4
Operational Modal Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
6.5
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
7
Results
69
7.1
Deterministic Parameter Estimation using Maximum Likelihood Esti-
mation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
7.2
Parameter estimation using AKF-based Bayesian Inference
. . . . . .
74
7.2.1
Two Parameter Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
7.2.2
Five Parameter Estimation Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
7.2.2.1
Estimation of Structural Parameters . . . . . . . . . .
81
7.2.3
Large Parameter Estimation Case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
7.3
Parameter estimation using combined Modal and AKF-based Bayesian
Inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
7.3.1
Estimation of Posterior PDF using Bayesian Inference with
Modal-likelihood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
7.3.2
Estimation of PDF using the combined Bayesian Inference Frame-
work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
8
Discussion
93
9
Conclusion
97
10 Further Work
99
Appendices
101
Appendix A Journal articles
103
Bibliography
105
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Introduction to the topic
During their lifetime, structures and civil infrastructures are subjected to overloads
(earthquake forces, extreme wave- and wind-induced loads), which can jeopardise the
functionality but, most importantly, the safety and reliability of the structural sys-
tems. Additionally, aging and deterioration mechanisms, such as, corrosion of the
steel reinforcing bars and scouring of the foundation elements, can further undermine
the structural integrity, which can be further compromised by the repetitive nature
of various loads inducing fatigue to structural elements and joints.
Due to these
adverse loads and degrading conditions, structures are frequently experiencing the
development of non-linearities that, in turn, lead to structural damages and perma-
nent degradation of the capacity. Various failure modes and damage mechanisms
can be formed so that their timely and precise detection is not always possible via a
common visual inspection.
On the other hand, over the last decades, the use of sensing technology and struc-
tural vibration recordings have been found to provide good insights for assessing the
health of structural systems. Often at times, the monitoring of structural health is a
continuous process, which traditionally requires monitoring the vibrational readings
of the structural system over the life-cycle of the structure, in order to detect dam-
ages and non-linearities in the system. However, since the interest and research in the
field of Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) has been a recent development, many of
the old existing infrastructures lack monitoring data from when they were emerged.
Additionally, there are often signal losses in monitoring data due to losses in power
supply, aging of sensors and other practical reasons [1]. Hence, the data acquisition
phase is the foundation of all SHM systems and the missing data can affect the overall
health assessment of a structure.
Hence, one probable solution to overcome this problem is the use of statistical
and probabilistic models to extract probable values for unknown structural prop-
erties. Bayesian inference is one such powerful probabilistic framework where the
input uncertainties are modeled by fully or partially known probability distributions,
based on available data, expert opinions or bibliographic databases [2]. The uncer-
tainty quantification process is reliant on Monte Carlo techniques; which are a family
of sampling method where the unknowns are chosen based on their respective proba-
bilistic distributions. Probabilistic models such as Bayesian Inference model updating
techniques are different from deterministic model updating techniques [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].
The updated models with deterministic parameters remain incapable to cope with the
==PAGE:12==
2
Introduction
variability caused by the physical system variations and the inaccuracy of measure-
ments.
In the field of structural health monitoring, Bayesian Inference, when coupled with
numerical models (FE models), is becoming widely adopted for model updating and
parameter estimation problems. Numerical models, effectively called digital twins
for existing structures when tuned properly, are effective modern tool for continuous
monitoring of structures, damage detection, structural prognosis and decision making.
When real-life structures are modelled, there are always errors and uncertainties asso-
ciated with modelling assumptions that may invite inaccuracies and uncertainties and
as a result, result in inaccurate condition assessment of structures. In this regard, this
study will investigate the potential of using structural vibration signals to provide
reliable condition assessment of existing infrastructure in their operational conditions
with unknown input loading, using Finite Element (FE) models and Bayesian Infer-
ence (BI). Traditionally, this methodology falls within the branch of Finite Element
Model Updating (FEMU), that aims to calibrate the numerical FE model based on
the actual behavior of the structure determined from the vibration measurement
signals. Especially, the focus will be dedicated on detecting accurately the current
(damaged) condition of a linear 2D structure using Kalman Filters and dynamic pa-
rameters, upon the availability of vibration recordings only from the present state of
the structure assuming that no recordings from the past lifetime of the structure are
available. In addition, a completely novel two-step Bayesian inference based estima-
tion methodology is presented, where at first, the modal-parameters (frequencies and
mode shapes) are used to calibrate the unknown structural parameters, and then the
reliability and certainty of the estimation is enhanced by using KF-based Bayesian
Inference method.
The framework of Bayesian Inference FE model updating has many components
associated with it, which will be referenced in the literature, and the theoretical
background, as well the the chapters following them. However, before the detailed
methodology is laid down in , it is important to form an understanding of the various
moving components of the framework. A typical FE model updating using BI frame-
work is showcased in Figure 1.1. Initially, the sensor data is collected from real-world
data, and the measurements are fed into the Bayesian Inference framework.
The
Bayesian inference framework here operates on the mathematical model, which is a
numerical representation of real-life structure. In this Bayesian Inference framework,
we can perform sensitivity analysis to single out the structural elements to be up-
dated. Then the Bayesian Inference is performed, which takes a prior distribution;
indicating prior information we posses about the unknown parameters to be updated,
a likelihood function; function which calibrates the unknown parameters to the sensor
data, and a posterior distribution; the distribution obtained using the prior and the
likelihood function. This posterior indicates the probable values of the unknown pa-
rameters. In high-dimensional spaces, the inference or sampling is performed using
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulations, which are probabilistic sampling
methods, and because the high-dimensional space can be complex and computation-
==PAGE:13==
Introduction
3
Figure 1.1. Typical framework for FE model updating using Bayesian Inference [7]
ally expensive to traverse or sample, the posterior distribution is often approximated
by a surrogate model. A surrogate model is a numerical model that approximates the
posterior space using a subset of points from the product of the prior and likelihood
functions. Ultimately, this Bayesian Inference framework can then determine the un-
known structural parameters, and update our initial FE model, which can then be
used as a benchmark for future SHM applications and structural prognosis analysis,
which ultimately aids in decision making in a timely manner.
Motivation
It is very crucial to monitor major existing infrastructure such as bridges, buildings,
and offshore structures, as any detriment, defect or damage in the structure can lead
to substantial economic, but most importantly, possible loss of human life. Unfortu-
nately, replacing such crucial infrastructure requires careful planning to shut down
existing infrastructure and provide temporary solutions, and a lot of financing. Hence,
it is often more feasible to restrengthen the structures, rather than to construct an
all new replacement.
Although Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) and condition monitoring of the
structure has grown in interest in the past few decades. Majority of the old existing
infrastructure that has been erected many decades ago, lack any sort of vibrational
monitoring data from the beginning of the structure’s lifetime. Although the condi-
tion of the structure can be monitored relative to some point after the construction
==PAGE:14==
4
Introduction
of the structure, the relative degradation only highlights the degradation rate, rather
than the current state of the structure. Hence any damage occurring before the deploy-
ment of the sensors, can often be let under the radar. In this case, the damage could
be defined as any changes occurring in the system from its initial state that could
potentially affect its operations and structural integrity. Additionally, the condition
of some structures can be so detrimental, that monitoring the health of the structure
over a period of time might involve the risk and assumption that the structure will
not fail for the duration of the data acquisition phase of the structure. And although
few other techniques falling under the umbrella of SHM, such as visual inspection,
destructive and non-destructive testing, do exist to provide a real-time estimation of
the structural condition, often times, these methods are unreliable, costly, can detect
local deformities only instead of painting a broader assessment of the structural con-
dition and are impractical in places where access to structural is limited. An example
of this limited access can be in case of offshore structures, where a critical portion
of the structure is submerged underwater, subjected to heavy dynamic and fatigue
inducing wave loads.
Hence, the core motivation of undertaking this project was to define a probable
framework that can overcome the uncertainties in estimating and modelling of a
structural system, such that not only its current state can be accurately estimated,
but also the developed calibrated FE model can be utilized to estimate the remaining
life of the structure.
Research Objectives
The main focus of this research will be to investigate in detail the applicability of
Kalman-Filters (KF) state-estimation technique, for parameter estimation of a simu-
lated ”damaged” structure, using the Bayesian Inference framework. In addition, the
research will also focus on developing methodologies to further refine the reliability
of the method and reduce the computational time of the algorithm. One of these
methodologies is to first use the modal parameters of the structure in the Bayesian
Inference framework for FE model updating, and then use the KF-estimations to
further calibrate and update the structural parameters of the model. To the best
of the author’s knowledge, this dual setup of modal/dynamic parameter-based and
KF-based Bayesian inference for FE model updating with unknown loading is a com-
pletely novel concept.
The research will, for the most part, use a 2D frame structure with 18 nodes
and 45 degrees-of-freedom. The multi-story frame structure will be modelled as an
reinforced concrete (RC) structure, with non-linear material model.
Additionally,
the structure will be excited with ambient accelerations to mimic real-life ambient
loading, and ensure that the response of the structure remains linear. The horizontal
time-series acceleration responses will be the primary and only measurement input
employed by the Kalman-Filters and OMA. Hence, the Kalman-Filter (KF) algorithm
==PAGE:15==
Introduction
5
will be coupled with Bayesian Inference to estimate the degradation in stiffness of the
concrete in various members of the structural frame.
This will later incorporate
an additional step for determination of prior probability distributions using dynamic
properties (estimated natural frequency and mode shapes) of the structure to increase
the reliability, computational time and confidence interval of the posterior.
The
following are some of the main research objectives of this study:
• Can Kalman-Filters coupled with Bayesian Inference be utilized for estimation
of the unknown parameters of the structure, provided only the time-series ac-
celeration measurements at various points in the structure and the loading is
unknown?
• What are the different factors that may affect the reliability and eﬀiciency of
parameter estimation using Bayesian Inference methodology being used?
• Can the robustness of the Bayesian Inference be improved by utilizing addi-
tional dynamical parameters of the structure? In principal, can a modal-based
likelihood function be used to form a reliable prior distribution for the KF-based
Bayesian Inference method?
Thesis Structure
The structure of this thesis report follows a sequential narrative, not necessarily de-
picting the sequential progress of the project. The report initially starts with a proof
that the KF, which is the foundation of this methodology, works as intended in esti-
mating the state of the structure at various points. Following this, the KF method
is utilized for estimation of the structural parameters. The study following this in-
volves understanding the main factors affecting the accuracy and reliability of the
estimated parameters, and coupling dynamical parameter based parameter estima-
tion to increase the overall robustness and computational eﬀiciency of the method.
That said, the thesis is structured into chapters, each including sections and sub-
sections further exploring the chapter. The chapters are structured in the the follow-
ing manner:
• Chapter 1: Introduction to the topic, and motivation for choosing the said topic
and background on FEMU using Bayesian Inference
• Chapter 2: Literature review of existing works
• Chapter 3: Theoretical background behind the methods used in this study
• Chapter 4: A brief description of the methodology behind the developed frame-
work
• Chapter 5: Discusses the setup of numerical model and practical implementa-
tion of the methodology
==PAGE:16==
6
Introduction
• Chapter 6: Contains the results of all the pre-requisite analysis required before
the model can be updated using Bayesian Inference
• Chapter 7: This chapter is dedicated towards exploring the results for the
estimation using Bayesian Inference method, particularly for the Kalman-filter
based likelihood function, the modal-parameter based likelihood function and
the combination of the two in a two-step scheme
• Chapter 8: Provides a minor commentary on the findings. Chapter 7 already
incorporates the major part of discussion.
• Chapter 9: Highlights the main conclusions from the study
• Chapter 10: A short discussion on recommendations for future work
==PAGE:17==
8
==PAGE:18==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
In the published literature, there have been various Bayesian Inference inspired method-
ologies adopted for a plethora of purposes such as parameter estimation, state estima-
tion, model updating and uncertainty reduction to name a few. However, the focus
of this chapter of the report will primarily be a thorough overview of the published
material pertaining to application of Kalman-Filters and Bayesian Inference in the
field of structural engineering, and the various parameter estimation methodologies
utilized in the Bayesian Inference framework.
2.1
Bayesian Inference in Structural Health Monitoring
and FE model updating
Updating Finite Element (FE) models using Bayesian Inference has become a stan-
dard tool for condition monitoring and damage detection in structures. The Bayesian
FE model updating framework was initially proposed by Beck and Katafygiotis [55],
where they performed model updating of a steel frame with the Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) algorithm, while Vanik et al. [14] later presented a more articulated
version of the method. Applications of this method to the Structural Health Moni-
toring (SHM) problems were first presented in [17, 19].
The basis of most Bayesian inference updating techniques within the context of
civil structures is to minimize the discrepancy between the experimental and ana-
lytical modal frequencies and mode shapes through a particular modal inspired loss
function derived through deterministic or probabilistic methods. Although the most
common type of measured data is acceleration responses, they are seldom used di-
rectly for model updating purposes, as detailed information on the applied loading
is not available in most practical cases [9]. Therefore, it is widely preferred to use
modal properties of structures to update structural model parameters. The modal
information, including modal frequencies and mode shapes, can be retrieved from
the response time histories through numerous methods in the literature, such as sub-
space modal identification, frequency-domain decomposition, and fast Bayesian FFT
[10, 11, 12, 13].
Most modal FEMU methodologies are based on updating a linear FE model up-
dating, whereby damage is characterised mostly as loss of effective stiffness in various
elements or groups of elements. Hence, while these methods are effective tools for
detecting damages, it is often hard to quantify and localize the damages to individual
members. Zhou et al. [6] demonstrated Bayesian model updating of an actual steel
==PAGE:19==
10
Literature Review
truss bridge using Transitional MCMC and modal frequency and mode shape based
likelihood function, whereby model updating was performed on group of damaged
elements to avoid large sample space and the modal information was acquired using
Fast Bayesian FTT method. Similarly, Teymouri et al. [8] proposed a novel Hierar-
chical Bayesian MU technique on an actual offshore platform with 150 nodes using
optimal weighting of modal residuals based on covariance of modal residuals. The
optimal weight of modal factors has also been explored in other parallel literature
[56]. [53] implemented a surrogate based FE model updating using modal likelihood
function on a historical masonry tower, whereby the modal properties were extracted
from experimental vibration test. Yang et al. [20] developed a two-phase adaptive
MCMC whereby initially, a parameter space-search algorithm is employed to obtain
a near-optimal solution by minimizing the negative log likelihood function (NLLF)
and then weighting to generate samples in regions of high probability.
In addition to variations in likelihood functions used in the literature, there have
been many sampling dedicated studies as well. Among many sampling algorithms,
the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling algorithm has received the most
attention, especially for the Metropolis–Hastings (MH) algorithm which is based on
the principal of random walk. Beck and Au [55] proposed the Adaptive MH algo-
rithm (AMH), which uses a sequence of intermediate distributions to converge on a
target distribution. However, when numerous uncertain parameters are considered,
the high dimensions pose important diﬀiculties for sampling eﬀiciency, low acceptance
rate and dimensional [56]. Vrugt et al. [57] found that the single-chain method’s con-
vergence performance depends on the selection of the proposal distribution, and the
computational eﬀiciency is low when dealing with complex posterior PDFs charac-
terized by heavy tails and multiple regions of attraction. [6] remarked that different
sampling methods will only affect the eﬀiciency and not the accuracy of the method.
However, for greater numbers of uncertain parameters, higher dimensional solution
space is necessary and as a result, more samples must be accumulated to produce a
better approximation [6]. [56] demonstrated that the MCMC struggles to capture the
posterior PDFs of parameters in multi-modal problems accurately.
2.2
Application of Kalman-Filters in Structural Health
and Bayesian Inference
Kalman-filters have been widely adopted for structure health monitoring purposes,
particularly for state estimation of linear and non-linear structures [22, 52]. Most of
the literature concerning KF for state estimation is based on input-output methods,
where the input loading is know [47]. Ching et al. [47] compared particle filter and
an extended Kalman filter (EKF) for parameter and state estimation with known
input loading. A similar problem is also considered in [48]. However, the task of
joint input-state-parameter estimation remains challenging and is still an emerging
==PAGE:20==
2.2 Application of Kalman-Filters in Structural Health and Bayesian Inference
11
area of investigation.
A plausible approach for parameter estimation along with
input state estimation with respect to state-space methods have emerged with the
emergence of state augmentation for parameter learning. Azam et al. [49], Naets et
al. [49] and Maes et al. [50] have made the use of EKF, AKF and dual KF for joint-
input-state-parameter estimation problems for linear systems and have demonstrated
that the said techniques are reliable for joint-input-state-parameter estimation of
linear systems. [16] presented a similar problem but for non-linear mechanics based
systems, where Bayesian optimal and extended Kalman Filters (EKF) where used
for parameter estimation for structures undergoing damages (loss of stiffness) under
lateral earthquake ground motions. Ramancha et al. [23] employed the unscented
Kalman filter (UKF) to update time-varied properties in non-linear FE model of Pine
flat dam using input-output measurement scheme. Astroza et al. [15] introduced the
Iterated Extended Kalman filter (IEKF) for non-linear material parameter estimation
and compared the technique to EKF and UKF in terms of convergence, accuracy,
robustness, and computational demand when estimating model parameters of a 3D 5-
storey RC structure and concluded that UKF slightly outperforms the EKF and IEKF
and prevents large and abrupt changes in the estimates of the model parameters.
To the best of author’s knowledge, there have been two research publications
which have employed KF and its variants with Bayesian Inference for estimation of
structural properties. Among these, Rogers et al. [3] is the only author to propose
an output only KF based Bayesian Inference method. Rogers presented the Gaussian
Process latent force model for the dynamic parametric estimation; (Stiffness, Damping
and Mass) while also estimating a non-Gaussian input loading and the latent states;
(displacements and velocities) of the system. The inference was performed on a 3
DOF lumped mass system using Metropolis Hastings (MH) based Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) over the parameters of the model and presented a robust
confidence interval for the estimated parameters; with the estimated stiffness showing
the narrowest range.
Ramancha et al. in their synonymous studies [7, 26] presented the potential of
UKF with Bayesian inference for estimating parameters of a mechanics based non-
linear FE model of a bridge column and pine flat gravity dam, for the case where the
input loading was known. Here, the inference was performed in batch mode using the
transitional Markov chain Monte Carlo (TMCMC) method. The study highlighted
that Bayesian inference when performed using KF based methods (methods that
primarily focus on point estimates) can sucumb to finding non-true sets (local minima)
of parameter estimates which explain the measurement response equally well.
==PAGE:21==
12
==PAGE:22==
CHAPTER 3
Theoretical
Background
This chapter will form the basis for the theoretical background of the concepts utilized
in this report. The main concepts utilized in the formulation of the methodology of
this project include Structural Dynamics, Kalman Filters, Operational Modal Anal-
ysis, Bayesian Inference and Monte Carlo Simulations. Further concepts related to
each topic will be discussed individually in the respective section.
3.1
Structural Dynamics
The fundamentals of this thesis are based on the concepts of Structural Dynamics and
in part Structural Health Monitoring (SHM), which defines mechanics of a structure
which is subjected to dynamic loading. Dynamic loads are time variant loads and
can emerge from a range of sources such as wind, earthquakes, traﬀic, and machinery
vibrations. Understanding how structures respond to these loads is not only critical
for ensuring their safety, performance, and durability, but also forms the foundation
of all SHM methodologies based of structures. In order to mechanically define the
dynamics of a structure, it is important to first form a mathematical representation
of the main components of the structure; namely the mass, stiffness and the damping.
Another equally important component to determine the dynamic response of the
structure is the mathematical representation of the loading a structure is subjected
to. Determining these key factors allows us not only to mathematically represent the
dynamics of the structure, but also allows us to determine the dynamic response of
the structure, which is represented as the acceleration, velocity and the displacement
of the structure, with respect to time. Hence, the mathematical representation of the
structure will be formed using the Equations of Motion (EOM).
To explain the concept of EOM, it is first important to highlight the concept of
Degrees-of-Freedom or DOF, which is a variable representing the ’free’ movement of
the structure. The movement of the structure is defined as the translation (displace-
ment) or rotation of the respective point being analyzed; and since displacement or
rotation are derivatives of velocity and acceleration or angular velocity and angular
acceleration respectively, the concept of DOFs when incorporating the respective free
movement and its derivatives, can form the EOM to represent the complete mechanics
of a structure [36].
==PAGE:23==
14
Theoretical Background
In order to understand the formulation of the equation of motion, it is important
to first define the respective equation for a single DOF, classify defined as a SDOF
system, whereby the free movement is typically defined as displacement of rotation.
In a typical 3 dimensional system, each point can undergo six distinct DOFs, namely
the translations and rotations in the three dimensions; hence, in order to avoid over-
complication, it is imperative to define the system on a simple case. The simplest way
to visualize such a system is by assuming all the mass of the system is concentrated
at a point.
Assuming the system experience a time-variant external loading described as f(t)
is applied in a single direction, the variable load will result in the displacement of the
system, which can be represented by x(t). In this system the dash-pot describes the
natural damping in the system and will set to dissipate the energy from the system
in an attempt to reduce the displacement; thereby allowing the system to come to
rest with time upon the removal of the loading. Hence, for a real-life structures, it
is important to define the coeﬀicient of damping c as greater than 0, without which
the system will never come to rest upon the removal of the loading. The spring in
this case represents the displacement of the structure and for a linear case, cases a
proportional displacement with respect to the applied loading. Hence, using the main
principles discussed in the paragraph above, the differential equation called the EOM
can be formulated as follows [36]:
m¨x(t) + c ˙x(t) + kx(t) = f(t)
(3.1)
where ¨x(t), ˙x(t) and x(t) represents the displacement, velocity and the acceleration of
the body respectively. Collectively, the equation of motion is based on the principle
of conservation of energy or momentum, whereby the left hand side of the equation
represents the ’restoring forces’, which are summation of inertial force, damping force
and elastic force, and collectively balance out the applied external force f(t). Addi-
tionally, the EOM can also be normalized with respect to the mass of the system; thus
resulting in the natural frequency ω and damping ratio ζ, which are both expressed
alongside the normalized EOM as:
¨x(t) + 2ζω ˙x(t) + ω2x(t) = 1
m · f(t)
where ω2 = k
m and ζ =
c
2
√
km
(3.2)
The importance of defining the EOM interms of ω lies in the importance of the
dynamics of a moving body, whereby it will have a tendency to vibrate at its angular
or natural frequency ω.
The natural frequency ω is an inherent property of any
system and is independent of the external factors such as the applied loading. A
Multiple DOF (MDOF) body will have as many ωi as the number of DOFs of the
system; where i ∈[1, 2 .... n] and n = number of DOFs of the system. The damping
ratio ζ is also another critical but very convenient property of the system, which
represents the damping of the system relative to the critical damping ccritical = 2
√
km,
the damping at which the structure will comes to rest without oscillating.
Civil
==PAGE:24==
3.1 Structural Dynamics
15
engineering structures exhibit internal damping primarily owing to their material
characteristics or due to friction between structural connections.
Hence, for civil
engineering structure, critically or over-damped systems ζ ≥1 are not of importance
as no real-life civil structure exhibits such magnitudes of internal damping. Almost
all civil structures lie in the under-damped category of structures 0 < ζ < 1, with
most RC structures possessing a random ratio in the range 0.01 < ζ < 0.05 [36].
While SDOF systems are an excellent way to get an intuition of the dynamics
of simplified systems, it is seldom the case that real life structures are approximated
as SDOF systems.
Most structural systems consist of many members of various
geometries, which requires discretising the systems into multiple smaller components
via geometric points or nodes, and each node may exhibit multiple DOFs depending
on the restraints applied to the respective node. To understand the concept of EOM
for MDOF systems, the simplest case of 2 DOF system can be utilized for conceptual
understanding. In a typical 2 DOF system, there will be as many EOM as the number
of DOFs:
m1¨x1(t) + (c1 + c2) ˙x1(t) −c2 ˙x2(t) + (k1 + k2)x1(t) −k2x2(t) = f1(t)
(3.3)
m2¨x2(t) −c2 ˙x1(t) + c2 ˙x2(t) −k2x1(t) + k2x2(t) = f2(t)
(3.4)
This equation can be re-written in matrix notation as:
 m1
0
0
m2
  ¨x1(t)
¨x2(t)

+
 c1 + c2
−c2
−c2
c2
  ˙x1(t)
˙x2(t)

+
 k1 + k2
−k2
−k2
k2
  x1(t)
x2(t)

=
 f1(t)
f2(t)

(3.5)
And this can further be compared into:
M¨x(t) + C ˙x(t) + Kx(t) = f(t)
,
x(t)⊤=
 x1(t)
x2(t)
. . .
xn(t) 
(3.6)
Where the capital bold notations represent matrices and the lowercase bold notations
represent vectors or arrays. This way of notation will be relied on consistency in the
sections to follow.
Before moving onto the next section, a brief explanation will be provided for the
formation of the eigenvalue equation of structural dynamics, a fundamental equation
that allows us to extract the natural frequencies and mode shape. Without diving
into the exact formulation, the real displacements of the system can be defined in the
modal space as x(t) = ϕeiωt [36], where ϕ is the eigen vector or the mode shape of the
system. Hence, substituting x(t) = ϕeiωt in EOM results in the following eigen value
equation, which can be solved to determine two most important dynamic properties,
the natural frequencies ω and the mode shapes ϕ:
(Mω2 + Ciω + K)ϕ
(3.7)
==PAGE:25==
16
Theoretical Background
3.1.1
Damping
This section of the chapter will be concerned with the theoretical concept behind the
choice of damping in the system. Among the three system parameters defining the
dynamics of the structure, damping is the most arbitrary and complex to determine
owing to the various factors that can effect the damping of the system. There are many
different mathematical and mechanics based models that can describe the damping
of the system such as the viscous damping, modal damping and hysteretic damping
[36]; however for complex MDOF systems, modelling the damping using the described
methods can become very complex. An eﬀicient way of modelling the damping is
assuming that the damping is a linear combination of mass damping and stiffness of
the system. This type of damping is called the Rayleigh damping and is described
using the following equation:
C = αM + βK
(3.8)
where C is the damping matrix, M is the mass matrix, K is the stiffness matrix,
and α and
are the mass and stiffness damping coeﬀicients respectively. This type
of damping definition is rather convenient since it results in the damping matrix C
of the same size as the other system parameter matrices M and K. Additionally,
depending on the choice of α and β coeﬀicients, the damping applied to each mode of
vibration can be varied. To determine suitable values for α and , a few steps need to
be carried out. For a dynamic system undergoing harmonic motion with an angular
frequency ω, the damping ratio ζ of the system is defined as one-half of the ratio
between damping force and restoring force. For an SDOF system, the damping force
can be represented by c ˙x. However, as described previously, using the concept of
Rayleigh damping, the damping force can be defined as αM ˙x + βKx. Hence, for one
of the modes of a system, the damping ratio can be re-written as:
ζ = 1
2
ω2xα ˙x
ω2x
+ ω2xβω2x
ω2x

= 1
2
ωα
ω + βω

(3.9)
Similarly, the equation can be manipulated to compute the minimum damping ratio
as:
α = ζmin ωmin
,
β = ζmin
ωmin
(3.10)
where the minimum damping can be defined for the desired mode, which will to a
larger damping ratio for the remaining modes.
Another philosophy for choosing the Rayleigh damping co-eﬀicient is to assume
the same damping ratio for two candidate modes, whereby ζ = ζi = ζj, where i and
==PAGE:26==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
17
j represent two separate modes. This results in the following expression:
α = 2ζωiωj
ωi + ωj
,
β =
2ζ
ωi + ωj
,
i = j = 1, 2, . . . , n
(3.11)
Adopting this methodology of assigning damping will result in a smaller damping for
all the modes lying in between i and j and higher damping for all modes less than i
and more than j assuming i < j.
3.2
Operational Modal Analysis
Operational Modal Analysis (OMA) is a technique used to determine the dynamic
properties of structures under their operational conditions where the input loading
or excitation is not required to be known.
This method is particularly practical
in real-world applications where subjecting a structure to controlled excitation is
impractical and unfeasible. There are many methods developed for OMA, and the
main distinction between the methods is whether they are developed in time-domain
or frequency domain, and whether they are Bayesian or non-Bayesian.
Here, the
non-Bayesian Frequency Domain Decomposition (FDD) methodology is employed for
Operational Modal Analysis of a structure.
Modal analysis involves determining the dynamic properties of the structure, par-
ticularly the natural frequencies, damping ratios, and mode shapes of a structure.
The equation of motion for a linear time-invariant system with n degrees of freedom
is presented again:
M¨x(t) + C ˙x(t) + Kx(t) = f(t)
(3.12)
Here, the force vector f(t) is assumed to be an unknown, but is assumed to be a
broad-band excitation, that is, it is assumed to posses a Gaussian distribution with
zero mean and some variance. In the frequency domain, the response of the system
can be represented using the Fourier transform. Hence, the Fourier transformation is
performed for both sides of this equation to transform the time domain differential
equation into the frequency domain. The Fourier transform of the time domain signal
in frequency domain is represented as X(ω). In mathematical terms, it is represented
as:
F[x(t)] = X(ω) =
Z ∞
−∞
x(t)e−iωtdt
(3.13)
Similarly, the Fourier transform is applied to the entire EOM, and the following
transformations are yielded:
F[M¨x(t)] + F[C ˙x(t)] + F[Kx(t)] = F[f(t)]
(3.14)
==PAGE:27==
18
Theoretical Background
F[¨x(t)] = −ω2X(ω)
(3.15)
F[ ˙x(t)] = iωX(ω)
(3.16)
F[x(t)] = X(ω)
(3.17)
F[f(t)] = F(ω)
(3.18)
Substituting these into the transformed equation, we obtain:
−ω2MX(ω) + iωCX(ω) + KX(ω) = F(ω)
(3.19)
Which can be reformulated into:
 −ω2M + iωC + K

X(ω) = F(ω)
(3.20)
The term in parentheses is known as the dynamic stiffness matrix, and is denoted by
D(ω):
D(ω) = −ω2M + iωC + K
(3.21)
The inverse of the D(ω) matrix is known as the frequency response function, and is
denoted by H(ω):
H(ω) =
n
X
r=1
 ϕrϕT
r
λr −iω + ϕ∗
rϕ∗T
r
λ∗r + iω

(3.22)
where ϕr are the mode shapes and λr are the eigenvalues. This ultimately results in
the transformation of EOM in frequency domain as:
X(ω) = H(ω)F(ω)
(3.23)
where F(ω) is the Fourier transform of the input load. Hence, now the frequency
domain decomposition (FDD), can be performed.
The FDD is used to estimate
modal parameters directly from the power spectral densities (PSD) of the measured
responses. The PSD of a signal provides a measure of its power content as a function
of frequency. The PSD of the output Gxx(ω) can be expressed as:
Gxx(ω) = E

X(ω)XH(ω)

(3.24)
==PAGE:28==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
19
Substituting X(ω) = H(ω)F(ω) into this expression yields the following equation:
Gxx(ω) = E
h
(H(ω)F(ω)) (H(ω)F(ω))Hi
(3.25)
Gxx(ω) = H(ω)E

F(ω)FH(ω)

HH(ω)
(3.26)
The term E

F(ω)FH(ω)

is the PSD of the input forces Gff(ω):
Gxx(ω) = H(ω)Gff(ω)HH(ω)
(3.27)
where Gff(ω) is the power spectral density of the input forces and HH(ω) is the
conjugate transpose of the FRF matrix. Since we assume that the unloading f(t)
was a white noise signal, Gff(ω) will be constant in the frequency domain.
Gff(ω) = SI
(3.28)
where S is a constant scalar and I is the identity matrix.
Substituting this into the relationship:
Gxx(ω) = SH(ω)HH(ω)
(3.29)
Thus, under the white noise assumption, the output PSD Gxx(ω) is directly propor-
tional to the product of the FRF matrix H(ω) and its conjugate transpose HH(ω).
Thus, the dominant eigenvalues and eigenvectors of Gxx(ω) correspond to the modal
parameters. Hence, the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of Gxx(ω) can be per-
formed to obtain the modal properties of the structure:
Gxx(ω) = U(ω)Σ(ω)UH(ω)
(3.30)
where U(ω) is the matrix of singular vectors, and Σ(ω) is the diagonal matrix of
singular values. The peaks in the first singular value plot correspond to the natural
frequencies of the system. The corresponding singular vectors provide estimates of
the mode shapes.
3.2.1
State Space Formulation
State-space formulation is a powerful mathematical framework within the field of
structural dynamic. It represents a system’s dynamics using a set of first-order dif-
ferential equations, which are typically easier to analyze and manipulate than higher-
order equations. Let us consider an MDOF EOM:
M¨y(t) + C ˙y(t) + Ky(t) = f(t) = Spp(t)
(3.31)
==PAGE:29==
20
Theoretical Background
here y, ˙y and ¨y are the displacement, velocity and acceleration vectors and f(t) is
the external force, which can be defined as the multiplication of the load distribution
matrix Sp (which describes the time-invariant spatial distribution of the loads) with
the load factor vector p(t) which describes the magnitude of the loading at a particular
DOF.
In continuous time, the state-space equation is a first order differential equation
in the time variable. (3.31) can be rearranged to result in the following equation:
¨y(t) = −M−1C ˙y(t) −M−1Ky(t) + M−1 Spp(t)
(3.32)
Similarly, the velocity vector can be related to itself by representing a dummy equa-
tion:
˙y(t) = 0y(t) + ˙y(t) + 0p(t)
(3.33)
˙y(t) = ˙y(t)
(3.34)
Hence, (3.34) can be substituted into (3.32) to form:
 ˙y(t)
˙y(t)

=

0
I
−M−1K
−M−1C
  y(t)
˙y(t)

+

0
M−1Sp

p(t)
(3.35)
The equation above can be defined in its compact form as:
˙z(t) = Acz(t) + Bcp(t)
(3.36)
where,
z(t) =
 y(t)
˙y(t)

,
Ac =

0
I
−M−1K
−M−1C

,
Bc =

0
M−1Sp

(3.37)
here z is called the state vector defining the latent states y(t) and ˙y(t), Ac is called
the system (or state) matrix, and Bc is the input/loading matrix. The subscripts “c”
indicates the continuous time. Equation (3.36) is a first order differential equation,
whereas the equation (3.31) is a second order different equation. In the state space
terminology, equation (3.36) is the called the process equation. The process equation
defines how the displacements and velocities of our system evolve in time; that is, it
computes the states for each time-step. This equation forms a key component of the
Kalman-Filters, a concept that will be explored in the sections to follow.
To complete the state-space formulation, we need to define the observation equa-
tion, a mathematical equation that relates the state z (displacements and velocities)
of a system to some observable (or measurable) quantity that we can call d. In tra-
ditional SHM setting, d is matrix of time-varying sensor measurement data, whereby
the number of rows are equal to the number of sensors accounting in the calculation
==PAGE:30==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
21
of the state parameters, and numbers of columns are equal to the number of steps
recorded by the sensors during the measurement step. The observable or the output
equation is an equation relating the latent states of our system to some output re-
sponse quantity. This is especially useful in determining the response of our system
at some arbitrary location, provided we have calculated the states of our dynamical
system, and additionally, helps us compare the output of our system to some observ-
able or measurement quantity. This is a fundamental part of the FEMU, where we
are trying to calibrate our computed responses to some measurement response.
For linear dynamical systems, the observation equation can be defined in contin-
uous and discrete time notation as:
d(t) = Hz(t) + Jp(t)
(3.38)
dk = Hzk + Jpk
(3.39)
As described previously, at any one time-step, d is a vector representing the output of
the system, whereas H and J represent the output matrix and the direct feed-through
matrix. Conceptually, this can be understood by considering that the output matrix
is some function of the latent states and the input loading to the system. Deriving
the matrices H and J enables us to compute the output displacements, velocities
and accelerations of the system, as d is known from the measurement data, and it is
assumed for not that the input loading to the system p is also known at all time-steps.
Assuming the system is still an MDOF system with n degrees-of-freedom, we can
define the output vector d in terms of the actual displacements y, which are already
present in the state vector z = {y
˙y}:
dk = yk =
 In
0   yk
˙yk

+ 0pk
(3.40)
H =
 In
0 
J = 0
(3.41)
Additionally, we can further modify this equation to allow us to extract the type of
output we want (specific displacements and velocities) at any DOF. This can be done
by defining a new selection matrix Sd, where the number of rows nd is equal to the
number of outputs we need and number of columns n are equal to the number of
DOFs in the system. This concept is better understood with the help of an example.
If we want to compute the displacements at DOFs 2 and 5 of a 5-DOF system, we
==PAGE:31==
22
Theoretical Background
can define Sd in the following manner:
dk =
 y2,k
y5,k

=
 Sd
0   yk
˙yk

+ 0pk
(3.42)
H =
 Sd
0 
J = 0
(3.43)
Sd =
 0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

(3.44)
Hence, the selection matrix is always composed of 1s and 0s, serving as a yes/no or
accept/not accept type of filter on the H matrix. Similarly, the velocities can also
be selected from the output matrix H by defining a velocity selection matrix Sv. As
another example to illustrate the concept, suppose we’re now willing to extract the
velocities at DOFs 1 and 4, and displacements at DOFs 2 and 5, we can extract the
said in the following manner:
dk =


y2,k
˙y1,k
y5,k
˙y4,k

=
 Sd
Sv
 
yk
˙yk

+ 0pk
(3.45)
H =
 Sd
Sv

J = 0
(3.46)
Sd =

0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

Sv =

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0

(3.47)
Since the accelerations are not part of the state vector z, we need to utilize the
equation of motion developed in (3.32):
¨y(t) = −M−1C ˙y(t) −M−1Ky(t) + M−1Spp(t)
(3.48)
Since this equation is a function of the states of the system z, very much like the out-
put vector d, we can formulate it in the following manner to extract the accelerations
at all DOFs of the system:
dk = ¨yk =
 −M−1K
−M−1C   yk
˙yk

+

M−1Sp

pk
(3.49)
H =
 −M−1K
−M−1C 
J =
 M−1Sp

(3.50)
It is imperative to note that while computation of the states of the system is indepen-
dent of the input loading to the system, the same is not the case for the accelerations.
The input loading will results in a change in accelerations at the DOFs specified in
the load distribution matrix Sp. Hence, as a complete process, in order to define
the output matrix H, we first need to define the selection matrices for accelerations,
==PAGE:32==
3.2 Operational Modal Analysis
23
velocities and displacements Sa, Sv and Sd respectively. The sizes of the selection
matrices are nd×n, nv×n and na×n (d, v and a stand for displacement, velocity and
acceleration, respectively). Hence, putting everything together, we have successfully
obtained the main components of the observation equation as follows:
dk = Hzk + Jpk
(3.51)
H =


Sd
0
0
Sv
−SaM−1K
−SaM−1C


J =


0
0
SaM−1SP


(3.52)
Now finally, before we move forward to define the mathematical representation for
the Kalman-Filter algorithm, we must address the problem of noise in response mea-
surements of real-life structural systems. Previously, we defined the process equation
and observation equations, equations which defines the evolution of states and relating
those states with some observable output response. In discrete time, the equations
are represented as:
zk+1 = Azk + Bpk
(3.53)
dk+1 = Hzk+1 + Jpk+1
(3.54)
In real-life scenarios, we are faced with the problems of uncertainty, which can arise
from a plethora of factors. And hence, our idealized representation in (3.57) is only
a mathematical representation, which will never behave the same as the true real-life
system. These uncertainties are basically errors in the response estimation of our
system, and can be segmented into process noise and the measurement noise; noise
representation the error in the respective equations. The following can be primary
reasons for the emergence of uncertainties in our estimations:
• in the FE models, we idealize our structures into simplified elements such as
beam elements, which do not fully represent the mechanics of a fully infinite
solid element
• we only model the critical aspects of a structural system and cannot capture
the exact digital twin
• some phenomena are either unknown or not perfectly represented by our math-
ematical formulation, the most obvious being the damping of our system
• ambient vibrations such as from winds or pedestrian walking can induce fluctu-
ations or noise in our measurements
• our structure is always succumb to minute non-linearities, some of which cannot
be accurately modelled in numerical models
• the accuracy of computations is limited by the choice of numerical integration
scheme and step chosen
==PAGE:33==
24
Theoretical Background
• etc.
Hence, we can consider all sources of modelling and process errors collectively into
a single term such as wk which represents the process noise from all sources in the
system. In simple terms, it is the difference or the error between our modelled dynam-
ical system and the ”true” dynamical system. This error, owing to the discretized
nature of our equations, is represented for each time-step k. Similarly, our sensors
are limited by their sensitivity and can never represent or accurately capture the true
response in our system. Hence, we can classify this error as the measurement noise
or error vk, and describes the accuracy of our measurement device. Hence, in each
time-step of our model updating process, there is an error term in both the equations.
We can now redefine our process and observation equations as:
zk+1 = Azk + Bpk + wk
(3.55)
dk+1 = Hzk+1 + Jpk+1 + vk+1
(3.56)
As a usual assumption in our Gaussian based estimation techniques, we assume that
the process noise and measurement noise follow a Gaussian distribution and hence,
can be represented as (random) Gaussian white noise in our system with zero mean
and covariance matrices Q related to process noise wk and R related to measurement
noise vk.
3.3
Kalman Filter for state estimation
In this section, the concept of Kalman Filters will be developed using the State-
Space formulation defined in the previous section. A Kalman filter is an algorithm
that provides estimates of some unknown variables given the measurements observed
over time. It’s widely used in various fields such as control systems, navigation, and
time-series analysis because it is eﬀicient in handling time-series data and owing to
the philosophy behind its formulation, can handle noisy data. As defined previously,
the state of the system refers to the displacements and velocities of the various DOFs
of the system. Acceleration responses are not typically part of the state of the system
as they can be analytically defined using the equation of motion that relates the
acceleration to the states of the system, such as one in (3.32).
The Kalman Filter is based on the principal of Bayesian filter. Although Bayesian
statistics and Bayesian inference will be explored in a later section, it is important
to highlight that Kalman Filters compute the posterior probability distribution of
the state of a system, given some observation or measurement output. In order to
elaborate further, the posterior distribution is assumed to be a Gaussian distribution,
with the mean value defining the mean state of the system with some uncertainty
of variance. The state in the previous step forms the prior in order to compute the
posterior at the next time-step recursively. This recursive state estimation can be
==PAGE:34==
3.3 Kalman Filter for state estimation
25
defined using the Bayes’ theorem [27]. Since the Bayes’ theorem involves an inference
problem, it involves defining and modelling the uncertainty (noise in our case) in the
system, and hence, the resulting problem becomes an estimation problem in a prob-
abilistic sense, with a probability distribution for the observed state defined at each
time-step, rather than determining a solution in the deterministic sense. Logically, if
the system is assumed to be a perfect system, free of any process and measurement
noise, the resulting problem would become deterministic in nature.
Initially, the Kalman-Filter algorithm will be developed for an input-output state
only estimation problem, where the input loading is known. As stated previously, the
Kalman Filter is based on the Bayesian Filter; hence, the state-space representation
will be the tool by which we will explain the conditional probability of the system
and the inference will be performed on the states in the following time-step. It is
rather convenient to segment the Kalman-Filter algorithm into a prediction and the
measurement update step. The following algorithm is performed at each time-step.
At first, we start with the input to the problem, the initial state ˆz0, and the initial
P0 error covariance matrix; which is formed using the process noise in the system.
Here the ˆz0 can be assumed to be a vector of zeros, since we do not know the initial
state. Whereas the initial covariance error matrix P0 of the size n × n is an even
more arbitrary concept to define since the noise in any system is highlight diﬀicult to
model accurately, and for modelling purposes, it is better to start with a very large
value, highlighting a great uncertainty in the initially assumed state. The evolution
of the system will set to reduce the error in the estimation as output will enable
inference and better accuracy each time-step. Using these inputs, we can perform the
prediction step:
ˆz−
k = Aˆzk−1 (+Bpk−1)
(3.57)
P−
k = APk−1AT + Q
(3.58)
Here an initial prediction ˆz−
k at the current time-step is made using the process
equation defined previously in (3.31), but without accounting for any uncertainties
(noise), using the system or state transmission matrix A and load influence matrix
B defined previously in (3.57). Similarly, using the system matrix A and the process
noise covariance matrix Q, an updated error matrix is computed. The minus sign
notation here represents that the prediction is made blindly, without accounting for
the real-life measurements that can help calibrate the states.
Using the results from the prediction step, we can determine the key component of
this algorithm, which is the Kalman gain Gk; which essentially determines how much
the estimates should be adjusted based on the difference between the predicted and
actual measurements. It essentially balances the reliance on the predicted state versus
the new measurement, optimizing the estimate by minimizing the mean squared error.
The following equation demonstrates how the matrix P in the prediction step can help
compute the Kalman Gain. The larger the error in the predicted states relative to the
==PAGE:35==
26
Theoretical Background
output of the system, the greater the adjustment needed to be made to the estimation
of states, as well be demonstrated in the next steps of the algorithm. The Kalman
gain is defined as:
Gk = P−
k HT  HP−
k HT + R
−1
(3.59)
where R is the measurement error matrix. Now we can update our initial predictions
using the output responses d and the Kalman gain Gk in the measurement update
step:
ˆzk = ˆz−
k + Gk
 dk −Hˆz−
k (−Jpk)

(3.60)
Pk = P−
k −GkHP−
k
(3.61)
Hence, for one time-step k, the above algorithm outputs the estimated state ˆzk, and
the error in the current step Pk. These two components will be become the priori
of the inputs for the next time-step, until the time-step reaches k = N, where N
is the last time-step in the measurement. From these equations, we can also get a
further intuition about the role of the Kalman Gain Gk.
Let us assume there is
no uncertainty in the estimation problem such that P and R are null matrices; in
such a case, the Gk would be a null matrix as well and the estimated state ˆzk would
exactly be equal to the predicted state ˆz−
k , which would also mean that the estimation
is completely independent of the output measurements dk at any estimation step k.
Similarly, if the error in the system is assumed to be the maximum possible error such
that Gk is an identity matrix, this would result in the estimation being completely
dependent on the measurements. Hence, Gk should ideally be in between these two
extreme ranges.
3.3.1
Augmented Kalman Filter for Joint Input-State Estimation
For most real-life structures, we cannot excite the externally structure using artificial
means. In laboratory scaled structure testing, we can generate and apply a known
loading in the structure, which enables us to understand the behavior of the structure
in greater detail and with a higher precision. However, for most real-life structures,
the loading is an unknown phenomena, unless we dedicate instrumentation to carefully
predicting a load on a structure, such as in the case of earthquake ground motions
being recorded by field recorded within the vicinity of the structure. Throughout
the years, there have been many techniques developed that enable us to extract the
properties of the structure without estimating the load directly. These techniques are
termed as output only techniques, such as subspace modal identification, frequency-
domain decomposition, and fast Bayesian FFT [10, 11, 12, 13].
Here, in this subsection, we will form an augmented formulation of the Kalman-
Filters, termed the Joint input-state Augmented Kalman-Filter (AKF) algorithm,
==PAGE:36==
3.3 Kalman Filter for state estimation
27
which at first allows us to estimate the applied loading of a system, and in conjunc-
tion, also allows us to estimate the state of a structure at each time-step k. This is
especially useful if we want to extrapolate the behavior of a structure only knowing
the vibrations at various points of the structure due to ambient vibrations, such as
those from wind and pedestrian loading etc. This estimation technique was developed
by Lourens et al. [44] in a publication from 2012.
To model the uncertainty of the unknown loading, we can include a unknown η
which will enable us to understand the evolution of load over time. This method of
modelling uncertainty in the input is known as the random walk model, in which a
load p at time step k+1 is equal to the load at time step k with an additional random
value η drawn from a Gaussian distribution.
pk+1 = pk + ηk
(3.62)
Here η is drawn from a multivariate Gaussian distribution (assuming more than one
output measurement) with variance S. This equation can be termed as the process
equation for the load. Coupling this with the already defined KF algorithm enables
the predicted states to guide the algorithm into potentially converging to a probable
evolution of the input load, assuming at each time-step k, the load is not behaving
very erratically. Hence, now the process equation will include the following equations,
which can be condensed into a matrix form as follows:
zk+1 = Azk + Bpk + wk
(3.63)
pk+1 = pk + ηk
(3.64)
 zk+1
pk+1

=
 A
B
0
I
  zk
pk

+
 wk
ηk

(3.65)
This can be further condensed into a more compacted form:
za
k+1 = Aaza
k + wa
k
(3.66)
where the superscript a stands for augmented. The process noise now also needs to
be modified to include a covariance term S for the load uncertainty. The augmented
process noise wa
k now has covariance matrix Qa defined as:
Qa =

Q
0
0
S

(3.67)
Lastly, we also have to modify the observation equation to account for the augmen-
==PAGE:37==
28
Theoretical Background
tation in the state:
dk+1 =
 H
J   zk+1
pk+1

+ vk+1
(3.68)
dk+1 = Haza
k+1 + vk+1
(3.69)
These augmented equations can now be substituted in the already existing Kalman
Filter algorithm.
3.4
Bayesian Inference for Structural Parameter
Estimation
The purpose of Bayesian inference is to provide a mathematical framework that can
be used for modeling systems, while also accounting for their uncertainties, and ul-
timately, enabling decision making according to rational principles [27].
To build
a Bayesian model, we need the two components that make up its composition; the
prior model which provides preliminary knowledge on the the parameter and the mea-
surement model, which describes the stochastic mapping from the parameter to the
measurements. These building blocks are combined using the Bayes’ rule, whereby
the parameters are conditionally dependant on the measurement; thus, enabling us
to provide an inference or an estimation of a probable distribution of the problem
parameters using the measurements. This conditional probability distribution of the
parameters on the measurements is termed the posterior distribution, and represents
the state of knowledge about the parameters when all the information in the observed
measurements and the model is utilized. Lastly, the predictive posterior distribution
is the distribution of new, not yet observed measurements when all the information in
the observed measurements and the model is used, typically as in a Machine Learning
Algorithm [27].
Prior Model
As detailed previously, the prior model is derived from our subjective experience-
based beliefs about the probable values of the parameters, before anything has been
observed. The prior distribution is a mathematical representation of this prior knowl-
edge we posses:
p(θ) = information on parameter θ before seeing any observations
(3.70)
If information or prior knowledge of a parameter is not available, then we can utilize
a non-informative prior such a truncated uniform probability distribution. The non-
informative prior distribution can be selected in various different ways [28].
==PAGE:38==
3.4 Bayesian Inference for Structural Parameter Estimation
29
Measurement model
As we previously discussed in our state-space model in 3.2.1, the true parameters (for
example, a state in dynamical formulation) and the measurements are almost always
deviant by an error or noise. This relationship can be mathematically modeled using
the measurement model:
p(y | θ) = distribution of observation y given the parameters θ
(3.71)
Posterior distribution
The posterior distribution is the most critical, and most diﬀicult part of the puzzle. It
is the methodology by which you relate the parameters to the given observations, using
a well-formulated mathemtical model, such as the state-space model or the Kalman-
filters. It is formally defined as the conditional distribution of the parameters given
the observations. It represents the updated knowledge we have about the parameter
θ after the measurement y has been obtained. It can be computed by using Bayes’
rule,
p(θ | y) = p(y | θ) p(θ)
p(y)
∝p(y | θ)p(θ)
(3.72)
where the normalization constant is given as:
p(y) =
Z
p(y | θ) p(θ)dθ
(3.73)
hence, the Bayes’ rule can be re-written as:
p(θ | y) =
p(y | θ) p(θ)
R
p(y | θ) p(θ)dθ
(3.74)
In the case of multiple measurements y1:T , if the observation measurements are
conditionally independent, such as in the case of vibration information in our real-life
structures, the joint likelihood of all measurements is the product of distributions of
the individual measurements, and the posterior distribution can then be defined as:
p (θ | y1:T ) ∝p(θ)
T
Y
k=1
p (yk | θ)
(3.75)
where the normalization term can be computed by integrating the right hand side
over θ. If the random variable is discrete, the integration is replaced by summation.
==PAGE:39==
30
Theoretical Background
Likelihood Function (Kalman Filter)
The likelihood function, represented by p(y | θ) in (3.74), is a fundamental concept in
statistics and represents the probability of the observed data given a set of parameters
in a statistical model. The likelihood function is essential for parameter estimation,
particularly in the context of maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) and Bayesian
Inference. However, it is also often the most diﬀicult component to determine, as
we need to represent the likelihood function using a mathematical model relating the
observations to the parameters. As described previously, the posterior probability is
proportional to the likelihood function:
p (θ | Y e) ∝π(θ) L (θ | Y e)
(3.76)
here, the likelihood function is represented as L (θ | Y e), and the observation data
and prior are now defined as Y e and π(θ) respectively. The equation above infers
that the greater the value of the likelihood function, the more likely it is that uncer-
tain parameters are close to the real value. The likelihood function is constructed
as the joint probability density function of the error residual of model output and
experimental observations when defined in the context of parameter estimation prob-
lems. A multivariate Gaussian distribution is commonly assumed and the likelihood
function can be expressed as:
L (θ | Y e) =
n
Y
i=1
1
p
(2π)d|Σ|
exp

−1
2
 eT
i Σ−1ei

(3.77)
where Σ denotes the covariance matrix of the measured data; n is the total number
of samples of the observed data; and d denotes the dimension of data; The error
residual e = Y (θ) −Y e represents the error between simulation and experimental
data. To ensure numerical stability and computational simplicity, the likelihood is
usually converted into a logarithmic form, such as:
L (θ | Y e) = −nd
2 log(2π) −n
2 log(|Σ|) −1
2
n
X
i=1
eT
i Σ−1ei
(3.78)
where L represents the log-likelihood function. Based on (3.78), the log-likelihood
is negatively correlated with the term known as information entropy, which is the
summation of error residuals weighted by the inverse of the covariance matrix. In
order to setup the Kalman-Filter algorithm for parameter estimation problems, it is
first important to define what the problem parameter might be. Since the elemental
stiffness K is the most important strength determining parameter of a material, we
will setup the estimation problem to estimate the stiffness of individual members. We
will assume the actual system stiffness is some factor of the assumed stiffness used to
==PAGE:40==
3.4 Bayesian Inference for Structural Parameter Estimation
31
setup the numerical model. Hence, mathematically, this can be defined as:
Kactual = αKassumed
(3.79)
Now, we need to setup a likelihood function as in (3.78) which will relate the stiffness
K of our system to the observation measurement. In a Kalman-Filter algorithm, the
residual model error is defined as:
ek = dk −Hˆz−
k−1
(3.80)
This error ek is computed at each iteration k of the state estimation algorithm. The
variance corresponds to the variance in the estimated error in our system. This was
previously explored in 3.60, whereby, the error covariance matrix S is used to define
this:
Sk = HP−
k HT + R
(3.81)
Again, the error covariance matrix Sk is computed at each step k of the algorithm.
Now the error terms and the variance term can be substituted in (3.78). Since the
Kalman-Filter algorithm runs at each step, the number of samples n will always be
equal to one in one iteration; similarly, the dimension d of will also be unity:
L (θ | Ye) = −1
2 log(2π) −1
2 log(|Sk|) −1
2
n
X
i=1
eT
k S−1
k ek
= 1
2 ln |2πSk| + 1
2eT
k S−1
k ek
(3.82)
L in this case becomes the negative-log-likelihood of the system and needs to be
computed at each step of the Kalman-Filter algorithm. For one estimation run, the
total negative-log-likelihood will be the summation of negative-log-likelihood at each
step k:
Ltot (θ | Ye) = Σ Lk (θ | Ye)
(3.83)
In a non-Bayesian optimization problem, the unknown factor α can be determined
from the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) or the maximum likelihood method
[29]. This corresponds to an optimization problem in which the negative-log-likelihood
of the measurements is maximized:
ˆαMLE = arg min
α Ltot(α)
(3.84)
which means that we are seeking the value of α that will minimize the negative log-
likelihood of all the measurements. The difference between Bayesian inference and
the maximum likelihood method is that the starting point of Bayesian inference is to
==PAGE:41==
32
Theoretical Background
formally consider the parameter as a random variable, whereas the MLE determines
the parameter as a deterministic variable with a fixed value. However, in Bayesian
inference, because we are dealing with a distribution and a probabilistic approach,
we want to choose the most probable value of the random variable, the maximum
a posteriori (MAP) estimate, which is given by the maximum of the posterior dis-
tribution. The optimal estimate in the mean squared sense is the posterior mean
of the parameter (MMSE-estimate). There are an infinite number of other ways of
choosing the point estimate from the distribution, some of which will be discussed in
the following chapter discussing the Monte Carlo Simulation and sampling methods.
The MLE can be considered a MAP-estimate with uniform prior p(θ) ∝1 on the
parameter θ.
Likelihood Function (Modal Error Residual)
As defined previously, in the Bayesian inference framework, setting up the likelihood
function dictates how we model the uncertainty in the system and relate the observa-
tion data to the system parameters. To setup a modal based likelihood function, it
is important to first characterize how we can determine the error residuals between
the observation and the simulation. For modal analysis, the time-series measurement
is seldom used directly and instead, we need to manipulate the the observation into
a useful property enabling inference.
Hence, we can convert the observations Ye
into modal frequencies and mode shapes using techniques such as Operational Modal
Analysis (OMA). Hence, the measured data are the operational modal frequencies
ˆωm : m = 1, 2, . . . , m and mode shapes ˆϕm : m = 1, 2, . . . , m. m here represents
the number of samples or in our case, the number of modes used for the estimation
problem. In order for us to utilize the modal observations, we need to assume that
the fractional errors of the natural frequencies and the mode shapes are indepen-
dent and identically distributed random variables, which observe the same Gaussian
distributions with zero mean and variance σ2.
Since the mode shapes ˆϕm cannot be readily used since they’re diﬀicult to quantify,
we can extract the modal assurance criteria (MAC) values from them, to quantity
the deviation of the observations from the measurements. The MAC is defined as:
MAC

ϕm(θ), ˆϕm

=
ˆϕ
T
mϕm(θ)

2

ˆϕ
T
m ˆϕm
 
ϕT
m(θ)ϕm(θ)

(3.85)
where ˆϕm represents the simulated mode from the model. Using this parameter, we
==PAGE:42==
3.5 Monte Carlo Simulation
33
can quantify the error residuals for both the modal properties of the system as:
ϵω,m = bωm −ωm(θ)
bωm
(3.86)
ϵϕ,m =


1 −
ˆϕ
T
mϕm(θ)

2

ˆϕ
T
m ˆϕm
 
ϕT
m(θ)ϕm(θ)




1/2
(3.87)
where ϵω,m and ϵϕ,m are the respective errors associated with frequencies and mode
shapes. While the error residuals are straightforward to determine, the variance in the
error is a diﬀicult parameter to quantity since we need to run the estimation problem
first to identify the errors.
Hence, for simplification, we will assume an expected
value for the error σm in the modal parameters. Hence, the likelihood function can
now be setup for the modal residual errors using (3.78) defined previously. Here, the
number of samples is equal to the number of modes considered and the dimension of
the system is one. Thus, we obtain the following likelihood expression:
L (θ | Ye) = −1
2 log(2π) −m
2 log
 |σ2|

−m
2
m
X
i=1
eT
mσ−2em
= m ln
 2πσ2
+
1
2σ2
m
X
m=1
  bωm −ωm(θ)
bωm
2
+ (1 −MAC

ϕm(θ), ˆϕm

(3.88)
The equation can be compressed and written in terms of error residuals as:
L (θ | Ye) = m ln
 2πσ2
+
1
2σ2
m
X
m=1
 (ϵω,m)2 + (ϵϕ,m)2
(3.89)
3.5
Monte Carlo Simulation
The posterior probability density function (PDF) of a real-life structural dynamic
systems have complex surfaces and hence, cannot be described analytically. A prob-
able solution to these problems can be reached by employing stochastic sampling
techniques. Often, the regions of high probability constitute only a small region of
the parameter space, thus locating these regions with eﬀicient sampling can be very
challenging.
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) [30, 31] methods are some of the most com-
monly employed stochastic sampling techniques.
They are a class of algorithms
for drawing random variables from a given distributions by simulating a Markov
chain that has the desired distribution as its stationary distribution. These methods
==PAGE:43==
34
Theoretical Background
are particularly suited for simulating samples from Bayesian posterior distributions
ep(θ | y1:T ) because they allow drawing from sampling spaces with unnormalized pos-
terior distribution ep(θ | y1:T ) = p(y1:T | θ)p(θ) and knowledge of the normalization
constant of the posterior distribution is not required.
Metropolis–Hastings (MH)
The Metropolis–Hastings (MH) algorithm is the most common type of MCMC method.
MH uses a proposal density q

θ∗| θ(i−1)
when searching for a new sample vector
θ(i) given the previous ones θ(i−1). The algorithm can be formally written as follows
[27]:
• Draw the starting point θ(0) from an arbitrary random Gaussian distribution.
• for i = 1, 2, . . . , N, do
1. Sample a candidate point θ∗from the proposal distribution:
θ∗∼q

θ∗| θ(i−1)
(3.90)
2. Evaluate the acceptance probability
αi = min


1, exp

φT

θ(i−1)
−φT (θ∗)
 q

θ(i−1) | θ∗
q

θ∗| θ(i−1)



(3.91)
3. generate a uniform random variable u ∼U(0, 1) and set
θ(i) =
(
θ′
if u < αi
θ(i−1)
otherwise
(3.92)
For the case where the proposal distribution is a symmetric distribution (as will be our
assumption) such that q

θ(i) | θ(i−1)
= q

θ(i−1) | θ(i)
, the Metropolis algorithm
can be a valid replacement for the Metropolis-Hastings (MH) algorithm. In such a
scenario, the acceptance probability becomes:
αi = min
n
1, exp

φT

θ(i−1)
−φT (θ∗)
o
(3.93)
Choosing the proper proposal distribution is critical, yet it can be very challenging
to determine the appropriate choice [30, 31]. In some cases, the choice of the algo-
rithm may result in the samples becoming highly correlated and in other cases, the
acceptance rate may become very low. A common practice is to assume a Gaussian
==PAGE:44==
3.5 Monte Carlo Simulation
35
distribution for the proposal distribution,
q

θ(i) | θ(i−1)
= N

θ(i) | θ(i−1), Σi−1

(3.94)
where Σi−1 is the covariance matrix. This algorithm is commonely terms as the ran-
dom walk Metropolis algorithm, because the transition distribution in this algorithm
defines a Gaussian random walk in parameter space.
Robust Adaptive Metropolis (RAM)
The choice of suitable covariance matrix for the random walk can be a challenging
task. One way of selecting the covariance matrix can be via the adaptive Markov chain
Monte Carlo (AMCMC) methods where the covariance of the Gaussian proposal in the
Metropolis algorithm is automatically adapted during the MCMC run [32, 33, 34]. In
the adaptive MCMC methods, the covariance of the previously generated samples can
be used to estimate of the actual covariance of the posterior distribution. It is possible
to optimize the covariance of the proposal distribution to allow an acceptance rate ¯α∗
that is optimal. For the random walk Metropolis algorithm, the optimal acceptance
rate in certain ideal conditions is ¯α∗= 0.234 [35].
Although there have been many adaptive MCMCs proposed, the common philos-
ophy behind them is to adapt the covariance Σi with each iteration. [32] proposed
the robust adaptive Metropolis (RAM) algorithm. The algorithm is defined as follows:
1. Draw the starting point θ(0) from an arbitrary random Gaussian distribution,
and initialize S0 to be lower-triangular Cholesky factor of the initial covariance
Σ0
2. Sample a candidate point by θ∗= θi−1 + Si−1ri, where ri ∼N(0, I).
3. Compute the acceptance probability
αi = min
n
1, exp

φT

θ(i−1)
−φT (θ∗)
o
(3.95)
4. Sample a uniform random variable u from the uniform distribution U(0, 1).
5. If u ≤αi, set θ(i) = θ(∗). Else set θ(i) = θ(i−1)
6. Compute a lower-triangular matrix Si with positive diagonal elements satisfying
the equation
SiS⊤
i = Si−1
 
I + ηi (αi −¯α∗) rir⊤
i
∥ri∥2
!
S⊤
i−1,
(3.96)
==PAGE:45==
36
Theoretical Background
where {ηi}i≥1 ⊂(0, 1] is an adaption step size sequence decaying to zero. Vihola
et al. recommends ηi = i−γ where γ ∈(1/2, 1]
7. Set i ←i+1, and reiterate from step 2 until the desired number of samples have
been generated.
3.6
Surrogate modelling using Radial Basis Function
The Kalman-filter is not only a computationally expensive algorithm, but since its
estimation is based on point estimates, it requires more points to sample to reach a
reasonable estimation of the parameters being estimated. Hence, a viable approach to
dealing this is to train a surface formed from Kalman-Filter based likelihood function,
on some arbitrary training points. Hence, a surrogate model can be employed. A
surrogate model, such as the Radial Basis Function (RBF) interpolates a function as
a linear combination of basis functions, for each training point. The basis in the RBF
represents that the basis functions depend only on the distance from the prediction
point to the training point.
The coeﬀicients of the basis functions are computed
during the training stage. The prediction equation for RBF is defined as:
y = p(x)wp +
nt
X
i
ϕ (x, xti) wr
(3.97)
where x ∈Rnx is the prediction input vector, y ∈R is the prediction output, xti ∈
Rnx is the input vector for the ith training point, p(x) ∈Rnp is the vector mapping
the polynomial coeﬀicients to the prediction output, ϕ (x, xti) ∈Rnt is the vector
mapping the radial basis function coeﬀicients to the prediction output, wp ∈Rnp
is the vector of polynomial coeﬀicients, and wr ∈Rnt is the vector of radial basis
function coeﬀicients. The coeﬀicients, wp and wr, are computed by solving the follow
linear system:


ϕ (xt1, xt1)
. . .
ϕ (xt1, xtnt)
p (xt1)T
...
...
...
...
ϕ (xtnt, xt1)
. . .
ϕ (xtnt, xtnt)
p (xtnt)T
p (xt1)
. . .
p (xtnt)
0




wr1
...
wrnt
wp

=


yt1
...
ytnt
0


(3.98)
The basis function ϕ (xi, xj) is a Gaussian based basis function and is represented as:
ϕ (xi, xj) = exp
 
−∥xi −xj∥2
2
d2
0
!
(3.99)
where d2
0 is a scaling factor.
==PAGE:46==
3.6 Surrogate modelling using Radial Basis Function
37
Additionally, before using the samples directly in the RBF, they need to be scaled
using the Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) method. LHS is a statistical method
used in surrogate modeling which allows sampling multidimensional input spaces
eﬀiciently and effectively.
This is achieved by ensuring that the samples observe
a more uniform distribution when compared to simple random sampling.
This is
particularly important in surrogate modeling where the goal is often to create a
model that can accurately represent the behavior of a system across a wide range of
inputs. The uniformity is achieved by divided the range of each variable into equal
intervals, such that each interval is equally represented when sampling. This ensures
that the entire range of each variable is explored.
Additionally.
LHS is also eﬀicient in stratifying the sample space, which is a
term representing reduction in clustering, since multiple points are prevented from
being in close proximity when sampled uniformly in an interval. Lastly, the curse of
dimensionality can make it very challenging to cover the input space adequately when
large input spaces are sampled. LHS helps to mitigate this issue by ensuring that
each dimension is thoroughly explored without requiring an exponentially increasing
number of samples [37, 38, 39].
Mathematically, LHS generates n points in [0, 1)d where d represents the dimen-
sion of the space. Each uni-variate marginal distribution is stratified, placing exactly
one point in [j/n, (j + 1)/n) for j = 0, 1, . . . , n −1. They are still applicable when
n << d [38].
==PAGE:47==
38
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 4
Methodology
This chapter of the thesis will discuss in detail the complete methodology for the
parameter estimation scheme used in this project. The methodology is split step by
step, and each heading will detail a step of this methodology.
Setting up the simulated FE Model
The first step to this estimation scheme is to set up a FE model which describes
and models a real-life structure. Since this work is based completely on simulation
work, the measurement data will also be generated virtually through simulations.
Hence, setting up the FE model forms the foundation of this estimation scheme.
The structure for the FE model is based on a real-life structures scaled down for
experimental study in laboratory. The structure in question is a 5 storey RC frame
structure. It is important to point out that correctly setting up the FE model is a
vital step in FE based estimation schemes. Any errors while setting up the model are
carried forward in the estimation scheme as well. The laboratory scaled structure here
is idealized as a beam-element frame structure, and rather than setting up structure
in 3 dimensions, it has been decided to setup a slice of the 3D structure structure to
approximate it as a 2D structure. Hence, a 2D structure, where dimensions are taken
from structural drawings and material properties based on design specifications, is
modelled.
The FE model is developed in OpenSees, which is an open-source FE modelling
tool available both in MATLAB and in Python as a library. OpenSees is a power-
ful tool to model real-life structure and carry our dynamic analysis, since it allows
comprehensive modelling of non-linear structural behavior and is supported by many
material laws to model a wide range of structures. The modelling procedure and the
structural properties and parameters are detailed in the next chapter of this report.
The RC concrete in this model is setup by segmenting the cross-section into two
portions; the confined and the unconfined portions. The reinforcement is modelled
as a uni-axial Giuffré-Menegotto-Pinto steel material with isotropic strain hardening.
The concrete on the other hand is modelled as a linear tension softening concrete
based on the Kent-Scott-Park concrete material model. It is important to highlight
that the estimation problem is setup for structure in operational conditions; that is,
the general assumption is that despite the damages in the material, the behavior
of the structure will remain linear, and hence, despite modelling the structure as a
non-linear structure, the response will still be linear. The convenience of OpenSees
lies in easily extracting the global structural dynamic properties (mass, damping and
stiffness matrix) with a one-line code using GimmeMCK_dofDict().
==PAGE:49==
40
Methodology
Setting up the damaged/real FE Model
Since the stiffness of the individual members are taken to be the unknown parameters
in this estimation scheme, the damage is specifically applied to them. This is the only
differentiating part in the simulated and the damaged model. The damage to the
structure is modelled as a degradation of the concrete stiffness. This is an effective
way of modelling damage in linear structures. The damage is applied by reducing
the compressive strength fc parameter of the Concrete02 model. The stiffness in the
Concrete02 model is derived from the compressive strength,
Ec = 2 · fc
ϵ0
(4.1)
where Ec is the linear elastic stiffness of the concrete, and ϵ0 is the yielding strain;
hence, any reduction in the concrete strength will also result in the reduction of
the stiffness, and thus, allowing us to model damages in the concrete. For modelling
purposes, the stiffness of the concrete is normalized such that the initial stiffness of the
structure when it was constructed is assumed to be 1; hence, any damage will cause
the stiffness of the structure to fall below 1. Each member of the structure is setup,
such that a stiffness factor k is associated with the member. Hence, any reduction or
damage can be modelled by simply reducing this factor k for the respective element.
Hence, the damage can now be modelled in any member of the structure using a
stiffness factor associated with that element.
Obtain Measurement Output
For the estimation problem, the observation measurement is taken to be acceleration
recordings from the sensors. The sampling frequency of the sensors is setup to be
between 10 Hz to 100 Hz, which is a practice sampling frequency range for most
accelerometers. One sensor is placed per storey. The load applied to the structure is
an ambient operational load; hence, it is modelled as a white noise Gaussian signal
with zero mean and some arbitrary variance. Additionally, a measurement noise of 1%
is applied on the measured response to account for the accuracy and the uncertainty
associated with the sensor.
To obtain the measurement recording virtually (since we do not have real-life mea-
surements), a complete dynamic analysis needs to be run. The dynamic analysis can
be run by using the in-build functionality of OpenSeesPy, whereby after defining the
load pattern at each time-step as an array, the load can be applied using the com-
mands timeSeries() and pattern(). The recorded response can then be recorded
at any defined node and at any DOF of the node, either as a displacement, velocity,
or acceleration response using the recorder() command. Since the KF algorithm is
based on absolute accelerations, we need to specify the command in the recorder()
function to record absolute accelerations. The recorder() function can also be used
to record the behavior, such as the deformation, or rotation for any of the structural
==PAGE:50==
Methodology
41
members, although that is not of interest for this project.
Additionally, the dynamic modal parameters of the simulated structure can be
extracted using eigen('-fullGenLapack', m) commend of the Python OpenSees
library, where m represents the number of modes output by the model. The mode
shape on the other hand, can be extracted by recording the Eigenvector at each
node using nodeEigenvector(n, m, d), where n represents the node number, m
represents the mode for which the coordinate should be extracted, and d represents
the particular DOF we wish to save.
Sensitivity Analysis
Following this, a modal sensitivity analysis can be performed sequentially by applying
damage to each of the members and then observing how the modal frequency, mode
shapes (MAC values) and the TRAC values are affected relative to the undamaged
structure. This enables us to understand which members are the most critical in
affecting the dynamic properties of the structure when damaged.
Operational Modal Analysis (OMA)
The operational modal analysis (OMA) is performed in order to obtain the observa-
tion data for the modal-based Bayesian Inference scheme. The OMA is performed
using the frequency domain decomposition method using the pre-existing PyOMA li-
brary of Python. The input time-series data is the noise polluted absolute horizontal
acceleration measurements obtained in the third step of this methodology. Following
this, no data filtering or smoothing scheme is applied to disregard the influence of
external parameters. The peak-picking method is used to define the natural frequen-
cies from the power spectral density function of the signal measurements. The signal
used here is recorded for a duration of 120 seconds to allow the readings to stabilize;
otherwise, the method can be susceptible to inaccuracies. Following this, the modes
are normalized to unity.
Setting up the prior
This is a critical part of the estimation methodology. The choice of prior can have
consideration implications on the estimated output. There will be two approaches
used. In the first approach, called the scheme A, it will be assumed that we have
no prior knowledge on the prior and hence, a truncated uniform distribution will
be utilized to model the prior concrete stiffness of the members in the estimation
problem.
Using this, the KF based Bayesian inference will be used to localize a
probable range for the parameter’s stiffness. However, since the KF algorithm is a
very expensive algorithm, adopting a wide range for the prior can make the sample
space very broad and hence, many samples need to be trained for the surrogate model
to approximate a reasonable surface, especially when the dimension or the unknown
==PAGE:51==
42
Methodology
parameters become larger.
Another approach, termed the scheme B, is an eﬀicient way of reducing the size
of the sample space. This methodology involves first using a less expensive, modal-
parameter based Bayesian Inference scheme to narrow down the range of the distri-
bution of the prior. The mean and the variance of the posteriors obtained from the
modal-based estimation scheme will be used to develop Gaussian probability distri-
bution functions of the different unknown parameters. This will now form the prior
distribution for the KF-based algorithm, considerably reducing the number of samples
needed to approximate the surfaces.
Lastly, since the likelihood function is scaled on the logarithmic scaled, the priors
distributions will also need to be converted to negative logarithmic form.
Setting up KF-based Likelihood function
The KF based likelihood function will be based on the theory already developed in the
previous chapters. The parameter estimation scheme will involve varying the stiffness
of the to-be-estimated parameters between the range specified for the priors of the
respective elements. In a deterministic setting, the estimation run corresponding to
the minimum negative-log-likelihood will be the predicted value for the parameters.
Surrogate Model Training
The surrogate model functions are used directly from the smt.surrogate_models
function of the smt library. The Latin Hypercube sampler will be used to segment
the surface into uniform regions. The surrogate model will be trained for a number of
samples in order to approximate the surface for the sampling algorithm. The exact
number of samples needed to approximate a surface is not within the scope of this
problem; hence, in an iterative trial and error based scheme, the number of samples
will be determined until it is inferred that the estimation is not changing any further.
The eﬀiciency of training the surface will also be estimated, in terms of time-taken.
The range of training the surface is defined 15% below the lower prior limit and 15%
above the upper prior limit. This is done so as to account for the shortcoming of
the RBF, where it has slightly poorly defined surface near the edges. It is important
to specify here that the surface is trained for the posterior distribution; that is, the
training samples are formed from multiplying the prior with the likelihood.
Posterior Sampling Algorithm
For sampling, either the random walk Metropolis-Hastings (MH) or the robust adap-
tive Metropolis (RAM) MCMC algorithm is adaptive. The ¯α∗factor in RAM is taken
to be 0.234, whereas the γ exponent is taken to be 0.77 to include some of the effect
of the sampling step in the algorithm.
==PAGE:52==
Methodology
43
Estimation using scheme A
In estimation scheme A, the poster distributions of the inferred parameters are taken
assumed a uniform prior distribution. This is the last step of the estimation scheme
A. The mean of the resulting parameters is compared with the actual stiffness of the
parameters.
Setting up modal-based likelihood function
This is the deviating step in the scheme A and B. This involves setting up the modal-
residual based likelihood function which infers the parameters based on the modal
properties of the structure, taking into account the OMA estimated frequencies and
mode shapes as the observation measurement. This likelihood function then sets to
calibrate the parameter distribution such that the modal properties of the simulated
structure are as close to those determined from OMA.
Estimation using scheme B
The Bayesian Inference is performed here using the modal-based likelihood function
and taking into account uniform prior distributions of the parameters over a wider
range. The resulting PDF of this Bayesian Inference run is taken to be the prior PDF
for the KF-based estimation scheme. The resulting methodology remains the same
as that of scheme A.
==PAGE:53==
44
Methodology
Construct FE Model
Sensitivity Analysis
Obtain measurement response
Generate damaged realization
Operational Modal Analysis (OMA)
Modal Parameters 
(measurement data)
Setup Modal based Likelihood function
MCMC Sampling
Probability Distribution Function
 (PDF) for unknown parameters
Choose prior 
Setup KF-based Likelihood
function
MCMC Sampling
Obtain final Probability Distribution
Function (PDF) for unknown
parameters
Train Surrogate Model
Estimation
Scheme B
Figure 4.1. Flowchart of the methodology for the estimation scheme
==PAGE:54==
CHAPTER 5
Structural Modelling
This chapter of the report will discuss in detail not only the formulation of the FE
model, which is the foundation piece of this project, but will also highlight the prop-
erties of the structure.
5.1
Structural Model Setup
As mention briefly in the previous chapter, the structural model used in this report
is a laboratory scale structure developed in a previous research. The details of the
research can be found in the published article ”Shaking Table Tests of a Reinforced
Concrete Frame Subjected to Mainshock and Aftershock Sequences” by Yu-Meng Qiao,
Da-Gang Lu, and Xiao-Hui Yu published in 2022 [40]. The real-life structure, on
which the laboratory prototype was based on, is a real RC frame structure situated
in Wenchuan, China. The aim of the research for which this laboratory prototype was
constructed, was to analyze the damage behavior of the structure was subjected to a
scaled ground motion representative of the 2008 Wenchuan earthquake, using shake
table testing. The laboratory specimen is scaled down to 1/5th of the real structures
size. Additionally, in this research, only one slice of the frame is utilized to idealize
the structure as a 2D frame structure, in order to limit the computational cost and
determine the applicability of the estimation algorithm in an eﬀicient and easy to
understand manner.
The slabs at each story are 24 mm in thickness, and modelled as a structural
weight.
Including the size and distribution of reinforcement, there are 6 types of
columns and 20 types of beams. Additionally, at each floor, additional weight, in the
form of iron plates and iron blocks, has been added to each floor of the structure in
order to account for stationary permanent loads on the structure. Each iron plate
weights about 20 kg and was fixed on the slab by a bolt. On the other hand, each iron
block had a weight of 3.5 kg and was fixed on the slab using mortar [40]. This load
will be modelled as an additional mass and will be considered both in the gravity and
the dynamic analysis of the structure. The cross-sectional details and the material
properties of the reinforced sections is discussed in the next section of this chapter.
5.2
Material Properties
In this section, the material parameters and the cross-sectional members details will
be presented. As mentioned previously, the structure is an RC structure, and hence,
==PAGE:55==
46
Structural Modelling
Figure 5.1. Experimental Setup of the structure used in the study [40]
Table 5.1. Summary of additional load placed at each storey of the structure
Floor No.
Plate
Bolt
Mass
[-]
[-]
[kg]
1
12
14
289
2
12
8
268
3
12
8
268
4
12
8
268
5
0
64
224
composed of the material concrete and steel. These materials can be defined using
various material models in OpenSees; however, since the non-linear behavior of the
elements is not of great significance, any viable material law which can model the
linear and the non-linear behavior of these materials will suﬀice.
The materials will be modelled as uniaxial materials using the ops.uniaxial-
Material() function of the OpenSeesPy library. This allows us to choose the material
law, and then provide the relevant material properties associated with the material
law. The reinforcing steel is modelled as a Giuffré-Menegotto-Pinto steel material
object with isotropic strain hardening, using the material function Steel02. The
material properties required to model the Steel02 material are termed as b; the strain
hardening ratio (ratio between post-yielding stiffness and initial tangent stiffness),
and R0, cR1 and cR2; parameters controlling the transition from elastic to inelastic
behavior of the material. The OpenSees documentation [reference] recommends the
following values for the controlling parameters; 10 ≤R0 ≤20, cR1 as 0.925, cR2 as
0.15, and b as 0.1.
The concrete, on the other hand, will be modelled as a Kent-Scott-Park material
==PAGE:56==
5.3 Member Cross-Sections
47
Table 5.2. Material parameters of the Giuffré-Menegotto-Pinto material model
Yield Strength
Ultimate Strength
Young’s Modulus
Elongation
(fy) [MPa]
(fu) [MPa]
(Es) [GPa]
(-) [%]
280
375
200
26
using the Concrete02 material function. Additionally, the material properties of the
concrete were determined from laboratory compressive strength testing, and hence,
the properties obtained were reflective of an unconfined concrete. In a RC concrete
section, the concrete confined by the stiffness has improved properties, owing to the
confining effect of the stiffness. However, since stirrups are not modelled in the mem-
ber sections, an effective substitute modelling method is to modify the properties of
the confined part of the concrete. For both the confined and the unconfined portions
of the RC member, the Concrete02 material function will be used. However, the
distinction for the two portions will be made by modifying their respective compres-
sive strength fc, the yielding strain ϵ0 and the ultimate strain ϵu. From the material
properties obtained through laboratory testing, the tension softening are not known.
These can however, be approximated based on some developed relationships. Hence,
by following guidelines from the OpenSees documentation, the unknown parameters
can be assigned the following values:
Table 5.3. Material parameters of the Kent-Scott-Park material model
Storey
Compressive
Ultimate
Crushing
Modulus of
Strength
Strain
Strain
Elasticity
(fc)
(ϵc0)
(ϵcu)
(Ec)
[MPa]
[-]
[-]
[GPa]
1
12.77
0.00166
0.00332
15.40
2
17.11
0.00139
0.00278
24.65
3
14.81
0.00140
0.00281
21.10
4
17.01
0.00185
0.00370
18.40
5
17.93
0.00146
0.00293
24.50
5.3
Member Cross-Sections
The cross-sections in OpenSeesPy is modelled using the section() function, whereby
the type chosen is Fiber. This method of modelling section segments the section into
different fibers, and each ”fiber” region can be alloted a pre-defined material property.
This is an effective way of providing different material properties to the confined,
unconfined and the reinforcement regions of an RC section. Hence, the confined part
of the concrete is modelled after the popular Mander model (1988) [41] for concrete.
The cross-sections subjected to each structural members are shown in Figure 5.4.
==PAGE:57==
48
Structural Modelling
Figure 5.2. Cross-section of structural column showing reinforcement bars group 1 (blue)
and type 2 (red)
Table 5.4. Dimensions and reinforcement detailing of structural columns
Section
a
b
Reinforcement
Reinforcement
Group 1
Group 2
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
C1
80
80
1.6
2.77
C2
80
80
2.11
3.5
C3
70
70
2.11
1.2
Figure 5.3. Cross-section of structural beams showing reinforcement bars group 1 (blue),
type 2 (red), type 3 (green) and type 4 (light blue)
In each, the numbering of the members can also be seen, which will referenced when
stating which members are damaged.
5.4
Finite Element Model
To model the structure and conduct the dynamic analysis on it, the python based
tool OpenSeesPy was used. OpenSees was primary developed for running seismic and
dynamic simulations, and in full, stands for Open-System for Earthquake Engineering
==PAGE:58==
5.4 Finite Element Model
49
Table 5.5. Dimensions and reinforcement detailing of structural beams
Section
Beam type
a
b
Reinfor.
Reinfor.
Reinfor.
Reinfor.
Group 1
Group 2
Group 3
Group 4
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
[mm]
B1
1
50
120
2.11
3.5
1.2
2.77
B2
2
50
70
2.11
2.11
1.2
-
B3
3
50
70
2.11
2.11
2.77
3.5
Figure 5.4. Structural Layout representing the section type associated with a member
Simulation. However, apart from seismic simulations, OpenSees has capabilities of
modelling a range of structures, with varying degrees of non-linearities. The advan-
tage of OpenSees is that it is an open-source software and was developed at the UCLA,
Berkeley. As a result, OpenSees has garnered a special attention for researches focus-
ing on structural dynamics, structural health monitoring and design and optimization
studies.
Two structural models will be developed, which are similar in terms of their struc-
==PAGE:59==
50
Structural Modelling
tural configuration and material behavior. The one differential factor in between the
models will be the number of nodes. In model B, the number of nodes have been
increased to allow placement of virtual sensors or recorders at the mid-point of the
columns. Both of the structures are modelled as 2D 5-storey frame structures. Hence,
at each node, there will be 3 degrees-of-freedom.
The structural models are defined such that the elements are defined from node
to node, and a previously defined cross-section can be applied to each element. In
terms of the modelling hierarchy, an illustration of the various components is provided
below:
Model A
In the first FE model, a node is defined at the conjunction between each element.
Hence, for a total of 15 columns and 10 beams, 18 nodes have been specified. The
base-points of the structure is modelled without any free movement; hence, they’re
located in place, not allowing for any translations and rotations.
Rest of the 15
remaining nodes are free to translate and rotate. Hence, there are 45 DOFs in total.
Figure 5.5. Structural Layout including placement of sensors
==PAGE:60==
5.4 Finite Element Model
51
Model B
In the second FE model, a node is defined both at the conjunction between each
element, and also at the mid-point of each column. Hence, for a total of 15 columns
and 10 beams, 33 nodes have been specified. Here also, the base-points of the structure
are fixed supports. In total, there are 90 DOFs in this layout of the structure.
Elements
The RC frame structure is primarily composed of beam and column elements. A
distinction is made between these elements since column and beam elements can
experience different types of load mechanics and non-linearities. In principal, all the
elements are all modelled as forceBeamColumn elements in OpenSees. This element
type allows for non-linear modelling and can encompass distributed plasticity with
a variety of integration methods. Using this type of element additionally allows the
user to define integration points along the length of the element, in order to observe
the cross-sectional member behavior at the defined points.
Additionally, an integration method has also to be specified in order to allow the
software to accurately and eﬀiciently integrate the response of structural elements
over their length and obtain the cross-sectional behaviors mentioned previously. For
this cause, the ’Gauss-Lobatto’ integration is used, as it placed the integration points
at each end of the element where the critical bending moments are usually observed.
Moreover, the points are distributed uniformly along the length of the element. In
order to limit the computational cost of the model, while also keeping accuracy of
results in mind, five integration points will be used for each element.
Another important aspect of FE model definition in OpenSees is the definition
of the geometric transformations, through which the local elemental properties are
transformed to the global system. Moreover, this also enables the consideration of the
geometric non-linearities if needed. However, within the context of a 2D structure,
geometric transformations are only needed to specify joint offsets, as in a 2D model
with solid elements are idealized as beams, it is diﬀicult to specify how elements meet
at a joint. Hence, the -jntOffset input of the ops.geomTransf() function allows
us to model joint offsets.
Gravity Loads
For the definition and application of gravity loads in the model, it is first important to
assign mass to the system. Assigning both the mass and static loads is important for
the results of the modal properties of the structure, as well as the static and dynamic
analysis. The main considerations here will be the mass of the modelled structural
members themselves, the mass of the non-modelled structural members, such as the
slabs and the in-plane loads, and lastly, the mass of additional items (iron plates
and bars). Here, the masses are applied using the lumped mass approach, where the
==PAGE:61==
52
Structural Modelling
mass are lumped at each node. To model this, the ops.mass() command is used,
which assigns a nodal mass at each DOF. Hence, the same mass will be applied to
the horizontal and the vertical translation DOF. However, for the rotation DOF, a
small value, such as 0.0001 will be used.
As for the definition of loads, the loads from the slabs and the additional masses
will be converted to unit length loads, and then applied uniformly to the beam el-
ements as line loads. In general, for the beams, their weight is simply considered
as a line load imposed on itself, whereas for the columns, the while their respective
weight is applied as a point node. Additionally, at each node, the weight of half the
column length above the node, and weight of half the column length below the node
is modelled. For the node at the top column, only the weight of one-half the top
column is considered.
Damping
The damping in the structure is modelled as the Rayleigh damping, explained thor-
oughly in the subsection 3.1.1. This can be applied using the ops.rayleigh() com-
mand of the OpenSees. The values of the α and β factors are chosen based by setting
the damping of the first and fifth modes of the structure to be equivalent (the second
method of choosing Rayleigh parameters defined in (3.11)).
5.5
Damaged Realization of Structure
The damage to the structure is applied by reducing the concrete stiffness of the desired
elements. In general, the following damages are assumed for parameter estimation
scheme. The values of these reduced stiffness was chosen using a random value gen-
erator in Python that generates a value between 0 and 1.0, the maximum assumed
range of damages. In addition, multiple damage layouts are shown which will be used
to highlight different aspects of the Bayesian Inference schemes.
==PAGE:62==
5.5 Damaged Realization of Structure
53
Figure 5.6. Damaged realizations of the structure
Figure 5.7. Damaged realizations of the structure
==PAGE:63==
54
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 6
Structural
Bench-marking
The formulation of a proper FE model is one of the key components in FE based
perimeter estimation schemes and understanding the behavior of our structural model
is crucial when making assumptions about analysis of results and testing out our hy-
pothesized methodologies. Hence, this chapter can be considered as a pre-requisite
chapter to the chapter and sets to present all the analysis before the parameter esti-
mation step of the methodology, that is, this chapter discusses the preliminary results
of any FE model, such as the modal properties and structural response against a dy-
namic loading, the generation of potential measurement data in parameter estimation
schemes, as well as the setup of Kalman-filter and Operational modal analysis algo-
rithms, which are essential components of the parameter estimation scheme. Lastly,
this chapter also presents a detailed sensitivity analysis of the structure. The purpose
of the sensitivity analysis is to understand the results of our parameter estimation
scheme and also, to identify the critical members of the structure which most greatly
influence the structural properties such as the modal properties and the response of
the structure.
6.1
Modal Analysis
The natural frequency are generated automatically using the eigen() command of
the OpenSeesPy library which runs the eigenvalue analysis on the defined structure.
Hence, both the natural frequencies and mode shapes can be extracted from this
function. The results of the natural frequencies are displayed in Table 6.1 and it can
be seen that the frequencies are well separated and typical of a 5-storey structure. As
compared to the natural frequencies determined from the experimental setup in [40],
these computed frequencies are larger, but still ≤10% relative to the experimentally
determined ones. The slight increase is a consequence of the 2D idealization of a
3D structure, which neglects the additional stiffness brought about by structural
members such as the slab, which is modelled as a structural load in a 2D model. In
addition, the modes shapes of the structure are also presented in Figure 6.1. Here,
the mode shape vector was recorded only for the horizontal movements and extracted
from OpenSeesPy. Then, the mode shapes were plotted manually by associating the
mode shape vector elements with the respective co-ordinates of the nodes. Hence, no
vertical deflection is visible in the plotted mode shape, since that is not of relevance in
==PAGE:65==
56
Structural Bench-marking
Table 6.1. Natural Frequencies for the first five modes from numerical simulations
Mode No.
Time period T
Natural Frequency f
Angular frequency ω
[s]
[Hz]
[rad/s]
1
0.315
3.18
19.97
2
0.102
9.85
61.88
3
0.055
18.10
113.71
4
0.037
26.94
169.24
5
0.029
34.45
216.45
this project. In addition, the un-deflected shape of the structure is also plotted with
blue dotted lines. It can be seen that the point of inflection (directional change of
curvature) increase with each subsequent modes, since only the transnational modes
are represented in a 2D structure.
Figure 6.1. Plot of the first five mode shapes of the undamaged structure
==PAGE:66==
6.2 Dynamic Analysis
57
6.2
Dynamic Analysis
This section of the chapter will address the results associated with the dynamic anal-
ysis of the structure, when subjected to a ground motion.
Here, at first, a simple dynamic analysis is performed on the structure. The struc-
ture is at first subjected to a ground motion, representing the El-centro earthquake
(1940) ground motion recorded at the USGS station 931, with a time-step of 0.005
seconds. There are a total of 7803 time-steps recorded, hence the duration of the
signal is roughly 39 seconds. Since this structure is already a scaled model of a real-
life structure with a total height of 3.68 m, the ground motion is scaled down by a
factor of 0.0001, so that the structure doesn’t fail under extreme accelerations. In
addition, the structural response of the system for the horizontal response at the top
column and bottom column in the first row of columns is also shown in Figure 6.3.
Also the structure is modelled using non-linear properties, it has been ensured that
the response of the structure remains fairly linear, since in the following sections, the
loading will be adjusted so as to cause a linear structure response with no structural
damage due to the applied time-series dynamic loading.
Figure 6.2. Time-series ground motion - El Centro Earthquake ground motion
Figure 6.3. Horizontal displacement response of the structure at node 6, DOF 15
==PAGE:67==
58
Structural Bench-marking
6.3
Kalman Filter Load and Response Estimation
Results
This section of the results chapter will address the load and state estimation for
using augmented KF formulation for joint input-state estimation. As detailed in the
chapter 3 chapter, the augmented Kalman filter used here can both, estimate the input
state of the structure, and also estimate the response of the structure when output
measurements are provided.
In this case, the output recordings are the absolute
acceleration time response extracted from the structure in Figure 6.3, which were
recorded using virtual sensors placed at each floor of the structure. It is important
to mention here that the sensor measurements are polluted with 1% noise, hence,
replicating the real-life measurement errors associated with a sensor.
Initially, the load-estimation by the Kalman filter algorithm is show-cased. One
of the major advantages of the Kalman filter algorithm is that it can be tuned to
formulate an output only algorithm, which does not need the input loading, in order
to compute the structural response at various DOFs of the system. This is often
the main drawback of most algorithms in parameter estimation schemes.
Hence,
the load estimation for the El-centro earthquake ground-motion due to the Kalman
filter algorithm is shown below in Figure 6.4.
From the figure, it is visible that
Figure 6.4. Input Load Estimation of El-Centro Earthquake
the Kalman-filter algorithm predicts the input loading to a reasonable accuracy just
from visual observation. The load prediction from the Kalman-filter depicts a more
noisy signal, which can be attributed to the measurement noise associated with the
measurement. In addition, the formulation also includes the noise associated with
the process, to account for any modelling and numerical inaccuracies; hence, this can
further undermine the estimations.
Following the load estimation, the response estimation due to the Kalman-filter
algorithm is shown to depict that the algorithm functions as intended when estimating
the state (displacements in this case) of the structure, which is its primary purpose.
Although the state-estimation is not directly used in the parameter estimation scheme,
==PAGE:68==
6.3 Kalman Filter Load and Response Estimation Results
59
the estimation of the state at each time-step of the AKF algorithm is still influential
to compute the residual error ek at each time-step, which computes the difference in
our estimated state and the observation measurements. Since the residual error ek is
a key component of the likelihood function for the AKF algorithm, the estimation of
the states becomes of relevance for the estimation of unknown structural parameters.
As a showcase of the actual and estimates structural response, results are shown
for horizontal displacements at the bottom and top columns for the right most set
of columns.
It can be seen that there are slight variations between the real and
the predicted responses. This may be due to a combination of factors; one being
that the concrete is a highly non-linear material; and often at time, even before the
application of lateral loading, the structure may exhibit non-linearities due to the
dead loads. Another reason is that due to the modelling of noise in the system, the
estimated responses can deviate from the true response, especially since the process
noise is added at each time-step.
Hence, some deviations between the predicted
responses and the true responses are expected. The TRAC values for the predicted
responses, relative to the true responses, can be seen in Table 6.2.
Figure 6.5. Estimation of horizontal displacement response due to Earthquake Loading
for member 5 (top) and member 1 (bottom)
==PAGE:69==
60
Structural Bench-marking
Table 6.2. TRAC values for the estimated response at each DOF of the system
Node
TRAC value
Node
TRAC value
1
0.921
9
0.929
2
0.924
10
0.916
3
0.927
11
0.922
4
0.929
12
0.924
5
0.929
13
0.927
6
0.921
14
0.929
7
0.924
15
0.912
8
0.927
6.3.1
Generating measurement response for parameter
estimation
Lastly, before presenting the results for the operational modal analysis (OMA), the
results of another case of dynamic analysis are shown for a random ambient load with
a Gaussian distribution. The purpose of presenting these results is to highlight that
for both, for estimation of modal properties and for the Kalman-filter algorithm, the
observation measurements will be taken for a random loading case. Hence, in this
subsection, a random loading is simulated onto the real/damaged structural model
and the absolute accelerations are recorded at the desired nodes.
Since the Kalman-filter input estimation scheme is formulated based on a Gaussian
assumption, it can be seen that the load-estimation for a random loading is extremely
precise, which can help reduce errors associated with the estimation of structure
parameters. The absolute horizontal acceleration response recorded by the sensor at
Figure 6.6. Input Load Estimation of Random Loading
node 6 (top of column 5 in storey 5) for ambient excitation, which is later used as the
observation measurement for AKF and OMA, is presented below in Figure 6.7. This
is generated for damage case 1, and can be changed depending on the damage case
==PAGE:70==
6.4 Operational Modal Analysis
61
being investigated.
Figure 6.7. Observation measurement response from sensor capturing absolute horizontal
acceleration at node 6
6.4
Operational Modal Analysis
In this section of the report, the results for the OMA are presented for estimation
of the natural frequencies and mode shapes for the first five modes of the damaged
structure (damaged case 1). The choice for the number of modes has no concrete
basis, but rather, is based on common practice found in most literature. The OMA
method, like the AKF method for joint input-state estimation, is an output only
method that does not depend on the input loading being known. Here, the frequency
domain decomposition (FDD) variation of the OMA is used and the observation
measurements for the modal parameter estimation are the acceleration measurements
for the true/damaged structure under ambient random loading, recorded from five
sensors at the structure, the placement of which is depicted in Figure 5.5.
The
OMA is perfored using the PyOMA python library. At first, the power spectral density
(PSD) plots of the Fourier transformation of the observation measurements is shown
in Figure 6.8. This is the first step of the OMA method, and from this, the peaks
are identified, which represent the natural frequencies for the first five modes.
A
comparison of the OMA identified frequencies and the true frequencies is shown below
in Table 6.3.
Table 6.3. Comparison of the first five modal frequencies identified from OMA
Mode No.
True Frequencies f
Estimated Frequencies fpred
Error
[Hz]
[Hz]
[-]
1
3.144
3.118
0.026
2
9.735
9.726
0.009
3
17.877
17.862
0.015
4
26.580
26.694
0.114
5
33.707
33.816
0.109
==PAGE:71==
62
Structural Bench-marking
Figure 6.8. Plot of singular value decomposition of measurement response
From the tabulation of results, it can be observed that the error varies correspond-
ing to the mode number. A visual representation of this can also be seen in Figure 6.9.
Here, the errors are represented as percentage errors relative to the mode number.
Since the identified frequencies and mode shapes form the observation measurement
for the initial parameter estimation scheme using the modal-based likelihood function,
it is very important to highlight how damages in a structure affect the frequencies
and mode shapes. Hence, a simulation was performed using the undamaged structure
and the frequencies from the simulation were compared with the simulated frequen-
cies of the damaged model. The resulting errors between the simulated frequencies
are for the damaged and undamaged cases is also shown in Figure 6.9. The purpose
of showing this is to highlight the magnitude of frequency variation due to structural
damage, relative to the error in estimation of frequency from output data. This will
naturally result in an estimation error, since it can be seen that for the first modal fre-
quency, the error in estimation of the natural frequency is almost comparable to how
damages in the structure affect the frequency. However, for the subsequent modes,
it can be observed that structural damaged cause larger variations in the frequen-
cies, relative to the error due to the OMA estimations. Moreover, the OMA is also
used to estimate the mode shape of the structure under damage case 1. The OMA
estimated mode shapes are plotted as dotted blue lines on top of the actual mode
shapes in red line. It can be observed that under a naked eye, it is very diﬀicult to
spot any differences between the estimated and the true modes. Additionally, the
MAC values are computed using the estimated and true modes, and a comparison
plot similar to the one for frequencies is presented, whereby the MAC error is simply
==PAGE:72==
6.5 Sensitivity Analysis
63
Figure 6.9. Error in estimation of natural frequencies using OMA
computed as (1 - MAC). In the figure Figure 6.11, it can be observed that the errors
are minimal for all the modes except the 5th mode, whereby there is a deviation of
almost 0.01; which is still relatively a small difference, but compared to the variation
in MAC causes by structural damage, the differences are rather large. Hence, for the
parameter estimation scheme, only the first four modes will be used in estimation of
the structural parameters.
6.5
Sensitivity Analysis
The next step of the structural investigation scheme is to conduct a sensitivity analy-
sis on the structure. As detailed in the methodology section, the sensitivity analysis
is performed by reducing the stiffness of the members of the structure and then an-
alyzing the impact of the reduction in stiffness on the structural parameters. For
the modal-based likelihood function, the observation measurements are the modal
frequencies and mode shapes identified from OMA. Whereas, for the AKF based
likelihood function, the observation measurements are the actual raw time-series ac-
celeration responses of the structure recorded by the various sensors.
Hence, the
sensitivity analysis will take into account both, the affect of structural damage on the
output time-series acceleration response, and the modal-properties of the structure.
At first, the results for the sensitivity analysis are presented for how structural
damage, represented by 50% reduction in member’s concrete stiffness, affects the
output acceleration response at each node of the structure. Here, the time-response
assurance criteria (TRAC) is used as the criterion analyzing the variation in observa-
tion measurements. TRAC represents how close two time-series response or in more
general terms, how close two arrays are by comparing each value of the two arrays
with each other. If the arrays are identical, the resulting TRAC value is 1, and if
they are completely different, the resulting TRAC value is 1. Hence, the TRAC er-
==PAGE:73==
64
Structural Bench-marking
Figure 6.10.
Comparison of the first five mode shapes between the real and the OMA
estimated modes
Figure 6.11. Error in estimation of MAC using OMA
ror is calculated as 1 - TRAC. The more different an array is, the higher the value
of the TRAC error. Since the variation is analyzed for each node, that is, for 15
sensor measurements, the TRAC result for each of the individual sensor is not pre-
sented. Instead, the methodology here applied a damage to a structural member,
==PAGE:74==
6.5 Sensitivity Analysis
65
and then computes the TRAC values for the 15 sensor measurements relative to the
acceleration measurement of a completely undamaged structure. Then, the TRAC
values from the resulting 15 sensors are averaged to provide a representative affect of
member damage on the structural response. This helps us analyze which members
are most significantly impacting the measurement response of the structure when it
is subjected to damages, and hence, helps us prioritize the estimation of the most
influential structural members. The results for the TRAC-based sensitivity analysis
are presented in Figure 6.12.
Figure 6.12. TRAC-based sensitivity analysis for each member
In Figure 6.12, the horizontal axis represents the numbering of each member and
the vertical axis represents the TRAC error. From Figure 6.12, it can be inferred
that the members numbered 1 to 10 are most influential in affecting the output
measurement response of the structure. These structural members represent the first
and second ground of columns. This is an expected outcome, since the dimensions
of the structural column in column groups A and B have a cross-section of 80 x 80
mm, which is larger than the cross-section of the columns in the group C of columns
towards the right side of the structure. Hence, reducing the concrete’s stiffness in the
larger cross-section results in a more significant variation in the response. Moreover,
the beams connecting the group A and group B of columns have a span of 1440 mm,
which is larger than the span between group B and group C columns. Moreover, this
larger span of the beam also has more additional mass subjected to it. As a result, the
group A and B of columns are carrying a much larger magnitude of gravity loads, and
hence, they are more influential in disturbing the behavior of the structure. Secondly,
the reason why members 2, 4, 7 and 9 have more influence compared to the columns
in the same column group (having similar cross-section and reinforcement layout), is
due to the fact that these members posses a larger material stiffness compared to
the rest of the members in the same group. Lastly, it can be seen that the beam do
not impact the behavior of the structure as greatly as the columns. This observation
may be explained by the fact that in the beams, the main component of the load is
the flexural load which causes the structure to bend, and the reinforcement in this
case, act as the main load-bearing component of the cross-section. Hence, reducing
the stiffness of concrete doesn’t not impact the stiffness of the reinforcing bars; and
==PAGE:75==
66
Structural Bench-marking
thus, the impact on vibrational response of the structure is not as significant.
Similar to the TRAC-based member sensitivity analysis, a sensitivity analysis
is performed to determine how the reduction in an individual member’s stiffness
affects the dynamic properties, that is, the modal frequency and mode shape, of the
structure in question. Here, the affect of the stiffness reduction is visualized for each
mode, both for the frequency and the mode shapes. The results are presented in the
3D bar graph in Figure 6.13 for frequencies and in Figure 6.14 for the mode shapes.
Here, the z-axis represents the relative error, which is the change in frequency or
MAC values of the damaged structure relative to the undamaged structure. Hence,
the higher the effect the damaged member has on the MAC value or the frequency,
the higher the bar. From Figure 6.13, it can be observed that the columns (members
Figure 6.13.
Frequency-Based sensitivity analysis for 10 beams (left) and 15 columns
(right)
numbered 1 to 15) more strongly impact the modal frequencies relative to the beams
(members numbered 16 to 25). Additionally, it can be observed that the columns
in column group A and B have the greatest impact on the modal frequencies. This
observation can be explained in a similar light to the explanation presented for the
TRAC-based sensitivity analysis, whereby the columns bearing more structure load
impact the structure in a more severe manner. The modal frequencies of the structure
are calculated using the eigenvalue analysis, for which the structural stiffness matrix
K is an important influencing parameter.
Hence, it is natural that the members
most significantly impacting the stiffness will be the most influential in changing the
dynamic behavior of a structure.
Additionally, it can also be inferred that the damage in structural columns tend
to effect the higher modal frequencies more often than the lower order natural fre-
quencies. This observed can especially be observed for members 3, 4, 8 and 9. This is
usually indicative of local damages, which tend to affect the behavior of the structure
locally, rather than globally. This observation is logical taking into context that the
outlined members are in the higher stories of the structure, and hence, their influence
==PAGE:76==
6.5 Sensitivity Analysis
67
is mostly limited to the members itself. Whereas, it can be observed for members 1,
6 and 11 which represent the bottom columns, tend to influence all the five natural
frequencies of the structure in some capacity. This indicates that damages in bottom
columns, which bears the entire weight of the structural members and dead-loads on
top of it, affect the global dynamic behavior of the structure. This observation is
prevalent in the beams as well, where the first natural frequency is affected greatly
for the bottom beam, since it is subjected to a higher dead-load. However, since
the beams do not undertake the load from upper stories and only carry the load
subjected onto them, the effect on the global structural behavior is not as evident as
that for columns. Lastly, it can be observed that the shorter beams in beam group B,
numbered 21 to 25, impact the natural frequencies much less than the longer beams
in beam group A. Similar to the impact of member level damage on the natural fre-
Figure 6.14. MAC-Based sensitivity analysis for 10 beams (left) and 15 columns (right)
quencies of the structure, the results for the impacted MAC values are presented in
Figure 6.14. As a first observation, it can be seen that the impact of member dam-
age on the beams is a not nearly comparable to the impact due to column damages.
The reason for these results can be explained by identifying that the sensors in place
measure the lateral displacements of the structure. Hence, the vertical movement
of the structure is not considered in the mode-shape vector. As a result, structural
beams, which are primarily flexural members and deflect vertically at the mid-span
of the structure, do not impact the lateral movement of the structure, and hence,
their contribution to the mode shape remains ambiguous in this analysis. Where
the structural columns are represented clearly due to the horizontal movement cap-
tured by the sensors in place, and hence, their contribution is more significant in this
case. Moreover, for the columns, it can be observed that the larger columns (80 x
80 mm), numbered 1 to 10, tend to impact the mode shape more severely than the
smaller counterparts (70 x 70 mm) numbered 11 to 15. Moreover, like the modal
frequencies, it can be observed that the damage in columns impacts the higher modes
significantly more than the first few modes. This again represents a local structural
damage, whereby the deflection at the location of the damaged member is impact
==PAGE:77==
68
Structural Bench-marking
more, than the deflection at the rest of the structure.
Lastly, the relative errors for all the modes are summed, and the cumulative
affect of member-level damage on all modes is presented in Figure 6.15 for the modal
frequencies and mode shapes. Immediately, it is evident that the first ten members are
most influential on the dynamic properties of the structure, and hence, their stiffness
estimation becomes of prime importance in our parameter estimation scheme.
Figure 6.15. Modal residual error based sensitivity analysis for each member
==PAGE:78==
CHAPTER 7
Results
This chapter is concerned with the presentation of the results for the structural param-
eter estimation. Initially, the results for the Kalman-Filter estimation are presented
for the determination of a single unknown structural parameter using a deterministic
approach, whereby the stiffness of the unknown parameter is varied over a specified
range, and the optimal structural parameter is identified using a minimum likelihood
estimation.
Following this, estimation of unknown structural parameters is made
using Bayesian inference methodology. Lastly, the initial prior estimation scheme is
presented, whereby the Bayesian inference methodology is used to estimate the un-
known structural parameters over a wide prior range using the modal-based likelihood
function.
7.1
Deterministic Parameter Estimation using Maximum
Likelihood Estimation
This section of the chapter will provide a comprehensive study to understand the
behavior of the AKF based likelihood function.
The understanding of the AKF
based likelihood function will be done by analyzing the behavior of the negative-
log-likelihood (NLL) (commonly denoted by L) estimation curve for the different
structural members, and how different levels of damage may impact the estimation
of the parameters.
At first, a simple case of structural parameter estimation is presented, whereby
the concrete stiffness of the column 5 is reduced, and the reduced element’s stiffness is
considered as an unknown parameter k in the parameter estimation scheme. Hence,
the stiffness of the unknown parameter k is varied over a range from 0 to 1 with
an increment of 0.05, whereby 0 represents complete loss of concrete stiffness, and 1
signifies that the stiffness of the unknown parameter is exactly the same as the one
assumed to generate the FEM model. The horizontal absolute acceleration measure-
ment response obtained in subsection 6.3.1 are used as the observation measurements,
and these are obtained at the nodes 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the structure; hence, one sensor
per storey.
The results of the estimation are presented in Figure 7.1 for two cases, one where
the structure is extremely damaged (k = 20%) and one where the structure is not
as greatly damaged (k = 80%). Since the increment of stiffness variation is 0.05, the
accuracy of the estimation will also be precise down to the 0.05 value. For both of
these damage cases, the estimated stiffness is exactly equal to the simulated damage
==PAGE:79==
70
Results
in the structure; hence, validating the precision of the Kalman-Filter based likelihood
function. However, an interesting feature immediately evident by analyzing the two
figures is that when there is a greater damage in the member, the estimation curve has
a larger curvature and variation around the true value of the parameter. However,
for the right figure in Figure 7.1, where the stiffness is reduced by 20%, it can be
observed that while there is a large variation in the NLL for values further away
from the true stiffness, the relative variation of the NLL around the true stiffness
is insignificant.
This ultimately means that had a stiffness increment of 0.05 not
been used, the estimated stiffness may as well have been misidentified. As a result, a
basic conclusion can be immediately derived; the smaller the structure damage, the
more the points needed to correctly estimate the structural parameter. This directly
translates into more computational time for parameter estimation of lightly damaged
structures. This concept is further explored in Figure 7.2, whereby a representative
Figure 7.1.
Parameter estimation curve for objective function for when member 5 is
damaged to 80% (left) and 20% (right)
structural column (member no. 5) and representative structural beam (member no.
20) are subject to various levels of structural damages, ranging from 10% to 100%.
It is important to point out that, for example, the k = 10% in the legend does
not represent 10% damage, but represents that the stiffness of the member is 10%
compared to the stiffness used to model the member.
Hence, k = 10% actually
represents a 90% reduction in stiffness relative to an undamaged member.
From Figure 7.2, it is evident that the higher the damage of the structural member,
the more the variation of the NLL around the true parameter. It can be observed
that for k ≥70%, the estimation curve almost reaches a flat plateau; making the
estimation of structural parameter with k ≥70% a challenging task. Though it must
be highlighted that this problem can be resolved by providing more estimation points,
since if enough points are sampled, the estimation in each of the damage case is 100%
precise. This really highlights the power of a point-based estimation method like the
KF, where the likelihood function is computed at each of the 3000 time-steps of the
observation measurement, and then summed for one estimation run.
==PAGE:80==
7.1 Deterministic Parameter Estimation using Maximum Likelihood Estimation
71
Figure 7.2.
Parameter estimation curve for objective function for when representative
beam (left) and column (right) is damaged to various levels
Apart from this, it is also important to understand the behavior of the NLL
estimation curve by the type of member. Figure 7.3 presents this, whereby one by
one in an iterative way, the stiffness of one of the structural members is reduce down
to k = 25%. Then the likelihood function is plotted for the said case. As an example,
Figure 7.3-(a) depicts the estimation curves for the column group A, whereby the
stiffness of left columns along the height of the structure is reduced one by one, and
the estimation curve is plotted for the 5 columns in group A on the same figure
Figure 7.3-(a). It can be immediately seen that the estimation curve at the bottom
floor column is almost flat compared to the top floor column. This figure is however
a little deceptive, in the sense that the actual estimation curve of the bottom story
floor is not in actual a flat plateau; however, in comparison to the NLL curve of the
top floor column, it is indeed not showing as much variation. What this entails is
that, the estimation of the stiffness of the upper floor members might be easier in
comparison to the bottom storey members, since there is a greater variation in the
value of stiffness when it is incrementally varied over a specified range and a specified
step. Other than that, Figure 7.3-(b), (c), (d) and (e) represent the variation of the
NLL estimation curves for the column groups B and C, and beam groups A and B
respectively. For each of the type of members, the same observation can be witnessed
along the height of the structure, when the stiffness of the members is reduced down
to k = 25%.
Lastly, Figure 7.4 represents the same type of figure as Figure 7.3, however, in
this instance, the damage in the structural members is limited to 20%; hence k =
80%. In general, the main remark is the same as that for Figure 7.3, whereby, the
higher the member in the storey, the more the variation in the NLL. The main reason
behind this phenomenon is that the members higher up in the height of the structure
are subjected to larger lateral displacements when a ground motion is applied to
them. Hence, the sensors recording the data closest to the member will depict the
greatest absolute change in results relative to an undamaged member. As a result,
==PAGE:81==
72
Results
the damages in the higher stories of the structure will result in a much sharper change
in NLL when the stiffness of the member is varied. Moreover, it can be observed that
even for the members in the upper floors, the problem of the flat plateau around the
true parameter is still prevalent. Hence, it cannot immediately be stated that fewer
points will be needed to estimate the stiffness of the members in the upper floors.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 7.3. Variation of parameter estimation curve by floor for each type of member when
stiffness is reduced by 75%
==PAGE:82==
7.1 Deterministic Parameter Estimation using Maximum Likelihood Estimation
73
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 7.4. Variation of parameter estimation curve by floor for each type of member when
stiffness is reduced by 25%
==PAGE:83==
74
Results
7.2
Parameter estimation using AKF-based Bayesian
Inference
This section, and the sections succeeding this are concerned with the estimation
of unknown stiffness parameters of the structure using the Bayesian inference (BI)
methodology. Bayesian inference, like the maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) or
the minimum negative log-likelihood estimation in our case, is statistical modeling
and inference technique that sets to estimate the unknowns in a system; however,
unlike the MLE which assumes the unknown parameter as a fixed value, the BI is
a probabilistic method, which incorporates the prior belief of variables, and sets to
update these priors based on some observed measurement data.
In addition, the
unknown parameters are treated as random variables with a probability distribution,
rather than fixed deterministic parameters. This makes the Bayesian inference not
only extremely flexible as a method, but also allows us to quantify the uncertainties
related with parameter estimation.
7.2.1
Two Parameter Case
Prior
Initially, the Bayesian Inference method is setup to estimate two unknown structural
parameters (columns 1 and 2). To develop the method, it is important to first setup
the method for lower dimensional data in order to understand the various different
components that make up the BI framework. Here, it is assumed that we do not have
any prior knowledge about the distribution of the unknown parameters, apart from
the material properties provided in design documentation and structural drawings.
Setting up the prior is an essential component of the BI framework; however, when
no prior information is known, the prior can be modelled with a uniform distribution
with a certain range. Here, it has been assumed that the range of the prior is between k
= 0.7 and k = 1.0; this means that we expect that the stiffness of the structure will be
lower than the one assumed for modelling purposes since we assume some damages in
the structure. Hence, the prior is setup as a uniform distribution truncated between
k = 0.7 and 1.0. The PDF of the prior can be seen as a horizontal black line in
Figure 7.6.
Surrogate Model
After setting a prior distribution, the Kalman Filter (KF)-based likelihood function
is used in conjunction with the priors to form a posterior distribution surface using
the surrogate model. The surrogate model acts as an intermediary to reduce compu-
tational time; it combines the prior and the likelihood function, using a set of ”data
==PAGE:84==
7.2 Parameter estimation using AKF-based Bayesian Inference
75
points” to approximate the posterior distribution surface. Once the surface is devel-
oped, the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm samples points from this
surface and evaluates them against some acceptance criteria. The number of accepted
points forms part of the probability distribution curve of the unknown parameters.
The number of data points or samples used to train the surrogate model is selected
by the user and can significantly impact the results. Ideally, enough samples must be
taken to approximate the surface reasonably well; otherwise, errors may arise from
a poorly defined surface. This concept is similar to the parameter estimation curves
shown in Figure 7.1, where insuﬀicient data points can lead to an ill-defined region
around the true value, causing process errors. The importance of the surrogate model
lies in the fact that forming a posterior distribution of the unknown parameters often
requires thousands of data points. This number can increase if the acceptance rate
for a selected method is poor. As an example, in this instance, the Robust Adaptive
Metropolis (MH) method was used to sample data-points with a step size of 0.001.
The step-size indicates how much the parameters should be varied between successive
iterations. For example, if at a particular step, the value of k1 is 0.9000, in the next
step, the value is changed to 0.9001 and then the resulting likelihood is estimated and
compared against an acceptance criteria. In this instance, the acceptance ratio was
yielded to be 0.545, which means if the estimation was performed 1000 times, only 545
samples will be accepted and will become part of the posterior distribution. Without
a surrogate model, to form this distribution, we would have to run the AKF algorithm
1000 times. However, with the surrogate model, we can train a surface using only 250
samples (assuming 250 samples are enough to approximate a two dimensional space),
which means the AKF is ran 250 times with different starting values of unknown
structural parameters θ and then, the resulting posterior points are connected using
the radial basis function (RBF) to form a surface. An example of how a surface looks
is presented in Figure 7.5. In higher dimensions, it becomes diﬀicult to visualize the
surface; hence, the visual example of the surrogate model surface is only presented
for the two-parameter estimation case.
Parameter estimation
The posterior probability distribution function (PDF) of the unknown parameters is
presented in Figure 7.6. It can be seen here than the estimation of the structural
parameters is extremely precise. The bars are concentrated around a single value;
which indicates that the algorithm found a reasonable acceptance value, and when it
tried to sample points away from this accepted value, the algorithm yielded rejections.
Hence, the majority of the points are sampled around this small space; indicating
that the KF-based likelihood function was highly variable even for a small step-size
of 0.001, that when a small step was taken away from the accepted values, the change
in likelihood value was significant enough from the previous iteration, to result in
a rejection of the current iterations parameters. This is a core-characteristic of the
AKF algorithm; because the likelihood function is estimated at each of the step of the
==PAGE:85==
76
Results
Figure 7.5. Visualisation of the surrogate model surface trained for 250 sample points in
three-dimensional space
input observation measurements and then summed, there can be extreme variation
in the likelihood values for when the structural parameters are even slightly varied.
This, however, can be a drawback of the algorithm itself, since it does yield a very
small confidence interval, and hence, assumes there is hardly any uncertainty in the
estimation of the unknown parameter. The algorithm can certainly be made more
uncertain by making the during of observation measurements to be shorter. For our
case, the observation measurements were captured by the sensors for 30 seconds, with
a sampling step of 0.01, yielding in 3000 time-steps for the AKF algorithm to estimate
the state of the system.
Figure 7.6. Estimation of 2 unknown parameter using Bayesian Inference
==PAGE:86==
7.2 Parameter estimation using AKF-based Bayesian Inference
77
Sampling method
The choice of sampling method is extremely crucial in our estimation methodology.
However, it is of even greater importance to ”tune” the sampling algorithm. One
of the greater benefits of the surrogate model is that it allows us to tune the sam-
pling algorithm so that there are enough accepted samples for form a posterior PDF.
Without a surrogate model, we would need to run the algorithm each time to tune
the parameters. Such as, for the MH algorithm, tuning the step-size and number of
iterations to run is of the prime importance.
Because the AKG likelihood estimation is based on estimation at each time-step,
the unknown parameters θ have to be varied very subtly. Otherwise, the acceptance
ratio would be extremely low. As an example, if the step size is chosen to be 0.1,
the acceptance ratio for the parameter estimation is 0.381%. This is because varying
the parameters by 0.1 in subsequent iterations brings about too great of a variation
in the NLL and hence, the acceptance criterion is not met. However, if we reduce
the step size to a very fine value such as 0.0001, the acceptance ratio increases to
82.35%. However, the main drawback of this is that the number of iterations need to
be increased to such a large value, to allow the Markov chain to traverse the posterior
surface enough to reach the true value.
An example is provided in Figure 7.7, whereby the results of the estimation seems
to be far off from the true value. This is because the MH algorithm choose a random
starting point for the k1 and k2 in between the range specified for the prior. Using
these initial values, the algorithm takes a random walk to move to values of k1 and k2
where the acceptance is reaching, and tries to move away from values where a rejection
was observed. However, because the initial k1 and k2 were chosen at random, and were
far enough from the true value, and because the step-size with which the algorithm
moves is very small, the number of iterations is not enough to reach the true values.
This is taking into account that the number of iterations chosen is 50,000. The figure
in Figure 7.8 represents the Markov chain of the MCMC, which shows how the values
of the unknown structural parameters change to reach convergence. However, as can
be seen in Figure 7.8, even 50,000 iterations were not enough for such a small step-size.
The algorithm is now run again for the same surrogate model trained by 250
samples and a step-size of 0.0001. However, in this run, the number of iterations is
increased by ten-times from the previous run to 500,000 iterations. It can be seen in
Figure 7.10 that now the the Markov chain has been allowed to move from its initial
starting value to reach a closer approximation to the true values. However, because
the step-size is too small, even after 500K iterations, it has failed to reach the true
value for the parameter k1. Had a surrogate model not been used, the KF algorithm
would be running 500K times and still fail to converge to a true value. This translates
to a computational time of 468,500 seconds, as opposed to a computational time of
230 seconds with the surrogate model. However, this is a very drastic case. The step
==PAGE:87==
78
Results
Figure 7.7.
Estimation of parameters using MH using a step-size of 0.0001 and 50,000
samples
Figure 7.8. MC Markov Chain of MH using a step-size of 0.0001 and 50,000 samples
size can always be increase to compromise the acceptance ratio. However, this just
exemplifies how crucial the tuning of the sampling algorithm parameters is.
From the first two runs, it is evident that a more eﬀicient sampling method needs
to be employed. Hence, the robust adaptive metropolis (RAM) is utilized here. As
the name suggests, the RAM sampling algorithm decides on the next values of the
parameters based on computation of a covariance matrix which is re-computed at
each step of the iteration. This allows the algorithm to automatically decide on the
optimal step size. Hence, it can be seen in Figure 7.12 that for just 50,000 iterations,
the sampling algorithm quickly finds the correct path in the Markov chain after 5000
iterations, and once it finds the ”correct” path on the chain, it converges here for
the next 45000 iterations. This makes the algorithm very robust, since the random
nature of sampling the parameters is eliminated.
Computationally, the algorithm
is 1000% times more eﬀicient than MH in this instance. Moreover, the estimation
==PAGE:88==
7.2 Parameter estimation using AKF-based Bayesian Inference
79
Figure 7.9. Estimation of parameters using MH using a step-size of 0.0001 and 500,000
samples
Figure 7.10. MC Markov Chain of MH using a step-size of 0.0001 and 500,000 samples
of the unknown structural parameter shown in Figure 7.11 is extremely accurate,
especially compared to the ones obtained from the MH, even for 10 times the number
of iterations.
==PAGE:89==
80
Results
Figure 7.11. Estimation of parameters using RAM for 2-parameter case
Figure 7.12. MC Markov Chain of RAM for 2-parameter case
7.2.2
Five Parameter Estimation Case
In this subsection of the chapter, the number of unknown parameters are increased
from two to five; hence, the complexity of the estimation is now increase. The damage
model used for this estimation is the model for damage case 1, which represents the
damage on the group A of columns as shown in Figure 5.6.
In this model, the
damaged model is generated with concrete stiffness values of k1 = 0.79, k2 = 0.88,
k3 = 0.82, k4 = 0.92 and k5 = 0.95 for the columns in group A. In addition, now
rather than sampling in a two-dimensional space, the samples will be generated from
a 5-dimensional space. This demands that the number of samples used to train the
surrogate model be increased to an acceptable value that minimizes the numerical
accuracy associated with an ill-trained/ill-defined space. In this study, the accuracy
of the surrogate model is not addressed; however, in an incremental manner, the
==PAGE:90==
7.2 Parameter estimation using AKF-based Bayesian Inference
81
training samples are increased until the model displays stable results. Hence, this is
the method by which it is ensured that the surrogate model is trained effectively.
7.2.2.1
Estimation of Structural Parameters
The figure in Figure 7.13 illustrates the prediction results in case of a 5-parameter BI
estimation scheme, whereby the model is trained with 2500 sampling points. In reality,
the results were stable even with 1000 training points; however, an upper bound for
the number of training samples is chosen to be on the safe side. As a result, the
estimation scheme for the 5-parameter case is trained with 10 times as many sample
points relative to the 2-parameter case. This emphasizes that the complexity and the
demand of the estimation increases significantly with the increase in the number of
dimensions. This further emphasizes the importance of the surrogate model for higher
dimensional parameter estimation methodology, whereby, the AKF algorithm would
have to be run equal to the number of iterations in the sampling method without a
surrogate model.
As with the estimation of 2-parameters, the estimation of 5-unknown structural
stiffness of the columns exhibit near perfect estimation, as can be seen in Figure 7.13.
Here, the problem of choosing a step-size is eliminated by using the RAM algorithm
for sampling. Figure 7.14 illustrates that it takes the 5000 iterations for the model to
converge and then for the next 45000 iterations, the values of the parameters fluctuate
around the stable value, trying to determining whether a step in another direction
can bring favourable results to satisfy the acceptance criteria or not. This is also the
reason why the histogram bars in Figure 7.13 display drastic peaks. This is because
for 5000 iterations, the parameter values are fluctuating to find a reasonable set of 5-
values that minimize the negative-log-posterior; hence, during the first 5000 iterations,
a variety of stiffness values are accepted. However, once the set of true values are
located, the estimation of the parameter values doesn’t deviate for the next 45000
steps; hence, since the same value is being accepted for 45000 iterations, very large
peaks are observed for the specific value in the histogram plot. In addition, the mean
and standard deviation for each of the accepted stiffness is taken and an equivalent
Gaussian distribution is also plotted on top of the histogram plot in Figure 7.13.
From the posterior PDF of the 5-stiffness values, k2 and k3 are observed to have
travelled the most distance from their starting values to reach stable values; hence,
because they have a range of accepted parameter values, the resulting posterior PDF
shows a wider confidence interval; allowing us to have a degree of uncertainty in our
estimation. This is one way where the problem of uncertainties can be tackled.
Effect of the prior interval on the estimation
Here, a short commentary is provided on the accuracy of results based on the sampling
interval, which is dependent on the range in which the posterior is defined. As an
example, in the previous estimations runs, the damage was modelled to be between
==PAGE:91==
82
Results
Figure 7.13. Estimation of parameters using RAM for 5-parameter case
Figure 7.14. MC Markov Chain of RAM for 5-parameter case
0 and 30% (k = 70 to 100%). Hence, the surrogate model was trained for a range of
stiffness values ranging from 0.65 to 1.05. However, if the damages in the model are
greater than this assumed range, the range of training the surrogate model should
also be widened. However, the widening of the training range means that if the model
==PAGE:92==
7.2 Parameter estimation using AKF-based Bayesian Inference
83
is trained with the same number of sample points used to train a narrower range of
surrogate model, then the surrogate model with a wider training range will include
less points to form the surface. Hence, in theory the surface should be of compromised
quality relative to the case where the surrogate model is defined over a narrower range.
The results of this short study are illustrated in Figure 7.15, whereby two models are
trained for damage case 1 with 500 sample points; one is trained with a prior ranging
from 0.7 to 1.0 and the other is trained with a prior range from 0.5 to 1.2. The degree
of damage is kept the same in the two cases to eliminate any other factors tampering
the results.
The results of the mean estimation of the unknown parameters using the two
cases is tabulated in Table 7.1 and the PDF of the results can be seen in Figure 7.15
and Figure 7.16. The results really emphasize the importance of adequate training
samples for wider prior or surrogate model training range. The RMSE for the wider
training range is 0.12, as compared to 0.01 for a narrower training range, hinting
that 500 samples were not adequate to approximate an accurate surface for the wider
surrogate model training range. Moreover, another observation from this analysis
is that with a wider range, the sampling of parameter can also become diﬀicult, be-
cause the probability of obtaining false sets of 5-parameters that explain the posterior
distribution increases.
Figure 7.15. Estimation of parameters for training range between k = 0.7 and 1.0 with
500 training samples
==PAGE:93==
84
Results
Figure 7.16. Estimation of parameters for training range between k = 0.5 and 1.2 with
500 training samples
Table 7.1. Comparison of RMSE for the parameter estimation using narrow and wide prior
range
Parameter
θtrue
θmean,1
θstd,1
Error
θmean,2
θstd,2
Error
k1
0.79
0.78
0.02
0.01
0.60
0.15
0.19
k2
0.89
0.88
0.04
0.01
1.07
0.04
-0.18
k3
0.82
0.83
0.03
-0.01
0.74
0.01
0.08
k4
0.95
0.94
0.01
0.01
0.98
0.04
-0.03
k5
0.97
0.96
0.00
0.01
1.01
0.04
-0.04
RMSE1
0.005
RMSE2
0.12
7.2.3
Large Parameter Estimation Case
In this sub-section of the chapter, the problem of estimating 10-unknown structural
parameters is presented using the Bayesian Inference framework employing the AKF
based likelihood function. To target this problem, the structural model for the dam-
age case 3 is chosen, which simulates damages on 10 of the structural columns in the
column group A and B, as illustrated in Figure 5.7. These 10 members were previ-
ously determined to be the most critical members of the structure in section 6.5, in
terms of influencing the dynamic behavior of the structure. The surrogate model in
this instance was trained with 10000 sample points, a four time increase in training
==PAGE:94==
7.2 Parameter estimation using AKF-based Bayesian Inference
85
samples from the 5-parameter estimation scheme. In total, 10740 seconds or approxi-
mately 3 hours were needed to train the surrogate model for this estimation problem.
The results for the estimation are provided in Figure 7.18.
Figure 7.17. Estimation of parameters for damage case 4 with 10000 training samples
From the results, it can be inferred that the estimation of structural parameters
with 10 unknowns yields very accurate results with an RMSE of 0.013 between the
mean of the estimated values and the true values. However, it can also be observed
that for some parameters, the confidence interval is extremely narrow and the true
value of the parameter lies in the very low probability ranges of the PDF. In high-
dimensional spaces, the posterior distribution can have a very complex landscape with
multiple peaks. This complexity arises because as the number of parameters increases,
==PAGE:95==
86
Results
Table 7.2. Results for the 10-parameter estimation
Parameter
θtrue
θmean
Absolute Error
k1
0.79
0.79
0.00
k2
0.88
0.87
0.01
k3
0.85
0.86
-0.01
k4
0.95
0.96
-0.01
k5
0.97
0.96
0.01
k6
0.76
0.79
-0.03
k7
0.82
0.82
0.00
k8
0.86
0.87
-0.01
k9
0.84
0.83
0.01
k10
0.92
0.89
0.03
RMSE
0.013
the number of potential interactions and dependencies between parameters also in-
creases, leading to a more intricate posterior surface.
In particular, this problem
is encountered for single chain MCMC algorithms, such as the Metropolis-Hastings
(MH) or Robust Adaptive Metropolis (RAM), whereby In a high-dimensional space,
these chains can easily get trapped in local modes or regions of high probability den-
sity, making it diﬀicult to explore the entire posterior distribution. This phenomenon
is known as slow mixing, where the MCMC chain spends a long time in one part of the
parameter space and fails to adequately explore other regions. Because the MCMC
chain can get stuck in local minima, it may converge to a set of parameters that
explain the posterior distribution well in that local region but do not represent the
true global posterior distribution. This false convergence can lead to biased estimates
of the parameters and an incorrect understanding of the uncertainty and variability
in the posterior distribution. Moreover, this is a problem unique to high-dimensional
spaces because the probability of moving from one high-probability region to another
is significantly lower in high dimensions because the volume of the parameter space
increases exponentially. This makes it challenging for the chain to find and move be-
tween different modes of the posterior distribution. An example of this phenomenon
is illustrated in Figure 7.19, whereby random walk is used to traverse the posterior
distribution very slowly; however, even with a careful sampling algorithm, the prob-
lem of the chain falling to a local minima is inevitable. The estimation of parameters
for high-dimensional unknown parameters lead to inaccurate results more often then
falling on the correct path of the chain.
==PAGE:96==
7.3 Parameter estimation using combined Modal and AKF-based Bayesian Inference
87
Figure 7.18. Example of estimation run succumb to the curse of dimensionality
7.3
Parameter estimation using combined Modal and
AKF-based Bayesian Inference
The preceding sections of this chapter have thoroughly examined the strengths and
weaknesses of the KF-based Bayesian Inference method. The primary findings indi-
cate that the Kalman-Filter algorithm, when applied to FE model updating, is highly
precise in estimating structural parameters.
However, the algorithm has notable
drawbacks, including its computationally intensive nature. Additionally, because the
==PAGE:97==
88
Results
Figure 7.19. Example of MCMC chain succumb to the curse of dimensionality
algorithm tends to narrow the probability of the unknown parameter value to a very
limited distribution range, it often necessitates that the sampling range be restricted.
This becomes problematic in real-life applications where the prior range is uncertain.
If the prior is incorrectly specified, the estimation results can be significantly inac-
curate. Therefore, it is essential to employ a computationally eﬀicient algorithm to
initially determine a probable distribution of the prior. In this section, a modal-based
likelihood function is utilized in a Bayesian inference scheme, developed without a
surrogate model, to form a probability distribution of the unknown parameters. This
approach assumes a uniform distribution for the prior, truncated over a broad range
(k = 0.2 to k = 1.2 in this instance). The PDF of the unknown parameters obtained
using this extra step will then be used as the prior distribution for the KF-based BI,
as has been done in the preceding sections of this chapter.
7.3.1
Estimation of Posterior PDF using Bayesian Inference with
Modal-likelihood
In this sub-section, it is assumed that we do not know the existing parameters of
the structure, and the damages are distributed over a wider range. Hence, damage
case 2 from Figure 5.7 is used, where 5 of the structural columns show large degrees
of damages, distributed over a wide range (k1 = 0.42, k2 = 0.63, k3 = 0.54, k4 =
0.85, k5 = 0.91). Hence, the prior for this initial step is assumed to have a uniform
distribution truncated between k = 0.3 to k = 1.2, to allow for modelling of large
degree of uncertainty in the prior. Here, the modal-based likelihood function is used
for the inference of unknown parameters. The modal parameter likelihood function
tries to estimate the unknown parameters by calibrating the modal properties (fre-
quencies and mode shapes) of the structure with some observation measurements.
The observation measurements in this case are the OMA identified modal properties
==PAGE:98==
7.3 Parameter estimation using combined Modal and AKF-based Bayesian Inference
89
of the structure in its operating conditions. The detailed OMA analysis and quantifi-
cation of the uncertainties associated with it were detailed in previously in section 6.4.
Hence, here, the result of the inference for the unknown parameters is directly shown.
Figure 7.20. Estimation of parameters using modal residual based likelihood
Here, over the broad range of k = 0.3 to k = 1.2, only 2000 iterations were
performed to form a posterior PDF. The modal-likelihood function, unlike the KF-
likelihood function, is not based on computing the likelihood at many steps; rather,
it is computed only once and hence, it is not as harsh as the KF-likelihood function
and has a very high acceptance ratio for the sampling methods used. Hence, even
2000 iterations are suﬀicient to form a PDF of the unknown parameters. Additionally,
because the modal-likelihood function is not as strict as the KF-based likelihood func-
tion, the range of the posterior estimation for the unknown parameters is distributed
over a much larger range, indicating that the algorithm is able to account for wider
range of uncertainties. This complements the KF-based BI perfectly, in the sense
that the modal-based BI narrows down the PDF of unknown parameters with some
degree of uncertainty. On the other hand, KF-based BI then further investigates this
region of uncertainty and is able to lock down a very narrow range of the parame-
ters with a very high degree of certainty. Lastly, the computational eﬀiciency of the
modal-parameter based BI is exceptional in comparison to the KF-based one. For
2000 iterations, the algorithm required 421 seconds to run, on a system with AMD
Ryzen 4800H (8 core processor with 16 threads) and 16 GB of RAM. Running the KF
on the same system for 2000 iterations resulting in a runtime of 1944 seconds. Hence,
the modal likelihood function is over 4.6 times eﬀicient in computing the same num-
==PAGE:99==
90
Results
ber of iterations. However, it must also be stated that the modal-based BI framework
was able to narrow down the posterior PDF of the unknown parameters over a broad
range of prior with only 2000 iterations.
From the plot in Figure 7.20 and the tabulation of results in Table 7.3, it can
be inferred that the modal-based BI method narrows down the uniform prior to a
narrower range, where the regions of higher probabilities are concentrated very close
to the true value.
In addition, the resulting resulting is a near perfect Gaussian
distribution. The equivalent Gaussian distribution PDF is plotted in golden behind
the histograms. Moreover, the mean values of the estimation is compared with the
true parameter values, and the resulting RMSE is only 0.067, which highlights a
reasonable degree of accuracy in estimation of parameters. Moreover, the standard
deviation of the values is around 0.09, which is around 3 to 5 times more than the one
for the KF-based BI, indicating that the modal-based BI presents the results with a
greater degree of uncertainty.
Table 7.3. Results for the 5-parameter estimation using modal-likelihood BI estimation
Parameter
θtrue
θmean
θstd
Error
k1
0.42
0.48
0.09
-0.06
k2
0.63
0.52
0.09
0.11
k3
0.54
0.57
0.10
-0.03
k4
0.85
0.84
0.09
0.01
k5
0.91
0.86
0.09
0.05
RMSE1
0.067
7.3.2
Estimation of PDF using the combined Bayesian Inference
Framework
The results of the modal-based BI are present in the previous sub-section. The same
posterior PDF of the parameters obtained using modal-based BI is now used as a
prior PDF for the parameters for which the estimation is being performed. The KF-
based BI was trained for 1000 samples to form the surrogate model. The results of the
posterior PDFs is plotted below in Figure 7.21. From the results, it is clearly evident
that even for a small training sample of 1000 samples over a very broad uncertainty
range, the resulting combination of the modal and KF based BI is able to first narrow
down the uniform prior PDF, and then further narrow the range to result in a very
certain estimation of the values of the unknown parameters.
Moreover, it must be stated that, as already developed in this chapter, KF based
BI alone, with a uniform distribution is able to estimate the unknown parameters
with a great deal of certainty. However, when the range of the prior is broadened
to account for greater uncertainties, more samples need to be trained for the larger
posterior space. In addition, when the space is broadened for the KF, the sampling
==PAGE:100==
7.3 Parameter estimation using combined Modal and AKF-based Bayesian Inference
91
Figure 7.21. Estimation of parameters using KF based likelihood with prior PDF obtained
using modal based likelihood
of the parameters using RAM or MH MCMC becomes very challenging, with the
method often succumbing to local regions of high probability distributions, which do
not represent the global posterior PDF. Hence, an extra step which first reduces the
range of the posterior space is extremely beneficial not only because less samples need
to be trained, which ultimately improves the computational time, but also because
the sampling over a narrower regions results in a higher degree of confidence for the
results of the KF-based BI, and makes the overall estimation scheme very robust.
Additionally, as a basis for comparison, a KF-based BI is performed over a uniform
prior range between k = 0.3 and k = 1.2, and 1000 samples are trained for the
surrogate model. The results are plotted in Figure 7.22. It is clearly evident that for
the same number of training samples for the surrogate model, the combined modal
and KF based BI results in more accurate results.
It is true that more training
samples would result in more accurate estimation for KF-only BI, but at the expense
of computational power and time. The results for the cases modal-only BI, KF-only-
BI and combined modal and KF BI are tabulated in Table 7.4. For the modal BI,
5000 samples are trained, where for the other two methods, 1000 samples are trained
to results in equivalent computational time of around 1000 to 1200 seconds. From the
results, it is evident that the combined method results in an almost negligible RMSE,
whereas for the other two methods, the errors are almost comparable. However, the
main difference lies in the fact that the modal-based BI method provides a larger
range of certainty, which allows the true value to lie in regions of slightly lower
==PAGE:101==
92
Results
probabilities; whereas the KF based method provides a lower certainty range, and as
a result, completely dismisses the true parameter since it lies in the region of zero
probability, as can be seen in Figure 7.22. However, with the KF only method, the
number of training samples can always be increased for more accurate estimations;
however, for the modal-based method, there will always be some magnitude of error
since the OMA estimates the modal parameters of the system with some degree of
error.
Figure 7.22. Estimation of parameters using only KF based likelihood with uniform prior
PDF
Table 7.4. Results for the 5-parameter estimation using modal-likelihood BI estimation
Parameter
True
Modal
KF
Combined
θtrue
θmean,1
θmean,2
θmean,3
k1
0.42
0.48
0.45
0.43
k2
0.63
0.52
0.65
0.63
k3
0.54
0.57
0.53
0.54
k4
0.85
0.84
0.75
0.84
k5
0.91
0.86
0.99
0.92
RMSE
0.065
0.062
0.008
==PAGE:102==
CHAPTER 8
Discussion
This chapter provide a brief discussion on some of the factors not account for in the
chapter 7 chapter. However, it must be stated that the greater part of the discussion
is already presented in the chapter 7 chapter and this chapter serves as a counterpart
to the previous chapter, providing some more insights.
In this report, the concept of placement and number of sensors is not challenged,
since the estimation seems to be very reliable without discussing it. However, it can
be challenged that sensors placed at a nodes or structural joints are connected to
three-structural members (two columns and one beam). As a result, damage in any
of the three-members can alter the readings of the same sensor and hence, the sensor
measurement alone cannot infer exactly on which member the damage lies. Hence, a
simple deterministic parameter estimation is performed using KF, where the sensors
are now at the mid-point of the columns. The results for two estimation runs are
presented in Figure 8.1. From the results, it is evident that there is no significant
change in the NLL estimation curve. Only the degree of change or curvature seems
to have change.
Figure 8.1. Parameter estimation curve for objective function of model B, for when member
5 is damaged to 80% (left) and 20% (right)
The main change between the two analysis cases can only be seen when the range
is limited, providing a more local and closer look at the same of the estimation curves
around the value of the true parameters. From Figure 8.2, it can be seen that even
when the curve are analyzed locally at a larger scale, the estimation curves seems
to be identical. However, one obvious change is that when the sensors are placed at
the mid-points of the columns, the curvature for bottom story columns has definitely
increased. This can be seen in for the estimation curve for the first floor column,
==PAGE:103==
94
Discussion
whereby, for the cases where sensors are placed at the joints of the structure, the
curve is a flat. As already discussed in chapter 7, the flatter the estimation curve, the
more the points needs to be trained to form the posterior surface when used in the
context of Bayesian Inference.
Figure 8.2. Close-up evaluation of parameter estimation curve for objective function for
when column is damaged by 15% for model A (left) and model B (right)
However, while it can be argued that less training samples are needed when sensors
are placed at mid-points of columns due to a more severe change in the likelihood val-
ues relative to the simple case; thereby reducing computational time, the reality is not
the same. This is because to model sensors at mid-points of the columns, additional
nodes needs to be modelled. As a result, the model becomes more computationally
heavy. This is clearly evident from Figure 8.3, where two models are compared, one
with 18 nodes and the other with 33 nodes.
On average, for the 33-node model,
approximately four times as much time is required.
Figure 8.3. Computational duration for running single-parameter estimation KF run with
respect to length of signal
On the topic of computational eﬀiciency, a small commentary is provided on the
==PAGE:104==
Discussion
95
computational time for modal based and KF based BI methods. As already discussed
in chapter 7, the modal-based method is on average 4.5 times faster than the KF one.
This is visualized in Figure 8.5, whereby the two methods are ran for varying number
of iterations. Moreover, in the same figure, it can also be seen that the computational
time is almost linearly increasing with the number of iterations ran.
Figure 8.4. Computational Eﬀiciency of KF and Modal based BI methods with respect to
number of samples/iterations
Lastly, the affect of the number of unknown parameters is analyzed on the com-
putational time. For all of these cases, 1000 samples are trained. It is evident from
Figure 8.5 that the computational time for training the surrogate model is indepen-
dent of the dimensional space.
Figure 8.5. Computational Eﬀiciency of training surrogate model with respect to number
of unknown parameters
==PAGE:105==
96
==PAGE:106==
CHAPTER 9
Conclusion
To conclude, the purpose of this thesis was to formulate a methodology using Bayesian
Inference and Finite Element Model to estimate the unknown structural parameters
assuming that the structure was in operational condition, where the input excitation
to the structure is not known and the response of the structure is linear under ambient
excitation. Hence, two output only methods, the Augmented Kalman Filter for joint
input-state estimation and the operational modal analysis (OMA), were selected to
calibrate the properties of the structure to the observation measurements. In particu-
lar, the OMA was used to estimate the probability distribution function (PDF) of the
unknown parameters over a broad range, and this PDF was then used as a prior to
perform Bayesian Inference FE model updating using the Kalman-Filter algorithm,
which further narrows down the distribution of the parameters to be estimated.
The FE model of the structure was constructed using drawings and data from
design documentation. Since this study was completely based on simulation work,
the observation measurements and the damaged real-life structure also had to be
simulated. The damage was simulated on the initial FE model developed from draw-
ings, as a degradation of concrete stiffness for the various members of the structure,
and then the damaged structure was subjected to ambient excitation, and the result-
ing absolute horizontal acceleration measurements with a 1% noise were used as the
observation measurements for the calibration using Bayesian Inference. Prior to per-
forming the Bayesian Inference on the structure, a thorough study of the FE model
was performed, whereby at first, OMA was performed to extract the modal prop-
erties of the structure from the time-domain measurements, and then a sensitivity
analysis was performed to understand which members of the structure dictated its
dynamic behavior. Ultimately, it was found out that the large structural columns,
numbered as members 1 to 10, were the most critical members which were dominant
in influencing the dynamic behavior of the structure.
Following this, the parameters of the structure were estimated at first using only
the Bayesian Inference framework formed where the likelihood function was a Kalman-
Filter inspired likelihood function.
Since the KF algorithm is a computationally
demanding algorithm, a surrogate model was trained using the KF-likelihood function
and the priors of the parameters, before the sampling was performed. Following this,
the parameters can be sampled from the space trained by the surrogate model. It was
concluded from the detailed study that the Kalman-filter inspired BI framework is
extremely precise in determining the unknown parameters of the structure, resulting
in RMSE values between the true and the mean of the estimated parameters to be
approximately 0.01, which is extremely minimal. However, it was also concluded that
the estimated probability distribution of the estimated parameters is concentrated
==PAGE:107==
98
Conclusion
over a very narrow range, and hence, the the uncertainties are not properly conveyed
in the results. The main reason for this outcome was hypothesized to be the fact
that the KF calculates the likelihood at each time-step of the input signal, and then
computes the cumulative likelihood value as the sum of all the likelihood values
computed at each time-step. This results in large variations of the likelihood values
for when the unknown parameters of the structure are even slightly varied and hence,
the acceptance criteria rejects the readings which are not close to the NLL value of
the true parameters.
Additionally, another interesting outcome of this study was
that for high-dimensional data, the space of the posterior distribution is extremely
complex, with local minimas over the posterior space. As a result, the the single chain
MCMC algorithms are extremely ineﬀicient and can often result in the estimations
to represent a false or local minima.
Lastly, the Bayesian inference framework was used with a modal properties based
likelihood function to first narrow down the probability distribution functions of the
parameters over a limited range. The posterior PDF from the first Bayesian Inference
scheme was then used as prior for the Bayesian Inference framework using Kalman-
Filter based likelihood function. The primary benefit of this extra step translates to
a direct reduction in the computational time for the algorithm, where the surrogate
model does not have to be trained for a large range of priors. The modal parameter
based Bayesian inference is on average five times as fast as the KF one; hence, using
it to limit the range of prior is an eﬀicient method to reduce the computational time
of the methodology. In addition, the main features for the methods were concluded to
be that the modal-based BI method provides a larger range of certainty, which allows
the true value to lie in regions of slightly lower probabilities; whereas the KF based
method provides a lower certainty range, and as a result, can completely dismiss the
true parameter since it may lie in the regions of zero probability.
However, with
the KF only method, the number of training samples can always be increased for
more accurate estimations; however, for the modal-based method, there will always
be some magnitude of error since the OMA estimates the modal parameters of the
system with some degree of error. Ultimately, the two methods were determined to be
very complementary to each other whereby the benefits of the one method countered
the drawbacks of the other method.
==PAGE:108==
CHAPTER 10
Further Work
The scope of this study was already very broad; however, since this study presents a
novel methodology of combining two output only methods: modal parameter based
and KF based likelihood functions, with the Bayesian Inference framework, the scope
of this study can be expended to gain an even better grounding of the method. Hence,
the main considerations for future work include:
• The main problem identified in this study for the setup of BI was the problem of
running into local minima for high-dimensional data. As a result, for sampling
of algorithm, a more eﬀicient sampling method suited for higher-dimensional
data should be used, such as the DiffeRential Evolution Adaptive Metropolis
(DREAM), which uses a Multi-chain MCMC algorithm with an adaptive step
that computes the covariance matrix for the different chains at each step of the
iteration, and can counter the curse of dimensionality.
• The methodology should be extended for estimating the parameters in a non-
linear system. In this study, it was assumed that the structure remains linear
under the imposed ambient loading; however, the damages in structural mem-
bers can be significant enough that the behavior of the structure is non-linear
even under small vibrations.
• The methodology should be extended also evaluate the performance of the
method for a 3D FE model, with more structural members such as slabs, di-
aphragm walls etc.
• The methodology should be tested on a real-life structure, since there are
far more uncertainties. This study was based on very idealized assumptions,
whereby the only uncertain parameters were the unknown concrete stiffness of
the members
• The modelling of structural damages was simulated in a very idealized manner,
whereby the damage was characterized as a loss of concrete stiffness. However,
in real-life damages, damages can also occur in other structural materials, such
as the reinforcement include RC members. Additionally, the damages can also
result in spalling of concrete/loss in mass of the structural material.
Such
uncertainties make the parameter estimation methodology very challenging.
• An additional analysis should be adapted in the methodology, which first eval-
uates the accuracy of the surrogate model, and after determining the optimal
training parameters, moves onto training the surrogate model.
==PAGE:109==
100
Further Work
• An additional analysis should be adapted in the methodology, which first eval-
uates the accuracy of the surrogate model, and after determining the optimal
training parameters, moves onto training the surrogate model.
• The modal-based likelihood estimation methodology should be tuned to calcu-
late the covariance matrix of the error residuals and update the covariance in
the likelihood function, rather than use a static variance as an assumption.
• The performance of this method should be compared for the case where the
input loading to the system is known.
• Both the Operational Modal Analysis and the Augmented Kalman-filter assume
a Gaussian distribution for the input loading. Hence, the performance of this
method should be analyzed under a loading following a non-Gaussian distribu-
tion.
==PAGE:110==
Appendices
==PAGE:111==
Bibliography
[1]
Jianwei Zhang, Minshui Huang, Neng Wan, Zhihang Deng, Zhongao He, and Jin
Luo. Missing measurement data recovery methods in structural health monitor-
ing: The state, challenges and case study. Measurement, page 114528, 2024.
[2]
Etienne de Rocquigny, Nicolas Devictor, and Stefano Tarantola. Uncertainty in
industrial practice: a guide to quantitative uncertainty management. John Wiley
& Sons, 2008.
[3]
TJ Rogers, K Worden, and EJ Cross. On the application of gaussian process
latent force models for joint input-state-parameter estimation: With a view to
bayesian operational identification. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing,
140:106580, 2020.
[4]
E Lourens, Costas Papadimitriou, Steven Gillijns, Edwin Reynders, Guido
De Roeck, and Geert Lombaert. Joint input-response estimation for structural
systems based on reduced-order models and vibration data from a limited num-
ber of sensors. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 29:310–327, 2012.
[5]
E Lourens, Costas Papadimitriou, Steven Gillijns, Edwin Reynders, Guido
De Roeck, and Geert Lombaert. Joint input-response estimation for structural
systems based on reduced-order models and vibration data from a limited num-
ber of sensors. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 29:310–327, 2012.
[6]
Xin Zhou, Chul-Woo Kim, Feng-Liang Zhang, and Kai-Chun Chang. Vibration-
based bayesian model updating of an actual steel truss bridge subjected to incre-
mental damage. Engineering Structures, 260:114226, 2022.
[7]
Mukesh K Ramancha, Rodrigo Astroza, Ramin Madarshahian, and Joel P Conte.
Bayesian updating and identifiability assessment of nonlinear finite element mod-
els. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 167:108517, 2022.
[8]
Daniz Teymouri, Omid Sedehi, Mingming Song, Babak Moaveni, Costas Pa-
padimitriou, and Lambros S Katafygiotis. Hierarchical bayesian finite element
model updating: Optimal weighting of modal residuals with application to fino3
offshore platform. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 211:111150, 2024.
[9]
Ellen Simoen, Guido De Roeck, and Geert Lombaert. Dealing with uncertainty
in model updating for damage assessment: A review. Mechanical Systems and
Signal Processing, 56:123–149, 2015.
==PAGE:112==
106
Bibliography
[10] Edwin Reynders. System identification methods for (operational) modal analysis:
review and comparison.
Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering,
19:51–124, 2012.
[11] Ka-Veng Yuen and Lambros S Katafygiotis.
Bayesian fast fourier transform
approach for modal updating using ambient data. Advances in Structural Engi-
neering, 6(2):81–95, 2003.
[12] Siu-Kui Au. Operational modal analysis. Modeling, Bayesian Inference, Uncer-
tainty laws Springer, 2017.
[13] Ka-Veng Yuen, James L Beck, and Lambros S Katafygiotis. Eﬀicient model up-
dating and health monitoring methodology using incomplete modal data without
mode matching. Structural Control and Health Monitoring: The Oﬀicial Journal
of the International Association for Structural Control and Monitoring and of
the European Association for the Control of Structures, 13(1):91–107, 2006.
[14] Michael W Vanik, James L Beck, and Siu-Kui Au. Bayesian probabilistic ap-
proach to structural health monitoring.
Journal of Engineering Mechanics,
126(7):738–745, 2000.
[15] Rodrigo Astroza, Hamed Ebrahimian, and Joel P Conte.
Performance com-
parison of kalman- based filters for nonlinear structural finite element model
updating. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 438:520–542, 2019.
[16] Hamed Ebrahimian, Rodrigo Astroza, Joel P Conte, and Costas Papadimitriou.
Bayesian optimal estimation for output-only nonlinear system and damage identi-
fication of civil structures. Structural Control and Health Monitoring, 25(4):e2128,
2018.
[17] Ka-Veng Yuen, Siu Kui Au, and James L Beck. Two-stage structural health
monitoring approach for phase i benchmark studies.
Journal of Engineering
Mechanics, 130(1):16–33, 2004.
[18] Zhenhong Deng, Ming Zhan, Xiukai Yuan, Huageng Luo, and Baoqiang
Zhang. Bayesian model updating utilizing scaled likelihood ratio and bct-pca
with frequency response function. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing,
200:110505, 2023.
[19] Jianye Ching and James L Beck. New bayesian model updating algorithm applied
to a structural health monitoring benchmark.
Structural Health Monitoring,
3(4):313–332, 2004.
[20] Jia-Hua Yang, Heung-Fai Lam, and Yong-Hui An. Development of a two-phase
adaptive mcmc method for eﬀicient bayesian model updating of complex dynamic
systems. Engineering Structures, 270:114836, 2022.
==PAGE:113==
Bibliography
107
[21] Mukesh K Ramancha, Manuel A Vega, Joel P Conte, Michael D Todd, and Zhen
Hu. Bayesian model updating with finite element vs surrogate models: Appli-
cation to a miter gate structural system. Engineering Structures, 272:114901,
2022.
[22] Yushan Liu, Luyi Li, and Zeming Chang. Eﬀicient bayesian model updating for
dynamic systems. Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 236:109294, 2023.
[23] Mukesh Kumar Ramancha, Ramin Madarshahian, Rodrigo Astroza, and Joel P
Conte. Non-unique estimates in material parameter identification of nonlinear fe
models governed by multiaxial material models using unscented kalman filtering.
In Model Validation and Uncertainty Quantification, Volume 3: Proceedings of
the 37th IMAC, A Conference and Exposition on Structural Dynamics 2019,
pages 257–265. Springer, 2020.
[24] Rodrigo Astroza, Hamed Ebrahimian, and Joel P Conte.
Material param-
eter identification in distributed plasticity fe models of frame-type struc-
tures using nonlinear stochastic filtering.
Journal of Engineering Mechanics,
141(5):04014149, 2015.
[25] Hamed Ebrahimian, Rodrigo Astroza, and Joel P Conte.
Extended kalman
filter for material parameter estimation in nonlinear structural finite element
models using direct differentiation method. Earthquake Engineering & Structural
Dynamics, 44(10):1495–1522, 2015.
[26] Mukesh K Ramancha, Rodrigo Astroza, Joel P Conte, Jose I Restrepo, and
Michael D Todd. Bayesian nonlinear finite element model updating of a full-scale
bridge-column using sequential monte carlo. In Model Validation and Uncertainty
Quantification, Volume 3: Proceedings of the 38th IMAC, A Conference and
Exposition on Structural Dynamics 2020, pages 389–397. Springer, 2020.
[27] Simo Särkkä and Lennart Svensson. Bayesian filtering and smoothing, volume 17.
Cambridge university press, 2023.
[28] Andrew Gelman, John B Carlin, Hal S Stern, and Donald B Rubin. Bayesian
data analysis. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 1995.
[29] Jesse C Arnold and J Susan Milton. Introduction to probability and statistics:
principles and applications for engineering and the computing sciences. McGraw-
Hill, 2003.
[30] Jun S Liu and Jun S Liu. Monte Carlo strategies in scientific computing, vol-
ume 10. Springer, 2001.
[31] Steve Brooks, Andrew Gelman, Galin Jones, and Xiao-Li Meng. Handbook of
markov chain monte carlo. CRC press, 2011.
==PAGE:114==
108
Bibliography
[32] Heikki Haario, Eero Saksman, and Johanna Tamminen. Adaptive proposal distri-
bution for random walk metropolis algorithm. Computational statistics, 14:375–
395, 1999.
[33] Matti Vihola. Robust adaptive metropolis algorithm with coerced acceptance
rate. Statistics and computing, 22:997–1008, 2012.
[34] Christophe Andrieu and Johannes Thoms. A tutorial on adaptive mcmc. Statis-
tics and computing, 18:343–373, 2008.
[35] Gareth O Roberts and Jeffrey S Rosenthal.
Optimal scaling for various
metropolis-hastings algorithms. Statistical science, 16(4):351–367, 2001.
[36] James C. Anderson and Farzad Naeim. Basic Structural Dynamics, volume 17.
Cambridge university press, 2012.
[37] V Roshan Joseph and Ying Hung. Orthogonal-maximin latin hypercube designs.
Statistica Sinica, pages 171–186, 2008.
[38] MD McKay and RJ Beckman.
A comparison of three methods for selecting
values of input variables in the analysis of output... Technometrics: A journal
of statistics for the physical, chemical and engineering sciences, 42(1):55, 2000.
[39] Jon C Helton and Freddie Joe Davis. Latin hypercube sampling and the propa-
gation of uncertainty in analyses of complex systems. Reliability Engineering &
System Safety, 81(1):23–69, 2003.
[40] Yu-Meng Qiao, Da-Gang Lu, and Xiao-Hui Yu. Shaking table tests of a rein-
forced concrete frame subjected to mainshock-aftershock sequences. Journal of
Earthquake Engineering, 26(4):1693–1722, 2022.
[41] John B Mander, Michael JN Priestley, and Robert Park. Theoretical stress-strain
model for confined concrete. Journal of structural engineering, 114(8):1804–1826,
1988.
[42] E Lourens, Costas Papadimitriou, Steven Gillijns, Edwin Reynders, Guido
De Roeck, and Geert Lombaert. Joint input-response estimation for structural
systems based on reduced-order models and vibration data from a limited num-
ber of sensors. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 29:310–327, 2012.
[43] Rajdip Nayek, Souvik Chakraborty, and Sriram Narasimhan. A gaussian process
latent force model for joint input-state estimation in linear structural systems.
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 128:497–530, 2019.
[44] E Lourens, Edwin Reynders, Guido De Roeck, Geert Degrande, and Geert Lom-
baert. An augmented kalman filter for force identification in structural dynamics.
Mechanical systems and signal processing, 27:446–460, 2012.
==PAGE:115==
Bibliography
109
[45] C-K Ma, J-M Chang, and D-C Lin. Input forces estimation of beam structures
by an inverse method. Journal of sound and vibration, 259(2):387–407, 2003.
[46] Saeed Eftekhar Azam, Eleni Chatzi, and Costas Papadimitriou. A dual kalman
filter approach for state estimation via output-only acceleration measurements.
Mechanical systems and signal processing, 60:866–886, 2015.
[47] Jianye Ching, James L Beck, and Keith A Porter. Bayesian state and parameter
estimation of uncertain dynamical systems. Probabilistic engineering mechanics,
21(1):81–96, 2006.
[48] Steven Gillijns and Bart De Moor. Unbiased minimum-variance input and state
estimation for linear discrete-time systems. Automatica, 43(1):111–116, 2007.
[49] Saeed Eftekhar Azam, Vasilis Dertimanis, Eleni Chatzi, and Costas Papadim-
itriou. Output-only schemes for joint input-state-parameter estimation of linear
systems.
In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Uncertainty
Quantification in Computational Sciences and Engineering, UNCECOMP, 2015.
[50] Vasilis K Dertimanis, EN Chatzi, S Eftekhar Azam, and Costas Papadimitriou.
Input-state-parameter estimation of structural systems from limited output in-
formation. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, 126:711–746, 2019.
[51] K Maes, Freddie Karlsson, and G Lombaert.
Tracking of inputs, states and
parameters of linear structural dynamic systems. Mechanical Systems and Signal
Processing, 130:755–775, 2019.
[52] Luigi Caglio, Henrik Stang, Rune Brincker, and Evangelos Katsanos. Fe-aided
kalman filter for nonlinear state estimation with unknown input. Mechanical
Systems and Signal Processing, 200:110513, 2023.
[53] Federico Ponsi, Elisa Bassoli, Ghita Eslami Varzaneh, and Loris Vincenzi.
Surrogate-based bayesian model updating of a historical masonry tower. Pro-
cedia Structural Integrity, 44:1538–1545, 2023.
[54] Jianye Ching and Yi-Chu Chen. Transitional markov chain monte carlo method
for bayesian model updating, model class selection, and model averaging. Journal
of Engineering Mechanics, 133(7):816–832, 2007.
[55] James L Beck and Lambros S Katafygiotis. Updating models and their uncer-
tainties. i: Bayesian statistical framework. Journal of Engineering Mechanics,
124(4):455–461, 1998.
[56] Shiqiang Qin, Renxian Song, and Ning Li. Bayesian model updating for bridge
engineering applications based on dreamkzs algorithm and kriging model. In
Structures, volume 58, page 105565. Elsevier, 2023.
==PAGE:116==
110
Bibliography
[57] Jasper A Vrugt, Cajo JF ter Braak, Cees GH Diks, Bruce A Robinson, James M
Hyman, and Dave Higdon. Accelerating markov chain monte carlo simulation
by differential evolution with self-adaptive randomized subspace sampling. Inter-
national journal of nonlinear sciences and numerical simulation, 10(3):273–290,
2009.
[58] MD McKay and RJ Beckman.
A comparison of three methods for selecting
values of input variables in the analysis of output... Technometrics: A journal
of statistics for the physical, chemical and engineering sciences, 42(1):55, 2000.
