==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment of indoor environment 
in sustainable housing 
Master thesis 
 
 
 
 
 
Author: 
Sofie Ana Heide-Ottosen, s193943 
 
Supervisor: 
Jørn Toftum, DTU SUSTAIN 
 
 
June 22, 2024 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
Vurdering af indeklima i en bæredygtig boligenhed 
 
 
Master Thesis 
June 22, 2024 
 
By 
Sofie Ana Heide-Ottosen 
 
Supervisor:  
Jørn Toftum, DTU SUSTAIN 
 
Study line:  
Architectural Engineering 
 
Credits: 
 
30 ECTS 
 
Copyright:  
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must  
include the customary bibliographic citation, including au- 
thor attribution, report title, ect. 
 
Cover photo: 
Sciving Scandinavia, 2023 
 
Published by: 
DTU SUSTAIN, Anker Engelunds Vej 101, Building 101, 
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
 
 
www.sustain.dtu.dk 
 
==PAGE:3==
 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing  
i 
 
Preface 
 
This master thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Envi-
ronmental Engineering, at Technical University of Denmark, in partial fulfillment for 
the degree Master of Science in Architectural Engineering, MSc Arch Eng. This thesis 
was completed during the period from January 22nd to June 22nd, 2024, and is cred-
ited 30 ETCS points. 
It is assumed that the reader of this master thesis has a common knowledge of the 
subjects: indoor environment, sustainability and energy consumption. 
 
 
The Technical University of Denmark, Spring 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sofie Ana Heide-Ottosen 
22.06.2024 
 
==PAGE:4==
ii 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Abstract 
 
In recent decades, the awareness of the climate challenges as well as the focus on the 
occupants’ well-being in buildings has grown. The Green Transition Council states 
that the building concept needs to be rethought to produce responsible solutions 
that also ensures a good living environment because the carbon footprint from 
buildings accounts for almost 30% of the total emissions and given that an average 
person spends close to 90% of time indoor. 
The aim of this thesis was to assess the quality of the indoor environment in a tiny 
home designed with sustainable principles. 
To assess the unit, analyses of energy use and indoor climate simulations regarding 
thermal environment, indoor air quality and visual environment were carried out 
along with Life Cycle Assessments and DGNB-certifications to determine the level of 
sustainability. 
The findings indicate that the dwelling faces challenges in maintaining a good ther-
mal comfort, especially in terms of the solutions that improve the temperature in the 
KDLB-room and high levels of humidity in the bathroom. The analysis showed that 
the unit is sensitive to climates different from the temperate climatic zone. Moreover, 
the implication of sustainable principles is a low environmental impact. Finally, de-
sign modifications that can improve both the indoor environment and the sustaina-
bility of the unit are discussed. 
In the light of the study, it can be concluded that Sciving's housing unit demonstrates 
a generally high standard of both indoor environmental quality and sustainability, 
despite certain areas that could be optimized. Furthermore, the research indicates 
that these improvements can be achieved through solutions beneficial to both peo-
ple and planet. 
The study establishes that through targeted initiatives, such as implementing solar 
shading, improved ventilation and cooling systems and a more environmentally de-
sirable insulation type, both the livability inside and the sustainability of the unit 
will become even better. 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing  
iii 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Sofie Ana Heide-Ottosen, MSC Architectural Engineering, DTU, Creator of this mas-
ter thesis. 
I would like to express my profound gratitude to the following individuals and com-
panies for their interest, guidance, and support in relation to my thesis: 
Jørn Toftum, professor at DTU, for your guidance and support throughout the pro-
ject, for being readily accessible, for providing highly constructive criticism, and for 
the useful discussions. Daniel Dasic and Sune Nordby Thomsen from Sciving for a 
successful collaboration and for sharing information and in-depth knowledge about 
the housing unit. Andreas Sørensen, Digital Lead in Sustainability at Rambøll, for 
the insightful discussions on environmental sustainability and your assistance with 
LCAbyg. 
Furthermore, I would like to express my deep appreciation to Sciving for providing 
the case building. 
 
==PAGE:6==
==PAGE:7==
 
 
 
Content 
 
PREFACE 
I 
ABSTRACT 
II 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
III 
1.     INTRODUCTION 
1 
1.1 Significance of the study 
2 
2.     LITERATURE STUDY 
3 
2.1 Indoor environment 
3 
2.2 Sustainability 
8 
2.3 Energy performance 
13 
3.     CASE STUDY 
15 
3.1 Location & layout 
15 
3.2 Construction & materials 
18 
3.3 Building services 
23 
4.     METHODOLOGY 
27 
4.1 Settings, conditions, definitions, and assumptions 
27 
4.2 Approach to develop and assess the unit 
35 
5.     RESULTS 
39 
5.1 Overall assessment of the original housing unit 
39 
5.2 Study of change in Building parameters 
46 
5.3 Optimization 
54 
5.4 Influence of climate on the original unit 
62 
6.     DISCUSSION 
69 
6.1 Results 
69 
6.2 Limitations 
73 
==PAGE:8==
 
6.3 Further issues to address 
74 
7.     CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
75 
7.1 Recommendations 
75 
REFERENCES 
77 
APPENDIXES 
81 
Appendix A – Schedules for occupancy and internal loads depending on room 
81 
Appendix B1 – Model of the original window 
84 
Appendix B2 – Model of the optimized window 
84 
Appendix C – Material quantity calculations in Excel 
85 
Appendix D – Input to LCAbyg 
87 
Appendix E – DGNB-certification matrixes 
88 
Appendix F – GWP calculation for reference building elements 
97 
Appendix G – Results from IDA ICE and LCAbyg organized in Excel 
99 
Appendix H – Expanded table related to optimization scenarios 
102 
Appendix I – Environmental Product Declarations 
108 
 
 
 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
 
Abbreviation 
 
BR 
Building regulation 
CAV 
Constant air volume 
CO2 
Carbon dioxide 
DGNB 
Deutsche Gesellschaft fu r Nachhaltiges Bauen 
DS 
Dansk Standard 
DTU 
Technical University of Denmark 
EPD 
Environmental product declaretions 
GWP 
Global warming potential 
kWh 
Kilo watt hours 
IAQ 
Indoor air quality 
IDA ICE 
IDA Indoor Climate and Energy 
IEQ 
Indoor environment quality 
KDLB 
Kitchen-dining-living-bedroom 
LCA 
Life cycle assessment 
LCI 
Life cycle inventory 
LCIA 
Life cycle impact assessment 
ppm 
Parts per million 
RH 
Relative humidity 
RUC 
Roskilde University 
SBi 
State Building Research Institute 
VAV 
Variable air volume 
VOC 
Volatile organic compounds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:10==
==PAGE:11==
 
1 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
1.     Introduction 
Since 1990, the size of homes in Denmark has increased (Toft, 2018), while there has 
been a development in and a greater focus on the importance of the occupants’ well-
being in all types of buildings, since an average person spends close to 90% of the 
time inside (Roberts, 2016). Furthermore, in recent years, there has been a growing 
awareness of the climate challenges and thereby the importance of mitigating the 
carbon footprint from buildings, as the construction industry accounts for almost 
30% of the total CO2-emissions (Schefte, 2024). To produce responsible solutions 
that ensure a good living environment, we need to rethink the building concept. This 
thesis aims to assess the quality of the indoor environment in a tiny home designed 
with sustainable principles. 
This study focuses primarily on indoor environment, with sustainability considera-
tions accounting for the secondary aspect. Additionally, the study will address key 
indoor environment quality parameters, including thermal comfort, indoor air qual-
ity, and lighting, while comparing it with the sustainability parameter of global 
warming potential. The study will be conducted based on simulations and calcula-
tions for Sciving's housing unit assess the indoor environment of the housing unit 
along with the sustainability of the building. Moreover, factors contributing to or 
preventing from achieving optimal indoor comfort, will be identified in this process. 
New housing units like Sciving’s dwelling, designed to have a low climate impact, is 
often facing a complex task when finding the balance between energy efficiency and 
comfort. Highly insulated buildings are often energy-efficient but can suffer from 
poor ventilation, leading to indoor air quality issues. Similarly, rooms with a great 
amount of daylight might experience high temperatures (Lemon, 2014). Based on 
this hypothesis, it is assumed that less radical measures related to building design 
and modifications to operational systems will improve the indoor environment qual-
ity without substantially affecting the sustainability goals.  
The thesis is structured as following: 
1. Introduction: Provides the background, describes hypothesis and importance 
of the study. 
2. Literature review and Case study: Introduces research on indoor environmen-
tal quality and sustainability, including relevant standards and guidelines as 
well as explains the case. 
3. Methodology: Data collection methods, and analytical approaches used in the 
study. 
4. Results: Presents the findings from simulations and calculations. 
5. Discussion: Assessing the results, discussing their impacts, identifying poten-
tial improvements, limitations and addresses further issues to discuss. 
==PAGE:12==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
2 
 
6. Conclusion: Summarizes the key findings and provides recommendations for 
future research and practice. 
 
1.1 Significance of the study 
The topics addressed in this thesis are significant because they address a critical gap 
in the understanding of how sustainable housing performs in terms of indoor envi-
ronmental quality. Moreover, the findings will be relevant to others who aim to de-
sign buildings that are both environmentally sustainable and comfortable for occu-
pants. 
The overall purpose of this thesis, besides assisting Sciving in further developing 
their housing unit, is to contribute to a generally better understanding and 
knowledge of the indoor air quality in sustainable construction. The intention of this 
research is furthermore to ensure that homes designed to meet environmental goals 
do not compromise but rather contribute to providing a good and healthy living 
space where well-being and livability are paramount. This study hopefully inspires 
to make both the indoor environment and the sustainability aspect come together 
when designing future housing. 
 
==PAGE:13==
 
3 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
2.     Literature study 
 
2.1 Indoor environment 
Numerous studies underline the indoor climate challenge in schools and offices but 
fewer address the same issue in housing (Wargocki, 2018). Whichever the building 
typology, it is evident that the indoor environment affects people but just in different 
ways because no one is the same (Maykot, de Oliveira, Ghisi, & Forgiarini Rupp, 
2022). Studies identify occupancy behavior to be a crucial factor in how the indoor 
environment in homes is controlled, as personal preferences and lifestyle play a role 
(Korsholm, et al., 2021). Studies further demonstrate that the volume of a residence 
impacts the indoor climate more significantly as the volume decreases. The indoor 
climate results indicate that the housing shares the same drawbacks but also bene-
fits as the so-called tiny housing (Wotton, 2019). This means it is a challenge to main-
tain a good and comfortable indoor environment if not insulated properly or if the 
ventilation is inadequate (Mukhopadhyay, 2019). 
Indoor Environmental Quality (IEQ) covers several factors of which mainly four fac-
tors form the indoor environment. The important factors are the thermal environ-
ment, the visual environment, the acoustic environment, and the atmospheric envi-
ronment. These all affect how occupants perceive the indoor environment in a build-
ing. The four indoor environmental factors are illustrated in Figure 1. However, this 
study will not cover the acoustic environment but only address the three other main 
factors. 
 
Figure 1. The four primary factors impacting the indoor environment quality (IEQ) 
 
Thermal 
Environment
Visual 
Envirnoment
Indoor Air 
Quality
Acoustic 
Environment
 
IEQ 
==PAGE:14==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
4 
 
2.1.1 Thermal environment 
The thermal indoor environment parameter is impacted by temperature, humidity, 
and air velocity; however, the occupants’ satisfaction of the thermal comfort is also 
influenced by personal variables such as clothing and activity level. This study will 
delve into the temperatures and humidity but only touch the variable air velocity. 
The first aspect temperature has a vital part to play regarding the thermal in-
door comfort. The operative temperature in a room is a term for the overall 
influence of the air temperature, the mean radiant temperature, and the air 
velocity on the thermal comfort (Dansk Standard, 1993).  
According to DS/EN 16798-1 it is advised that the operative temperature in an oc-
cupied zone is consistent with comfort category II (Dansk Standard, 2019). See Table 
1 and Table 2. 
 
Table 1. Temperature ranges for hourly calculation of cooling and heating energy in four categories 
of indoor environment without mechanical cooling 
Type of building or space 
Category 
a 
Temperature range for 
heating seasons, °C 
Clothing approximately 
1,0 clo 
Temperature range for 
cooling seasons, °C 
Clothing approximately 
0,5 clo 
Residential buildings, living spaces 
(bedroom’s, living rooms, kitchens, 
etc.) 
Sedentary activities ~1,2 met 
I 
21,0-25,0 
23,5-25,5 
II 
20,0-25,0 
23,0-26,0 
III 
18,0-25,0 
22,0-27,0 
IV 
17,0-25,0 
21,0-28,0 
Residential buildings, other spaces 
(utility rooms, storage, etc.) 
Standing-walking activity ~1,5 met 
I 
18,0-25,0 
- 
II 
16,0-25,0 
- 
III 
14,0-25,0 
- 
a     The categories only apply at design/dimensioning indoor and outdoor temperatures 
 
Table 2. Design values of the indoor operative temperature in winter and summer for buildings with 
mechanical cooling systems 
Type of building or space 
Category 
Minimum operative 
temperature for 
heating seasons, °C 
Clothing approxi-
mately 
1,0 clo 
Maximum operative 
temperature for 
cooling seasons, °C 
Clothing approxi-
mately 
0,5 clo 
Residential buildings, living spaces 
(bedroom’s, living rooms, kitchens, 
etc.) 
I 
21,0 
25,5 
II 
20,0 
26,0 
III 
18,0 
27,0 
==PAGE:15==
 
5 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Sedentary activitiy ~1,2 met 
IV 
16,0 
28,0 
Residential buildings, other spaces 
(utility rooms, storage, etc.) 
Standing-walking activity ~1,5 met 
I 
18,0 
- 
II 
16,0 
- 
III 
14,0 
- 
NOTE – A 50% relative humidity level and low air velocity level (<0,1 m/s) is assumed 
 
The thermal indoor environment should comply with the building regulations and 
listed in Table 3 (Social- og Boligstyrelsen, 2018).  
 
Table 3. Requirements specification for the thermal indoor environment 
Category 
Standard 
Temperature tolerance a 
100 hours > 27 °C b 
25 hours > 28 °C b 
a     The requirements are only valid if the windows in the room of the housing unit is operable. 
b     The hours above only applies for the time of the year where the room is in use/occupied 
 
According to SBi 196 the operative temperature should at no point during the occu-
pied time of the year be below 18°C (Ole Valbjørn, 2000). 
The limits and recommendations regarding temperature are designed to give the oc-
cupants time and opportunity to adapt to the thermal environment. If people are in 
a too warm environment, they might experience hyperthermia, dehydration, or 
sleep problems where a very cold environment, can lead to shivers and weakening 
of the immune system (World Health Organization, 2018). 
The other aspect humidity is also an important factor in relation to the thermal 
indoor comfort. Humidity is more commonly referred to using the term rela-
tive humidity, which indicates the ratio between the actual amount of water 
vapour in the air and the maximal possible amount that the air can contain at the 
same temperature and pressure. In other contexts, the humidity can also be referred 
to by absolute humidity, which describes the actual amount of water vapour in the 
air. 
SBi 196 requires the relative humidity to be within the limits from 25% to 60% in 
dwellings when occupied but recommends keeping the relative humidity below 
40%-45% in winter (Ole Valbjørn, 2000). 
The limits are set to ensure an indoor environment that is neither too humid nor too 
dry. If a lot of moisture is present in a room, the risk of mold growth becomes high, 
which can give rise to health problems. Furthermore, when exposed to very humid 
environments the body’s ability to cool itself deteriorates together with the decrease 
==PAGE:16==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
6 
 
of sweat evaporation, which can lead to human heat stress. On the other hand, a dry 
indoor environment can cause eye irritation and a sore throat (Jane W. Baldwin, 
2023). 
 
2.1.2 Visual environment 
The visual environment is defined by the amount of natural light or daylight inside 
a room. 
Multiple factors contribute to the daylight access, which affects the visual 
comfort; the size of the openings, the orientation of the housing, the win-
dows’ properties, and if surrounding buildings or trees cause shading of 
the light or view out. Illuminance and visual comfort are used to describe 
the lighting and is an indicator of the luminous flux per unit area at a point on a 
surface measured in lux (Khanie, 2020).  
According to BR18, 50% of the relevant floor area of a room must be illuminated 
with 300 lux in minimum 50% of the daylight hours of the year in a housing unit 
(Social- og Boligstyrelsen, 2018). This requirement is equal to the minimum recom-
mendation according to DS/EN 17037+A1 as seen in Table 4 (Dansk Standard, 
2021). Alternatively, the 10%-rule can also be used to document, that a room has 
sufficient amount of daylight. This second method indicates that the glass area with-
out shading conditions must be equal to minimum 10% of the relevant floor area. 
 
Table 4. Recommendations regarding the approach to daylight through daylight openings on verti-
cal and sloping surfaces 
Recommended level 
for vertical and sloping 
daylight openings 
Value of 
illuminance 
Share of 
space for 
value 
Minimum 
value of 
illuminance 
Share of space 
for minimum 
value 
Percentage 
of daylight 
hours 
ET 
lx 
Fplane,% 
ETM 
lx 
Fplane,% 
Ftime,% 
Minimum 
300 
50 % 
100 
95 % 
50 % 
Mean 
500 
50 % 
300 
95 % 
50 % 
High 
750 
50 % 
500 
95 % 
50 % 
 
The amount of lighting in a room has a large influence on our well-being. Insufficient 
amount of daylight can lead to risks of occupants experiencing a negative impact on 
their mental health as well as a reduction in productivity. On the other hand, a well 
illuminated space can foster the power of concentration, improve performance, and 
not least lift the spirit among the occupants of the housing (FacilitiesNet, 2024). 
==PAGE:17==
 
7 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
2.1.3 Atmospheric environment 
The indoor air quality (IAQ) is defined by the numerous pollutants in the air – some 
more important than others. The air contains bio-effluents and volatile organic com-
pounds (VOC), that typically appear as gasses. Humans emits bio-effluents which in-
clude carbon dioxide and smell, influencing the air to be perceived inferior, where 
the VOCs refer to the organic chemicals emitted from interior and the building itself 
impacting the IAQ (Xiaojing Zhang, 2022). This study will only deal with the CO2-
concentration. 
The CO2 is focused on because humans live by breathing in O2 and exhaling 
CO2. This is also the reason why, the indoor air quality in buildings, where 
humans are the dominant source of pollution, is represented by the CO2-
concentration. As occupants in housing are the primary pollutant, it contributes 
largely to the development of the indoor air quality.   
In accordance with DS/EN 16798-1 the allowed level of carbon dioxide inside a 
housing is depending on the room type. As seen in Table 5, lower concentration is 
allowed in the bedroom than in other rooms of the housing and the CO2-concentra-
tion should comply with category I. 380 ppm above the outdoor concentration 
should not be exceeded in bedrooms where other rooms of the housing should keep 
under 550 ppm above outdoors (Dansk Standard, 2019). 
 
Table 5. Design ΔCO2-concentrations in bedrooms and other occupied rooms 
Category 
Design ΔCO2-concentration for bedrooms 
(ppm above outdoors) 
Design ΔCO2-concentration for other rooms 
(ppm above outdoors) 
I 
380 
550 
II 
550 
800 
III 
950 
1350 
IV 
950 
1350 
 
Headache, dizziness, irritation in eyes and respiratory tract infection are all symp-
toms associated with bad indoor air quality. The vital part is the concentration of the 
air pollutants because this is what defines the air quality of the indoor environment. 
However, elevated levels of carbon dioxide alone do not pose an actual health risk to 
people (Vinh Van Tran, 2020). 
 
==PAGE:18==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
8 
 
2.2 Sustainability 
To be sustainable or to foster sustainable development growth, needs to honor the 
present needs without risking future generations possibility of honoring their needs 
(Verdenskommissionen for Miljø og Udvikling, 1987). Sustainability has three per-
spectives which are the environmental, social, and economic sustainability. To assess 
sustainability all three aspects must be represented. 
 
Figure 2. The three perspectives of sustainability 
 
Environmental sustainability covers the green transition, building with respect of 
the environment as well as the climate, leaving as little footprint as possible. The 
second aspect regarding social sustainability represents equality and social justice 
for all without distinguishing status nor wealth. Economic sustainability is the third 
and last aspect. Budgets should reflect that the economy is managed in the best way 
where the value in the future is greater, it has potential to grow, or has the same value 
as today (GreenDozer, 2024). This means that sustainable construction is all about 
building affordable and healthy housing with a good indoor environment, and at the 
same time pay extensive regard to the environment as well as the climate 
(Bæredygtigt Byggeri, 2024). The three golden R’s in the pursuit of achieving sus-
tainability are to reduce, reuse and recycle. 
This study will primarily address environmental sustainability. 
 
2.2.1 Life Cycle Assessment of buildings 
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) is a quantitative and holistic method to address the en-
vironmental sustainability of products and systems by evaluating the environmental 
impact in the light of its life expectancy (UNEP, 2024). When doing a LCA on a build-
ing or housing unit both building materials and resources used to operate the 
 
 
Environmental 
Economic 
Social 
Sustainable 
==PAGE:19==
 
9 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
building are considered. The LCA makes it possible to see the most crucial spots so 
an improvement can be done but it can also be used to compare the footprint and 
environmental sustainability with other similar buildings. 
There are four phases of an LCA: Goal & Scope, Life Cycle Inventory (LCI), Life cycle 
Impact Assessment (LCIA) and Interpretation. In the first phase goal & scope, the 
aim and reasons to carry out the study are established as well as the system bound-
aries. The second phase LCI is all about calculating in and outputs of the framed sys-
tem. The LCIA involves the flows and emissions in the LCI associated with some en-
vironmental impact categories. The 9 most important of the 18 midpoint impact cat-
egories can be seen in Table 6. The last phase addresses the interpretation of the 
results in compliance with the goal & scope (European Commission, 2024). 
Much of the data used in the LCI comes from Environmental Product Declarations 
(EPD) which are composed in accordance with acknowledged European standards 
(Dansk Standard, 2019). An EPD contains information about the environmental im-
pact categories but also documents energy use and waste flows from cradle-to-grave 
(EPD Danmark, 2024). 
The building LCA consists of five stages with appurtenant modules: Product A1-A3, 
Construction process A4-A5, Use B1-B7, End of life C1-C4, Beyond the system bound-
ary D. If the End of Life of a product is wasted the analysis is called cradle-to-grave 
and span module A1-C4 but transition to cradle-to-cradle module A1-B7 and D when 
the product is reused or recycled (Ecochain, 2024) – see Figure 3. 
 
Table 6. Midpoint impact categories 
Midpoint impact category 
Abbreviations 
Unit 
Global warming potential 
GWP 
kg CO2 eq 
Stratospheric ozone depletion potential 
ODP 
kg CFC11 eq 
Formation of tropospheric ozone 
POCP 
kg Ethene eq 
Acidification potential of soil and water 
AP 
kg SO2 eq 
Eutrophication potential 
EP 
kg PO4 eq 
Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil resources 
ADPE 
kg Sb eq 
Abiotic depletion potential for fossil resources 
ADPF 
MJ 
Total use of primary energy sources 
PERT 
MJ 
Secondary energy use 
PENRT 
MJ 
 
 
 
==PAGE:20==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
10 
 
Life cycle stages and modules 
Product 
Construction 
process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond 
the system 
boundary 
Raw material supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy use 
Operational water use 
De-construction demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery and 
recycling potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Figure 3. The life cycle stages and modules for the building LCA (Dansk Standard, 2012) 
 
2.2.2 Guidelines and requirements 
An appendix was added to the BR18 the 1st of January 2023, stating that it was now 
mandatory to carry out an LCA on all new construction. Furthermore, it stated that 
buildings with more than 1.000 m2 heated floor area also must document a Global 
Warming Potential (GWP) of less than 12 kg CO2 equivalent per m2 per year without 
module D (EG A/S, 2023). If the voluntary low-emission class is to be complied with, 
the climate impact must not exceed 8 kg CO2 eq/m2/yr. These climate requirements 
are expected to be tightened every second year to help to give rise to more sustain-
able constructions in the future, see Figure 4 (VELFAC, 2022). 
 
Figure 4. The new climate requirements for new build 
New build < 1000 m2 
 
 
New build > 1000 m2 
 
 
Voluntary CO2-class 
2023            2024             2025             2026             2027            2028            2029            2030 
Requirement for LCA-
calculation without 
threshold value 
Threshold value of 
12 kg CO2-eq/m2/yr 
Threshold value of 
8 kg CO2-eq/m2/yr 
Revised requirement 
for threshold value 
of ex. 10,5 kg CO2-
eq/m2/yr 
Revised requirement 
for threshold value 
of ex. 9 kg CO2-
eq/m2/yr 
Revised requirement 
for threshold value 
of ex. 7,5 kg CO2-
eq/m2/yr 
Threshold value of 
7 kg CO2-eq/m2/yr 
Threshold value of 
6 kg CO2-eq/m2/yr 
Threshold value of 
5 kg CO2-eq/m2/yr 
==PAGE:21==
 
11 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Another initiative that focuses on adjusting the threshold value in the building reg-
ulations in the coming years is the Reduction Roadmap 2.0 (Artelia, EFFEKT & 
CEBRA, 2023). The interdisciplinary partnership behind the tool supports the green 
transition and a low but fair climate impact to contribute to achieving the goals of 
the Paris Agreement, which aims to limit the global temperature increase to 1,5°C.  
The emission from new build in Denmark today is on average 9,5 kg CO2 eq/m2/year 
but according to Reduction Roadmap 2.0 a new construction should only be allowed 
to emit 5,8 kg CO2 eq/m2/year in 2025 (Artelia, EFFEKT & CEBRA, 2023). 
More specific thresholds for different building typologies can be seen in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5. Reduction Roadmap 2.0’s proposal for the threshold values for buildings’ climate impact in 
2025 
 
On May 27, 2024, the government proposed a substantial tightening of the threshold 
values and dividing the climate requirement across different building types – see 
Table 7. The intention to tighten the threshold values is that the higher climate re-
quirements will ensure more green construction, through increased demand and in-
novation regarding new construction with low climate impact (Social-, Bolig- og 
Ældreministeriet, 2024). 
 
Table 7. Climate requirement for buildings in 2025 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
New build
average
Single-family-,
detached- and
row houses
Apartment
buildings,
dormitories,
etc.
Commercial
buildings,
schools, and
daycare
facilities
Actual emission 2023
Threshold 2025
Threshold 2023
==PAGE:22==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
12 
 
Building type 
GWP threshold value 
kg CO2 eq. /m2 /year 
Holiday homes, etc. 
4,0 
Single-family houses and row houses 
7,0 
Multi-family buildings 
8,0 
Office buildings 
8,0 
Institutions 
8,0 
Other new constructions, such as shops, 
warehouses, and parking garages 
9,0 
 
 
2.2.3 DGNB-certification 
In Denmark DGNB is a certification system whose criteria originate from the German 
organization DGNB (Deutsche Gesellschaft fu r Nachhaltiges Bauen). It is used to as-
sess building sustainability and is a global benchmark for sustainability. In Denmark 
the Green Building Council Denmark manages the DGNB benchmarking (German 
Sustainable Building Council, 2024). The LCA is one of the three fundamental pillars 
of DGNB. The other pillars are a holistic approach and performance orientation.  
DGNB manuals are produced to cover different building types or areas – these are 
updated regularly. The certification types are Renovation and new build, Service, 
Room, House and Urban areas. 
The DGNB can be divided into 6 sustainability areas: environmental, economic, so-
ciocultural, technical, process and site quality, where this study most focuses on the 
first three (German Sustainable Building Council, 2024). Within this certification it 
is possible to obtain Silver, Gold, or Platinum as a proof of the building’s quality. To 
obtain DGNB Silver certificate the overall result index needs to be 50% with mini-
mum 35% in each group result index, DGNB gold requires 65% in total and mini-
mum 50% in each group result index and only if the overall result is more than 80% 
where each group result index is 65% or more DGNB Platinum certification will be 
awarded. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. The three DGNB certificates: Silver, Gold, and Platinum. 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
13 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Furthermore, it’s possible for a project to obtain the special awards: DGNB Diamond, 
DGNB Heart or DGNB Planet. The certification will be marked with DGNB Diamond 
for acknowledgement of architectural quality, DGNB Heart if the project performs 
good on welfare and indoor climate and DGNB Plant mark is for projects that has an 
ambition of changing the construction industry within planetary boundaries. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The three special awards to the DGNB certificates: Diamond, Heart, and Planet. 
 
2.3 Energy performance 
Buildings account for almost 40% of the total energy consumption in Denmark, 
where the major part is allocated to heating, ventilation, and lighting 
(Energistyrelsen, 2024). 
Multiple factors impact the energy use in buildings – either directly or indirectly and 
some have a greater influence than others. Building energy use is affected by the 
climate and its surroundings in which the building is located as well as how well it 
is insulated, orientation, systems for heating, cooling, and venting but also occu-
pancy behavior is an important factor for the energy demand (Shuo Chen, 2021). 
Most of the systems used to maintain a good indoor environment consumes energy. 
The delivered energy to these energy consumptions in a building will be multiplied 
with its respective energy factor to make an estimation of the primary energy that 
needs to be traded (Energistyrelsen, 2024) – see Table 8. The term for this is also 
called the energy frame. The conversation factors describe the average amount of 
energy source the manufacturer need to produce in terms of supplying the costumer 
1,0 kWh. This entail the district heating to be the most effective type of primary en-
ergy, where more energy is generated in the process. The opposite is the case for 
electricity, because the energy is almost reduced by half before it reaches the cos-
tumer. 
 
Table 8. Primary energy sources and their conversion factor 
Energy source 
Conversion factor 
Electricity 
1,9 
District heating 
0,85 
Other 
1,0 
==PAGE:24==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
14 
 
 
In accordance with BR18, residential buildings, dormitories, hotels, and similar 
buildings must not exceed a total operational energy demand of 30,0 kWh/m2 per 
year plus an additional 1.000 kWh divided with the heated floor area per year – this 
includes heating, cooling, ventilation, and domestic hot water (Social- og 
Boligstyrelsen, 2018). This requirement is corresponding to the energy label A2015, 
see Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. Energy labelling of houses in Denmark (Energistyrrelsen, 2024) 
 
2.3.1 Building envelope requirements 
The thermal envelope covers all building components separating the indoors from 
the outdoors, that includes exterior walls, roofs, foundations, ground decks, doors 
and windows. It is the component that besides its structural function, serves as a 
shell controlling the heat, energy and matter flows through here, which thereby has 
an influence on the indoor climate but also impacts the energy consumption. Table 
9 shows the relevant building components with corresponding BR18 requirements 
for the heat transfer coefficient (Social- og Boligstyrelsen, 2018). 
 
Table 9. Primary energy sources and their conversion factor 
Building component 
U-value 
Exterior wall 
0,30 m2K 
Ground deck 
0,20 m2K 
Roof 
0,20 m2K 
 
Energy label 
Limit value kWh/m2 
A2020 
27 
A2015 
< 30,0 + 1.000/Area 
A2010 
< 52,5 + 1.650/Area 
B 
< 70,0 + 2.200/Area 
C 
< 110 + 3.200/Area 
D 
< 150 + 4.200/Area 
E 
< 190 + 5.200/Area 
F 
< 240 + 6.500/Area 
G 
< 240 + 6.500/Area 
==PAGE:25==
 
15 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
3.     Case study 
Sciving is a startup whose mission is to provide sustainable and affordable Scandi-
navian student housing. The company delivers tiny, simple, and sustainable modular 
housing solutions that fit all terrains as well as a spacious, light, and modern design 
– see Figure 9. As Sciving is a new company, this residence is their first design. 
(Sciving, 2024). 
The following section will encompass the design of Sciving’s student housing and 
describe the materials and building services used, which have a great impact on the 
performance of the indoor climate and sustainability. 
 
Figure 9. 3D illustration of Sciving’s modular housing vision 
 
3.1 Location & layout 
Sciving’s housing unit is constructed as a standalone building. However, since Sciv-
ing’s vision for the project has evolved, this master thesis will consider, analyze, and 
assess the unit as if it were a residence connected at the end of a series of three sim-
ilar housing units. The adjustment is aimed at making this report more relevant to 
Sciving’s envision for the framework of the housing unit. 
A prototype housing unit is located at DTU in the 1st quadrant between building 119 
and building 121A as seen in Figure 10. The unit has a heated floor area of 16,1 m2 
which covers a bathroom of 3,2m2 and a 12,9m2 sized room that serves as both 
kitchen-dining area, living room and bedroom. The layout of the housing unit is il-
lustrated in Figure 11 and Figure 12. 
==PAGE:26==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
16 
 
 
 
Figure 10. The location of Sciving’s housing unit at DTU marked with full green area. 
Striped green area is marking area for additional housing units. 
 
 
Figure 11. Floor plan of Sciving’s student housing 
 
==PAGE:27==
 
17 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
  
 
Figure 12. Sciving’s student housing unit from inside 
 
The building is constructed on a pile foundation 0,5 meters above the ground and 
has a flat roof. External walls towards north, east, and south are exposed to the cli-
matic conditions, where the wall facing west adjoins the neighboring dwelling. More-
over, the housing unit has six smaller windows that together form a large window 
facing south – three of the six windows are operable. Furthermore, the main en-
trance, which shares the same design as the window, is also located on the south-
facing façade – see Figure 13. Given that the building is not located in a city center 
surrounded by dense urban development nor in terrain fully exposed to wind and 
weather, it is considered as semi-exposed. 
==PAGE:28==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
18 
 
 
Figure 13. The façade of Sciving’s housing unit 
 
3.2 Construction & materials 
Scivings' residential unit is mounted on top of point foundations – more specifically, 
six screw foundations from BAYO. The ground screw used for this project is the 
Screw Round M16 76x1250, which is made of hot-dip galvanized steel, with a weight 
of approximately 10.2 kg each. The location of the screw foundations can be seen in 
Figure 14. 
 
Figure 14. The screw foundation 
 
==PAGE:29==
 
19 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
The load-bearing structure consists solely of timber. The beams framing the ground 
deck and the roof are glulam beams primarily made of spruce wood.  C24 roof 
trusses constitute the vertical construction, consisting of 59% spruce and 41% pine. 
The structural framework is assembled with joist hangers and angle brackets both 
made of galvanized steel S250GD with corrosion prevention of zinc Z275. See Figure 
15 to study the load-bearing construction. 
 
Figure 15. The load-bearing structures 
 
The following Figures 16-22 illustrate the composition of the housing elements. 
 
Figure 16. Construction of the KDLB-rooms roof 
Roof (KDLB-room) 
Roofing felt, 4mm 
Plywood, 18mm 
Air cavity, 70mm 
Wind barrier, 9mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 195mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 45mm 
Plywood, 18mm 
Gypsum board, 13mm 
 
U-value = 0,17 W/m2K 
==PAGE:30==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
20 
 
 
Figure 17. Construction of the bathrooms roof 
 
Figure 18. Construction of the KDLB-rooms ground deck 
 
 
Figure 19. Construction of the bathrooms ground deck 
Roof (Bathroom) 
Roofing felt, 4mm 
Plywood, 18mm 
Air cavity, 70mm 
Wind barrier, 9mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 195mm 
Vapor barrier, 0,2mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 45mm 
Plywood, 18mm 
Gypsum board, 13mm 
 
U-value = 0,17 W/m2K 
Ground deck (KDLB-room) 
Bamboo flooring, 19mm 
Sound damping flooring, 2mm 
Plywood, 18mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 45mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 195mm 
Wind barrier, 9mm 
 
U-value = 0,18 W/m2K 
Ground deck (Bathroom) 
Vinyl flooring, 2mm 
Plywood, 18mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 45mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 195mm 
Wind barrier, 9mm 
 
U-value = 0,18 W/m2K 
==PAGE:31==
 
21 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Figure 20. Construction of the KDLB-rooms exterior wall 
 
Figure 21. Construction of the bathrooms exterior wall 
Exterior wall (KDLB-room) 
Bamboo façade plank, 12mm 
Air cavity, 25mm 
Wind barrier, 9mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 145mm 
Plywood, 18mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 45mm 
Gypsum board, 13mm 
Oak veneered MDF, 16mm 
 
U-value = 0,21 W/m2K 
Exterior wall (Bathroom) 
Bamboo façade plank, 12mm 
Air cavity, 25mm 
Wind barrier, 9mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 145mm 
Plywood, 18mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 45mm 
Gypsum board, 13mm 
Fibo wall panels, 11mm 
 
U-value = 0,21 W/m2K 
==PAGE:32==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
22 
 
 
Figure 22. Construction of the interior wall 
 
In addition to Figure 16-22, the following should be mentioned: 
⎯ The plywood used in the building elements is made of pine wood. 
⎯ The insulation material is Knauf Formstykker 34 (Ecobat), which is glass min-
eral wool. 
Concerning Figure 16-17 and Figure 20-21: 
⎯ Pressure-treated spruce wood spacers are used in the cavities. 
⎯ The gypsum are Gyproc Ergonomic plasterboards. 
Following applies to Figure 16-17: 
⎯ Derbigum NT, a 2-layer system, is used as roof covering. 
It goes for Figure 17 that: 
⎯ The vapor barrier is the product Cembrit Windstopper Extreme from Swis-
spearl. 
For Figure 19 it also applies that: 
⎯ The vinyl flooring in the bathroom is Tarkett's Optima vinyl flooring. 
And concerning only Figure 18: 
⎯ The floor in the KDLB-room is Holse & Wibroe's traditional bamboo plank TM 
without surface treatment. 
About Figure 21-22 it applies that: 
Interior wall 
Fibo wall panels, 11mm 
Construction wood incl. insulation, 95mm 
Plywood, 18mm 
Oak veneered MDF, 16mm 
 
U-value = 0,40 W/m2K 
==PAGE:33==
 
23 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
⎯ The wet room panels in the bathroom are Fibo wall panels primarily consist-
ing of birch veneer, high-pressure laminate, and a small amount of adhesive. 
Finally, following must be mentioned about Figure 20-21: 
⎯ The bamboo planks for the facade come from Holse and Wibroe. 
 
The front door and the windows used in Sciving’s housing unit is provided by the 
Danish company Krone Vinduer. Both are 3-paned elements that have the structure 
4-16-4-14-6. It is assumed that the gap between the glass layers is filled with 10% 
air and 90% argon, and that the glass has a solar factor of 71.9% and a light trans-
mittance of 75.6% – see Figure 23. 
Moreover, the timber used as frames and for the sashes is made of hardwood oak, 
with an aluminum profile respectively finishing the bottom of each of the two ele-
ments. 
 
Figure 23. Construction of the window/glass door 
 
3.3 Building services 
Building services are a key factor and has a great impact on the indoor climate in 
buildings. Sciving’s unit has ventilation- and a heating systems as its building ser-
vices, which will be described further in the following sections. 
 
3.3.1 Ventilation 
DUKA ONE Pro 50+ is a decentralized ventilation system used in the housing unit 
where it is installed in the KDLB-room. The ventilation system is CAV controlled and 
regulated based on the temperature and the relative humidity that it measures in the 
room. The fan in the unit alternates between intake and exhaust function, where 
Window/Glass door 
Glass, 4mm 
Gap, 16mm 
Glass, 4mm 
Gap, 14mm 
Glass, 6mm 
 
U-value = 1,07/1,06 W/m2K 
==PAGE:34==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
24 
 
each cycle takes 70 seconds. The DUKA ventilation system ventilates with the con-
stant air volume of 11,1 L/s, unless the relative humidity exceeds 60%, then the air-
flow increases to 16,7L/s. Furthermore, inside the DUKA ventilator is a heat ex-
changer, that can use the heat from the exhaust air to heat the incoming supply air 
from outside. The heat exchanger operates by switching off when the temperature 
of the exhaust air exceeds 21°C. In addition, it should be mentioned that the ventila-
tion system doesn’t use cooling, which is tantamount to the supply air temperature 
being the same as the outdoor air temperature, when the exhaust air exceeds the 
21°C (Duka Ventilation, 2024). 
Figure 24 shows pictures of the ventilation system in the housing unit. 
Figure 24. The DUKA ventilation system 
 
3.3.2 Heating 
Mitsubishi LN25-HERO heat pump is the primary heating system used in the housing 
unit and it is installed just below the ceiling in the KDLB-room with the duct going 
out the back of the housing unit. A secondary heating system of Termo Slim Line 
electric glass panel is mounted on the wall above the toilet in the bathroom to sup-
plement the primary heating system so that a good indoor environment will be 
maintained. 
The heat pump seen in Figure 25 has two parts – an indoor- and an outdoor unit. 
The outdoor unit of the heat pump has the function of extracting heat from the out-
door air. Subsequently, the heat is transferred to the heating surface within the part 
of the Mitzubishi unit that is inside the housing unit. The indoor unit of the heat 
pump then cleans and heats the indoor air by recirculating it, which means the heat 
pump does not contribute to the ventilation. The unit installed in Scivings housing 
unit doesn’t use cooling but 19°C has been set as the heating point by a remote. This 
spell, that the heating function will switch off when the temperature in the room 
exceeds the 19°C. The Mitzubishi heat pump has a total weight of 50,32 kg and a 
==PAGE:35==
 
25 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
nominal heating capacity of 3,2kW and a nominal cooling capacity of 2,5kW if the 
unit also is set to cool (Mitsubishi Electric, 2024). 
Figure 25. The Mitzubishi heat pump 
 
The electric panel seen in Figure 26 has the power of 400 watts. This heating unit 
has a temperature sensor and an electrical thermostat. In this housing unit it is de-
termined that the setpoint for the temperature is 18°C, which means that the ther-
mostat will reduce the heat output or turn off the power to the radiator to prevent 
the room temperature from exceeding the desired temperature (Termo, 2024). 
Figure 26. The Termo electric panel 
 
3.3.3 Sanitary installations 
KDE5 electronic LCD is an electric flow through water heater which is used to heat 
the water that will be consumed as hot water in the bathroom and kitchen. This wa-
ter heater is installed in the wall behind the sink in the bathroom of the housing. 
With a heat capacity of 12kW, the hot water can be heated to temperatures in the 
range of 30°C - 60°C (KOSPEL, 2024). 
Figure 27 shows a picture of the water heater used in the unit. 
==PAGE:36==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
26 
 
Figure 27. The electric water heater 
 
 
 
==PAGE:37==
 
27 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
4.     Methodology 
 
4.1 Settings, conditions, definitions, and assumptions 
4.1.1 Indoor environment simulation 
The software IDA ICE (IDA Indoor Climate and Energy) is in this project used to es-
timate the indoor environment and energy consumption in Sciving’s housing unit.  
IDA ICE is a dynamic simulation tool that can estimate temperatures, the air humid-
ity, CO2-concentrations, illumination, airflows, heat gains, and losses as well as the 
energy use and -production based on the inputs it receives. 
Parameters and values not described or defined by Sciving is set as default in IDA 
ICE. This includes the ambient air CO2 level of 400 ppm, infiltration of 0,2 L/s·m2, 
daylight is measured 0,85 m above floor and overcast sky. The envelope area is set 
to overall internal with thermal bridges as shown in Figure 28. 
 
 
Figure 28. Default values for the thermal bridges of Sciving’s unit in IDA ICE 
 
==PAGE:38==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
28 
 
4.1.1.1 The model in IDA ICE 
Based on Scivings interest to install the housing unit in a rowhouse setting instead 
of using it as a standalone unit, the onsite prototype has been modified to fit their 
vision of the housing unit as explained in Chapter 3 – Case study. Otherwise, the 
model in IDA ICE is designed with the same dimensions, orientation and material 
properties as the drawings and documents that were received from Sciving. If the 
thermal values of a material in the construction is unknown, general values for the 
specific material will be used in IDA ICE (IESVE, 2024). 
  
 
Figure 29. 3D-model of the housing unit in IDA ICE together with its surrounding building envelope 
 
Since Sciving’s housing unit has been completed but not started using by a resident 
prior to the end of this master thesis, the use, internal loads for occupancy and dif-
ferent systems will be assumed based on the Industry Guide for Indoor Climate Cal-
culations' charts as in Appendix A – Schedules for occupancy and internal loads de-
pending on room (Mette Havgaard Vorre, 2017). The main room in the housing 
(KDLB-room) serves as both the kitchen-dining area, living room and bedroom, 
hence the schedules and internal loads will be a combination of the industry guide-
lines’ definitions for those rooms. The equipment’s utilization factors used as input 
to the simulations are assumptions as well as the long wave radiation fraction for 
the computer and the steam generated in the shower. Table 10-13 describe sched-
ules and associated settings. 
 
Table 10. Occupancy schedules and associated settings 
Occupancy 
Room 
Profile 
Notes 
KDLB-room 
Weekdays: 0-7, 7:30-8, 16:30-22, 22:30-24 
Weekend:  0-9, 9:30-23, 23:30-24 
1 person with activity level of 1,2 met 
and constant clothing of 0,75 ±0,25 CLO 
==PAGE:39==
 
29 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Bathroom 
Weekdays: 7-7:30, 22-22:30 
Weekend:  9-9:30, 23-23:30 
1 person with activity level of 1,5 met 
and constant clothing of 0,75 ±0,25 CLO 
 
Table 11. Equipment schedules and associated settings for the KDLB-room 
KDLB-room 
Internal gain 
Profile 
Load 
Energy carrier 
Light 
Weekdays: 7:30-8, 16:30-22 
Weekend: 9:30-10, 15-23 
4 units 
7 W/unit 
120 lm/W 
Electricity 
Fridge 
Always on   
1 unit 
50 W/unit 
Utilization factor: 0,3 
Electricity 
Computer 
Weekdays: 16:30-18 
Weekend: 9:30-11:30 
1 unit 
30 W/unit 
Long wave radiation fraction: 0,5 
Utilization factor 0,6 
Electricity 
Stove 
Weekdays: 18-18:30 
Weekend:  18:30-19 
1 unit 
1000 W/unit 
Utilization factor: 1 
Electricity 
 
Table 12. Equipment schedules and associated settings for the Bathroom 
Bathroom 
Internal gain 
Profile 
Load 
Energy carrier 
Light 
Weekdays: 7-7:30, 22-22:30 
Weekend:  9-9:30, 23-23:30 
2 units 
7 W/unit 
120 lm/W 
Electricity 
Shower 
Weekdays: 7-7:10 
Weekend:  9-9:10 
1 unit 
12.000 W/unit 
Dry steam emission: 0,002 kg/s 
Utilization factor: 0,7 
Electricity 
 
Table 13. Schedule and fan power for the extraction devices  
Extraction devices 
Room 
Profile 
Exhaust 
KDLB-room 
Weekdays: 18-18:30 
Weekend:  18:30-19 
Kitchen hood: CAV of 1,6 L/(s·m2) 
Bathroom 
Always on 
Extractor fan: CAV of 3,47 L/(s·m2) 
 
==PAGE:40==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
30 
 
Furthermore, there was a lack of information regarding the window and front door 
used in Sciving’s housing unit. Of the glazing properties, only the transmission coef-
ficient is stated and thereby a 3-layer glass combination made with Guardian Glass 
Analytics tool online is done, which can be seen in Appendix B1 – Model of the orig-
inal window. The assumed glass properties are based on the result from this tool as 
showed in Table 14. 
 
Table 14. Glazing properties for the window and front door 
Glazing properties 
Property 
Value 
Total solar transmittance, g 
71,9 % 
Direct solar transmittance, Te 
65,3 % 
Light transmittance, Tv 
75,6 % 
U-value of glazing 
1,074 W/m2K 
 
To make IDA ICE simulate a window that is operable, input parameters needed to be 
defined. The input parameters are a PI temperature control and a schedule, that will 
make the window open and close in the housing unit. The PI temperature control 
ensures that the window opens when the set temperature is exceeded where the 
schedule defines at what time of the year the window is operable so that the window 
isn’t open when the resident is not home or is asleep. General settings for openings 
in the housing unit is listed in Table 15. 
 
Table 15. Schedules for openings 
Openings 
Item 
Profile 
Windows 
1. Dec – 28. Feb: Always closed 
Weekdays:  7-8, 17-23 
Weekends: 8-24 
Front door 
Always closed 
Sliding door 
Always open 
==PAGE:41==
 
31 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
The controller setpoints for the two rooms are seen in Table 16. Also, setpoint tem-
peratures for the window opening control, heating and cooling systems are con-
trolled by the zone setpoints. 
 
Table 16. Temperature setpoints in the two rooms in the unit 
Setpoints 
Room 
Min. temperature 
Max. temperature 
KDLB-room 
19 °C 
24 °C 
Bathroom 
18 °C 
 
4.1.1.2 General IDA ICE settings 
In IDA ICE the model is simulated by using global data with Jægersborg as the loca-
tion, and the wind profile being suburban. DRY_2001-2010_epw is the weather data 
file that IDA ICE uses when simulating. The building is simulated with pressure co-
efficients corresponding to a semi-exposed location. The IDA ICE results illustrated 
as a function of time, will have an automatic smoothing degree of 2 corresponding 
to ±24 minutes to reduce simulation times. 
 
4.1.2 Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
The LCA is carried out in accordance with the European standards DS/EN 
15643:2021 Sustainability of construction works – Framework for assessment of 
buildings and civil engineering works, DS/EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 Sustainability of 
construction works – Environmental product declarations – Core rules for the product 
category of construction products and DS/EN 15978 Sustainability of construction 
works – Assessment of environmental performance of buildings – Calculation method.  
Several factors have an influence on the performed LCA, which will be elaborated 
in the following (Hauschild, 2018). 
 
4.1.2.1 Goal of the LCA 
The intended application of the results is mainly to document the environmental 
performance of Scivings student housing unit. However, the aim of this study is also 
to compare and evaluate environmental impacts from changes in the building design 
and secondary to identify the products that contribute most to its environmental 
impact through a hot spot identification. 
==PAGE:42==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
32 
 
There are limitations due to methodological choices since Sciving hasn’t delivered 
all necessary information on products used in the housing unit, which is crucial and 
will influence the results of the final LCA. 
Much information is unknown due to the fact that the housing unit is a development 
project. Therefore, this LCA will mainly be based on assumptions to cover the un-
known information. 
The decision context is that the results from this study will be used and disclosed 
only for internal purposes within Sciving, and the reason to carry out the study is to 
present to Sciving how the housing unit performs. The documentation of the envi-
ronmental footprint deduced from the LCA can guide Sciving in their further devel-
opment of their student housing. Given that the LCA results are just for decision sup-
port and will not lead to any largescale consequences, the decision context is Micro-
level (Hauschild, 2018). 
Moreover, the target audience are primarily Sciving, but also manufacturers, inves-
tors and other stakeholders who potentially will live in the student housing. 
 
4.1.2.2 Scope of the LCA 
The object of assessment is the small student housing unit, that has functions as de-
scribed below in Table 17. 
 
Table 17. Functions of the product 
Product 
Main function 
Other functions 
Housing unit 
Residence for 1 person 
Provide: 
• Shelter from weather 
• Comfort in relation to indoor environment 
• Facilities for sleeping, cooking, dining, personal 
hygiene, and for studying 
• Privacy from public areas 
• Sustainability through eco-friendly practices 
 
The LCA has been conducted with a consideration period of 50 years, where the life 
expectancies of various products are defined by the lifespan tables in LCAbyg, which 
were composed by BUILD from BUILD REPORT 2021:32 – BUILD Lifespan Table – 
Version 21. 
Above-mentioned forms the basis of the functional unit: 
==PAGE:43==
 
33 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
• Provide a tiny and sustainable but livable home for 1 adult for 50 years in 
Denmark 
The environmental parameters are the lifespan of building components and number 
of hours in use per year. 
The LCI modelling framework is defined by the simulation and calculation tool 
LCAbyg along with the software’s limitations. The system boundaries are a cradle-
to-grave scope that includes module A1-A3, B4, B6 and C3-C4 as seen in Table 18. 
Module D is out of system boundary but is still entered in the program. Moreover, all 
environmental inputs to LCAbyg are based on data from product-specific Environ-
mental Product Declarations (EPD). For products and materials that are not speci-
fied by Sciving, the EPD for a similar product is used. All EPD’s used in this thesis are 
sourced from epddanmark.dk or epdhub.com and can be found in Appendix I – En-
vironmental Product Declarations. 
 
Table 18. List of the stages which the program LCAbyg includes  
A1-A3 
Product stage 
A4-A5 
Construction 
process 
B1-B7 
Use 
C1-C4 
End of life 
D 
Beyond 
the system 
boundary 
Raw material supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy use 
Operational water use 
De-construction demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery and 
recycling potential 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
X 
X 
(X) 
 
4.1.2.3 Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) 
Regarding input data in LCAbyg, there are certain limitations, that are important to 
address first. According to BR18, all sub-components in constructions of the build-
ing are included in the LCA-calculation. This includes roofs, exterior and interior 
walls, decks and similar components from the internal to the external surfaces.  
On the other hand, fasteners such as nails, screws, and gusset plates are not included 
unless they are large assemblies significant to the structural system. Similarly, seal-
ants and lists are excluded. Finally, an estimate for straight runs of pipes and wires 
for technical installations is included (Social- og Boligstyrelsen, 2018). It should be 
==PAGE:44==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
34 
 
noted that installations for heat production, ventilation, and water heating are also 
included. 
Regarding energy consumption as an input to the LCA calculation, the following ap-
plies. Sciving's original housing unit was modeled in both IDA ICE and Be18 to ex-
amine the operational energy consumption. Comparing the results for energy use 
from IDA ICE with those from the simulations in Be18 shows a high degree of con-
sistency, with the Be18 result being 5% lower. Due to time constraints and the strong 
alignment between the operational energy consumption of the two models, further 
modeling and simulation in Be18 was omitted. Therefore, the energy consumption 
from IDA ICE is used as input in LCAbyg. 
The calculation of quantities for all products used to construct the unit done in Excel 
are to be found in Appendix C – Material quantity calculations in Excel. Values for all 
midpoint impact categories are typed in LCAbyg for EPD’s following Standard EN 
15804+A1, where it is only the indicator GWP that is entered in LCAbyg if the EPD 
follows EN 15804+A2. The amounts and global warming potentials entered as input 
to LCAbyg can be seen in Appendix D – Input to LCAbyg. General settings in the pro-
gram are displayed in Table 19. 
 
Table 19. General settings in LCAbyg 
General settings 
Building typology 
131 – Rowhouse 
Project type 
New build 
Stories above ground 
1 floor 
Gross floor area 
16,1 m2 
Reference study period 
50 years 
 
 
4.1.2.4 Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) 
GWP has been selected as the measure representing environmental sustainability, 
which is the reason that only results concerning the impact on GWP will be assessed. 
 
4.1.2.5 Interpretation 
From LCAbyg it is exclusively the chosen measurement unit that will be interpreted 
and discussed. 
 
==PAGE:45==
 
35 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
4.1.3 DGNB-certification 
Based on the 2023 DGNB manual for new buildings and extended renovations 
(Green Building Council Denmark, 2023) a matrix in Excel is created. The certifica-
tion matrix only needs inputs of achieved points for each criterion to automatically 
calculate and tell if and which certification the building type dwelling will obtain. 
The approach is as follows: 
1. To determine the achieved points for the criterion names, the methods de-
scribed in the manual is followed. When the method or procedure to docu-
ment the points is unavailable or unknown, an estimate of the points within 
the specific criterion name is assumed. 
2. Achieved points, maximum possible points, weighting for each criterion 
name and group weighting is typed in the excel sheet according to the man-
ual. 
3. Then achieved weighting points as well as the maximum weighting points are 
calculated by multiplying respectively the achieved or maximum points with 
its corresponding weighting. 
4. Next, the achieved and maximum points for each criterion group is deter-
mined when all points within each quality is summed up. 
5. The group result index for each quality is the outcome of the achieved points 
for each criterion group divided with the maximum points for each criterion 
group. 
6. Finally, the overall result index is a sum of all six qualities’ group result index 
multiplied with the corresponding group weighting and the matrix will show 
if any and which DGNB-certification is obtained. 
 
4.2 Approach to develop and assess the unit 
The first step to improve and optimize Sciving’s student housing unit is to design 
variations of the original housing unit to evaluate their impact regarding indoor en-
vironment, sustainability, and energy. The parameters having the most substantial 
influence on the building design, will be assessed at first. Variables corresponding to 
heating type, solar shading and ventilation will be assessed mainly based on indoor 
environmental parameters where the insulation material is assessed primarily in 
the light of sustainability. Afterwards, alternatives with the best results will be com-
bined into an optimized housing unit. This optimized housing unit will then go 
through stage two of the optimization where the parameters having less influence 
on the building design will be assessed. It all leads to an assessment of indoor envi-
ronment quality, global warming potential, DGNB-certification, and energy use in a 
final design unit. Table 20 shows the progression of parameters and variables. 
==PAGE:46==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
36 
 
To understand the changes being examined at the various stages of the optimization, 
a column that elaborates and specifies all variables of the dwelling improvement has 
been added to the Table 20. An expanded table with specific values and changes done 
in each optimization scenario can be found in Appendix H – Expanded table related 
to optimization scenarios. 
It is important that the dwelling and its results, both during and after the optimiza-
tion, are viewed from a holistic perspective and assessed accordingly. 
 
Table 20. The parameter and corresponding variables referring to the optimization process and as-
sessment of the Sciving’s housing unit 
Stage 1 – Design and assessment of original housing unit 
Stage 2 – Optimization of original housing unit 
Heating type 
Original heat pump with cooling 
Smaller heat pump without cooling 
Smaller heat pump with cooling 
Floor heating but no el-panel 
Bigger electric panel 
Insulation material 
* 
Straw 
Wood fibre 
Hemp 
Paper granules 
Solar shading 
Solid front door – no glass 
Louvres 
Overhang 
Active external blinds 
Surface layer in front door/window 
(Appendix B2 – Model of the optimized window) 
Ventilation 
Window in bathroom 
Skylight in KBLD-room 
Stage 3 – Design and assessment of optimized housing unit 
Stage 4 – Improvement of optimized housing unit 
Comfort & Energy 
Set temperatures 
Solar panels 
Stage 5 – Design and assessment of final housing unit 
*   NOTE – When referring to insulation material, it is only the thickest layer in the building element that changes 
==PAGE:47==
 
37 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
In consequence of the changes made to the housing unit, the new settings will be 
adjusted in IDA ICE, LCAbyg and the certification matrix. 
Analyses of various set temperatures and solar panels were not included in this re-
port.  
 
4.2.1 Comparison of GWP-values 
When the constructions in Sciving’s original housing unit are compared with refer-
ence values in relation to GWP, the calculations comply with the Danish building reg-
ulation’s method (Social- og Boligstyrelsen, 2018). The reference values and calcu-
lation methods can be found in Appendix F – GWP calculation for reference building 
elements. 
 
4.2.2 Comparison of operational energy use 
When the operational energy use for Sciving’s housing unit is compared with other 
building typologies the following is assumed: 
 
Table 21. Assumptions with reference to each building typology 
Building type 
Operational energy 
consumption 
(kWh/m2/year) 
Number of 
occupants 
(Persons) 
Thermal envelope 
area 
(m2) 
Dorm 
91 
1 
22,5 
Apartment 
107 
2 
78,0 
Row house 
133 
3 
258,0 
Single family house 
170 
4 
344,0 
 
The operational energy use covers the energy used to heat, cool, and ventilate the 
building as well as the energy used for domestic hot water (DHW) – i.e. the opera-
tional energy use does not include other equipment in the household. 
 
4.2.3 Other climates 
Given the fact that Sciving has plans of setting up their housing units at Roskilde 
University in Denmark, at the German island Femern, in Oxford in the UK and in Dub-
lin in Ireland, simulations in IDA ICE will be run to study the impact of their 
==PAGE:48==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
38 
 
corresponding climates on the indoor environment. Furthermore, the influence of 
the locations on the GWP and energy consumption will also be evaluated. In addi-
tion, four various locations with different and more extreme climates are studied as 
a reference: 
• Aswan, Egypt: Tropical climate, Warm and dry weather profile 
• Bele m, Brazil: Sub-equatorial climate, Warm and humid weather profile 
• Bergen, Norway: Temperate climate, Cold and humid weather profile 
• Siberia, Russia: Sub-arctic climate, Cold and dry weather profile 
The 8 locations’ external weather data used as input in IDA ICE are location files and 
IWEC2 climate files from the simulation tool’s own database. 
In the energy and indoor climate simulations, it has not been accounted for that 
countries other than Denmark may have different energy factors due to less or more 
green sources for energy production. Furthermore, it has not been considered that 
materials used may not be available in the selected countries, where another Envi-
ronmental Product Declaration (EPD) with different values for GWP otherwise 
would be used. 
 
==PAGE:49==
 
39 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
5.     Results 
 
5.1 Overall assessment of the original housing unit 
The simulations done in IDA ICE and LCAbyg of Sciving’s original housing unit have 
after data processing resulted in the outcomes in Table 22. All results can also be 
found in Appendix G – Results from IDA ICE and LCAbyg organized in Excel.  
 
Table 22. Indoor environment, sustainability and energy consumption results of Sciving’s original 
housing unit compared against requirements and recommendations 
Assessment subject 
Requirement 
Recommendation 
Results of analysis 
Room 
Indoor environment 
Max. 100 hours 
above 27°C 
- 
256 h above 27°C  
KDLB 
200 h above 27°C 
Bath 
Max. 25 hours 
above 28°C 
- 
180 h above 28°C 
KDLB 
156 h above 28°C 
Bath 
- 
Operative tempera-
ture in Category II 
100% 
52 % of occupancy 
hours within Cat. II 
KDLB 
25 % of occupancy 
hours within Cat. II 
Bath 
Minimum relative 
humidity 25 % 
- 
8,6 % of occupancy 
hours is below 25 % 
RH 
KDLB 
2,2 % of occupancy 
hours is below 25 % 
RH 
Bath 
Maximum relative 
humidity 60 % 
- 
4,7 % of occupancy 
hours is above 60 % 
RH 
KDLB 
50,9 % of occu-
pancy hours is 
above 60 % RH 
Bath 
50 % of the rele-
vant floor area is il-
luminated with 300 
lux in min. 50 % of 
the daylight hours 
- 
83,5 % of the rele-
vant floor area is il-
luminated with 300 
lux in 50 % of the 
daylight hours 
KDLB 
- 
Max. CO2-concen-
tration of 780 ppm 
Max. CO2-concen-
tration is 696 ppm  
KDLB 
- 
Max. CO2-concen-
tration of 950 ppm 
Max. CO2-concen-
tration is 990 ppm 
Bath 
==PAGE:50==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
40 
 
Sustainability 
LCA-calculation but 
no GWP-value 
- 
LCA has been car-
ried out with the 
result of emitting 
9,74 kg CO2 
eq./m2/year 
Building 
Energy consumption 
Limit value of 92,1 
kWh/m2 for opera-
tional energy use 
- 
Operational energy 
use consumes 69,8 
kWh/m2 
Building 
 
The results show that both rooms in the house exceed the requirements of a maxi-
mum of 27°C by more than double the allowed number of exceedance hours but also 
exceed 28°C more than six times number of hours the hours allowed. 
The Kitchen-Dining-Living-Bedroom comply with the recommendation just above 
half the occupancy hours where the bathroom only in 25% of the time meet the rec-
ommended Cat. II. 
Regarding the relative humidity, none of the rooms in the housing accommodate the 
requirements entirely. 
Since 83,5 % of the relevant floor area is illuminated as required, the visual environ-
ment exceeds the requirement. 
Furthermore, the indoor air quality and the maximum CO2-concentration in KDLB-
room is below and thereby comply with the recommended level 100% of the time. 
The advised level is exceeded in the bathroom with 40 ppm, however it should be 
mentioned that the CO2-concentration does comply with the recommendations 99% 
of the occupancy hours. 
Since a Life Cycle Assessment has been carried out for this building the requirement 
has been met. The Life Cycle Impact Assessment (LCIA) show that the Global Warm-
ing Potential (GWP) result of 9,74 kg CO2 eq./m2/year for this building compared 
with what a new build in average emits in 2023, the GWP value is almost consistent 
with the 9,5 kg CO2 eq./m2/year. 
Regarding the 69,8 kWh/m2 operational energy that Sciving’s housing unit con-
sumes then it is 22,3 kWh/m2 below and thereby follow the limit value that is re-
quired. 
 
Figure 30 show, that the operative temperature in the KDLB-room can reach above 
30°C on a regular winter day. Figure 31 show, that most of the heat gain in the middle 
of the day comes from the sun and that most heat is lost through the structure. 
==PAGE:51==
 
41 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Figure 30. The operative temperature in KDLB-room a single day in winter season 
 
 
Figure 31. The heat balance in KDLB-room a single day in winter season 
 
Figure 32 show, that on the same winter day in the bathroom, the temperature spikes 
to above 30°C in the morning between 8:30 am and 9:10 am. When studying Figure 
33 it is clear to see that the relative humidity in this room also spikes in the same 
time interval. The bathroom almost reaches 80% RH from being below 20% RH. Fig-
ure 34 show that heat gain from equipment in the morning is almost 3000 W, where 
the heat is lost primary through the structure but also through air flows. 
==PAGE:52==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
42 
 
 
Figure 32. The operative temperature in Bathroom a single day in winter season 
 
 
Figure 33. The relative humidity in Bathroom a single day in winter season 
==PAGE:53==
 
43 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Figure 34. The heat balance in Bathroom a single day in winter season 
 
When studying the constructions of Sciving’s original housing unit in relation to 
GWP value it becomes clear from Figure 35, that all constructions are more sustain-
able in comparison with the building regulations reference values. Especially the ex-
terior wall is worth mentioning since the emitted amount of kg CO2 eq./m2/year 
from Sciving’s building is less than one fourth of the typical emission from this con-
struction. 
 
Figure 35. GWP for different constructions according to BR18 in comparison with Sciving’s unit 
(Social- og Boligstyrelsen, 2018) 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Roof
Ground deck
Exterior wall
Interior wall
Beams
kg CO2 eq. /m2 /yr
Comparison of Sciving original housing and BR18 GWP for different 
constructions 
BR18 reference value
Sciving original housing
==PAGE:54==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
44 
 
 
Figure 36 shows a hotspot analysis from LCAbyg of Sciving’s original housing unit. 
From the Figure 37 it can be deduced that the wood used for the beams in the bear-
ing construction is the product with the highest GWP value even in spite of the neg-
ative emission in product phase A1-A3 because it has almost +1,5 kg CO2 
eq./m2/year in phase C3 where waste is processed. The hotspot analysis indicate 
that this is a tendency that recur for all wooden products used in Sciving’s housing 
unit. Additionally, the ventilation unit is the product that is the second largest culprit 
regarding global warming – emits approximately the same amount as the wooden 
beams. The product emitting third most is the Cembrit Windstopper extreme with a 
GWP of almost 0,5 kg CO2 eq./m2/year. 
 
Table 23. The list of the most influential products used in Sciving’s original housing unit 
Product no. 
Name 
1 
Annebergs Limtræ, Beam 
2 
DUKA ONE Pro 50+ Ventilation 
3 
Cembrit windstopper extreme, Roof 
4 
Bamboo flooring, Holse & Wibroe 
5 
Cembrit windstopper extreme, Exterior wall 
6 
MDF 
7 
Krone window/glassdoor 
8 
5-Plywood, Pine, Exterior wall 
9 
Cembrit windstopper extreme, Ground deck 
10 
Mineral wool, Knauf (145mm) 
11 
Roof covering, Derbigum NT 
12 
Fibo, wet room panel 
13 
BAYOs screwfoundations 
14 
Krone window/glassdoor 
15 
Fibo, wet room panel 
16 
Mineral wool, Knauf (195mm) 
17 
Mineral wool, Knauf (195mm) 
18 
Bamboo facade, H&W 
19 
Water heater 
20 
5-Plywood, Pine, Roof 
21 
5-Plywood, Pine, Ground deck 
22 
5-Plywood, Pine, Interior wall 
23 
MDF 
24 
Swedoor, sliding door 
25 
Steel Plus Gutter System 
26 
Aluminium section 
27 
Gypsum plaster board, Knauf 
28 
5-Plywood, Pine, Roof 
29 
Steel sheet (20µm hot dip galvanized) 
30 
Electric panel 
 
 
==PAGE:55==
 
45 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Figure 36. Hot Spot Analysis of Sciving’s original housing unit, with the most influential products 
 
 
Figure 37. Advanced Hot Spot Analysis of Sciving’s original housing unit, with the most influential 
products 
 
==PAGE:56==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
46 
 
 
5.2 Study of change in Building parameters 
The change, which different heating sources, insulation materials, solar shadings 
and ventilation methods give rise to to Sciving’s original housing unit, has been eval-
uated – the variables are listed below in Table 24. 
 
Table 24. The variables and their number related to all figures about Building parameter 
Building parameter 
No. 
Variable 
Heating type 
1 
Original heat pump (with cooling) & original el-panel 
2 
Smaller heat pump (no cooling) & original el-panel 
3 
Smaller heat pump (with cooling) & original el-panel 
4 
Floor heating 
5 
Bigger electric panel & original el-panel 
Insulation material 
6 
Straw 
7 
Wood fibre 
8 
Hemp 
9 
Paper granules 
Solar shading 
10 
Solid front door – no glass 
11 
Louvres 
12 
Overhang 
13 
Active external blinds 
14 
Surface layers in front door & window 
Ventilation 
15 
Window in bathroom 
16 
Skylight in KBLD-room 
 
 
5.2.1 Impact on indoor environment 
From Figure 38 and Figure 39 it can be deduced that the most efficient change in 
relation to reduce the number of hours above 27°C and 28°C in the KDLB-room is to 
use a heat pump with its cooling function turned on. Also, a surface layer in the 
widow and front door has proven to bring down the number of hours to almost a 
third of the original housing. In the bathroom the best result occurs when a window 
is installed, then the total number of hours above 27°C will be almost down to 25 
and below 25 hours for temperatures above 28°C. Among the scenarios with change 
in insulation materials especially the KDLB-room has tendency of having a warmer 
indoor climate when using straw as insulation material.  
==PAGE:57==
 
47 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Even though the original housing and the housing regardless of change all turn out 
with almost the same percentage of occupancy hours within comfort category II for 
the KDLB-room, Figure 40 indicates and underlines that a heat pump with cooling 
and a surface layer in all glass areas in the façade result in the best outcome in rela-
tion to temperatures. The same applies to the bathroom, where the scenario with a 
new window entails the share of time in comfort cat. II to increase from Sciving’s 
original housing of 25% to 69% as shown in Figure 41. 
 
 
Figure 38. Temperature above 27°C in the housing unit. The numbers on the x-axis represent the 
variables that are changed which can be seen from Table 24. 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Sciving
original
housing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
hours
Temperature above 27°C as a function of building variable
KDLB-room
Bathroom
==PAGE:58==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
48 
 
 
Figure 39. Temperature above 28°C in the housing unit. The numbers on the x-axis represent the 
variables that are changed which can be seen from Table 24. 
 
 
Figure 40. Distribution of occupancy hours in the comfort categories for the KDLB-room. The num-
bers on the x-axis represent the variables that are changed which can be seen from Table 24. 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Sciving
original
housing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
hours
Temperature above 28°C as a function of building variable
KDLB-room
Bathroom
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Sciving
original
housing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Share of occupancy hours
KBLD-room operative temperature distribution corrosponding to 
comfort categories as a function of building variable
I (High)
II (Medium)
III (Moderate)
IV (Low)
No category
==PAGE:59==
 
49 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Figure 41. Distribution of occupancy hours in the comfort categories for the bathroom. The num-
bers on the x-axis represent the variables that are changed which can be seen from Table 24. 
 
The changes also influence the relative humidity. Figure 42 shows, that occupancy 
hours below 25% RH only differ across the variables with ±1,5% from the number 
of hours below in the original unit. Regarding RH above 60% the results differ to a 
greater extent based on change in variable as seen in Figure 43. It is interesting that 
the same variables that improved the temperatures also cause a more humid indoor 
environment in both rooms except from the scenario where a window is installed in 
the bathroom. The percentage of occupancy hours with more than 60% RH in the 
bathroom changes from 51% of the time to only occurring 38% of the time. 
 
 
Figure 42. Relative humidity below 25% in the housing. The numbers on the x-axis represent the 
variables that are changed which can be seen from Table 24. 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Sciving
original
housing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
Share of occupancy hours
Bathroom operative temperature distribution corrosponding to 
comfort categories as a function of building variable
I (High)
II (Medium)
III (Moderate)
IV (Low)
No category
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Sciving
original
housing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
% of occupancy hours
Relative humidity below 25% as a function of building variable
KDLB-room
Bathroom
==PAGE:60==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
50 
 
 
Figure 43. Relative humidity above 60% in the housing. The numbers on the x-axis represent the 
variables that are changed which can be seen from Table 24. 
 
From Figure 44 a change in the amount of daylight only occurs when implementing 
any type of solar shading or additional windows to the KDLB-room. Changing the 
front door to a solid door without glass will lead to the least amount of daylight in 
the building where 78% of the relevant floor area is illuminated with 300 lux in min-
imum half of the daylight hours of the year. Installing a skylight window in the room 
would on the other hand result in a minor rise to 89% from 84% in the original 
housing unit. 
 
Figure 44. The amount of daylight in the KDLB-room in the housing. The numbers on the x-axis rep-
resent the variables that are changed which can be seen from Table 24. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Sciving
original
housing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
% of occupancy hours
Relative humidity above 60% as a function of building variable
KDLB-room
Bathroom
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Sciving
original
housing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
% of relevant floor area
Daylight in KDLB-room as a function of building variable
300lx 50%
500lx 50%
700lx 50%
==PAGE:61==
 
51 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Studying the results of the maximum CO2-concentration in the two rooms illustrated 
in Figure 45, only show a notable change when a window in the bathroom is in-
stalled. In this case the maximum CO2-concentration will increase with 70 ppm in 
the KDLB-room but decrease in the bathroom with 50 ppm. 
 
Figure 45. The maximum CO2-concentration in the housing. The numbers on the x-axis represent 
the variables that are changed which can be seen from Table 24. 
 
5.2.2 Impact on sustainability 
The data extraction from LCAbyg shows that the total Global Warming Potential is 
least when using straw instead of mineral wool as insulation, see Figure 46. Replace-
ment of the insulation type whichever alternative of biogenic insulation material will 
reduce the carbon footprint with up to 0,45 kg CO2 eq./m2/year for this specific 
building, which is clarified by Figure 48. Furthermore, Figure 46 and Figure 47 show 
that the GWP increases when cooling is activated for the heat pump, or the heat 
pump is replaced with an electric panel in the KDLB-room. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Sciving
original
housing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
ppm
Max. CO2-concentration as a function of building variable
KDLB-room
Bathroom
==PAGE:62==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
52 
 
 
Figure 46. The total GWP value for the unit. The numbers on the x-axis represent the variables that 
are changed which can be seen from Table 24. 
 
 
Figure 47. The savings in GWP value for the housing. The numbers on the x-axis represent the varia-
bles that are changed which can be seen from Table 24. 
 
0,0
1,0
2,0
3,0
4,0
5,0
6,0
7,0
8,0
9,0
10,0
11,0
Sciving
original
housing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
kg CO2 eq. /m2 /yr
GWP as a function of building variable
Building elements
Operational energy use
-0,6
-0,4
-0,2
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
Sciving
original
housing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
kg CO2 eq. /m2 /yr
Change in GWP as a function of building variable
Change in Building element
Change in Operational energy use
==PAGE:63==
 
53 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Figure 48. The savings in GWP value on the basis of insulation material replacing the current insula-
tion material mineral wool in the housing. The numbers on the x-axis represent the variables that 
are changed which can be seen from Table 24. 
 
5.2.3 Impact on energy consumption 
The operational energy use is displayed in Figure 49, which also indicate the distri-
bution in the housing unit across the different building variables. The operational 
energy consumption increases significant in three cases; when the cooling mecha-
nism is functional in the heat pump or if the heat pump is replaced with an electric 
panel. Activating cooling in the original heat pump will increase the operational en-
ergy consumption with 7,7 kWh/m2/year, a smaller heat pump with cooling will in-
crease the consumption by 12,2 kWh/m2/year and finally the change of using an 
electric panel would increase the operational energy consumption with 10,2 
kWh/m2/yr. 
 
 
Figure 49. Distribution and total operational energy use for the unit 
0,00
0,05
0,10
0,15
0,20
0,25
0,30
0,35
0,40
0,45
0,50
Mineral wool
Straw
Wood fibre
Hemp
Paper granules
kg CO2 eq. /m2 /yr
GWP as a function of insulation material
Consumed GWP
Saved GWP
0,0
10,0
20,0
30,0
40,0
50,0
60,0
70,0
80,0
90,0
Sciving
original
housing
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
kWh/m2/yr
Operational energy use as a function of building variable
Hot water
Heating/cooling
Venting
==PAGE:64==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
54 
 
 
5.3 Optimization 
In this chapter, the assessment of the building variables is extended by an optimi-
zation of the original housing unit – see Table 25. 
 
Table 25. The variables related to all figures about optimization 
Optimization scenario 
Name 
Variable 
Building parameters 
Sciving 
optimized 
housing 
Original heat pump (with cooling) & original el-panel 
Straw 
Surface layers in front door & window 
Window in bathroom 
Comfort & Energy 
Sciving 
Final 
housing 
Min. set temperature (20,5 °C) 
Max. set temperature (KBLD = 23,5 °C;Bathroom = 25,0 °C) 
Solar panels 
 
5.3.1 Indoor environment 
Figure 50 and Figure 51 show that the number of hours above 27°C and 28°C is re-
duced substantially from the original housing which goes for both the optimized and 
final unit. This means that the requirements are complied with for these two units. 
For the final unit it applies that 0 hours are above the permitted temperatures in the 
KDLB-room. In the bathroom the temperature only exceeded 27°C for 26 hours and 
28°C for 13 hours. No notable change concerning overheating happens to any of the 
rooms after the set temperature has been adjusted and when solar panels are in-
stalled on top of the building’s roof. 
 
 
Figure 50. Temperature above 27°C in different Sciving housing scenarios 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Sciving
original
housing
Sciving
optimized
housing
Sciving
final
housing
hours
Temperature above 27°C as a function of optimization scenario
KDLB-room
Bathroom
==PAGE:65==
 
55 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Figure 51. Temperature above 28°C in different Sciving housing scenarios 
 
Further assessment of the thermal comfort can be done on the basis of the results in 
Figure 52 and Figure 53. Where 52% of the occupancy hours in the KDLB-room is 
within comfort category II for the original Sciving housing unit the share decreases 
to 39% for the optimized housing but is then again increased for the final housing to 
94%. An even greater development is happening in the bathroom where the share 
of occupancy hours in cat. II evolve from the original housing with 24% to be 67% 
in the optimized housing to yet another improvement to 90% for the final housing 
unit. 
 
Figure 52. Distribution of occupancy hours in the comfort categories for the KDLB-room in different 
Sciving housing scenarios 
 
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
Sciving
original
housing
Sciving
optimized
housing
Sciving
final
housing
hours
Temperature above 28°C as a function of optimization scenario
KDLB-room
Bathroom
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Sciving
original
housing
Sciving
optimized
housing
Sciving
final
housing
Share of occupancy hours
KDLB-room operative temperature distribution corrosponding to 
comfort categories as a function of optimization scenario
I (High)
II (Medium)
III (Moderate)
IV (Low)
No category
==PAGE:66==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
56 
 
 
Figure 53. Distribution of occupancy hours in the comfort categories for the bathroom in different 
Sciving housing scenarios 
 
The impact of the optimization and further adjustments on the relative humidity is 
to be found in Figure 54 and Figure 55. The two figures show that all scenarios of 
Sciving’s housing unit do not accommodate the requirement of being within 25%-
60% RH when occupied all year round. From the original unit to the optimized unit, 
the share of occupancy hours below 25% RH in both rooms decreases and increases 
for RH 60%. 
 
Figure 54. Relative humidity below 25% in different Sciving housing scenarios 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Sciving
original
housing
Sciving
optimized
housing
Sciving
final
housing
Share of occupancy hours
Bathroom operative temperature distribution corrosponding to 
comfort categories as a function of optimization scenario
I (High)
II (Medium)
III (Moderate)
IV (Low)
No category
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Sciving
original
housing
Sciving
optimized
housing
Sciving
final
housing
% of occupancy hours
Relative humidity below 25% as a function of optimization scenario
KDLB-room
Bathroom
==PAGE:67==
 
57 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Figure 55. Relative humidity above 60% in different Sciving housing scenarios 
 
Looking at Figure 56, the amount of daylight is decreasing in the KDLB-room from 
the original housing to the optimized housing but that no results vary from the opti-
mized to the final housing. Sciving’s original housing unit could meet the high level 
of recommendation regarding the visual environment given that more than half of 
the relevant floor area is illuminated with 700 lux in minimum half of the daylight 
hours of the year. The optimized and final housing is equivalent to the recommended 
medium level of lighting as 68% of the floor is illuminated with 500 lux. This also 
spell that the requirement for visual indoor environment is more than complied with 
whichever the scenario. 
 
Figure 56. The amount of daylight in the KDLB-room in different Sciving housing scenarios 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Sciving
original
housing
Sciving
optimized
housing
Sciving
final
housing
% of occupancy hours
Relative humidity above 60% as a function of optimization scenario
KDLB-room
Bathroom
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Sciving
original
housing
Sciving
optimized
housing
Sciving
final
housing
% of relevant floor area
Daylight in KDLB-room as a function of optimization scenario
300lx 50%
500lx 50%
700lx 50%
==PAGE:68==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
58 
 
The maximum CO2-concentration when a room in the household is occupied in-
creases to approximately 860ppm in the KDLB-room and 940ppm in the bathroom 
in connection with the optimization scenarios. This means that the CO2-concentra-
tion in the KDLB-room now exceeds the recommendation with 90ppm but that the 
CO2-concentration in the bathroom in both the optimized and final scenario comply 
with the requirements. Figure 57 show, that the CO2-concentration in the KDLB-
room in the original housing unit corresponding to level I has changed to be in level 
II for the optimized and final housing. The CO2-concentration in the bathroom that 
corresponded to level II for the original housing has changed in the optimized and 
final housing to comply with level I. 
 
Figure 57. The maximum CO2-concentration in different Sciving housing scenarios 
 
5.3.2 Sustainability 
Figure 58 shows that the GWP almost doesn’t increase from the original housing unit 
to the optimized scenario. Even so, the total operational energy use has increased 
with 0,3 kg CO2 eq./m2/year but likewise has the building elements decreased with 
equal amount. In the final housing scenario, the GWP is decreased to just below 8 kg 
CO2 eq./m2/year but here it is important to comment that the building elements ac-
count for a much bigger share of the total GWP of the building than before and that 
the GWP share represented by the operational energy use has been reduced to al-
most zero. 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Sciving
original
housing
Sciving
optimized
housing
Sciving
final
housing
ppm
Max. CO2-concentration as a function of optimization scenario
KDLB
Bathroom
==PAGE:69==
 
59 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Figure 58. The total GWP value for different Sciving housing scenarios 
 
The assessment of sustainability according to DGNB-certification for the tree hous-
ing scenarios is to be seen in Table 26. Considering all the six aspects of qualities, it 
can be concluded that whatever housing scenario, Sciving’s building would be certi-
fied with DGNB Silver. Individually, all group result indexes score above 35% which 
is the threshold value to be certified and the overall result will be above 50%. The 
Site quality is scoring 40% which is the least where the Economic quality has the 
highest score of 68% for the original housing that increases for the optimized and 
final housing to 70%. Moreover, the Table 26 shows that the Environmental quality 
has the biggest changes from being 42% fulfilled in the original housing to 59% in 
the final housing. Finally, the change of 5% is seen within the Social quality. Appendix 
E – DGNB-certification matrixes shows the distribution of points within each quality. 
 
Table 26. Extract of the DGNB-certification matrix 
Building scenario 
Quality 
Group result index 
Overall result 
Certificate 
Sciving original 
housing 
Environmental (ENV) 
42% 
52% 
 
Economic (ECO) 
68% 
Social (SOC) 
46% 
Technical (TEC) 
55% 
Process (PRO) 
50% 
Site (SITE) 
40% 
Sciving optimized 
housing 
Environmental (ENV) 
42% 
53% 
Economic (ECO) 
70% 
0,0
1,0
2,0
3,0
4,0
5,0
6,0
7,0
8,0
9,0
10,0
Sciving
original
housing
Sciving
optimized
housing
Sciving
final
housing
kg CO2 eq. /m2 /yr
GWP as a function of optimization scenario 
Operational energy use
Building elements
==PAGE:70==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
60 
 
Social (SOC) 
51% 
 
Technical (TEC) 
55% 
Process (PRO) 
50% 
Site (SITE) 
40% 
Sciving final 
housing 
Environmental (ENV) 
59% 
57% 
 
Economic (ECO) 
70% 
Social (SOC) 
51% 
Technical (TEC) 
55% 
Process (PRO) 
50% 
Site (SITE) 
40% 
 
5.3.3 Energy consumption 
Figure 59 shows a substantial change from the original to the final unit in relation to 
the operational energy consumption. The solar panels added to the final housing 
unit spell a saving of approximately 79,2 kWh/m2/year. In addition, the heating and 
cooling demand is increased from the original to the optimized housing unit sce-
nario and increased again in Sciving’s final housing unit to about 80 kWh/m2/year, 
which account for a total change in operational energy use of roughly 10 
kWh/m2/year. 
 
Figure 59. The distribution and the total operational energy use for different Sciving housing sce-
narios 
 
The total operational energy demand shows that the requirement of 92,1 kWh/m2 
is followed by all Sciving’s housing scenarios. The final housing unit even complies 
with the best energy label A2020 since the operational energy demand of 1,3 
kWh/m2 is less than the 27 kWh/m2 limit value. 
-80,0
-60,0
-40,0
-20,0
0,0
20,0
40,0
60,0
80,0
100,0
Sciving
original
housing
Sciving
optimized
housing
Sciving
final
housing
kWh/m2/yr
Operational energy use as a function of optimization scenario
Venting
Heating/cooling
Hot water
Solar Panels
==PAGE:71==
 
61 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Furthermore, it can be deduced from Figure 60, that all units perform better than 
any of the listed building typologies, if only considering the energy consumption per 
heated floor area. 
On the other hand, when comparing energy consumption per person in the different 
dwelling types, the outcome looks quite different – see Figure 61. Now the outcome 
from the original and optimized housing units are in between the dorm and the 
apartment. The operational energy use per person is still least in the final Sciving 
housing. 
What is also interesting is the results from Figure 62. In comparison with the other 
building typologies the original and optimized housing units is more similar to a row 
house and an apartment, if energy consumption is considered per area thermal en-
velope. Sciving’s final housing do still perform best. 
 
 
Figure 60. The operational energy use per household for different dwelling types 
 
0,0
20,0
40,0
60,0
80,0
100,0
120,0
140,0
160,0
180,0
Sciving final housing
Sciving optimized housing
Sciving original housing
Single family house
Row house
Apartment
Dorm
kWh/m2/yr/housing unit
Comparison of operational energy use per household as a function 
of dwelling type
==PAGE:72==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
62 
 
 
Figure 61. The operational energy use per person for different dwelling types 
 
 
Figure 62. The operational energy use per area thermal envelope for different dwelling types 
 
5.4 Influence of climate on the original unit 
Table 27 below describes various locations with their corresponding climates in 
which Sciving's original housing unit has been simulated, to assess the correlation 
between weather conditions and the indoor climate. 
 
Table 27. Variation of climate parameters, their location and climate related to all figures about cli-
mates 
Climate parameter 
Location 
Climate* 
Variable 
Location 
A 
Dfb 
Roskilde University (RUC), Denmark 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Sciving final housing
Sciving optimized housing
Sciving original housing
Single family house
Row house
Apartment
Dorm
kWh/m2/yr/person
Comparison of operational energy use per person as a function of 
dwelling type
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
Sciving final housing
Sciving optimized housing
Sciving original housing
Single family house
Row house
Apartment
Dorm
kWh/m2/yr/m2 thermal envelope
Comparison of operational energy use per area thermal envelope as 
a function of dwelling type
==PAGE:73==
 
63 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
B 
Cfb 
Femern, Germany 
C 
Cfb 
Oxford, England 
D 
Cfb 
Dublin, Ireland 
E 
BWh 
Aswan, Egypt 
F 
Af 
Belém, Brazil 
G 
Dfc 
Bergen, Norway 
H 
Dfd 
Siberia, Russia 
*   Köppen-Geiger climate classification system: Af = Tropical rainforest, BWh = Dry and hot Aird De-
sert, Cfb = Humid temperate climate with warm summer, Dfb = Humid continental climate with warm 
summer, Dfc = Humid continental climate with cold summer, Dfd = Humid continental climate with 
very cold winter (Kottek, 2006). 
 
5.4.1 Indoor environment 
Figure 63 and 64 shows that installing an original unit in Denmark, Germany and 
England will have almost the same outcome with regard to overtemperatures in both 
rooms. The location in Ireland and Norway has quite similar and fewer number of 
hours above 27°C and 28°C in the KDLB-room where it in the bathroom stays 
roughly the same. The biggest change occurs when the unit is installed in the two 
warm climates, where most of the occupied hours in both rooms are above the limit. 
The figures show a divergence of approximately 100% in the KDLB-room between 
the original location at DTU and RUC which are both located in Denmark. The unit at 
the original location having twice as many hours above the temperature limits than 
if the unit was located at RUC goes for both 27 °C and 28 °C requirement.  
 
 
Figure 63. Temperature above 27°C in the light of different locations 
Sciving
original
housing
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
KDLB
256
137
144
171
46
5600
6284
94
341
Bathroom
200
189
188
191
184
363
367
183
138
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
hours
Temperature above 27°C as a function of location
==PAGE:74==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
64 
 
 
 
Figure 64. Temperature above 28°C in the light of different locations 
 
Figure 65 and Figure 66 show a significant drop in share of occupancy hours within 
cat. II for the unit in Egypt. On the other hand, if the unit is located in England or 
Ireland the occupancy hours in comfort category II will increase compared with the 
original location at DTU. 
 
Figure 65. Distribution of occupancy hours in the comfort categories for the KDLB-room in different 
locations 
Sciving
original
housing
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
KDLB-room
180
96
92
110
28
5295
6121
67
272
Bathroom
156
154
151
159
153
318
323
149
106
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
hours
Temperature above 28°C as a function of location
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Sciving
original
housing
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Share of occupancy hours
KBLD-room operative temperature distribution corrosponding to 
comfort categories as a function of location
I (High)
II (Medium)
III (Moderate)
IV (Low)
No category
==PAGE:75==
 
65 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
 
Figure 66. Distribution of occupancy hours in the comfort categories for the bathroom in different 
locations 
 
The locations’ impact on the relative humidity in the original building can be seen in 
Figure 67. A warm and dry outdoor environment is tantamount to more than half 
the occupancy time where the RH is below 25% which is the same outcome if the 
housing unit is in the cold and dry climate in Russia. By contrast, the results for a 
warm and humid outdoor environment signify no hours below 25% RH. 
Looking at Figure 68 both the warm and dry but also the cold and humid reference 
climates lower the number of hours above 60% RH in the KDLB-room but that only 
the location in Egypt is decreasing the humidity level in the bathroom. The warm 
and humid climate corresponding to the location in Brazil influences the thermal 
environment by increasing the time above 60% RH to 70% in the KDLB-room and 
almost the entire time in the bathroom. 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Sciving
original
housing
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Share of occupancy hours
Bathroom operative temperature distribution corrosponding to 
comfort categories as a function of location
I (High)
II (Medium)
III (Moderate)
IV (Low)
No category
==PAGE:76==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
66 
 
 
Figure 67. Relative humidity below 25% in different locations 
 
 
Figure 68. Relative humidity above 60% in different locations 
 
As seen in Figure 69, a relocation of Sciving’s original student housing unit to Egypt 
or Brazil will improve the amount of daylight in the building by illuminating approx-
imately 6% more of the relevant floor area with 300 lux in the KDLB-room. On the 
contrary, relocating the housing unit to Bergen in Norway would decrease the per-
centage of relevant floor area illuminated for both 300, 500 and 700 lux in minimum 
half of the daylight hours of the year. 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Sciving
original
housing
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
% of occupancy hours
Relative humidity below 25% as a function of location
KDLB-room
Bathroom
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Sciving
original
housing
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
% of occupancy hours
Relative humidity above 60% as a function of location
KDLB-room
Bathroom
==PAGE:77==
 
67 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Figure 69. The amount of daylight in the KDLB-room in different locations 
 
From Figure 70 no change in maximum CO2-concentration is worth mentioning 
since the levels can be said to remain the same across the studied locations for both 
rooms. 
 
Figure 70. The maximum CO2-concentration in different locations 
 
5.4.2 Sustainability 
Figure 71 show that the GWP increases significantly if the housing unit is installed 
in Siberia because of the high operational energy use. A slight change in GWP can be 
seen from the location at DTU to RUC, Femern, Oxford and Dublin where the GWP is 
decreasing. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Sciving
original
housing
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
% of relevant floor area
Daylight in KDLB as a function of location
300lx 50%
500lx 50%
700lx 50%
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Sciving
original
housing
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
ppm
Max. CO2-concentration as a function of location
KDLB-room
Bathroom
==PAGE:78==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
68 
 
 
 
Figure 71. The total GWP value for different locations 
 
5.4.3 Energy consumption 
When studying which influence the location has on the energy consumption, the 
housing unit simulated in the location of Russia stands out – see Figure 72. For this 
location, significantly more energy must be allocated to heating the dwelling. The 
two warm climates in Egypt and Brazil affect energy consumption to decrease. For 
the humid but warm climate in Brazil, it is observed that energy consumption for 
ventilation increases slightly. Otherwise, the locations at Roskilde University and 
Femern do not affect the housing unit differently than the original location at DTU. 
 
Figure 72. The distribution and the total operational energy use for different locations 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Sciving
original
housing
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
kg CO2 eq. /m2 /yr
GWP as a function of location
Operational energy use
Building elements
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Sciving
original
housing
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
kWh/m2/yr
Operational energy use as a function of location
Venting
Heating
Hot water
==PAGE:79==
 
69 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
6.     Discussion 
 
6.1 Results 
The results show that Sciving's original housing unit is challenged in terms of ther-
mal comfort in both rooms but otherwise has a good indoor environmental quality 
and reflects great environmental performance. That the housing achieves DGNB Sil-
ver reflects that this is a complete project that is not only environmentally sustaina-
ble but also socioculturally and economically speaking. The study of how geograph-
ical location impacts the unit holistically reflects that the housing unit is designed in 
accordance with a temperate climate. 
The findings show that the sun is the primary energy source for overheating in the 
main room which correlates with the great amount of daylight. Results from the 
KDLB-room indicate by increased temperatures, that the room needs solar shading 
solutions or ventilation strategies to remedy the issues. Even though the cooling fea-
ture have the best thermal result a passive solution is to prefer. To achieve a better 
and more stable thermal comfort a combination of both is most advantageous and 
ensures an adequate heat gain from the sun into the room as well as lower temper-
atures, so the unit complies with all temperature requirements and recommenda-
tions. The reason why a regular overhang is not the best option as solar shading for 
the unit is because the overheating occurs throughout all seasons of the year, where 
the MicroShade film is a better solution to protect the room from overheating. This 
film also reduces the amount of daylight, which is okay as the visual environment 
will still perform exceptionally and exceed all requirements. Although the heat pump 
is oversized relative to the housing unit, the material emits so little CO2 that it would 
not make sense to install a smaller heat pump. The results show that the difference 
in efficiency between the two sizes is more significant than the actual size of the de-
vice. This is because the GWP value corresponding to the energy consumption will 
increase more with the less efficient and smaller heat pump than the savings 
achieved from the reduced material of the larger heat pump. 
The unit is a lightweight construction with low heat capacity of the building materi-
als. Wood's specific heat capacity of 1700 J/kgK is approximately 700 J/kgK lower 
than that of a heavy concrete construction. This means that Sciving’s unit with less 
thermal mass to a lesser extent will be self-regulating in relation to the indoor envi-
ronment. This is furthermore one of the reasons why the indoor climate in the orig-
inal unit is being so warm even in heating season, which decreases the amount of 
time which the operative temperature is within Comfort category II. The percentage 
of hours in category II will decrease after the first optimization in the KDLB-room, 
as the setpoint for mechanical cooling is low which means that indoor temperatures 
==PAGE:80==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
70 
 
become cooler than recommended in some periods. Conversely, the proportion of 
occupancy hours in comfort category II in the bathroom will increase after the first 
optimization phase because the installation of a window reduces overheating. The 
final housing unit, after the second phase of optimization in both rooms, has over 
90% of occupancy hours in comfort category II due to the change of higher temper-
ature setpoints. Consequently, the coldest indoor climate in both rooms will meet 
both the minimum and nearly the maximum limits for comfort category II during 
usage time. 
The completion of a Life Cycle Assessment for Sciving’s housing unit signifies com-
pliance with the sustainability requirement. The carbon footprint of 9,74 kg CO2 
eq./m2/year is low for the original housing unit and is even below the 12 kg CO2-
eq./m²/year, equivalent to the requirement for a building over 1000 m². Whatever 
scenario of Sciving’s unit, the energy consumption is clearly below the limit value of 
92,1 kWh/m2, which signifies that this parameter performs well for Sciving’s unit. 
Nevertheless, the emissions from Sciving's housing unit are higher than those of a 
new average building from 2023. This discrepancy can be attributed to the fact that 
many new constructions are built with sustainable materials due to the increased 
focus on climate and CO2-emissions. As a result, the average emissions from newer 
buildings are relatively low. 
Where there is only a very small difference in the GWP between the original and the 
optimized unit, the final housing unit emits somewhat less. Even though the energy 
used to cool the unit is increased, the energy demand decreases for the final unit 
because the solar panels produce a lot of energy. The solar panels have reduced the 
energy demand and thereby the environmental footprint to such an extent that the 
unit is future-proofed until 2029 when compared to the building regulations' re-
quirements. However, this is not the case when the GWP is measured against the 
Reduction Roadmap 2.0, whose threshold value is 6.5 kg CO2-eq./m2/year, nor when 
compared to the government’s new climate initiative.  
If looking at BoligVærkstedet in Copenhagen, that has the highest class of indoor cli-
mate and emits 3 times less CO2 than a single-family house, it became clear that 
wood still consumes CO2 the first period after a building is build (VELUX, 2023). 
Since wood is also the primary construction material in Sciving’s housing unit, this 
is most likely a fact that is crucial to the good outcome of the LCA. 
In extension of this, it is interesting to comment on the assessment of the individual 
building elements in comparison with BR18's basic data. The primary reason all the 
building parts' global warming potentials are lower than the reference values is that 
Sciving's housing unit is, by definition, a sustainable light timber construction, 
whereas the reference values probably are based on an average of wood, steel, and 
concrete constructions. That the exterior wall in the original housing unit is the 
==PAGE:81==
 
71 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
building component that performs best in relation to its reference value is not sur-
prising. Dwellings with a brick facade and concrete backing form a large part of the 
average for this reference value. Since these materials generally have a higher cli-
mate impact than wood, it results in a larger difference. Furthermore, the exterior 
wall is often the building element that spans the largest area, meaning that the 
change to a more sustainable material leads to an even greater reduction in GWP for 
this building element. 
The biogenic insulation materials all perform better than mineral wool despite hav-
ing a lower insulation capacity, requiring more material to maintain the same U-
value, because the biogenic materials’ climate footprint is significantly lower. It 
should be noted that the calculations only consider the replacement of the insulation 
type in the thickest insulation layer of each building component, where the thinnest 
layer in all scenarios will consist of mineral wool as in the original housing unit. This 
means, of course, that there is even more potential for reducing the greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
Whatever scenario, the fluctuating level of humidity in the two rooms relates to the 
temperatures. The findings show that the indoor climate is a bit too dry in the KDLB-
room in the original unit since the RH is almost below 25% 10% of the occupancy 
hours, which can be explained by the warmer indoor climate, since more moisture 
is needed to increase the humidity. Nevertheless, the humidity exceeds 60% RH in 
5% of occupancy hours. If non-building related solutions is preferred a dehumidifier 
or more indoor plants should be considered, because plants have the same quality 
to extract water from the air. Another study revealing the qualities of clay, that this 
material naturally regulates temperature and humidity. That raised a question of the 
opportunities to incorporate clay in the plaster boards in the building elements of 
Scivings housing, to absorb heat during the day and release it slowly as temperatures 
drop while also absorbing moist when the indoor climate is humid (Preston, 2024).  
The opposite goes for the bathroom. Approximately 60% of the occupancy hours in 
the bathroom has a humid indoor climate with RH above 60% but few hours below 
25% RH. The warm and humid indoor environment in the bathroom can to a great 
extent be explained by the shower which is the primary source to both. Additionally, 
it is important to remember that the door between the bathroom and the large living 
room is simulated as always being open – even when someone is showering, which 
is usually not the case. This means there can be a flow of relative humidity from the 
bathroom to the KDLB-room, contributing to higher relative humidity in the KDLB-
room. However, the results for relative humidity do not clearly show a correlation 
indicating that the humidity from the bathroom is being removed from the room to 
the extent that a roughly 2 square meter opening would be expected to affect the 
indoor climate. Results from the bathroom indicate by a high relative humidity, that 
the exhaust ventilation in the bathroom is insufficient and that the ventilation in this 
==PAGE:82==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
72 
 
room should be increased – a problem that an additional window in the room can 
solve. However, the results show that a window in the bathroom leads to a more 
humid indoor climate as the humidity increases when the temperature drops. The 
indoor environment becomes a little less humid when the set temperatures are in-
creased, because the window opens when the room exceeds a higher temperature. 
The maximum CO2-concentration in both the original unit and all other scenarios is 
good in the KDLB-room since it follows the recommendation. The CO2-concentration 
in the bathroom in the optimized and final unit doesn’t comply with the require-
ments of 950ppm but since the limit is only exceeded 1% of the usage time, it can be 
argued that the indoor air quality is okay. 
Compared with other average building typologies Sciving’s unit uses energy almost 
equal to a dorm but performs better than an apartment even though the unit has a 
bigger thermal envelope area and fewer square meters over which to distribute the 
energy consumption. On the other hand, the energy use of the unit indicates a larger 
share of energy use compared to building component when looking at the GWP, 
which is also the challenging tendency for tiny houses (Mukhopadhyay, 2019). 
Since the buildings floor area is so small, the building size impacts the GWP to a 
greater extent. Less floor area means a smaller factor to divide the total GWP by, 
which in the end results in a higher GWP value per m2 per year. Additionally, smaller 
buildings, like Sciving's residential unit, generally have a more compact design since 
the same functions need to be incorporated into less space, resulting in more mate-
rial per square meter of housing (Crawford, 2020). For that reason, it is even more 
impressive that the original student housing has a global warming potential less 
than 10 kg CO2 eq./m2/year. 
The rise in Site quality in the DGNB-matrix from the original housing to the final 
housing happens due to the solar shading initiative. The Environmental quality that 
undergoes the biggest changes is because of the change in GWP between the scenar-
ios. Finally, the change seen within the Social quality, can be explained by the reduc-
tion in hours of overtemperatures and the fact that an operable window is added to 
the bathroom, which entail more points given in this quality. 
The findings indicate that the indoor environment is sensitive to the climate when 
installed in a cold and dry setting or in warm locations, since the thermal environ-
ment to a great extent is reflected by the outdoor conditions. The indoor environ-
ment in the unit located in Siberia is too cold, which affects the percentage of occu-
pancy hours in comfort category II to decrease. The great amount of energy used to 
heat this unit is reflected in the huge increase in GWP. The converse is true for units 
located in the warm climates in Brazil and Egypt where there is no need for energy 
to heat up the housing unit and thereby affects the GWP to be even less than the 
original unit. 
==PAGE:83==
 
73 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Another possibility to get closer to meet the thermal requirements would be to im-
prove the U-value of the building envelope by increasing the thickness of the insula-
tion material. This will make the housing unit more resistant to the weather condi-
tions. Since the roof and ground deck has values close to the permitted restrictions, 
it might be an opportunity to consider optimizing these elements to obtain an effec-
tive form of thermal regulation. This way both living comfort and energy efficiency 
will be optimized, and the building will be less thermally sensitive to seasonal 
changes. The bigger amount of material would increase the GWP but the savings in 
energy consumption would most likely make the GWP decrease even more. 
Sciving should in addition consider changing the design of their large window from 
six panes to just two panes with a 35%/65% split, where only the smaller pane is 
operable. The amount of wood used between the panes is reduced, which can cause 
even more overheating because of reduced shading conditions but on the other hand 
the linear losses will be minimized. The practical advantage is that the window han-
dles is lowered making them accessible to residents of all heights and that fewer 
windows need to be managed. 
If climate module D were included as a part of the LCA, the GWP for Sciving's original 
unit would decrease by 1,87 to 7,88 kg CO2-eq./m²/year and comply with the 2023 
voluntary CO2-class. The optimized dwelling's GWP value would end up just above 8 
kg CO2-eq./m²/year, whereas the fully optimized and final unit would go from emit-
ting 7,84 kg CO2-eq./m²/year to only emitting 5,22 kg CO2-eq./m²/year. This reduc-
tion in GWP of 2,62 kg CO2-eq./m²/year means that the final housing unit could com-
ply with the Reduction Roadmap's recommendation that new buildings should emit 
a maximum of 5,8 kg CO2-eq./m²/year by 2025. Thus, Sciving's dwelling unit is fu-
ture proofed. 
The building regulation’s requirements are assessed based on simulations with 
weather files whose data is more than 10 years old. With the climate in Denmark 
changing to a more warm and humid future, it isn’t possible to tell whether Sciving’s 
housing unit is future proofed in terms of both indoor environmental quality and 
environmental sustainability. 
 
6.2 Limitations 
There must be showed consideration for the assessment of this study, since it is 
solely produced based on a theoretical approach without any actual measurements. 
The assumption that the glass in the front door and the window have a high solar 
transmittance of more than 70% can affect the temperature in the KDLB room, lead-
ing to a warmer indoor climate than the actual conditions due to a greater heat gain 
from solar radiation. 
==PAGE:84==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
74 
 
The modelling of window opening control affects the windows to open even when 
the outdoor temperature is higher, causing the indoor environment to become 
warmer. In scenarios where the cooling function is enabled, it will result in more 
energy being used for cooling, which will result in higher energy consumption and 
an increased GWP. 
The smoothing function impacts temperature and relative humidity results, since 
the impact from internal loads will start to change before the actual change occurs 
and will last longer than the usage time in the room. However, this choice has been 
made to reduce simulation time to complete all simulations in this study. 
There is a discrepancy in results between the unit at DTU using DRY10 climate file 
and alle the other units in the location scenarios where ASHRAE's IWEC2 weather 
files is used in the simulations. This limitation in methodology must be incorporated 
when assessing and comparing the results. 
It can further be discussed to what degree the prepared DGNB-certification is repre-
sentative of the housing unit because several assumptions are made within the qual-
ities of Technical, Process, and Site. However, this would likely not have significantly 
affected the DGNB-certification. 
Another uncertainty is that energy use is extracted from IDA ICE and used as input 
in LCAbyg, which requires the key performance indicators for energy from the en-
ergy performance calculation in Be18. That the energy frame calculation in Be18 in-
dicates a lower energy use than the IDA ICE result, indicates that the environmental 
footprint could have been slightly lower. 
Despite the three energy sources being multiplied with the corresponding energy 
factor in Denmark, the change of those energy factors, COP- and EER values in each 
country are not considered. This also impacts the GWP results of the study of loca-
tions’ impact on the unit’s performance. 
 
6.3 Further issues to address 
To improve this study, it would be advantageous to incorporate physical measure-
ments of the indoor climate within the housing unit. By comparing the simulated 
results with the measured values, a correlation will emerge which contributes to a 
more robust basis for assessing the performance of the indoor environment. 
In addition, it would be interesting to examine the acoustics and how this quality of 
indoor environment performs. The impact of a ventilation system with variable air 
volume (VAV) as well as the influence of particles and chemicals emitted from paint 
and the interiors on the indoor environment would be of great value to study. 
==PAGE:85==
 
75 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
7.     Conclusion and recommendations 
 
This study aimed to holistically assess the indoor environment and energy use as 
well as the level of sustainability of a tiny home under Sciving’s design principles. 
The primary focus to balance healthy indoor environment while maintaining a low 
global warming potential has proven to be a challenging and complex task. The find-
ings indicate that Sciving's housing unit demonstrates a generally high standard of 
both indoor environmental quality and sustainability, despite certain areas that 
need optimization. 
Assessment of the indoor air quality shows good performance most of the time 
where the quality of visual environment overall was favorable during the entire day. 
However, the thermal environment revealed inadequate temperatures in both 
rooms several days a year as well as a fluctuating level of humidity. This underlines 
the necessity for solar shading solutions and ventilation strategies to remedy the is-
sues. The study of the influence of the geographical location reflects that the housing 
unit is designed in accordance with a temperate climate. 
When reviewing the housing unit from a sustainability perspective, the life cycle as-
sessment highlighted the benefits of using sustainable materials, contributing to a 
lower GWP. Moreover, the LCA uncovered the significant impact that energy con-
sumption has on the GWP and that even a minor design adjustment could improve 
the outcome. That the housing achieves DGNB Silver reflects that this is a complete 
project that is not only environmentally sustainable but also socioculturally and eco-
nomically speaking. 
The energy consumption performed better than the requirements. Depending on the 
measure used to compare the operational energy use in Sciving’s housing unit with 
other residential building types, the result of the performance changed. 
In summary, Sciving’s student housing unit achieves a balance between the IEQ and 
the sustainability. The study establishes that through targeted initiatives, such as im-
plementing solar shading, improved ventilation and cooling systems and a more en-
vironmentally desirable insulation type, the livability inside the unit will become 
even better just like the building’s sustainability. 
 
7.1 Recommendations 
The solution to a more comfortable and sustainable living environment lies in alter-
native initiatives that improve the thermal environment as well as the building 
==PAGE:86==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
76 
 
design. Based on the analysis of the indoor climate simulations, the LCA-calculations 
and the DGNB-certifications, the following is valid for this specific housing unit: 
1. It is advised to implement sunlight protection to prevent overheating – pref-
erably by integrating one layer of MicroShade’s film in the south facing glass 
areas. Otherwise, reduce these glass areas, or install active external blinds. 
2. It is recommended that the cooling function in the heat pump is activated, to 
supplement the solar shading system eliminating overtemperatures. In that 
respect, the set temperatures should be changed to 20,5/23,5 °C in the KDLB-
room and 20,5/25,0 °C in the bathroom to obtain better indoor comfort. 
3. To improve the temperature and relative humidity in the bathroom, by in-
stalling a window to ventilate the room after a shower to prevent accumula-
tion of heat and moisture. 
4. Consider mounting solar panels on top of the unit to reduce energy demand 
which will also minimize the environmental footprint by reducing the GWP 
with approximately 2 kg CO2 eq./m2/year. 
5. Consider replacing the current insulation material of mineral wool with 
straw to reduce the environmental impact of the unit even more. 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
 
77 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
References 
 
Artelia, EFFEKT & CEBRA. (2023). Reduction Roadmap 2.0 Q&A. Reduction Roadmap. 
Bæredygtigt Byggeri. (2024, April 19th). Bæredygtigt Byggeri DK - om håndværk, materialer 
og miljø. Retrieved from Bæredygtigt Byggeri DK - om håndværk, materialer og 
miljø: https://www.xn--bredygtigtbyggeri-
rrb.dk/#:~:text=B%C3%A6redygtigt%20byggeri%20handler%20om%20at,og%20ke
miske%20fugemasser%20og%20malinger 
Crawford, R. &. (2020). Tiny house, tiny footprint? The potential for tiny houses to reduce 
residential greenhouse gas emissions. In R. &. Crawford, Earth and Environmental 
Science 588. Melbourne. 
Dansk Standard. (1993). DS 474: Norm for specifikation af termisk indeklima. København: 
Danish Standards Association. 
Dansk Standard. (2012). DS/EN 15978: Bæredygtighed inden for byggeri og anlæg - 
Vurdering af bygningers miljømæssige kvalitet - Beregningsmetode. København: 
Danish Standards Association. 
Dansk Standard. (2019). DS/EN 15804+A2: Bæredygtighed inden for byggeri of anlæg - 
Miljøvaredeklarationer - Grundlæggende regler for produktkategorien byggevarer. 
København: Danish Standards Association. 
Dansk Standard. (2019). DS/EN 16798-1: Bygningers energieffektivitet – Ventilation I 
bygninger – Del 1: Indeklimamæssige inputparametre til beregning og evaluering af 
bygningers energieffektivitet I forbindelse med indendørs luftkvalitet, termisk miljø, 
belysning og akustik. København: Danish Standards Association. 
Dansk Standard. (2021). DS/EN 17037+A1: Dagslys i bygninger. København: Dansih 
Standards Association. 
Duka Ventilation. (2024, March 15). Produkter: DUKA ONE Pro 50+. Retrieved from Duka 
Ventilation: https://dukaventilation.dk/produkter/1-rums-
ventilationsloesninger/duka-one-pro-50-plus 
Ecochain. (2024, April 25th). Cradle-to-grave in LCA - What is it & how does it work? 
Retrieved from Ecochain: https://ecochain.com/blog/cradle-to-grave-in-lca/ 
EG A/S. (2023, April 12th). Mandatory new requirements for sustainable construction. 
Retrieved from EG A/S - Let's go further: 
https://global.eg.dk/news/2023/april/mandatory-new-requirements-for-
sustainable-construction/ 
Energistyrelsen. (2024, April 27th). Byggeri og renovering - Energibesparende tiltag for 
nybyggeri og renovering af eksisterende byggeri. Retrieved from ens.dk: 
https://ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/energibesparelser/byggeri-og-renovering 
==PAGE:88==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
78 
 
Energistyrelsen. (2024, May 16th). Energimærkning af bygninger, hvad mærket viser og 
forskellen på faktisk og beregnet forbrug. Retrieved from ens.dk: 
https://ens.dk/ansvarsomraader/energimaerkning-af-bygninger/det-viser-
energimaerket 
Energistyrrelsen. (2024, April 3th). Energimærkning af huse. Retrieved from SparEnergi - 
Energistyrelsen: https://old.sparenergi.dk/forbruger/boligen/energimaerkning-
boliger/huse 
EPD Danmark. (2024, April 3). EPD Databasen. Retrieved from EPD Danmark: 
https://www.epddanmark.dk/epd-databasen/ 
European Commission. (2024, March 6th). Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). Retrieved from 
European Comission Platform on LCA | EPLCA: 
https://eplca.jrc.ec.europa.eu/lifecycleassessment.html#:~:text=LCA%20is%20ba
sed%20on%204,impact%20assessment%2C%204)%20interpretation 
FacilitiesNet. (2024, June 3rd). Daylighting Advantages and Disadvantages. Retrieved from 
Facilitiesnet.com: https://www.facilitiesnet.com/lighting/topic/Daylighting-
Advantages-And-Disadvantages--19593 
German Sustainable Building Council. (2024, May 11). About the DGNB system. Retrieved 
from Deutsche Gesellschaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen - DGNB: 
https://www.dgnb.de/en/certification/important-facts-about-dgnb-
certification/about-the-dgnb-system 
Green Building Council Denmark. (2023). 2023 DGNB manual for nye bygninger og 
omfattende renoveringer v1.0. København: Rådet for Bæredygtigt byggeri. 
GreenDozer. (2024, March 13). Hvad er bæredygtighed? Retrieved from GreenDozer: 
https://greendozer.com/hvad-er-baeredygtighed 
Hauschild, M. Z. (2018). Life Cycle Assessment Theory and Practice. Kongens Lyngby: 
Springer. 
IESVE. (2024, April 2nd). Table 6: Thermal Conductivity, Specific Heat Capacity and 
Density. Retrieved from IESVE.com: 
https://help.iesve.com/ve2021/table_6_thermal_conductivity__specific_heat_cap
acity_and_density.htm 
Jane W. Baldwin, T. B. (2023). Humidity’s Role in Heat-Related Health Outcomes: A Heated 
Debate. Environmental Health Perspectives - PubMed Central, EHP 11807. 
Khanie, M. S. (2020, September 2nd). Measuring light. Introduction to light & daylighting 
11142. DTU Civil Engineering. 
Korsholm, R., Mahdavi, A., Berger, C., Amin, H., Ampatzi, E., Andersen, A. E., . . . Khovalyg, 
D. (2021). The role of occupants in buildings' energy performance gap. Myth or 
reality? Switzerland: MDPI. 
==PAGE:89==
 
79 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
KOSPEL. (2024, March 23th). KDE5 electronic LCD. Retrieved from Kospel - comfortable 
and clean heating: https://kospelglobal.com/instantaneous-water-heaters/ppe3-
electronic-lcd.html 
Kottek, M. J. (2006). World Map of the Köppen-Geiger climate classification updated. 
Meteorol. Z. 15, pp. 259-263. 
Lemon, T. (2014, September 1st). Overheating from South Windows. Retrieved from Green 
Building Advisor: https://www.greenbuildingadvisor.com/article/overheating-from-
south-windows 
Maykot, J. K., de Oliveira, C. C., Ghisi, E., & Forgiarini Rupp, R. (2022). Influence of Gender 
on Thermal, Air-Movement, Humidity and Air-Quality Perception in Mixed-Mode 
and Fully Air-Conditioned Offices. Sustainability 14 - DTU Library, Article 9722. 
Mette Havgaard Vorre, M. H. (2017). Branchevejledning for indeklima beregninger. 
København: Statens Byggeforskningsinstitut. 
Mitsubishi Electric. (2024, March 15th). Mitsubishi LN25-HERO varmepumpe. Retrieved 
from NovaSolar: https://www.novasolar.dk/luft-til-luft-varmepumper/22-17412-
mitsubishi-msz-ln25-hero-varmepumpe-8851492558096.html#/73-
farver_indedel-hvid_000_dkk 
Mukhopadhyay, J. (2019, October 15). Observations of energy consumption and IEQ in a 
'Tiny House'. Building Research & Information 48, pp. 613-631. 
Ole Valbjørn, S. L. (2000). SBI-anvisning 196: Indeklimahåndbogen. Hørsholm: Statens 
Byggeforskningsinstitut. 
Preston, K. (2024, January 23th). The warmth of wellbeing: Improving thermal comfort at 
Home. Retrieved from WLLW: https://wllw.eco/journal/thermal-comfort-at-home 
Roberts, T. (2016, December 15th). We spend 90% of our time indoors. Says who? 
Retrieved from BuildingGreen: https://www.buildinggreen.com/blog/we-spend-90-
our-time-indoors-says-who 
Schefte, A. F. (2024, June 2nd). Øget klimabelastning fra offentligt byggeri er et problem. 
Retrieved from Rådet for Grøn Omstilling: https://rgo.dk/oeget-klimabelastning-
fra-offentligt-byggeri-er-et-problem/ 
Sciving. (2024, February 8th). Sciving Student Housing. Retrieved from Sciving: 
https//www.sciving.com 
Shuo Chen, G. Z. (2021, June). The impacts of occupant behavior on building energy 
consumption: A review. Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments, Vol. 
45, p. 101212. 
Social- og Boligstyrelsen. (2018). Bygningsreglementet. Retrieved from 
http://bygningsreglementet.dk/ 
Social-, Bolig- og Ældreministeriet. (2024, May 21st). Nye byggerier skal være markant 
mere grønne. Retrieved from SM Nyhedsarkiv: 
==PAGE:90==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
80 
 
https://www.sm.dk/nyheder/nyhedsarkiv/2024/maj/nye-byggerier-skal-vaere-
markant-mere-groenne 
Termo. (2024, March 15th). Termo elradiator Slim Line glas 400 W. Retrieved from 
Bauhaus: https://www.bauhaus.dk/termo-elradiator-slim-line-glas-400-w 
Toft, L. V. (2018). Udvilkingen i den gennemsnitlig boligstørrelse. København S: KL. 
UNEP. (2024, June 10th). Term - Life Cycle Assessment. Retrieved from Environmental 
information systems: https://www.eea.europa.eu/help/glossary/eea-glossary/life-
cycle-
assessment#:~:text=Life%2Dcycle%20assessment%20(LCA),use%20efficiency%
20and%20decreasing%20liabilities 
VELFAC. (2022, November 30th). Nye BR18 Klimakrav - Se hvad de betyder for dig. 
Retrieved from Velfac - Nyheder og aktuelt til professionelle: 
https://nyheder.velfac.dk/erhverv/br18-klimakrav 
Verdenskommissionen for Miljø og Udvikling. (1987). Our Common Future. Bergen: FN-
forbundet og Mellemfolkeligt Samvirke. 
Vinh Van Tran, D. P.-C. (2020). Indoor Air Pollution, Related Human Diseases, and Recent 
Trends in the Control and Improvement of Indoor Air Quality. Int J Envion Res Public 
Health - PubMed Central. 
Wargocki, P. (2018). How indoor climate affects productivity in offices, schools and similar 
buildings. Retrieved from InnoBYG: 
https://www.innobyg.dk/media/52235/pawel%20wargocki%20l%C3%A5st.pdf 
World Health Organization. (2018). WHO Housing and Health Guidelines. Geneva: WHO. 
Wotton, J. &. (2019, July 1st). Tiny house - when size matters. Australian Planner 55, pp. 
209-220. 
Xiaojing Zhang, A. M. (2022). Handbook of Indoor Air Quality - Effects from Exposures to 
Human Bioeffluents and Carbon Dioxide. Singapore: Springer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
 
81 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Appendixes 
 
Appendix A – Schedules for occupancy and internal loads depending on room 
 
 
Occupancy in rooms/bedrooms (Mette Havgaard Vorre, 2017) 
Rooms/bedrooms 
Profile 
Weekdays 
Weekend 
 
 
Occupancy in kitchen-dining area (Mette Havgaard Vorre, 2017) 
Kitchen-dining area 
Profile 
Weekdays 
Weekend 
 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
82 
 
Occupancy in living room and other living spaces (Mette Havgaard Vorre, 2017) 
Living room and 
other living spaces 
Profile 
Weekdays 
Weekend 
 
 
Internal loads for rooms/bedrooms (Mette Havgaard Vorre, 2017) 
Rooms/bedrooms 
Profile 
Weekdays 
Weekend 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
83 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Internal loads for kitchen-dining area (Mette Havgaard Vorre, 2017) 
Kitchen-dining area 
Profile 
Weekdays 
Weekend 
 
 
Internal loads for living room and other living spaces (Mette Havgaard Vorre, 2017) 
Living room and 
other living spaces 
Profile 
Weekdays 
Weekend 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
84 
 
Appendix B1 – Model of the original window 
 
 
https://glassanalytics.guardian.com/app/configure 
 
Appendix B2 – Model of the optimized window 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
 
85 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Appendix C – Material quantity calculations in Excel 
 
General: 
 
 
Roof: 
 
 
Exterior wall: 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
86 
 
Ground deck: 
 
 
Interior wall: 
 
 
Window and doors: 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
87 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Appendix D – Input to LCAbyg 
 
  
==PAGE:98==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
88 
 
Appendix E – DGNB-certification matrixes 
Original unit: 
 
Quality
Criterion group
Total Economy (ECO1)
Functionality (SOC2)
Mobility (TEC3)
DWELLING (NER)
Environmental quality (ENV)
Impact on Global and Local Environment (ENV1)
Social quality (SOC)
Health, Comfort, and User Satisfaction (SOC1)
Resource Consumption and Waste (ENV2)
Economic quality (ECO)
Economic Future-Proofing (ECO2)
Aesthhetics (SOC3)
Technical quality (TEC)
Technical Execution (TEC1)
Process quality (PRO)
Planning (PRO1)
Quality Assurance of Execution (PRO2)
Site quality (SITE)
Site Quality (SITE1)
==PAGE:99==
 
89 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
 
 
Criterion name
Achieved points
Max. points
Weighting
ENV1.1 Life cycle assessment
26,0
100
8
ENV1.2 Hazardous substances
45,0
100
4
ENV1.3 Responsible resource extraction
100,0
100
2
ENV2.2 Drinking water consumption and wastewater discharge
50,0
100
2
ENV2.3 Landuse
80,0
110
1
ENV2.4 Biodiversity
26,0
110
2
ECO1.1 Total economy
85,0
100
3
ECO2.1 Flexibility and adaptability
63,0
110
2
ECO2.2 Robustness
56,0
100
2
SOC1.1 Thermal comfort
30,0
100
3
SOC1.2 Indoor air quality
56,5
100
3
SOC1.3 Acoustic indoor climate
52,5
100
3
SOC1.4 Visual comfort
90,0
100
3
SOC1.6 Quality of outdoor areas
0,0
100
2
SOC2.1 Universal design
50,0
100
4
SOC3.2 Building-integrated art
0,0
100
0
SOC3.3 Space planning
19,5
100
2
TEC1.1 Fire safety and security
50,0
100
2
TEC1.3 Quality of the climate envelope
70,0
100
3
TEC1.4 Adaptability of technical systems
45,0
120
3
TEC1.5 Design for maintenance and ease of cleaning
58,2
115
2
TEC1.6 Demolition and recycling
86,5
110
3
TEC1.8 Documentation with environmental product declarations (EPD)
100,0
100
1
TEC3.1 Mobility infrastructure
25,0
120
2
PRO1.1 Quality in project preparation
35,0
100
1
PRO1.4 Sustainability in construction tendering
50,0
110
3
PRO1.5 Guidance on maintenance and use of the building
65,0
100
2
PRO1.6 Procedure for architectural quality
20,0
150
2
PRO2.1 Construction site/process
60,0
110
2
PRO2.2 Documentation of quality in execution
40,0
100
3
PRO2.3 Comissioning
90,0
110
4
PRO2.4 User communication
50,0
100
3
SITE1.1 Local environment
61,5
100
2
SITE1.2 Area and neighborhood and  condition
25,0
100
2
SITE1.3 Traffic connections
43,0
100
2
SITE1.4 Access to facilities in the vicinity
34,0
110
2
==PAGE:100==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
90 
 
 
 
 
Achieved weighting points
Max.weighting points
Achieved points for criterion group
Max. points for criterion group
Group result index
Group weignting
Overall result index
Certificate
208,0
800
180,0
400
200,0
200
100,0
200
80,0
110
52,0
220
255,0
300
126,0
220
112,0
200
90,0
300
169,5
300
157,5
300
270,0
300
0,0
200
200,0
400
0,0
0
39,0
200
100,0
200
210,0
300
135,0
360
116,5
230
259,5
330
100,0
100
50,0
240
35,0
100
150,0
330
130,0
200
40,0
300
120,0
220
120,0
300
360,0
440
150,0
300
123,0
200
50,0
200
86,0
200
68,0
220
820,0
1930
926,0
2000
22,5%
52%
DGNB Silver
493,0
720
68%
22,5%
42%
46%
22,5%
971,0
1760
55%
15,0%
5,0%
1105,0
2190
50%
12,5%
327,0
820
40%
==PAGE:101==
 
91 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Optimized unit: 
 
Quality
Criterion group
Total Economy (ECO1)
Functionality (SOC2)
Mobility (TEC3)
DWELLING (NER)
Environmental quality (ENV)
Impact on Global and Local Environment (ENV1)
Social quality (SOC)
Health, Comfort, and User Satisfaction (SOC1)
Resource Consumption and Waste (ENV2)
Economic quality (ECO)
Economic Future-Proofing (ECO2)
Aesthhetics (SOC3)
Technical quality (TEC)
Technical Execution (TEC1)
Process quality (PRO)
Planning (PRO1)
Quality Assurance of Execution (PRO2)
Site quality (SITE)
Site Quality (SITE1)
==PAGE:102==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
92 
 
 
Criterion name
Achieved points
Max. points
Weighting
ENV1.1 Life cycle assessment
24,0
100
8
ENV1.2 Hazardous substances
45,0
100
4
ENV1.3 Responsible resource extraction
100,0
100
2
ENV2.2 Drinking water consumption and wastewater discharge
50,0
100
2
ENV2.3 Landuse
80,0
110
1
ENV2.4 Biodiversity
26,0
110
2
ECO1.1 Total economy
85,0
100
3
ECO2.1 Flexibility and adaptability
63,0
110
2
ECO2.2 Robustness
60,0
100
2
SOC1.1 Thermal comfort
45,0
100
3
SOC1.2 Indoor air quality
56,5
100
3
SOC1.3 Acoustic indoor climate
52,5
100
3
SOC1.4 Visual comfort
100,0
100
3
SOC1.6 Quality of outdoor areas
0,0
100
2
SOC2.1 Universal design
50,0
100
4
SOC3.2 Building-integrated art
0,0
100
0
SOC3.3 Space planning
29,5
100
2
TEC1.1 Fire safety and security
50,0
100
2
TEC1.3 Quality of the climate envelope
70,0
100
3
TEC1.4 Adaptability of technical systems
45,0
120
3
TEC1.5 Design for maintenance and ease of cleaning
58,2
115
2
TEC1.6 Demolition and recycling
86,5
110
3
TEC1.8 Documentation with environmental product declarations (EPD)
100,0
100
1
TEC3.1 Mobility infrastructure
25,0
120
2
PRO1.1 Quality in project preparation
35,0
100
1
PRO1.4 Sustainability in construction tendering
50,0
110
3
PRO1.5 Guidance on maintenance and use of the building
65,0
100
2
PRO1.6 Procedure for architectural quality
20,0
150
2
PRO2.1 Construction site/process
60,0
110
2
PRO2.2 Documentation of quality in execution
40,0
100
3
PRO2.3 Comissioning
90,0
110
4
PRO2.4 User communication
50,0
100
3
SITE1.1 Local environment
61,5
100
2
SITE1.2 Area and neighborhood and  condition
25,0
100
2
SITE1.3 Traffic connections
43,0
100
2
SITE1.4 Access to facilities in the vicinity
34,0
110
2
==PAGE:103==
 
93 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Achieved weighting points
Max.weighting points
Achieved points for criterion group
Max. points for criterion group
Group result index
Group weignting
Overall result index
Certificate
192,0
800
180,0
400
200,0
200
100,0
200
80,0
110
52,0
220
255,0
300
126,0
220
120,0
200
135,0
300
169,5
300
157,5
300
300,0
300
0,0
200
200,0
400
0,0
0
59,0
200
100,0
200
210,0
300
135,0
360
116,5
230
259,5
330
100,0
100
50,0
240
35,0
100
150,0
330
130,0
200
40,0
300
120,0
220
120,0
300
360,0
440
150,0
300
123,0
200
50,0
200
86,0
200
68,0
220
327,0
820
40%
5,0%
1105,0
2190
50%
12,5%
51%
22,5%
971,0
1760
55%
15,0%
22,5%
53%
DGNB Silver
501,0
720
70%
22,5%
804,0
1930
42%
1021,0
2000
==PAGE:104==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
94 
 
Final unit: 
 
Quality
Criterion group
Total Economy (ECO1)
Functionality (SOC2)
Mobility (TEC3)
DWELLING (NER)
Environmental quality (ENV)
Impact on Global and Local Environment (ENV1)
Social quality (SOC)
Health, Comfort, and User Satisfaction (SOC1)
Resource Consumption and Waste (ENV2)
Economic quality (ECO)
Economic Future-Proofing (ECO2)
Aesthhetics (SOC3)
Technical quality (TEC)
Technical Execution (TEC1)
Process quality (PRO)
Planning (PRO1)
Quality Assurance of Execution (PRO2)
Site quality (SITE)
Site Quality (SITE1)
==PAGE:105==
 
95 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
 
Criterion name
Achieved points
Max. points
Weighting
ENV1.1 Life cycle assessment
35,0
100
8
ENV1.2 Hazardous substances
45,0
100
4
ENV1.3 Responsible resource extraction
100,0
100
2
ENV2.2 Drinking water consumption and wastewater discharge
50,0
100
2
ENV2.3 Landuse
80,0
110
1
ENV2.4 Biodiversity
26,0
110
2
ECO1.1 Total economy
85,0
100
3
ECO2.1 Flexibility and adaptability
63,0
110
2
ECO2.2 Robustness
60,0
100
2
SOC1.1 Thermal comfort
45,0
100
3
SOC1.2 Indoor air quality
56,5
100
3
SOC1.3 Acoustic indoor climate
52,5
100
3
SOC1.4 Visual comfort
100,0
100
3
SOC1.6 Quality of outdoor areas
0,0
100
2
SOC2.1 Universal design
50,0
100
4
SOC3.2 Building-integrated art
0,0
100
0
SOC3.3 Space planning
29,5
100
2
TEC1.1 Fire safety and security
50,0
100
2
TEC1.3 Quality of the climate envelope
70,0
100
3
TEC1.4 Adaptability of technical systems
45,0
120
3
TEC1.5 Design for maintenance and ease of cleaning
58,2
115
2
TEC1.6 Demolition and recycling
86,5
110
3
TEC1.8 Documentation with environmental product declarations (EPD)
100,0
100
1
TEC3.1 Mobility infrastructure
25,0
120
2
PRO1.1 Quality in project preparation
35,0
100
1
PRO1.4 Sustainability in construction tendering
50,0
110
3
PRO1.5 Guidance on maintenance and use of the building
65,0
100
2
PRO1.6 Procedure for architectural quality
20,0
150
2
PRO2.1 Construction site/process
60,0
110
2
PRO2.2 Documentation of quality in execution
40,0
100
3
PRO2.3 Comissioning
90,0
110
4
PRO2.4 User communication
50,0
100
3
SITE1.1 Local environment
61,5
100
2
SITE1.2 Area and neighborhood and  condition
25,0
100
2
SITE1.3 Traffic connections
43,0
100
2
SITE1.4 Access to facilities in the vicinity
34,0
110
2
==PAGE:106==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
96 
 
 
 
 
Achieved weighting points
Max.weighting points
Achieved points for criterion group
Max. points for criterion group
Group result index
Group weignting
Overall result index
Certificate
280,0
800
180,0
400
200,0
200
100,0
200
80,0
110
52,0
220
255,0
300
126,0
220
120,0
200
135,0
300
169,5
300
157,5
300
300,0
300
0,0
200
200,0
400
0,0
0
59,0
200
100,0
200
210,0
300
135,0
360
116,5
230
259,5
330
100,0
100
50,0
240
35,0
100
150,0
330
130,0
200
40,0
300
120,0
220
120,0
300
360,0
440
150,0
300
123,0
200
50,0
200
86,0
200
68,0
220
327,0
820
40%
5,0%
1105,0
2190
50%
12,5%
51%
22,5%
971,0
1760
55%
15,0%
22,5%
54%
DGNB Silver
501,0
720
70%
22,5%
892,0
1930
46%
1021,0
2000
==PAGE:107==
 
97 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Appendix F – GWP calculation for reference building elements 
 
 
 
==PAGE:108==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
98 
 
 
 
Calculation and results in Excel: 
 
 
 
==PAGE:109==
 
99 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Appendix G – Results from IDA ICE and LCAbyg organized in Excel 
 
Original unit and Building parameter scenarios: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
100 
 
Original unit and Location parameter scenarios: 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:111==
 
101 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Original, Optimized and final unit: 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:112==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
102 
 
Appendix H – Expanded table related to optimization scenarios 
Stage 1 – Design and assessment of original housing unit 
Stage 2 – Optimization of original housing unit 
Heating type 
Original heat pump with cooling 
• Cooling capacity = 2,5 kW 
• EER = 10,5 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Smaller heat pump without cooling 
• Heating capacity = 2,8 kW 
• COP = 4,83 
• Heat pump weight = 37 kg 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Smaller heat pump with cooling 
• Heating capacity = 2,8 kW 
• COP = 4,83 
• Cooling capacity = 2,0 kW 
• EER = 5 
• Heat pump weight = 37 kg 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Floor heating but no el-panel 
• Delete el-panel and heat pump 
• Insert 16,1 m2 floor heating 
• Heating capacity = 100 W/m2 
• Service life = 60 years 
• GWP 
- A1-A3 = 9,28 kg CO2-eq./m2 
- C4 = 0,246 kg CO2-eq./m2 
- D = -0,27 kg CO2-eq./m2 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Bigger electric panel 
• Delete heat pump 
• Insert big electric panel 
• Heating capacity = 1000 W 
• Weight = 6,8 kg 
• Service life = 40 years 
• GWP: 
- A1-A3 = 4,45 kg CO2-eq./kg 
- C3 = 9,18e-4 kg CO2-eq./kg 
- D = -1,56 kg CO2-eq./kg 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
==PAGE:113==
 
103 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Insulation material 
* 
Straw 
• Thermal conductivity = 0,052 W/mK 
• Density = 100 kg/m3 
• Specific heat = 1600 J/kgK 
• Thickness: 
- Exterior wall = 0,17 m 
- Ground deck/roof = 0,225 m 
• Service life: 
- Exterior wall = 60 years 
- Ground deck = 60 years 
- Roof = 40 years 
- Interior wall = 100 years 
• GWP: 
- A1-A3 = 1,44 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- C4 = 0,262 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- D = -1,54e-2 kg CO2-eq./m3 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Wood fibre 
• Thermal conductivity = 0,036 W/mK 
• Density = 34,5 kg/m3 
• Specific heat = 1400 J/kgK 
• Thickness: 
- Exterior wall = 0,107 m 
- Ground deck/roof = 0,142 m 
• Service life: 
- Exterior wall = 60 years 
- Ground deck = 60 years 
- Roof = 40 years 
- Interior wall = 100 years 
• GWP: 
- A1-A3 = -1,00 kg CO2-eq./kg 
- C3 = 1,53 kg CO2-eq./kg 
- D = -0,466 kg CO2-eq./kg 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
==PAGE:114==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
104 
 
Hemp 
• Thermal conductivity = 0,040 W/mK 
• Density = 35 kg/m3 
• Specific heat = 1700 J/kgK 
• Thickness: 
- Exterior wall = 0,12 m 
- Ground deck/roof = 0,163 m 
• Service life: 
- Exterior wall = 60 years 
- Ground deck = 60 years 
- Roof = 40 years 
- Interior wall = 100 years 
• GWP: 
- A1-A3 = -68,1 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- C3 = 70,8 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- C4 = 1,7 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- D = 25,7 kg CO2-eq./m3 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Paper granules 
• Thermal conductivity = 0,038 W/mK 
• Density = 32 kg/m3 
• Specific heat = 1600 J/kgK 
• Thickness: 
- Exterior wall = 0,112 m 
- Ground deck/roof = 0,152 m 
• Service life: 
- Exterior wall = 60 years 
- Ground deck = 60 years 
- Roof = 40 years 
- Interior wall = 100 years 
• GWP: 
- A1-A3 = -65,1 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- C3 = 62,3 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- C4 = 7,12 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- D = -20,0 kg CO2-eq./m3 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
==PAGE:115==
 
105 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Solar shading 
Solid front door – no glass 
• Change front door 
• Thermal conductivity = 0,14 W/mK 
• Density = 500 kg/m3 
• Specific heat = 2300 J/kgK 
• U-value = 0,88 W/m2K 
• Weight = 50 kg 
• GWP: 
- A1-A3 = 34,4 kg CO2-eq./m2 
- C3 = 32,3 kg CO2-eq./m2 
- C4 = 5,5 kg CO2-eq./m2 
- D = -7,48 kg CO2-eq./m2 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Louvres 
• Add 6 external horizontal lamellas in 
front of windows with dimension of: 
1,5m x 0,12 m x 0,04 m (WxDxH) 
• Amount = 0,0432 m3/pcs. 
• Service life = 50 years 
• GWP: 
- A1-A3 = -743 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- C3 = 774 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- D = -116 kg CO2-eq./m3 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Overhang 
• Add wooden external overhang in 
front of windows with 0,4 m dis-
tance in between and the dimen-
sions: 
1,5m x 0,7 m x 0,04 m (WxDxH) 
• Amount = 0,042 m3 
• Service life = 50 years 
• GWP: 
- A1-A3 = -743 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- C3 = 774 kg CO2-eq./m3 
- D = -116 kg CO2-eq./m3 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
==PAGE:116==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
106 
 
Active external blinds 
• Add blinds 
- Multiplier for g = 0,14 
- Multiplier for T = 0,09 
• Solar radiation level at which shad-
ing are drawn = 400 W/m2 
• Amount = 3,16 m2 
• Service life = 40 years 
• GWP: 
- A1-A3 = 38 kg CO2-eq./m2 
- C3 = 1,77e-1 kg CO2-eq./m2 
- C4 = 3,18e-2 kg CO2-eq./m2 
- D = -17,4 kg CO2-eq./m2 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Surface layer in front door/window 
(Appendix B2 – Model of the opti-
mized window) 
• Change glazing properties to: 
- g = 0,363 
- Te = 0,336 
- Tv = 0,645 
- Ug-value = 0,8 W/m2K 
• Amount = 3,16 m2 
• Service life = 40 years 
• GWP: 
- A1-A3 = 14,69 kg CO2-eq./m2 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Ventilation 
Window in bathroom 
• Adding 0,5 m2 window to the bath-
room wall facing north 
• Opening control = 18°C / 24°C 
• Weight = 33 kg 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Skylight in KBLD-room 
• Adding 0,5 m2 skylight window to 
the KDLB-room 
• Opening control = 18°C / 24°C 
• Weight = 33 kg 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Stage 3 – Design and assessment of optimized housing unit 
Stage 4 – Improvement of optimized housing unit 
==PAGE:117==
 
107 
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
 
Comfort & Energy 
Set temperatures 
Solar panels 
 
• Set temperatures: 
- KDLB-room: 
   min./max. = 20,5 °C / 23,5 °C 
- Bathroom: 
   min./max. = 20,5 °C / 25,0 °C 
• Adding solar panels on the top of 
the roof in a line in the middle 
- Amount: 3 pcs. 
- Orientation: south 
- Angle: 47 degrees 
  (ProfileSOLAR, 2024) 
- Size: 2,04 x 0,997 = 2,03m2/panel 
- Distance: 2,35 m 
- Power: 470 W/panel 
• Service life = 20 years 
• GWP: 
- A1-A3 = 77,2 kg CO2-eq./m2 
- C3 = 0,129 kg CO2-eq./m2 
- C4 = 1,45e-3 kg CO2-eq./m2 
- D = -31,2 kg CO2-eq./m2 
• Update LCAbyg with energy con-
sumption 
Stage 5 – Design and assessment of final housing unit 
*   NOTE – When referring to insulation material, it is only the thickest layer in the building element that changes 
 
 
==PAGE:118==
Assessment of indoor environment in sustainable housing 
108 
 
Appendix I – Environmental Product Declarations 
 
==PAGE:119==
 
PAGE 1/15 
   
 
    
Environmental 
Product 
Declaration 
In accordance with EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 for: 
 
Holse & Wibroe Traditional Bamboo 
from 
Holse & Wibroe 
 
Programme: 
The International EPD® System, www.environdec.com 
Programme operator: 
EPD International AB 
EPD registration number: 
S-P-07067 
Publication date: 
2023-05-22 
Valid until: 
2028-05-22 
 
 
An EPD should provide current information and may be updated if conditions change. The stated 
validity is therefore subject to the continued registration and publication at www.environdec.com 
==PAGE:120==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 2/15 
General information 
Programme information  
Programme: 
The International EPD® System 
Address: 
EPD International AB  
Box 210 60  
SE-100 31 Stockholm 
Sweden 
Website: 
www.environdec.com 
E-mail: 
info@environdec.com 
 
Accountabilities for PCR, LCA and independent, third-party verification 
Product Category Rules (PCR) 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the Core Product Category Rules (PCR) 
Product Category Rules (PCR):  
PCR 2019:14 Construction products, version 1.2.5 (2023-01-xx) 
PCR review was conducted by: IVL Swedish Environmental Research Institute 
Moderator: Martin Erlandsson, Martin.erlandsson@ivl.se 
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
LCA accountability: Chao WANG, Ecovane Environmental 
Third-party verification 
Independent third-party verification of the declaration and data, according to ISO 14025:2006, via: 
 
☒ EPD verification by individual verifier 
      
Third-party verifier: Marcus Wendin, Miljögiraff AB (marcus@miljogiraff.se) 
 
Approved by: The International EPD® System 
OR 
Independent third-party verification of the declaration and data, according to ISO 14025:2006, via: 
 
☐ EPD verification by accredited certification body 
      
Third-party verification: <name, organisation> is an approved certification body accountable for the 
third-party verification 
The certification body is accredited by: <name of accreditation body & accreditation number, where 
applicable> 
 
OR 
==PAGE:121==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 3/15 
Independent third-party verification of the declaration and data, according to ISO 14025:2006 via: 
☐ EPD verification by EPD Process Certification* 
 
Internal auditor: <name, organisation> 
 
Third-party verification:  <name, organisation> is an approved certification body accountable for third-
party verification 
Third-party verifier is accredited by: <name of accreditation body & accreditation number, where 
applicable> 
*For EPD Process Certification, an accredited certification body certifies and reviews the management process and verifies EPDs 
published on a regular basis. For details about third-party verification procedure of the EPDs, see GPI v.4, Section 7.5. 
Procedure for follow-up of data during EPD validity involves third party verifier: 
 
☒ Yes 
☐ No 
 
The EPD owner has the sole ownership, liability, and responsibility for the EPD.  
 
EPDs within the same product category but registered in different EPD programmes, or not compliant 
with EN 15804, may not be comparable. For two EPDs to be comparable, they must be based on the 
same PCR (including the same version number) or be based on fully-aligned PCRs or versions of 
PCRs; cover products with identical functions, technical performances and use (e.g. identical 
declared/functional units); have equivalent system boundaries and descriptions of data; apply 
equivalent data quality requirements, methods of data collection, and allocation methods; apply 
identical cut-off rules and impact assessment methods (including the same version of characterisation 
factors); have equivalent content declarations; and be valid at the time of comparison. For further 
information about comparability, see EN 15804 and ISO 14025. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 4/15 
Company information 
Owner of the EPD:  
Holse & Wibroe A/S 
Address: Agenavej 20, 2670 Greve, Denmark 
Website: http://www.holseogwibroe.dk 
Tel: +45 8818 2800           Email: oho@holseogwibroe.dk 
 
Description of the organisation:  
Holse & Wibroe A/S is a Danish company founded in 2004. The entire business is based upon bamboo. 
Bamboo products were supplied for both outdoor and indoor use. Hereunder bamboo floorings, bamboo 
panels, bamboo veneer, bamboo decking, bamboo cladding and bamboo beams. The head office is 
located near Copenhagen, Denmark. 
 
Holse &Wibroe A/S is founded upon the values of honesty, trust, long term partnership and the ability 
to supply environmental and sustainable bamboo products of high quality, for both residential and 
commercial use. Together with the long-term partners, Holse &Wibroe A/S strive to develop new 
bamboo products of high quality, and move the borders for bamboo use in the building industry. 
 
Name and location of production site(s):  
Anji Qichen Bamboo Industry Co., Ltd. 
Address: Baishuiyang, Tianhuangping town, Anji county, Huzhou, P.R.China 
 
Product information 
Product name:  
Holse & Wibroe Traditional Bamboo 
 
Product identification:  
Table1 Product technical specifications 
Density 
700 kg/m3 
Thickness 
15/19 mm 
 
Manufacturing process: 
 
Figure1 Holse & Wibroe traditional bamboo manufacturing process 
 
Product description:  
Bamboo is one of the fastest-growing plants in the world. It is a renewable and versatile resource with 
multi- purpose usage. Bamboos are of notable economic and cultural significance in South Asia, 
Southeast Asia, and East Asia where the climate is best suitable for its cultivation. The material may 
be cut and laminated into sheets and planks, and may be curved or flattened by the application of heat 
and pressure. It is an ideal construction material as it is durable, sustainable, and environmentally 
friendly. Bamboo used for construction purposes must be harvested when the culms reach their 
greatest strength and when the sugar level in the sap is at its lowest (usually when the bamboo culm is 
==PAGE:123==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 5/15 
3 to 5 years old), and afterwards it should be cured and dried properly for further treatment and 
manufacturing purpose. Harvesting is best taking place at the end of the dry season, and a few 
months prior to the start of the rainy season. 
 
  
 
Figure2 Bamboo culms and rough processing site near plantations 
 
Traditional bamboo floorings are solid floorings made from special selected bamboo strips. All strips 
are color sorted by hand and then glued together. The look is strict Scandinavian with straight lines 
appearing, but with a warm glow. Floorings are delivered with tongue & grove. Made from bamboo 
specie "Phyllostachus Pubescens", origin China. 
 
UN CPC code:  
3145 Plywood, veneer panels and similar laminated wood of bamboo 
 
Geographical scope:  
Global
 
LCA information 
Functional unit / declared unit:  
The declared unit is 1kg of bamboo product. 
 
Time representativeness:  
The study used primary data collected from January 2021 to January 2022. 
 
Database(s) and LCA software used: 
SimaPro9 was used for the LCA modelling. In the study, the key parameters for producer-specific 
foreground data were based on one year (January 2021 to January 2022) of averaged data from 
Holse & Wibroe. Generic data for certain processes were sourced from Ecoinvent 3.8 database in 
SimaPro9.4.0.1. Modification of the global background database was done by replacing all the energy 
data, especially electricity production data, by localized Chinese energy data. 
 
The data quality requirements for this study were as follows: 
• 
Existing LCI data were, at most, 10 years old. Newly collected LCI data were current or up to 3 
years old; 
• 
The LCI data related to the geographical locations where the processes took place, e.g. electricity 
and transportation data from China, disposal data from Europe were utilized; 
• 
The scenarios represented the average technologies at the time of data collection.  
 
==PAGE:124==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 6/15 
System diagram: 
 
 
Description of system boundaries:  
The is a “cradle-to-gate with options” EPD. The LCA study traced all energy and material inputs back 
to the extraction of resources for each life-cycle stage of the products. In addition, the study quantified 
emissions from the whole system, and included various waste management scenarios. 
 
The life cycle stages below have been covered: 
• 
A1-A3: Product stage (raw material acquisition, transport to manufacturing site and 
manufacturing) 
• 
A4: Construction stage (transport to user site) 
• 
C1-C4: End-of-life stage (deconstruction, transport, waste processing and disposal) 
• 
D: Resource recovery stage (reuse, recovery, recycling) 
Excluded lifecycle stages: 
The installation stage on the construction site and the usage stage of the product are excluded from 
this study. 
 
Assumption and limitations: 
For certain aspects of bamboo flooring studied, the following key assumptions were made as follows: 
• 
For missing background data, substitution of missing data using similar background data 
approach was taken to shorten the gap.  
• 
Transport assumptions were made where it was not possible to obtain the specific data, for 
instance from distribution center to outlet and from outlet to consumer. When this occurred, it was 
clearly stated in the report; 
• 
Electricity consumption data was not obtained for certain processes so assumptions were made 
for these. When this occurred, it was clearly stated in the report; 
• 
A modification of the global background database was done by replacing all the energy data, 
especially electricity production data, by Chinese energy data, and the study used the modified 
background data to get better indication of the potential environmental impact results by using 
more localized dataset of energy supply. 
 
Allocation: 
During the production process of Holse & Wibroe traditional bamboo products, the use of raw 
materials and resource were calculated according to the relationship between output and energy 
consumption, water consumption, and related resources, avoiding the use of mass, energy, and 
economic distribution method. 
 
==PAGE:125==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 7/15 
During manufacturing process, there is no generation of by-products that need to be allocated in this 
situation. 
 
Cut-off rules: 
Raw materials that account for less than 1% of the mass of the product were allowed not to be 
considered in the study, including the transportation of the associated materials. The infrastructure for 
manufacturing was not included in the LCA, including the machine, either. 
 
Electricity source: 
As required in PCR Section 4.8, “If purchased electricity used in the manufacturing process of module 
A3 accounts for more than 30% of the GWP-GHG results of modules A1-A3, the EPD shall declare the 
energy source behind the purchased electricity and its climate impact as kg CO2 eq./kWh (using the 
GWP-GHG indicator).” 
 
In this LCA, the grid mix data on electricity for the site in Zhejiang Province was based on grid mixes of 
China. The electricity inventory is based on the year of 2018 for Chinese electricity generation (China 
Energy Statistics). Eastern China grid electricity mix is used. 
 
In Chinese map of electricity generation, thermal power is the principal part of total national installed 
capacity and electricity generation. Development of hydropower is slower than that of thermal power, 
and nuclear power is still in its initial step. Power generation from renewable energy resources, such 
as wind, solar energy, and tide, are usually not included due to the small share in electricity generation 
in China. However, the renewable energy was also considered in this study by taking a small ratio of 
wind, solar, and other renewable energy generation in China into account. 
 
In 2018, the source of power supply is 71.1% thermal power, 17.2% hydropower and 5.1% wind 
power. The transmission of electricity in all cases is taken from the power station via a high voltage 
electricity grid to low voltage electricity suitable for domestic use, with a loss factor of 7.52% of the 
electricity produced at the power station, and a loss of 6.15% by the electricity consumption at the 
power plants.The emission of the electricity used for manufacturing stage is 0.85kg CO2 eq./kWh. 
 
Life cycle assessment scenarios: 
According to Holse & Wibroe, products are consumed in Denmark, and transportation distance for 
product delivery was estimated with reference to external resources. The table blow demonstrates the 
data used for stage A4 in the LCA modelling. 
 
Table 2 Transport to the construction site (A4) 
Additional technical information for stage A4 
Scenario title 
Parameter 
Units (expressed 
per declared unit) 
Value 
A4 Transport to Site 
Vehicle type used for transport 
Lorry 
Lorry 
Vehicle load capacity 
Metric ton 
32 
Fuel type and consumption 
Diesel, L/100km 
31.11 
Distance to central warehouse 
or storage, if relevant 
Km 
227 
Distance to construction site 
Km 
- 
Capacity utilization 
(including empty returns) 
% 
50 
Bulk density of transportation 
Kg/m3 
Unknown 
Volume capacity utilization 
factor 
Not applicable 
 
==PAGE:126==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 8/15 
Demounting and demolition of the product were assumed to be conducted manually, so there was no 
energy and material input involved in the LCA modelling. For waste processing, three sets of 
background data were used. 
 
Table 3 End of life (C1-C4) 
Additional technical information for end-of-life C stage 
Module 
Parameter 
Units (expressed per 
declared unit) 
Value 
C1 Deconstruction 
Collection process 
specified by type 
Kg collected separately 
1 
Kg collected with mixed 
construction waste 
- 
C2 Transport 
Assumptions for scenario 
development 
Km 
100 
C3 Waste 
processing 
Recovery system specified 
by type 
Kg for re-use 
- 
Kg for recycling 
- 
Kg for incineration 
1 
Kg for landfill 
- 
C4 Disposal 
Disposal specified by type 
Kg product or material 
for final deposition 
- 
 
==PAGE:127==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 9/15 
Modules declared, geographical scope, share of specific data (in GWP-GHG results) and data 
variation (in GWP-GHG results): 
 
Product stage 
Construction 
process 
stage 
Use stage 
End of life stage 
Resource 
recovery 
stage 
Raw material supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Construction installation 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy use 
Operational water use 
De-construction demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
 
Reuse-Recovery-Recycling-
potential 
Module 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
 
D 
Modules 
declared 
X 
X 
X 
X 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
Geography 
CN 
CN 
CN 
CN 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
DK 
DK 
DK 
DK 
 
DK 
Specific 
data used 
>90% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
Variation – 
products 
<10% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
Variation – 
sites 
0% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
 
 
==PAGE:128==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 10/15 
Content information 
Product components 
Percentage, % 
CAS Number 
Biogenic carbon kg C/kg 
Bamboo pole 
91.43 
- 
0.4025 
Phenolic resin 
8.57 
9003-35-4 
0 
Packaging materials 
Weight, kg 
Weight-% (versus 
the product) 
Weight biogenic carbon, kg 
C/kg 
Corrugated board 
28 
0.04 
12.32 
Pallet 
8.5 
0.012 
3.74 
Packing film 
0.3 
0.0004 
0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:129==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 11/15 
Environmental Information 
 
Potential environmental impact for Holse & Wibroe Traditional Bamboo 
Results per functional or declared unit 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
1.42E+00 
2.60E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.72E-02 
1.80E-02 
0.00E+00 
-6.09E-02 
GWP-
biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-1.48E+00 
2.98E-06 
0.00E+00 
1.02E-05 
1.48E+00 
0.00E+00 
-7.56E-03 
GWP-luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
3.10E-03 
1.77E-04 
0.00E+00 
7.15E-06 
1.19E-05 
0.00E+00 
-6.40E-04 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
-4.96E-02 
2.60E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.72E-02 
1.49E+00 
0.00E+00 
-6.91E-02 
ODP 
kg CFC 11 
eq. 
6.93E-08 
5.23E-08 
0.00E+00 
3.74E-09 
1.10E-09 
0.00E+00 
-1.79E-08 
AP 
mol H+ eq 
7.84E-03 
7.38E-03 
0.00E+00 
8.73E-05 
1.68E-04 
0.00E+00 
-2.40E-03 
EP-
freshwater 
kg P eq. 
3.30E-04 
1.02E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.29E-06 
9.02E-06 
0.00E+00 
-1.70E-05 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
1.54E-03 
1.83E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.96E-05 
8.47E-05 
0.00E+00 
-6.95E-04 
EP-
terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
1.65E-02 
2.04E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.23E-04 
8.18E-04 
0.00E+00 
-1.16E-02 
POCP 
kg NMVOC 
eq. 
5.11E-03 
5.29E-03 
0.00E+00 
9.20E-05 
2.01E-04 
0.00E+00 
-1.97E-03 
ADP-
minerals&m
etals* 
kg Sb eq. 
2.85E-05 
4.37E-07 
0.00E+00 
5.91E-08 
5.05E-08 
0.00E+00 
-2.16E-07 
ADP-fossil* 
MJ 
1.85E+01 
3.41E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.55E-01 
1.75E-01 
0.00E+00 
-7.25E-01 
WDP* 
m3 
3.48E-01 
6.87E-03 
0.00E+00 
8.83E-04 
-1.00E-02 
0.00E+00 
-8.53E-03 
GWP-GHG 
kg CO2 eq 
1.43E+00 
2.60E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.72E-02 
1.81E-02 
0.00E+00 
-6.15E-02 
Acronyms 
GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential biogenic; GWP-luluc = 
Global Warming Potential land use and land use change; ODP = Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone layer; 
AP = Acidification potential, Accumulated Exceedance; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication potential, fraction of nutrients 
reaching freshwater end compartment; EP-marine = Eutrophication potential, fraction of nutrients reaching marine end 
compartment; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication potential, Accumulated Exceedance; POCP = Formation potential of 
tropospheric ozone; ADP-minerals&metals = Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil resources; ADP-fossil = Abiotic 
depletion for fossil resources potential; WDP = Water (user) deprivation potential, deprivation-weighted water 
consumption 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
==PAGE:130==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 12/15 
Use of resources for Holse & Wibroe Traditional Bamboo 
Results per functional or declared unit 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
MJ 
2.03E+01 
2.60E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.95E-03 
4.42E-02 
0.00E+00 
-1.18E+01 
PERM 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
MJ 
2.03E+01 
2.60E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.95E-03 
4.42E-02 
0.00E+00 
-1.18E+01 
PENRE 
MJ 
2.22E+01 
3.31E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.52E-01 
1.86E-01 
0.00E+00 
-6.56E-01 
PENRM 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
MJ 
2.22E+01 
3.31E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.52E-01 
1.86E-01 
0.00E+00 
-6.56E-01 
SM 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
m3 
7.03E-01 
4.44E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.60E-03 
9.08E-03 
0.00E+00 
-3.57E-02 
Acronyms 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM 
= Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy 
resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources used as 
raw materials; PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of 
non-renewable primary energy re-sources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; 
NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels; FW = Use of net fresh water 
 
 
Waste production and output flows for Holse & Wibroe Traditional Bamboo 
Waste production 
Results per functional or declared unit 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Hazardous 
waste 
disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Non-
hazardous 
waste 
disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Radioactive 
waste 
disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
 
 
 
==PAGE:131==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 13/15 
Output flows 
Results per functional or declared unit 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Component
s for re-use 
kg 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Material for 
recycling 
kg 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Materials 
for energy 
recover 
kg 
- 
- 
- 
- 
1.00E+00 
- 
- 
Exported 
energy, 
electricity 
MJ 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Exported 
energy, 
thermal 
MJ 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
Additional environmental information 
The formaldehyde emission of Holse & Wibroe traditional bamboo is no more than 0.1 mg/m2h and the 
product reaches therefore the emission level E1 according to GB/T 17657-2013 (Test methods of 
evaluating the properties of wood- based panels and surface decorated wood-based panels). 
 
References 
General Programme Instructions of the International EPD® System. Version 4.0. 
PCR 2019:14. Construction products. (EN15804:A2) Version 1.2.5 
EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declaration – 
Core rules for the product category of construction products 
ISO 21930:2017 Environmental declaration of building products 
ISO 14025:2006 Environmental labels and declaration – Type III environmental declarations – 
Principles and procedures 
ISO 14040:2006 Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and framework 
ISO 14044:2006 Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and guidelines 
EN 13986:2004 Wood-based panels for use in construction 
GB/T 17657-2013 Test methods of evaluating the properties of wood-based panels and surface 
decorated wood-based panels 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:132==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 14/15 
Contact information 
 
EPD Owner 
 
 
Holse & Wibroe A/S 
Email: oho@holseogwibroe.dk 
Website: www.holseogwibroe.dk 
 
 
 
LCA and EPD Practitioner 
Ecovane Environmental Co., Ltd  
Email: Chao WANG (wangchao@1mi1.cn) 
Website: www.1mi1.org
==PAGE:133==
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
www.environdec.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.environdec.com 
==PAGE:134==
TECHNICAL DATA SHEET 
 
     SCREW TIP 1250 
 
	  
BAYO.S SE • THE GROUNDSCROO 
ISO 9001:2008 • TAX ID CZ01875744 
info@bayo-s.com • www.bayo-s.com           
A 
BASIC INFO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Article Number 
55101 
Weight 
7,90 kg 
+3% -8% tolerance 
Materials 
Steel S235 
Surface 
Hot-dip galvanized Steel,  
according to DIN EN ISO 1461 
Installation 
GEARBOX SET 1:150  
+ drilling head HEX PROFI   
 
INSTALLATION MAST – HULK 
+ drilling head PLATE PROFI   
 
PILE DRIVER MACHINE – DINO 
+ drilling head PLATE PROFI 
Compatibility 
Extension / Series B 
Attachment / Series C 
==PAGE:135==
TECHNICAL DATA SHEET 
 
     HEX TOP M16 
 
	  
BAYO.S SE • THE GROUNDSCROO 
ISO 9001:2008 • TAX ID CZ01875744 
info@bayo-s.com • www.bayo-s.com           
C 
BASIC INFO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
	  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Article Number 
55301 
Weight 
3,38 kg 
+3% -8% tolerance 
Materials 
Steel S235 
Surface 
Hot-dip galvanized Steel,  
according to DIN EN ISO 1461 
Compatibility 
Ground Screws / Series A 
Extensions / Series B 
Attachment / Series C+ 
Note 
possibility different nut on request 
==PAGE:136==
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Owner: 
Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S 
No.: 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 
Issued: 
30-05-2023 
Issued first time: 
18-10-2021 
Valid to: 
18-10-2026 
EPD 
VERIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION | ISO 14025 & EN 15804 
3 r d  P A R T Y  V E R I F I E D  
==PAGE:137==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 2 of 23 
 
Owner of declaration 
Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S 
Gasværksvej 24 
9000 Aalborg 
CVR-nr. 18336774 
 
Programme 
EPD Danmark 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
☐ Industry EPD   
☒ Product EPD 
Declared products 
Cembrit Windstopper Extreme (Natural & Dark grey) 
Cembrit Windstopper Extreme (Anthracite) 
Cembrit Windstopper Basic 
Swisspearl Construction 
Swisspearl Construction (Anthracite) 
Swisspearl Multi Force 
 
Number of  declared datasets/product variations: 6 
 
Production site 
Mineraalintie 1 
08680 Lohja 
Finland 
Products use 
The Cembrit fibre cement boards; Windstopper Extreme, 
Windstopper Extreme (Anthracite) and Windstopper Basic are wind 
barrier 
boards 
in 
exterior 
wall 
constructions. 
Swisspearl 
Construction and Construction (Anthracite) are untreated fibre 
cement building board which can be installed for facade purpose. 
Swisspearl Multi Force is an indoor interior cladding panel. The 
material inputs are shown in table 2. 
Declared unit 
1 m² fibre cement board with a thickness of 9 mm 
 
Year of data 
2019 
 
Issued: 
16-05-2023 
Valid to: 
18-10-2026 
Basis of calculation 
This EPD is developed in accordance with the European 
standard EN 15804:2012+A2:2019.  
 
Comparability 
EPDs of construction products may not be comparable 
if they do not comply with the requirements in EN 
15804:2019+A2. EPD data may not be comparable if 
the datasets used are not developed in accordance 
with EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 and if the background 
systems are not based on the same database. 
 
Validity 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 
14025 and is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 
 
Use 
The intended use of an EPD is to communicate 
scientifically based environmental information for 
construction products, for the purpose of assessing the 
environmental performance of buildings. 
 
EPD type 
☐Cradle-to-gate with modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options, modules C1-C4 and D 
☒Cradle-to-grave and module D 
☐Cradle-to-gate 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options 
 
 
 
 
 
Martha Katrine Sørensen 
EPD Danmark 
CEN standard EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 serves as 
the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to EN ISO 14025 
☐ internal 
☒ external 
 
Third party verifier: 
 
Ninkie Bendtsen 
 
 
Life cycle stages and modules (MND = module not declared) 
Product 
Construction 
process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond the system 
boundary 
Raw material 
supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery 
and recycling 
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
==PAGE:138==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 3 of 23 
 
Product information 
Product description 
The main product components are shown in the table below. Values are given as intervals covering the six 
declared product variations with a thickness of 9 mm. 
Material 
Weight-% of declared product 
Cement 
35-59% 
Limestone 
14-60% 
Cellulose1/fibres 
0-7% 
Pigment 
0-6% 
Filler 
0-15% 
Perlite 
0-14% 
Packaging material 
kg per declared unit 
Pallets 
0.028-0.04 
Plastic foil - top 
0.0044-0.007 
Stretch foil 
0.0036-0.005 
 
Representativity 
This declaration including data collection and the modelled foreground system, represents the production 
of 1 m² of Swisspearl fibre cement board on the production site located in Finland. Product specific data 
are based on average 2019 production values collected in 2020. Background data are mainly based on GaBi 
and are less than 10 years old. For a few exceptions, GaBi data was supplemented with data from Ecoinvent 
version 3.7.1 (2020). Generally, the used background datasets are of high quality, and the majority of the 
datasets are only a couple of years old, which meets the requirements in EN 15804:2012+A2:2019. 
 
Hazardous substances 
Swisspearl facade boards do not contain substances listed in the ”Candidate List of Substances of Very High 
Concern for authorisation”. 
(http://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table) 
Essential characteristics (CE) 
Swisspearl fibre cement boards are covered by the harmonised technical specification EN 12467. 
Declaration of performance according to EU regulation 305/2011 is available for all declared product 
variations. 
Further technical information can be obtained by contacting the manufacturer or on the manufacturer's 
website: 
https://www.swisspearl.com/  
Reference Service Life (RSL) 
Swisspearl's fibre cement boards have an expected lifetime of 30 years when installed and used correctly.  
 
 
1 The Cellulose used in production of the declared swisspearl boards is FSC Certified. 
==PAGE:139==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 4 of 23 
 
 
Picture of products 
Swisspearl build products 
Cembrit Windstopper Extreme (Natural grey) 
 
Cembrit Windstopper Extreme (Dark grey) 
 
 
Cembrit Windstopper Extreme (Anthracite) 
 
Cembrit Windstopper Basic 
 
 
Swisspearl Construction   
 
Swisspearl Construction (Anthracite)  
 
 
 
Swisspearl indoor products 
Swisspearl Multi Force 
 
==PAGE:140==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 5 of 23 
 
LCA background 
Declared unit 
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD relates to 1 
m² of Swisspearl fibre cement boards with a 
thickness 
of 
9 
mm 
for 
types: 
Cembrit 
Windstopper 
Extreme, 
Cembrit 
Windstopper 
Extreme 
(Anthracite), 
Cembrit 
Windstopper 
Basic, 
Swisspearl 
Construction, 
Swisspearl 
Construction (Anthracite) and Swisspearl Multi 
Force. 
Swisspearl 
produces 
Cembrit 
Windstopper 
Extreme and Cembrit Windstopper Extreme 
(Anthracite) in 4.5 mm and 9 mm. Swisspearl 
Construction is produced with a thickness of 6 
mm, 8 mm and 10 mm. Swisspearl Construction 
(Anthracite) is produced with a thickness of 8 
mm. Swisspearl Multi Force is produced with a 
thickness of both 9mm and 12 mm. In this EPD a 
conversion was made so that the density and 
results are calculated and shown for 9 mm boards 
for the sake of comparison. 
Cembrit Windstopper Extreme is produced both in 
a natural grey colour and a dark grey colour, the 
production and materials are the same, except in 
the dark grey module there is a small amount of 
pigment. In this EPD the two colour variants are 
modelled as one product, where an average of the 
production between the two colour variants has 
been applied to calculate the amount of pigment. 
Results for these variations can be converted to 
the various thicknesses using the conversion 
factor described in the results. 
 
PCR 
This EPD is developed according to the core 
rules for the product category of construction 
products in EN 15804:2012+A2:2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Name 
Value 
Unit 
Conversion 
factor to 1 
kg. 
Declared unit 
1 
m²  
 
Cembrit  
Windstopper 
Extreme 
14.4 
kg/m² 
0.069 
Cembrit 
Windstopper 
Extreme 
(Anthracite) 
14.4 
kg/m² 
0.069 
Cembrit  
Windstopper Basic 
13.3 
kg/m² 
0.075 
Swisspearl 
Construction 
16.8 
kg/m² 
0.060 
Swisspearl  
Construction 
(Anthracite) 
16.8 
kg/m² 
0.067 
Swisspearl Multi 
Force 
10.0 
kg/m² 
0.100 
==PAGE:141==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 6 of 23 
 
 
Flow chart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:142==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 7 of 23 
 
System boundary 
This EPD is based on a cradle-to-grave + module 
D, in which >99 weight-% has been accounted 
for. 
The general rules for the exclusion of inputs and 
outputs 
follows 
the 
requirements 
in 
EN 
15804:2012+A2:2019, 6.3.5, where the total of 
neglected input flows per module shall be a 
maximum of 5 % of energy usage and mass and 
1 % of energy usage and mass for unit processes. 
Data collection and measurements includes all 
processes, materials or emissions that are known 
to make a significant contribution to the 
environmental impact of producing fibre cement 
boards at Swisspearl Holding A/S. All these 
emissions 
were 
considered 
in 
the 
model. 
Therefore, there has been no exclusion of inputs 
and outputs above these limits. 
 
Product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
A1 – Extraction and processing of raw materials 
A2 – Transport to the production site 
A3 – Manufacturing processes 
The product stage comprises the acquisition of all 
raw materials, products and energy, transport to 
the 
production 
site, 
packaging 
and 
waste 
processing up to the ”end-of-waste” state or final 
disposal. The LCA results are declared in 
aggregated form for the product stage, which 
means, that the sub-modules A1, A2 and A3 are 
declared as one module: A1-A3. 
Swisspearl fibre cement boards are produced 
according to a flow-on method, partly automated 
to a certain extent. The base materials are 
processed into a homogeneous mixture with 
water and applied to a running endless felt loop, 
from which part of the water is filtered through 
the felt material. The evacuated water is returned 
to the process, and no wastewater is produced.  
The format roller is gradually covered by layers of 
fibre cement. When the required thickness of the 
boards is reached, it is applied to a format roll 
which is gradually covered by layers of fibre 
cement material. Once the required thickness is 
reached, the fibre cement layer is taken from the 
roll, cut, piled and compressed. The boards are 
cured in an owen, which runs on natural gas. After 
the drying process the products are ready to be 
sanded, trimming edges, cutting to customised 
size, painted, edge-sealed, ending with quality 
controls and packing processes. 
 
Construction 
process 
stage 
(A4-A5) 
includes: 
A4 – Transportation simulating transportation to 
a construction site in Europe. This scenario uses 
an average truck, transporting goods at a 
distance of 3,300 km. Transportation of the 
packaging waste from the construction site to the 
municipal waste incinerator are also included in 
this module. 
A5 – Accounts for the environmental impacts 
associated with the disposal of packaging handled 
at the construction site. It is assumed incinerated 
at an incineration plant which is assumed to be 
the most likely and realistic situation. Disposal of 
product waste is assumed to be landfilled. 
Furthermore, environmental impacts associated 
with trucks and fuel for the construction 
installation. The mounting of the boards is done 
by using smaller electrical tools e.g. screwdriver. 
It is estimated that the energy for the hand tool 
is very low and below the cut-off criteria of 1% 
and is therefore excluded.  
 
==PAGE:143==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 8 of 23 
 
Use stage (B1-B7) includes: 
Modules are not relevant for this product. 
 
End of Life (C1-C4) includes: 
C1 – Accounts for the environmental impacts 
associated with dismantling and demolition of the 
fibre cement boards. Fuel used for demolition 
equipment and transport on site vehicles. 
C2 – Transportation of the discarded products 
from the construction site to a landfilling site. The 
transport is estimated to be 100 km in an average 
truck. 
C3 – The fibre cement boards are sent to landfill 
and therefore there is no environmental impacts 
associated with waste processing of materials 
flows intended for reuse, recycling or energy 
recovery.  
C4 – Environmental impacts associated with the 
processes at the landfill. 
 
 
 
 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
includes: 
D - The fibre cement boards are sent to landfill 
after use. The product has therefore no impact 
during 
this 
stage 
and 
no 
associated 
environmental impacts. The Swisspearl boards 
are expected to be reusable over time, but this is 
not included in the actual LCA calculation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:144==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 9 of 23 
 
LCA results 
 
Cembrit Windstopper Extreme 
The declared unit is for 1 m² of Cembrit Windstopper Extreme with a thickness of 9 mm. A conversion 
factor 0.5 must be applied, when calculating results LCIA results for Cembrit Windstopper Extreme with a 
thickness of 4.5 mm. 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER EXTREME 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total [kg CO2 eq.] 9.36E+00 
2.80E+00 
2.17E-02 
0.00E+00 
8.47E-03 
1.04E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.91E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-fossil [kg CO2 eq.] 9.55E+00 
2.74E+00 
2.20E-02 
0.00E+00 
8.79E-03 
1.02E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.07E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-
biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1.99E-01 
2.99E-02 
-3.00E-04 
0.00E+00 
-3.86E-04 
1.11E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.64E-02 
0.00E+00 
GWP-luluc [kg CO2 eq.] 
7.30E-03 
2.25E-02 
5.48E-05 
0.00E+00 
6.83E-05 
8.40E-04 
0.00E+00 
5.95E-04 
0.00E+00 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 
eq.] 
5.69E-08 
5.10E-16 
-9.85E-17 
0.00E+00 
1.55E-18 
1.90E-17 
0.00E+00 
7.66E-16 
0.00E+00 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
2.09E-02 
3.10E-03 
2.25E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.31E-05 
1.20E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.48E-03 
0.00E+00 
EP-
freshwater [kg PO4 eq.] 
2.35E-04 
8.47E-06 
-1.43E-08 
0.00E+00 
2.57E-08 
3.16E-07 
0.00E+00 
3.55E-07 
0.00E+00 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
6.11E-03 
9.29E-04 
1.44E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.99E-05 
3.68E-05 
0.00E+00 
3.82E-04 
0.00E+00 
EP-
terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
6.62E-02 
1.11E-02 
1.73E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.21E-04 
4.37E-04 
0.00E+00 
4.19E-03 
0.00E+00 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC 
eq.] 
1.76E-02 
2.55E-03 
4.11E-05 
0.00E+00 
5.59E-05 
9.93E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.16E-03 
0.00E+00 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 
5.51E-05 
2.25E-07 
-9.82E-10 
0.00E+00 
6.82E-10 
8.39E-09 
0.00E+00 
1.86E-08 
0.00E+00 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
8.13E+01 
3.71E+01 
-4.45E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.13E-01 
1.38E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.71E+00 
0.00E+00 
WDP1 
[m3] 
1.09E+00 
2.71E-02 
9.25E-04 
0.00E+00 
8.23E-05 
1.01E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.17E-02 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - 
biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidification; EP-freshwater = 
Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical 
zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
 
Additional environmental impacts, as declared in the project report of this EPD, may be declared in this 
EPD: 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER EXTREME 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
2.76E-07 
2.10E-08 
3.37E-10 
0.00E+00 
4.85E-10 
7.95E-10 
0.00E+00 
1.84E-08 
0.00E+00 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
6.77E-01 
1.01E-02 
-2.15E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.07E-05 
3.78E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.18E-03 
0.00E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
5.80E+01 
2.78E+01 
3.14E-02 
0.00E+00 
8.43E-02 
1.04E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.55E+00 
0.00E+00 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
1.91E-09 
5.74E-10 
1.61E-13 
0.00E+00 
1.74E-12 
2.14E-11 
0.00E+00 
2.30E-10 
0.00E+00 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1.34E-07 
2.91E-08 
4.76E-11 
0.00E+00 
1.02E-10 
1.09E-09 
0.00E+00 
2.53E-08 
0.00E+00 
SQP1 
-  
5.67E+01 
1.30E+01 
-1.10E-01 
0.00E+00 
3.95E-02 
4.86E-01 
0.00E+00 
5.65E-01 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer 
effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not 
consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential 
ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
==PAGE:145==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 10 of 23 
 
 
 
 
RESOURCE USE PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER EXTREME 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1.76E+01 
2.15E+00 
-5.70E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.51E-03 
8.00E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.55E-01 
0.00E+00 
PERM 
[MJ] 
9.47E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.76E+01 
2.15E+00 
-5.70E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.51E-03 
8.00E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.55E-01 
0.00E+00 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
8.14E+01 
3.73E+01 
-4.41E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.13E-01 
1.39E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.71E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
2.84E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
8.14E+01 
3.73E+01 
-4.41E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.13E-01 
1.39E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.71E+00 
0.00E+00 
SM 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
4.32E-02 
2.50E-03 
6.17E-06 
0.00E+00 
7.59E-06 
9.33E-05 
0.00E+00 
6.84E-04 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable 
primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable 
primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = 
Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER EXTREME 
Parameter
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1.73E-07 
1.72E-06 
5.14E-09 
0.00E+00 
5.23E-09 
6.43E-08 
0.00E+00 
4.13E-08 
0.00E+00 
NHWD 
[kg] 
1.57E+00 
5.90E-03 
2.29E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.79E-05 
2.20E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.36E+01 
0.00E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
5.52E-03 
6.87E-05 
-1.29E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.08E-07 
2.56E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.09E-05 
0.00E+00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
5.00E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.00E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EE 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for 
re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER DECLARED UNIT (1 m2) 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic  carbon content in 
product 
kg C 
0.6 
Biogenic carbon content in 
accompanying packaging 
kg C 
0.2 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:146==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 11 of 23 
 
Cembrit Windstopper Extreme (Anthracite) 
The declared unit is for 1 m² of Cembrit Windstopper Extreme (Anthracite) with a thickness of 9 mm. A 
conversion factor 0.5 must be applied, when calculating results LCIA results for Cembrit Windstopper 
Extreme (Anthracite) with a thickness of 4.5 mm. 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER EXTREME (ANTHRACITE) 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total [kg CO2 eq.] 9.52E+00 
2.94E+00 
2.21E-02 
0.00E+00 
8.91E-03 
1.10E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.01E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-fossil [kg CO2 eq.] 9.71E+00 
2.89E+00 
2.24E-02 
0.00E+00 
9.25E-03 
1.08E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.17E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-
biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1.99E-01 
3.14E-02 
-3.21E-04 
0.00E+00 
-4.06E-04 
1.17E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.72E-02 
0.00E+00 
GWP-luluc [kg CO2 eq.] 
7.92E-03 
2.37E-02 
5.84E-05 
0.00E+00 
7.18E-05 
8.83E-04 
0.00E+00 
6.26E-04 
0.00E+00 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 
eq.] 
5.90E-08 
5.37E-16 
-9.82E-17 
0.00E+00 
1.63E-18 
2.00E-17 
0.00E+00 
8.06E-16 
0.00E+00 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
2.13E-02 
3.26E-03 
2.47E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.53E-05 
1.26E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.56E-03 
0.00E+00 
EP-
freshwater [kg PO4 eq.] 
2.50E-04 
8.91E-06 
-1.29E-08 
0.00E+00 
2.70E-08 
3.32E-07 
0.00E+00 
3.73E-07 
0.00E+00 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
6.21E-03 
9.77E-04 
1.55E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.10E-05 
3.87E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.01E-04 
0.00E+00 
EP-
terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
6.75E-02 
1.16E-02 
1.85E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.32E-04 
4.60E-04 
0.00E+00 
4.41E-03 
0.00E+00 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC 
eq.] 
1.78E-02 
2.68E-03 
4.40E-05 
0.00E+00 
5.88E-05 
1.04E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.22E-03 
0.00E+00 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 
5.53E-05 
2.37E-07 
-9.44E-10 
0.00E+00 
7.18E-10 
8.82E-09 
0.00E+00 
1.95E-08 
0.00E+00 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
8.33E+01 
3.90E+01 
-3.84E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.18E-01 
1.46E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.85E+00 
0.00E+00 
WDP1 
[m3] 
2.93E+00 
2.85E-02 
9.28E-04 
0.00E+00 
8.66E-05 
1.06E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.28E-02 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - 
biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidification; EP-freshwater = 
Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical 
zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
 
Additional environmental impacts, as declared in the project report of this EPD, may be declared in this 
EPD: 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER EXTREME (ANTHRACITE) 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
2,80E-07 
2,21E-08 
3,62E-10 
0.00E+00 
5,10E-10 
8,36E-10 
0.00E+00 1,93E-08 0.00E+00 
IRP2 
[kBq 
U235 eq.] 
6,63E-01 
1,07E-02 
-2,15E-03 
0.00E+00 
3,23E-05 
3,97E-04 
0.00E+00 3,34E-03 0.00E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
6,56E+01 
2,92E+01 
3,59E-02 
0.00E+00 
8,86E-02 
1,09E+00 
0.00E+00 1,63E+00 0.00E+00 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
1,93E-09 
6,04E-10 
2,54E-13 
0.00E+00 
1,83E-12 
2,25E-11 
0.00E+00 2,41E-10 0.00E+00 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,35E-07 
3,06E-08 
5,30E-11 
0.00E+00 
1,07E-10 
1,14E-09 
0.00E+00 2,66E-08 0.00E+00 
SQP1 
-  
5,67E+01 
1,37E+01 
-1,07E-01 
0.00E+00 
4,16E-02 
5,11E-01 
0.00E+00 5,95E-01 0.00E+00 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer 
effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not 
consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential 
ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:147==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 12 of 23 
 
RESOURCE USE PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER EXTREME (ANTHRACITE) 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1.73E+01 
2.26E+00 
-5.65E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.85E-03 
8.42E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.74E-01 
0.00E+00 
PERM 
[MJ] 
9.47E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.73E+01 
2.26E+00 
-5.65E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.85E-03 
8.42E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.74E-01 
0.00E+00 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
8.33E+01 
3.92E+01 
-3.80E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.19E-01 
1.46E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.85E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
2.84E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
8.33E+01 
3.92E+01 
-3.80E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.19E-01 
1.46E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.85E+00 
0.00E+00 
SM 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
8.54E-02 
2.63E-03 
6.56E-06 
0.00E+00 
7.98E-06 
9.81E-05 
0.00E+00 
7.19E-04 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable 
primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable 
primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = 
Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER EXTREME (ANTHRACITE) 
Paramete
r 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
2.20E-07 
1.81E-06 
5.41E-09 
0.00E+00 
5.50E-09 
6.76E-08 
0.00E+00 
4.35E-08 
0.00E+00 
NHWD 
[kg] 
1.58E+00 
6.21E-03 
2.28E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.88E-05 
2.32E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.43E+01 
0.00E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
5.32E-03 
7.22E-05 
-1.29E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.19E-07 
2.69E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.25E-05 
0.00E+00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
5.00E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.00E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EE 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for 
re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER DECLARED UNIT (1 m2) 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic  carbon content in 
product 
kg C 
0.6 
Biogenic carbon content in 
accompanying packaging 
kg C 
0.2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:148==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 13 of 23 
 
Cembrit Windstopper Basic 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER BASIC 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total [kg CO2 eq.] 6.14E+00 
2.64E+00 
2.03E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.99E-03 
9.85E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.80E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-fossil [kg CO2 eq.] 6.23E+00 
2.59E+00 
2.05E-02 
0.00E+00 
8.29E-03 
9.66E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.95E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-
biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-9.27E-02 
2.82E-02 
-2.84E-04 
0.00E+00 
-3.64E-04 
1.05E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.55E-02 
0.00E+00 
GWP-luluc [kg CO2 eq.] 
3.40E-03 
2.12E-02 
5.19E-05 
0.00E+00 
6.44E-05 
7.92E-04 
0.00E+00 
5.61E-04 
0.00E+00 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 
eq.] 
3.54E-08 
4.81E-16 
-9.17E-17 
0.00E+00 
1.46E-18 
1.80E-17 
0.00E+00 
7.23E-16 
0.00E+00 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1.31E-02 
2.92E-03 
2.15E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.06E-05 
1.13E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.40E-03 
0.00E+00 
EP-
freshwater [kg PO4 eq.] 
1.38E-04 
7.99E-06 
-1.30E-08 
0.00E+00 
2.42E-08 
2.98E-07 
0.00E+00 
3.35E-07 
0.00E+00 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
3.90E-03 
8.76E-04 
1.37E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.88E-05 
3.47E-05 
0.00E+00 
3.60E-04 
0.00E+00 
EP-
terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
4.23E-02 
1.04E-02 
1.64E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.08E-04 
4.12E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.95E-03 
0.00E+00 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC 
eq.] 
1.14E-02 
2.40E-03 
3.89E-05 
0.00E+00 
5.27E-05 
9.37E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.09E-03 
0.00E+00 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 
3.43E-05 
2.12E-07 
-9.06E-10 
0.00E+00 
6.44E-10 
7.91E-09 
0.00E+00 
1.75E-08 
0.00E+00 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
5.24E+01 
3.50E+01 
-4.01E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.06E-01 
1.31E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.56E+00 
0.00E+00 
WDP1 
[m3] 
5.43E-01 
2.56E-02 
8.63E-04 
0.00E+00 
7.76E-05 
9.54E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.04E-02 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - 
biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidification; EP-freshwater = 
Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical 
zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
 
 
Additional environmental impacts, as declared in the project report of this EPD, may be declared in this 
EPD: 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER BASIC 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
2.14E-07 
1.98E-08 
3.20E-10 
0.00E+00 
4.58E-10 
7.50E-10 
0.00E+00 
1.73E-08 
0.00E+00 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
4.00E-01 
9.55E-03 
-2.00E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.90E-05 
3.56E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.00E-03 
0.00E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
3.53E+01 
2.62E+01 
3.03E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.95E-02 
9.77E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.46E+00 
0.00E+00 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
1.15E-09 
5.41E-10 
1.71E-13 
0.00E+00 
1.64E-12 
2.02E-11 
0.00E+00 
2.17E-10 
0.00E+00 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
7.64E-08 
2.74E-08 
4.55E-11 
0.00E+00 
9.62E-11 
1.02E-09 
0.00E+00 
2.39E-08 
0.00E+00 
SQP1 
-  
3.21E+01 
1.23E+01 
-1.02E-01 
0.00E+00 
3.73E-02 
4.58E-01 
0.00E+00 
5.33E-01 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer 
effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not 
consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential 
ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:149==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 14 of 23 
 
RESOURCE USE PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER BASIC 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1.03E+01 
2.02E+00 
-5.30E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.14E-03 
7.55E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.35E-01 
0.00E+00 
PERM 
[MJ] 
5.93E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.03E+01 
2.02E+00 
-5.30E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.14E-03 
7.55E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.35E-01 
0.00E+00 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
5.24E+01 
3.51E+01 
-3.97E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.07E-01 
1.31E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.56E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
3.15E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
5.24E+01 
3.51E+01 
-3.97E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.07E-01 
1.31E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.56E+00 
0.00E+00 
SM 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
2.14E-02 
2.36E-03 
5.83E-06 
0.00E+00 
7.16E-06 
8.80E-05 
0.00E+00 
6.45E-04 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable 
primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable 
primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = 
Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER m² CEMBRIT WINDSTOPPER BASIC 
Parameter
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1.46E-07 
1.62E-06 
4.85E-09 
0.00E+00 
4.93E-09 
6.06E-08 
0.00E+00 
3.90E-08 
0.00E+00 
NHWD 
[kg] 
7.45E-01 
5.57E-03 
2.13E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.69E-05 
2.08E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.29E+01 
0.00E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
3.25E-03 
6.48E-05 
-1.20E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.97E-07 
2.42E-06 
0.00E+00 
2.91E-05 
0.00E+00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
2.50E-01 
0.00E+00 
9.33E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EE 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for 
re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER DECLARED UNIT (1 m2) 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in 
product 
kg C 
0.2 
Biogenic carbon content in 
accompanying packaging 
kg C 
0.2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:150==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 15 of 23 
 
Swisspearl Construction 
The declared unit is for 1 m² of Swisspearl Construction with a thickness of 9 mm. A conversion factor 
0.667, 0.889 and 1.11 must be applied, when calculating results LCIA results for Swisspearl Construction 
with a respective thickness of 6, 8 and 10 mm. 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² SWISSPEARL CONSTRUCTION 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total [kg CO2 eq.] 1.17E+01 
2.90E+00 
2.71E-02 
0.00E+00 
9.89E-03 
1.22E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.23E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-fossil [kg CO2 eq.] 1.21E+01 
2.72E+00 
2.73E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.03E-02 
1.20E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.41E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-
biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-3.43E-01 
1.83E-01 
-3.40E-04 
0.00E+00 
-4.51E-04 
1.30E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.91E-02 
0.00E+00 
GWP-luluc [kg CO2 eq.] 
1.41E-02 
4.01E-07 
6.22E-05 
0.00E+00 
7.97E-05 
9.80E-04 
0.00E+00 
6.94E-04 
0.00E+00 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 
eq.] 
4.85E-08 
9.08E-21 
-1.28E-16 
0.00E+00 
1.81E-18 
2.22E-17 
0.00E+00 
8.94E-16 
0.00E+00 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
2.70E-02 
1.10E-03 
2.35E-05 
0.00E+00 
5.03E-05 
1.40E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.73E-03 
0.00E+00 
EP-
freshwater [kg PO4 eq.] 
2.27E-04 
1.51E-10 
-2.19E-08 
0.00E+00 
3.00E-08 
3.69E-07 
0.00E+00 
4.14E-07 
0.00E+00 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
8.31E-03 
5.51E-04 
1.61E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.33E-05 
4.30E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.45E-04 
0.00E+00 
EP-
terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
8.90E-02 
6.15E-03 
1.96E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.58E-04 
5.10E-04 
0.00E+00 
4.89E-03 
0.00E+00 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC 
eq.] 
2.28E-02 
1.12E-03 
4.60E-05 
0.00E+00 
6.52E-05 
1.16E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.35E-03 
0.00E+00 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 
4.34E-05 
4.00E-12 
-1.36E-09 
0.00E+00 
7.96E-10 
9.79E-09 
0.00E+00 
2.17E-08 
0.00E+00 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
1.07E+02 
6.60E-04 
-7.25E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.31E-01 
1.62E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.16E+00 
0.00E+00 
WDP1 
[m3] 
1.33E+00 
4.83E-07 
1.19E-03 
0.00E+00 
9.60E-05 
1.18E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.53E-02 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - 
biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidification; EP-freshwater = 
Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical 
zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
 
Additional environmental impacts, as declared in the project report of this EPD, may be declared in this 
EPD: 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² SWISSPEARL CONSTRUCTION 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
3.52E-07 
4.75E-09 
3.74E-10 
0.00E+00 
5.66E-10 
9.28E-10 
0.00E+00 
2.14E-08 
0.00E+00 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
6.71E-01 
1.80E-07 
-2.80E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.59E-05 
4.41E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.71E-03 
0.00E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
6.33E+01 
2.39E-03 
2.98E-02 
0.00E+00 
9.83E-02 
1.21E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.81E+00 
0.00E+00 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
2.41E-09 
3.64E-13 
-1.84E-14 
0.00E+00 
2.03E-12 
2.50E-11 
0.00E+00 
2.68E-10 
0.00E+00 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
2.07E-07 
4.78E-10 
4.84E-11 
0.00E+00 
1.19E-10 
1.27E-09 
0.00E+00 
2.95E-08 
0.00E+00 
SQP1 
-  
7.46E+01 
2.32E-04 
-1.48E-01 
0.00E+00 
4.61E-02 
5.67E-01 
0.00E+00 
6.60E-01 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer 
effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not 
consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential 
ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:151==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 16 of 23 
 
RESOURCE USE PER m² SWISSPEARL CONSTRUCTION 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1.98E+01 
3.82E-05 
-7.48E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.60E-03 
9.34E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.15E-01 
0.00E+00 
PERM 
[MJ] 
7.12E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.98E+01 
3.82E-05 
-7.48E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.60E-03 
9.34E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.15E-01 
0.00E+00 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
1.07E+02 
6.63E-04 
-7.20E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.32E-01 
1.62E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.17E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
9.86E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
1.07E+02 
6.63E-04 
-7.20E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.32E-01 
1.62E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.17E+00 
0.00E+00 
SM 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
5.53E-02 
4.45E-08 
7.01E-06 
0.00E+00 
8.85E-06 
1.09E-04 
0.00E+00 
7.98E-04 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable 
primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable 
primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = 
Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER m² SWISSPEARL CONSTRUCTION 
Parameter
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
7.99E-08 
3.07E-11 
5.98E-09 
0.00E+00 
6.10E-09 
7.50E-08 
0.00E+00 
4.83E-08 
0.00E+00 
NHWD 
[kg] 
8.90E-01 
1.05E-07 
2.96E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.09E-05 
2.57E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.59E+01 
0.00E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
5.12E-03 
1.22E-09 
-1.68E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.43E-07 
2.99E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.60E-05 
0.00E+00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
2.80E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.30E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EE 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for 
re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER DECLARED UNIT (1 m2) 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in 
product 
kg C 
1.1 
Biogenic carbon content in 
accompanying packaging 
kg C 
0.2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:152==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 17 of 23 
 
Swisspearl Construction (Anthracite) 
The declared unit is for 1 m² of Swisspearl Construction (Anthracite) with a thickness of 9 mm. A conversion 
factor 0.889 must be applied, when calculating results LCIA results for Swisspearl Construction (Anthracite) 
with a thickness of 8 mm. 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² SWISSPEARL CONSTRUCTION (ANTHRACITE) 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total [kg CO2 eq.] 1.17E+01 3.31E+00 
2.72E-02 
0.00E+00 
1,00E-02 
1,23E-01 
0.00E+00 
2,26E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-fossil [kg CO2 eq.] 1.21E+01 3.25E+00 
2.75E-02 
0.00E+00 
1,04E-02 
1,21E-01 
0.00E+00 
2,44E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-
biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-3.42E-01 
3.54E-02 
-3.45E-04 
0.00E+00 
-4,56E-04 
1,32E-03 
0.00E+00 -1,94E-02 0.00E+00 
GWP-luluc [kg CO2 eq.] 1.41E-02 
2.67E-02 
6.33E-05 
0.00E+00 
8,07E-05 
9,92E-04 
0.00E+00 
7,03E-04 
0.00E+00 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 
eq.] 
4.96E-08 
6.05E-16 
-1.28E-16 
0.00E+00 
1,83E-18 
2,25E-17 
0.00E+00 
9,06E-16 
0.00E+00 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 2.71E-02 
3.67E-03 
2.42E-05 
0.00E+00 
5,09E-05 
1,42E-04 
0.00E+00 
1,75E-03 
0.00E+00 
EP-
freshwater [kg PO4 eq.] 2.36E-04 
1.00E-05 
-2.15E-08 
0.00E+00 
3,04E-08 
3,73E-07 
0.00E+00 
4,19E-07 
0.00E+00 
EP-marine [kg N eq.] 
8.36E-03 
1.10E-03 
1.64E-05 
0.00E+00 
2,36E-05 
4,35E-05 
0.00E+00 
4,51E-04 
0.00E+00 
EP-
terrestrial [mol N eq.] 8.95E-02 
1.31E-02 
1.99E-04 
0.00E+00 
2,61E-04 
5,17E-04 
0.00E+00 
4,95E-03 
0.00E+00 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC 
eq.] 
2.30E-02 
3.02E-03 
4.68E-05 
0.00E+00 
6,60E-05 
1,17E-04 
0.00E+00 
1,37E-03 
0.00E+00 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 4.35E-05 
2.66E-07 
-1.35E-09 
0.00E+00 
8,06E-10 
9,91E-09 
0.00E+00 
2,19E-08 
0.00E+00 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
1.07E+02 4.40E+01 -7.08E-02 
0.00E+00 
1,33E-01 
1,64E+00 
0.00E+00 3,20E+00 0.00E+00 
WDP1 
[m3] 
1.79E+00 
3.21E-02 
1.19E-03 
0.00E+00 
9,72E-05 
1,20E-03 
0.00E+00 
2,56E-02 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - 
biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidification; EP-freshwater = 
Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical 
zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
 
Additional environmental impacts, as declared in the project report of this EPD, may be declared in this 
EPD: 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² SWISSPEARL CONSTRUCTION (ANTHRACITE) 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
3.52E-07 
2.49E-08 
3.81E-10 
0.00E+00 
5.73E-10 
9.39E-10 
0.00E+00 
2.17E-08 
0.00E+00 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
6.75E-01 
1.20E-02 
-2.79E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.63E-05 
4.47E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.75E-03 
0.00E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
6.73E+01 
3.29E+01 
3.10E-02 
0.00E+00 
9.96E-02 
1.22E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.83E+00 
0.00E+00 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
2.41E-09 
6.80E-10 
7.13E-15 
0.00E+00 
2.06E-12 
2.53E-11 
0.00E+00 
2.71E-10 
0.00E+00 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
2.07E-07 
3.44E-08 
4.99E-11 
0.00E+00 
1.21E-10 
1.28E-09 
0.00E+00 
2.99E-08 
0.00E+00 
SQP1 
-  
7.47E+01 
1.54E+01 
-1.47E-01 
0.00E+00 
4.67E-02 
5.74E-01 
0.00E+00 
6.68E-01 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer 
effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not 
consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential 
ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:153==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 18 of 23 
 
RESOURCE USE PER m² SWISSPEARL CONSTRUCTION (ANTHRACITE) 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1.99E+01 
2.54E+00 
-7.47E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.69E-03 
9.46E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.20E-01 
0.00E+00 
PERM 
[MJ] 
7.12E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.99E+01 
2.54E+00 
-7.47E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.69E-03 
9.46E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.20E-01 
0.00E+00 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
1.07E+02 
4.41E+01 
-7.03E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.34E-01 
1.64E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.21E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
9.90E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
1.07E+02 
4.41E+01 
-7.03E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.34E-01 
1.64E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.21E+00 
0.00E+00 
SM 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
6.61E-02 
2.96E-03 
7.12E-06 
0.00E+00 
8.97E-06 
1.10E-04 
0.00E+00 
8.08E-04 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable 
primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable 
primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = 
Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER m² SWISSPEARL CONSTRUCTION (ANTHRACITE) 
Parameter
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
8.02E-08 
2.04E-06 
6.06E-09 
0.00E+00 
6.18E-09 
7.59E-08 
0.00E+00 
4.89E-08 
0.00E+00 
NHWD 
[kg] 
8.94E-01 
6.99E-03 
2.96E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.12E-05 
2.60E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.61E+01 
0.00E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
5.12E-03 
8.13E-05 
-1.68E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.46E-07 
3.03E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.65E-05 
0.00E+00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
2.80E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.30E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EE 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for 
re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER DECLARED UNIT (1 m2) 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in 
product 
kg C 
1.1 
Biogenic carbon content in 
accompanying packaging 
kg C 
0.2 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:154==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 19 of 23 
 
Swisspearl Multi Force 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² SWISSPEARL MULTI FORCE 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total [kg CO2 eq.] 6.90E+00 
1.93E+00 
1.64E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.85E-03 
7.20E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.32E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-fossil [kg CO2 eq.] 7.01E+00 
1.89E+00 
1.66E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.06E-03 
7.07E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.43E-01 
0.00E+00 
GWP-
biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1.07E-01 
2.06E-02 
-1.98E-04 
0.00E+00 
-2.66E-04 
7.69E-04 
0.00E+00 
-1.13E-02 
0.00E+00 
GWP-luluc [kg CO2 eq.] 
4.14E-03 
1.55E-02 
3.64E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.71E-05 
5.79E-04 
0.00E+00 
4.10E-04 
0.00E+00 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 
eq.] 
3.86E-08 
3.52E-16 
-7.88E-17 
0.00E+00 
1.07E-18 
1.31E-17 
0.00E+00 
5.29E-16 
0.00E+00 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1.51E-02 
2.14E-03 
1.33E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.97E-05 
8.27E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.02E-03 
0.00E+00 
EP-
freshwater [kg PO4 eq.] 
1.54E-04 
5.84E-06 
-1.42E-08 
0.00E+00 
1.77E-08 
2.18E-07 
0.00E+00 
2.45E-07 
0.00E+00 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
4.46E-03 
6.41E-04 
9.37E-06 
0.00E+00 
1.38E-05 
2.54E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.63E-04 
0.00E+00 
EP-
terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
4.83E-02 
7.64E-03 
1.15E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.52E-04 
3.02E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.89E-03 
0.00E+00 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC 
eq.] 
1.30E-02 
1.76E-03 
2.67E-05 
0.00E+00 
3.86E-05 
6.85E-05 
0.00E+00 
7.97E-04 
0.00E+00 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 
3.75E-05 
1.55E-07 
-8.58E-10 
0.00E+00 
4.71E-10 
5.79E-09 
0.00E+00 
1.28E-08 
0.00E+00 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
6.10E+01 
2.56E+01 
-4.78E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.77E-02 
9.55E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.87E+00 
0.00E+00 
WDP1 
[m3] 
5.26E-01 
1.87E-02 
7.30E-04 
0.00E+00 
5.68E-05 
6.98E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.49E-02 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - 
biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidification; EP-freshwater = 
Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical 
zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
 
Additional environmental impacts, as declared in the project report of this EPD, may be declared in this 
EPD: 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m² SWISSPEARL MULTI FORCE 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
1.86E-07 
1.45E-08 
2.16E-10 
0.00E+00 
3.35E-10 
5.48E-10 
0.00E+00 
1.27E-08 
0.00E+00 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
4.65E-01 
6.99E-03 
-1.72E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.12E-05 
2.61E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.19E-03 
0.00E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
4.40E+01 
1.92E+01 
1.60E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.81E-02 
7.15E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.07E+00 
0.00E+00 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
1.36E-09 
3.96E-10 
-6.05E-14 
0.00E+00 
1.20E-12 
1.48E-11 
0.00E+00 
1.58E-10 
0.00E+00 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
8.74E-08 
2.01E-08 
2.69E-11 
0.00E+00 
7.04E-11 
7.49E-10 
0.00E+00 
1.74E-08 
0.00E+00 
SQP1 
-  
3.56E+01 
8.99E+00 
-9.19E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.73E-02 
3.35E-01 
0.00E+00 
3.90E-01 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer 
effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not 
consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential 
ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:155==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 20 of 23 
 
RESOURCE USE PER m² SWISSPEARL MULTI FORCE 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1.15E+01 
1.48E+00 
-4.62E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.49E-03 
5.52E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.45E-01 
0.00E+00 
PERM 
[MJ] 
6.48E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.15E+01 
1.48E+00 
-4.62E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.49E-03 
5.52E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.45E-01 
0.00E+00 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
6.10E+01 
2.57E+01 
-4.75E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.80E-02 
9.59E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.87E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
6.00E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
6.10E+01 
2.57E+01 
-4.75E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.80E-02 
9.59E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.87E+00 
0.00E+00 
SM 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
2.28E-02 
1.73E-03 
4.10E-06 
0.00E+00 
5.23E-06 
6.43E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.72E-04 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable 
primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable 
primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = 
Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER m² MULTI FORCE 
Parameter
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 – B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1.75E-07 
1.19E-06 
3.53E-09 
0.00E+00 
3.61E-09 
4.43E-08 
0.00E+00 
2.85E-08 
0.00E+00 
NHWD 
[kg] 
7.90E-01 
4.07E-03 
1.82E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.24E-05 
1.52E-04 
0.00E+00 
9.41E+00 
0.00E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
3.79E-03 
4.74E-05 
-1.04E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.44E-07 
1.77E-06 
0.00E+00 
2.13E-05 
0.00E+00 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
2.50E-01 
0.00E+00 
8.00E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EE 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for 
re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER DECLARED UNIT (1 m2) 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in 
product 
kg C 
0.3 
Biogenic carbon content in 
accompanying packaging 
kg C 
0.2 
==PAGE:156==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 21 of 23 
 
Additional information 
Technical information on scenarios 
 
Transport to the building site (A4) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Fuel type and consumption 
0.5-0.913 
L diesel 
Transport distance 
3,300 
km 
Capacity utilisation (including empty runs) 
80 
% 
Gross density of products transported 
9.4 – 16.2 
kg/m²  
Capacity utilisation volume factor 
0.55 
- 
 
Installation of the product in the building (A5) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Ancillary materials 
0 
kg 
Water use 
0 
m3 
Other resource use 
0 
kg 
Fuel consumption 
0.002 – 0.003 
kg 
Waste materials 
0.038 – 0.053 
kg 
Output materials 
0 
kg 
Direct emissions to air, soil or water 
0 
kg 
 
Reference service life 
RSL information 
Unit 
Reference service Life 
30 Years 
 
Use (B1-B7)  
Modules not relevant 
End of life (C1-C4) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Collected separately 
0 
kg 
Collected with mixed waste 
0 
kg 
For reuse 
0 
kg 
For recycling 
0 
kg 
For energy recovery 
0 
kg 
For final disposal 
9.4 – 16.2 
kg 
 
 
 
==PAGE:157==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 22 of 23 
 
 
Indoor air 
Swisspearl 
has 
performed 
an 
emission 
classification of Building materials – M1, for the 
indoor products. The certification is voluntary and 
refers to indoor air quality standards for materials 
used in regular work and residential facilities. The 
certification test covers emission measurements 
of volatile organic compounds (VOC, TVOC, CMR), 
ammonia and formaldehyde. The classification 
enhances the development and use og low-
emitting building materials. 
 
Soil and water 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to soil and water because 
the horizontal standards on measurement of 
release of regulated dangerous substances from 
construction products using harmonized test 
methods according to the provisions of the 
respective technical committees for European 
product standards are not available. 
 
 
==PAGE:158==
 
 
 
 
MD-21010-EN_rev1 | Swisspearl Danmark Holding A/S | Page 23 of 23 
 
References 
 
Publisher 
 
 
www.epddanmark.dk 
Programme operator 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA-practitioner 
 
 
Julie Rønholt and Maria Magnea 
Steingrimsdottir 
COWI A/S 
 
www.cowi.com 
LCA software /background data 
 
GaBi Professional 2020 and EcoInvent 3.6 2019 
 
3rd party verifier 
Ninkie Bendtsen 
NIRAS A/S 
Sortemosevej 19 
DK-3450 Allerød 
www.niras.dk  
 
General programme instructions 
Version 2.0 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
EN 15804 
DS/EN 15804:2012 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental  
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products” 
 
EN 15942 
DS/EN 15942:2011 – ” Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – 
Communication format business-to-business” 
 
ISO 14025 
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmental declarations 
– Principles and procedures” 
 
ISO 14040 
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and 
framework” 
 
ISO 14044 
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and 
guidelines” 
==PAGE:159==
Environmental Product Declaration 
In accordance with 14025 and EN15804 +A2 
DAFA ProFoil
Owner of the declaration: 
DAFA Building Solutions A/S 
Holmstrupgaardvej 1, DK 8220 Brabrand, 
Denmark 
Product name: 
DAFA ProFoil  
Declared unit: 
 1 m2 of plastic foil  
Product category /PCR: 
 NPCR PART A: Construction products and 
services version 2.0,  NPCR PART B: Roof 
waterproofing version 2.0 
Program holder and publisher: 
The Norwegian EPD Foundation 
Declaration number: 
NEPD-4554-3811-EN  
Registration number: 
NEPD-4554-3811-EN
Issue date: 19.06.2023 
Valid to:    19.06.2028
The Norwegian EPD Foundation 
==PAGE:160==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
2
Product: 
DAFA ProFoil 
Type of EPD: 
Product Specific 
Program Operator: 
The Norwegian EPD Foundation 
Post Box 5250 Majorstuen, 0303 Oslo, Norway 
Tlf: 
+47 23 08 80 00
e-mail:
post@epd-norge.no 
Declaration Number: 
NEPD-4554-3811-EN
This declaration is based on Product 
Category Rules: 
NPCR PART A: Construction products and services 
version 2.0, NPCR PART B: Roof waterproofing 
version 2.0 
Statements: 
The owner of the declaration shall be liable for the 
underlying information and evidence. EPD 
Norway shall not be liable with respect to the 
manufacturer, life cycle assessment data and 
evidences. 
Declared unit: 
One square meter (1 m2 plastic foil. 
Verification: 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to ISO14025:2010 
internal 
external 
_____________________________________________________ 
Independent verifier approved by EPD Norway 
Linda Høibye 
Life Cycle Assessment Consulting 
Owner of the declaration: 
DAFA Building Solutions A/S 
Website: https://dafa-build.com 
Contact person: 
Jan Møller Thuesen 
Phone: 
+45 29 25 00 81
e-mail:
jmt@dafa.dk
Manufacturer: 
DAFA Building Solutions A/S 
Holmstrupgaardvej 1, DK 8220 Brabrand 
Denmark 
Place of production: 
Germany 
Management system: 
ISO 9001, ISO 14001 
Organisation no: 
41854510 
Issue date: 
19.06.2023
Valid to: 
19.06.2028 
Year of study: 
2023 
Comparability: 
The EPD of construction products may not be 
comparable if they do not comply with EN 15804 
and are seen in a building context. 
Approved by manager of EPD Norway 
General information 
==PAGE:161==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
3
Product description: 
1 m2 installed plastic foil used as a vapor barrier in construction with a technical lifetime of 60 
years. DAFA ProFoil is used in walls and as a ceiling component. DAFA ProFoil is manufactured 
at a production site in Germany and imported to Denmark for storage at two locations. 
DAFA ProFoil 
Amount 
Declared unit  [m2 of plastic foil] 
1 
Density [kg/m2] 
0.184 
Thickness [µm] 
200 
Conversion factor [1 kg] 
5.43 
Production volume of year of study [kg] 
307,719 
Total m2 produced in production year [m2] 
1,672,389 
Relative production volume [%] 
12 
Product specification: 
DAFA ProFoil: A vapor barrier foil is a part of the DAFA AirStop System product series. DAFA 
ProFoil is characterized by high breaking strength during construction where this aspect is 
critical. DAFA ProFoil is a CE marked polyethylene material. The foil’s multilayer structure gives 
it high tensile and tear strength, despite only being 0.20 mm thick. The foil is used in ceiling, 
wall, and floor structures. DAFA ProFoil is manufactured through an extrusion process. 
Materials 
KG 
% 
Polyethylene 
1.79E-01 
97.20 
Mineral filler batch 
3.68E-03 
2.00 
UV-batch 
9.20E-04 
0.50 
Color batch 
5.52E-04 
0.30 
Packaging 
Containerboard 
1.12E-02 
82.01 
Pallet 
5.11E-05 
0.37 
Packaging film 
2.41E-03 
17.62 
Technical data: 
DAFA ProFoil manufactured cf. EN 13984. Technical data can be found through the following 
link: https://dafa-build.com/en/downloads/building-materials/dafa-airstop-system-en 
Market: 
Denmark 
Technical service life: 
Product 
==PAGE:162==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
4
60 years 
Declared unit: 
1 m2 installed plastic foil. 
Data quality: 
Product-specific data is delivered by DAFA Building Solution A/S. Product-specific data is 
sourced from the production site located in Germany, and two warehouses located in Denmark, 
where ProFoil is stored. Generic data is from Ecoinvent 3.8 (2022) "Allocation cut-off by 
classification". Product-specific data is representative of the year 2021 and was collected in 
2022.  
Allocation: 
Allocation is done in accordance with the provisions of EN 15804+A2. Allocation of energy, 
water, and waste from production is calculated by a physical allocation factor based on the 
manufacturer’s input. For waste produced at the manufacturing, the benefits for reuse, recycling 
and recovery are allocated by using this allocation factor. 
System boundary: 
Figure 1 shows the system boundaries for the analysis. The analysis is a cradle-to-gate, with 
module options A4, A5, C1, C2, C3, C4, and D. Note: the boundary around A1 indicates processes 
tied to the production in Germany. 
Figure 1: Modules covered in the EPD 
Cut-off criteria: 
The general rules apply for the exclusion of inputs and outputs in the LCA which complies with 
15804:2012+A2:2019. 6.3.6. In cases of insufficient input data or data gaps for a unit process, 
the cut-off criteria shall be 1 % of renewable and non-renewable primary energy usage and 1 % 
of the total mass input of that. The total neglected input flows, e.g., per module A1-A3, A4-A5, 
and B1-B5, B6-B7, C1-C4 and module D shall be a maximum of 5 % of energy usage and mass. 
LCA: Calculation rules 
==PAGE:163==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
5
All major raw materials and all the essential energy is included. This cut-off rule does not apply 
to hazardous materials and substances. The following processes and materials have been 
excluded based on specified cut-off criteria. 
Process excluded from the 
study 
Cut-off criteria 
Quantified 
contribution 
from process 
Exclusion Justification 
Module A1: Packaging from 
RMA, such as reusable big 
bags, and pallets 
Environmental 
significance 
<1% 
As the product at this stage is intermediate, 
it is assumed that the product is moved 
utilizing pragmatic reusable packaging, i.e. 
pallets or big bags.  
Module A3: Waste generated 
in operations at DAFA 
warehouses. 
Environmental 
significance 
<1% 
As no alternation of either product or 
product packaging are performed once the 
product arrives at DAFA’s warehouses (A3), 
the waste generation related to this process 
is expected to be marginal. 
Module A5: Minor installation 
activities, such as the 
potential use of an electric 
staple gun. 
Energy 
significance 
<1% 
The installation can potentially make use of 
electric equipment either through an 
electric, or compressed air staple gun 
(normal practice is manual stapling). As 
neither of these is necessary, it has been 
excluded through cut off. 
Module C1: Minor 
dismantling activities such as 
the potential use of an electric 
drill 
Energy 
significance 
<1% 
The dismantling can potentially make use of 
electric equipment like an electric drill, or 
something of the like. None of this is 
however necessary as manual labor is 
usually utilized and has therefore excluded 
through cut off.  
Module D: Benefits tied to: 
Steel (staples), N-olefins 
(color), polycarboxylates (uv-
stabilizer), Calcium carbonate 
(mineral batch). 
Energy 
significance 
<1% 
The materials either has a minor 
contribution within the product and are 
therefore recycled as “part of the product”, 
or has a very small calorific value which in 
turn result in an insignificant benefit at 
energy recovery. 
Product stage (A1-A3) 
Module A1 is the manufacturing of DAFA ProFoil at the production site located in Germany. All 
raw materials are sourced from within Germanys borders with an average transport distance of 
500 km. DAFA ProFoil is manufactured from petrochemical-based virgin polyethylene. DAFA 
ProFoil is manufactured through an extrusion manufacturing process. Packaging of the product 
is performed at the production site, where the product is rolled onto a cardboard core, and 
wrapped in packaging film. Production in Germany is based on the national residual electricity 
mix and utilize excess heat generated during production for facility heating. 
Module A2 is transport of DAFA ProFoil by truck from the production site located in Germany 
to DAFA’s two warehouse sites. Transport data is applied based on communication with 
suppliers.  
Module A3 is DAFA’s own warehouse activities. This includes water, electricity, and heating 
related activities. DAFA ProFoil is stored at two warehouses in Brabrand and Stilling, in 
Denmark. The Danish residual electricity mix is applied for DAFA’s own activities. DAFA Does 
not alter the structure, or packaging of the product once received in Denmark. 
Transport from production place to installation/user (A4) 
LCA: Additional technical information 
==PAGE:164==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
6
Transport in A4 is based on data from an outsourced logistical company, with data provided by 
said company. 
Type 
Capacity utilization (incl. 
return) % 
Type of 
vehicle 
Distance KM 
Fuel/Energy 
consumption 
(l/tkm) 
value 
(l/t) 
Truck 
80 
Lorry 16-32 
metric ton, 
EURO5 
204 
0.004 
0.87 
Installation (A5) 
The installation of the vapor barrier results in a 10% product loss, which is considered when 
fulfilling the declared unit of 1 m2. Furthermore, tape and staples are needed for the 
installation. 
Unit 
Value 
Tape 
kg 
1.77E-04 
Staples 
kg 
1.75E-03 
Material loss 
kg 
1.84E-02 
Packaging waste 
kg 
1.37E-02 
End of Life (C1, C3, C4) 
The product does not contribute to Module C1. This is because no process is tied to the 
disassembling of foils and does not require handling during the demolition/rebuilding of a 
structure. The following scenario is applied. Waste sent to recycling is 50.4%, Waste sent to 
energy recovery is 45.4%, and Waste sent to landfill is 4.2%. 
Unit 
Value 
Sent for recycling 
kg 
9.29E-02 
Sent for energy recovery 
kg 
8.35E-02 
Sent to landfill 
kg 
7.74E-03 
Transport to waste processing (C2) 
Module C2 Transport from the building/demolition site to the waste treatment/recycling 
facility is estimated based on national statistics for transport. 
Type 
Capacity utilisation (incl. 
return) % 
Type of 
vehicle 
Distance KM 
Fuel/Energy 
consumption 
(l/tkm) 
value 
(l/t) 
Truck 
59 
lorry >32 
metric ton, 
EURO6 
93 
0.04 
3.74 
Benefits and loads beyond the system boundary (D) 
The energy recovered mitigates 25% electricity, and 75% heat, with a 5 % loss factored in. 
Unit 
Value 
Energy mitigation (Electricity) 
kWh/m2 
2.62E-01 
==PAGE:165==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
7
Energy mitigation (Thermal) 
kWh/m2 
1.17E+00 
Recycling mitigation (PE) 
kg/m2 
1.11E-01 
LCA calculations are based on data collected during the study period that represent an average 
tonne (mass-weighted) per declared unit.  
System boundaries (X=included, MND= module not declared) 
Product stage 
Assembl
y stage 
Use stage 
End of life stage 
Benefits 
& loads 
beyond 
system 
boundar
y 
Raw materials 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Assembly 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy use 
Operational water use 
De-construction demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Reuse-Recovery-Recycling-
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Core environmental impact indicators 
Reading example: 9,0 E-03 = 9,0*10-3 = 0,009 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
6.90E-01 
8.43E-03 
5.71E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.29E-03 
2.31E-01 
1.36E-02 
-1.56E-01 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
7.03E-01 
8.40E-03 
3.79E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.28E-03 
2.31E-01 
1.36E-02 
-1.35E-01 
GWP-biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-1.33E-02 
2.26E-05 
1.92E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.42E-05 
2.17E-05 
1.01E-06 
-2.04E-02 
GWP-LULUC 
kg CO2 eq. 
4.01E-04 
3.36E-06 
1.07E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.11E-06 
2.52E-05 
9.64E-08 
-1.16E-04 
ODP 
kg CFC11 eq. 
6.14E-08 
1.95E-09 
9.41E-10 
0.00E+00 
1.22E-09 
3.74E-09 
3.56E-11 
-7.25E-09 
AP 
mol H⁺ eq. 
2.48E-03 
2.39E-05 
6.84E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.50E-05 
1.47E-04 
2.54E-06 
-6.80E-04 
EP-freshwater 
kg P eq. 
1.46E-04 
5.51E-07 
3.95E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.46E-07 
5.65E-06 
2.41E-08 
-5.88E-05 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
5.07E-04 
4.85E-06 
3.07E-05 
0.00E+00 
3.04E-06 
6.28E-05 
2.70E-06 
-2.39E-04 
EP-terrestial 
mol N eq. 
5.21E-03 
5.29E-05 
1.57E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.32E-05 
5.21E-04 
1.22E-05 
-1.68E-03 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 
1.67E-03 
1.37E-05 
4.31E-05 
0.00E+00 
8.61E-06 
1.28E-04 
3.48E-06 
-3.24E-04 
ADP-M&M 
kg Sb eq. 
3.57E-06 
2.98E-08 
2.70E-07 
0.00E+00 
1.87E-08 
2.03E-07 
6.96E-10 
-8.12E-07 
ADP-fossil 
MJ 
1.93E+01 
1.27E-01 
1.48E-01 
0.00E+00 
8.00E-02 
3.77E-01 
2.94E-03 
-1.79E+00 
WDP 
m³ 
9.10E-01 
3.88E-04 
4.44E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.43E-04 
9.25E-03 
5.00E-05 
-7.97E-02 
GWP-total: Global Warming Potential; GWP-fossil: Global Warming Potential fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic: Global Warming Potential 
biogenic; GWP-LULUC: Global Warming Potential land use and land use change; ODP: Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone 
layer; AP: Acidification potential, Accumulated Exceedance; EP-freshwater: Eutrophication potential, fraction of nutrients reaching 
freshwater end compartment; See “additional Norwegian requirements”  for indicator given as PO4 eq. EP-marine: Eutrophication 
potential, fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment; EP-terrestial: Eutrophication potential, Accumulated 
Exceedance; POCP: Formation potential of tropospheric ozone; ADP-M&M: Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil resources 
(minerals and metals); ADP-fossil: Abiotic depletion potential for fossil resources; WDP: Water deprivation potential, deprivation 
weighted water consumption 
LCA: Results 
==PAGE:166==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
8
Additional environmental impact indicators 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
Disease incidence 
3.23E-08 
5.32E-10 
8.73E-10 
0.00E+00 
3.34E-10 
2.02E-09 
4.58E-11 
-1.58E-08 
IRP 
kBq U235 eq. 
7.93E-02 
6.56E-04 
1.08E-03 
0.00E+00 
4.12E-04 
2.14E-03 
1.11E-05 
-2.49E-02 
ETP-fw 
CTUe 
6.43E+00 
9.99E-02 
4.09E-01 
0.00E+00 
6.27E-02 
8.66E-01 
1.26E-02 
-4.93E+00 
HTP-c 
CTUh 
2.49E-10 
3.22E-12 
2.09E-10 
0.00E+00 
2.02E-12 
8.07E-11 
2.10E-12 
-1.12E-10 
HTP-nc 
CTUh 
6.57E-09 
1.01E-10 
3.53E-10 
0.00E+00 
6.34E-11 
7.35E-10 
2.65E-11 
-8.87E-09 
SQP 
Dimensionless 
7.09E+00 
9.20E-02 
9.40E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.78E-02 
3.07E-01 
3.13E-03 
-2.62E+00 
PM: Particulate matter emissions; IRP: Ionising radiation, human health; ETP-fw: Ecotoxicity (freshwater); ETP-c: Human toxicity, 
cancer effects; HTP-nc: Human toxicity, non-cancer effects; SQP: Land use related impacts / soil quality 
Classification of disclaimers to the declaration of core and additional environmental 
impact indicators 
ILCD 
classification 
Indicator 
Disclaimer 
ILCD type / level 
1 
Global warming potential (GWP) 
None 
Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone layer (ODP) 
None 
Potential incidence of disease due to PM emissions (PM) 
None 
ILCD type / level 
2 
Acidification potential, Accumulated Exceedance (AP) 
None 
Eutrophication potential, Fraction of nutrients reaching marine end 
compartment (EP-marine) 
None 
Eutrophication potential, Accumulated Exceedance (EP-terrestrial) 
None 
Formation potential of tropospheric ozone (POCP) 
None 
Potential Human exposure efficiency relative to U235 (IRP) 
1 
ILCD type / level 
3 
Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil resources (ADP-minerals&metals) 
2 
Abiotic depletion potential for fossil resources (ADP-fossil) 
2 
Water (user) deprivation potential, deprivation-weighted water consumption 
(WDP) 
2 
Potential Comparative Toxic Unit for ecosystems (ETP-fw) 
2 
Potential Comparative Toxic Unit for humans (HTP-c) 
2 
Potential Comparative Toxic Unit for humans (HTP-nc) 
2 
Potential Soil quality index (SQP) 
2 
Disclaimer 1 – This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on 
human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to 
possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. 
Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some 
construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
Disclaimer 2 – The results of this environmental impact indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on 
these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator 
Resource use 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
RPEE 
MJ 
9.06E-01 
1.82E-03 
2.59E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.14E-03 
2.02E-02 
5.33E-05 
-6.32E-01 
RPEM 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
TPE 
MJ 
9.06E-01 
1.82E-03 
2.59E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.14E-03 
2.02E-02 
5.33E-05 
-6.32E-01 
NRPE 
MJ 
1.48E+00 
2.70E-03 
1.55E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.69E-03 
2.86E-02 
6.03E-05 
-4.19E-01 
==PAGE:167==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
9
NRPM 
MJ 
1.78E+01 
1.25E-01 
1.33E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.83E-02 
3.48E-01 
2.88E-03 
-1.37E+00 
TRPE 
MJ 
1.93E+01 
1.27E-01 
1.48E-01 
0.00E+00 
8.00E-02 
3.77E-01 
2.94E-03 
-1.79E+00 
SM 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
W 
m3 
8.70E-01 
3.80E-04 
4.36E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.39E-04 
8.94E-03 
0.00E+00 
-7.85E-02 
RPEE Renewable primary energy resources used as energy carrier; RPEM Renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; 
TPE Total use of renewable primary energy resources; NRPE Non renewable primary energy resources used as energy carrier; NRPM 
Non renewable primary energy resources used as materials; TRPE Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM Use of 
secondary materials; RSF Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF Use of non renewable secondary fuels; W Use of net fresh water 
End of life – Waste 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HW 
KG 
1.03E-05 
3.33E-07 
1.53E-07 
0.00E+00 
2.09E-07 
6.99E-07 
1.65E-08 
-1.69E-06 
NHW 
KG 
3.26E-01 
6.67E-03 
1.90E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.19E-03 
1.91E-02 
2.36E-03 
-3.51E-02 
RW 
KG 
4.04E-05 
8.61E-07 
4.88E-07 
0.00E+00 
5.40E-07 
1.40E-06 
1.33E-08 
-8.19E-06 
HW Hazardous waste disposed; NHW Non hazardous waste disposed; RW Radioactive waste disposed 
End of life – output flow 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
CR 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MR 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.69E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.11E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.52E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.95E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EEE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.05E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.29E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
ETE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.14E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.89E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
CR Components for reuse; MR Materials for recycling; MER Materials for energy recovery; EEE Exported electric energy; ETE Exported 
thermal energy 
Information describing the biogenic carbon content at the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content 
Unit 
Value 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
0 
Biogenic carbon content in the accompanying packaging 
kg C 
5.83E-03 
Greenhouse gas emissions from the use of electricity in the manufacturing phase 
A national residual mix has been applied for the original manufacturing (A1) and DAFA-specific 
activities (A3).  
Electricity mix 
Applied in 
Data Source 
Amount 
Unit 
Electricity, medium voltage {DE_Residual} 
A1 
Ecoinvent 3.8 
0.762 
kg CO2 
eq./kWh 
Electricity, low voltage {DK_Residual} 
A3 
Ecoinvent 3.8 
0.523 
kg CO2 
eq./kWh 
Additional environmental impact indicators required in NPCR Part A for construction 
products 
In order to increase the transparency of biogenic carbon contribution to climate impact, the 
indicator GWP-IOBC is required as it declares climate impacts calculated according to the 
principle of instantaneous oxidation. GWP-IOBC is also referred to as GWP-GHG in context to 
Swedish public procurement legislation.  
Additional Norwegian requirements 
==PAGE:168==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
10
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-IOBC 
kg CO2 eq. 
7.04E-01 
8.41E-03 
3.79E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.28E-03 
2.31E-01 
1.36E-02 
-1.36E-01 
GWP-IOBC Global warming potential calculated according to the principle of instantaneous oxidation.  
Hazardous substances 
The declaration is based upon reference to threshold values and/or test results and/or material 
safety data sheets provided to EPD verifiers. Documentation available upon request to EPD 
owner. 
□
The product contains no substances given by the REACH Candidate list or the
Norwegian priority list.
□
The product contains substances given by the  REACH Candidate list or the Norwegian
priority list that are less than 0,1 % by weight.
□
The product contain dangerous substances, more then 0,1% by weight, given by the
REACH Candidate List or the Norwegian Priority list, see table.
□
The product contains no substances given by the REACH Candidate list or the
Norwegian priority list. The product is classified as hazardous waste (Avfallsforskiften,
Annex III), see table.
Name 
CAS no. 
Amount 
 - 
- 
- 
Indoor environment 
Not relevant 
Carbon Footprint 
Carbon footprint according to ISO 14067 has not been worked out for the product. 
==PAGE:169==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
11
ISO 14025:2010 
Environmental labels and declarations - Type III environmental 
declarations - Principles and procedures 
ISO 14044:2006 
Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - 
Requirements and guidelines  
EN 15804 +A2:2019 
Sustainability of construction works - Environmental product 
declaration - Core rules for the product category of construction 
products 
ISO 21930:2007 
Sustainability in building construction - Environmental 
declaration of building products 
The Norwegian EPD foundation (2021) NPCR PART A: Construction products and services 
version 2.0 
The Norwegian EPD foundation (2022) NPCR PART B: Roof waterproofing version 2.0 
Ecoinvent v3.8, 2022, Allocation, cut-off by classification. Swiss Centre of Life Cycle Inventories. 
Association of issuing bodies 2021, European Residual Mixes 2021: https://www.aib-
net.org/facts/european-residual-mix 
District heating mix, Kredsloeb, 2022:https://www.kredslob.dk/professionel/produkter-og-
services/fjernvarme/miljoedeklaration-emissionsdata 
Statistics Denmark, Transport: 
https://www.statistikbanken.dk/NVG1 
Statistics Denmark, Transport: 
https://www.statistikbanken.dk/NVG41 
Statistics Denmark, Waste:  
https://www.statistikbanken.dk/20294 
Program Operator 
tlf 
+47 23 08 80 00
The Norwegian EPD Foundation 
Post Box 5250 Majorstuen, 0303 Oslo 
e-post: 
post@epd-norge.no 
Norway 
web 
www.epd-norge.no 
Publisher 
tlf 
+47 23 08 80 00 
The Norwegian EPD Foundation 
Post Box 5250 Majorstuen, 0303 Oslo 
e-post: 
post@epd-norge.no 
Norway 
web 
www.epd-norge.no 
Owner of the declaration 
tlf 
+45 87 47 66 66
DAFA Building Solutions A/S 
Fax 
Holmstrupgaardvej 1, 8220 Brabrand 
e-post: 
dbs@dafa-group.com 
Danmark 
web 
dafa-build.com/dk 
Author of the life cycle assessment 
tlf 
+45 70404101 
Jesper Kokborg Lassen 
EnergySolution A/S 
Fax 
True Møllevej 1, 8381 Tilst 
e-post: 
info@energysolution.dk 
Danmark 
web 
www.energysolution.dk 
ECO Platform 
ECO Portal 
web 
web 
www.eco-platform.org 
ECO Portal 
Bibliography 
==PAGE:170==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
12
EPD for the best 
environmental 
decision 
The Norwegian EPD foundation 
www.epd-norge.no 
==PAGE:171==
 
Confidential
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Owner: 
Imperbel NV/SA 
No.: 
MD-21033-EN_rev1 
First issued: 
Issued: 
15-07-2021 
19-09-2023 
Valid to: 
15-07-2026 
EPD 
VERIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION | ISO 14025 & EN 15804 
3 r d
P A R T Y
V E R I F I E D
==PAGE:172==
 
 
 
 
MD-21033-EN_rev1 | Derbigum | Page 2 of 11 
 
Confidential
Owner of declaration 
Imperbel NV/SA 
Chaussée de Wavre 67, 1360 
Perwez 
BE 0400.484.591 
 
Programme 
EPD Danmark 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
☐ Industry EPD   
☒ Product EPD 
 
Declared product(s) 
Derbigum NT 
 
 
Number of declared datasets/product variations: 1 
 
Production site 
Perwez, Belgium 
Product(s) use 
Bituminous roofing material 
Declared/ functional unit 
 
Functional unit: 1 m2 installed roof waterproofing from cradle-to-
grave with activities needed for a study period of 50 years for a 
building. 
 
 
Year of data 
2020 
EPD version 
Second version 
 
Issued: 
19-09-2023 
Valid to: 
15-07-2026 
Basis of calculation 
This EPD is developed in accordance with the European 
standard EN 15804+A2 and NPCR 022 version 2.0 
(PCR – Part B for roof waterproofing).  
 
Comparability 
EPDs of construction products may not be comparable 
if they do not comply with the requirements in EN 
15804+A2. EPD data may not be comparable if the 
datasets used are not developed in accordance with EN 
15804+A2 and if the background systems are not 
based on the same database. 
 
Validity 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 
14025 and is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 
 
Use 
The intended use of an EPD is to communicate 
scientifically based environmental information for 
construction products, for the purpose of assessing the 
environmental performance of buildings. The EPD is 
developed for B2B communication.  
 
EPD type 
☐Cradle-to-gate with modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options, modules C1-C4 and D 
☒Cradle-to-grave and module D 
☐Cradle-to-gate 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options 
 
 
 
Martha Katrine Sørensen 
EPD Danmark 
CEN standard EN 15804+A2 serves as the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to EN ISO 14025 
☐ internal 
☒ external 
 
Third party verifier: 
 
 
               
Linda Høibye 
Life Cycle Assessment Consulting 
 
Life cycle stages and modules (MNR = module not relevant) 
Product 
Construction 
process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond the system 
boundary 
Raw material 
supply 
Transport 
Manufacturin
g 
Transport 
Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishme
nt 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
De-
construction 
demolition
Transport 
Waste 
processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, 
recovery and 
recycling 
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
==PAGE:173==
 
 
 
 
MD-21033-EN_rev1 | Derbigum | Page 3 of 11 
 
Confidential
Product information 
Product description 
Derbigum NT is a bituminous waterproofing 
membrane modified by plastomeric polymers. 
Derbigum NT partly consists of bitumen extracted 
from recycled cutting waste from installing 
bituminous waterproofing membranes and used 
bituminous roofing membranes. The top of the 
membrane is 
equipped with two different 
reinforcements; a glass cloth and a non-woven 
polyester. These materials give the roofing 
membrane dimensional stability and tear and 
puncture resistance.  
The main product components are shown in the 
table below.  
Material 
Weight-% of 
declared product 
Bitumen 
53-61% 
Polymers 
17-21% 
Reinforcements 
4-6% 
Others 
18-24% 
 
Representativity 
This declaration, including data collection and the 
modeled foreground system including results, 
represents the production of one square meter 
Derbigum NT bitumen roof waterproofing system 
in the production site located in Perwez, Belgium. 
The product specific data, covering the production 
process and packaging of the products, as well as 
supplier location and information on inbound 
transport, has been collected for the year 2020. 
Allocation of manufacturing data is based on the 
factory data from 2020 and allocated per square 
meter by dividing by the total production in 2020. 
Background data are based on GaBi ts 10.0.1.92 
incl. databases 2021 Edition, Ecoinvent 3.6 and 
an LCI profile from Eurobitume and are less than 
10 years old. 
Hazardous substances 
The product does not contain substances listed in 
the ”Candidate List of Substances of Very High 
Concern for authorization”.  
(http://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table) 
Essential characteristics  
The modified bituminous roofing membrane is 
covered by harmonized technical specification 
DS/EN13707:2004+A2:2009. 
Declaration 
of 
performance 
according 
to 
EU 
regulation 
305/2011 is available for the declared product.  
Fire resistance: In accordance with EN 13501-5, 
class BROOF (t2) according to method CEN/TS 
1187. 
Further technical information can be obtained by 
contacting 
the 
manufacturer 
or 
on 
the 
manufacturer’s website: www.derbigum.dk/   
Reference Service Life (RSL) 
The reference service life of the building is set to 
50 years. The Derbigum NT product system is 
expected to fulfil its function for the entirety of its 
installation, thus no replacement is expected for 
the Derbigum NT product system. The product is 
expected to fulfill its function in compliance with 
TGA 
(Teknik 
Godkendelse til 
Anvendelsen 
Nr TGA.2017/002).  
Picture of product(s) 
 
 
==PAGE:174==
 
 
 
 
MD-21033-EN_rev1 | Derbigum | Page 4 of 11 
 
Confidential
 
 
LCA background 
Functional Unit 
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD relates to a 
functional unit of 1 m2 installed Derbigum NT 
bitumen roof waterproofing system, consisting of 
a 4 mm layer. The functional unit is defined as: 
“1 m2 installed roof waterproofing, from cradle-
to-grave, with activities needed for a study period 
of 50 years for the building.” 
Name 
Value 
Unit 
Functional unit 
1 
m2 installed 
roof 
waterproofing 
during 50 
years 
Weight per unit  
5.19 
kg/m2 
installed 
Conversion factor to 1 kg. 
0.193 
m2/kg 
PCR 
This EPD is developed according to the core rules 
for the product category of construction products 
in EN 15804, and NPCR 022 version 2.0 (PCR – 
Part B for roof waterproofing), referred to as 
reference PCR. The reference PCR suggests an 
RSL of 60 years. To reflect Danish calculation 
rules, according to LCAbyg, this was changed to 
50 years.
 
Flowdiagram 
 
 
 
==PAGE:175==
 
 
 
 
MD-21033-EN_rev1 | Derbigum | Page 5 of 11 
 
Confidential
 
System boundary 
This is a specific product EPD, based on a cradle-
to-grave and module D LCA, in which 100 product 
weight-% has been accounted for.  
The cut-off criteria, meaning the general rules for 
the exclusion of inputs and outputs, follows the 
requirements in EN 15804, 6.3.5, where the total 
of neglected input flows per module shall be a 
maximum of 5 % of energy usage and mass and 
1 % of renewable and non-renewable primary 
energy usage and mass for unit processes. The 
application of cut-off criteria is described below.   
Excluded processes: 
In addition to the processes explicitly excluded 
from the system boundary by DS/EN 15804 and 
the reference PCR, the following exclusions have 
been made based on the cut-off criteria: 
• 
Production and waste management of 
packaging materials used for incoming 
raw materials.  
• 
Production of 
infrastructure, capital 
goods, travelling by 
personnel and 
research and development. 
• 
Production and waste management of 
packaging materials accompanying the 
product which are small (0.12 % of 
weight) in comparison to the product, 
these are: 
o 
Corrugated board 
o 
Plastic packaging 
o 
Tape 
Product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
A1 – Raw material supply 
Module A1 comprises impacts from extraction and 
processing of raw materials including bitumen, 
polymers, reinforcements (glass- and polyester 
fiber), fillers, etc. The module also includes the 
production of purchased electricity used at the 
Derbigum production site. The recycling process 
of secondary raw materials used in the product is 
also included in module A1. 
A2 – Transport (to the production site) 
Module A2 comprises impacts from transportation 
of raw materials to the Derbigum production site, 
which includes extraction and production of the 
fuels as well as the combustion of the fuel during 
the transport. 
A3 – Manufacturing  
Module A3 includes the manufacturing of the final 
product, production of larger packaging materials 
(e.g. pallet), combustion of fuels on site (natural 
gas, diesel, and propane), as well as end-of-life 
treatment 
of 
waste 
generated 
during 
manufacturing. Inflows and outflows of water that 
is used in the manufacturing is also included as 
well as the wastewater treatment.  
The LCA results are declared in aggregated form 
for the product stage, which means, that the sub-
modules A1, A2 and A3 are declared as one 
module A1-A3.  
The module A1-A3 includes the production of 
additional bitumen sheets needed for overlap of 
the layers for complete waterproofing. 
Construction 
process 
stage 
(A4-A5) 
includes: 
A4 – Transport 
Module A4 includes impacts from transportation 
of the finished product to an assumed installation 
site in Denmark. The module includes extraction 
of the fuels and the combustion of the fuel during 
the transport. 
A5 – Construction installation process 
Module A5 represents installation of the product 
to the building at the installation site. The module 
includes the production of additional bitumen 
sheets needed for 
wasted product during 
installation. The module includes production of 
fastening 
materials, 
and 
production 
and 
combustion of propane for torching. Waste from 
the installation is classified as materials for 
recycling (99%) and waste for incineration (1%). 
Impacts 
from 
these 
waste 
management 
processes are included in module A5 whereas 
potential benefits are reported in module D. 
==PAGE:176==
 
 
 
 
MD-21033-EN_rev1 | Derbigum | Page 6 of 11 
 
Confidential
Use stage (B1-B7) includes: 
B1 – Use 
No impacts from use have been included in 
accordance with the default values provided in 
the reference PCR. 
B2 – Maintenance 
No impacts from maintenance have been included 
in accordance with the default values provided in 
the reference PCR. 
B3 – Repair 
No impacts from repair have been included in 
accordance with the default values provided in 
the reference PCR 
B4 – Replacement 
No impacts from replacement have been included 
since the product is expected to fulfill its function. 
for 50 years and thus no replacement is needed.  
B5 – Refurbishment 
No impacts from the refurbishment have been 
included in accordance with the default values 
provided in the reference PCR.  
B6 – Operational energy use 
The roofing system does not require energy to 
operate. Therefore, no operational energy use for 
either of the product systems is included. 
B7 – Operational water use 
The roofing system does not require water to 
operate, there is therefore no operational water 
use for either of the product systems.  
 
End of Life (C1-C4) includes: 
C1 – De-construction, demolition 
De-construction of the waterproofing sheet was 
assumed to be done manually, and thus not 
require any processes with an environmental 
impact. 
 
C2 – Transport (to waste processing) 
Comprises impacts from transportation of the 
deconstructed products after 50 years to the 
waste processing (incineration or recycling site).  
C3 – Waste processing 
Module C3 consists of the waste processing steps, 
that is incineration of the bitumen sheets (1%) 
and plastic fastening materials at end-of-life. 
Emissions from the materials incinerated in 
Denmark are reported in module C3 and the 
benefits from heat and electricity generation are 
carried forward to module D.  
Most of the de-constructed bitumen roofing 
(99%) from C1 is collected by Derbigum for 
recycling. This is reported as materials for 
recycling in C3 and the burden from the recycling 
process and the benefits from replacing bitumen 
is recorded in module D. 
C4 – Disposal 
Ashes and other remains after incineration are 
reported in stage C4. 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
includes: 
Module D includes recovery and/or recycling 
potential, expressed as net impact and benefits.  
At end of life most of the product is recycled. 
When bitumen sheets are recycled throughout the 
modules, the burden from the recycling process 
and net benefit of this recycling is reported in 
module D. The net benefit consists of the virgin 
material 
in 
the 
bitumen sheet replacing 
alternative material production. 
A part of the product is also incinerated, and heat 
and electricity are produced. The energy is 
recovered and assumed to replace heat that 
would have been produced from other sources.
 
 
==PAGE:177==
 
 
 
 
MD-21033-EN_rev1 | Derbigum | Page 7 of 11 
 
Confidential
LCA results 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [m2 installed roof waterproofing during 50 years] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
3.75E+00 
4.30E-01 
3.32E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.78E-01 
1.22E-01 
1.22E-05 
-2.55E-01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
3.76E+00 
4.22E-01 
3.06E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.69E-01 
1.22E-01 
1.23E-05 
-2.52E-01 
GWP-
biogenic 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
-5.50E-03 
4.54E-03 
2.61E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.05E-03 
6.51E-06 
-1.26E-07 
-4.01E-03 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
2.78E-03 
3.48E-03 
2.16E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.87E-03 
1.45E-06 
1.23E-08 
4.22E-04 
ODP 
[kg CFC 
11 eq.] 
7.04E-08 
8.42E-17 
1.27E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.35E-17 
5.56E-10 
2.91E-20 
-4.23E-08 
AP 
[mol H+ 
eq.] 
1.00E-02 
1.37E-03 
5.76E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.53E-03 
4.35E-05 
3.92E-08 
-6.05E-03 
EP-
freshwater 
[kg PO4 
eq.] 
1.52E-04 
1.27E-06 
2.92E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.41E-06 
5.88E-07 
9.36E-12 
-2.64E-05 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
2.68E-03 
6.29E-04 
1.98E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.99E-04 
1.26E-05 
9.73E-09 
-9.62E-04 
EP-
terrestrial 
[mol N 
eq.] 
2.91E-02 
7.02E-03 
2.17E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.81E-03 
1.16E-04 
1.07E-07 
-1.08E-02 
POCP 
[kg 
NMVOC 
eq.] 
9.07E-03 
1.24E-03 
6.48E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.38E-03 
2.96E-05 
3.07E-08 
-4.00E-03 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb 
eq.] 
3.11E-06 
3.78E-08 
7.31E-08 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.20E-08 
5.98E-08 
8.49E-13 
1.72E-07 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
1.76E+02 
5.68E+00 
7.44E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.31E+00 
3.00E-02 
1.79E-04 
-1.73E+02 
WDP1 
[m3] 
2.67E-01 
3.96E-03 
1.08E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.40E-03 
2.89E-03 
-1.46E-07 
-5.76E-02 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming 
Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; 
EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – 
terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone formation; ADPm = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion 
Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [m2 installed roof waterproofing during 50 years] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
8.61E-08 
7.93E-09 
6.61E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.82E-09 
2.71E-10 
4.25E-13 
-2.01E-09 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
1.63E-01 
1.51E-03 
7.98E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.68E-03 
1.36E-04 
2.93E-07 
-2.60E-03 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
5.83E+01 
4.21E+00 
3.82E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.68E+00 
5.22E-02 
5.27E-05 
-9.26E+00 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
3.91E-09 
8.52E-11 
1.33E-10 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.47E-11 
3.48E-12 
6.12E-15 
2.38E-10 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1.40E-07 
4.99E-09 
6.16E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.55E-09 
1.25E-10 
6.15E-13 
8.12E-10 
SQP1 
-  
9.16E+00 
1.95E+00 
3.31E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.17E+00 
1.58E-02 
1.32E-05 
1.97E-01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – 
cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It 
does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground 
facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:178==
 
 
 
 
MD-21033-EN_rev1 | Derbigum | Page 8 of 11 
 
Confidential
RESOURCE USE PER [m2 installed roof waterproofing during 50 years] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
9.93E+00 
3.27E-01 
2.91E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.63E-01 
1.22E-03 
1.29E-05 
9.94E+00 
PERM 
[MJ] 
1.95E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.69E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.01E+01 
3.27E-01 
3.18E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.63E-01 
1.22E-03 
1.29E-05 
9.94E+00 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
3.38E+01 
5.70E+00 
4.15E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.33E+00 
3.00E-02 
1.79E-04 
7.34E+01 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1.48E+02 
0.00E+00 
3.40E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-2.56E+02 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
1.82E+02 
5.70E+00 
7.55E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.33E+00 
3.00E-02 
1.79E-04 
-1.83E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
1.18E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.12E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
1.14E-02 
3.74E-04 
4.95E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.16E-04 
6.72E-05 
1.85E-09 
-1.37E-03 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable 
primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable 
primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary material;  RSF = 
Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER [m2 installed roof waterproofing during 50 years] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
9.82E-09 
3.00E-10 
4.01E-10 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.34E-10 
0.00E+00 
3.17E-14 
6.11E-10 
NHWD 
[kg] 
5.38E-02 
8.94E-04 
1.86E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.93E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.52E-04 
2.17E-03 
RWD 
[kg] 
8.27E-04 
1.03E-05 
4.78E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.15E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.04E-09 
-2.93E-05 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.13E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.12E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EE 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.08E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for 
re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy  
 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER [m2 installed roof waterproofing during 50 years] 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
[kg C] 
0 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying 
packaging 
[kg C] 
6.88E-03 
Note 
1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg of CO2 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:179==
 
 
 
 
MD-21033-EN_rev1 | Derbigum | Page 9 of 11 
 
Confidential
Additional information 
Technical information on scenarios 
 
Production of waterproofing (A1-A3) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Material weight per produced square meter 
4.61 
kg/m2 
Material weight of additional sheets for overlap (11,.81%) 
0.55 
kg/m2 
Weight per functional unit (total weight including fastening material) 
5.19 
kg/m2 
 
Transport to the building site (A4) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Fuel type 
Diesel 
- 
Vehicle type 
Truck, Euro 5, 28-32t gross 
- 
Transport distance 
1230 
km 
Capacity utilization (including empty runs) 
61 
% 
Capacity utilization volume factor 
1 
- 
 
Installation of the product in the building (A5) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Ancillary materials  
0.0172 (plastic fasteners) 
kg 
Water use 
0 
m3 
Other resource use 
0 
kg 
Energy type and consumption  
0.05 (propane) 
kg 
Waste materials 
0.014 (wooden pallet, for incineration) 
kg 
0.001 (bitumen trimmings, for incineration) 
0.091 (bitumen trimmings, for recycling) 
Output materials 
0 
kg 
Direct emissions to air, soil or water 
Combustion of propane 
kg 
Overlap in cm 
13 
cm 
Additional material due to overlap 
11.8 
% 
 
Reference service life 
RSL information 
Unit 
Reference service Life 
50 years for building; 50 years for product 
Declared product properties 
Roof waterproofing 
Assumed quality of work 
Instructions are available via: www.derbigum.dk/   
Maintenance 
- 
 
 
End of life (C1-C4) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Collected separately 
5.173 
kg 
Collected with mixed waste 
 
kg 
For reuse 
 
kg 
For recycling 
5.12 
kg 
For energy recovery 
0.05 
kg 
Assumptions for scenario development 
50 km to incineration and landfill 
1230 km to recycling 
- 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
Scenario information/Materiel 
Value 
Unit 
Materials replacing bitumen  
3.89 
kg 
Heat replacing Danish natural gas 
0.94 
MJ 
Electricity replacing Danish electricity grid mix 
0.49 
MJ 
 
 
 
==PAGE:180==
 
 
 
 
MD-21033-EN_rev1 | Derbigum | Page 10 of 11 
 
Confidential
Indoor air 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to indoor air because the 
horizontal standards on measurement of release 
of regulated dangerous substances from 
construction products using harmonised test 
methods according to the provisions of the 
respective technical committees for European 
product standards are not available. 
Soil and water 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to soil and water because 
the horizontal standards on measurement of 
release of regulated dangerous substances from 
construction products using harmonised test 
methods according to the provisions of the 
respective technical committees for European 
product standards are not available. 
 
 
==PAGE:181==
 
 
 
 
MD-21033-EN_rev1 | Derbigum | Page 11 of 11 
 
Confidential
References 
Publisher 
 
 
www.epddanmark.dk 
Programme operator 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA-practitioner 
 
 
Katarzyna Dziubanii, Jonathan Klement 
Ramboll Sweden AB 
Email: katarzyna.dziubanii@ramboll.se 
jonathan.klement@ramboll.se 
LCA software /background data 
 
GaBi ts 10.0.1.92 incl. databases 2021 Edition 
Ecoinvent 3.6  
LCI profile from Eurobitume (2019) 
3rd party verifier 
Linda Høibye 
Life Cycle Assessment Consulting 
Email: hoeibye@gmail.com 
 
General programme instructions 
Version 2.0 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
EN 15804 
DS/EN 15804 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental  
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products” 
 
Product specific cPCR 
NPCR 022 version 2.0 (PCR – Part B for roof waterproofing) 
 
EN 15942 
DS/EN 15942:2011 – ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – Communication 
format business-to-business” 
 
ISO 14025 
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmental declarations – Principles 
and procedures” 
 
ISO 14040 
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and framework” 
 
ISO 14044 
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and guidelines” 
==PAGE:182==
Produktkatalog 2021 
P-DK-01-2021    (+45) 8781 7400    strongtie.dk
Bandlock® Pro BPTD 
Sokkelanker 
Side 79
BAN09 
0,9 mm vindtrækbånd 
Side 82
SSF
Beslagskrue 
til CLT og limtræ  
Side 17
SAE-PB 
Sortlakeret bjælkesko 
Side 144
==PAGE:183==
Generel information
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
2
Indholdsfortegnelse
Generel information                                                                      
Generel information ........................................................... 4
Virksomhedsinformation .................................................... 6
Hvem er Simpson Strong-Tie? ........................................... 6
Kvalitetspolitik .................................................................... 7
CE-mærkning .................................................................... 7
ISO certiﬁ cering ................................................................. 7
Teknisk support ................................................................. 7
Korrosionsbeskyttelsesniveauer ......................................... 8
Metaltype & coatings ......................................................... 9
Anvendelsesklasser ........................................................... 9
Generelt om skruer .......................................................... 10
Generelt om bygningsbeslag ........................................... 10
Ikoner .............................................................................. 11
Produktegenskaber ......................................................... 11
Skruer                                                                      
Beslagskruer ................................................................... 16
Beslagskruer, elforzinket / udendørsbrug ......................... 16
Beslagskruer, elforzinket med sort hoved RAL 9005 ........ 16
Beslagskruer, rustfri syrefast A4 ....................................... 17
Beslagskrue til CLT og limtræ .......................................... 17
Beslagskruer / konstruktionsskruer  ................................. 18
Konstruktionsskruer ......................................................... 20
Konstruktionsskrue, skivehoved................................. 20, 24
Konstruktionsskrue, undersænket ................................... 21
Konstruktionsskrue, dobbeltgevind .................................. 22
Konstruktionsskrue, fuldgevind ........................................ 23
Konstruktionsskrue, udendørs ......................................... 24
Træskruer ........................................................................ 25
Træskruer,  Impreg®+ Coating .......................................... 25
Træskrue, elforzinket ........................................................ 26
Træskrue, rustfri syrefast A4 ............................................ 27
Træskrue pan, elforzinket ................................................. 28
Træskrue pan, Impreg®+ Coating ..................................... 29
Terrasseskruer ................................................................. 30
Terrasseskrue, rustfri syrefast A4 ..................................... 30
Terrasseskrue, Impreg® X4 ............................................... 30
Hårdttræ terrasseskrue, rustfri syrefast A4 ....................... 31
Beklædningsskrue, Impreg®+ .......................................... 31
Premium System til skjulte terrasseskruer ........................ 32
Fibercementskruer ........................................................... 33
Gulvskruer ....................................................................... 34
Listeskrue ........................................................................ 34
Pladeskruer ..................................................................... 35
OSB- & spånpladeskrue .................................................. 35
Metalpladeskrue .............................................................. 36
Bygge- & konsolskrue, elforzinket .................................... 36
Stålproﬁ lskruer ................................................................. 37
Stålproﬁ lskrue, fosfateret / elforzinket ............................... 37
Gipsskruer ....................................................................... 38
Gipsskrue, High-Low gevind ............................................ 38
Gipsskrue, Protec Coating ......................................... 38, 39
Gipsskrue, fosfateret .................................................. 39, 41
Gipsskruer, elforzinket  ..................................................... 40
Hårdgipsskrue, fosfateret ................................................. 41
Montageskrue, udegips / elforzinket / Protec Coating ...... 42
Montageskrue med borspids, Impreg®+ .......................... 43
Vingeborskrue, Protec ..................................................... 43
Søm                                                                      
Beslagsøm ...................................................................... 46
CNA Beslagsøm, elforzinket ............................................ 46
CNA-G Beslagsøm, ekstra varmgalvaniseret .................... 46
CNA-S Beslagsøm, rustfri syrefast A4 .............................. 46
CNAC15 Elforzinket ......................................................... 47
CNAC15-G Ekstra varmgalvaniseret ................................ 47
CNA-PC Båndede beslagsøm, elforzinket........................ 48
Skudsøm ......................................................................... 49
RSN34G Ekstra varmforzinket ......................................... 49
RSND34G Ekstra varmforzinket ....................................... 49
Firkantede søm ................................................................ 50
Firkantede søm, blank Stål .............................................. 50
Firkantede søm, ekstra varmgalvaniseret ......................... 50
Firkantede søm, rustfri syrefast A4 ................................... 51
Entreprenørsøm, blanke .................................................. 51
Søm ................................................................................ 52
Søm, elforzinket ............................................................... 52
Søm, hvidmalet ............................................................... 52
Søm, alu med tætningsskive ............................................ 57
Messingsøm, blank .......................................................... 57
Kamsøm .......................................................................... 53
Kamsøm, rustfri syrefast A4 ............................................. 53
Kamsøm, rustfri syrefast A4 med EPDM-skive ................. 53
Kamsøm, rustfri syrefast A4 ............................................. 53
Lægtesøm ....................................................................... 54
Papsøm ........................................................................... 54
Papsøm, ekstra varmgalvaniseret .................................... 54
Papsøm, blank stål .......................................................... 54
Dykkere ........................................................................... 55
Dykkere, elforzinket ......................................................... 55
Dykkere, hvidlakeret ........................................................ 55
Dykkere, ekstra varmforzinket .......................................... 55
Runde dykkere, elforzinket ............................................... 56
Gipssøm, elforzinket ........................................................ 56
Kramper .......................................................................... 58
Kramper, elforzinket  ........................................................ 58
Kramper, ekstra varmgalvaniseret  ................................... 58
Bygningsbeslag                                                                      
Vinkelbeslag .................................................................... 62
Vinkelbeslag med ribbe .................................................... 62
Vinkelbeslag til udendørsbrug, ZPRO ............................... 62
Vinkelbeslag med kantforstærkning ................................. 63
Vinkelbeslag til montage af letfacader .............................. 63
Højstyrke vinkelbeslag ............................................... 63, 70
Betonvinkler ..................................................................... 64
Betonvinkler til udendørsbrug, ZPRO ............................... 64
Trækankerbeslag ............................................................. 65
Forskydningsvinkel .......................................................... 65
Vinkelbeslag med bolthuller ............................................. 66
Vinkelbeslag til tagspærmontage ..................................... 69
Kraftigt vinkelbeslag ......................................................... 69
Knagger .......................................................................... 69
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning ................................... 70
Vinkelbeslag og Hulplade til CLT ...................................... 72
Montagesystemer ............................................................ 73
Vinduesmontage ............................................................. 73
Dørmontagebeslag .......................................................... 75
Elementmontage ............................................................. 76
Facademontage .............................................................. 77
==PAGE:184==
Generel information
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
3
Indholdsfortegnelse
Vindafstivning og forankring............................................. 78
Wind Secure® vindkrydssæt............................................. 78
Vindkrydssæt................................................................... 78
Bandlock® Pro båndstrammer og sokkelanker................. 79
Tilslutningsbeslag, båndstrammer og båndspændere....... 80
Vindtrækbånd.................................................................. 82
Beslag til tagkonstruktioner.............................................. 83
Universalbeslag og Tagåseankre...................................... 83
Lægtebeslag.................................................................... 84
Toplægtebeslag og Topplankebeslag............................... 84
Spær- & gaffelankre......................................................... 85
Spærfodsbeslag og Spærvinkel....................................... 86
Spærrejsningsbeslag........................................................ 87
Forankring på ståldrager.................................................. 87
Bjælkesko & bjælkebærere............................................... 88
Vekseljern......................................................................... 91
Endetræsbeslag............................................................... 92
Bjælkesko til I-bjælker ..................................................... 93
Skjult bjælkebærer........................................................... 94
Hulplader......................................................................... 96
Ikke-bærende reperationsplader....................................... 98
Gerberbeslag................................................................... 99
Søjlesko......................................................................... 100
Tilbehør til beslag........................................................... 105
Bulldog® skiver............................................................... 107
Rustfrie beslag                                                                      
Rustfrie vinkelbeslag....................................................... 110
Rustfrie vindtrækbånd.................................................... 112
Rustfrie hulbånd............................................................. 112
Rustfrie bjælkesko.......................................................... 113
Quik Drive                                                                      
Forsatser........................................................................ 116
Multifunktion skruesystem.............................................. 116
Skruesystem til gulv- & terrasseskruemontage............... 117
Skruesystem til beslagskruemontage............................. 118
Skruesystem til beklædningsmontage............................ 119
Skruesystem til gipsskruemontage................................. 120
Skruesystem til gipsmontage.......................................... 121
Skruesystem til stålmontage........................................... 122
Adaptere........................................................................ 123
Adaptere til Bosch®........................................................ 123
Adaptere til Dewalt®....................................................... 123
Adaptere til Hitachi®....................................................... 123
Adaptere til Hilti®............................................................ 123
Adaptere til Makita®........................................................ 123
Adaptere til Milwaukee®.................................................. 123
Adaptere til Spit®............................................................ 123
Adaptere - Oversigtstabel............................................... 124
Båndede skruer............................................................. 125
Båndede skruer til fibergips............................................ 125
Båndede skruer til fibercement....................................... 125
Båndede skruer til gips................................................... 126
Båndede beslagskruer................................................... 128
Båndede skruer til beklædning....................................... 129
Båndede terrasseskruer................................................. 130
Båndede træskruer........................................................ 131
Båndede skruer til stålmontage...................................... 131
Tilbehør & reservedele.................................................... 132
Bitpakker....................................................................... 132
Bitholder........................................................................ 133
Forlængere..................................................................... 133
Fremføringshage............................................................ 133
Skruepose..................................................................... 133
Fjeder............................................................................. 133
Krop............................................................................... 133
Næsestykke................................................................... 133
Betonankre & Skudmontage                                   
Injektionslim & tilbehør.................................................... 136
Injektionslim................................................................... 136
Mixerrør og forlængerrør................................................. 136
Rengøringstilbehør......................................................... 137
Injektionspistol............................................................... 137
Betonskrue.................................................................... 137
Skudværktøj, krudt......................................................... 138
Krudt til skudværktøj...................................................... 138
Enkeltskudsøm (hårdt stål og beton).............................. 138
Skudværktøj, gas........................................................... 140
Skudsøm, magasinerede................................................ 140
Reservedele .................................................................. 141
Gør-det-selv beslag                                                                      
Design Series................................................................. 144
Vinkelbeslag, sort........................................................... 144
Bjælkesko, sort.............................................................. 144
To-delt stolpebærer, sort................................................ 144
Stolpetop, sort............................................................... 144
L og T-jern, sort.............................................................. 144
Fastgørelsesmidler......................................................... 145
Trappevinkel................................................................... 145
Byg-selv-kit.................................................................... 146
Ophængningsbånd........................................................ 146
Stolpestøtter.................................................................. 147
Stolpespyd..................................................................... 147
Index                                                                     
Alfabetisk index.............................................................. 148
==PAGE:185==
Befæstigelsesløsninger 
til professionelt byggeri
==PAGE:186==
Generel information....................................................... 4
Virksomhedsinformation............................................... 6
Kvalitetspolitik.................................................................. 7
CE-mærkning................................................................... 7
Teknisk support................................................................ 7
ISO certificering................................................................ 7
Korrosionsbeskyttelse................................................... 8
Materialer og coatings...................................................... 8
Anvendelsesklasser.......................................................... 9
Korrosionskategorier........................................................ 9
Om vores fasteners........................................................ 10
Om selvskærende skruer................................................ 11
Om vores bygningsbeslag............................................ 12
Forbindelser med beslag................................................ 12
CE-mærkning mm.......................................................... 12
Vælg det rigtige beslag................................................... 12
Ikoner............................................................................. 13
Produktegenskaber........................................................ 13
Generel
information
Generel 
information
==PAGE:187==
Simpson Strong-Tie®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
6
Generel 
information
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
6
Virksomhedsinformation
(+45) 8781 7400  l  www.strongtie.dk
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021      Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
I mere end 60 år har Simpson Strong-Tie fokuseret på at skabe strukturelle 
produkter, der hjælper mennesker med at bygge mere sikre og stærkere hjem 
og bygninger. Som førende inden for forskning og teknologi til strukturelle 
systemer er Simpson Strong-Tie en af de største leverandører af strukturelle 
byggeprodukter i verden. Simpson Strong-Tie’s forpligtigelse til produktudvikling, 
teknik, test og træning ses tydeligt i den ensartede høje kvalitet og 
leveringssikkerhed vi tilbyder på vores produkter og tjenester.
Besøg vores hjemmeside på strongtie.dk for mere information. 
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
Simpson Strong-Tie lægger vægt på at producere mest muligt 
lokalt for at sikre tilgængeligheden af vores produkter samt at 
mindske miljøbelastningen forbundet med import. I Danmark 
produceres beslagene på vores produktionsanlæg i Boulstrup, 
tidligere kendt under navnet BMF Bygningsbeslag A/S. Her har vi i 
mere end 60 år udviklet og produceret bygningsbeslag af højeste 
kvalitet til den danske byggebranche.
Dansk produktion
Fabrikker, kontorer og varelagre i Australien, Østrig, 
Canada, Chile, Kina, Danmark, Frankrig, Tyskland,  
Holland, New Zealand, Norge, Polen, Portugal, Sverige, 
Sydafrika, Schweiz, Taiwan, England og USA.
Distribution til Australien, Canada, Chile, Vesteuropa, dele 
af Østeuropa, Mellemøsten, Japan, Korea, Egypten, Taiwan 
og andre asiatiske lande, Mexico, New Zealand, Sydafrika, 
England og USA. 
==PAGE:188==
Generel information
Vi hjælper mennesker med at bygge mere sikre konstruktioner på en økonomisk måde. Vi gør dette 
ved at designe, konstruere og producere “No Equal” befæstigelsesprodukter som lever op til eller 
overgår kundernes behov og forventninger.
Alle medarbejdere hos Simpson Strong-Tie® er ansvarlige for produktkvaliteten og er forpligtede til 
at sikre effektiviteten af kvalitetsstyringssystemet. Simpson Strong-Tie® er en ISO-9001 registreret 
virksomhed. ISO-9001 er en internationalt anerkendt kvalitetsstyringssystemsstandard, som giver 
kunderne vished om at de kan stole på at få en ensartet kvalitet fra Simpson Strong-Tie’s produkter 
og services.
Karen Colonias
President,  
Chief Executive Officer
Vores Simpson Strong ‑Tie® “No Equal” 
løfte til dig er:
Kvalitetspolitik
Teknisk support 
Et team af ingeniører og konstruktører står til rådighed for at hjælpe dig med byggetekniske 
løsninger og råd. Vi hjælper dig med at finde de rigtige løsninger til dit byggeri. 
Du kan skrive direkte til vores tekniske afdeling på: technic-nordic@strongtie.eu eller ringe til os på 
tlf:  +45 8781 7400, så hjælper vi dig gerne videre.
•	 Kvalitetsprodukter udviklet for at give mest 
muligt værdi for slutbrugeren, enten i form af 
at opnå lavere installationsomkostninger eller 
højere lastbæreevner  
•	 Branchens mest gennemtestede og 
evaluerede bygningsbeslag
•	 Strategisk placerede produktions- og 
lagerfaciliteter
•	 Dokumentation iht. lokale standarder
•	 Branchens største sortiment af patenterede 
bygningsbeslag
•	 Globalt samarbejde men med lokale 
salgsteams
•	 In-house R&D- og værktøjsafdelinger  
•	 In-house produkttests og kvalitetskontrol 
udført af ingeniører
Vi er ISO 9001-2015 certificerede
Vi har topmoderne produktionsfaciliteter i Frankrig, England og Danmark, der 
er certificeret iht. ISO 9001:2015. Desuden investerer vi mere i testfaciliteter 
end nogen anden specialist på bygningsbeslag. Vort europæiske testlabora-
torium var det første producentejede, der blev akkrediteret i henhold til den 
internationale standard EN ISO/IEC 17025. Dette betyder, at vi er autoriseret 
til at udføre test, som ligger til grund for CE-mærkning af bygningsbeslag.
CE-mærkning af et produkt betyder, at det er fremstillet og kon­trolleret i overensstemmelse 
med en harmoniseret europæisk standard eller en europæisk teknisk vurdering. Dette betyder, 
at produkterne lever op til kravene til bl.a. sikkerhed, der stilles i Bygge­vareforordningen. 
Ydeevnedeklarationer (DoP) er fabrikantens dokumentation for produktets CE-mærkning. Simpson 
Strong-Tie’s DoP’er kan down­loades fra vores hjemmeside, www.strongtie.dk, eller fremsendes 
efter henvendelse på tlf. 8781 7400.
CE-mærket er desuden en slags rejsepas, idet produkter, der er CE-mærkede, frit 
kan omsættes på det europæiske marked uden nye krav om national prøvning og 
godkendelse. Hos Simpson Strong-Tie® tager vi CE-mærkningen meget seriøst 
og er derfor i dag den førende producent af ETA-godkendte og CE-mærkede 
bygningsbeslag. Vi har desuden valgt at etablere vort eget testl­aboratorium 
akkrediteret til at lave test iht. ETAG bestemmelserne. 
CE-mærkning
Generel 
information
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
7
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
7
Virksomhedsinformation
Generel 
information
Skruer
Rustfrie beslag
Betonankre & 
Skudmontage
Gør-det-selv 
beslag
Alfabetisk index
Bygningsbeslag
Søm
Quik Drive®
4-13
14-43
44-59
60-107
108-113
114-133
134-141
142-147
148-154
==PAGE:189==
Generel information
Materialer og coatings
Materialer og coatings
SC 1
Fosfateret
Fosfatering er en behandling, der består af skruen, der gennemgår en kemisk proces og derefter olieres. Overfladen bliver 
meget tynd og meget hård, hvilket beskytter gevindene og spidserne på skruerne mod at blive stumpe. Fosfaterede skruer 
har derfor ekstremt gode egenskaber, når de skrues i metalplader.
Elforzinket
5 µm
Elforzinkede skruer til almindelige træsamlinger leveres med en zinklagtykkelse på ca. 5 µm. Elforzinkning er en elektrolytisk 
behandling, hvor fastgørelseselementet dyppes i et bad. Overfladen bliver skinnende og glat.
Gulkromat
5 µm
Gulkromatiserede skruer til almindelige træsamlinger leveres med en zinklagtykkelse på ca. 5 µm. Gulkromatisering er en 
elektrolytisk behandling, hvor fastgørelseselementet dyppes i et bad. Overfladen bliver skinnende og glat.
SC 2
Elforzinket
12 µm
Beslagsøm og beslagskruer fra Simpson Strong-Tie leveres med en zinklagtykkelse på ca. 12 µm for at kunne indgå i 
strukturelle beslagsamlinger i anvendelsesklasse 2. Elforzinkningen er en elektrolytisk behandling, hvor fastgørelseselementet 
dyppes i et bad. Overfladen bliver skinnende og glat.
Gulkromat
12 µm
Konstruktionsskruer fra Simpson Strong-Tie som er designet til at indgå i strukturelle trækonstruktioner leveres med en 
zinktykkelse på ca. 12 µm. Gulkromatisering er en elektrolytisk behandling, hvor fastgørelseselementet dyppes i et bad. 
Overfladen bliver skinnende og glat.
Electrocoating 
(E-Coat™)
Elektrocoat bruger elektrisk strøm til at deponere belægningsmaterialet på fastgørelseselementet. Efter påføring,
hærdes belægningen i en ovn. Elektrocoat er beregnet til tørre, overdækkede applikationer.
Varmforzinket 
stål Z275
20 µm
De fleste beslag fremstilles af varmforzinket stål S250GD + Z275. Stålmaterialet leveres varmforzinket fra stålværk med en 
zinklagstykkelse på ca. 20 μm. Overfladebehandlingen Z275 anvendes til anvendelsesklasse 1+2 og anbefales at bruges i 
tørt miljø.
AISI 410 
Hardened
Grade 410 rustfrit stål er et rustfrit materiale, der indeholder krom, til almindeligt brug, der giver medium korrosionsbestandig-
hed til beskyttede udendørs applikationer.
Quik Guard®
Coating
Quik Guard® består af et galvaniseret zinkbaselag og et system af organiske toplakker beregnet til beskyttede udendørs 
applikationer.
Protec®
Coating
Protec består af tre lag: Lag 1 er et metallisk zinklag, lag 2 er en kemisk konverteringsfilm, lag 3 er et «indbagt» keramisk lag, 
der giver en beskyttende film, og gør det muligt at farve produktet.
Protec®+
Coating
En ikke-elektrolytisk overfladebehandling. Dens holdbarhed er især velegnet til grove træskruer, hvor iskruningsmomentet 
genererer høje temperaturer og høj friktion.
SC 3
Double-Barrier
Coating
Simpson Strong-Tie’s Double Barrier coating er en beskyttende belægning, der giver et korrosionsbestandigt niveau, der 
svarer til varmgalvanisering og er beregnet til udendørs applikationer.
®
PRO
ZPRO er en unik korrosionsbeskyttende coating, som yder tilsvarende korrosionsbeskyttelse som ved ekstra varmforzinket 
stål med 55 μm zink - korrosionskategori C3 (EN ISO 12944). 
IMPREG
Impreg® + er en elektrolytisk overfladebehandling bestående af zink og nikkel som forhindrer galvanisk korrosion i kontakt 
med rustfrit stål og aluminium. Impreg® + kan anvendes i udendørs applikationer.
IMPREG
Impreg® X4 er et 4-lags system med meget gode korrosionsegenskaber. Overfladebehandlingen er specielt udviklet til trykimprægne-
ret træ, fordi den har en unik kemisk resistens. Impreg® X4 kan anvendes i udendørs applikationer.
Ekstra varmgalvaniserede beslag, bliver sendt til varmgalvanisering efter bearbejdning til færdig udformning og vil have en 
zinklagstykkelse på 55 μm. Denne type overflade anvendes til anvendelsesklasse 3 og anbefales til brug udendørs i fugtige 
omgivelser hvis den ikke vil blive påvirket af salt fra havet eller forurening fra industri. 
A2
INOX
A2 (rustfri) Nogle beslag kan leveres i rustfrit stål 1.4301 svarende til AISI 304 og type 1.4509, disse rustfrie typer er ikke 
syrefaste. Denne ståltype anbefales der hvor der kan forekomme fugt og kortvarig kontakt med vand.  
A4
INOX
A4 (rustfri & syrefast) Den mest anvendte type rustfrit stål er 1.4401 / 1.4404 svarende til AISI 316(L) (rustfrit og syrefast). 
Denne ståltype anbefales ved uoverdækkede konstruktioner eller i korrosive miljøer, som f.eks. tæt ved havet.
Generel 
information
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
8
Korrosionsbeskyttelse
==PAGE:190==
Generel information
SC 1
SC 3
SC 2
Anvendelsesklasse 1
•	 Konstruktioner i opvarmede bygninger, hvor der ikke sker opfugtning af luften, f.eks. boliger, kontorer og for-
retninger.
Anvendelsesklasse 2
•	 Konstruktioner i ventilerede, ikke-permanent opvarmede bygninger, f.eks. fritidshuse, uopvarmede garager og 
lagerbygninger. 
•	 Ventilerede konstuktioner beskyttet mod nedbør, f.eks. ventilerede tagkonstruktioner.
Anvendelsesklasse 3
•	 Konstruktioner i fugtige rum.
•	 Konstruktioner udsat for nedbør eller vand i øvrigt.
•	 Underlag for tagpaptage.
I Eurocode 5 er der angivet krav til korrosionsbeskyttelse af både beslag og forbindelsesmidler. Krav til korrosionsbeskyttelse afhæn-
ger af, i hvilken anvendelses­klasse beslag og forbindelsesmidler anvendes. Anvendelsesklasse 1, 2 og 3 er defineret i Eurocode 5 og 
herunder er angivet eksempler på konstruktioner i anvendelsesklasserne. 
Ovenstående gælder ved anvendelse af beslag og forbindelsesmidler sammen med ubehandlet træ. Ved anvendelse sammen med 
imprægneret træ i fugtigt miljø er korrosionsfaren større. Det anbefales derfor, at anvende rustfrie beslag og forbindelsesmidler. Ved 
projektering af beslag til stærkt korrosive miljøer eksempelvis svømmehaller og salthaller anbefales det altid at tage kontakt til Simp-
son Strong-Tie’s tekniske afdeling på tlf. 8781 7400.
Anvendelsesklasser
INDOOR
SEVERE
OUTDOOR
Indoor (C1/C2)
•	 C1 - Opvarmede rum med tør luft og ubetydelige mængder forurenende stoffer, f.eks. kontorer, butikker, 
skoler, hoteller.
•	 C2 - Uopvarmede rum med skiftende temperatur og fugtighed. Lav frekvens af fugtkondensering og lavt ind-
hold af luftforurenende stoffer, f.eks. sportshaller, lagre.
Outdoor (C3/C4)
•	 C3 - Atmosfærer med en vis mængde salt eller moderate mængder luftforurenende stoffer. Byområder og let 
industrialiserede områder. Områder med en vis indflydelse fra kysten. Rum med moderat fugtighed og en vis 
mængde luftforurenende stoffer fra produktionsprocesser, f.eks. bryggerier, mejerier, vaskerier.
•	 C4 - Atmosfærer med moderate mængder salt eller betydelige mængder luftforurenende stoffer. Industrielle og 
kystnære områder. 
Severe (C5)
•	 C5-I - Industrielle områder med høj luftfugtighed og aggressiv atmosfære. Rum med næsten permanent fugt-
kondensation og en stor mængde luftforurenende stoffer.
•	 C5-M - Kyst- og offshoreområder med en stor mængde salt. Rum med næsten permanent fugtkondensation 
og en stor mængde luftforurenende stoffer.
Befæstigelsesprodukters korrosionsbestandighed kommunikeres ofte i henhold til korrosionskategorier. I modsætning til anvendel-
sesklasser er dette en mere detaljeret klassificering og kan derved hjælpe med at danne et bedre beslutningsgrundlag for udvælgel-
sen af befæstigelsesprodukter.
Korrosionskategorier
Generel 
information
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
9
Korrosionsbeskyttelse
==PAGE:191==
Generel information
Snoet skaft
Hoved typer skruer
Gevind typer skruer
Skruespids typer
Undersænket 
med fræseribber
Flange hoved
Pan hoved med 
konisk skaft
Trompethoved
Cap hoved
Lav profil  
hoved
Lav profil  
hoved
Hex-hoved  
med flange
Undersænket 
med fræseribber
Undersænket 
med fræseribber
Undersænket 
hoved
Reduceret 
trompet hoved
Cylinder hoved
Fint gevind
Groft gevind
Groft gevind 
med fræser
Groft savtakket 
gevind
Højt-lavt  
gevind
Dobbelt gevind 
med modsatrettet 
gevind
Savtakket 
fræsende gevind
Dobbelt gevind
Fiber-Cut
Half-Cut spids
Skarp spids
Undersænket 
med facet-ribber
Pan hoved
Udvidet trompet 
hoved
Savtakket 
fiber-cut
Fladt hoved
Linsehoved 
med skive
Linse hoved
Fladt hoved
Undersænket 
hoved
Dobbelt hoved
Klokkehoved 
med skive
Kærv typer skruer
G
S3
G
TX kærv
PH kærv
Firkant kærv
Hex-hoved
G
50
50
Hex-hoved  
med TX spor
Mål pan, flange, fladt hoved, 
rundt, skive og hex-hoved skruer 
fra undersiden af hoved til spids.
l
Mål alle andre 
skruer fra top af 
hoved til spids
l
Sawtooth® 
spids
Søm hoveder facon
Undersænket 
med fiber-lock 
technologi
Hex-hoved med 
konisk skaft 
Fladt hoved med 
konisk skaft
Kasse gevind
Firkant snoet 
skaft
Hulkehl skaft
Rund skaft
Takket skaft
Riflet skaft
Skaft typer søm
Forkammet 
skaft
Flat hoved med 
konisk skaft 
Borespids  
med vinger
Applikation:
Træ-metal
Applikation:
Træ-træ
Borespids
Applikation:
Metal
Pilotspids
Applikation:
Træ-metal
Applikation:
Træ-træ
Applikation:
Træ-træ
Applikation:
Træ-træ
Applikation:
Træ-træ
Generel 
information
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
10
Om vores fasteners
==PAGE:192==
Generel information
Når man skal vælge en selvskærende skrue er det vigtigt at vælge 
en spids, som egner sig til materialetykkelsen. Der er tre vigtige 
ting man skal være opmærksom på:
1. Borerille / boreslids 
Boreslidsernes højde afgør hvor tykt et materiale skruen kan 
trænge igennem. Eftersom slidserne fjerner borestøv mens man 
skruer vil borestøvet blive fanget i slidserne og gøre det sværere 
for skruen at skære sig igennem, hvis de bliver helt indesluttede 
i materialet. Dette kan få spidsen til at blive varm og brække af.
2. Spidsens længde 
Den del af spidsen, der ikke har gevind, skal være lang nok til 
fuldstændig at gennemtrænge materialet før gevindet rammer 
materialet. Eftersom gevindet skrues hurtigere i end selve bore-
processen, kan skruen sætte sig fast og brække, hvis gevindet 
rammer materialet før boreprocessen er overstået. 	
3. Befæstigelse af tykkere materiale til metal 
Når man skal fæstne tykkere materiale som f.eks. træ til metal, 
er det nødvendigt at bruge en skrue med vinger på skaftet. 
Ving­erne forstørrer hullerne i det befæstigede materiale så 
gevindet kan passere igennem uden at sætte sig fast eller gøre 
skade. Når vingerne kommer i kontakt med metallet brækker 
de af og gevindet tager ved metallet.
Hoved
Gevind
Vinger
Boreslids
Vingerne udvider hullet så det bliver større 
end gevindet, så gevindet ikke tager ved 
træet.
Vingerne brækker herefter af, når de rammer 
stål, hvorefter gevindet griber fast. 
Vingeudvidelse
Skruespidstype
Skruediameter
Materialetykkelse*
#2
3,5
0,9 - 2,5
4,2
0,9 - 2,5
4,8
0,9 - 2,8
#3
4,2
2,5 - 3,6
4,8
2,8 - 4,4
5,5
2,8 - 5,3
6,1
2,8 - 5,3
#4
5,5
4,4 - 5,6
6,1
4,4 - 5,6
*Alle dimensioner er i mm. Total ståltykkelse er inkl. luft mellem lagene. 
2
1
Borespids
(#2, #3 og #4)
Generel 
information
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
11
Om selvskærende skruer
==PAGE:193==
Generel information
Valg af beslag i en træforbindelse afhænger af forbindelsens geometri, størrelse og retning af kraftpåvirkningen, 
montagemulighed, krav til korrosionsbeskyttelse og udseende.
Den mest effektive kraftoverførsel opnås ved skivevirkning i beslag­ene, kontakttryk mellem trædelene og tværlast 
på forbindelses­midlerne. I praksis forekommer ofte bøjningspåvirkning af beslagets plader og udtrækspåvirkning af 
forbindelsesmidlerne. Eventuelt påvirkes forbindelsesmidlerne samtidigt aksialt og på tværs.
Forbindelser med beslag
CE-mærkning mm.
De fleste af vore beslag og forbindelsesmidler er CE-mærkede. CE-mærkningen har baggrund i enten en europæisk 
harmoniseret standard (EN) eller en Europæisk Teknisk Vurdering (ETA).
Ved beskrivelsen af de enkelte produkter er angivet nummeret på den ETA eller EN, som produktet er omfattet af. 
ETA’ernes fulde ordlyd kan downloades fra www.strongtie.dk.
Valg af beslag i en træforbindelse afhænger af samlingens geometri, størrelse, retning af kraftpåvirkningen, montage-
mulighed, krav til korrosionsbeskyttelse og udseende.
1. Samlingens geometri
Beslagets geometri ift. tømmerdimensionerne bør være det 
første man overvejer i sin udvælgelse af beslag. Man skal altid 
kunne overholde minimumskravene til kantafstande, da et 
forkert fastgjort beslag kan svække træets styrke.
3. Retning af kraftpåvirkningen
Alt efter samlingstypen bliver beslaget 
påvirket fra forskellige retninger. Det er 
vigtigt at man tager højde for dette i valg 
af beslag, f.eks. ved at vurdere om man 
skal bruge vinkelbeslag med eller uden 
ribbe.
2. Samlingens størrelse
Det giver sig selv at man bør anvende det beslag hvor 
man opnår størst mulig kontakt mellem trædelene. Jo 
flere korrekt placerede forbindelsesmidler beslaget tillader, 
desto større bæreevne har samlingen.
4. Montagemulighed
Der kan forekomme situationer hvor det er vanskeligt 
at montere beslag efter foreskrifterne. Der kan være 
trækomponenter eller andet der kommer i vejen for 
installation. Her bør man undersøge alternative  
beslagsløsninger.
6. Udseende
Er der tale om en synlig samling, bør 
man selvfølgeligt overveje beslagets 
udseende. Der findes ofte et skjult 
beslag som kan erstatte et synligt alt 
efter samlingstype.
F1
F2/3
F4/5
5. Krav til korrosionsbeskyttelse
Man bør altid overveje korrosionsklassen for den 
pågældende samling. Korrosion kan forekomme når 
beslaget udsættes for fugt, kemiske dampe og salt. 
Er man i tvivl om korrosionsniveauet bør man anvende 
beslag med ekstra korrosionsbeskyttelse.
Vælg det rigtige beslag
Generel 
information
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
12
Om vores bygningsbeslag
==PAGE:194==
Generel information
PATENT
Patenteret eller patentanmeldt produkt
Produktnyhed
Produktet er CE-mærket iht. en harmoniseret europæisk standard
Produktet er CE-mærket iht. en ETA
Anbefalet produkt
Dette ikon indikerer at det pågældende produkt har klare fordele sammelignet med tilsvarende produk-
ter, enten i form af: 
	
a) hurtigere montage, b) højere bæreevne, c) lavere omkostninger eller en kombination af disse.
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
Structural loads
Dette ikon indikerer at det pågældende produkts karakteristiske bæreevneværdier er testede og  
dokumenterede.
Følger man anvisninger mht. placering og udsømning, sikrer man at konstruktionens bæreevner kan 
dokumenteres efterfølgende.
A4
Ekstra korrosionsbeskyttelse
Disse små ikoner indikerer at det pågældende produkt har en høj, meget høj eller ekstrem korrosions­beskyttelse. 
Læs mere om de forskellige korrosionsbeskyttelsesniveauer på forrige side.
A2
Kan anvendes under 
fugtige forhold
Brandmodstandsdygtig
(30 min.)
Kan anvendes der hvor 
der stilles krav til last­
kapacitet
Kan anvendes i urev-
net beton
Kan anvendes i revnet 
beton
Kan anvendes ved 
små kantafstande
Produktegenskaber
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
Produktet er produceret i Danmark af Simpson Strong-Tie A/S
R 30
kN
Generel 
information
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
13
Ikoner
==PAGE:195==
Befæstigelses-
løsninger til byggeriet
SSH beslagskrue med Hex hoved
==PAGE:196==
Beslagskruer................................................................ 16
Beslagskruer, elforzinket / udendørsbrug........................ 16
Beslagskruer, elforzinket med sort hoved RAL 9005....... 16
Beslagskruer, rustfri syrefast A4..................................... 17
Beslagskrue til CLT og limtræ......................................... 17
Beslagskruer / konstruktionsskruer ............................... 18
Konstruktionsskruer.................................................... 20
Konstruktionsskrue, skivehoved.................................20, 24
Konstruktionsskrue, undersænket................................... 21
Konstruktionsskrue, dobbeltgevind................................. 22
Konstruktionsskrue, fuldgevind....................................... 23
Konstruktionsskrue, udendørs........................................ 24
Træskruer..................................................................... 25
Træskruer,  Impreg®+ Coating........................................ 25
Træskrue, elforzinket...................................................... 26
Træskrue, rustfri syrefast A4........................................... 27
Træskrue pan, elforzinket............................................... 28
Træskrue pan, Impreg®+ Coating................................... 29
Terrasseskruer............................................................. 30
Terrasseskrue, rustfri syrefast A4................................... 30
Terrasseskrue, Impreg® X4............................................. 30
Hårdttræ terrasseskrue, rustfri syrefast A4...................... 31
Beklædningsskrue, Impreg®+......................................... 31
Premium System til skjulte terrasseskruer...................... 32
Fibercementskruer....................................................... 33
Gulvskruer.................................................................... 34
Listeskrue..................................................................... 34
Pladeskruer.................................................................. 35
OSB- & spånpladeskrue............................................... 35
Metalpladeskrue.......................................................... 36
Bygge- & konsolskrue, elforzinket.................................. 36
Stålprofilskruer............................................................ 37
Stålprofilskrue, fosfateret / elforzinket............................ 37
Gipsskruer.................................................................... 38
Gipsskrue, High-Low gevind........................................... 38
Gipsskrue, Protec Coating.........................................38, 39
Gipsskrue, fosfateret.................................................39, 41
Gipsskruer, elforzinket ................................................... 40
Hårdgipsskrue, fosfateret............................................... 41
Montageskrue, udegips / elforzinket / Protec Coating..... 42
Montageskrue med borspids, Impreg®+......................... 43 
Vingeborskrue, Protec.................................................... 43
Skruer
Skruer
==PAGE:197==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
16
Beslagskruer
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
CSA4,0X30
CSA4,0X30
1244230
CSA beslagskrue 4,0x30 mm, TX15
250
12
CSA5,0X25
CSA5,0X25
1244256
CSA beslagskrue 5,0x25 mm, TX20
250
12
CSA5,0X35
CSA5,0X35
1244280
CSA beslagskrue 5,0x35 mm, TX20
250
12
CSA5,0X35T
1439922
CSA beslagskrue 5,0x35 mm, båndede (Quik Drive), TX20
1.500
QD båndede
CSA5,0X40
CSA5,0X40
1244295
CSA beslagskrue 5,0x40 mm, TX20
250
12
CSA5,0X40-HV
1267185
CSA beslagskrue 5,0x40 mm, håndværkerspand, TX20
1.500
spand
CSA5,0X40T
1439929
CSA beslagskrue 5,0x40 mm, båndede (Quik Drive), TX20
1.500
QD båndede
CSA5,0X50
CSA5,0X50
1245787
CSA beslagskrue 5,0x50 mm, TX20
250
12
CSA5,0X50T
1440026
CSA beslagskrue 5,0x50 mm, båndede (Quik Drive), TX20
1.000
QD båndede
CSA5,0x80
CSA5,0x80-DE*)
1964716
CSA beslagskrue 5,0x80 mm, TX20
200
- **)
*) Uden fiber-cut spids
CSA beslagskruen er specielt udviklet til at fastgøre stålbeslag til træ. Det glatte skaft under hovedet 
passer til hullet i beslaget. Herved opnås en stærk samling med større tværbæreevne end for stan-
dardskruer. Fibercut spidsen giver en nem og hurtig iskruning.
ETA-04/0013
25 mm - 80 mm
CSA Elforzinket
**) Leveres ikke i omkartoner
CSA-Z Impreg®+ Coating (udendørsbrug)
ETA-04/0013
35 mm - 40 mm
Reference
Best nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
CSA5.0X35PB-R
-
2150442
CSA beslagskrue 5,0x35 mm med sort hoved, TX20
100
15
CSA-PB Elforzinket med sort hoved RAL 9005
ETA-04/0013
35 mm
SC 2
SC 2 RAL
9005
IMPREG
OUTDOOR
SC 3
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Konisk form under hovedet sikrer fuld kontakt med beslaget, 
hvilket øger overførslen af kræfter
•	 Fiber-cut spids
Anvendes til:
•	 Beslag til træ
Solid-Drive
™  
CSA Beslagskrue
Reference 
Best nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
CSA5.0X35Z
CSA5.0X35Z
2056636
Beslagskrue til udendørsbrug 5,0x35 mm, TX20
250
8
CSA5.0X35ZT
2135429
Impreg+ beslagskrue 5,0x35 mm, båndede (Quik Drive), TX20
1.500
QD båndede
CSA5.0X40Z
CSA5.0X40Z
2056635
Beslagskrue til udendørsbrug 5,0x40 mm, TX20
250
8
CSA5.0X40Z-HV
2073842
Beslagskrue til udendørsbrug 5,0x40 mm, håndværkerspand, TX20
1.500
spand
CSA5.0X40ZT
2135430
Impreg+ beslagskrue 5,0x40 mm, båndede (Quik Drive), TX20
1.500
QD båndede
==PAGE:198==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
17
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
CSA5,0X25S
CSA5,0X25S
1244278
Rustfri CSA beslagskruer 5,0x25 mm, rustfri syrefast, A4, TX20
250
12
CSA5,0X35S
CSA5,0X35S
1244285
Rustfri CSA beslagskruer 5,0x35 mm, rustfri syrefast, A4, TX20
250
12
CSA5,0X35ST
1439919
Rustfri CSA beslagskruer 5,0x35 mm, rustfri syrefast, A4 - båndede, TX20
1.500
QD båndede
CSA5,0X40S
CSA5,0X40S
1244304
Rustfri CSA beslagskruer 5,0x40 mm, rustfri syrefast, A4, TX20
250
12
CSA5,0X40ST
1439925
Rustfri CSA beslagskruer 5,0x40 mm, rustfri syrefast, A4 - båndede, TX20
1.500
QD båndede
CSA-S Rustfri syrefast A4
25 mm - 40 mm
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
Beslagskruer
SSF bruges til montage af stålbeslag hvor der kræves en høj last-styrke. Det lave runde hoved er designet med konisk 
skaft til at passe perfekt i boltehullerne i stålbeslagene. De kan bruges i udvendigt normalt miljø. Fiber-cut modvirker revne-
dannelser og fræseribber og savtakket gevind reducerer inddrivningsmomentet. SSF har et rundt fladt hoved med TX-kærv 
og giver et æstetisk forbedret slut-resultat
25 mm - 80 mm
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Fladt rundt hoved
•	 Konisk form under hovedet sikrer fuld kontakt med beslaget, 
hvilket øger overførslen af kræfter
•	 Fræseribbe
•	 Savtakket grovgevind
•	 Fiber-cut spids
Anvendes til:
•	 Beslag til CLT og limtræ
IMPREG
OUTDOOR
SC 3
PT =
Delgevind
PTM =
Delgevind with fræseribbe
FT =
Fuldgevind
G
200
200
Reference 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
SSF8.0X40
75185
2054545
SSF Beslagskrue til CLT og limtræ, 8,0x40, TX40
13
40
8,0
50
8
SSF8.0X60
75186
2054546
SSF Beslagskrue til CLT og limtræ, 8,0x60, TX40
13
60
8,0
50
8
SSF8.0X80
75187
2054547
SSF Beslagskrue til CLT og limtræ, 8,0x80, TX40
13
80
8,0
50
6
SSF10.0X40
75188
2054548
SSF Beslagskrue til CLT og limtræ, 10,0x40, TX40
15
40
10,0
50
8
SSF10.0X60
75189
2054549
SSF Beslagskrue til CLT og limtræ, 10,0x60, TX40
15
60
10,0
50
6
SSF10.0X80
75190
2054550
SSF Beslagskrue til CLT og limtræ, 10,0x80, TX40
15
80
10,0
50
6
SSF Impreg®+ Coating 
Solid-Drive
™  
SSF Beslagskrue til CLT og limtræ
ETA-04/0013
A4
INOX
SEVERE
SC 3
==PAGE:199==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
18
Beslagskruer / konstruktionsskruer 
Anvendes til at fastgøre beslag og geometrien under hovedet på skruen er tilpasset hullet i beslaget, hvilket giver  
optimale lastværdier. Fibercut spidsen minimerer risikoen for at træet flækker og fræseribben på skaftet reducerer  
inddrivningsmomentet. SSH har både TX-recess og hex-hoved hvilket giver flere valg af montageform.
SSH skruer kan erstatte franske skruer i de fleste applikationer hvor disse bruges i dag. Sammenlignet med franske 
skruer giver SSH skruerne op til 20% bedre bæreevneværdier. Kombinationen af Hex+TX giver en nemmere og mere 
fleksibel installation og sammenlignet med franske skruer har SSH et meget lavere indskruningsmoment og installeres 
nemt med en almindelig skruemaskine. Der er desuden ikke behov for at bore for.
SSH Impreg®+ Coating
Reference 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
SSH6.0X40
75128
2054502
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 6,0x40
10
40
6,0
100
8
SSH6.0X50
75129
2054503
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 6,0x50
10
50
6,0
100
8
SSH6.0X60
75130
2054504
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 6,0x60
10
60
6,0
100
8
SSH6.0X75
75131
2054505
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 6,0x75
10
75
6,0
100
6
SSH6.0X90
75132
2054506
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 6,0x90
10
90
6,0
100
6
SSH6.0X120
75133
2054507
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 6,0x120
10
120
6,0
100
4
SSH8.0X40
75134
2054508
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x40
13
40
8,0
50
8
SSH8.0X50
75135
2054509
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x50
13
50
8,0
50
8
SSH8.0X60
75136
2054510
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x60
13
60
8,0
50
8
SSH8.0X80
75137
2054511
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x80
13
80
8,0
50
6
SSH8.0X90
75138
2054512
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x90
13
90
8,0
50
6
SSH8.0X100
75139
2054513
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x100
13
100
8,0
50
6
SSH8.0X120
75140
2054514
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x120
13
120
8,0
50
4
SSH8.0X140
75141
2054515
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x140
13
140
8,0
50
4
SSH8.0X160
75142
2054516
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x160
13
160
8,0
50
4
SSH8.0X180
75143
2054517
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x180
13
180
8,0
50
1
SSH8.0X200
75144
2054518
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x200
13
200
8,0
50
1
SSH8.0X240
75145
2054519
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x240
13
240
8,0
50
1
SSH8.0X260
75146
2054520
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x260
13
260
8,0
50
1
SSH8.0X280
75147
2054521
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x290
13
280
8,0
50
1
SSH8.0X300
75148
2054522
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 8,0x300
13
300
8,0
50
1
SSH 
6,0 mm
40 - 120 mm
40 - 300 mm
G
200
200
SSH 
8,0-12,0 mm
FT = 
Fuldgevind
PTM = 
Delgevind med fræseribbe
PT = 
Delgevind
G
X
Egenskaber:
•	 Hex-hoved med integreret TX-recess
•	 Impreg®+ coating
•	 Fibercut spids
•	 Fræseribbe på skaftet
•	 Kraftigt savtakket gevind
Fordele:
•	 Ingen forboring
•	 Nem iskruning - ca. 20% lavere iskruningsmoment 
end almindelige franske skruer
•	 Optimeret til beslag
•	 Coated til udendørs brug
Anvendes til:
•	 Stål til træ
•	 Træ til træ
IMPREG
OUTDOOR
SC 3
Tabel fortsættes på næste side.
Solid-Drive
™  
SSH Konstruktionsskrue med hex-hoved, Impreg
®+
==PAGE:200==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
19
Reference 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
SSH10.0X40
75149
2054523
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x40
15
40
10,0
50
8
SSH10.0X50
75150
2054524
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x50
15
50
10,0
50
8
SSH10.0X60
75151
5054525
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x60
15
60
10,0
50
6
SSH10.0X80
75152
2054526
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x80
15
80
10,0
50
6
SSH10.0X90
75153
2054527
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x90
15
90
10,0
50
6
SSH10.0X100
75154
2054528
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x100
15
100
10,0
50
4
SSH10.0X120
75155
2054529
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x120
15
120
10,0
50
4
SSH10.0X140
75156
2054530
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x140
15
140
10,0
50
4
SSH10.0X160
75157
2054531
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x160
15
160
10,0
50
4
SSH10.0X180
75158
2054532
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x180
15
180
10,0
50
1
SSH10.0X200
75159
2054533
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x200
15
200
10,0
50
1
SSH10.0X240
75160
2054534
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x240
15
240
10,0
50
1
SSH10.0X280
75161
2054535
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 10,0x280
15
280
10,0
50
1
SSH12.0X60
75162
2054536
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 12,0x60
17
60
12,0
25
8
SSH12.0X80
75163
2054537
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 12,0x80
17
80
12,0
25
6
SSH12.0X90
75164
2054538
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 12,0x90
17
90
12,0
25
6
SSH12.0X100
75165
2054539
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 12,0x100
17
100
12,0
25
4
SSH12.0X120
75166
2054540
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 12,0x120
17
120
12,0
25
4
SSH12.0X140
75167
2054541
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 12,0x140
17
140
12,0
25
4
SSH12.0X160
75168
2054542
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 12,0x160
17
160
12,0
25
4
SSH12.0X180
75169
2054543
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 12,0x180
17
180
12,0
25
4
SSH12.0X200
75170
2054544
Beslagskrue med Hex hoved, Impreg®+, 12,0x200
17
200
12,0
25
1
Beslagskruer / konstruktionsskruer 
==PAGE:201==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
20
Konstruktionsskruer
ESCR er en 6, 8 eller 10 mm diameter skruer med skivehoved, som er designet til at samle to eller flere stykker tømmer. ESCR skruerne 
har en type 17 spids, som griber hurtigt i træet, og en fræseribbe, som sikrer nem og jævn iskruning af skaftet. Det store skivehoved 
sikrer høj gennemtrækningsmodstand og sørger samtidig for at tømmerstykkerne trækkes tæt til hinanden. 
ESCR Konstruktionsskrue, skivehoved
ETA-13/0796
60 mm - 400 mm
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
ESCR6.0x60
1964749
Konstruktionsskrue 6,0x60, gulkromatiseret
6,0
60
-
100
-
ESCR6.0x80
1965708
Konstruktionsskrue 6,0x80, gulkromatiseret
6,0
80
-
100
-
ESCR6.0x100
1965709
Konstruktionsskrue 6,0x100, gulkromatiseret
6,0
100
-
100
-
ESCR6.0x120
1965710
Konstruktionsskrue 6,0x120, gulkromatiseret
6,0
120
-
100
-
ESCR6.0x140
1965711
Konstruktionsskrue 6,0x140, gulkromatiseret
6,0
140
-
100
-
ESCR6.0x160
1965712
Konstruktionsskrue 6,0x160, gulkromatiseret
6,0
160
-
100
-
ESCR6.0x180
1965713
Konstruktionsskrue 6,0x180, gulkromatiseret
6,0
180
-
50
-
ESCR6.0x200
1965714
Konstruktionsskrue 6,0x200, gulkromatiseret
6,0
200
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x80
1806119
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x80, gulkromatiseret
8,0
80
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x100
1806096
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x100, gulkromatiseret
8,0
100
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x120
1806097
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x120, gulkromatiseret
8,0
120
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x140
1806098
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x140, gulkromatiseret
8,0
140
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x160
1806099
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x160, gulkromatiseret
8,0
160
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x180
1806102
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x180, gulkromatiseret
8,0
180
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x200
1712367
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x200, gulkromatiseret
8,0
200
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x220
1712368
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x220, gulkromatiseret
8,0
220
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x240
1712369
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x240, gulkromatiseret
8,0
240
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x260
1712370
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x260, gulkromatiseret
8,0
260
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x280
1712371
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x280, gulkromatiseret
8,0
280
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x300
1712372
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x300, gulkromatiseret
8,0
300
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x320
1806103
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x320, gulkromatiseret
8,0
320
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x340
1806106
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x340, gulkromatiseret
8,0
340
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x360
1806107
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x360, gulkromatiseret
8,0
360
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x380*)
1806110
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x380, gulkromatiseret
8,0
380
-
50
-
ESCR8.0x400
1806112
Konstruktionsskrue 8,0x400, gulkromatiseret
8,0
400
-
50
-
ESCR10.0x100*)
1806070
Konstruktionsskrue 10,0x100, gulkromatiseret
10,0
100
-
25
-
ESCR10.0x120*)
1806071
Konstruktionsskrue 10,0x120, gulkromatiseret
10,0
120
-
25
-
ESCR10.0x140*)
1806072
Konstruktionsskrue 10,0x140, gulkromatiseret
10,0
140
-
25
-
ESCR10.0x160*)
1806073
Konstruktionsskrue 10,0x160, gulkromatiseret
10,0
160
-
25
-
ESCR10.0x200*)
1806077
Konstruktionsskrue 10,0x200, gulkromatiseret
10,0
200
-
25
-
ESCR10.0x220*)
1806082
Konstruktionsskrue 10,0x220, gulkromatiseret
10,0
220
-
25
-
ESCR10.0x260*)
1806084
Konstruktionsskrue 10,0x260, gulkromatiseret
10,0
260
-
25
-
ESCR10.0x280*)
1806085
Konstruktionsskrue 10,0x280, gulkromatiseret
10,0
280
-
25
-
ESCR10.0x320*)
1806088
Konstruktionsskrue 10,0x320, gulkromatiseret
10,0
320
-
25
-
ESCR10.0x340
1806090
Konstruktionsskrue 10,0x340, gulkromatiseret
10,0
340
-
25
-
ESCR10.0x360*)
1806091
Konstruktionsskrue 10,0x360, gulkromatiseret
10,0
360
-
25
-
*) Leveringstid på forespørgsel.  
SC 2
Egenskaber:
•	 Ingen forboring
•	 Skivehoved giver høj gennemtræksstyrke
•	 Fræseribbe på skaftet giver nem iskruning
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
•	 CLT og limtræ
==PAGE:202==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
21
Konstruktionsskruer
ESCRC er en 6, 8 eller 10 mm diameter skrue med undersænket hoved, som er designet til at samle to eller flere stykker tømmer. 
ESCRC skruen har en fræseribbe, som sikrer nem og jævn iskruning af skaftet. Det undersænkede hoved giver en plan afslutning og 
mulighed for tæt montage efterfølgende. 
ESCRC Konstruktionsskrue, undersænket
ETA-13/0796
60 mm - 400 mm
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
ESCRC6.0x60
1806125
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x60, gulkromatiseret
6,0
60
-
200
-
ESCRC6.0x70
1806126
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x70, gulkromatiseret
6,0
70
-
200
-
ESCRC6.0x80
1806127
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x80, gulkromatiseret
6,0
80
-
100
-
ESCRC6.0x90
1712397
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x90, gulkromatiseret
6,0
90
-
100
-
ESCRC6.0x100
1806123
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x100, gulkromatiseret
6,0
100
-
100
-
ESCRC6.0x120
1712386
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x120, gulkromatiseret
6,0
120
-
100
-
ESCRC6.0x140
1712388
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x140, gulkromatiseret
6,0
140
-
100
-
ESCRC6.0x150
1712389
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x150, gulkromatiseret
6,0
150
-
100
-
ESCRC6.0x160
1712390
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x160, gulkromatiseret
6,0
160
-
100
-
ESCRC6.0x180
1712391
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x180, gulkromatiseret
6,0
180
-
100
-
ESCRC6.0x200
1712392
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x200, gulkromatiseret
6,0
200
-
100
-
ESCRC6.0x240
1712393
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x240, gulkromatiseret
6,0
240
-
100
-
ESCRC6.0x280
1712395
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x280, gulkromatiseret
6,0
280
-
100
-
ESCRC6.0x300
1712396
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 6,0x300, gulkromatiseret
6,0
300
-
100
-
ESCRC8.0x80
1806129
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x80, gulkromatiseret
8,0
80
-
50
-
ESCRC8.0x100
1806128
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x100, gulkromatiseret
8,0
100
-
50
-
ESCRC8.0x120
1712399
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x120, gulkromatiseret
8,0
120
-
50
-
ESCRC8.0x140
1712398
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x140, gulkromatiseret
8,0
140
-
50
-
ESCRC8.0x160
1712400
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x160, gulkromatiseret
8,0
160
-
50
-
ESCRC8.0x180
1712401
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x180, gulkromatiseret
8,0
180
-
50
-
ESCRC8.0x200
1712402
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x200, gulkromatiseret
8,0
200
-
50
-
ESCRC8.0x260
1712405
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x260, gulkromatiseret
8,0
260
-
50
-
ESCRC8.0x280
1712406
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x280, gulkromatiseret
8,0
280
-
50
-
ESCRC8.0x300
1712407
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x300, gulkromatiseret
8,0
300
-
50
-
ESCRC8.0x340
1712409
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x340, gulkromatiseret
8,0
340
-
50
-
ESCRC8.0x400
1712413
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 8,0x400, gulkromatiseret
8,0
400
-
50
-
ESCRC10.0x120
1712373
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 10,0x120, gulkromatiseret
10,0
120
-
50
-
ESCRC10.0x140
1806121
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 10,0x140, gulkromatiseret
10,0
140
-
50
-
ESCRC10.0x180
1806122
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 10,0x180, gulkromatiseret
10,0
180
-
50
-
ESCRC10.0x200
1712375
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 10,0x200, gulkromatiseret
10,0
200
-
50
-
ESCRC10.0x240
1712377
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 10,0x240, gulkromatiseret
10,0
240
-
50
-
ESCRC10.0x280
1712379
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 10,0x280, gulkromatiseret
10,0
280
-
50
-
ESCRC10.0x300
1712380
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 10,0x300, gulkromatiseret
10,0
300
-
50
-
ESCRC10.0x320
1712381
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 10,0x320, gulkromatiseret
10,0
320
-
50
-
ESCRC10.0x360
1712383
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 10,0x360, gulkromatiseret
10,0
360
-
50
-
ESCRC10.0x400
1712385
Undersænket, konstruktionsskrue 10,0x400, gulkromatiseret
10,0
400
-
50
-
SC 2
Egenskaber:
•	 Ingen forboring
•	 Undersænket hoved med ribber
•	 Fræseribbe på skaftet giver nem iskruning
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
•	 CLT og limtræ
==PAGE:203==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
22
Konstruktionsskruer
Dobbeltgevind træskrue bruges til lastbærende trækonstruktioner såsom montage af limtræbjælker eller CLT 
elementer, hvor fastgørelsen skal være skjult. Skruen har Protec®+ overfladebelægninger, der er klassificeret C3 og 
giver en stærk og glat overflade. Skruen kan bruges i et beskyttet udendørs miljø. Spidsen giver en god iskruning 
og minimerer risikoen for revner. Forskellen på gevindstigningen sikrer at emnerne trækkes sammen.
Solid-Drive
™  
SWD Konstruktionsskrue, dobbeltgevind
65 mm - 330 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
SWD6.5X65
75425
2055782
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
6,5
65
8,0
50
8
SWD6.5X90
75426
2055783
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
6,5
90
8,0
50
6
SWD6.5X130
75427
2055784
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
6,5
130
8,0
50
4
SWD6.5X160
75428
2055785
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
6,5
160
8,0
50
4
SWD6.5X190
75429
2055786
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
6,5
190
8,0
50
-
SWD6.5X220
75430
2055787
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
6,5
220
10,0
50
-
SWD8.0X90
75431
2055788
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
8,0
90
10,0
50
6
SWD8.0X130
75432
2055789
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
8,0
130
10,0
50
4
SWD8.0X160
75433
2055790
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
8,0
160
10,0
50
4
SWD8.0X190
75434
2055791
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
8,0
190
10,0
50
-
SWD8.0X220
75435
2055792
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
8,0
220
10,0
50
-
SWD8.0X245
75436
2055793
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
8,0
245
10,0
50
-
SWD8.0X275
75437
2055794
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
8,0
275
10,0
50
-
SWD8.0X300
75438
2055795
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
8,0
300
10,0
50
-
SWD8.0X330
75439
2055796
Træskrue med dobbeltgevind
8,0
330
10,0
50
-
GX
OUTDOOR
SC 2
GX
Egenskaber:
•	 Cylindrisk hoved
•	 Dobbeltgevind
•	 Mejselspids
•	 Protec®+ coating
Anvendes til: 
•	 Træ til træ
•	 CLT og limtræ
SWD Protec+ Coating
==PAGE:204==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
23
ESCRFTC / ESCRFTZ med fuldgevind anvendes til at samle 2 stykker tømmer til hinanden 
uden forboring. Konstruktionsskruen findes både med undersænket hoved (C) og cylinder 
hoved (Z).
140 mm - 240 mm
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
ESCRFTC8.0x140
1965717
Konstruktionsskrue C, fuldgevind 8,0x140
8,0
140
-
50
-
ESCRFTC8.0x160
1965718
Konstruktionsskrue C, fuldgevind 8,0x160
8,0
160
-
50
-
ESCRFTC8.0x180
1965719
Konstruktionsskrue C, fuldgevind 8,0x180
8,0
180
-
50
-
ESCRFTC8.0x200
1965720
Konstruktionsskrue C, fuldgevind 8,0x200
8,0
200
-
50
-
ESCRFTC8.0x240
1965721
Konstruktionsskrue C, fuldgevind 8,0x240
8,0
240
-
50
-
*) Kan leveres i andre størrelser på forespørgsel.  
ETA-13/0796
GX
Konstruktionsskruer
SC 2
ESCRFTC Gulkromatiseret
Egenskaber:
•	 Ingen forboring
•	 Fuldgevind giver høj udtræksstyrke
•	 Cylinder- eller undersænket hoved sikrer pæn og skjult samling
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
•	 CLT og limtræ
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
ESCRFTZ8.0X120
1965722
Konstruktionsskrue Z, fuldgevind 8,0x120
8,0
120
-
50
-
ESCRFTZ8.0X140
1965723
Konstruktionsskrue Z, fuldgevind 8,0x140
8,0
140
-
50
-
ESCRFTZ8.0X160
1965724
Konstruktionsskrue Z, fuldgevind 8,0x160
8,0
160
-
50
-
ESCRFTZ8.0X200
1965725
Konstruktionsskrue Z, fuldgevind 8,0x200
8,0
200
-
50
-
ESCRFTZ8.0X240
1965726
Konstruktionsskrue Z, fuldgevind 8,0x240
8,0
240
-
50
-
*) Kan leveres i andre størrelser på forespørgsel.  
ESCRFTZ Gulkromatiseret
120 mm - 240 mm
ETA-13/0796
SC 2
Solid-Drive
™  
ESCRFTC / ESCRFTZ Konstruktionsskrue, 
fuldgevind
==PAGE:205==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
24
SDW træskruer installeres uden forboring og er dermed velegnede til hurtig fastgørelse af dobbeltspær, da der 
kun skal skrues fra den ene side. Skruernes høje forskydningsstyrke tillader større afstand imellem skruerne, og 
det flade lav-profil hoved gør skruen nem at håndtere og installere.
68-171 mm
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. ks.
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
SDW22258-R50E
2054434
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x68 mm
8,0
68
19,4
50
6
SDW22300-R50E
2054441
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x76 mm
8,0
76
19,4
50
6
SDW22338-R50E
1865763
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x86 mm
8,0
86
19,4
50
6
SDW22438-R50E
2054444
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x111 mm
8,0
111
19,4
50
4
SDW22458-R50E
2054457
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x118 mm
8,0
118
19,4
50
4
SDW22500-R50E
2054467
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x127 mm
8,0
127
19,4
50
4
SDW22600-R50E
2054551
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x152 mm
8,0
152
19,4
50
4
SDW22634-R50E
2054554
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x172 mm
8,0
171
19,4
50
4
SDW22638-R50E
2054555
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x162 mm
8,0
162
19,4
50
4
EN 14592
X
.
X
X
W
2
2
Konstruktionsskruer
SDWS konstruktionsskruer til udendørs brug installeres uden forboring. Den patenterede spids sikrer at skruen 
hurtigt bider sig fast i træet og der er på ingen måde grund til at bore for. Skruens grove gevind giver en høj 
udtræksstyrke og det store lavprofilerede skivehoved betyder at man ikke behøver underlagsskiver.
75-252 mm
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. ks.
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
SDWS08X75DB
2066741
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x75
8,0
75
19.4
50
6
SDWS08X100DB
2066736
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x100
8,0
100
19.4
50
6
SDWS08X126DB
2066737
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x126
8,0
126
19.4
50
6
SDWS08X151DB
2066738
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x151
8,0
151
19.4
50
6
SDWS08X202DB
2066739
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x202
8,0
202
19.4
50
6
SDWS08X252DB
2066740
Konstruktionsskrue, fladt hoved, 8,0x252
8,0
252
19.4
50
6
EN 14592
SC 2
OUTDOOR
SC 3
SDW E-coat
SDWS Double Barrier Coating
Egenskaber:
•	 Fladt hoved som muliggør at elementer kan skubbes helt tæt
•	 Grovgevind giver høj styrke
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Egenskaber:
•	 Fladt hoved som muliggør at elementer kan skubbes helt tæt
•	 Grovgevind giver høj styrke
•	 Coated til udendørs brug
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Solid-Drive
™  
SDW Konstruktionsskrue, skivehoved
Solid-Drive
™  
SDWS Konstruktionsskrue, udendørs
==PAGE:206==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
25
Træskruer
Undersænket træskrue med Impreg®+ overflade anvendes udendørs. Fiber-cut spids sikrer at skruen bider 
i træet. Bits medfølger i kassen. Skruer på 80 mm eller længere er udstyret med fræseribbe på skaftet som 
reducerer indrivningsmomentet.
16 mm - 180 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
TTZNFS3,5x16*)
74476
1949971
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 3,5x16 mm TX15 FT
3,5
16
7,0
200
8
TTZNFS3,5x20*)
74477
1949972
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 3,5x20 mm TX15 FT
3,5
20
7,0
200
8
TTZNFS3,5x30*)
74478
1949973
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 3,5x30 mm TX15 FT
3,5
30
7,0
200
8
TTZNFS4,0x20*)
74479
1949974
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 4,0x20 mm TX20 FT
4,0
20
8,0
200
8
TTZNFS4,0x30*)
74480
1949975
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 4,0x30 mm TX20 FT
4,0
30
8,0
200
8
TTZNFS4,5x25
74481
1949976
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 4,5x25 mm TX20 FT
4,5
25
9,0
200
8
TTZNFS4,5x30
74482
1949977
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 4,5x30 mm TX20 FT
4,5
30
9,0
200
8
TTZNFS4,5x40
74483
1949978
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 4,5x40 mm TX20 PT
4,5
40
9,0
200
8
TTZNFS4,5x50
74484
1949979
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 4,5x50 mm TX20 PT
4,5
50
9,0
200
8
TTZNFS4,5x60
74485
1949980
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 4,5x60 mm TX20 PT
4,5
60
9,0
200
8
TTZNFS4,5x70
74486
1949981
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 4,5x70 mm TX20 PT
4,5
70
9,0
100
8
TTZNFS5,0x50
74489
1949984
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 5,0x50 mm TX25 PT
5,0
50
10,0
200
8
TTZNFS5,0x60
74490
1949985
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 5,0x60 mm TX25 PT
5,0
60
10,0
200
8
TTZNFS5,0x70
74491
1949986
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 5,0x70 mm TX25 PT
5,0
70
10,0
100
8
74492
1949987
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 5,0x70 mm TX25 PT
5,0
70
10,0
750
-
TTZNFS5,0x80
74493
1949988
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 5,0x80 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
80
10,0
100
6
74494
1949989
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 5,0x80 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
80
10,0
650
-
TTZNFS5,0x90
74495
1949990
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 5,0x90 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
90
10,0
100
6
74496
1949991
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 5,0x90 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
90
10,0
450
-
TTZNFS5,0x100
74487
1949982
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 5,0x100 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
100
10,0
100
6
74510
1950005
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 5,0x100 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
100
10,0
450
-
TTZNFS5,0x120
74488
1949983
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 5,0x120 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
120
10,0
100
4
TTZNFS6,0x60
74504
1949999
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x60 mm TX30 PT
6,0
60
12,0
200
-
TTZNFS6,0x70
74505
1950000
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x70 mm TX30 PT
6,0
70
12,0
100
-
TTZNFS6,0x80
74506
1950001
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x80 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
80
12,0
100
6
74507
1950002
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x80 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
80
12,0
450
-
TTZNFS6,0x90
74508
1950003
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x90 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
90
12,0
100
6
74509
1950004
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x90 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
90
12,0
450
-
TTZNFS6,0x100
74497
1949992
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x100 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
100
12,0
100
6
74498
1949993
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x100 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
100
12,0
300
-
TTZNFS6,0x120
74499
1949994
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x120 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
120
12,0
100
4
74500
1949995
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x120 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
120
12,0
250
-
TTZNFS6,0x140
74501
1949996
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x140 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
140
12,0
100
4
TTZNFS6,0x160
74502
1949997
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x160 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
160
12,0
100
4
TTZNFS6,0x180
74503
1949998
Træskrue IMPREG+ C4 6,0x180 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
180
12,0
100
4
G X
FT = 
Fuldgevind
PT = 
Delgevind
PTM = 
Delgevind m. 
fræseribbe
IMPREG
OUTDOOR
SC 3
TTZNFS Impreg®+ Coating
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Undersænket hoved sikrer en pæn samling
•	 Savtakket fiber-cut spids
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Solid-Drive
™  
TTZNFS Træskrue, Impreg
®+
*) ikke CE-mærkede
==PAGE:207==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
26
Træskruer
De undersænkede træskruer har en unik hovedform som sikrer at skruen sænkes godt ned i træet. 
Bits medfølger i kassen. Skruer på 80 mm eller længere er udstyret med fræseribbe på skaftet som 
reducerer indrivningsmomentet.
16 mm - 180 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
TTUFS3,0x16*
74414
1949909
Træskrue elforzinket 3,0x16 mm TX10 FT
3,0
16
6,0
200
8
TTUFS3,0x20*
74415
1949910
Træskrue elforzinket 3,0x20 mm TX10 FT
3,0
20
6,0
200
8
TTUFS3,0x25*
74416
1949911
Træskrue elforzinket 3,0x25 mm TX10 FT
3,0
25
6,0
200
8
TTUFS3,0x30*
74417
1949912
Træskrue elforzinket 3,0x30 mm TX10 FT
3,0
30
6,0
200
8
TTUFS3,5x16*
74418
1949913
Træskrue elforzinket 3,5x16 mm TX15 FT
3,5
16
7,0
200
8
TTUFS3,5x20*
74419
1949914
Træskrue elforzinket 3,5x20 mm TX15 FT
3,5
20
7,0
200
8
TTUFS3,5x25*
74420
1949915
Træskrue elforzinket 3,5x25 mm TX15 FT
3,5
25
7,0
200
8
TTUFS3,5x30*
74421
1949916
Træskrue elforzinket 3,5x30 mm TX15 FT
3,5
30
7,0
200
8
TTUFS3,5x35*
74422
1949917
Træskrue elforzinket 3,5x35 mm TX15 FT
3,5
35
7,0
200
8
TTUFS3,5x40*
74423
1949918
Træskrue elforzinket 3,5x40 mm TX15 FT
3,5
40
7,0
200
8
TTUFS3,5x50*
74424
1949919
Træskrue elforzinket 3,5x50 mm TX15 PT
3,5
50
7,0
200
8
TTUFS4,0x20*
74425
1949920
Træskrue elforzinket 4,0x20 mm TX20 FT
4,0
20
8,0
200
8
TTUFS4,0x25*
74426
1949921
Træskrue elforzinket 4,0x25 mm TX20 FT
4,0
25
8,0
200
8
TTUFS4,0x30
74427
1949922
Træskrue elforzinket 4,0x30 mm TX20 FT
4,0
30
8,0
200
8
TTUFS4,0x35*
74428
1949923
Træskrue elforzinket 4,0x35 mm TX20 FT
4,0
35
8,0
200
8
TTUFS4,0x40*
74429
1949924
Træskrue elforzinket 4,0x40 mm TX20 FT
4,0
40
8,0
200
8
TTUFS4,0x45*
74430
1949925
Træskrue elforzinket 4,0x45 mm TX20 PT
4,0
45
8,0
200
8
TTUFS4,0x50*
74431
1949926
Træskrue elforzinket 4,0x50 mm TX20 PT
4,0
50
8,0
200
8
TTUFS4,0x60*
74432
1949927
Træskrue elforzinket 4,0x60 mm TX20 PT
4,0
60
8,0
200
8
TTUFS4,0x70*
74433
1949928
Træskrue elforzinket 4,0x70 mm TX20 PT
4,0
70
8,0
100
8
TTUFS4,5x25
74434
1949929
Træskrue elforzinket 4,5x25 mm TX20 FT
4,5
25
9,0
200
8
TTUFS4,5x30
74435
1949930
Træskrue elforzinket 4,5x30 mm TX20 FT
4,5
30
9,0
200
8
TTUFS4,5x35
74436
1949931
Træskrue elforzinket 4,5x35 mm TX20 FT
4,5
35
9,0
200
8
TTUFS4,5x40
74437
1949932
Træskrue elforzinket 4,5x40 mm TX20 FT
4,5
40
9,0
200
8
TTUFS4,5x45
74438
1949933
Træskrue elforzinket 4,5x45 mm TX20 PT
4,5
45
9,0
200
8
TTUFS4,5x50
74439
1949935
Træskrue elforzinket 4,5x50 mm TX20 PT
4,5
50
9,0
200
8
TTUFS4,5x60
74440
1949936
Træskrue elforzinket 4,5x60 mm TX20 PT
4,5
60
9,0
200
8
TTUFS4,5x70
74441
1949937
Træskrue elforzinket 4,5x70 mm TX20 PT
4,5
70
9,0
100
8
TTUFS4,5x80
74442
1949938
Træskrue elforzinket 4,5x80 mm TX20 PTM
4,5
80
9,0
100
6
TTUFS5,0x30
74373
1949941
Træskrue elforzinket 5,0x30 mm TX25 FT
5,0
30
10,0
200
8
TTUFS5,0x40
74374
1949942
Træskrue elforzinket 5,0x40 mm TX25 FT
5,0
40
10,0
200
8
TTUFS5,0x50
74375
1949943
Træskrue elforzinket 5,0x50 mm TX25 PT
5,0
50
10,0
200
8
*) ikke CE-mærkede
Fortsættes på næste side.
G
FT = 
Fuldgevind
PT = 
Delgevind
PTM = 
Delgevind m. 
fræseribbe
INDOOR
SC 1
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Undersænket hoved sikrer en pæn samling
•	 Fiber-cut spids
•	 Savtakket gevind på spidsen
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Solid-Drive
™  
TTUFS Træskrue, elforzinket
==PAGE:208==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
27
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
TTUFS5,0x60
74376
1949944
Træskrue elforzinket 5,0x60 mm TX25 PT
5,0
60
10,0
200
8
TTUFS5,0x70
74377
1949945
Træskrue elforzinket 5,0x70 mm TX25 PT
5,0
70
10,0
100
8
TTUFS5,0x80
74378
1949946
Træskrue elforzinket 5,0x80 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
80
10,0
100
6
TTUFS5,0x90
74379
1949947
Træskrue elforzinket 5,0x90 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
90
10,0
100
6
TTUFS5,0x100
74443
1949939
Træskrue elforzinket 5,0x100 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
100
10,0
100
6
TTUFS5,0x120
74372
1949940
Træskrue elforzinket 5,0x120 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
120
10,0
100
4
TTUFS6,0x40
74455
1949953
Træskrue elforzinket 6,0x40 mm TX30 FT
6,0
40
12,0
200
8
TTUFS6,0x50
74457
1949954
Træskrue elforzinket 6,0x50 mm TX30 PT
6,0
50
12,0
200
6
TTUFS6,0x60
74458
1949955
Træskrue elforzinket 6,0x60 mm TX30 PT
6,0
60
12,0
200
6
TTUFS6,0x70
74459
1949956
Træskrue elforzinket 6,0x70 mm TX30 PT
6,0
70
12,0
100
8
TTUFS6,0x80
74460
1949957
Træskrue elforzinket 6,0x80 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
80
12,0
100
6
TTUFS6,0x90
74461
1949958
Træskrue elforzinket 6,0x90 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
90
12,0
100
6
TTUFS6,0x100
74380
1949948
Træskrue elforzinket 6,0x100 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
100
12,0
100
6
TTUFS6,0x120
74451
1949949
Træskrue elforzinket 6,0x120 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
120
12,0
100
4
TTUFS6,0x140
74452
1949950
Træskrue elforzinket 6,0x140 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
140
12,0
100
4
TTUFS6,0x160
74453
1949951
Træskrue elforzinket 6,0x160 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
160
12,0
100
4
TTUFS6,0x180
74454
1949952
Træskrue elforzinket 6,0x180 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
180
12,0
100
4
Træskruer
Træskrue rustfri syrefast A4 anvendes i krævende udendørs miljøer. Skruen har TX-recess som sikrer bedre 
greb samt fiber-cut spids som gør at skruen bider bedre i træet. Bits medfølger i kassen.
Skruer på 80 mm eller længere er udstyret med fræserribbe på skaftet som reducerer iskruningsmomentet.
60 mm - 140 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
TTSFS5,0x60
74446
1949961
Træskrue syrefast A4 5,0x60 mm TX25 PT
5,0
60
5.0 
100
8
TTSFS5,0x70
74447
1949962
Træskrue syrefast A4 5,0x70 mm TX25 PT
5,0
70
5.0 
100
8
TTSFS5,0x80
74448
1949963
Træskrue syrefastA4 5,0x80 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
80
5.0 
100
6
TTSFS5,0x90
74449
1949964
Træskrue syrefast A4 5,0x90 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
90
5.0 
100
6
TTSFS5,0x100
74444
1949959
Træskrue syrefast A4 5,0x100 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
100
5.0 
100
6
TTSFS5,0x120
74445
1949960
Træskrue syrefast A4 5,0x120 mm TX25 PTM
5,0
120
5.0 
100
4
TTSFS6,0x70
74473
1949968
Træskrue syrefast A4 6,0x70 mm TX30 PT
6,0
70
6.0 
100
8
TTSFS6,0x80
74474
1949969
Træskrue syrefast A4 6,0x80 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
80
6.0 
100
6
TTSFS6,0x90
74475
1949970
Træskrue syrefast A4 6,0x90 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
90
6.0 
100
6
TTSFS6,0x100
74450
1949965
Træskrue syrefast A4 6,0x100 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
100
6.0 
100
6
TTSFS6,0x120
74471
1949966
Træskrue syrefast A4 6,0x120 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
120
6.0 
100
4
TTSFS6,0x140
74472
1949967
Træskrue syrefast A4 6,0x140 mm TX30 PTM
6,0
140
6.0 
100
4
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
G
PT = 
Delgevind
PTM = 
Delgevind 
med fræseribbe
A4
INOX
SEVERE
SC 3
TTSFS Rustfri syrefast A4
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Undersænket hoved sikrer en pæn samling
•	 Fiber-cut spids
•	 Savtakket gevind på spidsen
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Solid-Drive
™  
TTSFS Træskrue, rustfri syrefast A4
==PAGE:209==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
28
Træskruer
Pan træskrue med TX-recess for bedre greb samt fiber-cut spids. Skruen er 
udstyret med fræseribbe på skaftet som reducerer indrivningsmomentet. Bits 
medfølger i kassen.
15 mm - 100 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
TTUFP3,0x15*
74511
1950006
Træskrue Pan elforz 3,0x15 mm TX10 FT
3,0
15
6,0
200
8
TTUFP3,5x15*
74512
1950007
Træskrue Pan elforz 3,5x15 mm TX15 FT
3,5
15
7,0
200
8
TTUFP3,0x20*
74513
1950008
Træskrue Pan elforz 3,0x20 mm TX10 FT
3,0
20
6,0
200
8
TTUFP3,5x20*
74514
1950009
Træskrue Pan elforz 3,5x20 mm TX15 FT
3,5
20
7,0
200
8
TTUFP3,5x25*
74515
1950010
Træskrue Pan elforz 3,5x25 mm TX15 FT
3,5
25
7,0
200
8
TTUFP3,5x30*
74517
1950011
Træskrue Pan elforz 3,5x30 mm TX15 FT
3,5
30
7,0
200
8
TTUFP4,0x15*
74518
1950012
Træskrue Pan elforz 4,0x15 mm TX20 FT
4,0
15
8,0
200
8
TTUFP4,0x20*
74519
1950013
Træskrue Pan elforz 4,0x20 mm TX20 FT
4,0
20
8,0
200
8
TTUFP4,0x25*
74520
1950014
Træskrue Pan elforz 4,0x25 mm TX20 FT
4,0
25
8,0
200
8
TTUFP4,0x30*
74521
1950015
Træskrue Pan elforz 4,0x30 mm TX20 FT
4,0
30
8,0
200
8
TTUFP4,0x35*
74522
1950016
Træskrue Pan elforz 4,0x35 mm TX20 FT
4,0
35
8,0
200
8
TTUFP4,0x40*
74523
1950017
Træskrue Pan elforz 4,0x40 mm TX20 FT
4,0
40
8,0
200
8
TTUFP4,0x50*
74524
1950018
Træskrue Pan elforz 4,0x50 mm TX20 PT
4,0
50
8,0
200
8
TTUFP5,0x30
74525
1950019
Træskrue Pan elforz 5,0x30 mm TX25 FT
5,0
30
10,0
200
8
TTUFP5,0x40
74526
1950020
Træskrue Pan elforz 5,0x40 mm TX25 FT
5,0
40
10,0
200
8
TTUFP5,0x50
74527
1950021
Træskrue Pan elforz 5,0x50 mm TX25 PT
5,0
50
10,0
200
8
TTUFP5,0x60
74528
1950022
Træskrue Pan elforz 5,0x60 mm TX25 PT
5,0
60
10,0
200
8
TTUFP5,0x70
74529
1950023
Træskrue Pan elforz 5,0x70 mm TX25 PT
5,0
70
10,0
100
8
TTUFP5,0x80
74530
1950024
Træskrue Pan elforz 5,0x80 mm TX25 PT
5,0
80
10,0
100
6
TTUFP6,0x40
74532
1950026
Træskrue Pan elforz 6,0x40 mm TX30 FT
6,0
40
12,0
200
8
TTUFP6,0x50
74533
1950027
Træskrue Pan elforz 6,0x50 mm TX30 PT
6,0
50
12,0
200
6
TTUFP6,0x60
74534
1950028
Træskrue Pan elforz 6,0x60 mm TX30 PT
6,0
60
12,0
200
6
TTUFP6,0x70
74535
1950029
Træskrue Pan elforz 6,0x70 mm TX30 PT
6,0
70
12,0
100
8
TTUFP6,0x80
74536
1950030
Træskrue Pan elforz 6,0x80 mm TX30 PT
6,0
80
12,0
100
6
TTUFP6,0x100
74531
1950025
Træskrue Pan elforz 6,0x100 mm TX30 PT
6,0
100
12,0
100
6
*) ikke CE-mærkede
G X
FT = 
Fuldgevind
PT = 
Delgevind
PTM = 
Delgevind 
med fræseribbe
INDOOR
SC 1
TTUFP Elforzinket
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Pan hoved
•	 Fiber-cut spids
•	 Savtakket gevind på spidsen
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Solid-Drive
™  
TTUFP Træskrue pan, elforzinket
==PAGE:210==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
29
Træskruer
Pan træskrue med TX-recess for bedre greb samt fiber-cut spids med Impreg®+ overflade anvendes udendørs. 
Bits medfølger i kassen. Skruer på 70 mm eller længere er udstyret med fræseribbe på skaftet som reducerer 
indrivningsmomentet.
30 mm - 100 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
TTZNFP4,0x30*
74537
1950031
Træskrue Pan IMPREG+ C4 4,0x30 mm TX20 FT
4,0
30
8,0
200
8
TTZNFP4,0x40*
74538
1950032
Træskrue Pan IMPREG+ C4 4,0x40 mm TX20 FT
4,0
40
8,0
200
8
TTZNFP4,0x50*
74539
1950033
Træskrue Pan IMPREG+ C4 4,0x50 mm TX20 PT
4,0
50
8,0
200
8
TTZNFP5,0x40
74540
1950034
Træskrue Pan IMPREG+ C4 5,0x40 mm TX25 FT
5,0
40
10,0
200
8
TTZNFP5,0x50
74541
1950035
Træskrue Pan IMPREG+ C4 5,0x50 mm TX25 FT
5,0
50
10,0
200
8
TTZNFP5,0x60
74542
1950036
Træskrue Pan IMPREG+ C4 5,0x60 mm TX25 FT
5,0
60
10,0
200
8
TTZNFP5,0x70
74543
1950037
Træskrue Pan IMPREG+ C4 5,0x70 mm TX25 FT
5,0
70
10,0
100
8
TTZNFP5,0x80
74544
1950038
Træskrue Pan IMPREG+ C4 5,0x80 mm TX25 FT
5,0
80
10,0
100
6
TTZNFP6,0x60
74546
1950040
Træskrue Pan IMPREG+ C4 6,0x60 mm TX30 FT
6,0
60
12,0
200
6
TTZNFP6,0x80
74547
1950041
Træskrue Pan IMPREG+ C4 6,0x80 mm TX30 FT
6,0
80
12,0
100
6
TTZNFP6,0x100
74545
1950039
Træskrue Pan IMPREG+ C4 6,0x100 mm TX30 FT
6,0
100
12,0
100
6
*) ikke CE-mærkede
FT = 
Fuldgevind
PT = 
Delgevind
IMPREG
OUTDOOR
SC 3
TTZNFP Impreg®+ Coating
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Pan hoved
•	 Fiber-cut spids
•	 Savtakket gevind på spidsen
•	 Coated til udendørs brug
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
•	 Stål til træ
Solid-Drive
™  
TTZNFP Træskrue pan, Impreg
®+
==PAGE:211==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
30
Terrasseskruer
Rustfri syrefast terasseskrue er velegnet til montage af udendørs terrassebrædder og i brædder i ædeltræ. 
Skruen har TX-recess som sikrer et stærkt greb samt fiber-cut spids som sikrer et bedre bid i træet. Bits 
medfølger i kassen.
35 mm - 75 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
TTFA44,2x35
74385
1949880
Terasseskrue syrefast A4 4,2x35 mm TX20
4,2
35
7,0
250
8
TTFA44,2x45
74386
1949881
Terasseskrue syrefast A4 4,2x45 mm TX20
4,2
45
7,0
250
8
TTFA44,2x55
74387
1949882
Terasseskrue syrefast A4 4,2x55 mm TX20
4,2
55
7,0
250
8
TTFA44,8x75
74389
1949884
Terasseskrue syrefast A4 4,8x75 mm TX20
4,8
75
7,0
100
8
Terrasseskrue Impreg®X4 er velegnet til montage af trykimprægnerede terrassebrædder. Skruen har TX-recess 
som sikrer et stærkt greb samt fiber-cut spids som sikrer et bedre bid i træet. Bits medfølger i kassen.
35 mm - 75 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
DSIX4,2x35
74361
1949819
Terasseskrue Impreg®x4, C4 4,2x35 mm TX20
4,2
35
7,0
250
8
DSIX4,2x45
74362
1949820
Terasseskrue Impreg®x4, C4 4,2x45 mm TX20
4,2
45
7,0
400
8
DSIX4,2x55
74363
1949821
Terasseskrue Impreg®x4, C4 4,2x55 mm TX20
4,2
55
7,0
350
8
DSIX4,2x75
74365
1949823
Terasseskrue Impreg®x4, C4 4,2x75 mm TX20
4,2
75
7,0
300
8
A4
A4
A4
A4
G
A4
INOX
SEVERE
SC 3
IMPREG
OUTDOOR
SC 3
TTFA4 Rustfri syrefast A4
DSIX Impreg®X4 Coating
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Lille undersænket hoved giver en pæn samling
•	 Grovgevind giver høj styrke
•	 Fiber-cut spids
Anvendes til:
•	 Terrassebrædder på træ
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Lille undersænket hoved giver en pæn samling
•	 Grovgevind giver høj styrke
•	 Fiber-cut spids
Anvendes til:
•	 Trykimprægnerede terrassebrædder på træ
Deck-Drive
™ 
TTFA4 Terrasseskrue, rustfri syrefast A4
Deck-Drive
™ 
DSIX4 Terrasseskrue, Impreg® X4
==PAGE:212==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
31
DSPROA4 Syrefast A4
50 - 80 mm
G
A4
A4
A4
A4
DSPROA4 terasseskrue er designet til montage af hårdt træ terassebrædder som Ipé, Bankirai, Jatoba, 
Cumaro etc. Kan anvendes i kystnære miljøer med megen  fugt- og salt-påvirkning. Der anbefales at forbore i 
hårdttræsbrædder med 4 mm trinbor.
Reference
Best. nr. DB nr.
Beskrivelse 
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal  
ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
DSPROA45,5x50
74287
1949805
Terrasseskrue DSPROA4 5,5x50, syrefast A4, TX25
6,5
50
5,5
150
6
DSPROA45,5x60
74288
1949806
Terrasseskrue DSPROA4 5,5x60, syrefast A4, TX25
6,5
60
5,5
150
6
DSPROA45,5x70
74289
1949807
Terrasseskrue DSPROA4 5,5x70, syrefast A4, TX25
6,5
70
5,5
150
6
DSPROA45,5x80
74290
1949808
Terrasseskrue DSPROA4 5,5x80, syrefast A4, TX25
6,5
80
5,5
150
6
Terrasseskruer / Beklædningsskruer
A4
INOX
SEVERE
SC 3
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Dobbeltgevind
•	 Spadeformet spids
Anvendes til:
•	 Hårdttræ terrassebrædder til træ
Deck-Drive
™ 
DSPROA4 Hårdttræ terrasseskrue, rustfri syrefast A4
Velegnet for udendørs træ beklædning. Det flade hoved med fiber-lock teknologi beskytter træet mod fugtighed 
og dobbelt gevind sikrer effektiv montage selv i træ med høj densitet uden risiko for overskruning.
CLSZN Beklædningsskrue, Impreg®+
48 mm - 65 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
CLSZN4.8X48
75460
2055816
Beklædningsskrue, Impreg®+
4,8
48
8
250
8
CLSZN48E
-
2135414
Beklædningsskrue, Impreg®+, båndede (Quik Drive)
4,8
48
8
1.000
QD båndede
CLSZN4.8X65
75462
2055818
Beklædningsskrue, Impreg®+
4,8
65
8
250
6
CLSZN65E
-
2135421
Beklædningsskrue, Impreg®+, båndede (Quik Drive)
4,8
65
8
1.000
QD båndede
G
65
65
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Fladt hoved med fiberlock undersænkning
•	 Dobbeltgevind
•	 Ekstrem smidighed
Anvendes til:
•	 Træbeklædning på træ
IMPREG
OUTDOOR
SC 3
CLSZN Impreg®+ Coating
Deck-Drive
™ 
==PAGE:213==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
32
EB-TY® Premium er Simpson Strong-Tie’s system til skjult terrasseskruemontage. Systemet består af sorte 
polymer-beslag som er forstærket med rustfrit stål som fastgøres i en forskåret slids i terrassebrædderne, 
med de medfølgende rustfrie skruer. Montagen er simpel med den medfølgende EB-GUIDE boreskabelon.
EB-TY® Premium System til  
montage af skjulte terrasseskruer
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
L
D
EB332WD316R175
1967261
EB-TY system til 2,4 mm bræddeafstand
59
25
1 kit
-
EB14WD316R175
1967262
EB-TY system til 6,4 mm bræddeafstand
59
25
1 kit
-
EB-TY Premium
A4
A4
Indhold i kassen: 
•	 175 EB-TY® beslag
•	 190 rustfri syrefaste skruer (A4)
•	 12 træ-plugs
•	 EB-GUIDE boreskabelon
•	 Bor 
•	 TX-bits  
A4
INOX
SEVERE
SC 3
Terrasseskruer, skjulte
EB-
GUIDE
Pat. Pending
Bjælke
Terrasse-
bræt
EB-GUIDE
boreskabelon
Not
Forbor med det 
medfølgende bor
Fastgør den første
brædde til rammen
med medfølgende
skruer og propper.
EB-TY
®
Bjælke
Terrasse-
bræt
EB-TY
®  Premium 
beslag
Not
Skjul skruer med
de medfølgende
Ipê propper
Fastgør skruen
gennem beslaget
i det forborede hul
==PAGE:214==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
33
Skruer til montering af fibercementpaneler. Fås både som fladbåndede og Quik Drive båndede (se side 125). 
Skruen kan bruges til montage af fibercementplader til træ eller til stål med en tykkelse op til 1 mm. Skruen har 
‘Twin-Thread’ gevind til hurtig iskruning samt et relativt lille hoved med ribber i bunden, som sikrer udsparing i 
pladen uden at skabe et ‘stød’ omkring hovedet under montering.
FBCB / FBCS Fibercementskrue, båndede
25 mm - 35 mm
IMPREG
OUTDOOR
SC 3
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
FBCS3.9X25
75719
2056066
Fibercementskrue, båndede 3,9x25 mm
3,9
25
6,8
1.000
8
FBCS3.9X35
75720
2056067
Fibercementskrue, båndede 3,9x35 mm
3,9
35
6,8
1.000
8
FBCS Impreg®+ Coating, Fladbåndet
IMPREG
OUTDOOR
SC 3
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
FBCB3.9X25
75721
2056068
Fibercementskrue, fladbåndede 3,9x25 mm
3,9
25
6,8
1.000
8
FBCB Impreg®+ Coating, Fladbåndet
X
25 mm - 35 mm
G
Fibercementskruer
Egenskaber:
•	 PH-recess
•	 Undersænket hoved med ribber
•	 Skarp- eller borspids
•	 Fladbåndede og Quik Drive båndede
Anvendes til:
•	 Fibrecement til stål eller træ
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
FBCB25E
-
2135410
Fibercementskrue, båndede 3,9x25 mm, båndede (Quik Drive)
3,9
25
6,8
2.500
båndede
FBCB35E
-
2135411
Fibercementskrue, båndede 3,9x35 mm, båndede (Quik Drive)
3,9
35
6,8
2.500
båndede
FBCB Impreg®+ Coating, Båndet til Quik Drive
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
FBCS25E
-
2135407
Fibercementskrue, båndede 3,9x25 mm, båndede (Quik Drive)
3,9
25
6,8
2.500
båndede
FBCS35E
-
2135408
Fibercementskrue, båndede 3,9x35 mm, båndede (Quik Drive)
3,9
35
6,8
2.500
båndede
FBCS45E
-
2135409
Fibercementskrue, båndede 3,9x45 mm, båndede (Quik Drive)
3,9
45
6,8
2.000
båndede
FBCS Impreg®+ Coating, Båndet til Quik Drive
==PAGE:215==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
34
Gulvskruer / listeskruer
Gulvskrue som er specielt anvendelig i trægulve af massive træsorter som f.eks. eg. Skruen 
kan også anvendes til montage af lister og sokler i træ- eller stålreglar. Bits medfølger i kassen.
LTSFH / LTSF Gulvskrue
42 mm - 57 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
LTSFH4,2x42
74369
1949871
Gulvskrue gulkromat 4,2x42 mm, TX15
4,2
42
7,0
250
8
LTSFH4,2x57
74370
1949872
Gulvskrue gulkromat 4,2x57 mm, TX15
4,2
57
7,0
250
8
LTSF3,9x35
74371
1949874
Gulvskrue gulkromat 3,9x35 mm, TX10
3,9
35
7,0
250
8
LTSF3,9x42
74360
1949875
Gulvskrue gulkromat 3,9x42 mm, TX10
3,9
42
7,0
250
8
LTSF3,9x57
74381
1949876
Gulvskrue gulkromat 3,9x57 mm, TX10
3,9
57
7,0
250
8
LTSF3,9x70
74382
1949877
Gulvskrue gulkromat 3,9x70 mm, TX10
3,9
70
7,0
250
8
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
LTSF3,9x42
74383
1949878
Gulvskrue Hvidmalet 3,9x42 mm, TX10
3,9
42
5,0
250
8
LTSF3,9x57
74384
1949879
Gulvskrue Hvidmalet 3,9x57 mm, TX10
3,9
57
5,0
250
8
LTSFH / LTSF Gulkromatiseret
LTSF Gulkromatiseret + hvidmalet hoved RAL 9010
42 mm - 57 mm
G
G
35 mm - 70 mm
LTSFH
LTSF
G
Listeskrue med borspids anvendes til montage af lister, spånplader og krydsfiner. Listeskruen er 
udstyret med fræseribber under hovedet der sikrer en effektiv sænkning i træet samt borspids der 
gør det muligt at montere i forstærkningsreglar på op til 2 mm i tykkelse. Bits medfølger i kassen.
TSB Listeskrue
28 mm - 57 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
TSB3,9x28
74276
1949793
Listeskrue gulkromatiseret 3,9x28 mm
3,9
28
7,0
500
8
TSB3,9x42
74277
1949794
Listeskrue gulkromatiseret 3,9x42 mm
3,9
42
7,0
500
6
TSB3,9x57
74278
1949795
Listeskrue gulkromatiseret 3,9x57 mm
3,9
57
7,0
250
8
TSB Gulkromatiseret
G
INDOOR
SC 1
RAL
9010
INDOOR
SC 1
INDOOR
SC 1
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Reduceret hoved
•	 Fiber-cut eller borspids
Anvendes til:
•	 Montage af lister og sokler i træ- eller stålreglar
•	 Montage af gulvbrædder på træ
Egenskaber:
•	 PH-recess
•	 Undersænket hoved med ribber
•	 Borspids
•	 Fingevind
Anvendes til:
•	 Lister, spånplade, krydsfiner på stål
==PAGE:216==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
35
Pladeskruer
Pladeskruen anvendes indendørs og er udstyret med fiber-cut spids som driver skruen ned i de hårde spånplader 
og lignende. Skruen har et rifflet felt under hovedet som frigør skruen fra pladen hvorved man elimerer risiko for at 
gulvet begynder at knirke.
TTF Pladeskrue
35 mm - 75 mm
Reference 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
TTF4,2x35
74282
1949799
Pladeskrue elforz 4,2x35 mm, TX20
4,2
35
7,0
250
8
TTF4,2x45
74280
1949797
Pladeskrue båndet elforz 4,2x45 mm, PH2
4,2
45
7,0
1.000 (båndede)
8
74283
1949800
Pladeskrue elforz 4,2x45 mm, TX20
4,2
45
7,0
250
8
TTF4,2x50
74281
1949798
Pladeskrue båndet elforz 4,2x50 mm, PH2
4,2
50
7,0
1.000 (båndede)
6
TTF4,2x55
74284
1949801
Pladeskrue elforz 4,2x55 mm, TX20
4,2
55
7,0
250
8
TTF4,2x75
74285
1949802
Pladeskrue elforz 4,2x75 mm, TX20
4,2
75
7,0
250
8
TTF Elforzinket
OSB- & spånpladeskruen monteres indendørs og anvendes til at fastgøre OSB- & spånplader på 
stålreglar med en max. tykkelse på 1,0 mm.
TT OSB- & spånpladeskrue
28 mm
Reference 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
TT3,9x28
74390
1949885
OSB/Spånskrue fosfat bånd 3,9x28 mm, PH2
3,90
28
7,0
1.000 (båndede)
8
74391
1949886
OSB-/Spånskrue fosfat 3,9x28 mm, PH2
3,90
28
7,0
500
8
TT Fosfateret
X
G
INDOOR
SC 1
INDOOR
SC 1
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Undersænket hoved med ribber
•	 Fiber-cut spids
Anvendes til:
•	 Spånplade på træ
•	 Krydsfiner på træ
•	 OSB-plade på træ
Egenskaber:
•	 PH-recess
•	 Undersænket hoved med ribber
•	 Skarp spids
•	 Fingevind
Anvendes til:
•	 OSB- & spånplade på stål
==PAGE:217==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
36
Pladeskruer / Bygge- & konsolskruer
Metalpladeskruer anvendes indendørs til at fastgøre en plade til en anden plade, f.eks. ved montage 
af ventilationsrør. Skruer med borspids er selvborende og klarer fastgørelse i stålreglar op til 2,25 mm 
i tykkelse.
HSB / HS Metalpladeskrue
13 mm - 
25 mm
Reference 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
HSB4,2x13
74392
1949887
Pladeskrue borsp. elforz 4,2x13 mm 
4,2
13
8,5
1.000
8
HSB4,2x19
74393
1949888
Pladeskrue borsp. elforz 4,2x19 mm 
4,2
19
8,5
1.000
6
HSB4,2x25
74394
1949889
Pladeskrue borsp. elforz 4,2x25 mm 
4,2
25
8,5
1.000
4
HSB Elforzinket
13 mm - 
19 mm
Reference 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
HS4,2x13
74395
1949890
Pladeskrue elforz 4,2x13 mm 1/4", PH2
4,2
13
8,5
1.000
8
HS4,2x19
74396
1949891
Pladeskrue elforz 4,2x19 mm 1/4", PH2
4,2
19
8,5
1.000
6
HS Elforzinket
Bygge- & konsolskrue anvendes til fastgørelse af konsoller, hulbånd, VVS-
artikler mm. i træregler eller beton med Ø10 mm plugs.
GKS Bygge- & konsolskrue, elforzinket
40 mm - 
100 mm
Reference 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
GKS6,5x40
74272
1949789
Byggeskrue elforzinket 6,5x40
6,5
40
15,0
100
6
GKS6,5x50
74273
1949790
Byggeskrue elforzinket 6,5x50
6,5
50
15,0
100
6
GKS6,5x60
74274
1949791
Byggeskrue elforzinket 6,5x60
6,5
60
15,0
100
6
GKS6,5x75
74275
1949792
Byggeskrue elforzinket 6,5x75
6,5
75
15,0
100
6
GKS6,5x100
74271
1949788
Byggeskrue elforzinket 6,5x100
6,5
100
15,0
100
6
G
INDOOR
SC 1
INDOOR
SC 1
INDOOR
SC 1
GKS Elforzinket
Egenskaber:
•	 PH-recess
•	 Hex hoved
•	 Skarp- eller borspids
Anvendes til:
•	 Stål til stål
Egenskaber:
•	 Growgevind
•	 Hex-skivehoved 8 mm
Anvendes til:
•	 Stål til træ
==PAGE:218==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
37
Stålprofilskrue anvendes til at samle forstærkede stålprofiler. Den fosfaterede FSM skrue er velegnet til fast-
gørelse af stålprofiler med en tykkelse op til 2x1,0 mm. Den elforzinkede skrue kan anvendes til stålprofiler 
op til 2x2,0 mm.
FSM Stålprofilskrue, med borspids
14 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
FSM4,2x14
74398
1949893
 Stålprofilskrue 4,2x14 mm, fosfateret 
4,2
14
8,0
500
8
FSM Fosfateret
X
G
X
18 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
FSM4,8x16
74397
1949892
 Stålprofilskrue 4,8x18 mm, elforzinket 
4,8
16
10,0
500
8
FSM Elforzinket
Stålprofilskruer
Stålprofilskrue anvendes til at samle stålprofiler med en max. tykkelse på 2x0,56 mm. 
SSP Stålprofilskrue
14 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
SSP3.9x14
74399
1949894
 Stålprofilskrue 3,9x14 mm, fosfateret 
3,9
14
6,0
500
8
SSP Fosfateret
INDOOR
SC 1
INDOOR
SC 1
INDOOR
SC 1
Egenskaber:
•	 Borspids
•	 Fingevind
Anvendes til:
•	 Stål til stål
Egenskaber:
•	 Skarp spids
•	 Fingevind
Anvendes til:
•	 Stål til stål
==PAGE:219==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
38
Gipsskruer
Gipsskrue High-Low monteres i træ- samt stålreglar med en max. tykkelse på 1,0 mm. Trompethovedet hindrer 
at overfladen på gipspladen ødelægges ved montering.
GK / UGTS Gipsskrue, High-Low gevind
30 mm - 55 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
GK3,9x30
74296
1949826
Gipsskrue, High-Low bånd elforzinket 3,9x30 mm, PH2
3,9
30
8,2
1.000 (båndede)
8
74299
1949829
Gipsskrue, High-Low elforzinket 3,9x30 mm, PH2
3,9
30
8,2
1.000
6
GK3,9x40
74297
1949827
Gipsskrue, High-Low bånd elforzinket 3,9x40 mm, PH2
3,9
40
8,2
1.000 (båndede)
8
74301
1949831
Gipsskrue, High-Low elforzinket 3,9x40 mm, PH2
3,9
40
8,2
1.000
4
GK3,9x55
74298
1949828
Gipsskrue, High-Low bånd elforzinket 3,9x55 mm, PH2
3,9
55
8,2
1.000 (båndede)
6
74303
1949833
Gipsskrue, High-Low elforzinket 3,9x55 mm, PH2
3,9
55
8,2
500
4
GK Elforzinket
30 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
UGTS3,9x30
74305
1949834
Gipsskrue udv. PROTEC bånd 3,9x30 mm, PH2
3,9
30
9,0
1.000 (båndede)
8
74307
1949835
Gipsskrue udv. PROTEC 3,9x30 mm, PH2
3,9
30
9,0
250
8
UGTS Protec Coating
G
X
G
X
INDOOR
SC 1
OUTDOOR
SC 2
Egenskaber:
•	 PH-recess
•	 Trompethoved
•	 High-Low gevind
Anvendes til:
•	 Gips på træ
•	 Gips på stål (max. 1,0 mm)
==PAGE:220==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
39
Gipsskruer
Selvborende gipsskruer til ind- og udvendig brug. Til montage af gipsplader på stålreglar. Trompethovedet 
hindrer at overfladen på gipspladen ødelægges ved montering.
GSB / UGSB Gipsskrue, borspids
25 mm - 75 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
GSB3,5x25
74310
1949837
Gipsskrue borspids fosfat bånd 3,5x25 mm
3,5
25
8,2
1.000 (båndede)
-
74314
1949841
Gipsskrue borspids fosfat 3,5x25 mm ,PH2
3,5
25
8,2
1.000
6
GSB3,5x40
74311
1949838
Gipsskrue borspids fosfat bånd 3,5x40 mm
3,5
40
8,2
1.000 (båndede)
-
74313
1949840
Gipsskrue borspids fosfat 3,5x40 mm, PH2
3,5
40
8,2
1.000
4
GSB3,9x48
74315
1949842
Gipsskrue borspids fosfat 3,9x48 mm, PH2
3,9
48
8,2
500
4
GSB4,2x75
74295
1949825
Gipsskrue borspids fosfat 4,2x75 mm, PH2
4,2
75
8,2
250
8
GSB Fosfateret 
25 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
UGSB3,9x25
74309
1949839
Gipsskrue borspids bånd PROTEC 3,9x25 mm
3,9
25
9,0
1.000 (båndede)
8
74312
1949836
Gipsskrue borspids PROTEC 3,9x25 mm 
3,9
25
9,0
250
8
UGSB Protec Coating
G
X
G
X
INDOOR
SC 1
OUTDOOR
SC 2
Egenskaber:
•	 PH-recess
•	 Trompethoved
•	 Borspids
Anvendes til:
•	 Gips på stål
==PAGE:221==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
40
Gipsskruer
Gipsskruer anvendes indendørs til fastgørelse af gipsplader. GS anvendes til montage i stålreglar 
(max. 1.0 mm). GT anvendes til montage i træ. GG anvendes til montage på gips. Trompethovedet 
hindrer at overfladen på gipspladen ødelægges ved montering.
GS / GT / GG Gipsskrue, elforzinket
25 mm -  38 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
GS3,5x25
74316
1949843
Gipsskrue elforzinket 3,5x25 mm, PH2
3,5
25
8,2
1.000
6
GS3,5x38
74317
1949844
Gipsskrue elforzinket 3,5x38 mm, PH2
3,5
38
8,2
1.000
4
GS Elforzinket 
30 mm - 75 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
GT3,9x30
74347
1949863
Gipsskrue elforzinket bånd 3,9x30 mm, PH2
3,9
30
8,2
1.000 (båndede)
8
74349
1949865
Gipsskrue elforzinket 3,9x30 mm, PH2
3,9
30
8,2
1.000
4
GT3,9x40
74348
1949864
Gipsskrue elforzinket bånd 3,9x40 mm, PH2
3,9
40
8,2
1.000 (båndede)
8
74351
1949867
Gipsskrue elforzinket 3,9x40 mm, PH2
3,9
40
8,2
1.000
4
GT3,9x55
74367
1949869
Gipsskrue elforzinket 3,9x55 mm, PH2
3,9
55
8,2
500
6
GT3,9x75
74368
1949870
Gipsskrue elforzinket 3,9x75 mm, PH2
3,9
75
8,2
250
8
GT Elforzinket
38 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
GG5,2x38
74327
1949854
Gipsskrue t/ gips elforzinket 5,2x38 mm, PH2
5,2
38
6,2
500
6
GG Elforzinket 
X
G
G
X
G
INDOOR
SC 1
INDOOR
SC 1
INDOOR
SC 1
Egenskaber:
•	 PH-recess
•	 Trompethoved
•	 Skarp
Anvendes til:
•	 Gips på stål
==PAGE:222==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
41
Gipsskruer
Gipsskrue fosfateret monteres indendørs i stålreglar med en max. tykkelse på 1,0 mm. Den fosfaterede 
skrue skærer sig hurtigt og effektivt igennem underlaget. Trompethovedet hindrer at overfladen på gips-
pladen ødelægges ved montering.
GS Gipsskrue, fosfateret
25 mm - 75 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
GS3,5x25
74328
1949855
Gipsskrue fosfateret bånd 3,5x25 mm, PH2
3,5
25
8,2
1.000 (båndede)
8
74342
1949858
Gipsskrue fosfateret 3,5x25 mm, PH2
3,5
25
8,2
1.000
6
GS3,5x38
74329
1949856
Gipsskrue fosfateret bånd 3,5x38 mm, PH2
3,5
38
8,2
1.000 (båndede)
8
74343
1949859
Gipsskrue fosfateret 3,5x38 mm, PH2
3,5
38
8,2
1.000
4
GS3,9x55
74753
1956537
Gipsskrue fosfateret bånd 3,9x55 mm, PH2
3,9
55
8,2
1.000 (båndede)
6
74345
1949861
Gipsskrue fosfateret 3,9x55 mm, PH2
3,9
55
8,2
500
6
GS3,9x75
74346
1949862
Gipsskrue fosfateret 3,9x75 mm, PH2
3,9
75
8,2
250
6
GS Fosfateret 
Hårdgipsskruen anvendes indendørs til fastgørelse af hårdgips i stålreglar med en max. tykkelse på 1,0 mm. 
Skruens konstruktion med modgevind sikrer en skruen sænkes bedre ned i den hårde gipsplade.
RST Hårdgipsskrue, fosfateret
32 mm - 57 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
RST3,9x25
74321
1949848
Hårdgipsskrue fosfat bånd, 3,9x25 mm, PH2 
3,9
25
7,0
1.000 (båndede)
8
RST3,9x32
74318
1949845
Hårdgipsskrue fosfat 3,9x32 mm, PH2 
3,9
32
7,0
1.000
6
74322
1949849
Hårdgipsskrue fosfat bånd 3,9x32 mm, PH2 
3,9
32
7,0
1.000 (båndede)
8
RST3,9x41
74319
1949846
Hårdgipsskrue fosfat 3,9x41 mm, PH2 
3,9
41
7,0
1.000
4
74323
1949850
Hårdgipsskrue fosfat bånd 3,9x41 mm, PH2 
3,9
41
7,0
1.000 (båndede)
8
RST4,2x55
74324
1949851
Hårdgipsskrue fosfat bånd 4,2x55 mm ,PH2 
4,2
55
7,0
1.000 (båndede)
6
RST4,2x57
74320
1949847
Hårdgipsskrue fosfat 4,2x57 mm, PH2 
4,2
57
7,0
250
8
RST Fosfateret 
G
X
X
INDOOR
SC 1
INDOOR
SC 1
Egenskaber:
•	 PH-recess
•	 Trompethoved
•	 Skarp
Anvendes til:
•	 Gips på stål
Egenskaber:
•	 PH-recess
•	 Reduceret trompethoved
•	 Skarp
•	 Fingevind med modsatrettet gevind under hovedet
Anvendes til:
•	 Hårdgips på stål
==PAGE:223==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
42
Montageskruer
Montageskrue PROTEC anvendes til at montere udegips i træreglar eller stålreglar med en max. 
tykkelse på 1,0 mm.
FS Montageskrue, udegips
13 mm - 65 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
FS4,2x13
74405
1949900
Montageskrue PROTEC 4,2x13 mm, PH2
4,2
13
12,0
250
8
FS4,2x25
74402
1949897
Montageskrue PROTEC 4,2x25 mm, PH2
4,2
25
12,0
250
8
FS4,2x32
74404
1949899
Montageskrue PROTEC 4,2x32 mm, PH2
4,2
32
12,0
250
8
FS4,2x65
74413
1949908
Montageskrue PROTEC 4,2x65 mm, PH2
4,2
65
12,0
250
4
FS Protec Coating
G
X
Montageskrue med borspids anvendes til at fastgøre stålreglar til hinanden. De længere skruer anvendes 
til at fastgøre en række forskellige materialer i stålreglar med en max. tykkelse på 3,0 mm.
FSB Montageskrue med borspids
13 mm - 65 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
FSB4,2x13
74410
1949905
Montageskrue borsp. elforz 4,2x13 mm, PH2
4,2
13
12,0
250
8
FSB4,2x25
74411
1949906
Montageskrue borsp. elforz 4,2x25 mm, PH2
4,2
25
12,0
250
8
FSB4,2x40
74406
1949901
Montageskrue borsp. elforz 4,2x40 mm, PH2
4,2
40
12,0
250
8
FSB4,2x65
74407
1949902
Montageskrue borsp. elforz 4,2x65 mm, PH2
4,2
65
12,0
250
4
FSB Elforzinket
13 mm - 32 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
FSB4,2x13
74412
1949907
Montageskrue borsp. PROTEC 4,2x13 mm, PH2
4,2
13
12,0
250
8
FSB4,2x25
74409
1949904
Montageskrue borsp. PROTEC 4,2x25 mm, PH2
4,2
25
12,0
250
8
FSB4,2x32
74408
1949903
Montageskrue borsp. PROTEC 4,2x32 mm, PH2
4,2
32
12,0
250
8
FSB Protec Coating
G
X
G
X
OUTDOOR
SC 2
INDOOR
SC 1
OUTDOOR
SC 2
Egenskaber:
•	 PH-recess
•	 Flangehoved
•	 Skarp
•	 Fingevind
Anvendes til:
•	 Gips på træ
•	 Gips på stål (max. 1,0 mm)
Egenskaber:
•	 PH-recess
•	 Flangehoved
•	 Borspids
Anvendes til:
•	 Stål på stål
•	 Fibercement på stål
•	 Træplader på stål
==PAGE:224==
Skruer
Skruer
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
43
Vingeborskruer er selvborende og kan anvendes udendørs ved montage af træreglar, 
træfiberplader mm. Bits medfølger i kassen.
BW Vingeborskrue, Protec
45 mm - 115 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Dimension 
på træ
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
Stål‑ 
tykkelse
BW4,2x45
74258
1949781
Vingeborskrue PROTEC 4,2x45 mm, TX25
6-30
4,2
45
1-2
100
8
BW4,8x50
74259
1949782
Vingeborskrue PROTEC 4,8x50 mm, TX25
10-38
4,8
50
2-4
100
8
BW4,8x85
74260
1949783
Vingeborskrue PROTEC 4,8x85 mm, TX25
10-60
4,8
85
1-2
100
6
BW5,5x65
74262
1949785
Vingeborskrue PROTEC 5,5x65 mm, TX30
10-40
5,5
65
2-4
100
8
BW5,5x85
74263
1949786
Vingeborskrue PROTEC 5,5x85 mm, TX30
25-60
5,5
85
2-4
100
6
BW5,5x90
74270
1949787
Vingeborskrue PROTEC 5,5x90 mm, TX30
25-55
5,5
90
4-12
100
6
BW5,5x115
74261
1949784
Vingeborskrue PROTEC 5,5x115 mm, TX30
40-80
5,5
115
4-12
100
6
BW Protec Coating
G
Montageskrue med borspids anvendes til at fastgøre stålreglar til hinanden. De længere skruer 
anvendes til at fastgøre en række forskellige materialer i stålreglar med en max. tykkelse på 3,0 mm.
FSBZN Montageskrue med borspids, Impreg®+
35 mm - 110 mm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
FSBZN4.8X35
75444
2055801
Montageskrue med borspids, Impreg®+, TX25
4,8
35
11,5
250
8
FSBZN4.8X50
75445
2055802
Montageskrue med borspids, Impreg®+, TX25
4,8
50
11,5
250
6
FSBZN4.8X70
75446
2055803
Montageskrue med borspids, Impreg®+, TX25
4,8
70
11,5
250
4
FSBZN4.8X90
75447
2055804
Montageskrue med borspids, Impreg®+, TX25
4,8
90
11,5
200
4
FSBZN4.8X110
75448
2055805
Montageskrue med borspids, Impreg®+, TX25
4,8
110
11,5
150
4
FSBZN Impreg®+ Coating
Egenskaber:
•	 Skivehode
•	 Borspids
•	 High-Low gevind
Anvendes til: 
•	 Træ til stål
•	 Fibercement til stål
•	 Træfiberplade til stål
IMPREG
OUTDOOR
SC 3
GX
Vingeborskruer
OUTDOOR
SC 2
Egenskaber:
•	 TX-recess
•	 Undersænket med fræseribber
•	 Borspids med vinger
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til stål
==PAGE:225==
Kvalitetssøm til dine 
byggeprojekter
==PAGE:226==
Beslagsøm.................................................................... 46
CNA Beslagsøm, elforzinket............................................ 46
CNA-G Beslagsøm, ekstra varmgalvaniseret................... 46
CNA-S Beslagsøm, rustfri syrefast A4............................. 46
CNAC15 Elforzinket........................................................ 47
CNAC15-G Ekstra varmgalvaniseret................................ 47
CNA-PC Båndede beslagsøm, elforzinket........................ 48
Skudsøm....................................................................... 49
RSN34G Ekstra varmforzinket......................................... 49
RSND34G Ekstra varmforzinket...................................... 49
Firkantede søm............................................................ 50
FIRK Firkantede søm...................................................... 50
FIRKU Blank Stål............................................................ 50
FIRKG Ekstra varmgalvaniseret....................................... 50
FIRKS Rustfri syrefast A4................................................ 51
ENTS Entreprenørsøm, blanke........................................ 51
Søm............................................................................... 52
SPKEZ Elforzinket........................................................... 52
SPKC Hvidmalet............................................................. 52
TNA Søm, alu med tætningsskive................................... 57
BRN Messingsøm, blank................................................. 57
Kamsøm........................................................................ 53
ARA4 Kamsøm, Rustfri syrefast A4................................. 53
ARA4 Kamsøm, Rustfri syrefast A4 med EPDM-skive...... 53
MKSA4 Kamsøm Rustfri syrefast A4............................... 53
Lægtesøm / papsøm.................................................... 54
BN Lægtesøm................................................................. 54
BN Ekstra varmgalvaniseret............................................ 54
PAPP / PAPS Papsøm...................................................... 54
PAPP Ekstra varmgalvaniseret........................................ 54
PAPS Blank stål.............................................................. 54
Dykkere........................................................................ 55
BRDEZ Dykkere, elforzinket............................................ 55
BRDC Dykkere, hvidlakeret............................................. 55
BRDHG Dykkere, ekstra varmforzinket............................ 55
ODYK Runde dykkere, elforzinket.................................... 56
PN Gipssøm, elforzinket.................................................. 56
Kramper........................................................................ 58
CEZ Kramper, elforzinket ............................................... 58
CHG Kramper, ekstra varmgalvaniseret .......................... 58
Søm
Søm
==PAGE:227==
Søm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
CNA4,0X40S
CNA4,0X40S
1371876
Rustfri beslagsøm 4,0x40, rustfri syrefast, A4
4,0
40
250
8
CNA4,0X50S
CNA4,0X50S
1337505
Rustfri beslagsøm 4,0x50, rustfri syrefast, A4
4,0
50
250
8
CNA4,0X60S
CNA4,0X60S
1371901
Rustfri beslagsøm 4,0x60, rustfri syrefast, A4
4,0
60
250
6
CNA-S Rustfri syrefast A4
CNA Elforzinket
Sælges kun i hele omkartoner.
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
CNA3,1X22*
CNA3,1X22
1371333
CNA beslagsøm 3,1x22 mm
3,1
22
500
12
CNA3,1X40
CNA3,1X40
1371861
CNA beslagsøm 3,1x40 mm
3,1
40
500
12
CNA3,1X60
CNA3,1X60
1371862
CNA beslagsøm 3,1x60 mm
3,1
60
250
12
CNA3,7X50
CNA3,7X50
1371867
CNA beslagsøm 3,7x50 mm
3,7
50
250
8
CNA4,0X35
CNA4,0X35
1322397
CNA beslagsøm 4,0x35 mm
4,0
35
250
8
CNA4,0X40
CNA4,0X40
1868694
CNA beslagsøm 4,0x40 mm
4,0
40
250
8
CNA4,0X40-FR
2099800
CNA beslagsøm 4,0x40 mm, håndværkerkasse
4,0
40
1.500
1 kasse
CNA4,0X50
CNA4,0X50
1868686
CNA beslagsøm 4,0x50 mm
4,0
50
250
8
CNA4,0X60
CNA4,0X60
1868678
CNA beslagsøm 4,0x60 mm
4,0
60
250
8
CNA4,0X75
CNA4,0X75
1322080
CNA beslagsøm 4,0x75 mm
4,0
75
250
6
CNA4,0X100
CNA4,0X100
1371870
CNA beslagsøm 4,0X100 mm
4,0
100
250
6
CNA6,0X60**
CNA6,0X60
1371937
CNA beslagsøm 6,0x60 mm
6,0
60
100
6
CNA6,0X80**
CNA6,0X80
1371940
CNA beslagsøm 6,0x80 mm
6,0
80
100
6
CNA6,0X100**
CNA6,0X100
1371918
CNA beslagsøm 6,0x100 mm
6,0
100
100
9
*) CE-mærket iht. EN14592, **) Ikke lagervare – leveringstid oplyses ved forespørgsel
Solid-Drive ™ 
CNA Beslagsøm
CNA beslagsøm er specielt udviklede til at fastgøre stålbeslag på træ. Forkamningen 
forøger udtræksevnen i træ meget sammenlignet med et glat søm. Hovedets form er 
udformet, så det passer perfekt i beslag.
Beslagsøm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
CNA4,0X40G
CNA4,0X40G
1322398
CNA beslagsøm 4,0x40 mm, ekstra varmgv.
4,0
40
250
8
CNA-G Ekstra varmgalvaniseret
Sælges kun i hele omkartoner.
Egenskaber:
•	 Den koniske form under hovedet sikrer, at sømmet er i fuld 
kontakt med hullet i beslaget
•	 Høj udtræksbæreevne
Anvendes til:
•	 Beslag på træ
NYHED! Beslagsøm med  
længde­angivelse stemplet på  
hovedet gør det nu nemt at  
inspicere samlingen 
efter montering
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
46
ETA-04/0013
SC 3
OUTDOOR
40 mm mm
ETA-04/0013
ETA-04/0013 / EN14592
22 mm - 100 mm
40 mm - 60 mm
A4
A4
A4
SC 2
SC 3
SEVERE
A4
INOX
==PAGE:228==
Søm
Beslagsøm
Egenskaber:
•	 Den koniske form under hovedet sikrer, at sømmet er i 
fuld kontakt med hullet i beslaget
•	 Høj udtræksbæreevne
Anvendes til:
•	 Beslag på træ
Kompatible skudværktøjer:
Tjep®
BC 60
BEA®
AN 560 TC
MAX®
HN65J
Se også skudværktøjets produktbeskrivelse for at finde 
de nøjagtige sømdimensioner.
Båndede (plasticbånd) CNA beslagsøm som passer i alle gængse 
beslagsømpistoler på markedet med en hældning på sømmet på 15-16°.
CNAC15-G Ekstra varmgalvaniseret
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
CNAC15Z4.0X40
76138
2124150
Båndede beslagsøm 15°, elforzinket
4,0
40
1.200
-
CNAC15Z4.0X50
76139
2124151
Båndede beslagsøm 15°, elforzinket
4,0
50
1.200
-
CNAC15Z4.0X60
76140
2124152
Båndede beslagsøm 15°, elforzinket
4,0
60
1.200
-
CNAC15 Elforzinket
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
CNAC15G4.0X40
76142
2124154
Båndede beslagsøm 15°, ekstra varmgalvaniseret
4,0
40
1.200
-
CNAC15G4.0X50
76143
2124155
Båndede beslagsøm 15°, ekstra varmgalvaniseret
4,0
50
1.200
-
CNAC15G4.0X60
76144
2124156
Båndede beslagsøm 15°, ekstra varmgalvaniseret
4,0
60
1.200
-
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
47
ETA-04/0013
ETA-04/0013
CNAC15
SC 2
SC 3
OUTDOOR
Solid-Drive ™ 
15° CNAC Båndede beslagsøm
==PAGE:229==
Søm
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
CNA4,0x35PC34
1897085
CNA båndede beslagsøm 4,0x35, 1.500 stk
4,0
35
1.500
-
CNA4,0x40PC34
1897086
CNA båndede beslagsøm 4,0x40, 1.500 stk
4,0
40
1.500
-
CNA4,0x50PC34
1897087
CNA båndede beslagsøm 4,0x50, 1.000 stk
4,0
50
1.000
-
CNA4,0x60PC34
1897088
CNA båndede beslagsøm 4,0x60, 1.000 stk
4,0
60
1.000
-
CNA-PC Elforzinket
Båndede (papbånd) CNA beslagsøm som passer i alle gængse 
beslagsømpistoler på markedet med en hældning på sømmet på 34°.
Egenskaber:
•	 Den koniske form under hovedet sikrer, at sømmet er i 
fuld kontakt med hullet i beslaget
•	 Høj udtræksbæreevne
Anvendes til:
•	 Beslag på træ
Kompatible skudværktøjer:
Tjep®
KA 4060 GAS 2G*, KA 4060 GAS 3G*, KA 2*, KA 1*/**, KA 1L*/**, KA 4060 GAS*
Senco®
GT60NN*, MC60*
BEA®
R60-664E*
Paslode®
PPN50i**, F 250 S PP*, PSN50NP* 
Solid-Drive ™ 
34° CNA-PC Båndede beslagsøm
Beslagsøm
Se også skudværktøjets produktbeskrivelse for at finde de nøjagtige sømdimensioner.
*Ikke kompatibel med 35 mm søm
**Ikke kompatibel med 60 mm søm
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
48
CNAPC34
ETA-04/0013
SC 2
==PAGE:230==
Søm
Skudsøm
Egenskaber:
•	 Varmgalvaniseret
•	 34 grader
•	 Papirbåndet
•	 Forskudt rundt hoved eller D-hoved
•	 Forkamret skaft
Anvendes til: 
•	 Træ/træ samlinger
Kompatible skudværktøjer:
Tjep®
GRF 34/90 G2*/**, GRF 34/105*/**, GRF 34/100*/**, GRF 100 Compact XP*/**, GRF 34/90*/**
Senco®
A900FN**, FramePro 701/751XP**, FramePro 601/651**, SN951 XP**, SN901 XP**, GT90CH**
BEA®
Dynamik D90 E Long Magazine**, Dynamik D90 S Standard**
Paslode®
M100i*, IM90i*, PF90S*, IM350+**, PSN100.1**, PSN90**, PF90S**,  IM350/90CT**
Bostitch®
GF33PT**, F33PT**
Hikoki®
NR90GC2**, NR90AD**
Bosch®
GSN 90-34 DK Professional**, GSN 100-34 DK Professional**
Dewalt®
DCN690M2**, D51856**, D51825**, D51823**
Max®
SN890CH2**, SN883CH**, GS690CH**
34° skudsøm til træ/træ samlinger. Sømmene findes i to versioner, en med et forskudt rundt 
hoved og en med D-hoved. Forkamringen på sømmets skaft øger udtrækningskapaciteten.
34° RSN / RSND Båndede skudsøm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
RSN34G2.8X65
75754
2056101
Båndede skudsøm, 34° (rundt hoved)
2,8
65
1.700
-
RSN34G2.8X75
75755
2056102
Båndede skudsøm, 34° (rundt hoved)
2,8
75
1.500
-
RSN34G3.1X90
75756
2056103
Båndede skudsøm, 34° (rundt hoved)
3,1
90
1.000
-
RSN34G3.1X98
76150
2123731
Båndede skudsøm, 34° (rundt hoved)
3,1
98
1.000
-
RSN34G Ekstra varmforzinket, forskudt rundt hoved
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
RSND34G2.8X65
75762
2056109
Båndede skudsøm, 34° (D-hoved)
2,8
65
1.700
-
RSND34G2.8X75
75763
2056110
Båndede skudsøm, 34° (D-hoved)
2,8
75
1.500
-
RSND34G3.1X90
75764
2056111
Båndede skudsøm, 34° (D-hoved)
3,1
90
1.000
-
RSND34G3.1X98
76149
214527
Båndede skudsøm, 34° (D-hoved)
3,1
98
1.000
-
RSND34G Ekstra varmforzinket, D-hoved
Se også skudværktøjets produktbeskrivelse for at finde de nøjagtige sømdimensioner.
*Kompatibel med RSN34G
**Kompatibel med RSND34G
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
49
CNAPC34
SC 3
OUTDOOR
l
d
dh
lg
SC 3
OUTDOOR
l
d
dh
lg
==PAGE:231==
Søm
Firkantede søm anvendes til de fleste sømsamlinger ved træ mod træ, fordi de har en høj 
styrke ved forskydning. FIRKS søm med A4 overflade kan bl.a. anvendes i diverse udendørs 
trækonstruktioner i trykimpregneret træ samt ædeltræ.
FIRKU Blank Stål
FIRK Firkantede søm
FIRKG Ekstra varmgalvaniseret
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
FIRKU1,8x35*)
74694
1950584
Firkantsøm blank 1,8X35 mm
1,80
35
4,5
1.000
8
FIRKU2,0x40
74695
1950585
Firkantsøm blank 2,0X40 mm
2,00
40
5
500
8
FIRKU2,2x45
74691
1950581
Firkantsøm blank 2,2X45 mm
2,20
45
5,5
500
8
FIRKU2,5x55
74696
1950586
Firkantsøm blank 2,5X55 mm
2,50
55
6,3
500
6
FIRKU2,8x65
74697
1950587
Firkantsøm blank 2,8X65 mm
2,80
65
7
250
8
FIRKU3,1x80
74698
1950588
Firkantsøm blank 3,1X80 mm
3,10
80
7,8
250
6
FIRKU3,4x90
74699
1950589
Firkantsøm blank 3,4X90 mm
3,40
90
8,5
250
6
FIRKU3,8x100
74700
1950590
Firkantsøm blank 3,8X100 mm
3,80
100
9,5
250
6
FIRKU4,6x130
74701
1950591
Firkantsøm blank 4,6X130 mm
4,60
130
11,5
160
4
FIRKU5,5x160
74702
1950592
Firkantsøm blank 5,5X160 mm
5,50
160
13,8
110
4
FIRKU6,0x180
74590
1950575
Firkantsøm blank 6,0X180 mm
6,00
180
15,0
100
-
FIRKU7,0x210
74567
1950571
Firkantsøm blank 7,0X210 mm
7,00
210
17,5
60
-
FIRKU7,0x260
74569
1950573
Firkantsøm blank 7,0X260 mm
7,00
260
17,5
60
-
*) Ikke CE-mærket
*) Ikke CE-mærket
Egenskaber:
•	 Firkantede blanke søm har ca 25% højere udtræksstyrke i 
forhold til runde søm
•	 Firkantede søm har den fordel at de er lettere at rette, selv hvis 
bøjningen er sket under islåningen
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
FIRKG1,8x35*)
74692
1950582
Firkantsøm varmforz 1,8X35 mm
1,80
35
4,5
1.000
8
FIRKG2,0x40
74706
1950593
Firkantsøm varmforz 2,0X40 mm
2,00
40
5,0
500
8
FIRKG2,2x45
74707
1950594
Firkantsøm varmforz 2,2X45 mm
2,20
45
5,5
500
8
FIRKG2,5x55
74708
1950595
Firkantsøm varmforz 2,5X55 mm
2,50
55
6,3
500
6
FIRKG2,8x65
74709
1950596
Firkantsøm varmforz 2,8X65 mm
2,80
65
7,0
250
8
FIRKG3,1x80
74710
1950597
Firkantsøm varmforz 3,1X80 mm
3,10
80
7,8
250
6
FIRKG3,4x90
74711
1950598
Firkantsøm varmforz 3,4X90 mm
3,40
90
8,5
250
6
FIRKG3,8x100
74712
1950599
Firkantsøm varmforz 3,8X100 mm
3,80
100
9,5
250
4
FIRKG4,6x130
74713
1950600
Firkantsøm varmforz 4,6X130 mm
4,60
130
11,5
160
4
FIRKG5,5x160
74693
1950583
Firkantsøm varmforz 5,5X 160 mm
5,50
160
13,8
70
4
FIRKG6,0x180
74566
1950570
Firkantsøm varmforz 6,0X180 mm
6,00
180
15,0
100
-
FIRKG7,0x210
74568
1950572
Firkantsøm varmforz 7,0X210 mm
7,00
210
17,5
60
-
FIRKG7,0x260
74570
1950574
Firkantsøm varmforz 7,0X 260 mm
7,00
260
17,5
60
-
Firkantede søm
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
50
Hulkehl
Hulkehl
35 mm - 260 mm
35 mm - 260 mm
SC 1
INDOOR
OUTDOOR
SC 3
==PAGE:232==
Søm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
FIRKS2,3x60
74189
1950517
Søm rustfri syrefast A4 2,3x60 mm
2,30
60
5,75
500
6
FIRKS2,8x75
74190
1950518
Søm rustfri syrefast A4 2,8x75 mm
2,80
75
7,00
250
6
FIRKS3,4x100
74149
1950505
Søm rustfri syrefast A4 3,4x100 mm
3,40
100
8,50
250
6
FIRKS Rustfri syrefast A4
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
ENTS3,4x75
74591
1950576
Entrepenørsøm blank 3,4x75 mm
3,40
75
6,7
250
6
ENTS3,4x90
74592
1950577
Entrepenørsøm blank 3,4x90 mm
3,40
90
6,7
220
6
ENTS3,7x100
74593
1950578
Entrepenørsøm blank 3,7x100 mm
3,70
100
7,3
190
6
ENTS håndsøm kan anvendes til forskellige formål og til 
midlertidig fastgørelse i træ.
ENTS Entreprenørsøm, blanke
ENTS Blank stål
Egenskaber:
•	 Dobbelthovedet gør det let at trække sømmet ud igen
Anvendes til:
•	 MIdlertidige træ til træ samlinger
Firkantede søm
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
51
Hulkehl
Hulkehl
A4
A4
A4
60 mm - 100 mm
SEVERE
A4
INOX
SC 3
75 mm - 100 mm
SC 1
INDOOR
==PAGE:233==
Søm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
SPKEZ1,2x20
74179
1950507
Søm elforzinket 1,2x20 mm
1,20
20
3,00
1.000
8
SPKEZ1,4x25
74180
1950508
Søm elforzinket 1,4x25 mm
1,40
25
3,50
1.000
8
SPKEZ1,7x35
74182
1950510
Søm elforzinket 1,7x35 mm
1,70
35
4,25
1.000
8
Søm
SPKEZ og SPKC anvendes indendørs og i tørre miljøer, til diverse træ/træ samlinger som ved 
opsætning af lister og andet finsnedkerering. 
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
SPKC1,7x40
74183
1950511
Søm vådlakeret 1,7x40 mm
1,70
40
4,25
1.000
8
SPKC2,0x50
74184
1950512
Søm vådlakeret 2,0x50 mm
2,00
50
5,00
500
8
SPKEZ Elforzinket
SPKC Hvidmalet
SPKEZ / SPKC Søm
Egenskaber:
•	 Fladt hoved
•	 Hulkehl skaft
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
52
Hulkehl
Hulkehl
20 mm - 35 mm
40 mm - 50 mm
INDOOR
SC 1
NCS
0502-Y
SC 1
INDOOR
==PAGE:234==
Søm
Anvendes til at samle trædele i tilfælde hvor der ønskes høje udtræksevner. Grundet sømmets A4 overflade 
kan det bl.a. anvendes i diverse udendørs trækonstruktioner i trykimpregneret træ samt ædeltræ.
ARA4 Rustfri syrefast A4
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
ARA41,9x20*)
74219
1950548
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 1,9x20 mm
1,90
20
4,75
1.000
8
ARA41,9x25*)
74220
1950549
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 1,9x25 mm
1,90
25
4,75
1.000
8
ARA41,9x30*)
74221
1950550
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 1,9x30 mm
1,90
30
4,75
1.000
8
ARA42,3x35
74223
1950552
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 2,3x35 mm
2,30
35
5,75
1.000
8
ARA42,3x45
74224
1950553
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 2,3x45 mm
2,30
45
5,75
500
8
ARA42,3x50
74225
1950554
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 2,3x50 mm
2,30
50
5,75
500
8
ARA42,5x60
74226
1950555
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 2,5x60 mm
2,50
60
6,25
250
8
ARA43,1x75
74227
1950556
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 3,1x75 mm
3,10
75
7,75
250
4
*) Ikke CE-mærkede
ARA4 Kamsøm
Kamsøm
ARA4 Rustfri syrefast A4 med EPDM-skive
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
ARA44,0x35
74228
1950557
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 4,0x35 mm
4,00
35
8,00
250
8
A4
SC 3
SEVERE
A4
INOX
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
MKSA44,0x100
74229
1950558
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 4,0x100 mm
4,00
100
9,00
100
6
MKSA44,0x125
74230
1950559
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 4,0x125 mm
4,00
125
9,00
100
4
MKSA44,0x145
74231
1950560
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 4,0x145 mm
4,00
145
9,00
100
4
MKSA44,0x175
74232
1950561
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 4,0x175 mm
4,00
175
9,00
100
4
MKSA44,0x200
74233
1950562
Kamsøm rustfri syrefast  A4, 4,0x200 mm
4,00
200
9,00
100
6
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
Egenskaber:
•	 Linsehoved
•	 Forkamringer på skaftet
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Anvendes til at samle trædele i tilfælde hvor der ønskes høje udtræksevner. Grundet sømmets A4 overflade 
kan det bl.a. anvendes i diverse udendørs trækonstruktioner i trykimpregneret træ samt ædeltræ.
MKSA4 Kamsøm
Egenskaber:
•	 Linsehoved
•	 Forkamringer på skaftet
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
MKSA4 Rustfri syrefast A4
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
53
35 mm
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
A4
100 mm - 200 mm
20 mm - 75 mm
SC 3
SEVERE
A4
INOX
SC 3
SEVERE
A4
INOX
==PAGE:235==
Søm
Lægtesøm / papsøm
Lægtesøm er et rundt forkammet søm, der er fladt rundt om hovedet. Det er velegnet til lægte/spærsam-
linger, idet det har stor udtræksbæreevne og dermed er i stand til at optage den løftende kraft i de fleste af 
disse samlinger.
BN Lægtesøm
Reference
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
BN4,5X90G
1371164
Lægtesøm varmgalv 45x90
4,5
90
11,3
100
8
BN4,5X110G
1371162
Lægtesøm varmgalv 45x110
4,5
110
11,3
100
6
BN4,5X130G
1371163
Lægtesøm varmgalv 45x130
4,5
130
11,3
100
4
Anvendes til at fastgøre tagpap, asfaltboard, byggefolier og læhegnspap 
til et underlag af træ.
PAPP / PAPS Papsøm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
PAPP2,1x20
74212
1950540
Papsøm varmforzinket 2,1x20 mm
2,10
20
7,25
1.000
8
PAPP2,5x25
74213
1950541
Papsøm varmforzinket 2,5x25 mm
2,50
25
8,75
1.000
8
PAPP2,5x40
74214
1950543
Papsøm varmforzinket 2,5x40 mm
2,50
40
8,75
500
6
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
PAPS2,8x20
74595
1950580
Papsøm blank 2,8x20 mm
2,80
20
9,8
1.000
6
PAPS2,5x25
74724
1950604
Papsøm blank 2,5x25 mm
2,50
25
8,75
1.000
6
PAPS2,5x40
74725
1950605
Papsøm blank 2,5x40 mm
2,50
40
8,75
500
8
PAPP Ekstra varmgalvaniseret
PAPS Blank stål
BN Ekstra varmgalvaniseret
Egenskaber:
•	 Fladt hoved
•	 Forkamringer på skaftet
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Egenskaber:
•	 Fladt hoved
•	 Rundt skaft
Anvendes til:
•	 Tagpap
•	 Asfaltplader
•	 Udvendige pladematerialer
•	 Byggefolier
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
54
90 mm - 130 mm
20 mm - 40 mm
20 mm - 40 mm
SC 3
OUTDOOR
SC 3
OUTDOOR
SC 1
INDOOR
==PAGE:236==
Søm
Dykkere
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
BRDEZ1,2x20
74196
1950524
Dykker elforzinket 1,2x20 mm
1,20
20
1,92
1.000
8
BRDEZ1,4x25
74197
1950525
Dykker elforzinket 1,4x25 mm
1,40
25
2,24
1.000
8
BRDEZ1,7x35
74198
1950526
Dykker elforzinket 1,7x35 mm
1,70
35
2,72
1.000
8
BRDEZ1,7x40
74199
1950527
Dykker elforzinket 1,7x40 mm
1,70
40
2,72
1.000
8
BRDEZ2,0x50
74201
1950529
Dykker elforzinket 2,0x50 mm
2,00
50
3,20
500
8
Dykkere anvendes f.eks. til opsætning af lister eller til at fastgøre hårde træplader til 
et underlag af træ. Hovedet er undersænket hvilket giver en skjult udsømning.
BRDEZ / BRDC / BRDHG Dykkere
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
BRDC1,4x25
74202
1950530
Dykker hvidlakeret 1,4x25 mm
1,40
25
2,24
1.000
8
BRDC1,7x35
74203
1950531
Dykker hvidlakeret 1,7x35 mm
1,70
35
2,72
1.000
8
BRDC1,7x40
74204
1950532
Dykker hvidlakeret 1,7x40 mm
1,70
40
2,72
1.000
8
BRDC2,0x50
74205
1950533
Dykker hvidlakeret 2,0x50 mm
2,00
50
3,20
500
8
BRDC2,3x60
74206
1950534
Dykker hvidlakeret 2,3x60 mm
2,30
60
3,68
500
6
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
BRDHG1,7x35
74207
1950535
Dykker varmforzinket 1,7x35 mm
1,70
35
2,72
1.000
8
BRDHG1,7x40
74208
1950536
Dykker varmforzinket 1,7x40 mm
1,70
40
2,72
1.000
8
BRDHG2,0x50
74209
1950537
Dykker varmforzinket 2,0x50 mm
2,00
50
3,20
500
8
BRDHG2,0x60
74210
1950538
Dykker varmforzinket 2,3x60 mm
2,30
60
3,68
500
6
BRDHG2,0x75
74211
1950539
Dykker varmforzinket 2,8x75 mm
2,80
75
4,48
250
8
BRDC Hvidlakeret
BRDEZ Elforzinket
BRDHG Ekstra varmforzinket
Egenskaber:
•	 Lille undersænket hoved
•	 Hulkehl skaft
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
55
Hulkehl
Hulkehl
Hulkehl
20 mm - 50 mm
25 mm - 60 mm
35 mm - 75 mm
SC 1
INDOOR
INDOOR
SC 1
SC 3
OUTDOOR
==PAGE:237==
Søm
Reference 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
D
PN2,4x35
74150
1950506
Gipssøm elforzinket 2,4x35 mm
2,40
35
6,00
1.000
8
Gipssøm anvendes indendørs og i tørre miljøer, til fastgørelse af gipsplader 
og porøse træfiberplader i underlag af træ.
PN Gipssøm, elforzinket
PN Elforzinket
35 mm
Egenskaber:
•	 Undersænket hoved
•	 Takket skaft
Anvendes til:
•	 Gipsplader på træ
ODYK håndsøm er runde dykkere, som kan anvendes til forskellige formål 
og til fastgørelse i træ.
ODYK Elforzinket
Egenskaber:
•	 Lille undersænket hoved
•	 Rundt skaft
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Dykkere
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
ODYK1,2x20
74594
1950579
Dykker rund 1,2x20 mm
1,20
20
1,8
1.000
8
ODYK1,2x25
74721
1950601
Dykker rund 1,2x25 mm
1,20
25
1,8
1.000
8
ODYK1,4x25
74722
1950602
Dykker rund 1,4x35 mm
1,40
35
1,8
1.000
8
ODYK1,6x40
74723
1950603
Dykker rund 1,6x40 mm
1,60
40
1,8
1.000
8
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
56
SC 1
INDOOR
ODYK Runde dykkere, elforzinket
20 mm - 40 mm
SC 1
INDOOR
==PAGE:238==
Søm
Søm
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
TNA2,6x25
74215
1950544
Søm alu med tætningskive 2,6x25 mm
2,60
25
6,50
1.000
8
TNA3,0x30
74216
1950545
Søm alu med tætningskive 3,0x30 mm
3,00
30
6,50
500
8
TNA3,0x35
74217
1950546
Søm alu med tætningskive 3,0x35 mm
3,00
35
7,50
500
8
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
dh
BRN1,4x25
74191
1950519
Messingsøm blank 1,4x25 mm
1,40
25
2,80
1.000
8
BRN1,7x30
74192
1950520
Messingsøm blank 1,7x30 mm
1,70
30
3,40
1.000
8
BRN2,0x35
74193
1950521
Messingsøm blank 2,0x35 mm
2,00
35
4,00
1.000
8
BRN2,0x40
74194
1950522
Messingsøm blank 2,0x40 mm
2,00
40
4,00
1.000
8
BRN2,5x50
74195
1950523
Messingsøm blank 2,5x50 mm
2,50
50
5,00
500
8
Anvendes til at fastgøre aluminiumsplader mm. på træ.
TNA Søm, alu med tætningsskive
Messingsøm anvendes primært indendørs f.eks. ved opsætning af lister og 
dørtrin på underlag af træ.
BRN Messingsøm, blank
TNA Aluminium
BRN Messing
Egenskaber:
•	 Linsehoved med EPDM-skive
•	 Forkamringer på skaftet
•	 Coated aluminium
Anvendes til:
•	 Aluminumplader til træ
Egenskaber:
•	 Linsehoved
•	 Rundt skaft
Anvendes til:
•	 Træ til træ
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
57
25 mm - 35 mm
25 mm - 50 mm
SC 3
OUTDOOR
SC 1
INDOOR
==PAGE:239==
Søm
Kramper
Krampen anvendes til opsætning af hegn og metaltråd til træstolper mm. 
CEZ / CHG Kramper
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
A
CEZ1,75x19
74234
1950563
Krampe elforzinket 1,75x19 mm
1,75
19
5
1.000
8
CEZ Elforzinket
Reference
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal ks. pr. 
omkarton
Ø
L
A
CHG2,50x25
74235
1950564
Krampe varmforzinket 2,50x25 mm
2,50
25
7
500
8
CHG2,75x30
74236
1950565
Krampe varmforzinket 2,75x30 mm
2,75
30
8
500
8
CHG3,00x35
74237
1950566
Krampe varmforzinket 3,00x35 mm
3,00
35
10
250
8
CHG3,25x40
74238
1950567
Krampe varmforzinket 3,25x40 mm
3,25
40
10
250
8
CHG3,75x50
74239
1950568
Krampe varmforzinket 3,75x50 mm
3,75
50
11
250
4
CHG4,00x60
74240
1950569
Krampe varmforzinket 4,00x60 mm
4,00
60
11
150
6
CHG Ekstra varmgalvaniseret
Egenskaber:
•	 Rundt skaft
Anvendes til:
•	 Metaltråd til træ
Søm
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
58
19 mm - 60 mm
SC 1
INDOOR
SC 3
OUTDOOR
==PAGE:240==
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
59
Europæisk produktion
Ud over vores mange nyudviklinger og detaljerede testarbejde, er 
vores europæisk baserede produktionsfaciliteter det der gør det 
muligt for os at levere produkter af højeste kvalitet. Vi investerer i - og 
opfinder - produktionsteknologi, der kan give vores designs liv og 
i sidste ende bidrage til at give dine projekter styrke, hastighed og 
succes.
Se mere på strongtie.dk
==PAGE:241==
ABR9020Z vinkelbeslag
CSA-Z beslagskruer
Dokumenteret styrke
i alle samlinger
==PAGE:242==
Bygningsbeslag
Vinkelbeslag................................................................. 62
Vinkelbeslag med ribbe.................................................. 62
Vinkelbeslag til udendørsbrug, ZPRO.............................. 62
Vinkelbeslag med kantforstærkning................................ 63
Vinkelbeslag til montage af letfacader............................ 63
Højstyrke vinkelbeslag...............................................63, 70
Betonvinkler................................................................. 64
Betonvinkler til udendørsbrug, ZPRO............................... 64
Trækankerbeslag............................................................ 65
Forskydningsvinkel......................................................... 65
Vinkelbeslag med bolthuller............................................ 66
Vinkelbeslag til tagspærmontage.................................... 69
Kraftigt vinkelbeslag....................................................... 69
Knagger......................................................................... 69
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning.................................. 70
Vinkelbeslag og Hulplade til CLT..................................... 72
Montagesystemer........................................................ 73
Vinduesmontage............................................................ 73
Dørmontagebeslag......................................................... 75
Elementmontage............................................................ 76
Facademontage.............................................................. 77
Vindafstivning og forankring....................................... 78
Wind Secure® kits.......................................................... 78
Bandlock® vindkrydssæt................................................ 78
Bandlock® Pro Båndstrammer og Sokkelanker............... 79
Tilslutningsbeslag, båndstrammer og båndspændere..... 80
Vindtrækbånd................................................................. 82
Beslag til tagkonstruktioner........................................ 83
Universalbeslag og Tagåseankre..................................... 83
Lægtebeslag.................................................................. 84
Toplægtebeslag og Topplankebeslag............................... 84
Spær- & gaffelankre....................................................... 85
Spærfodsbeslag og Spærvinkel...................................... 86
Spærrejsningsbeslag...................................................... 87
Forankring på ståldrager................................................ 87
Bjælkesko & bjælkebærere............................................. 88
Vekseljern...................................................................... 91
Endetræsbeslag.............................................................. 92
Bjælkesko til I-bjælker ................................................... 93
Skjult bjælkebærer......................................................... 94
Hulplader....................................................................... 96
Ikke-bærende reperationsplader..................................... 98
Gerberbeslag.................................................................. 99
Søjlesko....................................................................... 100
Tilbehør til beslag......................................................... 105
Bulldog® skiver............................................................ 107
Bygningsbeslag
==PAGE:243==
Vinkelbeslag
ABR7015, ABR9020 og ABR10525 vinkelbeslag med den karakteristiske 
nøglehulsribbe er en videreudvikling af det klassiske ABR vinkelbeslag. 
Den patenterede nøglehulsribbe giver beslagene endnu højere bæreevne 
end beslag med standard ribbe.
AB Vinkelbeslag uden ribbe
AB70, AB90 og AB105 er traditionelle vinkelbeslag uden ribbe. Beslagene 
anvendes der hvor der ikke stilles høje krav til bæreevnen men hvor der stadig 
ønskes en stærk beslagssamling.
ABR Vinkelbeslag med ribbe
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ABR7015
1553168
Vinkelbeslag med nøglehulsribbe
70
70
55
1,5
50
A4
ABR7015S
1901749
Rustfri syrefast vinkelbeslag med ribbe, A4 *)
70
70
55
1,5
25
ABR9020
1241531
Vinkelbeslag med nøglehulsribbe
88
88
65
2,0
50
A4
ABR9020S
1901752
Rustfri syrefast vinkelbeslag med ribbe, A4 *)
88
88
65
2,0
25
ABR10525
1553164
Vinkelbeslag med nøglehulsribbe
105
105
90
2,5
50
A4
ABR10525S
1901755
Rustfri vinkelbeslag med ribbe, A4 *)
105
105
90
2,5
25
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
ABR-Z Vinkelbeslag til udendørsbrug, ZPRO
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ABR7015Z
2048395
ZPRO Vinkelbeslag med nøglehulsribbe
70
70
55
1,5
50
ABR9020Z
1938737
ZPRO vinkelbeslag med nøglehulsribbe
88
88
65
2,0
50
ABR10525Z
2048396
ZPRO Vinkelbeslag med nøglehulsribbe
105
105
90
2,5
50
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
AB70*
7742299
Vinkel AB70 uden ribbe 
70
70
55
2,0
100
A4
AB70S-B
5650114
Vinkel 70 uden ribbe, rustfri syrefast, A4 **)
70
70
55
2,0
100
AB90*
3779303
Vinkel AB90 uden ribbe 
88
88
65
2,5
100
A4
AB90S-B
2914711
Vinkel AB90 uden ribbe, rustfri syrefast, A4 **)
88
88
65
2,5
100
AB105*
3779329
Vinkel AB105 uden ribbe 
103
103
90
3,0
50
A4
AB105S-B
2914661
Vinkel 105 uden ribbe, rustfri syrefast, A4 **)
103
103
90
3,0
50
*) Find flere informationer i kapitlet 'Rustfrie beslag'.
**) Find flere informationer i kapitlet 'Rustfrie beslag'.
*Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
62
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
AB90
C
A
B
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ABR9020
C
A
B
PATENT
ETA-06/0106
SC 2
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
PATENT
ETA-06/0106
SC 3
®
PRO
==PAGE:244==
*Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Vinkelbeslag
ABR Vinkelbeslag med kantforstærkning
ABR9015 og ABR100 vinkelbeslag med kantforstærkninger er et godt 
alternativ til beslag med ribbeforstærkning, der hvor der ønsker ekstra 
styrke. ABR100 leveres med et ovalt bolthul hvilket gør det muligt at 
justere beslaget under fastgørelse på beton.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ABR170
1611299
Vinkel ABR170 til montage af letfacader
170
40
95
2,0
25
ABR220
1805973
Vinkel ABR220 til montage af letfacader
220
40
95
2,0
25
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
ABR Vinkelbeslag til montage af letfacader
Vinkelbeslag ABR170 og ABR220 anvendes til samlinger i bærende 
trækonstruktioner og stålløsninger samt træ-beton samlinger. ABR170/220 
kan anvendes ved opbygning af en let påhængt facade. Det skal over­vejes 
om konstruktionen skal understøttes af et fundament.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
E20/3
1247118
Vinkel E20/3 højstyrkebeslag
170
113
95
3,0
25
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
E20/3 Højstyrke vinkelbeslag
E20/3 er et kraftigt vinkelbeslag i 3,0 mm stål med ribbeforstærkning. Be-
slaget giver mulighed for installationer i beton med 4 bolte, hvilket skaber 
en yderst stærk samling med meget høje bæreevneværdier.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ABR9015*
1241530
Vinkel ABR9015 med kantforstærkning
89
89
60
1,5
50
ABR100*
1329235
Vinkel ABR100 med kantforstærkning 
100
100
90
2,0
50
A4
ABR100S
1870240
Vinkel 100 rustfri syrefast, A4 **)
100
100
90
2,0
50
**) Find flere informationer i kapitlet 'Rustfrie beslag'.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
63
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
C
A
B
E20/3
ABR170
C
A
B
ABR220
ETA-06/0106
C
A
B
ABR9015
ABR100
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
ETA-06/0106
SC 2
==PAGE:245==
Vinkelbeslag
AKR-Z Betonvinkler til udendørsbrug, ZPRO
AKR vinkelbeslag er kraftige vinkelbeslag forsynet med kantribbe­forstærkning. 
AKR beslagene har en godstykkelse på 3,0 mm med ZPRO coating og kan 
derfor benyttes udendørs.
ABL / ABJ Betonvinkler
Ekstra varmgalvaniserede betonvinkler uden dokumenterede bære­evner. 
Samlinger med ABL og ABJ er dermed ikke CE-mærkede.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
AKR95Z
2048459
ZPRO Vinkelbeslag AKR95
95
85
65
3,0
25
AKR95LZ
2048462
ZPRO Vinkelbeslag AKR95 - L
95
85
65
3,0
25
AKR135Z
2048465
ZPRO Vinkelbeslag AKR135 
135
85
65
3,0
25
AKR135LZ
2048466
ZPRO Vinkelbeslag AKR135 - L 
135
85
65
3,0
25
AKR285Z
2048467
ZPRO Vinkelbeslag AKR285 
285
85
65
3,0
25
AKR285LZ
2048468
ZPRO Vinkelbeslag AKR285 - L 
285
85
65
3,0
25
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ABL7514G
8977753
Betonvinkel P 75x75x6x50-14 
75
75
50
6,0
50
ABL10014G
7742182
Betonvinkel P 100x75x8x60-14 
100
75
60
8,0
25
ABL15014G
8977761
Betonvinkel P 150x75x8x60-14 
150
75
60
8,0
25
ABL15017G
5653597
Betonvinkel P 150x75x8x60 17,5 
150
75
60
8,0
25
ABJ210G
8977779
Betonvinkel 210x310x10x50 
309
209
50
10,0
10
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
64
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
C
A
B
ABJ210G
ETA-07/0285
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
®
PRO
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
L = aflangt hul
AKR135LZ
C
A
B
ABL15014
==PAGE:246==
Vinkelbeslag
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
AH9035
8977746
Trækankerbeslag 90x35x2,5x40 
90
35
40
2,5
100
AH9055
1805974
Trækankerbeslag 90x55x2,5x40
90
55
40
2,5
100
AH16050
7742190
Trækankerbeslag 160x50x3,0x40 
160
50
40
3,0
100
AH19050/2
5385138
Trækankerbeslag 190X50X2,0X40
192
52
40
2,0
100
AH29050/2
5385183
Trækankerbeslag 290x50x2,0x40
292
52
40
2,0
50
AH Trækankerbeslag
AH vinkelbeslagene anvendes til bjælke-bjælkesamlinger 
(AH9035 og AH16050) eller til samlinger mellem træbjælker/
træsøjler og beton.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
BNV33
5210321
Forskydningsvinkel 33x61x1,5x180
63
35
180
1,5
50
BNV Forskydningsvinkel
BNV vinklerne anvendes til bjælke-bjælkesamling eller samling af bjælke til 
beton f.eks. til fastgørelse af skotbjælke på rem i spærkonstruktioner.
A
B
C
AH9035
AH9055
AH16050
AH19050/2
AH29050/2
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
65
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
C
A
B
ETA-06/0106
ETA-07/0285
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
==PAGE:247==
Vinkelbeslag
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
AE48
3779212
Vinkel AE48
90
48
48
3,0
100
AE76
7742208
Vinkel AE76
90
48
76
3,0
100
AE116
7742216
Vinkel AE116
90
48
116
3,0
50
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
AE Vinkelbeslag med bolthuller
AE vinkelbeslag anvendes til bjælke-bjælkesamlinger eller samlinger på beton 
i bærende konstruktioner. AE116 er velegnet  til samling af bjælkespær på 
kiprem. 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
AG40312
1680602
Vinkel AG40312 
119
91
40
3,0
100
AG40314
5653563
Vinkel AG40314 
141
91
40
3,0
50
AG40412 
8977720
Vinkel AG40412
120
92
40
4,0
50
AG40414 
5653589
Vinkel AG40414
142
92
40
4,0
50
VIG40417*
5256991
Vinkel VIG40417
169
89
40
4,0
50
AG / VIG Vinkelbeslag
AG vinkelbeslagene anvendes til bjælke-bjælkesamlinger, bjælke-søjlesamlinger 
og samlinger på beton i bærende konstruktioner.  
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
AJ60416
5653126
Vinkel AJ60416 
164
84
60
4,0
50
AJ80416
5653324
Vinkel AJ80416 
164
84
80
4,0
25
AJ99416
5653332
Vinkel AJ99416 
164
84
100
4,0
25
AJ Vinkelbeslag
AJ vinkelbeslag anvendes til bjælke-bjælkesamlinger mm. i bærende 
trækonstruk­tioner, hvor der stilles store krav til bæreevnen. 
*Ikke CE-mærket.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
66
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
C
A
B
AJ60416
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
AG40312
C
A
B
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
C
A
B
AE116
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
==PAGE:248==
Vinkelbeslag
AA / ABB Vinkelbeslag til lette samlinger
AA og ABB vinkelbeslag anvendes til bjælke-bjælkesamlinger i bærende 
trækonstruktioner med små tømmerdimensioner. 
*Sælges kun i hele kasser.
*Sælges kun i hele kasser.
AC, ACR og AB vinkelbeslag anvendes ved små tømmerdimensioner til bjælke-
bjælke­samlinger eller til samling mellem træbjælke og beton. Der skal altid 
anvendes to vinkelbeslag pr. samling. 
AC / ACR / AB Småvinkler
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
AF90265
8977712
Vinkel AF90265 
67
67
90
2,0
100
AF Vinkelbeslag
AF vinkelbeslag uden dokumenterede bæreevner anvendes ved bjælke-bjælke-
samlinger med små tømmer­dimensioner. 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
AA60280*
1393510
Vinkel AA60280
83
62
40
2,0
50
ABB40390*
3779360
Vinkel ABB40390 
93
93
40
3,0
100
A4
ABB40390S-B
2914687
Vinkel 40390 rustfri syrefast, A4 **)
93
93
40
3,0
100
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ACR4712*
1544663
Vinkel ACR4712
48
48
37
1,25
100
AC35350*
5294082
Vinkel AC35350
50
50
35
2,0
100
A4
AC35350S
5307882
Vinkel AC35350 rustfri syrefast, A4 *)
50
50
35
2,0
100
AB55365*
1386018
Vinkel AB55365
65
65
55
2,5
100
A4
AB55365S-B
1454180
Vinkel 55365 rustfri syrefast, A4 *)
65
65
55
2,5
100
**) Find flere informationer i kapitlet 'Rustfrie beslag'.
*) Find flere informationer i kapitlet 'Rustfrie beslag'.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
67
C
A
B
AB55365
C
A
B
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
ACR4712
AC35350
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
AA60280
C
A
B
ABB40390
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
==PAGE:249==
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ANP254440
7742398
Hulpladevinkel 40x40x2,5x40 
40
40
40
2,5
200
ANP254460
1644046
Hulpladevinkel 40x40x2,5x60 
40
40
60
2,5
150
ANP254660
8258162
Hulpladevinkel 40x60x2,5x60 
40
60
60
2,5
150
ANP256640
1680636
Hulpladevinkel 60x60x2,5x40 
60
60
40
2,5
100
ANP256650
5650395
Hulpladevinkel 60x60x2,5x50 
60
60
50
2,5
150
ANP256660
4618724
Hulpladevinkel 60x60x2,5x60 
60
60
60
2,5
100
A4
ANP256660S-B
2914646
Vinkel 60x60x2,5x60 rustfri syrefast, A4 *)
60
60
60
2,5
100
ANP256680
1644053
Hulpladevinkel 60x60x2,5x80 
60
60
80
2,5
100
ANP2566100
5653399
Hulpladevinkel 60x60x2,5x100 
60
60
100
2,5
50
ANP256860
8258170
Hulpladevinkel 60x80x2,5x60 
60
80
60
2,5
100
ANP2561060
8258188
Hulpladevinkel 60x100x2,5x60 
60
100
60
2,5
100
ANP258860
5650411
Hulpladevinkel 80x80x2,5x60 
80
80
60
2,5
100
ANP258880
7742406
Hulpladevinkel 80x80x2,5x80 
80
80
80
2,5
50
ANP2588100
1684369
Hulpladevinkel 80x80x2,5x100
80
80
100
2,5
50
ANP25101060
5653381
Hulpladevinkel 100x100x2,5x60 
100
100
60
2,5
50
ANP25101080
5804551
Hulpladevinkel 100x100x2,5x80
100
100
80
2,5
50
ANP251010100
5653373
Hulpladevinkel 100x100x2,5x100 
100
100
100
2,5
50
ANP251020100-B
1868934
Hulpladevinkel 100x200x2,5x100
200
100
100
2,5
25
Vinkelbeslag
ANP Hulpladevinkler (2,5 mm)
ANP vinklerne anvendes til bjælke-bjælkesamlinger, bjælke-søjlesamling­er 
eller udvekslinger. 
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ANPS204425
4733051
Hulpladevinkel 40x40x2,0x25 
42
42
25
2,0
200
ANPS204625
4733069
Hulpladevinkel 40x60x2,0x25 
40
60
25
2,0
200
ANPS206625
4733077
Hulpladevinkel 60x60x2,0x25 
60
60
25
2,0
200
ANPS Hulpladevinkler (2,0 mm)
ANPS vinklerne anvendes til samlinger med små tømmerdimensioner. 
Brug altid to beslag pr. samling. 
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
*) Find flere informationer i kapitlet 'Rustfrie beslag'.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
68
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
C
A
B
ANP254440
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
C
A
B
ANPS204425
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
==PAGE:250==
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
KNAG90-B
1579879
Knagge 90
90
90
65
2,0
50
KNAG130
1585755
Knagge 130
125
125
80
2,0
50
KNAG170
1585756
Knagge 170
160
160
95
2,0
25
KNAG210-B
1579903
Knagge 210
200
200
100
2,0
15
KNAG Knagger
KNAG beslagene anvendes til bjælke-bjælkesamlinger, hvori der indgår større 
trædimensioner. Beslagene er især anvendelige i tagkonstruktioner med stor 
hældning. KNAG beslag anvendes alene eller, hvis store bære­evner ønskes, 
sammen med et eller to tagåsankre.
Vinkelbeslag
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ADR6035
5653357
Vinkel ADR6035
60
37
60
2,5
100
ADR6090L
1882590
Vinkel ADR6090L til tagspærmontage mm.
90
60
60
2,0
100
ADR Vinkelbeslag til tagspærmontage
ADR familien består af 3 vinkelbeslag, der sammen giver en lang række installations-
muligheder. ADR6090L er f.eks. velegnet til fastgørelse af tagspærkonstruktioner på 
murremmen, da de ovale huller i den lodrette flig muliggør at optage årstidsbestemte 
fugtudvidelser fra tagspærene. ADR6035 kan anvendes til forankring af vindtræk-
bånd til soklen.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
AG922
1863949
Vinkel AG922 med ribbeforstærkninger
121
79
151
2,5
25
AG Kraftigt vinkelbeslag
AG922 er et bredt vinkelbeslag med ribbeforstærkninger som kan anvendes i en 
række bærende konstruktioner, hvor der ønskes høj bæreevne. 
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
69
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
C
A
B
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ETA-06/0106
ETA-06/0106
SC 2
20 µm
Z275
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
A
B
C
AG922
A
N
B
E
F
A
L
E
T
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ADR6090L
C
A
B
ADR6035
==PAGE:251==
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
EBC100/2.5
2049808
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
98
53
65
2,5
50
EBC110/2.5
2049809
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
108
53
65
2,5
50
EBC120/2.5
2049811
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
118
53
65
2,5
50
EBC130/2.5
2049813
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
128
53
65
2,5
50
EBC140/2.5
2049814
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
138
53
65
2,5
50
EBC150/2.5
2049815
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
148
53
65
2,5
50
EBC160/2.5
2049817
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
158
53
65
2,5
50
EBC170/2.5
2049818
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
168
53
65
2,5
25
EBC180/2.5
2049819
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
178
53
65
2,5
25
EBC190/2.5
2049820
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
188
53
65
2,5
25
EBC200/2.5
2049821
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
198
53
65
2,5
25
EBC210/2.5
2049823
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
208
53
65
2,5
25
EBC220/2.5
2119321
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
218
53
65
2,5
25
EBC230/2.5
2119325
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
228
53
65
2,5
25
EBC240/2.5
2119332
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
238
53
65
2,5
50
EBC250/2.5
2119328
Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
248
53
65
2,5
50
EBC Vinkelbeslag til letvægsopbygning
EBC beslagene er designet til at opfylde de generelle regler for konstruktion og 
installation af udvendig termisk isolering og trærammebeklædning. De overholder 
CSTB specifikationerne 3194, 3316 og 3422 samt ETAG034 og er en del af ITE 
serien udviklet af Simpson Strong-Tie.
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Vinkelbeslag
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
E9/2,5
1420938
Vinkel E9/2,5 højstyrkebeslag
154
153
65
2,5
50
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
E9/2,5 forstærkede beslag er designede til strukturelle anvendelser i 
trærammebygninger.
E9/2,5 Højstyrke vinkelbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
70
ETA-06/0106
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
E9/2,5
C
A
B
SC 2
EBC
C
A
B
==PAGE:252==
Trækankre
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
HTT4
1388657
Trækanker HTT4
314
60
64
2,8
16
HTT5
1388655
Trækanker HTT5
403
56
64
2,8
10
HTT22E
2049836
Trækanker HTT22E
558
60
63
3,0
10
HTT31
2151752
Trækanker HTT31
793
60
90
3,0
5
HTT Trækankre
HTT trækankre anvendes i konstruktioner hvor der er 
behov for at forankre for store trækkræfter. Det kan 
være i byggerier med CLT elementer, træskelletvægge 
eller med præfabrikerede træelementer.  
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
HD340M12G-B
5804535
Trækanker 340 - M12
340
182
40
15
2,0
10
HD400M16G-B
5804536
Trækanker 400 - M16
400
123
40
15
3,0
10
HD420M16G-B
5804537
Trækanker 420 - M16
420
222
60
20
2,0
8
HD420M20G-B
5804538
Trækanker 420 - M20
420
102
60
20
2,0
10
HD Trækanker med underlagsklods
HD Trækankre består af to dele: Et vinkelbukket vindtræksbånd af varmforzinket 
plade og en varmforzinket underlagsplade som er i stand til at føre trækket i 
vindtrækbåndets lodrette del hen til betonbefæstigelsen.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
71
HD340M12G
A
C
D
B
ETA-07/0285
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
HTT4
C
B
A
HTT22E
ETA-07/0285
SC 2
HTT31E
HTT5
==PAGE:253==
NPB Hulplade til CLT
NPB er en hulplade der blev speciel udviklet til at forbinde CLT paneler til beton 
eller træ elementer. NPB kan optage store laster i lodret plan (F1) og vandret i 
parallel plan (F2/3)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
NPB255
1967265
Hulplade til CLT
214
255
3,0
10
Vinkelbeslag
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
AB255HD
2112421
Heavy duty træk- og forskydningsvinkel til CLT
120
100
255
3,0
10
AB255SSH
2121743
Heavy duty vinkelbeslag med SSH skruer til CLT
123
100
255
3,0
10
ABR255
1901628
Forskydningsvinkel til CLT
120
100
255
3,0
10
ABR255SO
2112422
Forskydningsvinkel til CLT på rem og beton
200
100
255
3,0
10
AB255 / ABR255 Vinkelbeslag til CLT
AB255HD vinkelbeslaget er udviklet til CLT-konstruktioner. Det 
fleksible vinkelbeslag er designet til både forskydning og lodret 
belastning. Forstærkning med fuldgevind konstruktionsskruer 
muliggør den meget høje lodrette styrke. 
AB255SSH vinkelbeslaget er udviklet til CLT-konstruktioner. Det 
fleksible vinkelbeslag er designet til både forskydning og lodret 
belastning. Muligheden for montage med SSH skruer sikrer en 
god bæreevne og meget hurtig montage.
ABR255 anvendes primært i CLT-konstruktioner, hvor der kan 
forekomme store horisontale forskydningskrafter.
ABR255SO anvendes i de situationer hvor der bliver brugt en rem 
til at opretning af beton inden vægelementer monteres.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
72
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
NPB255
A
B
ETA-06/0106
SC 2
C
A
B
AB255HD
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ABR255
AB255SSH
ABR255SO
==PAGE:254==
Montagesystemer
VIMOCON Vindueskonsoller  
VIMOCON™ vindueskonsoller anvendes til montage af vinduer på beton- 
eller letbeton vægge. De nye konsoller udmærker sig ved deres helt 
plane overflade, forstærkningsribber på siderne, samt det patenterede 
VIMOLOCK™ monteringshul som gør det muligt at finjustere og tilpasse 
konsollen til det borede hul i falsen, og dermed sikre at konsollen er 
monteret i vater. 
Muligheden for at finjustere konsollen under montagen er en stor fordel da 
man ofte støder på uforudsete udfordringer når man borer i beton eller let-
beton. Ofte ender man ud med et hul der ikke er placeret præcis der hvor 
man havde planlagt det og monterer man herefter et almindeligt konsol-
beslag i et forkert placeret hul, kan det resultere i at konsollen ikke sidder 
plant mod væggen og i sidste ende kommer vinduet til at sidde skævt. 
Med VIMOCON™ er man i disse tilfælde garanteret en mere fleksibel og 
sikker montage.
Konsollerne er desuden udført i ZPRO materiale som er godkendt til 
udendørs brug. Man behøver derfor ikke bekymre sig om risikoen for 
korrosion og derved forringet levetid ved f.eks. ophobning af kondens i 
hulmuren.
VIMOLOCK™ 
monteringshul
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
VIMOCON85Z
2104833
ZPRO Konsolbeslag 85
155
43
85
70
2,0
20
VIMOCON110Z
2104819
ZPRO Konsolbeslag 110
180
43
110
70
2,0
20
VIMOCON120Z
2104820
ZPRO Konsolbeslag 120
190
43
120
70
2,0
20
VIMOCON130Z
2104823
ZPRO Konsolbeslag 130
200
43
130
80
2,0
20
VIMOCON145Z
2104824
ZPRO Konsolbeslag 145
215
43
145
80
2,0
20
VIMOCON155Z
2104825
ZPRO Konsolbeslag 155
225
43
155
108
2,0
20
VIMOCON170Z
2104828
ZPRO Konsolbeslag 170
240
43
170
108
2,0
20
VIMOCON185Z
2104830
ZPRO Konsolbeslag 185
255
43
185
108
2,0
20
VIMOCON215Z
2104831
ZPRO Konsolbeslag 215
285
43
215
108
2,0
20
VIMOCON240Z
2104832
ZPRO Konsolbeslag 240
310
43
240
108
2,0
20
Ring til vores Sales Support for andre størrelser, tlf: 8781 7400.
VIMOCONP Trykfod til VIMOCON 
på porebeton
VIMOCONP anvendes sammen med VIMOCON konsolbeslagene i de tilfælde hvor 
bagmuren består af porebeton. VIMOCONP klikkes nemt fast på VIMOCON uden 
brug af skruer og bolte og er derved med til at fordele lasten fra vinduer ud på et 
større område af porebetonen
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
VIMOCONP
2151754
Trykfod til VIMOCON på porebeton
35 
46 
20
2,0
20
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
VIMOCONP 
monteret på 
VIMOCON
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
73
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
®
PRO
SC 3
A
D
C
B
VIMOCON
VIMOCONP
==PAGE:255==
Montagesystemer
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
VIMT170-B
5209111
Trykbeslag T170
170
30
2,0
50
VIMT190-B
5209112
Trykbeslag T190
190
30
2,0
50
VIMT200-B
5209113
Trykbeslag T200
200
30
2,0
50
VIMT215-B
5209114
Trykbeslag T215
215
30
2,0
50
VIMT225-B
5209115
Trykbeslag T225
225
30
2,0
50
VIMT240-B
5209116
Trykbeslag T240
240
30
2,0
50
VIMT250-B
5209117
Trykbeslag T250
250
30
2,0
50
VIMT290
1292292
Trykbeslag T290
290
30
2,0
50
VIMT350
1684374
Trykbeslag T350
350
30
2,0
50
VIMT370
1684375
Trykbeslag T370
370
30
2,0
50
VIMT Trykbeslag til vinduer med trækarme
Trykbeslaget VIMT anvendes til fastholdelse af vinduer med trækarme. Montage 
af beslag og vindue kan ske inde fra bygningen. Trykbeslag VIMT optager vindlast 
og fastholder vinduet for vandrette påvirkninger vinkelret på vinduet. 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
VIMS232-B
5209118
Skråbeslag S232
232
30
2,0
50
VIMS260-B
5209120
Skråbeslag S260
260
30
2,0
50
VIMS275-B
5209121
Skråbeslag S275
275
30
2,0
50
VIMS296-B
5209122
Skråbeslag S296
296
30
2,0
50
VIMS310-B
5209123
Skråbeslag S310
310
30
2,0
50
VIMS331-B
5209124
Skråbeslag S331
331
30
2,0
50
VIMS345-B
5209125
Skråbeslag S345
345
30
2,0
50
VIMS400
1292291
Skråbeslag S400
400
30
2,0
50
VIMS Skråbeslag til alle typer vinduer
Skråbeslagene VIMS kan kun optage træk og anvendes på over- eller under-
karm for at fastholde vinduet sideværts. 
VIMOKOMP Trykbeslag til komposit­karme
Trykbeslaget VIMOKOMP anvendes til fastholdelse af vinduer med kompositkarme. Montage 
af beslag og vindue kan ske inde fra bygning­en. Trykbeslag VIMOKOMP optager vindlast og 
fastholder vinduet for vandrette påvirkninger i vinduets plan. Vimokomp giver gode muligheder for 
karmjustering. 
VIMOKOMP leveres kun som specialbeslag. Der skal påregnes leveringstid - ring til Sales Support 
og hør nærmere, tlf: 8781 7400. 
 
OBS: Specialbeslag tages ikke retur! 
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
74
VIMS
B
A
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
VIMT
B
A
t=3
60
A
VIMOKOMP
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
==PAGE:256==
Montagesystemer
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
VIMOP130-B
1603059
Vimoplade 130x55x3,0
130
55
3,0
50
VIMOP155-B
2856946
Vimoplade 155x55x3,0 
155
55
3,0
50
VIMOP180-B
1603067
Vimoplade 180x60x3,0
180
60
3,0
50
VIMOP250-B
2856953
Vimoplade 250x60x3,0
250
60
3,0
50
VIMO Trykbeslag
Vimobeslagene anvendes som trykbeslag til fastgørelse af vinduer for 
optagelse af vindlast.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
VIMDK155
1901707
Dørkonsol 155
155
153
78
2,0
18
VIMDK170
1901714
Dørkonsol 170
170
153
78
2,0
18
VIMDK180
1901715
Dørkonsol 180
180
153
78
2,0
16
VIMDK190
1901717
Dørkonsol 190
190
153
78
2,0
16
VIMDK215
1901718
Dørkonsol 215
215
153
78
2,0
14
VIMDK240
1901726
Dørkonsol 240
240
153
78
2,0
12
VIMDK280
1901732
Dørkonsol 280
280
153
78
2,0
12
VIMDK Dørmontagebeslag
Konsolbeslaget VIMDK kan ikke optage lodrette belastninger, men har sin 
styrke ved vandrette belastninger fra hængsler på eksempelvis dørkarme. 
VIMDK anvendes med eller uden trælægtestykke til fastgørelse af vindues- eller 
dørelement afhængig af hvilken side man ønsker at fastgøre karmen fra.
Ring til vores Sales Support for andre størrelser, tlf: 8781 7400.
VIMTK Vindueskonsolbeslag til 
teglstensvægge
Vinduesmontagebeslag VIMTK anvendes til understøtning af vindueselement ved byggeri 
med udvendig isolering på teglstensvægge og betonvægge. Beslaget bruges til at optage 
den lodrette vægt af vinduet. I sider, top og bund sættes nødvendige tryk- og skråbeslag 
til at fastholde vinduet. 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
Ø
VIMTK1152
1561332
Konsolbeslag TK1152
115
330
12,5
10
VIMTK1153
1561440
Konsolbeslag TK1153
115
530
12,5
10
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
75
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
VIMOP250
VIMOP130
A
B
VIMDK
C
A
B
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
VIMTK
B
A
==PAGE:257==
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ACW155
1863947
Konsolbeslag ACW155
123
154
150
2,5
6
ACW Konsolbeslag til montage 
af elementer med høje laster
Konsolbeslag som er udviklet til at montere træ-elementer på betonvægge 
og sokler. Beslagets udformning betyder, at det kan optage store kræfter 
på meget lidt plads. Desuden kan beslaget med fordel gemmes væk bag 
træ-elementerne.
Montagesystemer
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ACFET200
1685562
Konsolbeslag ACFET200
49
100
200
4,0
10
ACFET Konsolbeslag til montage 
af lette vægelementer
ACFET konsolbeslagene anvendes til fastholdelse af lette vægelementer på 
beton. Beslagene anvendes i toppen af de lette vægelementer til fastholdelse 
til beton- eller letklinkerbeton vægelementer. Ved fastgørelse til betonelementer 
anvendes ACFET200 vinkel­beslaget.
DTT2Z Elementsamlingsbeslag
DTT2Z anvendes til at samle store træelementer.
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
DTT2Z
1967339
Elementsamlingsbeslag
176
41
82
41
15
20
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
76
ETA-06/0106
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
C
A
B
ACFET200
ETA-06/0106
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
A
B
C
®
PRO
SC 3
DTT2Z
A
C
B
E
D
==PAGE:258==
Montagesystemer
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
NEDC48238
1672954
Nedføringsbeslag
238
48
118
1,0
50
Nedføringsbeslag til sænkning af lofter for tekniske installationer. Produktet 
er designet ud fra Eurocode 5 og overholder krav til kantafstande.
NEDC Nedføringsbeslag
GAR Skadedyrsstop
GAR sokkelsikring forhindrer passage af gnavere, insekter og andre skadedyr 
i din bygning, samtidigt med at det ventilerer bygningsfacaden. GAR leveres i 
ruller, som er nemme at håndtere under transport og montage - og så tilpasses 
det uden spild på stedet.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
GAR22/45/25
1865791
Skadedyrstop 22x45 mm, 25m
45
22
0,8
25 m
-
GAR25/42/25
1865792
Skadedyrstop 25x42 mm, 25m
42
25
0,8
25 m
-
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
77
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
B
A
C
NEDC48238
GAR
®
PRO
SC 3
==PAGE:259==
Vindafstivning og forankring
Wind Secure® vindafstivningssystemer til montage på overside eller underside 
af tagfladen.
Den store fordel er, at vindtrækbåndet kan monteres direkte på beslaget, 
uden brug af koblingsbeslag. Båndspænder kan selvfølgelig også monteres 
direkte på beslaget. Se montagevejledning som medfølger i vores systemer. 
Vinklen mellem vindtrækbåndet og spær/lægter er variabel, men inden for 
den optimale hældning på 30° og 60°. Dermed kan det ikke lade sig gøre at 
montere båndet i en forkert vinkel.
Kitttet indeholder alle nødvendige beslag, skruer og clips for at kunne lave 1 
vindkryds. Bemærk: Vindtrækbånd sælges separat.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
WSK1
1865761
Kit med alle beslag og skruer til at lave ét vindkryds type V (butterfly vindkryds) *
1 kit
WSK2
1865762
Kit med alle beslag og skruer til at lave ét vindkryds type X (standard vindkryds) *
1 kit
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
WSK Wind Secure® vindkrydssæt 
til 25 og 40 mm bånd
Vindafstivningssystem til montage på overside eller underside. Dette system anvendes 
hvor der behov for styrken fra et 60 mm vindtrækbånd. Vindtrækbåndet fastgøres nemt 
pga. Bandlock® klik systemet.  
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
6099H
2156319
Bandlock® vindkrydssæt til 60 mm bånd *
1 kit
6099H Vindkrydssæt til 60 mm bånd
* BAN vindtrækbånd skal købes separat
Vindkrydssættet indeholder:
•	 2 sæt BNG60
•	 2 stk 6040H
•	 2 stk 6050H
* BAN vindtrækbånd skal købes separat
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
78
WSK1
BNG60 x 2 sæt
6040H x 2 stk
6050H x 2 stk
==PAGE:260==
BPST Bandlock® Pro båndstrammer
Bandlock® Pro BPST båndstrammer anvendes til at opstramme vindtrækbånd og fungerer samtidigt 
som koblingsbeslag mellem vindtrækbånd og Simpson Strong-Tie's Wind Secure® beslag. 
Fordelen ved BPST båndstrammeren er at man kan foretage samlingerne af vindtrækbånd helt uden 
brug af små møtrikker, bolte, dorne eller splitter.
Vindtrækbåndet fastgøres nemt og hurtigt til båndstrammeren med det simple klik-system og det 
eneste værktøj man behøver er en hammer eller tang til at låse samlingen med.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
BPST
2142326
Båndstrammer til 25 og 40 mm bånd
52
325-365
2,5
10
BPTD Bandlock® Pro sokkelanker
Bandlock® Pro BPTD sokkelanker anvendes til at forankre tagkonstruktionen til en M12 
gevindstang nedstøbt i soklen. 
Fordelen ved BPTD sokkelankeret er at man kan foretage samlingen af vindtrækbåndet til 
sokkelankeret helt uden brug af små møtrikker, bolte, dorne eller splitter.
Vindtrækbåndet fastgøres nemt og hurtigt til sokkelankeret med det simple klik-system og 
det eneste værktøj man behøver er en hammer eller tang til at låse samlingen med.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
BPTD
2142348
Sokkelanker (M12) til 25 og 40 mm bånd
52
185
2,5
10
Vindafstivning og forankring
5566H Bandlock® båndsamler, 40 mm
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
5566H
2108470
Bandlock® båndsamler, 40 mm
80
60
2,0
-
Båndsamleren anvendes når der er behov for at samle to BAN vindtrækbånd 
hvor det ikke er nødvendigt at kunne opstramme båndende efterfølgende. 
Det kan f.eks. være anvendeligt hvis et bånd skal samles til et andet bånd 
som er nedstøbt i soklen.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
79
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
BPTD
M12
A
B
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
BPST
A
B
ETA-10/0440
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
PATENT
SC 2
ETA-10/0440
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
PATENT
SC 2
ETA-10/0440
PATENT
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
B
5566H
A
A
N
B
E
F
A
L
E
T
A
N
B
E
F
A
L
E
T
==PAGE:261==
Vindafstivning og forankring
BNG / 6040H / 6050H Tilslutningsbeslag  
og båndstrammer til 60 mm bånd
Tilslutningsbeslagene BNG anvendes i kombination med bånd til 
afstivning af tag-, loft- og vægkonstruktioner. Beslagene anvendes 
altid med trækbånd placeret på oversiden af spærhovedet.
Anvender man 60 mm bånd samles og strammes disse enklest med 
vores Bandlock beslag som er udviklet netop til dette. Hvad enten 
der er tale om vindafstivning eller forankring af tagkonstrutkioner 
samles 60 mm båndet nemt med Bandlock beslagene.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
BNG60-14
1561238
Tilslutningsbeslag type G 60 (til 1 kryds)
262
198
66
3,0
2 sæt
6040H
2156317
Bandlock® båndstrammer med dorn, 60 mm
-
6050H
2156318
Bandlock® med dorn, 60 mm
-
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
F
t
WSD
1865760
Wind Secure® tilslutningsbeslag (inkl. skruer og bolte)
255
137
65
-
-
-
2,5
4
WSB
1865755
Wind Secure® tilslutningsbeslag (inkl. skruer og bolte)
188
224
82
45
77
110
2,5
4
WSP
1865752
Wind Secure® tilslutningsbeslag (inkl. bolte)
255
160
1
-
-
-
2,0
4
WS Wind Secure® tilslutningsbeslag
Tilslutningsbeslag til afstivning af alle typer tagflader. På ubrudte tagflader place-
res WSD på tagkonstruktionens yderste spær og forbindes med WSB beslaget 
placeret på det midterste spær. På brudte tagflader placeres WSD beslagene 
både på de yderste og de midterste spær og forbindes to-og-to med BAN 
vindtrækbånd.
WSP anvendes til afstivning af større tagflader hvor det af forskellige årsager kan 
være nødvendigt at lave flere afstivninger af spærkonstruktionen. WSP beslaget 
kan med sin flade udformning placeres steder hvor det ikke er muligt at bruge 
WSB eller WSD beslag.
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
80
SC 2
BNG
A
B
c
ETA-10/0440
B
t
C
F
E
D
A
WSB
PATENT
A
N
B
E
F
A
L
E
T
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
ETA-10/0440
WSD
B
t
A
C
WSP
B
t
A
6040H
6050H
==PAGE:262==
BNSP Båndspændere til 80 mm bånd
BNSP båndspændere anvendes til indbygning i vindtrækbånd. Herved opnås mulighed 
for mindre opspænding og efterspænding af båndene.
BNSP anvendes til bånd 80. Båndspænderen kan monteres midt på båndet med bånd 
i begge ender eller på koblingsbeslag eller tilslutningsbeslag i den ene ende og bånd i 
den anden ende.
BNSP80 har et Ø21 mm bolthul i den ene ende, hvilket muliggør fastgørelse til stålplade.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
BNSP80-B
8271264
Båndspænder 80 mm bånd
300-360
80
35,0
4
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Vindafstivning og forankring
BF Montageclips
M5X12 Stålsætskruer med møtrik
BF clipsene og M5X12 anvendes til fastgørelse af vindtrækbånd på tilslutningsbeslag 
eller i båndspændere.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. pose
Antal pr. 
kasse
d
l
BF25M5
1561173
Montageclips 25 bånd, nr. 23
5
12
25 x BF25M5
25
BF4060M5
1561181
Montageclips til 40,60,80 bånd, nr. 20
5
12
25 x BF4060M5
25
M5X12
5708372
Bolte M5x12 med møtrik
5
12
-
100
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
81
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
BNSP80
A
B
BF
ETA-10/0440
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
PATENT
SC 2
BF
ETA-10/0440
SC 2
M5X12
C
==PAGE:263==
BAN09 Vindtrækbånd i 0,9 mm højstyrkestål
BAN09 er et 0,9 mm højstyrkebånd som leveres i ruller af 12 meter eller 25 meter. 
Båndet er udstyret med forstærkede strong-holes® der øger trækstyrken. BAN09 
vejer kun ca. halvdelen sammenlignet med tilsvarende bånd i 2 mm stål, hvilket 
gøre det meget nemmere at håndtere og klippe over.
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Ståltype
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
BAN094025
1726428
Vindtrækbånd 40x0,9 - 25 m
S550GD
40
25 m
0,9
1
BAN094050
2144731
Vindtrækbånd 40x0,9 - 50 m
S550GD
40
50 m
0,9
1
BAN Vindtrækbånd i 1,5 eller 2,0 mm stål
BAN vindtrækbånd anvendes til forankring og afstivning af tagkonstruktioner.
Bemærk at BAN202510 sælges kun i hele kasser
*) Vindtrækbånd BAN154025, BAN204025 og BAN204050 er med målangivelse pr. 1/2 m.
**) Find flere informationer i kapitlet 'Rustfrie beslag'.
Vindafstivning og forankring
BAN hulbånd anvendes til forankring og samling af små trækonstruktioner.  
Typiske anvendelser er carporte, legehuse og pergolaer. 
*Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Ståltype
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
BAN202510
2856995
Vindtrækbånd 25x2,0 - 10 m
S250GD
25
10 m
2,0
4
BAN202525
1588383
Vindtrækbånd 25x2,0 - 25 m
S250GD
25
25 m
2,0
1
BAN154025*)
5047697
Vindtrækbånd 40x1,5 - 25 m
S350GD
40
25 m
1,5
1
BAN154050
5047698
Vindtrækbånd 40x1,5 - 50 m
S350GD
40
50 m
1,5
1
BAN204025*)
2634111
Vindtrækbånd 40x2,0 - 25 m
S250GD
40
25 m
2,0
1
A4
BAN204025S
3365475
Vindtrækbånd 40x2,0 - 25 m, rustfri syrefast, A4 **)
1.4404
40
25 m
2,0
1
BAN204050*)
2255073
Vindtrækbånd 40x2,0 - 50 m
S250GD
40
50 m
2,0
1
BAN206050
1597236
Vindtrækbånd 60x2,0 - 50 m
S250GD
60
50 m
2,0
1
BAN208025
3741832
Vindtrækbånd 80x2,0 - 25 m
S250GD
80
25 m
2,0
1
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
BAN102003*
8256216
Hulbånd 20x1,0 - 3 m
20
3 m
1,0
10
BAN102010*
2856979
Hulbånd 20x1,0 - 10 m
20
10 m
1,0
10
A4
BAN102010S
3779121
Hulbånd 20x1,0 - 10 m, rustfri syrefast, A4 **)
20
10 m
1,0
10
BAN102025*
1588367
Hulbånd 20x1,0 - 25 m
20
25 m
1,0
5
BAN152010*
2856987
Hulbånd 20x1,5 - 10 m 
20
10 m
1,5
10
BAN152025*
1588375
Hulbånd 20x1,5 - 25 m
20
25 m
1,5
4
**) Find flere informationer i kapitlet 'Rustfrie beslag'.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
82
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
EN 14545
A
N
B
E
F
A
L
E
T
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
BAN094025
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
BAN204025
EN 14545
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
EN 14545
SC 2
BAN Hulbånd
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
==PAGE:264==
Beslag til tagkonstruktioner
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
UNI100L
1644079
Universalbeslag Mini 100 venstre 
100
52,5
62,5
47,5
2,5
50
UNI100R
1644087
Universalbeslag Mini 100 højre 
100
52,5
62,5
47,5
2,5
50
UNI130L
3779162
Universalbeslag Midi 130 venstre 
130
61,5
62,5
58
2,5
25
UNI130R
3779170
Universalbeslag Midi 130 højre 
130
61,5
62,5
58
2,5
25
UNI190L
1680610
Universalbeslag Maxi 190 venstre
192
49,5
49,5
96
2,0
50
UNI190R
1680628
Universalbeslag Maxi 190 højre 
192
49,5
49,5
96
2,0
50
UNI Universalbeslag
Universalbeslagene anvendes i bjælke-bjælkesamlinger. Når der anvendes 
to beslag pr. samling, skal de placeres diagonalt overfor hinanden.  
Beslagene fremstilles i højre-og venstreudgaver og sælges enkeltvis.
SPF Tagåseankre
SPF tagankre anvendes til forankring mod sug i bjælke-bjælkesamlinger. Beslagene 
kan også optage horisontale kræfter. Afhængig af belastningen anvendes 2 eller 4 
beslag pr. samling. Ved anvendelse af 2 beslag placeres de diagonalt overfor hinan-
den. Beslagene fremstilles i højre- og venstreudgaver og sælges enkeltvis. SPF170 
og SPF210 findes også i en rustfri syrefast udgave (A4).
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
SPF170R
8978157
Tagåseanker 170 højre 
170
32,5
2,0
100
SPF170L
8978165
Tagåseanker 170 venstre 
170
32,5
2,0
100
SPF210L
8978173
Tagåseanker 210 venstre
210
32,50
2,0
100
SPF210R
8978181
Tagåseanker 210 højre 
210
32,50
2,0
100
A4
SPF210LS-B
2914638
Tagåseanker 210 venstre, rustfri syrefast, A4 *)
210
32,50
2,0
100
A4
SPF210RS-B
8036030
Tagåseanker 210 højre, rustfri syrefast, A4 *)
210
32,50
2,0
100
SPF250L
8978199
Tagåseanker 250 venstre 
250
32,50
2,0
100
SPF250R
8978207
Tagåseanker 250 højre
250
32,50
2,0
100
SPF290L
8978215
Tagåseanker 290 venstre 
290
32,50
2,0
100
SPF290R
8978223
Tagåseanker 290 højre 
290
32,50
2,0
100
SPF330L
7742596
Tagåseanker 330 venstre 
330
32,50
2,0
50
SPF330R
7742604
Tagåseanker 330 højre 
330
32,50
2,0
50
SPF370L
7742612
Tagåseanker 370 venstre 
370
32,50
2,0
50
SPF370R
7742620
Tagåseanker 370 højre 
370
32,50
2,0
50
*) Find flere informationer i kapitlet 'Rustfrie beslag'.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
83
ETA-07/0137
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
D
C
B
UNI130L   
D
C
B
UNI100L 
D
C
B
UNI190L
ETA-07/0137
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
SPF170
A
B
B
==PAGE:265==
Beslag til tagkonstruktioner
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
DLVS73-B
5170256
Lægtebeslag 73 incl. skruer
73
25
86
1,2
50
DLVS Lægtebeslag
Lægtebeslag DLVS73 anvendes til stødsamling af 38x73 mm lægter. 
Det er en stor montage­mæssig fordel at kunne støde alle lægter i 
samme snit af tagfladen.
TOL Toplægtebeslag
Toplægtebeslaget anvendes ved rygninger og grater på tegltage med undertag. 
I beslaget monteres en lægte til fastholdelse af rygningsstenen.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
t
TOL40-B
3425899
Toplægtebeslag 40
253
57
40
20
23
1,5
50
TOL50-B
3425907
Toplægtebeslag 50
248
57
51
20
23
1,5
50
TOP Topplankebeslag
Topplankebeslaget anvendes til fastgørelse af topplanken i tegltage udført med 
mørtelfri rygning med ventilation. Topplankebeslagene monteres parvis. Beslaget er 
udviklet til fastgørelse af en ventilationsplanke. Yder­ligere information om anvendelse 
og montage findes i ”Tegl 36, oplægning af tegltage, november 2005”.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
t
TOP51-B
3104296
Topplankebeslag 51x285
285
57
51
20
60
1,5
50
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
84
ETA-10/0440
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
A
C
B
DLVS
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
TOL
E
A
C
D
TOP
E
A
C
D
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
==PAGE:266==
Beslag til tagkonstruktioner
PFP / GAF Spær- & gaffelankre
Spærankre anvendes til forankring af spær og bjælker på underlig-
gende træ­konstruk­tioner. Den korte type anvendes til forankring på 
en smal rem (med en højde på min. 45 mm), mens den lange type 
anvendes til forankring til en stolpekonstruktion.
Gaffelanker anvendes til forankring af spær med bredde 45-50 mm 
på underliggende træ­konstruktion. Gaffelanker kan også anvendes til 
fastgørelse af toplægte eller topplanke i tegltage. 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
t
PFP36/170
8978280
Spæranker 36x170 
170
122
36
-
100
1,5
100
PFP36/390
8978298
Spæranker 36x390 
386
122
36
50
100
1,5
50
PFP48/170
8978306
Spæranker 48x170 
170
122
48
-
100
1,5
100
GAF48
8978272
Gaffelanker 48x320 
50
138
178
26
60
1,5
50
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
85
ETA-07/0317
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
PFP36/170
E
C
A
GAF48
E
D
B
C
A
PFP36/390
D
A
B
C
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
B
==PAGE:267==
Beslag til tagkonstruktioner
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
SFN
7742430
Spærfodsbeslag sæt 
177
139
53
39
25
SFM-B
2312668
Spærfodbeslag maxi sæt
260
169
73
91
10
SFN / SFM Spærfodsbeslag
SFN og SFM spærfodsbeslag anvendes til samling af hovedspær og skråt-
liggende rem i hanebåndsspær på bjælkelag. Beslagene fremstilles i højre-og 
venstreudgaver, der sælges og anvendes i sæt. Der skal altid anvendes et 
sæt spærfodsbeslag pr. spærende. Er der foreskrevet færre søm/skruer 
end antallet af huller i beslaget, placeres søm/skruer i hulrækker nærmest 
beslagets bukkelinie. 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
SVI200
5653340
Spærvinkel 200 sæt 
200
42
62
2,0
25
SVI240-B
2312650
Spærvinkel 240 sæt
240
43
63
2,0
15
SVI Spærvinkel
SVI spærvinklen anvendes til samling af hovedspær og rem i hanebåndsspær på 
beton eller letbetondæk. Spærvinklerne kan anvendes ved større spændvidder, 
hvor anvendelse af vandrette tagåsankre ikke er tilstrække­ligt. Beslagene fremstilles 
i højre-og venstreudgaver, der sælges og anvendes i sæt. Der skal altid anvendes 
et sæt spærvinkler pr. spærende. 
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
86
ETA-07/0317
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
C
B
A
D
C
SFM
ETA-07/0317
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
B
A
C
SVI
==PAGE:268==
Beslag til tagkonstruktioner
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
TICPKT01
1387039
Pakken indeholder beslag til 22 spærfag med en spærafstand på 1 meter
-
TICE
1340405
Sidste spær
-
TICN100
1340406
Beslag til mellemfag med spærafstand 1000 mm
-
TICS100
1340407
Beslag til første spær. Spærafstand 1000 mm når der startes fra et gavlspær
-
TIC Spærrejsningsbeslag
Spærrejsningsbeslaget (TIC beslag) kan anvendes ved rejsning af alle 
spærtyper så som hanebåndsspær, gitterspær og saksespær. Ved 
anvendelse af TIC beslag under montage af spærene er der ingen tømrer, 
der skal arbejde i spærkonstruktionen med afsværtning, og derved 
undgås faldulykker. TIC beslagene monteres almindeligvis på undersiden 
af spær­hovedet inden rejsning (kan også monteres på oversiden - se 
montagevejledning). TIC beslaget kræver en spærhovedhøjde på min. 120 
mm. TIC beslaget kan fås til spærafstande fra 300 mm til 1.000 mm med 
10 mm spring i længden. Antallet af nødvendige TIC beslag afhænger af 
spærtype og størrelse. 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
BJSTROP*
8978322
Bjælkestrop 800x40x1,5
756
134
40
200
1,5
40
HE135
1837230
HE anker 135
135
40
30
15
4,0
75
HE175
8977894
He anker 175
175
40
30
15
4,0
75
* Ikke CE-mærket
BJSTROP / HE Forankring på ståldrager
Bjælkestroppen anvendes typisk, når man ønsker at spare højde i en bjælkelags-
konstruktion, der er understøttet af en ståldrager. Træbjælkerne skæres over og 
lægges af på stålbjælkens underflange. 
HE ankre anvendes til forankring af bjælker, spær og remme til ståldragere. Der 
monteres to stk. HE-ankre pr. samling diagonalt overfor hinanden.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
87
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
PATENT
SC 2
TICN
TICE
TIC
TICS
ETA-07/0285
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
B
A
C
D
BJSTROP
B
C
A
D
HE175
==PAGE:269==
Bjælkesko & bjælkebærere
BSNN Bjælkesko  
med udvendige flige 
Bjælkesko med udvendige flige anvendes til samling af træbjælker i samme 
plan. Bjælkeskoen er optimeret med forskudte huller som gør det muligt at 
lave fuld udsømning i den sekundære bjælke, hvorved der kan opnås højere 
bæreevneværdier.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
BSNN45/93
1971617
Bjælkesko 45x93
45
93
64
27
2
50
BSNN45/108
1971613
Bjælkesko 45x108
45
108
64
27
2
40
BSNN45/138
1971614
Bjælkesko 45x138
45
138
64
27
2
40
BSNN45/168
1971615
Bjælkesko 45x168
45
168
64
27
2
40
BSNN45/198
1971616
Bjælkesko 45x198
45
198
64
27
2
30
BSNN51/90
1971626
Bjælkesko 51x90
51
90
64
27
2
50
BSNN51/105
1971622
Bjælkesko 51x105
51
105
64
27
2
40
BSNN51/135
1971623
Bjælkesko 51x135
51
135
64
27
2
40
BSNN60/160
1971629
Bjælkesko 51x160
60
160
64
27
2
40
BSNN64/98
1971633
Bjælkesko 64x98
64
98
64
27
2
40
BSNN64/128
1971632
Bjælkesko 64x128
64
128
64
27
2
40
BSNN70/125
1971635
Bjælkesko 70x125
70
125
64
27
2
40
BSNN73/154
1971638
Bjælkesko 73x154
73
154
64
27
2
40
BSNN76/122
1971640
Bjælkesko 76x122
76
122
64
27
2
40
BSNN76/152
1971641
Bjælkesko 76x152
76
152
64
27
2
40
BSNN76/182
1971642
Bjælkesko 76x182
76
182
64
27
2
30
BSNN90/145
1971647
Bjælkesko 90x145
90
145
64
27
2
40
BSNN90/205
1971648
Bjælkesko 90x205
90
205
64
27
2
30
BSNN100/100
2084730
Bjælkesko 100x100
100
100
64
27
2
40
BSNN100/140
1971600
Bjælkesko 100x140
100
140
64
27
2
40
BSNN100/170
1971601
Bjælkesko 100x170
100
170
64
27
2
30
BSNN100/200
1971602
Bjælkesko 100x200
100
200
64
27
2
30
BSNN115/163
1971603
Bjælkesko 115x163
115
163
64
27
2
30
BSNN140/180
1971608
Bjælkesko 140x180
140
180
64
27
2
30
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
BSNN45/93Z
2125769
Bjælkesko 45x93 ZPRO
45
93
64
27
2
50
BSNN45/138Z
2125775
Bjælkesko 45x138 ZPRO
45
138
64
27
2
40
BSNN45/168Z
2125778
Bjælkesko 45x168 ZPRO
45
168
64
27
2
40
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
88
ETA-06/0720
A
N
B
E
F
A
L
E
T
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
BSNN
D
C
B
A
ETA-06/0720
A
N
B
E
F
A
L
E
T
®
PRO
SC 3
==PAGE:270==
Bjælkesko & bjælkebærere
BSD Bjælkesko på specialmål
Simpson Strong-Tie tilbyder hurtig levering af bjælkesko på specialmål. De special-
fremstillede BSD og BSDI bjælkesko anvendes typisk til samling af træbjælker med 
store tværsnit i samme plan.
BSD er med udvendige flige og BSDI er med indadvendte flige.
BSD og BSDI leveres kun som specialbeslag. Der skal påregnes leveringstid - ring til 
Sales Support og hør nærmere, tlf: 8781 7400. 
 
OBS: Specialbeslag tages ikke retur! 
Ring til os på 
tlf. 8781 7400
og bestil
Beslagene produceres 
på vores fabrik i 
Boulstrup
Beslagene sendes 
direkte til bygge-
pladsen
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
89
ETA-06/0270
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
B
A
t
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
BSD
==PAGE:271==
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
BSIN45/78
1971583
Bjælkesko I 45x78 
45
78
76
17,5
2,0
50
BSIN45/127
1971582
Bjælkesko I 45x127
45
127
76
17,5
2,0
50
BSIN51/100
1971586
Bjælkesko I 51x100 
51
100
76
17,5
2,0
50
BSIN60/95
1971588
Bjælkesko I 60x95
60
95
76
17,5
2,0
50
BSIN64/93
1971590
Bjælkesko I 64x193
64
193
76
33,5
2,0
50
BSIN64/118
1971589
Bjælkesko I 64x118
64
118
76
33,5
2,0
50
BSIN76/112
1971591
Bjælkesko I 76x112
76
112
76
33,5
2,0
50
BSIN90/145
1971597
Bjælkesko I 90x145
90
145
76
33,5
2,0
40
BSIN100/100
1971571
Bjælkesko I 100x100
100
100
76
33,5
2,0
30
BSIN100/140
1971572
Bjælkesko I 100x140
100
140
76
33,5
2,0
40
BSIN115/193
1971576
Bjælkesko I 115x193
115
193
84
41,5
2,0
30
Bjælkesko & bjælkebærere
BSIN Bjælkesko med indadvendte flige
Bjælkesko BSIN med indadvendte flige anvendes til samlinger imellem træ­
bjælker i samme plan, hvor man ikke ønsker synlige flige på hovedbjælken. 
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
BSIL Bjælkesko med indadvendte 
flige til store tømmerdimensioner
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
BSIL90/195
8977688
Bjælkesko 90x195 IL 
90
195
42
62
2,0
25
BSIL90/235
8977696
Bjælkesko 90x235 IL 
90
235
42
62
2,0
25
BSIL100/190
7742471
Bjælksko 100x190 IL 
100
190
42
62
2,0
25
BSIL115/223
8977704
Bjælkesko 115x223 IL 
115
223
42
62
2,0
25
Bjælkesko BSIL er specielt udviklet til bjælke/søjlesamlinger, hvor bjælker og 
søjler har samme bredde. Ved en 2-akset last gør vi opmærksom på, at min. 
krav til kantafstand for søm skal overholdes (jf. EC5), dvs. at søjlen skal være 
bredere end bjælken. Bjælkesko BSIL kan leveres i andre størrelser og tykkelser 
uden CE-mærke med kort leveringstid.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
90
ETA-06/0270
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
BSIL
B
A
ETA-06/0720
A
N
B
E
F
A
L
E
T
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
BSIN
D
C
B
A
==PAGE:272==
Bjælkesko & bjælkebærere
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
SPR45/120
1863941
Bjælkesko 45x120 mm, justerbar
45
120
1,5
20
SPR Bjælkesko med vertikal hældning
Denne justerbare bjælksko tillader fastgørelse af spær på træ eller beton. Hældningen 
kan justeres op til 45° nedad eller opad. Bemærk: denne justering bør kun foretages 
én gang i den ønskede retning.
Udover standardstørrelsen 45/120 leveres SPR bjælkeskoen også som specialbeslag 
i størrelser mellem 38/100 til 140/400.
VEKS Vekseljern
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
VEKS170L
8978231
Vekseljern 170 venstre 
57
149
50
VEKS170R
8978249
Vekseljern 170 højre 
57
149
50
Vekseljern benyttes ved mindre udvekslinger. Der anvendes altid to beslag 
(et højre og et venstre beslag) pr. samling. Den øverste del af beslaget skal 
altid fastgøres til den bærende bjælke.
ET Bjælkesko med horisontal vinkling
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D1
D2
t
ET260
1862289
Bjælkesko ET260 45°
66,5
96,5
55
176,5
34
1,5
30
ET260 bjælkeskoen egner sig til samlinger af 45 mm bjælker 
med 45° vinkling (horisontalt).
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
91
VEKS
B
A
ETA-08/0053
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
SPR
B
C
D
A
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
ETA-07/0234
SC 2
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ET260
A
C
t
D2
D1
B
==PAGE:273==
Bjælkesko & bjælkebærere
EL / ELS Endetræsbeslag
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
EL30-B
5023081
Endetræsbeslag EL 30
30
55
120
10,0
25
EL40-B
5794015
Endetræsbeslag EL 40
40
55
120
10,0
25
EL60-B
5794016
Endetræsbeslag EL 60
60
55
120
10,0
25
EL80-B
5794017
Endetræsbeslag EL 80
80
55
120
10,0
25
EL100-B
5794018
Endetræsbeslag EL 100
100
55
120
10,0
25
ELS40-B
5028341
Endetræsbeslag ELS 40
40
-
178
10,0
25
ELS60-B
5028342
Endetræsbeslag ELS 60
60
-
178
10,0
25
ELS80-B
5028343
Endetræsbeslag ELS 80
80
-
178
10,0
25
ELS100-B
5028344
Endetræsbeslaf ELS 100
100
-
178
10,0
25
Endetræsbeslag EL og ELS anvendes til både bjælke/bjælkesamlinger 
og til søjle/bjælkesamlinger. Desuden kan EL-beslagene anvendes i 
samlinger til stål og beton.
ETB Endetræsbeslag med mulighed 
for 45° vertikal hældning
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
ETB90-B
5688246
Endetræsbeslag ETB 90
90
60
58
69
10,0
25
ETB120-B
5804558
Endetræsbeslag ETB 120
121
60
85
95
10,0
25
ETB160-B
5804559
Endetræsbeslag ETB 160
166
60
95
130
10,0
25
ETB190-B
5804560
Endetræsbeslag ETB 190
195
75
138
165
10,0
25
ETB230-B
5804561
Endetræsbeslag ETB 230
230
75
138
200
10,0
25
ETB endetræsbeslag anvendes til skjulte samlinger ved både bjælke-bjælkesamlinger 
og til søjle bjælkesamlinger. Der kan laves samlinger med en hældning på op til 90° 
og ved skrå tilslutning må vinklen være fra 15° til 165°.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
92
ETA-06/0245
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
EL
B
C
10 mm
A
A
C
ELS
ETA-06/0245
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
ETB
C
B
D
A
R 30
ALU
R 30
ALU
==PAGE:274==
Bjælkesko & bjælkebærere
IUSE Bjælkesko til I-bjælker  
monteret på massiv bjælke
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
IUSE199/48
1968374
Bjælkesko I 48x199 udadvendt flig
48
199
54
1,2
40
IUSE249/48
-
Bjælkesko I 48x249 udadvendt flig
48
249
54
1,2
25
IUSE299/48
1968372
Bjælkesko I 48x299 udadvendt flig
48
299
54
1,2
25
IUSE349/48
1968373
Bjælkesko I 48x349 udadvendt flig
48
349
54
1,2
30
IUSE359/48
-
Bjælkesko I 48x359 udadvendt flig
48
359
54
1,2
30
IUSE399/48
-
Bjælkesko I 48x399 udadvendt flig
48
399
54
1,2
30
IUSE199/50
1418502
Bjælkesko I 50x199 udadvendt flig
50
199
54
1,2
35
IUSE219/50
1418506
Bjælkesko I 50x219 udadvendt flig
50
219
54
1,2
35
IUSE299/50
1418361
Bjælkesko I 50x299 udadvendt flig
50
299
54
1,2
25
IUSE349/50
1418363
Bjælkesko I 50x349 udadvendt flig
50
349
54
1,2
30
IUSE399/50
1418365
Bjælkesko I 50x399 udadvendt flig
50
399
54
1,2
30
IUSE199/61
1418503
Bjælkesko I 61x199 udadvendt flig
61
199
54
1,2
25
IUSE239/61
1418507
Bjælkesko I 61x239 udadvendt flig
61
239
54
1,2
30
IUSE299/61
1418362
Bjælkesko I 61x299 udadvendt flig
61
299
54
1,2
25
IUSE359/61
1418364
Bjælkesko I 61x359 udadvendt flig
61
359
54
1,2
30
IUSE399/61
1418366
Bjælkesko I 61x399 udadvendt flig
61
399
54
1,2
25
IUSE299/63
-
Bjælkesko I 63x299 udadvendt flig
63
299
54
1,2
20
IUSE399/63
1454472
Bjælkesko I 63x399 udadvendt flig
63
399
54
1,2
30
IUSE bjælkesko anvendes ved samling af I-bjælker på en massiv træbjælke. 
ITB Bjælkesko til I-bjælker  
monteret på en anden I-bjælke
ITB bjælkesko gør det muligt at montere en I-bjælke på en anden I-bjælke uden 
brug af kropsudfyldning. Højere bæreevne kan dog opnås med kropsudfyldning 
på hovedbjælke.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ITB250/49
1382632
ITB Bjælkesko 250x49
49
250
51
1,2
15
ITB220/50
1457435
ITB Bjælkesko 220x50
50
220
51
1,2
20
ITB300/50
1454474
ITB Bjælkesko 300x50
50
300
51
1,2
15
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
93
ETA-17/0554
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
PATENT
SC 2
B
A
C
IUSE
ETA-17/0554
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
PATENT
SC 2
ITB
B
A
C
==PAGE:275==
Bjælkesko & bjælkebærere
TUB Skjulte bjælkebærere med  
mulighed for vinkling og hældning
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
TUB16
2049825
Skjult bjælkebærer
134
108
60
3.5
50
TUB20
2049827
Skjult bjælkebærer
174
108
60
3.5
25
TUB24
2049830
Skjult bjælkebærer
214
108
60
3.5
25
TUB28
2049832
Skjult bjælkebærer
254
108
60
3.5
20
Bjælkebærerne anvendes til skjulte samlinger af bjælker i træ eller skjulte 
bjælke/søjlesamlinger. Der kan udføres samlinger med lodret hældning på op 
til 45°. Til TUB bjælkebærere skal anvendes STD12 ståldorne.
TUBS Skjult bjælkebærer
TUBS bjælkebærere fungerer som skjulte forbindelser fra sekundære bånd til hovedbjælker 
eller til understøtninger. Tilslutninger med hældninger på op til 45° og med TUBS yderligere 
horisontal vinkling på 30° til 89° kan laves. TUBS bliver produceret på ordre i vinkel efter 
kundens ønsker. Enten vinklet til højre eller venstre.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
TUBSL16
-
Skjult bjælkebærer 16, L = (left) venstre
134
108
60
3.5
50
TUBSR16
-
Skjult bjælkebærer 16, R = (right) højre
134
108
60
3.5
50
TUBSL20
-
Skjult bjælkebærer 20, L = (left) venstre
174
108
60
3.5
25
TUBSR20
-
Skjult bjælkebærer 20, R = (right) højre
174
108
60
3.5
25
TUBSL24
-
Skjult bjælkebærer 24, L = (left) venstre
214
108
60
3.5
25
TUBSR24
-
Skjult bjælkebærer 24, R = (right) højre
214
108
60
3.5
25
TUBSL28
-
Skjult bjælkebærer 28, L = (left) venstre
254
108
60
3.5
20
TUBSR28
-
Skjult bjælkebærer 28, R = (right) højre
254
108
60
3.5
20
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
94
A
B
C
TUB
ETA-07/0245
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
SC 2
A
B
C
TUBS
Højre
Set ovenfra
Venstre
Set ovenfra
TUBS bestilles med den ønskede vinkel α  
(hvis denne er forskellig fra 90°).
R 30
ETA-07/0245
SC 2
R 30
==PAGE:276==
Bjælkesko & bjælkebærere
BT Skjulte bjælkebærere
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
BT4-90-B
3965068
Bjælkebærer type 90 - 4
90
106
61
3,0
25
BT4-120-B
3965076
Bjælkebærer type 120 - 4
120
106
61
3,0
25
BT4-160-B
3965084
Bjælkebærer type 160 - 4
160
106
61
3,0
20
BT4-200-B
3965092
Bjælkebærer type 200 - 4
200
106
61
3,0
15
BT4-240-B
3965100
Bjælkebærer type 240 - 4
240
106
61
3,0
15
BTALU90
1862485
Bjælkebærer type 90 alu
86
109
62
6,0
25
BTALU120
1821910
Bjælkebærer type 120 alu
116
109
62
6,0
25
BTALU160
1821917
Bjælkebærer type 160 alu
156
109
62
6,0
25
BTALU200
1862489
Bjælkebærer type 200 alu
196
109
62
6,0
15
BTALU240
1821920
Bjælkebærer type 240 alu
236
109
62
6,0
15
BTALU3000-B
5104612
Bjælkebærer 3000 mm alu
3000
103
62
6,0
1
BTC120-B
1862285
Bjælkebærer til betonmontage BTC120
120
131
96
3,0
15
BTC160-B
1870297
Bjælkebærer til betonmontage BTC160
160
131
96
3,0
15
BTC200-B
1862286
Bjælkebærer til betonmontage BTC200
200
131
96
3,0
12
BTC240-B
1870298
Bjælkebærer til betonmontage BTC240
240
131
96
3,0
10
BTN90-B
3399813
Bjælkebærer type 90
90
106
46
3,0
25
BTN120-B
3399821
Bjælkebærer type 120
120
106
46
3,0
25
BTN160
1480115
Bjælkebærer type 160
160
106
46
3,0
20
BTN200-B
3399847
Bjælkebærer type 200
200
106
46
3,0
15
BTN240-B
3399854
Bjælkebærer type 240
240
106
46
3,0
15
Bjælkebærerne anvendes til skjulte samlinger af bjælker i træ eller skjulte 
bjælke/søjlesamlinger (BTN eller BTALU). Der kan udføres samlinger med 
lodret hældning på op til 45°. Til en aktuel tømmerhøjde vælges beslaghøjde 
ca. 40 mm mindre end denne. Dog kan BTN90 og BT4-90 anvendes til en 
tømmerhøjde på 100 mm. 
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
95
BT4
A
B
C
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ETA-07/0245
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
BT4
BTALU
BTC
BTN
R 30
==PAGE:277==
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
NP15/60/160
5653464
Hulplade 60x160x1,5 mm 
60
160
1,5
50
NP15/60/180
3779287
Hulplade 60x180x1,5 mm 
60
180
1,5
50
NP15/60/220
5653472
Hulplade 60x220x1,5 mm 
60
220
1,5
50
NP15/80/100
5653605
Hulplade 80x100x1,5 mm 
80
100
1,5
50
NP15/80/140
8977811
Hulplade 80x140x1,5 mm 
80
140
1,5
50
NP15/80/300
8977829
Hulplade 80x300x1,5 mm 
80
300
1,5
50
NP15/100/380
8977845
Hulplade 100x380x1,5 mm 
100
380
1,5
25
NP15/140/200
5653704
Hulplade 140x200x1,5 mm 
140
200
1,5
50
NP15/140/240
8977852
Hulplade 140x240x1,5 mm 
140
240
1,5
50
NP15/140/300
5650502
Hulplade 140x300x1,5 mm 
140
300
1,5
25
NP15/140/420
1392298
Hulplade 140x420x1,5 mm
140
420
1,5
25
NP15/160/180
8977860
Hulplade 160x180x1,5 mm 
160
180
1,5
50
NP15/160/220
5653712
Hulplade 160x220x1,5 mm 
160
220
1,5
50
NP15/160/240
8977878
Hulplade 160x240x1,5 mm 
160
240
1,5
25
NP15/200/220
2686996
Hulplade 200x220x1,5 mm 
200
220
1,5
25
NP15/200/260
1392310
Hulplade 200x260x1,5 mm
200
260
1,5
25
Hulplader
NP Hulplader (1,5 mm)
NP hulplader kan anvendes som laskeplader i trækonstruktioner af enhver art. 
Der er mange forskellige anvendelsesmuligheder for hulpladerne, der fås i for-
skellige størrelser og tykkelser. Der anbefales, at der altid anvendes 2 hulplader 
pr. samling og at trædelene, der skal samles, har samme bredde. 
Sælges kun i hele kasser. 
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
96
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
NP
A
B
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
EN 14545
==PAGE:278==
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
NP20/40/120
3779154
Hulplade 40x120x2,0 mm 
40
120
2
100
NP20/40/160
8977902
Hulplade 40x160x2,0 mm 
40
160
2
50
NP20/50/200
8256240
Hulplade 50x200x2,0 mm 
50
200
2
50
NP20/60/140
8977910
Hulplade 60x140x2,0 mm 
60
140
2
50
NP20/60/200
8977928
Hulplade 60x200x2,0 mm 
60
200
2
50
NP20/60/240
8258154
Hulplade 60x240x2,0 mm 
60
240
2
50
NP20/80/180
2096148
Hulplade 80x180x2,0 mm
80
180
2
50
NP20/80/200
8977936
Hulplade 80x200x2,0 mm 
80
200
2
50
NP20/80/220
2096150
Hulplade 80x220x2,0 mm
80
220
2
50
NP20/80/240
5650346
Hulplade 80x240x2,0 mm 
80
240
2
50
NP20/100/140
7742414
Hulplade 100x140x2,0 mm 
100
140
2
50
NP20/100/200
8977951
Hulplade 100x200x2,0 mm 
100
200
2
50
NP20/100/220
2096151
Hulplade 100x220x2,0 mm
100
220
2
50
NP20/100/240
5650429
Hulplade 100x240x2,0 mm 
100
240
2
50
NP20/100/260
5653779
Hulplade 100x260x2,0 mm 
100
260
2
50
NP20/100/300
8977969
Hulplade 100x300x2,0 mm 
100
300
2
25
NP20/100/400
2184331
Hulplade 100x400x2,0 mm 
100
400
2
25
NP20/100/500
2184349
Hulplade 100x500x2,0 mm 
100
500
2
25
NP20/120/200
7742422
Hulplade 120x200x2,0 mm 
120
200
2
50
NP20/120/220
2096153
Hulplade 120x220x2,0 mm
120
220
2
50
NP20/120/240
8977977
Hulplade 120x240x2,0 mm 
120
240
2
25
NP20/120/260
5653787
Hulplade 120x260x2,0 mm 
120
260
2
25
NP20/120/300
8977985
Hulplade 120x300x2,0 mm 
120
300
2
25
NP20/120/400
5018533
Hulplade 120x400x2,0 mm
120
400
2
25
NP20/140/400
8977993
Hulplade 140x400x2,0 mm 
140
400
2
25
NP20/160/300
5650130
Hulplade 160x300x2,0 mm 
160
300
2
25
NP20/160/400
5788246
Hulplade. 160x400x2,0 mm 
160
400
2
20
Hulplader
NP Hulplader (2,0 mm)
NP hulplader kan anvendes som laskeplader i trækonstruktioner af enhver art. 
Der er mange forskellige anvendelsesmuligheder for hulpladerne, der fås i for-
skellige størrelser og tykkelser. Der anbefales, at der altid anvendes 2 hulplader 
pr. samling og at trædelene, der skal samles, har samme bredde. 
Sælges kun i hele kasser. 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
NP20/100/200Z
2152522
Hulplade 100x200x2,0 mm, ZPRO
100
200
2,0
25
NP20/120/300Z
2152523
Hulplade 120x300x2,0 mm, ZPRO
120
300
2,0
25
Hulplader i ZPRO udgave
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
97
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
NP
A
B
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
EN 14545
SC 2
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
EN 14545
SC 3
®
PRO
==PAGE:279==
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
NP20/40/1200
7742240
Hulplade 40x1200x2,0 mm 
40
1200
2,0
15
NP20/60/1200
1292249
Hulplade. 60x1200x2,0 mm 
60
1200
2,0
10
NP20/80/1200
1292250
Hulplade 80x1200x2,0 mm 
80
1200
2,0
10
NP20/100/1200
1806138
Hulplade100x1200x2,0 mm 
100
1200
2,0
5
NP20/120/1200
1806139
Hulplade 120x1200x2,0 mm 
120
1200
2,0
5
NP20/140/1200
1806140
Hulplade 140x1200x2,0 mm 
140
1200
2,0
5
NP20/160/1200
1806143
Hulplade 160x1200x2,0 mm 
160
1200
2,0
5
NP20/200/1200
1806145
Hulplade 200x1200x2,0 mm 
200
1200
2,0
5
NP25/60/1200-B
2184372
Hulplade 60x1200x2,5 mm
60
1200
2,5
10
NP25/80/1200
1806149
Hulplade 80x1200x2,5 mm
80
1200
2,5
5
NP25/100/1200-B
2184398
Hulplade 100x1200x2,5 mm
100
1200
2,5
5
NP25/120/1200-B
2184406
Hulplade 120x1200x2,5 mm
120
1200
2,5
10
NP25/140/1200
1806147
Hulplade 140x1200x2,5 mm
140
1200
2,5
5
NP25/160/1200
1806148
Hulplade. 160x1200x2,5 mm 
160
1200
2,5
5
NP25/200/1200-B
3401387
Hulplade 200x1200x2,5 mm
200
1200
2,5
2
Hulplader
NP Hulpladestrimler
NP hulplader kan anvendes som laskeplader i trækonstruktioner af enhver art. Der 
er mange forskellige anvendelsesmuligheder for hulpladerne, der fås i forskellige 
størrelser og tykkelser. Der anbefales, at der altid anvendes 2 hulplader pr. samling 
og at trædelene, der skal samles, har samme bredde. 
Sælges kun i hele kasser. 
MP Ikke-bærende reperationsplader
MP reperationsplader anvendes til at forstærke træ eller som samlingsplade 
til ikke-bærende samlinger. MP plader må ikke anvendes til samling af spær i 
bærende konstruktioner.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
MP25/100
2053445
Reperationsplade 
25
102
1,0
100
MP50/100
2053447
Reperationsplade
51
102
1,0
100
MP75/150
2053461
Reperationsplade
76
152
1,0
100
Sælges kun i hele kasser. 
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
98
MP24
B
A
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
NP
A
B
SC 2
EN 14545
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
EN 14545
==PAGE:280==
Gerberbeslag
GERB Gerberbeslag
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal sæt 
pr. kasse
A
B
C
t
GERB125-B
2681963
Gerber 125 B, sæt
129
90
27
2,0
25
GERB150-B
2681740
Gerber 150 B, sæt
154
90
29
2,0
25
GERB175-B
2681765
Gerber 175 B, sæt
179
90
33
2,0
25
GERB200-B
2681781
Gerber 200 B, sæt
205
90
33
2,0
25
GERB220-B
2681799
Gerber 220 B, sæt
220
90
34
2,0
25
Gerberbeslag GERB kan overføre forskydningskræfter i stødsamlinger i et gerbersystem 
af tagåse eller bjælker. Gerberbeslagene passer til de mest gængse tømmerdimensioner 
brugt i tagkonstruktioner i landbrugsbygninger og små industribygninger. Der skal altid 
anvendes to beslag pr. samling. Beslagene skal orienteres mod nærmeste understøtning.
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
GERW Gerberbeslag
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal sæt 
pr. kasse
A
B
C
t
GERW90-B
2857001
Gerber W 90, sæt 
90
140
20
2,0
25
GERW120
1480126
Gerber 120 W, sæt 
120
180
20
2,0
25
GERW140-B
2690782
Gerber 140 W, sæt
140
180
20
2,0
20
GERW160
1806130
Gerber 160 W, sæt 
160
180
20
2,0
20
GERW180-B
2690808
Gerber 180 W, sæt
180
180
20
2,0
15
GERW200-B
2690816
Gerber 200 W, sæt
200
180
20
2,0
15
GERW220-B
2690824
Gerber 220 W, sæt
220
180
20
2,0
15
GERW240-B
8271249
Gerber 240 W, sæt
240
180
20
2,0
15
GERW260-B
8271256
Gerber 260 W, sæt
260
180
20
2,0
10
GERW340
1539264
Gerber 340 W, sæt
340
180
20
2,0
8
Gerberbeslag GERW kan overføre forskydningskræfter og normalkræfter i stødsam-
linger i et gerbersystem af tagåse eller bjælker. Gerberbeslagene bruges i landbrugs-
bygninger og industribygninger med en stor ramme­afstand og/eller med en stor 
taghældning. Der skal altid anvendes to beslag pr. samling. 
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal sæt 
pr. kasse
A
B
C
t
GERB150Z
1628110
Gerber B150 Z PRO 800, sæt
154
90
29
2,0
25
GERB175Z
1628111
Gerber B 175 Z PRO 800, sæt
179
90
33
2,0
25
GERB i ZPRO udgave
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal sæt 
pr. kasse
A
B
C
t
GERW120Z
1628113
Gerber W 120 Z PRO 800, sæt
140
180
20
2,0
25
GERW140Z
1628109
Gerber W 140 Z PRO 800, sæt
140
180
20
2,0
20
GERW160Z
1628117
Gerber W 160 Z PRO 800, sæt
160
180
20
2,0
20
GERW i ZPRO udgave
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
99
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
GERB
C
A
B
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
GERW
B
C
A
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 2
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
®
PRO
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
®
PRO
ETA-07/0053
ETA-07/0053
ETA-07/0053
ETA-07/0053
==PAGE:281==
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
F
G
t
PPD48/40G
8978108
Søjlesko D 48x40 
48
40
121,5
250
16
5,0
20
PPD50/40G
5653795
Søjlesko D 50x40 
50
40
120,5
250
16
5,0
20
PPD73/40G
8978116
Søjlesko D 73x40 
73
40
121,5
250
16
5,0
20
PPD100/40G
8978033
Søjlesko D 100x40 
100
40
120,5
250
16
5,0
20
PPD98/60G
8978140
Søjlesko D 98x60 
98
60
122,5
250
16
5,0
15
PPD73/70G
8978124
Søjlesko D 73x70 
73
70
125,0
250
16
5,0
15
PPD75/70G
5653803
Søjlesko D 75x70 
75
70
124,0
250
16
5,0
15
PPD100/70G
8978041
Søjlesko D 100x70 
100
70
121,5
250
16
5,0
10
PPD90/90G
8978132
Søjlesko D 90x90 
90
90
136,5
250
20
5,0
10
PPD100/90G
8978058
Søjlesko D 100x90 
100
90
131,5
250
20
5,0
10
PPD115/90G
8978066
Søjlesko D 115x90 
115
90
124,0
250
20
5,0
10
PPD120/90G
5104553
Søjlesko D 120x90 
120
90
121,5
250
20
5,0
10
PPD125/90G-B
2856805
Søjlesko D 125x90
125
90
119,0
250
20
5,0
10
PPD140/90G
8978082
Søjlesko D 140x90 
140
90
121,5
250
20
5,0
10
PPD148/90G
8978090
Søjlesko D 148x90 
148
90
117,5
250
20
5,0
10
Søjlesko
PA / PB / PBL Søjlesko
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
F
G
t
PA70G
1293663
Søjlesko A 70 
70
70
50
200
16
5,0
25
PA90G
1432652
Søjlesko A 90 
90
90
50
200
20
6,0
20
PB70G
8978025
Søjlesko B 70 
70
70
125
250
16
5,0
20
PBL4540
1672843
Søjlesko BL 4540
45
40
90
200
14
4,0
20
Søjlesko uden dokumenterede lastbæreevner. 
PPD Søjlesko
PPD søjleskoens kamstålstang indstøbes i beton. Afstanden fra den 
vandrette plade til beton­overkanten må højst være 50 mm.
t
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
100
PPD
C
A
B
F
G
PB
C
A
B
F
G
ETA-07/0285
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
SC 3
PA
C
A
B
F
G
==PAGE:282==
Søjlesko
APR Højdejusterbar søjlesko
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
D
E
F
G
t
APR110/150
1862277
Højdejusterbar søjlesko
100
100
130
130
110-150
16
4,0
10
APR søjleskoene er justerbare i højden. De er lette og hurtige at installere og kan 
justeres efter installation. OBS: Møtrikken skal være centreret mellem de to flader. 
PU U-formet søjlesko
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
F
t
PU100-B
8036139
Søjlesko PU
101 
70 
126 
24 
4,0
20
PU søjlesko er et U-formet beslag med mulighed for montage direkte på beton, 
dæk eller betonvægge og fastgøres med ankerbolte. Stolpeskoen har integreret 
afstandsholder til stolpens endetræ. 
PVD / PVDB / PVI / PVIB 
Højde- og breddejusterbare 
søjlesko
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
t1
t2
PVD80G
1480117
Søjlesko variabel D 80
80 - 120
70
120
40
40
249 - 302
20
5,0
4,0
10
PVD120G
5653837
Søjlesko variabel D 120 
120 - 160
70
120
40
40
249 - 302
20
5,0
4,0
10
PVDB80G
1419045
Søjlesko variabel DB 80 
80 - 120
70
120
70
160
136 - 189
20
5,0
8,0
8
PVDB120G
1419046
Søjlesko variabel DB 120 
120 - 160
70
120
70
160
136 - 189
20
5,0
8,0
5
PVIG-B*)
2857019
Søjlesko variabel I
90
60
110
40
40
222 - 274
20
8,0
4,0
10
PVIBG*)
1480118
Søjlesko variabel IB 
90
60
110
70
160
109 - 161
20
8,0
8,0
10
PVD og PVDB søjlesko anvendes til understøtning af træsøjler med bred-
de fra 80 mm og opefter. PVI og PVIB søjlesko anvendes til understøtning 
af træsøjler med mindste tværsnit på 60x90 mm. Alle søjleskoene er 
højdejusterbare, og type PVD og PVDB er også breddejusterbare.
*) Husk STD ståldorne ved køb af PVI og PVIB søjlesko.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
101
D
B
PVD
PVDB
PVI
PVIB
5-8 mm
F
A
C
D
E
B
F
C
70
E
G
t2
G
A
t1
70
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
C
A
B
PU
F
t
A
F
E
D
B
t
APR
G
t
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ETA-07/0285
SC 2
ETA-07/0285
SC 3
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ETA-07/0285
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
==PAGE:283==
Søjlesko
PI / PIL / PP / PPL Skjulte søjlesko til indstøbning
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
t1
t2
PIG*)
7742257
Søjlesko type I 
90
60
110
-
-
250
20
8,0
10,0
10
PILG*)
3365566
Søjlesko type IL
90
60
110
70
70
510
38
8,0
10,0
10
PP80G
5089436
Søjlesko P
80
80
-
-
-
260
20
10,0
-
15
PPL80G
5089437
Søjlesko PL
80
80
-
70
70
510
38
10,0
5,0
10
PI og PIL søjleskoen anvendes til understøtning af træsøjler med træbredder 
fra 60 mm og opefter. PP og PPL søjleskoene anvendes til understøtning 
af træsøjler med bredde eller diameter fra 100 mm og opefter. Søjleskoens 
kamstålstang eller rør indstøbes i beton. Afstanden fra den vandrette plade 
til betonoverkanten må ikke være større end 50 mm ved søjlesko PI, 60 mm 
ved PP og 250 mm ved søjlesko PIL og PPL.
PIS / PISB Kraftige søjlesko
Søjleskoene anvendes til understøtning af træsøjler med bredder fra 80 mm 
og opefter. PIS og PISMAXI søjleskoens rør indstøbes i beton. Afstanden fra 
den vandrette plade til betonoverkanten må højst være 150 mm. 
PLB / PLS Højdejusterbar søjlesko
PLB og PLS stolpesko anvendes til understøtning af rem og stolper eller kun 
rem. Stolpeskoene er højdejusterbare, det vil sige, at afstanden fra den vand-
rette plade til betonoverkanten kan variere. 
*) Husk STD ståldorne ved køb af PI og PIL søjlesko.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
t1
t2
PIS70G-B*)
3104346
Søjlesko type IS 70
100
80
110
70
70
313
42
8,0
10,0
8
PISB160G-B*)
3104338
Søjlesko type ISB 160
100
80
110
160
100
168
42
8,0
10,0
5
PISB260G-B*)
8271280
Søjlesko type ISB 260
100
80
110
260
100
168
42
8,0
10,0
4
PISMAXIG-B
5688206
Søjlesko type IS maxi
120
120
105
90
90
323
70
8,0
15,0
1
PISBMAXIG-B
5650320
Søjlesko type ISB maxi
120
120
105
200
200
148
70
8,0
15,0
1
*) Husk STD ståldorne ved køb af PIS og PISB søjlesko.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
t1
t2
PLB80/190G-B
4681904
Søjlesko LB 80x190
80
70
190
90
90
105
16
4,0
5,0
10
PLS60/65G-B
4681821
Søjlesko LS 60x65
60
70
65
-
-
270
16
4,0
-
10
PLS80/90G-B
4681847
Søjlesko LS 80x90
80
70
90
-
-
270
16
4,0
-
10
PLS80/190G-B
4681854
Søjlesko LS 80x190
80
70
190
-
-
270
16
4,0
-
10
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
102
PISMAXI
PIS
PISB
70 mm
A
B
D
E
t2
C
t1
F
90 mm
PISBMAXI
A
B
D
E
t1
t2
C
F
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
PLB
D
E
F
C
A
B
t2
t1
G
PLS
F
C
t1
G
70 mm
B
A
C
A
B
F
G
70 mm
PIG
PIL
D
E
G
B
A
F
PP
t2
G
B
A
F
PPL
t
t2
t1
ETA-07/0285
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ETA-07/0285
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ETA-07/0285
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
==PAGE:284==
Søjlesko
PJPB / PJPS Skjulte justerbare søjlesko
PJPB og PJPS søjlesko anvendes til understøtning af træsøjler med bredde  
eller diameter fra 100 mm og opefter. Søjleskoene er højdejusterbare, det vil  
sige, at afstanden fra den vandrette plade til betonoverkanten kan variere,  
dog må afstanden højst være 205 mm for PJPS og højst 213 mm for PJPB.
PL Søjlesko til indstøbning
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
t
PL80/70G-B
2856839
Søjlesko 80x70 type L
80
70
126
70
70
500
38
5,0
10
PL100/70G-B
2856847
Søjlesko 100x70 type L
100
70
126
70
70
500
38
5,0
5
PL90/90G-B
3361235
Søjlesko 90x90 type L
90
90
141
70
70
500
38
5,0
5
PL100/90G
1837246
Søjlesko 100x90 type L
100
90
136
70
70
500
38
5,0
5
PL120/90G
1837276
Søjlesko 120x90 type L
120
90
126
70
70
500
38
5,0
5
PL140/90G
1837251
Søjlesko 140x90 type L
140
90
126
70
70
500
38
5,0
5
PL søjleskoens rør indstøbes i beton. Afstanden fra den vandrette 
plade til betonoverkanten må højst være 250 mm. 
PPB / PPS Højdejusterbar søjlesko
PPB og PPS stolpesko anvendes til understøtning af træsøjle. Stolpeskoene 
er højdejusterbare, det vil sige, at afstanden fra den vandrette plade til beton­
overkanten kan variere, dog må afstanden højst være 75 mm for PPB70 og 
PPB75 og højst 100 mm for PPB80 og PPS80.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
D
E
F
G
t1
t2
PJPBG
5089435
Søjlesko JPB
80
80
120
120
163-213
20
10,0
8,0
5
PJPSG
5089434
Søjlesko JPS
80
80
 - 
 - 
355-405
20
10,0
 - 
10
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
t1
t2
PPB70G
5650338
Søjlesko PB 70 
70
70
5 - 75
90
90
30 - 100
16
6,0
5,0
20
PPB75G
5104688
Søjlesko PB 75 
80
80
7 - 67
90
90
30 - 90
20
8,0
5,0
20
PPB80G
7742448
Søjlesko PB 80 
80
80
8 - 158
140
100
50 - 200
20
8,0
8,0
10
PPS80G-B
5104691
Søjlesko PS 80
80 
80
-
-
-
350 
20 
8,0
-
10
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
103
PPS
A
B
F
G
PPB
D
E
B
A
F
G
C
t1
t2
PL
F
B
C
D
A
E
t
t
PJPS
F
PJPB
F
B
A
D
E
t1
t2
G
t1
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ETA-07/0285
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ETA-07/0285
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
ETA-07/0285
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
SC 3
==PAGE:285==
Søjlesko - til ikke-bærende konstruktioner
PDKB Justerbare søjlesko
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
t
PDKB48/40G
5024003
Variabel søjlesko DKB 48x40
48
40,00
89
174-236
90 x 90
4,0
10
PDKB98/60G
5024004
Variabel søjlesko DKB 98x60
98
60,00
89
174-236
90 x 90
4,0
10
Til ikke-bærende konstruktioner.
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
PDL / PPU / PTB Søjlesko
Disse beslag består af en 4 mm tyk U-formet stålplade med en påsvejst 
Ø16 mm kamstålstang med længde 200 mm for søjlesko PPU og 450 mm 
for søjlesko PDL. Beslag der er 40 mm brede har Ø5 og Ø9 mm huller, 
mens beslag der er 60 mm brede har Ø9 og Ø11 mm huller.
Til ikke-bærende konstruktioner.
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
*Sælges i anbrud
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
t1
t2
PDL75/60G-B
5650379
Søjlesko DL 75x60
48
40
93
-
-
200
16
4,0
-
15
PDL100/60G-B
5650387
Søjlesko DL 100x60
50
40
92
-
-
200
16
4,0
-
15
PPU48/40G*
5708365
Søjlesko DK 48x40 
71
40
94
-
-
200
16
4,0
-
20
PPU50/40G-B
5653282
Søjlesko DK 50x40 
73
40
93
-
-
200
16
4,0
-
20
PPU71/40G
5708366
Søjlesko DK 71x40 
70
60
97
-
-
200
16
4,0
-
15
PPU73/40G-R
5708368
Søjlesko DK 73x40 
80
60
92
-
-
200
16
4,0
-
15
PPU70/60G
1252144
Søjlesko DK 70x60 
90
60
97
-
-
200
16
4,0
-
20
PPU80/60G
1252145
Søjlesko DK 80x60 
98
60
93
-
-
200
16
4,0
-
20
PPU90/60G
1252146
Søjlesko DK 90x60 
100
60
92
-
-
200
16
4,0
-
20
PPU98/60G
5708361
Søjlesko DK 98x60 
120
60
102
-
-
200
16
4,0
-
20
PPU100/60G
5653852
Søjlesko DK 100x60 
140
60
92
-
-
200
16
4,0
-
20
PPU120/60G-B
5708362
Søjlesko DK 120x 60 
75
60
94
-
-
450
16
4,0
-
20
PPU140/60G-B
5708363
Søjlesko DK 140x 60 
100
60
92
-
-
450
16
4,0
-
20
PTB48G
7742265
Stolpesko TB 48x60
48
60
106
100
100
30
24
4,0
5,0
10
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
104
A
F
D
E
PDKB
B
C
G
t
t
SC 3
A
C
PDL
A
C
PPU
PTB
C
D
E
B
A
F
G
B
F
SC 3
==PAGE:286==
Tilbehør til beslag
STD Dorne, elforzinket
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
STD8X45-B
1252314
DORN 8x45 elforzinket
100
STD8X60-B
1252317
DORN 8x60 elforzinket
100
STD8X65-B
1252318
DORN 8x65 elforzinket
100
STD8X90-B
1252328
DORN 8x90 elforzinket
100
STD8X100-B
1252330
DORN 8x100 elforzinket
100
STD8X115-B
1252333
DORN 8x115 elforzinket
100
STD8X120-B
1252337
DORN 8x120 elforzinket
100
STD8X140-B
1252346
DORN 8x140 elforzinket
100
STD8X160-B
1252348
DORN 8x160 elforzinket
100
STD10X90-B
1252352
DORN 10x90 elforzinket
100
STD10X100-B
1252355
DORN 10x100 elforzinket
100
STD12X60-B
1252365
DORN 12x60 elforzinket
100
STD12X80-B
1252372
DORN 12x80 elforzinket
100
STD12X90-B
1252373
DORN 12x90 elforzinket
100
STD12X100-B
1252374
DORN 12x100 elforzinket
100
STD12X115-B
5384075
DORN 12x115 elforzinket
100
STD12X120-B
1252376
DORN 12x120 elforzinket
100
STD12X140-B
1252378
DORN 12x140 elforzinket
100
STD12X160-B
1252379
DORN 12x160 elforzinket
100
STD12X180-B
1252380
DORN 12x180 elforzinket
100
STD12X200-B
1252381
DORN 12x200 elforzinket
100
STD16X140-B
1252384
DORN 16x140 elforzinket
50
Ståldorne anvendes som forbindelsesmiddel i samlinger mellem trædele 
og skjulte beslag, hvor stål- eller aluminiumsplader er indslidset i trædelen. 
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
105
EN14592
SC 2
==PAGE:287==
Tilbehør til beslag
STD Dorne, ekstra varmgalvaniseret
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
STD8X65G-B
1252320
DORN 8x65 varmgalvaniseret
100
STD8X80G-B
1252324
DORN 8x80 varmgalvaniseret
100
STD8X90G-B
1252327
DORN 8x90 varmgalvaniseret
100
STD8X100G-B
1252329
DORN 8x100 varmgalvaniseret
100
STD8X115G-B
1252332
DORN 8x115 varmgalvaniseret
100
STD8X120G-B
1252334
DORN 8x120 varmgalvaniseret
100
STD8X140G-B
1252354
DORN 8x140 varmgalvaniseret
100
STD12X65G-B
1252358
DORN 12x65 varmgalvaniseret
100
STD12X80G-B
1252364
DORN 12x80 varmgalvaniseret
100
STD12X90G-B
1252366
DORN 12x90 varmgalvaniseret
100
Ståldorne anvendes som forbindelsesmiddel i samlinger mellem trædele 
og skjulte beslag, hvor stål- eller aluminiumsplader er indslidset i trædelen. 
US Underlagsskiver
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
Ø
US40/40/10G-B
7742570
Underlagsskive 40x40x10,0
40
40
10
13,5
50
US40/50/10G-B
7742588
Underlagsskive 40x50x10,0
40
50
10
13,5x25
50
US50/50/8G-B
5104727
Underlagsskive 50x50x8,0
50
50
8
18
50
US60/60/6G-B
5104728
Underlagsskive 60x60x6,0
60
60
6
14
50
Underlagsskiver er tilpasset en række beslag og anvendes hvor afstivninig af 
tynde plader i beslagene er nødvendige. Det er vigtigt at underlagsskiverne 
vælges og vendes således, at én kant af skiven er tæt på beslagets bukkelinie.
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
106
EN14592
SC 3
SC 3
US50/50/8
US40/50/10
US40/40/10
A
B
US60/60/6
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
==PAGE:288==
Bulldog® skiver
C2 / C4 Enkeltsidet Bulldog®
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
C2-50M10G-B
8978397
Bulldog mellemlæg E 50 m 10
300
C2-50M12G-B
8271306
Bulldog mellemlæg E 50 m 12
300
C2-50M16G-B
8271314
Bulldog mellemlæg E 50 m 16
300
C2-50M20G-B
8978405
Bulldog mellemlæg E 50 m 20
300
C2-62M12G-B
8271322
Bulldog mellemlæg E 62 m 12
150
C2-62M16G-B
8271330
Bulldog mellemlæg E 62 m 16
150
C2-62M20G-B
8271348
Bulldog mellemlæg E 62 m 20
150
C2-75M12G-B
8978413
Bulldog mellemlæg E 75 m 12
100
C2-75M16G-B
8271355
Bulldog mellemlæg E 75 m 16
100
C2-75M20G-B
8271363
Bulldog mellemlæg E 75 m 20
100
C2-75M24G-B
8978447
Bulldog mellemlæg E 75 m 24
100
C2-95M16G-B
8271371
Bulldog mellemlæg E 95 m 16
50
C2-95M20G-B
8978462
Bulldog mellemlæg E 95 m 20
50
C2-95M22G-B
8978470
Bulldog mellemlæg E 95 m 22
50
C2-95M24G-B
8978488
Bulldog mellemlæg E 95 m 24
50
C2-117M16G-B
8271389
Bulldog mellemlæg E 117 m 16
40
C2-117M20G-B
8271397
Bulldog mellemlæg E 117 m 20
40
C2-117M22G-B
8978504
Bulldog mellemlæg E 117 m 22
40
C2-117M24G-B
8978512
Bulldog mellemlæg E 117 m 24
40
C4-73/130M24G-B
5650049
Bulldog mellemlæg E 73x130 m 24
50
Bulldog® mellemlæg anvendes til forstærkning af boltede samlinger 
i trækonstruktioner. Enkeltsidede mellemlæg kan anvendes i træ/
træ og f.eks. træ/stål samlinger. Ved enkeltsidede mellemlæg skal 
det indvendige huls diameter passe til boltediameteren.
C1 / C3 / C5 Dobbeltsidet Bulldog®
Bulldog® mellemlæg anvendes til forstærkning af boltede samlinger i 
trækonstruktioner. To-sidede mellemlæg kan udelukkende anvendes 
i træ/træ samlinger. Ved to-sidede mellemlæg kan der anvendes 
forskellige boltediametre i et mellemlæg.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
C1-50G-B
8271405
Bulldog mellemlæg D 50 Ø 17
200
C1-62G-B
8271413
Bulldog mellemlæg D 62 Ø 21
100
C1-75G-B
8271421
Bulldog mellemlæg D 75 Ø 26
100
C1-95G-B
8271439
Bulldog mellemlæg D 95 Ø 33
40
C1-117G-B
8977548
Bulldog mellemlæg D 117 Ø 48
25
C3-73/130G-B
8977571
Bulldog mellemlæg D 73x130
50
C5-100G-B
8977555
Bulldog mellemlæg D 100x100
50
C5-130G-B
8977563
Bulldog mellemlæg D 130x130
25
Bygningsbeslag
Bygningsbeslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
107
SC 3
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
C2
C4
C3
C1
C5
EN14545
SC 3
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
EN14545
==PAGE:289==
Bredt udvalg 
af A4 rustfri 
syrefaste 
beslag
==PAGE:290==
Rustfrie vinkelbeslag................................................. 110
Rustfrie vindtrækbånd............................................... 112
Rustfrie hulbånd......................................................... 112
Rustfrie bjælkesko..................................................... 113
Rustfrie beslag
Rustfrie 
beslag
==PAGE:291==
Rustfrie 
beslag
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
A4
ABR7015S
1901749
Rustfri syrefast vinkelbeslag med ribbe, A4
70
70
55
1,5
25
A4
ABR9020S
1901752
Rustfri syrefast vinkelbeslag med ribbe, A4
88
88
65
2,0
25
A4
ABR10525S
1901755
Rustfri vinkelbeslag med ribbe, A4
105
105
90
2,5
25
Rustfrie vinkelbeslag
ABR7015S, ABR9020S og ABR10525S vinkelbeslag med den karakteristiske  
nøglehulsribbe er en videreudvikling af det klassiske ABR vinkelbeslag. Den  
patenterede nøglehulsribbe giver beslagene endnu højere bæreevne end beslag 
med standard ribbe.
AB-S Vinkelbeslag uden ribbe
AB70S, AB90S og AB105S er traditionelle vinkelbeslag uden ribbe. Beslag­ene 
anvendes der hvor der ikke stilles høje krav til bæreevnen men hvor der stadig 
ønskes en stærk beslagssamling.
ABR100S Vinkelbeslag med  
kantforstærkning
ABR100S vinkelbeslag med kantforstærkninger er et godt alternativ til beslag 
med ribbeforstærkning, der hvor der ønsker ekstra styrke. ABR100 leveres 
med et ovalt bolthul hvilket gør det muligt at justere beslaget under fastgørelse 
på beton.
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
ABR-S Vinkelbeslag med 
nøgle­huls­ribbe
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
A4
ABR100S
1870240
Vinkel 100 rustfri syrefast, A4
100
100
90
2,0
50
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
A4
AB70S-B
5650114
Vinkel 70 uden ribbe, rustfri syrefast, A4
70
70
55
2,0
100
A4
AB90S-B
2914711
Vinkel AB90 uden ribbe, rustfri syrefast, A4
88
88
65
2,5
100
A4
AB105S-B
2914661
Vinkel 105 uden ribbe, rustfri syrefast, A4
103
103
90
3,0
50
Rustfrie beslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
110
ABR9020S
C
A
B
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ETA-06/0106
PATENT
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
C
A
B
ABR100S
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
AB105S
C
A
B
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
A4
INOX
A4
INOX
A4
INOX
==PAGE:292==
Rustfrie 
beslag
Rustfrie vinkelbeslag
ABB-S Vinkelbeslag til lette samlinger
ABB40390S vinkelbeslag anvendes til bjælke-bjælkesamlinger i bærende 
trækonstruktioner med små tømmerdimensioner. 
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
ANP-S Hulpladevinkler 2,5 mm
ANP-S vinklerne anvendes til bjælke-bjælkesamlinger, bjælke-søjlesamlinger eller 
udvekslinger. 
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
AC-S og AB-S vinkelbeslag anvendes ved små tømmerdimensioner til 
bjælke-bjælke­samlinger eller til samling mellem træbjælke og beton.  
Der skal altid anvendes to vinkelbeslag pr. samling. 
AB55365S
AC35350S
AC-S / AB-S Småvinkler
C
A
B
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
A4
ABB40390S-B
2914687
Vinkel 40390 rustfri syrefast, A4
93
93
40
3,0
100
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
A4
ANP256660S-B
2914646
Vinkel 60x60x2,5x60 rustfri syrefast, A4
60
60
60
2,5
100
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
A4
AC35350S
5307882
Vinkel AC35350 rustfri syrefast, A4
50
50
35
2,0
100
A4
AB55365S-B
1454180
Vinkel 55365 rustfri syrefast, A4
65
65
55
2,5
100
Rustfrie beslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
111
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
ABB40390S
C
A
B
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
C
A
B
ANP256660S
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
ETA-06/0106
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
A4
INOX
A4
INOX
A4
INOX
==PAGE:293==
Rustfrie 
beslag
Vindafstivning og forankring
BAN-S Vindtrækbånd
BAN vindtrækbånd anvendes til forankring og afstivning af tagkonstruktioner.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Ståltype
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
A4
BAN204025S
3365475
Vindtrækbånd 40x2,0 - 25 m, rustfri syrefast, A4
S250GD
40
25 m
2,0
1
BAN-S Hulbånd
BAN hulbånd anvendes til forankring og samling af små trækonstruktioner. 
Typiske anvendelser er carporte, legehuse og pergolaer. 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
t
A4
BAN102010S
3779121
Hulbånd 20x1,0 - 10 m, rustfri syrefast, A4
20
10 m
1,0
10
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Rustfrie beslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
112
BAN204025S
S
I
M
P
S
O
N
 
S
T
R
O
N
G
-
T
I
E
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
BAN102010S
EN 14545
DANMARK
PRODUCERET I
af Simpson Strong-Tie
®
EN 14545
A4
INOX
A4
INOX
==PAGE:294==
Rustfrie 
beslag
Beslag til tagkonstruktioner
Ring til os på 
tlf. 8781 7400
og bestil
Beslagene produceres 
på vores fabrik i 
Boulstrup
Beslagene sendes 
direkte til 
byggepladsen
Specialfremstillinger i 
rustfri syrefast stål A4
Vi fremstiller rusfri bjælkesko, hulplader og gerberbeslag på specialmål 
efter bestilling. Beslagene produceres på vores fabrik i Boulstrup nær 
Odder hvorved du sikres hurtig levering og høj kvalitet.
Rustfrie beslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
113
==PAGE:295==
Driftsikkert.
Hurtigt.
Ergonomisk.
QDPRO51E forsats
DWC båndede gipsskruer
==PAGE:296==
Forsatser..................................................................... 116
Multifunktion skruesystem........................................... 116
Skruesystem til gulv- & terrasseskruemontage............. 117
Skruesystem til beslagskruemontage........................... 118
Skruesystem til beklædningsmontage.......................... 119
Skruesystem til gipsskruemontage............................... 120
Skruesystem til gipsmontage....................................... 121
Skruesystem til stålmontage........................................ 122
Adaptere..................................................................... 123
Adaptere til Bosch®...................................................... 123
Adaptere til Dewalt®..................................................... 123
Adaptere til Hitachi®..................................................... 123
Adaptere til Hilti®.......................................................... 123
Adaptere til Makita®..................................................... 123
Adaptere til Milwaukee®............................................... 123
Adaptere til Spit®.......................................................... 123
Adaptere - Oversigtstabel.......................................... 124
Båndede skruer.......................................................... 125
Båndede skruer til fibergips.......................................... 125
Båndede skruer til fibercement..................................... 125
Båndede skruer til gips................................................. 126
Båndede beslagskruer.................................................. 128
Båndede skruer til beklædning..................................... 129
Båndede terrasseskruer............................................... 130
Båndede træskruer....................................................... 131
Båndede skruer til stålmontage.................................... 131
Tilbehør & reservedele............................................... 132
Bitpakker..................................................................... 132
Bitholder...................................................................... 133
Forlængere................................................................... 133
Fremføringshage.......................................................... 133
Skruepose.................................................................... 133
Fjeder........................................................................... 133
Krop............................................................................. 133
Næsestykke................................................................. 133
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
==PAGE:297==
Multifunktion skruesystem
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
116
QD76KE System
QD76KE indeholder:
•	 QD76KE multifunktionsforsats
•	 3 stk. udskiftelige næsestykker
•	 Forlænger
•	 Praktisk værktøjskuffert & skruepose
•	 Bitforlænger
•	 Ekstra bits
QD76KE er multifunktionel Quik Drive forsats som 
kan benyttes til en lang række installationer på træ 
og gips, i installations­opgaver af mindre omfang. 
På større opgave anbefales en af de specialiserede 
Quik Drive forsatser.
QD76KE leveres med udskiftelige næsestykker som 
anvendes alt efter længden på skruerne. Et nummer 
på siden af næsestykket viser hvilke skruer de kan 
bruges til.
Passer til følgende skruer:
side
CHB
131
DTHQ
129
DWC / DWCZ
126
DWF / DWFZ
126
DWFSD
127
DWHL
126
FBCB / FBCS
125
MTH / WSHL
125
RDPF
127
RDWF
127
RTFSD
127
WSC
131
WSNTL
131
25 mm - 76 mm
Kittet indeholder:
QD76KE
Forlænger
QDEXTE
•
Forsats
QD76KE
•
Skruepose
QUIVERE
•
Bitforlænger
MANDREL191E-RC
•
Værktøjskuffert
TOOLCASE
•
Best. nr.
Beskrivelse
DB nr.
QD76KE
Multifunktionsforsats,  
skruelængde fra 25 til 76 mm, uden adaptor 
5384786
==PAGE:298==
Skruesystem til gulv- & terrasseskruemontage
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
117
QDPRO76SKE System
QDPRO76SKE indeholder:
•	 QDPRO76SKE terrasseskrueforsats
•	 Forlænger
•	 Praktisk værktøjskuffert & skruepose
•	 Bitforlænger
•	 Ekstra bits
Passer til følgende skruer:
side
CBSDQ
125
CLSZN
129
DTHQ
129
SS3DSC
130
SSDTH
130
SSWSCB
130
WSC
131
WSNTL
131
38 mm - 76 mm
Kittet indeholder:
QDPRO76SKE
Forlænger
QDEXTE
•
Forsats
QDPRO76SKE
•
Skruepose
QUIVERE
•
Bitforlænger
MANDREL191E-RC
•
Værktøjskuffert
TOOLCASE
•
Best. nr.
Beskrivelse
DB nr.
QDPRO76SKE
Forsats til gulvlægning, til  
special- og terrasseskruer mv.
1724827
Med Simpson Strong-Tie’s terrasseskrueforsats er det 
nemt og hurtigt at montere terrassebrædder. Monta-
gen kan foretages stående så man undgår hold i ryg-
gen og smerter i knæene. Den nyudviklede næseclip 
sikrer en præcis og ensartet iskruning.
QDPRO76SKE systemet sikrer en ergonomisk korrekt 
montage og er samtidigt super effektiv. Et “must-have” 
for håndværkere der installerer mange terrasser.
==PAGE:299==
Skruesystem til beslagskruemontage
* rustfri syrefast skrue
** udendørs skrue 
Kittet indeholder:
QDBPC50E
Forsats
QDBPC50E
•
Bitforlænger
MANDREL128E
•
Bits
BITLTX20E
•
Best. nr.
Beskrivelse
DB nr.
QDBPC50E
Beslagskrueforsats  
1487225
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
118
QDBPC50E System
QDBPC50E indeholder:
•	 QDBPC50E beslagskrueforsats
•	 Opbevaringskuffert
•	 Bitforlænger
•	 Praktisk krog til værktøjsbæltet
Med Simpson Strong-Tie’s beslagskrueforsats er det 
nemt og hurtigt at fastgøre bygningsbeslag i træ med 
de båndede CSA beslagskruer.
QDBPC50E er et godt alternativ til både tryklufts- og 
gas beslagsømpistoler. Installationen med Quik Drive® 
er mindst ligeså hurtig som med sømpistoler og instal-
lation med skruer giver en pænere finish samt højere 
udtræksværdier.
Desuden er der mindre støj og mindre vibrationer 
forbundet med installationen med Quik Drive® sam-
menlignet med beslagsømpistoler.
Passer til følgende skruer:
side
CSA5,0x35T
128
CSA5,0x35ST *
128
CSA5,0x35ZT **
128
CSA5,0x40T
128
CSA5,0x40ST *
128
CSA5,0x40ZT **
128
CSA5,0x50T
128
35 mm - 50 mm
==PAGE:300==
Skruesystem til beklædningsmontage
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
119
QDPRORFE System
QDPRORFE indeholder:
•	 QDPRORFE skrueforsats
•	 Praktisk værktøjskuffert & skruepose
•	 Bitholder
•	 Ekstra bits
QDPRORFE forsatsen anvendes til fastgørelse af alle 
typer beklædningsplader, terrassebrædder naturskif-
fer og lignende. 
QDPRORFE er et “Must-have” for håndværkere der 
monterer mange beklædningsbrædder.
Passer til følgende skruer:
side
CBSDQ
125
CLSZN
129
DTHQ
129
SS3DSC
130
SSDTH
130
SSWSCB
130
WSC
131
WSNTL
125
38 mm - 64 mm
Kittet indeholder:
QDPRO51E
Forsats
QDPRORFE
•
Skruepose
QUIVERE
•
Bitholder
MANDREL191E-RC
•
Best. nr.
Beskrivelse
DB nr.
QDPRORFE
Forsats til montage af beklædningsbrædder mm 
på træ, uden adaptor
1936155
==PAGE:301==
Skruesystem til gipsskruemontage
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
120
QDPRO51KE System
QDPRO51KE indeholder:
•	 QDPRO51E gipsskrueforsats
•	 Forlænger
•	 Praktisk værktøjskuffert & skruepose
•	 Bitforlænger
•	 Ekstra bits
Med Simpson Strong-Tie’s gipsskrueforsats 
er det nemt og hurtigt at montere gipsplader 
på træ eller stål. Quik Drive systemet er meget 
driftsikkert og skruebåndets stivhed betyder 
at skruerne ikke vikler sig ind i hinanden, 
ledninger eller andet, som det typisk kan være 
tilfældet med alternative gipsskruesystemer på 
markedet.
QDPRO51KE er et “Must-have” for håndvær-
kere der installerer mange gipsplader.
Passer til følgende skruer:
side
CHB
131
DTHQ
129
DWC / DWCZ
126
DWF / DWFZ
126
DWFSD
127
DWHL
126
FBCS / FBCB
125
MTH / WSHL
125
RDPF
127
RDWF
127
RTFSD
127
WSC
131
WSNTL
131
25 mm - 51 mm
Kittet indeholder:
QDPRO51E
QDPRO51KE
Forlænger
QDEXTE
•
Forsats
QDPRO51E
•
•
Skruepose
QUIVERE
•
•
Bitforlænger
MANDREL 16E-RC
•
•
Værktøjskuffert
TOOLCASE
•
Best. nr.
Beskrivelse
DB nr.
QDPRO51E
Forsats til gipsmontage på træ eller stål, uden 
adaptor 
5384787
QDPRO51KE
Forsats til gipsmontage på træ eller stål med 
forlænger, uden adaptor 
1646690
==PAGE:302==
Skruesystem til gipsmontage
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
121
QDPRO51E Forsats
Anvendelse: stål på stål, stålprofiler eller 
lignende
•	 Forsatsen har en 360 graders arbejdsradius 
på adapter eller forlænger
•	 Let montage på skruemaskine eller forlænger
•	 Den flade næse modvirker mærker i 
gipspladernes overflade
•	 Den nemme selv-låsende dybdejustering 
sørger for ensartet undersænkning
•	 Bitholder 165E-RC er inkluderet i sættet
Best. nr.
Beskrivelse
DB nr.
QDPRO51E
Forsats til gipsmontage på træ eller stål, uden 
adaptor 
5384787
Passer til følgende skruer:
side
CBSDQ
125
CHB
131
DTHQ
129
DWC / DWCZ
126
DWF / DWFZ
126
DWFSD
127
DWHL
126
FBCS / FBCB
125
MTH / WSHL
125
RDPF
127
RDWF
127
RTFSD
127
WSC
131
WSNTL
131
25 mm - 51 mm
==PAGE:303==
Skruesystem til stålmontage
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
122
QDPROHX516G2 Forsats
Anvendelse: stål på stål, stålprofiler eller 
lignende
•	 Forsatsen har en 360 graders arbejdsradius 
på adapter eller forlænger
•	 Let montage på skruemaskine eller forlænger
•	 Bitholder BPHX516G2
•	 Selvlåsende dybdejustering
Best. nr.
Beskrivelse
DB nr.
QDPROHX516G2
Forsats til stål/stål skruer x-serien, skrue-
længde max 25 mm
1436791
Passer til følgende skruer:
Passer til skruer, 25 mm
side
X
131
QDPROLDGH2 Forsats
Anvendelse: træ på stål, stålprofiler eller 
lignende
•	 Forsatsen har en 360 graders arbejdsradius 
på adapter eller forlænger
•	 Let montage på skruemaskine eller forlænger
•	 Bitholder Mandrel165E-RC
•	 Selvlåsende dybdejustering
Best. nr.
Beskrivelse
DB nr.
QDPROLDGH2
Forsats til montage af SSBFHSD syrefast 
borvinge skrue på stål
2135449
Passer til følgende skruer:
Passer til SSBFHSD
side
SSBFHSD
129
==PAGE:304==
Adaptere
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
123
Best. nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
DB nr.
ABO1E-RC
Adaptor Bosch GSR 6-25TE, GSR 6-45TE & GSR 18V-EC TE
1
5384753
DWA7G2
Adaptor Dewalt DCF620N
1
1848239
DWA3G2
Adaptor Dewalt DCF622N
1
-
AHIE-RC
Adaptor Hitachi W6V3 / W8VB / W6V4
1
5384761
AHT2E-RC
Adaptor Hilti SF4000 / SD5000
1
5384759
AHTE-RC
Adaptor Hilti ST18 RPM-1900
1
5384760
AMAE-RC
Adaptor Makita 6823 / 6824 / 6825 / 6828
1
5384764
AMA4E-RC
Adaptor Makita 6834 / 6835D / 6842 / 6843 / BFR550
1
5384766
AMA8E-RC
Adaptor Makita BFS440 / BFS450
1
1390110
AMA9E-RC
Adaptor Makita FS 2300 / FS 6300 / BFS 441 / BFS451
1
1420805
AMIE-RC
Adaptor Milwalkee 6700
1
1244043
MIA2G2K
Adaptor Milwalkee FSGC-202X
1
-
ASPITE-RC
Adaptor Spit 216
1
1292259
Quik Drive adaptere
For nemt og på få sekunder at forvandle din skruemaskine til det automatiske 
skruesystem, Quik Drive®, tilbyder Simpson Strong-Tie® en bred vifte af adap-
tere. Hver af modellerne er tilpasset skruemaskiner på markedet. Læs ud af 
nedenstående tabel, hvilken adapter, der opfylder dine behov.
==PAGE:305==
Adaptere - Oversigtstabel
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
124
Værktøj
Item nr.
DB. nr.
Bosch®
GSR 6-25
ABO1E-RC
5384753
GSR 6-40
ABO1E-RC
5384753
Hitachi®
W8VB
AHIE-RC
5384761
W8VB2
AHIE-RC
5384761
W6VB2
AHIE-RC
5384761
W6VB3
AHIE-RC
5384761
W6VA3
AHIE-RC
5384761
W6VA4
AHIE-RC
5384761
W6V3
AHIE-RC
5384761
W6V4
AHIE-RC
5384761
W6VM
AHIE-RC
5384761
W4YD
Ikke mulig
-
Hilti®
SF4000
AHT2E-RC
5384759
SD2500
AHT2E-RC
5384759
SD5000
AHT2E-RC
5384759
SD6000
AHT2E-RC
5384759
ST1800
AHTE-RC
5384760
ST2500
AHTE-RC
5384760
Makita®
6842
AMA4E-RC
5384766
6843
AMA4E-RC
5384766
FS2300
AMA9E-RC
1420805
FS4000
AMA9E-RC
1420805
FS6300
AMA9E-RC
1420805
SPIT®
216
ASPITE-RC
1292259
217
ASPITE-RC
1292259
Ledningsmaskiner
Værktøj
Item nr.
DB. nr.
Bosch®
GSR 18V-EC
ABO1E-RC
5384753
DeWalt®
DCF620N
DWA7G2
1848239
DCF622N
DWA3G2
-
Hitachi®
WF18DSL
Ikke mulig
-
Hilti®
SF4000A
AHT2E-RC
5384759
SD5000A
AHT2E-RC
5384759
ST1800-A22
AHTE-RC
5384760
Makita®
BFR550
AMA4E-RC
5384766
BFR750
AMA4E-RC
5384766
BFS550
AMA8E-RC
1390110
BFS450
AMA8E-RC
1390110
DFS250/DFS251
AMA9E-RC
1420805
BFS451/DFS451
AMA9E-RC
1420805
Milwaukee®
FSGC-202X
MIA2G2K
-
SPIT®
216HDI
ASPITE-RC
1292259
Batterimaskiner
Opdateret liste findes på www.strongtie.dk
==PAGE:306==
Fibergipsskruer
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
MTH25E
1520774
3,8x25 mm dobb. gevind, sort, 2.500 stk - del-gevind
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
MTH32E
5384603
3,8x32 mm dobb. gevind, sort, 2.500 stk - del-gevind
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
MTH32SE
1689310
3,8x32 mm dobb. gevind, grå, 2.500 stk - fuld-gevind
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
Båndede fibergipsskruer
Quik Drive® systemet anbefales af Fermacell® til montage af deres fibergipsplader. Det 
stive bånd kommer ikke i vejen for maskinen og den høje driftsikkerhed giver en ekstremt 
effektiv montage. Firkantet recess sikrer hurtig iskruning.
MTHE, MTHSE (modificeret trimhoved)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
WSHL45E
1964687
3,8x45 mm fibergips del-gevind, sort, 2.000 stk
2.000
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
WSHL (fibergipsskrue)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
CBSDQ41E
5385127
4,1x41 mm fibercement selvborende, 1.500 stk
1.500
QDPRO51E / QDPRO76SKE
CBSDQ55E
1373180
4,8x55 mm fibercement selvborende, 1.000 stk
1.000
QDPRO76SKE
CBSDQ (fibercement, selvborende)
Quik Guard® overfladebehandling
Båndede fibercementskruer
Det er nemt og hurtigt at montere fibercementplader med Quik Drive® systemet. Det stive bånd 
kommer ikke i vejen for maskinen og den høje driftsikkerhed giver en ekstremt effektiv montage.
FBCS (fibercement, skarp spids )
FBCB (fibercement, borspids )
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
FBCS25E
2135407
3.9x25 mm fibercement, Impreg+ coated, 2.500 stk.
2.500
QDPRO51 / QD76KE
FBCS35E
2135408
3.9x35 mm fibercement, Impreg+ coated, 2.500 stk.
2.500
QDPRO51 / QD76KE
FBCS45E
2135409
3.9x45 mm fibercement, Impreg+ coated, 2.500 stk.
2.500
QDPRO51 / QD76KE
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
FBCB25E
2135410
3.9x25 mm fibercement, Impreg+ coated, 2.500 stk.
2.500
QDPRO51 / QD76KE
FBCB35E
2135411
3.9x35 mm fibercement, Impreg+ coated, 2.500 stk.
2.500
QDPRO51 / QD76KE
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
125
25 mm - 32 mm
EN14566 / 
EN 14592
BIT2SE
45 mm
BIT2SE
EN14566
41 mm - 55 mm
BIT2SUE
25 mm - 45 mm
X
25 mm - 35 mm
G
BIT2PE
BIT2PE
==PAGE:307==
Gipsskruer
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
DWHL48PE
1292272
3,8x48 mm gips, hi-lo gevind
2.000
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWHL 
(gips på træ & stål, hi-lo gevind)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
DWC3930PE
1382538
3,9x30 mm gips groft gevind sort, 2500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWC3940PE
1382540
3,9x40 mm gips groft gevind sort, 2500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWC3955PE
1382548
3,9x55 mm gips groft gevind sort, 2.000 stk
2.000
QD76KE
DWC3965PE
1382554
3,9x65 mm gips groft gevind sort, 1.500 stk
1.500
QD76KE
Båndede gipsskruer
Det er nemt og hurtigt at montere gipsplader med Quik Drive® systemet. Det stive bånd kommer 
ikke i vejen for maskinen og den høje driftsikkerhed giver en ekstremt effektiv montage.
DWC (gips på træ, groft gevind)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
DWCZ3930PE
1382571
3,9x30 mm gips groft gevind zink, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWCZ3941PE
1382607
3,9x41 mm gips groft gevind zink, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWCZ (gips på træ, groft gevind)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
DWF3525PE
1382608
3,5x25 mm gips fint gevind sort, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWF3535PE
1382609
3,5x35 mm gips fint gevind sort, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWF3540PE
1382610
3,5x40 mm gips fint gevind sort, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWF (gips på stål, fint gevind)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
DWFZ3530PE
1382611
3,5x30 mm gips fint gevind zink, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWFZ3541PE
1382612
3,5x41 mm gips fint gevind zink, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWFZ (gips på stål, fint gevind)
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
126
48 mm
EN 14566
25 mm - 65 mm
EN 14566
30 mm - 41 mm
EN 14566
25 mm - 40 mm
EN 14566
30 mm - 41 mm
EN 14566
BIT2PE
BIT2PE
BIT2PE
BIT2PE
BIT2PE
==PAGE:308==
Gipsskruer 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
RDPF40PE
1742579
4,2x40 mm, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
RDPF (hård gips)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
RDWF30BE
5384522
4,2x30 mm gips, dobb. gevind, sort, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
RDWF40BE
5384569
4,2x40 mm gips, dobb. gevind, sort, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
RDWF (vådrumsgips, dobbelt gevind, fint)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
DWFSD32PE
5384579
3,4x32 mm gips fint gevind, gul. bor, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWFSD41PE
5384601
3,4x41 mm gips, fint gevind, gul. bor, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE
DWFSD 
(gips på stål, fint gevind, selvborende)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
RTFSD25E
2135402
3.9x25 mm vådrumsgips, borspids, sort, 2.500 stk.
2500
QDPRO51 / QD76KE
RTFSD35E
2135404
3.9x35 mm vådrumsgips, borspids, sort, 2.500 stk.
2500
QDPRO51 / QD76KE
RTFSD (vådrumsgips til stål, borspids)
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
127
40 mm
EN 14566
30 mm - 40 mm
EN 14566
32 mm - 41 mm
EN 14566
BIT2PE
BIT2PE
BIT2PE
25 mm - 35 mm
EN 14566
BIT2PE
X
==PAGE:309==
Beslagskruer
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
CSA5,0X35T
1439922
Beslagskrue 5,0x35 mm båndet 1.500 stk
1.500
QDBPC50E
CSA5,0X40T
1439929
Beslagskrue 5,0x40 mm båndet 1.500 stk
1.500
QDBPC50E
CSA5,0X50T
1440026
Beslagskrue 5,0x50 mm båndet 1.000 stk
1.000
QDBPC50E
Båndede beslagskruer
CSA beslagskruen er specielt udviklet til at fastgøre stålbeslag til træ. Det glatte skaft 
under hovedet passer stramt til hullet i beslaget. Herved opnås en stiv samling med større 
tværbæreevne end for standardskruer. Fibercut spidsen giver en nem og hurtig iskruning.
CSA-T (beslagskruer)
CSA-ZT  
(beslagskruer til udendørs brug)
CSA-ST (beslagskruer, A4 syrefast)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
CSA5.0X35ZT
2135429
Impreg+ beslagskrue 5,0x35 mm, båndet 1.500 stk
1.500
QDBPC50E
CSA5.0X40ZT
2135430
Impreg+ beslagskrue 5,0x40 mm, båndet 1.500 stk
1.500
QDBPC50E
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
A4
CSA5,0X35ST
1439919
Rustfri beslagskrue 5,0x35 mm, båndet 1.500 stk
1.500
QDBPC50E
A4
CSA5,0X40ST
1439925
Rustfri beslagskrue 5,0x40 mm, båndet 1.500 stk
1.500
QDBPC50E
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
128
35 mm - 50 mm
ETA-04/0013
BITLTX20E
35 mm - 40 mm
ETA-04/0013
BITLTX20E
35 mm - 40 mm
ETA-04/0013
BITLTX20E
==PAGE:310==
DTHQ (træbeklædningsskrue)
Quik Guard® overfladebehandling
CLSZN-E (beklædningsskrue, Impreg+ 
coated, Fiberlock)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
DTHQ51E
5384679
4,2x51 mm beklædning, trimhoved, galv., 2.000 stk
2.000
QDPRO51E / QD76KE / QDPRO64E
DTHQ64E
5385128
4,2x64 mm beklædning, trimhoved, galv., 1.500 stk
1.500
QD76KE / QDPRO64E
DTHQ76E
5384689
4,5x76 mm beklædning, trimhoved, galva., 1.000 stk
1.000
QD76KE / QDPRO64E
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
CLSZN48E
2135414
4.8x48 mm træ, Impreg+, fiberlock, 1000 stk.
1000
QDPRO76SKE
CLSZN65E
2135421
4.8x65 mm træ, Impreg+, fiberlock, 1000 stk.
1000
QDPRO76SKE
Beklædningsskruer
Båndede beklædningsskruer
SSBFHSD (rustfri træ på stålskrue med 
elforzinket stål borspids og borwing)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
A4
SSBFHSD2SE
2135424
4.8x50 mm træ på stål, A4 316, borspids, borwing, 1.000 stk. 
1.000
QDPROLDGH2
Quik Drive båndede træbeklædningskruer fra Simpson Strong-Tie gør det nemt at 
montere træbeklædningsbrædder. Vi tilbyder coatede skruer velegnet til udendørs 
applikationer samt vores A4 rustfri borwing skrue til montage af træbeklædning på 
stål, f.eks. ved opbygning af letfacader.
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
129
51 mm - 76 mm
BIT2SUE
51 mm - 76 mm
BITTX20
G
65
65
0
50 mm
BIT2SE
==PAGE:311==
Terrasseskruer
SS3DSC (A4 & A2 rustfri træskruer med 
groft gevind og konisk hoved)
Båndede terrasseskruer
Quik Drive® systemet er yderst velegnet til montage af terrassebrædder, 
da man kan fastgøre skruerne stående. Man undgår derved smerter i 
ryg og knæ. 
SSDTH (terrasseskrue i rustfrit stål med 
formindsket hoved)
SSWSCB (rustfri træskrue med 
groft gevind og konisk hoved)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
A2
SSDTH51E
5384692
4,2x51 mm Træskrue, A2 305, lille hoved, 1.000 stk
1.000
QDPRO76SKE / QDPRORFE
A2
SSDTH64E
5384695
4,2x64 mm Træskrue, A2 305, lille hoved, 1.000 stk
1.000
QDPRO76SKE / QDPRORFE
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
A2
SSWSCB32E
1742620
4,6x32 mm Træskrue A2 305, fibercut, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO76SKE / QDPRORFE
A2
SSWSCB51E
1420726
4,6x51 mm Træskrue A2 305, fibercut, 2.000 stk
2.000
QDPRO76SKE / QDPRORFE
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
A2
SS3DSC64BE
1420728
4,9x64 mm træ, A2 305, fibercut, 1.500 stk
1.500
QDPRO76SKE / QDPRORFE
A2
SS3DSC76BE
1420729
4,9x76 mm træ, A2 305, fibercut, 1.000 stk
1.000
QDPRO76SKE
A4
SS3DSC64BE316
1742621
4,9x64 mm træ, A4 316, fibercut, 1.500 stk
1.500
QDPRO76SKE / QDPRORFE
A4
SS3DSC76BE316
1742623
4,9x76 mm træ, A4 316, fibercut, 1.000 stk
1.000
QDPRO76SKE
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
130
64 mm - 76 mm
51 mm - 64 mm
32 mm - 51 mm
EN 14592
BIT2SE
BIT3SE
BIT2SE
==PAGE:312==
Træskruer / Stålskruer
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
WSC32E
1240368
4,2x32 mm træskrue groft gevind zink, 2.500 stk
2.500
QDPRO51E / QD76KE / QDPRO76SKE
WSC38E
5384616
4,2x38 mm træskrue groft gevind zink, 2.000 stk
2.000
QDPRO51E / QD76KE / QDPRO64E / QDPRO76SKE
Båndede træskruer
Quik Drive® er velegnet til en række installationer hvor den samme type 
træskrue skal fastgøres mange gange. Det kan f.eks. være ved fastgørelse 
af spånplader eller træbeklædning. 
WSC (træskrue, groft gevind)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
WSNTL44E
1418369
4,6x44 mm træskrue twinlead zink, 2.000 stk
2.000
QDPRO51E / QDPRO64E / QD76KE / QDPRO76SKE
WSNTL51E
5384629
4,6x49 mm træskrue twinlead gul, 2.000 stk
2.000
QDPRO51E / QDPRO64E / QD76KE / QDPRO76SKE
WSNTL64E
5385435
4,6x64 mm træskrue twinlead gul, 1.500 stk
1.500
QDPRO64E / QD76KE / QDPRO76SKE
WSNTL76E
5384637
4,6x76 mm træskrue twinlead gul, 1.000 stk
1.000
QD76KE / QDPRO76SKE
WSNTL 
(træskrue med twin lead og spids ende)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
CHB51E
1292267
4,2x51 mm hårdplade, undersænket, 2.000 stk
2.000
QDPRO51E / QD76KE / QDPRO64E
CHB (hårdpladeskrue)
Quik Drive® tilbyder en række båndede skruer som gør montage af træ eller 
stål på stål mere effektiv. 
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
FPHSD34S1016
1964720
4,8x19 mm Panhoved selvborende
2.500
QDPROPHG2
FPHSD34S1214
1964721
5,5x19 mm Panhoved selvborende
2.500
QDPROPHG2
FPHSD (pan-hoved, selvborende)
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Forsats
X25E1016
1744144
4,8x25 mm Stål/stål skrue 8 mm 6 kt. selvborende
1.500
QDPROHX516G2
X (stålskrue, selvborende)
Båndede skruer til stålmontage
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
131
32 mm - 38 mm
EN 14592
44 mm - 76 mm
EN 14592
51 mm
EN 14592
BIT3SE
BIT2SE
BIT2SE
19 mm
25 mm
BITHEX8LBE
BIT3SE
==PAGE:313==
Best. nr.
Navn
Antal pr. 
kasse
DB nr.
BIT2PE-RC3
Bitpakke Phillips 2, 3 stk
3
5384772
BIT2PE-RC10
Bitpakke Phillips 2, 10 stk
10
1546610
QRP2E-50
Bitpakke Phillips 2, 50 stk
50
1292276
BIT2S-2-RC3
1/4” bit, firkant 2, 3 stk
3
1707165
BIT2SE-RC3
Bitpakke firkant 2, 3 stk
3
5384775
BIT2SE-RC10
Bitpakke firkant 2, 10 stk
10
1580819
QRS2E-50
Bitpakke firkant 2, 50 stk
50
1292277
BIT2SU-2-RC3
1/4” bit, firkant 2 formindsket, 3 stk
3
1710604
BIT2SUE-RC3
Bitpakke firkant 2, formindsket, 3 stk
3
5384776
BIT2SUE-RC10
Bitpakke firkant 2, formindsket, 10 stk
10
1561444
QRSU2E-50
Bitpakke firkant 2, formindsket, 50 stk
50
1292279
BIT3S-2-RC3
1/4” bit, firkant 3, 3 stk
3
1710608
BIT3SE-RC3
Bitpakke firkant 3, 3 stk
3
5384777
BIT3SE-RC10
Bitpakke firkant 3, 10 stk
10
1410513
BIT3SU-2-RC3
1/4” bit, firkant 3 formindsket, 3 stk
3
1710612
BIT3SU-RC10
Bitpakke firkant 3, formindsket, 10 stk
10
1410515
BIT3SUE-RC3
Bitpakke firkant 3, formindsket, 3 stk
3
5384778
BITLTX20E-RC10
Bitpakke TX20 lang 10 stk. i pakke
10
1439218
QRLTX20E-50
Bitpakke TX20 lang 50 stk. i pakke
50
1440025
BITTX20-RC3
0
Bitpakke TX20, 3 stk
3
2135444
BITTX20-RC10
Bitpakke TX20, 10 stk
10
2135447
BITTX25-RC3
5
Bitpakke TX25, 3 stk
3
2135441
BITTX25-RC10
Bitpakke TX25, 10 stk
10
2135442
Bitpakker
Obs. Der medfølger altid 1 stk. bits i hver kasse med båndede Quik Drive® skruer.
Tilbehør & reservedele
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
132
BIT3S-RC10
==PAGE:314==
Tilbehør & reservedele
Best. nr.
Navn
Antal pr. 
kasse
DB nr.
BPHX516G2
Bitholder hex bitholder til QDPROHX516G2
1
1811584
MANDREL128E
Bitholder 128E til QDBPC50E
1
1440009
MANDREL165E-RC
Bitholder 165E til 51 / PH
1
5384782
MANDREL191E-RC
Bitholder 191E til 64 / 76 / HSD
1
5384783
NPA2G2
Næse 2 (51 mm) 
1
1460809
NPA25G2
Næse 2,5 (64 mm)
1
1460808
NPABPC50E
Næsestykke til QDBPC50E
1
1742629
PFEEDPAWLE
Fremføringshage til QDPRO64E / QDPRO76SKE
1
1436881
PFEEDPAWLTLE
Fremføringshage til QDPRO51E / QD76E
1
1436884
PFEEDPAWL2E
Fremføringshage til QDPROPHE
1
1436877
PFEEDPAWL4E
Fremføringshage til BPQDBPC50E
1
1440017
QDLEAFSPRING
Bladfjeder til HX516G og PH forsatser
1
1798094
QDLEAFSPRING2
Bladfjeder til HX516G
1
1798096
QDSPRING2E
Fjeder til QDPRO51E (105013)
1
1421128
QDSPRING4E
Fjeder til QD76KE
1
1421133
PNOSECLIP
Næseclips reservedel, QDPRO64E
1
1436783
QDEXTG3-22
Forlænger 57 cm
1
2093142
QDEXTE
Forlænger 51 cm
1
5384802
QUIVERE
Skruepose
1
1292281
SPA51E
Krop til QDPRO51E
1
1436813
SPA76E
Krop til QD76E
1
1436814
Tilbehør & reservedele
*) Skaffevare - leveringstid må påregnes
Quik Drive®
Quik Drive®
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
133
MANDREL
QDEXTE 
forlænger
PFEEDPAWL
fremføringshage
PNOSECLIP
QUIVERE
QDSPRING
QDLEAFSPRING
SPA krop
NPA  
næse
==PAGE:315==
High-Performance
klæbemørtelsystemer
==PAGE:316==
Injektionslim & tilbehør............................................. 136
Injektionslim................................................................. 136
Mixerrør og forlængerrør.............................................. 136
Rengøringstilbehør....................................................... 137
Injektionspistol............................................................. 137
Betonskrue................................................................. 137
Skudværktøj, krudt.................................................... 138
Krudt til skudværktøj.................................................... 138
Enkeltskudsøm (hårdt stål og beton)............................. 138
Skudværktøj, gas....................................................... 140
Skudsøm, magasinerede.............................................. 140
Reservedele ............................................................... 141
Betonankre &  
Skudmontage
Betonankre & 
Skudmontage
==PAGE:317==
Injektionslim mm.
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
ATHP300BG-DK
2099761
AT-HP klæbemørtel opt.1, 300 ml med farveskift 
12
Injektionslim & tilbehør
AT-HP Injektionslim
Metacrylatinjektionsmørtel med option 1 til højstyrke fastgørelse af gevindstang/arme-
ringsjern i beton og i revnet beton. AT-HP™ har høj styrke, bred anvendelse og er nem 
at bruge. Limen skifter farve fra blå til grå idet hærdningsprocessen startes, hvorved man 
visuelt kan tjekke at limen er blandet korrekt. Indeholder ikke styren og epoxy.
MN / T8 Mixerrør og forlængerrør
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
MN1-RP10
1491331
Mixerrør UNI lim (AT-HP, POLYGP og POLYGPG)
6
MNE-RP10
1491441
Forlængerrør plastik til mixerrør, 200 mm
13
T8-650
1533040
Forlængerrør plastik til mixerrør, 650 mm
1
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
POLYGP300BG-DK
2099769
All round injektionsmasse med farveskift, 300 ml
12
POLY-GP Injektionslim
Polyesterklæbemørtel til montage i beton, letklinkerbeton, massivsten og hulsten. 
Limen skifter farve fra blå til grå idet hærdningsprocessen startes, hvorved man 
visuelt kan tjekke at limen er blandet korrekt. Indeholder ikke styren og epoxy.
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
POLYGPG300W-DK
2138142
Vinter injektionslim (-20°C), 300 ml
12
POLY-GPG Winter Injektionslim
Polyesterklæbemørtel til montage i beton. Limen hærder i temperaturer ned til 
-20°C. POLY-GPG Winter har ikke farveskift. Indeholder ikke styren og epoxy.
Betonankre
Betonankre & 
Skudmontage
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
136
R 30
kN
AT-HP
POLY-GP
R 30
kN
POLY-GPG Winter
R 30
kN
==PAGE:318==
PUMP / BR Rengøringstilbehør
DT Injektionspistol
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
PUMP
1491302
Rengøringspumpe
4
BR17-30
1492882
Børster til rengøring af Ø17 til Ø30 mm hul
15
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
DT300
1492868
Injektionspistol, 280-300 ml.
12
Injektionslim mm. / Betonskruer
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
FCSCI06060
1616461
FCSCI 7,5X60
100
FCSCI Betonskrue
FCSCI Betonskrue
Betonskrue FCSC-I er specielt udviklet til at fastgøre stålbeslag på beton. Betonskruen kan f.eks. anvendes 
til montage af konsolbeslag på beton og letklinkerbeton og bjælkesko på beton.
Reference nr.
Best. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Max. emne-
tykkelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
THD8 x 70/5
THD08070
1664626
Betonskrue 8,0x70/5
5
50
THD8 x 80/15
THD08080
1865794
Betonskrue 8,0x80/15
15
50
THD8 x 120/55
THD08120
1664774
Betonskrue 8,0x120/55
55
50
THD10 x 80/5
THD10080
1664783
Betonskrue 10,0x80/5
5
50
THD10 x 100/25
THD10100
1664792
Betonskrue 10,0x100/25
25
50
THD10 x 120/45
THD10120
1664799
Betonskrue 10,0x120/45
45
50
THD10 x 170/95
THD10170
1865801
Betonskrue 10,0x170/95
95
50
THD Betonskrue
THD Betonskrue
Betonskrue til brug i både revnet og ikke revnet beton. THD giver lav installationsmodstand og enestående 
ydelse. THD er designet og testet i tørre, ikke-korrosive omgivelser indendørs.
Sælges kun i hele pakker.
Betonankre
Betonankre & 
Skudmontage
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
137
EG
R 120
INDOOR
==PAGE:319==
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. kasse
PTP-27LE
1315184
Pistol med enkeltskud, 14-73 mm
1
Skudværktøj / skudsøm
Halvautomatisk skudværktøj med justerbar skudstyrke giver en vifte af styrker 
fra samme patron. Reduceret rekyl og lyddæmpningsmuffe. Værktøjet er let at 
rengøre og vedligeholde.
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal  
pr. kasse
Antal ks  
pr. karton
PDPA-50K
1315224
Enkeltskudsøm til hårdtstål, 14 mm
100
10
PDPA-62K
1315226
Enkeltskudsøm til hårdtstål, 16 mm
100
10
PDPA-75
1315227
Enkeltskudsøm til hårdtstål, 19 mm
100
10
PDPA-100
1438429
Enkeltskudsøm til hårdtstål, 25 mm
100
10
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal skud pr. kasse
P27SL3E
2125906
Patron grøn UN 0323 patron KL 1.4S
100 (10 strips)
P27SL4E
2125908
Patron gul UN 0323 patron KL 1.4S
100 (10 strips)
P27SL5E
2125910
Patron rød UN 0323 patron KL 1.4S
100 (10 strips)
P27SL6E
2125911
Patron sort UN 0323 patron KL 1.4S
100 (10 strips)
PTP Skudværktøj, krudt
Elgalv. søm til stål. Hoved Ø7,4 mm, skaft Ø4 mm. Fremstillet med henblik på 
høj ydeevne i hårdt stål.
PDPA Enkeltskudsøm (hårdt stål og beton)
0,27 kaliber 10-skuds ammunitionsplastikstrip.
P27SL CE-mærket krudt til 
skudværktøj
Betonankre
Betonankre & 
Skudmontage
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
138
PTP-27LE
PDPA
==PAGE:320==
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
139
Powerful  
calculations,  
© 2020 Simpson Strong-Tie Company Inc.  
 Concrete 
solutions
Anchor Designer™ er et innovativt beregningsprogram, som du kan bruge ganske gratis. 
Programmet bruges til at beregne dimensioneringen af ​ankre og finde det produkt, der 
opfylder dine specifikke behov.
Anchor Designer™ beregningsprogrammet har en intuitiv og interaktiv grafisk brugerflade 
i 3D. Det giver dig mulighed for at lave beregninger i metriske eller britiske enheder for 
mekaniske og kemiske ankre. 
Download programmet på strongtie.dk 
==PAGE:321==
Skudsøm / skudværktøj
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. kasse
GCN150KTE
1391713
40 skudsmagasineret gaspistol i kuffert
1
GFC34E
1391746
Løs gasflaske til GCN150, 12 BAR
1
Halvautomatisk skudværktøj med justerbar skudstyrke giver en vifte af styr-
ker fra samme patron. Reduceret rekyl og lyddæmpningsmuffe. Værktøjet 
er let at rengøre og vedligeholde.
GCN150KTE
GCN150KTE Skudværktøj, gas
Use in: 
FUEL CELL
GASFLASKE
GASDOSE
GFC34E
>120°F
 50°C
GFC34E
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal pr. 
karton
GDP-50KTE
1391734
Skudsøm 2,7x13 mm VFZ gasdrev inkl. gasflaske VKT 1.000/pk
1.000
5
GDP-62KTE
1391737
Skudsøm 2,7x16 mm VFZ gasdrev inkl. gasflaske VKT 1.000/pk
1.000
5
GDP-75KTE
1391742
Skudsøm 2,7x19 mm VFZ gasdrev inkl. gasflaske VKT 1.000/pk
1.000
5
GDP-100KTE
1391724
Skudsøm 2,7x25 mm VFZ gasdrev inkl. gasflaske VKT 1.000/pk
1.000
5
GDP-125KTE
1391726
Skudsøm 2,7x32 mm VFZ gasdrev inkl. gasflaske VKT 1.000/pk
1.000
5
GDP-150KTE
1391731
Skudsøm 2,7x38 mm VFZ gasdrev inkl. gasflaske VKT 1.000/pk
1.000
5
GDP: Mekanisk galv. skaft Ø2,7 og hoved Ø6,2.
GDPS: Guldchromat, skaft Ø3,0 og hoved Ø6,2.
GDP / GDPS Skudsøm, 
magasinerede
GDP
GDPS
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. kasse
Søm
Gas
GDPSK-138KT
1965759
Skudsøm 3,0x35 mm, riflet VFZ 1.000/pk inkl. gasflaske
1.000
1
Pris er angivet pr pakke - KTE-søm er incl. gas
Mekanisk galv. skaft Ø2,7 og hoved Ø6,2, riflet skaft.
Det riflede skaft sikrer god fastgørelse af materialer på tynd stål.
GDPSK Skudsøm, magasinerede
GDPSK
GDPS-50KTE
1434139
Skudsøm 13 mm til stål og hårdt beton inkl. gasflaske 1.000/pk
1.000
5
GDPS-62KTE
1434141
Skudsøm 16 mm til stål og hårdt beton inkl. gasflaske 1.000/pk
1.000
5
GDPS-75KTE
1442856
Skudsøm 19 mm til stål og hårdt beton inkl. gasflaske 1.000/pk
1.000
5
GDPS-100KTE
-
Skudsøm 25 mm til stål og hårdt beton inkl. gasflaske 1.000/pk
1.000
5
Pris er angivet pr pakke - KTE-søm er incl. gas
Betonankre
Betonankre & 
Skudmontage
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
140
==PAGE:322==
Reservedele 
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
Antal pk. pr. 
karton
GCNE-ADP013
1391718
12V adapter til stikkontakt 110-250V
1
-
GCNE-CHG008
1391715
6V lader til 12V adapter
1
-
GCNE-PPA019
1391719
6V batteri
1
-
GMR-2
1433325
Magnetholder
1
-
GWL-100
1438472
Stålskive Ø 25
1.000
-
Reservedele til GCN150KTE
GCNE-PP019
GCNE-CHG008
GCNE-ADP013
GMR-2
GWL
Betonankre
Betonankre & 
Skudmontage
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
141
==PAGE:323==
==PAGE:324==
Design Series............................................................. 144
Vinkelbeslag, sort......................................................... 144
Bjælkesko, sort............................................................. 144
To-delt stolpebærer, sort............................................... 144
Stolpetop, sort.............................................................. 144
L og T-jern, sort............................................................ 144
Fastgørelsesmidler....................................................... 145
Trappevinkel............................................................... 145
Byg-selv-kit................................................................ 146
Ophængningsbånd..................................................... 146
Stolpestøtter............................................................... 147
Stolpespyd.................................................................. 147
Gør-det-selv 
Gør-det-selv 
beslag
==PAGE:325==
Design Series
Hegn, pergolaer, hylder, bogreoler og endda synlige bjælker i et 
halvtag… Simpson Strong-Tie® sørger for en elegant og holdbar 
samling af dine konstruktioner i haven eller indendørs, ved nu at 
tilbyde sortlakerede beslag og skruer.
Diverse
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
L150PB
2145777
L-jern til samling af rem eller overligger til stolpe
38
150
150
2,0
20
T150PB
2145779
T-jern til samling af rem eller overligger til stolpe
38
150
150
2,0
20
Vinkelbeslag
Bjælkesko
To-delt stolpebærer
Stolpetop
L / T L og T-jern, sort
Gør-det-selv beslag
Gør-det-selv 
beslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
144
L150PB
A
B
C
T150PB
A
B
C
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
ABR100PB
2150427
Kraftigt vinkelbeslag med kantforstærkninger
100
100
90
2,0
15
EA444/2PB
2150429
Kit med 10 småvinkler og 60 stk. CSA5.0X35PB skruer
40
40
40
2,0
10
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
SAE200/46/2PB
2150434
Bjælkesko til 45x95 bjælker
46
77
84
41,5
2,0
8
SAE250/46/2PB
2150437
Bjælkesko til 45x120 bjælker
46
102
84
41,5
2,0
12
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
PPG60/25PB
2150438
To-delt stolpebærer
60
200
55
25
3,0
20
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
CABOCHON70PB
2150439
Stolpehætte til 70x70 mm stolper
71
71
35
2,0
20
CABOCHON90PB
2150440
Stolpehætte til 90x90 mm stolper
91
91
35
2,0
20
ABR100PB
SAE200/46/2PB
C
A
B
EA444/2PB
D
C
B
A
A
B
C
D
B
A
C
SAE250/46/2PB
PPG60/25PB
CABOCHON70PB
==PAGE:326==
Diverse
TA-Z Trappevinkel
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
TA10Z-R
1879904
Trappevinkel TA10Z
41
41
260
2,5
20
Trappevinklen TAZ gør det enkelt og hurtigt at montere trapper.
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Gør-det-selv beslag
Gør-det-selv 
beslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
145
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
d
l
Bit
CSA5.0X35PB-R
2150442
Beslagskruer med sortlakeret hoved
5,0
35
TX20
100
FIX PB
2150450
Kit med 4 stk. SSH10,0X60 skruer, 4 stk. M10-78/5 ekspansionsbolte og 4 stk. sorte hætter
12 dele
Fastgørelsesmidler
FIX PB
CSA5.0X35PB-R
D
l
TA-Z
A
B
C
®
PRO
SC 3
ETA-06/0106
ETA-04/0013
SSH
M10-78/5 
==PAGE:327==
WBSK Byg-selv-kit
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Antal pr. 
kasse
WBSK-NORDIC
1923165
Arbejdsbord eller reol byg-selv-kit
1 kit
Kittet indeholder de beslag, skruer og brugsanvisning som er nødvendige for 
at kunne samle et bord med to niveauer. På ingen tid vil du kunne lave dit eget 
arbejdsbord eller reolsystem. Du skal selv tilføje træet!
Læs mere på www.simplybuildit.dk
BANS / BANW / FBAR Ophængningsbånd
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
t
L
Ø
BANS071203
1761811
Bånd, 0,7x12 mm, 3 m
12
0,7
3 m
5
10
A2
BANS071203S
1761813
Bånd, 0,7x12 mm, 3 m - rustfri
12
0,7
3 m
5
10
BANW071203
1761815
Bånd, 0,7x12 mm, 3 m
12
0,7
3 m
5
10
A2
BANW071203S
1761822
Bånd, 0,7x12 mm, 3 m - rustfri
12
0,7
3 m
5
10
BANW071210
1761814
Bånd, 0,7x12 mm, 10 m
12
0,7
10 m
5
10
BANW071703
1761820
Bånd, 0,7x17mm, 3 m
17
0,7
3 m
7
10
BANW071710
1761819
Bånd, 0,7x17 mm, 10 m
17
0,7
10 m
7
10
BANW071725
1761821
Bånd, 0,7x17 mm, 25 m
17
0,7
25 m
7
5
FBPR16B
5688216
Bånd, 16x0,8x10 m, sort
16
0,8
10 m
5,7 mm + 
2,4 mm
20
Ophængningsbåndene forhandles i 4 dimensioner i ruller med længde 10 m. 
Nogle dimensioner kan leveres med farvet plastbelægning.
Bemærk venligst:
Ophængningsbånd må ikke anvendes til afstivning og forankring i bygningskon-
struktioner (til dette formål anvendes hulbånd og vindtrækbånd).
Sælges kun i hele kasser.
Diverse
Arbejdsbord
Arbejdsbord
med værktøjstavle
Reolsystem
Gør-det-selv beslag
Gør-det-selv 
beslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
146
WBSK-NORDIC
BANS
A
Ø
BANS
BANW
A
Ø
FBAR-16
FBAR-12
SC 3
®
PRO
==PAGE:328==
Stolpestøtter / Stolpespyd
PH / PHF Stolpestøtter
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
t
PH350Z
-
Stolpestøtte 350 
350
30
25
5
40
PH450Z
-
Stolpestøtte 450 
450
40
31
5
25
PH600Z
-
Stolpestøtte 600
600
40
5
20
PH1000G
1761261
Stolpestøtte 1000
1000
40
185
6
-
Disse beslag er fremstillet af 5 eller 6 mm stålplade. Stolpestøtte PH350 samt PH450 er forsynet med 
2 stk. Ø11 huller, PH600 med 3 stk. Ø11 mm huller og PH1000 er forsynet med 4 stk. Ø11 huller.
Til ikke-bærende konstruktioner.
PPH / PPHB Stolpestøtter
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
E
t
PPH90G
5104692
Søjlesko type H 90 
90
60
600
300
-
6
-
PPH100G
5104693
Søjlesko type H 100 
100
60
600
300
-
6
-
PPH120G
5104683
Søjlesko type H 120 
120
60
600
300
-
6
-
PPHB70G
5104684
Søjlesko type HB 70 
70
50
206
200
200
5; 6
-
PPHB90G
5104685
Søjlesko type HB 90 
90
50
206
200
200
5; 6
-
PPHB100G
5104686
Søjlesko type HB 100 
100
50
206
200
200
5; 6
-
Stolpesko PPH og PPHB er opsvejst af 6 mm plade. Beslagene er forsynet med Ø11 mm 
boltehuller og derefter varmforzinket. Typebetegnelse angiver B = bredden af stolpen.
 
Til ikke-bærende konstruktioner.
PPJET / PPJST Stolpespyd
Art. nr.
DB nr.
Beskrivelse
Mål [mm]
Antal pr. 
kasse
A
B
C
D
t
PPJE100/100/750G
1393572
Stolpespyd 100x100x750 
100
100
150
750
2
-
PPJET90/90/750G
1393579
Stolpespyd 90x90x750 
90
90
150
750
2
-
PPJET75/75/750G
1393571
Stolpespyd 75x75x750 
75
75
150
750
2
-
PPJET70/70/750G
1393574
Stolpespyd 70x70x750 
70
70
150
750
2
-
PPJET50/100/750G
1393568
Stolpespyd 50x100x750 
50/100
100
150
750
2
-
PPJET50/50/750G
1393551
Stolpespyd 50x50x750 
50
50
150
750
2
-
PPJST70/600
1967484
Stolpespyd 70x600 iskruning
71
71
150
600
2
-
PPJST100/600
1967485
Stolpespyd 100x600 iskruning
101
101
150
600
2
-
Sortimentet dækker de mest almindelige stolpedimensioner. PPJST skrues ned i jorden og er 
derved betydeligt nemmere end at banke spyddene ned, som med de traditionelle stolpespyd.
Til ikke-bærende konstruktioner.
Gør-det-selv beslag
Gør-det-selv 
beslag
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
147
PPJST
A
D
C
B
SC 3
SC 3
PH
A
B
PH1000G
®
PRO
PPH
A
C
D
B
PPHB
A
B
E
PPJET
A
D
C
B
SC 3
==PAGE:329==
==PAGE:330==
Alfabetisk index
Alfabetisk 
index
==PAGE:331==
Simpson Strong-Tie®
Alfabetisk 
index
Alfabetisk index
5566H...........................................................................79
6040H...........................................................................80
6050H...........................................................................80
6099H...........................................................................78 
A
AA60280.......................................................................67
AB105...........................................................................62
AB105S.................................................................62, 110
AB255HD......................................................................72
AB255SSH....................................................................72
AB55365.......................................................................67
AB55365S.............................................................67, 111
AB70.............................................................................62
AB70S...................................................................62, 110
AB90.............................................................................62
AB90S...................................................................62, 110
ABB40390.....................................................................67
ABB40390S...........................................................67, 111
ABJ210G.......................................................................64
ABL10014G...................................................................64
ABL15014G...................................................................64
ABL15017G...................................................................64
ABL7514G.....................................................................64
ABO1E-RC...................................................................123
ABR100.........................................................................63
ABR100PB...................................................................144
ABR100S...............................................................63, 110
ABR10525.....................................................................62
ABR10525S...........................................................62, 110
ABR10525Z...................................................................62
ABR170.........................................................................63
ABR220.........................................................................63
ABR255.........................................................................72
ABR255SO....................................................................72
ABR7015.......................................................................62
ABR7015S.............................................................62, 110
ABR7015Z.....................................................................62
ABR9015.......................................................................63
ABR9020.......................................................................62
ABR9020S.............................................................62, 110
ABR9020Z.....................................................................62
AC35350.......................................................................67
AC35350S.............................................................67, 111
ACFET200.....................................................................76
ACR4712.......................................................................67
ACW155........................................................................76
ADR6035.......................................................................69
ADR6090L.....................................................................69
AE116...........................................................................66
AE48.............................................................................66
AE76.............................................................................66
AF90265.......................................................................67
AG40312.......................................................................66
AG40314.......................................................................66
AG40412 ......................................................................66
AG40414 ......................................................................66
AG922...........................................................................69
AH16050.......................................................................65
AH19050/2....................................................................65
AH29050/2....................................................................65
AH9035.........................................................................65
AH9055.........................................................................65
AHIE-RC......................................................................123
AHT2E-RC...................................................................123
AHTE-RC.....................................................................123
AJ60416.......................................................................66
AJ80416.......................................................................66
AJ99416.......................................................................66
AKR135LZ, AKR135Z.....................................................64
AKR285LZ, AKR285Z.....................................................64
AKR95LZ, AKR95Z.........................................................64
AMA4E-RC..................................................................123
AMA8E-RC..................................................................123
AMA9E-RC..................................................................123
AMAE-RC....................................................................123
AMIE-RC.....................................................................123
ANP251010100.............................................................68
ANP25101060...............................................................68
ANP25101080...............................................................68
ANP251020100.............................................................68
ANP254440...................................................................68
ANP254460...................................................................68
ANP254660...................................................................68
ANP2561060.................................................................68
ANP2566100.................................................................68
ANP256640...................................................................68
ANP256650...................................................................68
ANP256660...................................................................68
ANP256660S.........................................................68, 111
ANP256680...................................................................68
ANP256860...................................................................68
ANP2588100.................................................................68
ANP258860...................................................................68
ANP258880...................................................................68
ANPS204425.................................................................68
ANPS204625.................................................................68
ANPS206625.................................................................68
APR110/150................................................................101
ARA41,9x20..................................................................53
ARA41,9x25..................................................................53
ARA41,9x30..................................................................53
ARA42,3x35..................................................................53
ARA42,3x45..................................................................53
ARA42,3x50..................................................................53
ARA42,5x60..................................................................53
ARA43,1x75..................................................................53
ARA44,0x35..................................................................53
ASPITE-RC..................................................................123
ATHP300BG-DK...........................................................136
B
BAN094025...................................................................82
BAN094050...................................................................82
BAN102003...................................................................82
BAN102010...................................................................82
BAN102010S........................................................82, 112
BAN102025...................................................................82
BAN152010...................................................................82
BAN152025...................................................................82
BAN154025...................................................................82
BAN154050...................................................................82
BAN202510...................................................................82
BAN202525...................................................................82
BAN204025...................................................................82
BAN204025S........................................................82, 112
BAN204050...................................................................82
BAN206050...................................................................82
BAN208025...................................................................82
BANS071203..............................................................146
BANS071203S............................................................146
BANW071203..............................................................146
BANW071203S...........................................................146
BANW071210..............................................................146
BANW071703..............................................................146
BANW071710..............................................................146
BANW071725..............................................................146
BF25M5........................................................................81
BF4060M5....................................................................81
BIT2PE-RC10..............................................................132
BIT2PE-RC3................................................................132
BIT2S-2-RC3...............................................................132
BIT2SE-RC10..............................................................132
BIT2SE-RC3................................................................132
BIT2SU-2-RC3.............................................................132
BIT2SUE-RC10............................................................132
BIT2SUE-RC3..............................................................132
BIT3S-2-RC3...............................................................132
BIT3SE-RC10..............................................................132
BIT3SE-RC3................................................................132
BIT3SU-2-RC3.............................................................132
BIT3SUE-RC3..............................................................132
BIT3SU-RC10..............................................................132
BITLTX20E-RC10.........................................................132
BITTX20-RC10............................................................132
BITTX20-RC3..............................................................132
BITTX25-RC10............................................................132
BITTX25-RC3..............................................................132
BJSTROP.......................................................................87
BN4,5X110G.................................................................54
BN4,5X130G.................................................................54
BN4,5X90G...................................................................54
BNG60-14.....................................................................80
BNSP80.........................................................................81
BNV33...........................................................................65
BPHX516G2................................................................133
BPST.............................................................................79
BPTD.............................................................................79
BR17-30.....................................................................137
BRDC1,4x25..................................................................55
BRDC1,7x35..................................................................55
BRDC1,7x40..................................................................55
BRDC2,0x50..................................................................55
BRDC2,3x60..................................................................55
BRDEZ1,2x20................................................................55
BRDEZ1,4x25................................................................55
BRDEZ1,7x35................................................................55
BRDEZ1,7x40................................................................55
BRDEZ2,0x50................................................................55
BRDHG1,7x35...............................................................55
BRDHG1,7x40...............................................................55
BRDHG2,0x50...............................................................55
BRDHG2,0x60...............................................................55
BRDHG2,0x75...............................................................55
BRN1,4x25....................................................................57
BRN1,7x30....................................................................57
BRN2,0x35....................................................................57
BRN2,0x40....................................................................57
BRN2,5x50....................................................................57
BSIL100/190.................................................................90
BSIL115/223.................................................................90
BSIL90/195...................................................................90
BSIL90/235...................................................................90
BSIN100/100.................................................................90
BSIN100/140.................................................................90
BSIN115/193.................................................................90
BSIN45/127...................................................................90
BSIN45/78.....................................................................90
BSIN51/100...................................................................90
BSIN60/95.....................................................................90
BSIN64/118...................................................................90
BSIN64/93.....................................................................90
BSIN76/112...................................................................90
BSIN90/145...................................................................90
BSNN100/100...............................................................88
BSNN100/140...............................................................88
BSNN100/170...............................................................88
BSNN100/200...............................................................88
BSNN115/163...............................................................88
BSNN140/180...............................................................88
BSNN45/108.................................................................88
BSNN45/138.................................................................88
BSNN45/138Z...............................................................88
BSNN45/168.................................................................88
BSNN45/168Z...............................................................88
BSNN45/198.................................................................88
BSNN45/93...................................................................88
BSNN45/93Z.................................................................88
BSNN51/105.................................................................88
BSNN51/135.................................................................88
BSNN51/90...................................................................88
BSNN60/160.................................................................88
BSNN64/128.................................................................88
BSNN64/98...................................................................88
BSNN70/125.................................................................88
BSNN73/154.................................................................88
BSNN76/122.................................................................88
BSNN76/152.................................................................88
BSNN76/182.................................................................88
BSNN90/145.................................................................88
BSNN90/205.................................................................88
BT4-120........................................................................95
BT4-160........................................................................95
BT4-200........................................................................95
BT4-240........................................................................95
BT4-90..........................................................................95
BTALU120.....................................................................95
BTALU160.....................................................................95
BTALU200.....................................................................95
BTALU240.....................................................................95
BTALU3000...................................................................95
BTALU90.......................................................................95
BTC120.........................................................................95
BTC160.........................................................................95
BTC200.........................................................................95
BTC240.........................................................................95
BTN120.........................................................................95
BTN160.........................................................................95
BTN200.........................................................................95
BTN240.........................................................................95
BTN90...........................................................................95
BW4,2x45.....................................................................43
BW4,8x50.....................................................................43
BW4,8x85.....................................................................43
BW5,5x115...................................................................43
BW5,5x65.....................................................................43
BW5,5x85.....................................................................43
BW5,5x90.....................................................................43
C
C1-117G.....................................................................107
C1-50G.......................................................................107
C1-62G.......................................................................107
C1-75G.......................................................................107
C1-95G.......................................................................107
C2-117M16G..............................................................107
C2-117M20G..............................................................107
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
150
==PAGE:332==
Simpson Strong-Tie®
Alfabetisk 
index
Alfabetisk index
C2-117M22G..............................................................107
C2-117M24G..............................................................107
C2-50M10G................................................................107
C2-50M12G................................................................107
C2-50M16G................................................................107
C2-50M20G................................................................107
C2-62M12G................................................................107
C2-62M16G................................................................107
C2-62M20G................................................................107
C2-75M12G................................................................107
C2-75M16G................................................................107
C2-75M20G................................................................107
C2-75M24G................................................................107
C2-95M16G................................................................107
C2-95M20G................................................................107
C2-95M22G................................................................107
C2-95M24G................................................................107
C3-73/130G................................................................107
C4-73/130M24G.........................................................107
C5-100G.....................................................................107
C5-130G.....................................................................107
CABOCHON70PB.........................................................144
CABOCHON90PB.........................................................144
CBSDQ41E..................................................................125
CBSDQ55E..................................................................125
CEZ1,75x19..................................................................58
CHB51E.......................................................................131
CHG2,50x25..................................................................58
CHG2,75x30..................................................................58
CHG3,00x35..................................................................58
CHG3,25x40..................................................................58
CHG3,75x50..................................................................58
CHG4,00x60..................................................................58
CLSZN4.8X48................................................................31
CLSZN4.8X65................................................................31
CLSZN48E.............................................................31, 129
CLSZN65E.............................................................31, 129
CNA3,1X22....................................................................46
CNA3,1X40....................................................................46
CNA3,1X60....................................................................46
CNA3,7X50....................................................................46
CNA4,0X100..................................................................46
CNA4,0X35....................................................................46
CNA4,0x35PC34............................................................48
CNA4,0X40....................................................................46
CNA4,0X40-FR..............................................................46
CNA4,0X40G.................................................................46
CNA4,0x40PC34............................................................48
CNA4,0X40S.................................................................46
CNA4,0X50....................................................................46
CNA4,0x50PC34............................................................48
CNA4,0X50S.................................................................46
CNA4,0X60....................................................................46
CNA4,0x60PC34............................................................48
CNA4,0X60S.................................................................46
CNA4,0X75....................................................................46
CNA6,0X100..................................................................46
CNA6,0X60....................................................................46
CNA6,0X80....................................................................46
CNAC15G4.0X40...........................................................47
CNAC15G4.0X50...........................................................47
CNAC15G4.0X60...........................................................47
CNAC15Z4.0X40...........................................................47
CNAC15Z4.0X50...........................................................47
CNAC15Z4.0X60...........................................................47
CSA4,0X30....................................................................16
CSA5,0X25....................................................................16
CSA5,0X25S..................................................................17
CSA5,0X35....................................................................16
CSA5,0X35S..................................................................17
CSA5,0X35ST........................................................17, 128
CSA5,0X35T..................................................................16
CSA5,0X35T................................................................128
CSA5,0X40....................................................................16
CSA5,0X40-HV..............................................................16
CSA5,0X40S..................................................................17
CSA5,0X40ST........................................................17, 128
CSA5,0X40T..........................................................16, 128
CSA5,0X50....................................................................16
CSA5,0X50T..........................................................16, 128
CSA5,0x80-DE..............................................................16
CSA5.0X35PB-R....................................................16, 145
CSA5.0X35Z..................................................................16
CSA5.0X35ZT........................................................16, 128
CSA5.0X40Z..................................................................16
CSA5.0X40Z-HV............................................................16
CSA5.0X40ZT........................................................16, 128
D
DLVS73.........................................................................84
DSIX4,2x35...................................................................30
DSIX4,2x45...................................................................30
DSIX4,2x55...................................................................30
DSIX4,2x75...................................................................30
DSPROA45,5x50...........................................................31
DSPROA45,5x60...........................................................31
DSPROA45,5x70...........................................................31
DSPROA45,5x80...........................................................31
DT300.........................................................................137
DTHQ51E....................................................................129
DTHQ64E....................................................................129
DTHQ76E....................................................................129
DTT2Z...........................................................................76
DWA3G2......................................................................123
DWA7G2......................................................................123
DWC3930PE................................................................126
DWC3940PE................................................................126
DWC3955PE................................................................126
DWC3965PE................................................................126
DWCZ3930PE..............................................................126
DWCZ3941PE..............................................................126
DWF3525PE................................................................126
DWF3535PE................................................................126
DWF3540PE................................................................126
DWFSD32PE................................................................127
DWFSD41PE................................................................127
DWFZ3530PE..............................................................126
DWFZ3541PE..............................................................126
DWHL48PE..................................................................126
E
E20/3............................................................................63
E9/2,5...........................................................................70
EA444/2PB..................................................................144
EB14WD316R175..........................................................32
EB332WD316R175........................................................32
EBC100/2.5...................................................................70
EBC110/2.5...................................................................70
EBC120/2.5...................................................................70
EBC130/2.5...................................................................70
EBC140/2.5...................................................................70
EBC150/2.5...................................................................70
EBC160/2.5...................................................................70
EBC170/2.5...................................................................70
EBC180/2.5...................................................................70
EBC190/2.5...................................................................70
EBC200/2.5...................................................................70
EBC210/2.5...................................................................70
EBC220/2.5...................................................................70
EBC230/2.5...................................................................70
EBC240/2.5...................................................................70
EBC250/2.5...................................................................70
EL30.............................................................................92
EL40.............................................................................92
EL60.............................................................................92
EL80.............................................................................92
EL100...........................................................................92
ELS40...........................................................................92
ELS60...........................................................................92
ELS80...........................................................................92
ELS100.........................................................................92
ENTS3,4x75..................................................................51
ENTS3,4x90..................................................................51
ENTS3,7x100................................................................51
ESCR10.0x100..............................................................20
ESCR10.0x120..............................................................20
ESCR10.0x140..............................................................20
ESCR10.0x160..............................................................20
ESCR10.0x200..............................................................20
ESCR10.0x220..............................................................20
ESCR10.0x260..............................................................20
ESCR10.0x280..............................................................20
ESCR10.0x320..............................................................20
ESCR10.0x340..............................................................20
ESCR10.0x360..............................................................20
ESCR6.0x100................................................................20
ESCR6.0x120................................................................20
ESCR6.0x140................................................................20
ESCR6.0x160................................................................20
ESCR6.0x180................................................................20
ESCR6.0x200................................................................20
ESCR6.0x60..................................................................20
ESCR6.0x80..................................................................20
ESCR8.0x100................................................................20
ESCR8.0x120................................................................20
ESCR8.0x140................................................................20
ESCR8.0x160................................................................20
ESCR8.0x180................................................................20
ESCR8.0x200................................................................20
ESCR8.0x220................................................................20
ESCR8.0x240................................................................20
ESCR8.0x260................................................................20
ESCR8.0x280................................................................20
ESCR8.0x300................................................................20
ESCR8.0x320................................................................20
ESCR8.0x340................................................................20
ESCR8.0x360................................................................20
ESCR8.0x380................................................................20
ESCR8.0x400................................................................20
ESCR8.0x80..................................................................20
ESCRC10.0x120............................................................21
ESCRC10.0x140............................................................21
ESCRC10.0x180............................................................21
ESCRC10.0x200............................................................21
ESCRC10.0x240............................................................21
ESCRC10.0x280............................................................21
ESCRC10.0x300............................................................21
ESCRC10.0x320............................................................21
ESCRC10.0x360............................................................21
ESCRC10.0x400............................................................21
ESCRC6.0x100..............................................................21
ESCRC6.0x120..............................................................21
ESCRC6.0x140..............................................................21
ESCRC6.0x150..............................................................21
ESCRC6.0x160..............................................................21
ESCRC6.0x180..............................................................21
ESCRC6.0x200..............................................................21
ESCRC6.0x240..............................................................21
ESCRC6.0x280..............................................................21
ESCRC6.0x300..............................................................21
ESCRC6.0x60................................................................21
ESCRC6.0x70................................................................21
ESCRC6.0x80................................................................21
ESCRC6.0x90................................................................21
ESCRC8.0x100..............................................................21
ESCRC8.0x120..............................................................21
ESCRC8.0x140..............................................................21
ESCRC8.0x160..............................................................21
ESCRC8.0x180..............................................................21
ESCRC8.0x200..............................................................21
ESCRC8.0x260..............................................................21
ESCRC8.0x280..............................................................21
ESCRC8.0x300..............................................................21
ESCRC8.0x340..............................................................21
ESCRC8.0x400..............................................................21
ESCRC8.0x80................................................................21
ESCRFTC8.0x140..........................................................23
ESCRFTC8.0x160..........................................................23
ESCRFTC8.0x180..........................................................23
ESCRFTC8.0x200..........................................................23
ESCRFTC8.0x240..........................................................23
ESCRFTZ8.0X120..........................................................23
ESCRFTZ8.0X140..........................................................23
ESCRFTZ8.0X160..........................................................23
ESCRFTZ8.0X200..........................................................23
ESCRFTZ8.0X240..........................................................23
ET260...........................................................................91
ETB120.........................................................................92
ETB160.........................................................................92
ETB190.........................................................................92
ETB230.........................................................................92
ETB90...........................................................................92
F
FBCB25E...............................................................33, 125
FBCB3.9X25..................................................................33
FBCB35E...............................................................33, 125
FBCS25E...............................................................33, 125
FBCS3.9X25..................................................................33
FBCS3.9X35..................................................................33
FBCS35E...............................................................33, 125
FBCS45E...............................................................33, 125
FBPR16B.....................................................................146
FCSCI06060................................................................137
FIRKG1,8x35.................................................................50
FIRKG2,0x40.................................................................50
FIRKG2,2x45.................................................................50
FIRKG2,5x55.................................................................50
FIRKG2,8x65.................................................................50
FIRKG3,1x80.................................................................50
FIRKG3,4x90.................................................................50
FIRKG3,8x100...............................................................50
FIRKG4,6x130...............................................................50
FIRKG5,5x160...............................................................50
FIRKG6,0x180...............................................................50
FIRKG7,0x210...............................................................50
FIRKG7,0x260...............................................................50
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
151
==PAGE:333==
Simpson Strong-Tie®
Alfabetisk 
index
Alfabetisk index
FIRKS2,3x60.................................................................51
FIRKS2,8x75.................................................................51
FIRKS3,4x100...............................................................51
FIRKU1,8x35.................................................................50
FIRKU2,0x40.................................................................50
FIRKU2,2x45.................................................................50
FIRKU2,5x55.................................................................50
FIRKU2,8x65.................................................................50
FIRKU3,1x80.................................................................50
FIRKU3,4x90.................................................................50
FIRKU3,8x100...............................................................50
FIRKU4,6x130...............................................................50
FIRKU5,5x160...............................................................50
FIRKU6,0x180...............................................................50
FIRKU7,0x210...............................................................50
FIRKU7,0x260...............................................................50
FIX PB.........................................................................145
FPHSD34S1016...........................................................131
FPHSD34S1214...........................................................131
FS4,2x13......................................................................42
FS4,2x25......................................................................42
FS4,2x32......................................................................42
FS4,2x65......................................................................42
FSB4,2x13....................................................................42
FSB4,2x13....................................................................42
FSB4,2x25....................................................................42
FSB4,2x25....................................................................42
FSB4,2x32....................................................................42
FSB4,2x40....................................................................42
FSB4,2x65....................................................................42
FSBZN4.8X110..............................................................43
FSBZN4.8X35................................................................43
FSBZN4.8X50................................................................43
FSBZN4.8X70................................................................43
FSBZN4.8X90................................................................43
FSM4,2x14....................................................................37
FSM4,8x16....................................................................37
G
GAF48...........................................................................85
GAR22/45/25................................................................77
GAR25/42/25................................................................77
GCN150KTE................................................................140
GCNE-ADP013.............................................................141
GCNE-CHG008............................................................141
GCNE-PPA019.............................................................141
GDP-100KTE...............................................................140
GDP-125KTE...............................................................140
GDP-150KTE...............................................................140
GDP-50KTE.................................................................140
GDP-62KTE.................................................................140
GDP-75KTE.................................................................140
GDPS-100KTE.............................................................140
GDPS-50KTE...............................................................140
GDPS-62KTE...............................................................140
GDPS-75KTE...............................................................140
GDPSK-138KT.............................................................140
GERB125.......................................................................99
GERB150 / GERB150Z...................................................99
GERB175 / GERB175Z...................................................99
GERB200.......................................................................99
GERB220.......................................................................99
GERW120 / GERW120Z.................................................99
GERW140 / GERW140Z.................................................99
GERW160 / GERW160Z.................................................99
GERW180......................................................................99
GERW200......................................................................99
GERW220......................................................................99
GERW240......................................................................99
GERW260......................................................................99
GERW340......................................................................99
GERW90........................................................................99
GFC34E.......................................................................140
GG5,2x38......................................................................40
GK3,9x30......................................................................38
GK3,9x40......................................................................38
GK3,9x55......................................................................38
GKS6,5x100..................................................................36
GKS6,5x40....................................................................36
GKS6,5x50....................................................................36
GKS6,5x60....................................................................36
GKS6,5x75....................................................................36
GMR-2........................................................................141
GS3,5x25................................................................40, 41
GS3,5x38................................................................40, 41
GS3,9x55......................................................................41
GS3,9x75......................................................................41
GSB3,5x25....................................................................39
GSB3,5x40....................................................................39
GSB3,9x48....................................................................39
GSB4,2x75....................................................................39
GT3,9x30......................................................................40
GT3,9x40......................................................................40
GT3,9x55......................................................................40
GT3,9x75......................................................................40
GWL-100.....................................................................141
H
HD340M12G.................................................................71
HD400M16G.................................................................71
HD420M16G.................................................................71
HD420M20G.................................................................71
HE135...........................................................................87
HE175...........................................................................87
HS4,2x13......................................................................36
HS4,2x19......................................................................36
HSB4,2x13....................................................................36
HSB4,2x19....................................................................36
HSB4,2x25....................................................................36
HTT22E.........................................................................71
HTT31...........................................................................71
HTT4.............................................................................71
HTT5.............................................................................71
I
ITB220/50.....................................................................93
ITB250/49.....................................................................93
ITB300/50.....................................................................93
IUSE199/48...................................................................93
IUSE199/50...................................................................93
IUSE199/61...................................................................93
IUSE219/50...................................................................93
IUSE239/61...................................................................93
IUSE249/48...................................................................93
IUSE299/48...................................................................93
IUSE299/50...................................................................93
IUSE299/61...................................................................93
IUSE299/63...................................................................93
IUSE349/48...................................................................93
IUSE349/50...................................................................93
IUSE359/48...................................................................93
IUSE359/61...................................................................93
IUSE399/48...................................................................93
IUSE399/50...................................................................93
IUSE399/61...................................................................93
IUSE399/63...................................................................93
K
KNAG90........................................................................69
KNAG130......................................................................69
KNAG170......................................................................69
KNAG210......................................................................69
L
L150PB.......................................................................144
LTSF3,9x35...................................................................34
LTSF3,9x42...................................................................34
LTSF3,9x57...................................................................34
LTSF3,9x70...................................................................34
LTSFH4,2x42.................................................................34
LTSFH4,2x57.................................................................34
M
M5X12..........................................................................81
MANDREL128E............................................................133
MANDREL165E-RC......................................................133
MANDREL191E-RC......................................................133
MIA2G2K.....................................................................123
MKSA44,0x100.............................................................53
MKSA44,0x125.............................................................53
MKSA44,0x145.............................................................53
MKSA44,0x175.............................................................53
MKSA44,0x200.............................................................53
MN1-RP10..................................................................136
MNE-RP10..................................................................136
MP25/100.....................................................................98
MP50/100.....................................................................98
MP75/150.....................................................................98
MTH25E......................................................................125
MTH32E......................................................................125
MTH32SE....................................................................125
N
NEDC48238..................................................................77
NP15/100/380..............................................................96
NP15/140/200..............................................................96
NP15/140/240..............................................................96
NP15/140/300..............................................................96
NP15/140/420..............................................................96
NP15/160/180..............................................................96
NP15/160/220..............................................................96
NP15/160/240..............................................................96
NP15/200/220..............................................................96
NP15/200/260..............................................................96
NP15/60/160................................................................96
NP15/60/180................................................................96
NP15/60/220................................................................96
NP15/80/100................................................................96
NP15/80/140................................................................96
NP15/80/300................................................................96
NP20/100/1200............................................................98
NP20/100/140..............................................................97
NP20/100/200 / NP20/100/200Z...................................97
NP20/100/220..............................................................97
NP20/100/240..............................................................97
NP20/100/260..............................................................97
NP20/100/300..............................................................97
NP20/100/400..............................................................97
NP20/100/500..............................................................97
NP20/120/1200............................................................98
NP20/120/200..............................................................97
NP20/120/220..............................................................97
NP20/120/240..............................................................97
NP20/120/260..............................................................97
NP20/120/300 / NP20/120/300Z...................................97
NP20/120/400..............................................................97
NP20/140/1200............................................................98
NP20/140/400..............................................................97
NP20/160/1200............................................................98
NP20/160/300..............................................................97
NP20/160/400..............................................................97
NP20/200/1200............................................................98
NP20/40/120................................................................97
NP20/40/1200..............................................................98
NP20/40/160................................................................97
NP20/50/200................................................................97
NP20/60/1200..............................................................98
NP20/60/140................................................................97
NP20/60/200................................................................97
NP20/60/240................................................................97
NP20/80/1200..............................................................98
NP20/80/180................................................................97
NP20/80/200................................................................97
NP20/80/220................................................................97
NP20/80/240................................................................97
NP25/100/1200............................................................98
NP25/120/1200............................................................98
NP25/140/1200............................................................98
NP25/160/1200............................................................98
NP25/200/1200............................................................98
NP25/60/1200..............................................................98
NP25/80/1200..............................................................98
NPA25G2.....................................................................133
NPA2G2.......................................................................133
NPABPC50E.................................................................133
NPB255.........................................................................72
O
ODYK1,2x20..................................................................56
ODYK1,2x25..................................................................56
ODYK1,4x25..................................................................56
ODYK1,6x40..................................................................56
P
P27SL3E.....................................................................138
P27SL4E.....................................................................138
P27SL5E.....................................................................138
P27SL6E.....................................................................138
PA70G.........................................................................100
PA90G.........................................................................100
PAPP2,1x20..................................................................54
PAPP2,5x25..................................................................54
PAPP2,5x40..................................................................54
PAPS2,5x25..................................................................54
PAPS2,5x40..................................................................54
PAPS2,8x20..................................................................54
PB70G.........................................................................100
PBL4540.....................................................................100
PDKB48/40G...............................................................104
PDKB98/60G...............................................................104
PDL100/60G................................................................104
PDL75/60G..................................................................104
PDPA-100...................................................................138
PDPA-50K...................................................................138
PDPA-62K...................................................................138
PDPA-75.....................................................................138
PFEEDPAWL2E............................................................133
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
152
==PAGE:334==
Simpson Strong-Tie®
Alfabetisk 
index
Alfabetisk index
PFEEDPAWL4E............................................................133
PFEEDPAWLE..............................................................133
PFEEDPAWLTLE...........................................................133
PFP36/170....................................................................85
PFP36/390....................................................................85
PFP48/170....................................................................85
PH1000G.....................................................................147
PH350Z.......................................................................147
PH450Z.......................................................................147
PH600Z.......................................................................147
PIG..............................................................................102
PILG............................................................................102
PIS70G........................................................................102
PISB160G....................................................................102
PISB260G....................................................................102
PISBMAXIG..................................................................102
PISMAXIG....................................................................102
PJPBG.........................................................................103
PJPSG.........................................................................103
PL80/70G....................................................................103
PL90/90G....................................................................103
PL100/70G..................................................................103
PL100/90G..................................................................103
PL120/90G..................................................................103
PL140/90G..................................................................103
PLB80/190G................................................................102
PLS60/65G..................................................................102
PLS80/190G................................................................102
PLS80/90G..................................................................102
PN2,4x35......................................................................56
PNOSECLIP..................................................................133
POLYGP300BG-DK.......................................................136
POLYGPG300W-DK......................................................136
PP80G.........................................................................102
PPB70G.......................................................................103
PPB75G.......................................................................103
PPB80G.......................................................................103
PPD100/40G...............................................................100
PPD100/70G...............................................................100
PPD100/90G...............................................................100
PPD115/90G...............................................................100
PPD120/90G...............................................................100
PPD125/90G...............................................................100
PPD140/90G...............................................................100
PPD148/90G...............................................................100
PPD48/40G.................................................................100
PPD50/40G.................................................................100
PPD73/40G.................................................................100
PPD73/70G.................................................................100
PPD75/70G.................................................................100
PPD90/90G.................................................................100
PPD98/60G.................................................................100
PPG60/25PB................................................................144
PPH100G.....................................................................147
PPH120G.....................................................................147
PPH90G.......................................................................147
PPHB100G..................................................................147
PPHB70G....................................................................147
PPHB90G....................................................................147
PPJE100/100/750G.....................................................147
PPJET50/100/750G.....................................................147
PPJET50/50/750G.......................................................147
PPJET70/70/750G.......................................................147
PPJET75/75/750G.......................................................147
PPJET90/90/750G.......................................................147
PPJST100/600............................................................147
PPJST70/600..............................................................147
PPL80G.......................................................................102
PPS80G.......................................................................103
PPU100/60G................................................................104
PPU120/60G................................................................104
PPU140/60G................................................................104
PPU48/40G..................................................................104
PPU50/40G..................................................................104
PPU70/60G..................................................................104
PPU71/40G..................................................................104
PPU73/40G..................................................................104
PPU80/60G..................................................................104
PPU90/60G..................................................................104
PPU98/60G..................................................................104
PTB48G.......................................................................104
PTP-27LE....................................................................138
PU100.........................................................................101
PUMP..........................................................................137
PVD120G.....................................................................101
PVD80G.......................................................................101
PVDB120G..................................................................101
PVDB80G....................................................................101
PVIBG..........................................................................101
PVIG............................................................................101
Q
QD76KE......................................................................116
QDBPC50E..................................................................118
QDEXTE.......................................................................133
QDEXTG3-22...............................................................133
QDLEAFSPRING...........................................................133
QDLEAFSPRING2.........................................................133
QDPRO51E..................................................................120
QDPRO51E..................................................................121
QDPRO51KE................................................................120
QDPRO76SKE..............................................................117
QDPROHX516G2.........................................................122
QDPROLDGH2.............................................................122
QDPRORFE..................................................................119
QDSPRING2E...............................................................133
QDSPRING4E...............................................................133
QRLTX20E-50..............................................................132
QRP2E-50...................................................................132
QRS2E-50...................................................................132
QRSU2E-50.................................................................132
QUIVERE......................................................................133
R
RDPF40PE...................................................................127
RDWF30BE..................................................................127
RDWF40BE..................................................................127
RSN34G2.8X65.............................................................49
RSN34G2.8X75.............................................................49
RSN34G3.1X90.............................................................49
RSN34G3.1X98.............................................................49
RSND34G2.8X65...........................................................49
RSND34G2.8X75...........................................................49
RSND34G3.1X90...........................................................49
RSND34G3.1X98...........................................................49
RST3,9x25....................................................................41
RST3,9x32....................................................................41
RST3,9x41....................................................................41
RST4,2x55....................................................................41
RST4,2x57....................................................................41
RTFSD25E...................................................................127
RTFSD35E...................................................................127
S
SAE200/46/2PB...........................................................144
SAE250/46/2PB...........................................................144
SDW22258-R50E..........................................................24
SDW22300-R50E..........................................................24
SDW22338-R50E..........................................................24
SDW22438-R50E..........................................................24
SDW22458-R50E..........................................................24
SDW22500-R50E..........................................................24
SDW22600-R50E..........................................................24
SDW22634-R50E..........................................................24
SDW22638-R50E..........................................................24
SDWS08X100DB...........................................................24
SDWS08X126DB...........................................................24
SDWS08X151DB...........................................................24
SDWS08X202DB...........................................................24
SDWS08X252DB...........................................................24
SDWS08X75DB.............................................................24
SFM..............................................................................86
SFN...............................................................................86
SPA51E.......................................................................133
SPA76E.......................................................................133
SPF170L / SPF170R......................................................83
SPF210L.......................................................................83
SPF210LS.....................................................................83
SPF210R.......................................................................83
SPF210RS.....................................................................83
SPF250L / SPF250R......................................................83
SPF290L / SPF290R......................................................83
SPF330L / SPF330R......................................................83
SPF370L / SPF370R......................................................83
SPKC1,7x40..................................................................52
SPKC2,0x50..................................................................52
SPKEZ1,2x20................................................................52
SPKEZ1,4x25................................................................52
SPKEZ1,7x35................................................................52
SPR45/120....................................................................91
SS3DSC64BE..............................................................130
SS3DSC64BE316........................................................130
SS3DSC76BE..............................................................130
SS3DSC76BE316........................................................130
SSBFHSD2SE..............................................................129
SSDTH51E...................................................................130
SSDTH64E...................................................................130
SSF10.0X40..................................................................17
SSF10.0X60..................................................................17
SSF10.0X80..................................................................17
SSF8.0X40....................................................................17
SSF8.0X60....................................................................17
SSF8.0X80....................................................................17
SSH10.0X100................................................................19
SSH10.0X120................................................................19
SSH10.0X140................................................................19
SSH10.0X160................................................................19
SSH10.0X180................................................................19
SSH10.0X200................................................................19
SSH10.0X240................................................................19
SSH10.0X280................................................................19
SSH10.0X40..................................................................19
SSH10.0X50..................................................................19
SSH10.0X60..................................................................19
SSH10.0X80..................................................................19
SSH10.0X90..................................................................19
SSH12.0X100................................................................19
SSH12.0X120................................................................19
SSH12.0X140................................................................19
SSH12.0X160................................................................19
SSH12.0X180................................................................19
SSH12.0X200................................................................19
SSH12.0X60..................................................................19
SSH12.0X80..................................................................19
SSH12.0X90..................................................................19
SSH6.0X120..................................................................18
SSH6.0X40....................................................................18
SSH6.0X50....................................................................18
SSH6.0X60....................................................................18
SSH6.0X75....................................................................18
SSH6.0X90....................................................................18
SSH8.0X100..................................................................18
SSH8.0X120..................................................................18
SSH8.0X140..................................................................18
SSH8.0X160..................................................................18
SSH8.0X180..................................................................18
SSH8.0X200..................................................................18
SSH8.0X240..................................................................18
SSH8.0X260..................................................................18
SSH8.0X280..................................................................18
SSH8.0X300..................................................................18
SSH8.0X40....................................................................18
SSH8.0X50....................................................................18
SSH8.0X60....................................................................18
SSH8.0X80....................................................................18
SSH8.0X90....................................................................18
SSP3.9x14....................................................................37
SSWSCB32E................................................................130
SSWSCB51E................................................................130
STD10X100.................................................................105
STD10X90...................................................................105
STD12X100.................................................................105
STD12X115.................................................................105
STD12X120.................................................................105
STD12X140.................................................................105
STD12X160.................................................................105
STD12X180.................................................................105
STD12X200.................................................................105
STD12X60...................................................................105
STD12X65G.................................................................106
STD12X80...................................................................105
STD12X80G.................................................................106
STD12X90...................................................................105
STD12X90G.................................................................106
STD16X140.................................................................105
STD8X100...................................................................105
STD8X100G.................................................................106
STD8X115...................................................................105
STD8X115G.................................................................106
STD8X120...................................................................105
STD8X120G.................................................................106
STD8X140...................................................................105
STD8X140G.................................................................106
STD8X160...................................................................105
STD8X45.....................................................................105
STD8X60.....................................................................105
STD8X65.....................................................................105
STD8X65G...................................................................106
STD8X80G...................................................................106
STD8X90.....................................................................105
STD8X90G...................................................................106
SVI200..........................................................................86
SVI240..........................................................................86
SWD6.5X130.................................................................22
SWD6.5X160.................................................................22
SWD6.5X190.................................................................22
SWD6.5X220.................................................................22
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
153
==PAGE:335==
Simpson Strong-Tie®
Alfabetisk 
index
Alfabetisk index
SWD6.5X65...................................................................22
SWD6.5X90...................................................................22
SWD8.0X130.................................................................22
SWD8.0X160.................................................................22
SWD8.0X190.................................................................22
SWD8.0X220.................................................................22
SWD8.0X245.................................................................22
SWD8.0X275.................................................................22
SWD8.0X300.................................................................22
SWD8.0X330.................................................................22
SWD8.0X90...................................................................22
T
T150PB.......................................................................144
T8-650........................................................................136
TA10Z-R......................................................................145
Terrasseskruer............................................................130
THD10 x 100/25 (THD10100)......................................137
THD10 x 120/45 (THD10120)......................................137
THD10 x 170/95 (THD10170)......................................137
THD10 x 80/5 (THD10080)..........................................137
THD8 x 120/55 (THD08120)........................................137
THD8 x 70/5 (THD08070)............................................137
THD8 x 80/15 (THD08080)..........................................137
TICE..............................................................................87
TICN100........................................................................87
TICPKT01......................................................................87
TICS100........................................................................87
TNA2,6x25....................................................................57
TNA3,0x30....................................................................57
TNA3,0x35....................................................................57
TOL40...........................................................................84
TOL50...........................................................................84
TOP51...........................................................................84
TSB3,9x28....................................................................34
TSB3,9x42....................................................................34
TSB3,9x57....................................................................34
TT3,9x28.......................................................................35
TTF4,2x35.....................................................................35
TTF4,2x45.....................................................................35
TTF4,2x50.....................................................................35
TTF4,2x55.....................................................................35
TTF4,2x75.....................................................................35
TTFA44,2x35.................................................................30
TTFA44,2x45.................................................................30
TTFA44,2x55.................................................................30
TTFA44,8x75.................................................................30
TTSFS5,0x100...............................................................27
TTSFS5,0x120...............................................................27
TTSFS5,0x60.................................................................27
TTSFS5,0x70.................................................................27
TTSFS5,0x80.................................................................27
TTSFS5,0x90.................................................................27
TTSFS6,0x100...............................................................27
TTSFS6,0x120...............................................................27
TTSFS6,0x140...............................................................27
TTSFS6,0x70.................................................................27
TTSFS6,0x80.................................................................27
TTSFS6,0x90.................................................................27
TTUFP3,0x15.................................................................28
TTUFP3,0x20.................................................................28
TTUFP3,5x15.................................................................28
TTUFP3,5x20.................................................................28
TTUFP3,5x25.................................................................28
TTUFP3,5x30.................................................................28
TTUFP4,0x15.................................................................28
TTUFP4,0x20.................................................................28
TTUFP4,0x25.................................................................28
TTUFP4,0x30.................................................................28
TTUFP4,0x35.................................................................28
TTUFP4,0x40.................................................................28
TTUFP4,0x50.................................................................28
TTUFP5,0x30.................................................................28
TTUFP5,0x40.................................................................28
TTUFP5,0x50.................................................................28
TTUFP5,0x60.................................................................28
TTUFP5,0x70.................................................................28
TTUFP5,0x80.................................................................28
TTUFP6,0x40.................................................................28
TTUFP6,0x50.................................................................28
TTUFP6,0x60.................................................................28
TTUFP6,0x70.................................................................28
TTUFP6,0x80.................................................................28
TTUFP6,0x100...............................................................28
TTUFS3,0x16................................................................26
TTUFS3,0x20................................................................26
TTUFS3,0x25................................................................26
TTUFS3,0x30................................................................26
TTUFS3,5x16................................................................26
TTUFS3,5x20................................................................26
TTUFS3,5x25................................................................26
TTUFS3,5x30................................................................26
TTUFS3,5x35................................................................26
TTUFS3,5x40................................................................26
TTUFS3,5x50................................................................26
TTUFS4,0x20................................................................26
TTUFS4,0x25................................................................26
TTUFS4,0x30................................................................26
TTUFS4,0x35................................................................26
TTUFS4,0x40................................................................26
TTUFS4,0x45................................................................26
TTUFS4,0x50................................................................26
TTUFS4,0x60................................................................26
TTUFS4,0x70................................................................26
TTUFS4,5x25................................................................26
TTUFS4,5x30................................................................26
TTUFS4,5x35................................................................26
TTUFS4,5x40................................................................26
TTUFS4,5x45................................................................26
TTUFS4,5x50................................................................26
TTUFS4,5x60................................................................26
TTUFS4,5x70................................................................26
TTUFS4,5x80................................................................26
TTUFS5,0x30................................................................26
TTUFS5,0x40................................................................26
TTUFS5,0x50................................................................26
TTUFS5,0x60................................................................27
TTUFS5,0x70................................................................27
TTUFS5,0x80................................................................27
TTUFS5,0x90................................................................27
TTUFS5,0x100..............................................................27
TTUFS5,0x120..............................................................27
TTUFS6,0x40................................................................27
TTUFS6,0x50................................................................27
TTUFS6,0x60................................................................27
TTUFS6,0x70................................................................27
TTUFS6,0x80................................................................27
TTUFS6,0x90................................................................27
TTUFS6,0x100..............................................................27
TTUFS6,0x120..............................................................27
TTUFS6,0x140..............................................................27
TTUFS6,0x160..............................................................27
TTUFS6,0x180..............................................................27
TTZNFP4,0x30..............................................................29
TTZNFP4,0x40..............................................................29
TTZNFP4,0x50..............................................................29
TTZNFP5,0x40..............................................................29
TTZNFP5,0x50..............................................................29
TTZNFP5,0x60..............................................................29
TTZNFP5,0x70..............................................................29
TTZNFP5,0x80..............................................................29
TTZNFP6,0x60..............................................................29
TTZNFP6,0x80..............................................................29
TTZNFP6,0x100............................................................29
TTZNFS3,5x16..............................................................25
TTZNFS3,5x20..............................................................25
TTZNFS3,5x30..............................................................25
TTZNFS4,0x20..............................................................25
TTZNFS4,0x30..............................................................25
TTZNFS4,5x25..............................................................25
TTZNFS4,5x30..............................................................25
TTZNFS4,5x40..............................................................25
TTZNFS4,5x50..............................................................25
TTZNFS4,5x60..............................................................25
TTZNFS4,5x70..............................................................25
TTZNFS5,0x100............................................................25
TTZNFS5,0x120............................................................25
TTZNFS5,0x50..............................................................25
TTZNFS5,0x60..............................................................25
TTZNFS5,0x70..............................................................25
TTZNFS5,0x80..............................................................25
TTZNFS5,0x90..............................................................25
TTZNFS6,0x100............................................................25
TTZNFS6,0x120............................................................25
TTZNFS6,0x140............................................................25
TTZNFS6,0x160............................................................25
TTZNFS6,0x180............................................................25
TTZNFS6,0x60..............................................................25
TTZNFS6,0x70..............................................................25
TTZNFS6,0x80..............................................................25
TTZNFS6,0x90..............................................................25
TUB16...........................................................................94
TUB20...........................................................................94
TUB24...........................................................................94
TUB28...........................................................................94
TUBSL16.......................................................................94
TUBSL20.......................................................................94
TUBSL24.......................................................................94
TUBSL28.......................................................................94
TUBSR16.......................................................................94
TUBSR20.......................................................................94
TUBSR24.......................................................................94
TUBSR28.......................................................................94
U
UGSB3,9x25..................................................................39
UGTS3,9x30..................................................................38
UNI100L / UNI100R.......................................................83
UNI130L / UNI130R.......................................................83
UNI190L / UNI190R.......................................................83
US40/40/10G..............................................................106
US40/50/10G..............................................................106
US50/50/8G................................................................106
US60/60/6G................................................................106
V
VEKS170L.....................................................................91
VEKS170R.....................................................................91
VIG40417......................................................................66
VIMDK155.....................................................................75
VIMDK170.....................................................................75
VIMDK180.....................................................................75
VIMDK190.....................................................................75
VIMDK215.....................................................................75
VIMDK240.....................................................................75
VIMDK280.....................................................................75
VIMOCON110Z..............................................................73
VIMOCON120Z..............................................................73
VIMOCON130Z..............................................................73
VIMOCON145Z..............................................................73
VIMOCON155Z..............................................................73
VIMOCON170Z..............................................................73
VIMOCON185Z..............................................................73
VIMOCON215Z..............................................................73
VIMOCON240Z..............................................................73
VIMOCON85Z................................................................73
VIMOCONP....................................................................73
VIMOP130.....................................................................75
VIMOP155.....................................................................75
VIMOP180.....................................................................75
VIMOP250.....................................................................75
VIMS232.......................................................................74
VIMS260.......................................................................74
VIMS275.......................................................................74
VIMS296.......................................................................74
VIMS310.......................................................................74
VIMS331.......................................................................74
VIMS345.......................................................................74
VIMS400.......................................................................74
VIMT170.......................................................................74
VIMT190.......................................................................74
VIMT200.......................................................................74
VIMT215.......................................................................74
VIMT225.......................................................................74
VIMT240.......................................................................74
VIMT250.......................................................................74
VIMT290.......................................................................74
VIMT350.......................................................................74
VIMT370.......................................................................74
VIMTK1152...................................................................75
VIMTK1153...................................................................75
W
WBSK-NORDIC............................................................146
WSB..............................................................................80
WSC32E......................................................................131
WSC38E......................................................................131
WSD..............................................................................80
WSHL45E....................................................................125
WSK1............................................................................78
WSK2............................................................................78
WSNTL44E..................................................................131
WSNTL51E..................................................................131
WSNTL64E..................................................................131
WSNTL76E..................................................................131
WSP..............................................................................80
X
X25E1016...................................................................131
Prisliste gældende fra 1. februar 2021. Forbehold for prisændringer og trykfejl.
Copyright: © Simpson Strong-Tie®   P-DK-01-2021
strongtie.dk 
154
==PAGE:336==
Indledning
Disse Almindelige Salgs- og Leveringsbetingelser gælder for alle 
leverancer af produkter, medmindre andet udtrykkeligt er aftalt 
mellem parterne. Betingelser, krav eller vilkår fremsat af køber i 
eksempelvis købers generelle købsbetingelser er ikke bindende for 
Simpson Strong-Tie® A/S, medmindre Simpson Strong-Tie® skriftligt 
har erklæret sig indforstået med de pågæld­ende betingelser m.v.
Priser
Alle priser er ex. moms og andre offentlige afgifter. Simpson Strong-
Tie® forbeholder sig ret at ændre prisen, såfremt der inden levering 
pålægges Simpson Strong-Tie® nye eller forøgede omkostninger. 
Produkter, der ikke i henhold til prislisten har en stk. pris, sælges 
kun i hele kasser. Produkter solgt i anbrud, vil blive pålagt et an-
brudstillæg på DKK 150 pr. anbrud.
Tilbud
Tilbud på produkter, som ikke er anført på Simpson Strong-Tie®’s 
officielle prisliste, er maksimalt gældende i 60 dage fra tilbuddets 
afgivelse, med­mindre andet udtrykkeligt er angivet af Simpson 
Strong-Tie®. 
Annullering, ændring, og/eller returnering
Købers annullering, ændring eller returnering af en ordre kan kun 
ske efter Simpson Strong-Tie®’s forudgående skriftlige accept og 
Simpson Strong-Tie® har i sådanne tilfælde altid ret til fuld dækning 
af sit tab eller omkostninger derved. Ved returnering forbeholder 
Simpson Strong-Tie® sig ret til at modregne et gebyr til omkost-
ningsdækning m.v. Leveringsomkostninger forbundet med om-
bytning eller returnering af produkter påhviler køber. Produkter mod-
tages kun retur i hele, ubrudte og originale kasser efter forudgående 
aftale og mod et returgebyr på 30%. Specialvarer, udgåede varer 
samt varer ældre end 12 måneder fra købsdato tages ikke retur.
Levering
Leveringsklausulen er FCA Boulstrup (DK) INCOTERMS 2010, med-
mindre andet er skriftligt aftalt mellem parterne. Der kan forekomme 
leveringstid på visse varer. Alle Simpson Strong-Tie®’s levering-
somkostninger skal betales af køber og transporten sker for købers 
risiko. Et af Simpson Strong-Tie® oplyst leveringstidspunkt er altid 
kun at anse som vejledende og kan fraviges en­sidigt af Simpson 
Strong-Tie®, uanset om det måtte være accepteret af køber. Der 
foreligger kun aftale om bindende leveringstidspunkt, såfremt et 
sådant er fastsat i en skriftlig aftale, som er underskrevet af begge 
parter, og som udtrykkeligt angiver, at leveringstidspunktet er bind-
ende og ikke kan ændres af Simpson Strong-Tie®. 
Betaling
Betaling sker i henhold til Simpson Strong-Tie®’s til enhver tid 
gældende betalingsbetingelser. Simpson Strong-Tie® forbeholder 
sig retten til at ændre de aftalte betalingsbetingelser, såfremt købers 
betalingsevne efter Simpson Strong-Tie®’s opfattelse svækkes efter 
aftalens indgåelse. Enhver forsinkelse med betaling giver Simpson 
Strong-Tie® ret til at tilbageholde yderligere leverancer og frigøre 
sig for samtlige forpligtelser i henhold til den indgåede aftale. Fra 
forfaldsdato debiteres køber en morarente på 1,5% pr. måned. 
Tilskrevne renter forfalder til omgående betaling og betales forud 
for anden gæld ved de løbende indbetalinger. Ved betalingsforsin-
kelse pålægges yderligere gebyrer efter Simpson Strong-Tie®’s til 
enhver tid gældende takster. Simpson Strong-Tie® forbeholder sig 
ejendomsretten til leverede produkter, indtil de er betalt. 
Mangler
Køber er forpligtet til at undersøge produkterne straks ved levering. 
Såfremt køber vil påberåbe sig, at leverancen er utilstrækkelig eller 
behæftet med fejl, skal køber senest 8 dage efter modtagelsen 
underrette Simpson Strong-Tie® skriftligt herom. Ved øvrige mangler 
skal køber reklamere skriftligt.
Simpson Strong-Tie®’s ansvar for mangler ved byggematerialer, lev-
eret i Danmark, ophører 5 år efter aflevering af det byggeri, hvori le-
verancen indgår, dog senest 6 år efter leveringen af byggematerialet 
til køber. Såfremt en reklamation fremsættes for sent, men Simpson 
Strong-Tie® alligevel indlader sig i realitetsdrøftelser med køber i 
anledning af en fremsat reklamation, sker dette uden at Simpson 
Strong-Tie® derved samtidig giver afkald på eventuelt senere at 
gøre gældende, at den pågældende reklamation er fremsat for sent, 
eller at kravet er forældet. Såfremt en af køber fremsat reklamation 
er berettiget, ombyttes den leverede vare eller den godtgøres ved 
kreditering af købsprisen med samtidig tilbagelevering af varen efter 
købers valg. Simpson Strong- Tie® har udover førnævnte pligter in-
tet ansvar for mangler. Køber kan derfor ikke gøre andre mislighold-
elsesbeføjelser gældende end et krav om enten ombytning af den 
mangelfulde vare eller en kreditering af købsprisen herfor. Simpson 
Strong-Tie® hæfter ikke under nogen omstændigheder, hverken 
ved mangler eller forsinkelse, og uanset eventuel grov uagtsomhed, 
for driftstab, avancetab eller andet indirekte tab eller følgeskader. 
Om Simpson Strong-Tie®’s ansvar henvises i øvrigt til beskrivelsen 
“Simpson Strong-Tie® A/S’ ansvar” i Simpson Strong-Tie®’s katalog.
Forsinkelser
I tilfælde af en forsinkelse med levering, som kan henregnes til 
Simpson Strong-Tie®’s forhold, og som er væsentlig, kan køber 
annullere ordren f.s.v. angår den forsinkede leverance. Derudover 
kan køber ikke rejse andre krav som følge af Simpson Strong-Tie®’s 
forsinkelse.
Force majeure
Simpson Strong-Tie® er berettiget til at annullere ordrer eller 
udskyde aftalt levering af produkter grundet force majeure. Force 
majeure foreligger, når Simpson Strong-Tie® forhindres helt eller del-
vis i at opfylde indgående leveringsforpligtelser som følge af forhold, 
som er uden for Simpson Strong-Tie®’s kontrol, herunder forhold, 
som kan henføres til Simpson Strong-Tie®’s underleverandører. 
Såfremt forsinkelsen som følge af Force Majeure forventes at vare 
mere end 3 uger, er såvel Simpson Strong-Tie® som køber ber-
ettiget til at hæve den indgåede aftale, uden at dette kan anses for 
misligholdelse over for den anden part.
Produktansvar
Simpson Strong-Tie® er ikke ansvarlig for skader forvoldt af produk-
terne, medmindre skaden skyldes forsæt eller grov uagtsomhed fra 
Simpson Strong-Tie®’s side, eller der er tale om forbruger-, tings- 
eller personskade. Simpson Strong-Tie® er således for eksempel 
ikke ansvarlig for skade på fast ejendom eller løsøre, som indtræder, 
mens det leverede er i købers besiddelse. Simpson Strong-Tie® er 
ligeledes ikke ansvarlig for skade på produkter, der er fremstillet 
af køber, eller på produkter, hvori disse indgår. Simpson Strong-
Tie® er dog ansvarlig for skade på fast ejendom og løsøre, såfremt 
skaden skyldes forsæt eller grov uagtsomhed begået af Simpson 
Strong-Tie® eller andre, som Simpson Strong-Tie® har ansvaret 
for. Uanset førnævnte kan Simpson Strong-Tie® på intet tidspunkt 
gøres ansvarlig for formuetab, driftstab, tabt arbejdsfortjeneste, 
tidstab, avancetab, følgeskader eller lignende indirekte tab. Køber 
er forpligtet til uden ugrundet ophold skriftligt at meddele Simpson 
Strong-Tie®, såfremt køber bliver bekendt med, at der er indtrådt 
eller at tredjemand påstår, at der er opstået en skade forårsaget af 
de leverede produkter, eller at der er fare for, at der vil ind­træde en 
sådan produktskade. Angivelse af førnævnte meddelelse til Simp-
son Strong-Tie® fritager ikke køber for at foretage de til skadens 
afværgelse eller begrænsning nødvendige foranstaltninger. Køber er 
pligtig til at lade sig sagsøge ved samme forum, som behandler en 
eventuel produktansvarssag mod Simpson Strong-Tie®. I den ud-
strækning, Simpson Strong-Tie® måtte blive pålagt produktansvar 
overfor tredjemand, er køber forpligtet til at holde Simpson Strong-
Tie® skadesløs i samme omfang, som Simpson Strong-Tie®’s ansvar 
er begrænset efter disse betingelser.
Værneting
Eventuelle tvister mellem parterne afgøres efter dansk ret og 
uden anvend­else af bestemmelserne i den internationale købelov. 
Enhver tvist, som ikke kan løses i mindelighed, skal indbringes for 
retten ved Simpson Strong-Tie®’s værneting. Uanset fornævnte er 
Simpson Strong-Tie® altid berettiget til at sagsøge køber ved købers 
hjemting. 
Simpson Strong-Tie® A/S’
Almindelige Salgs -og Leveringsbetingelser
strongtie.dk 
155
==PAGE:337==
Styrken ligger i fastgørelsen
CNA-PC båndede 
beslagsøm
BAN09 vindtrækbånd
Solid-Drive
SSH beslagskruer
ABR100 vinkelbeslag
Solid-Drive
CSA-T båndede 
beslagskruer
BSNN 
bjælkesko
Solid-Drive
CNA-PC båndede beslagsøm
ETB skjult bjælkebærer
Solid-Drive
CNA-S A4 syrefaste
beslagsøm
ABR-S A4 syrefast 
vinkelbeslag
Solid-Drive
CSA beslagskruer
SPF tagåseanker
Solid-Drive
Simpson Strong-Tie® tilbyder en komplet serie af beslagskruer og -søm designet og 
testet til brug sammen med vores bygningsbeslag, for at hjælpe dig med at bygge 
sikre, stærke trækonstruktioner. Sammen med vores beslag og fastgørelsesmidler 
følger der altid høj kvalitet, kundefokuseret service og nem tilgængelighed til vores 
produkter via vores lokale distributionsnetværk.
Læs mere på strongtie.dk/beslagfastgørelse
Always use Simpson Strong-Tie FASTENERS to install Simpson Strong-Tie CONNECTORS
There is no equal
Hvis du vil fastgøre vores beslag ordentligt, skal du bruge vores søm og skruer.
P-DK-01-2021
© Simpson Strong-Tie
==PAGE:338==
Environmental product declaration
in accordance with ISO 14025 and EN 15804+A2
LAPP ÖLFLEX® CLASSIC 110 2x0,75mm2 El.nr:1090415
The Norwegian EPD Foundation
Owner of the declaration: 
Elektroskandia Norge AS
Product: 
LAPP ÖLFLEX® CLASSIC 110 2x0,75mm2 El.nr:1090415
Declared unit: 
1 m
This declaration is based on Product Category Rules:
CEN Standard EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 serves as core
PCR 
NPCR 027:2020 Part B for Electrical cables and wires
Program operator: 
The Norwegian EPD Foundation
Declaration number: 
NEPD-4675-3905-EN
Registration number: 
NEPD-4675-3905-EN
Issue date: 
11.07.2023
Valid to: 
11.07.2028
EPD Software: 
LCA.no EPD generator ID: 66665
 1 / 12
==PAGE:339==
General information
Product
Owner of the declaration:
LAPP ÖLFLEX® CLASSIC 110 2x0,75mm2 El.nr:1090415
Elektroskandia Norge AS 
Contact person: Pål Kristiansen 
Program operator:
Post Box 5250 Majorstuen, 0303 Oslo, Norway 
The Norwegian EPD Foundation 
Phone: +47 23 08 80 00 
web: post@epd-norge.no
Declaration number: 
NEPD-4675-3905-EN
This declaration is based on Product Category Rules:
CEN Standard EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 serves as core PCR 
NPCR 027:2020 Part B for Electrical cables and wires
Statement of liability:
The owner of the declaration shall be liable for the underlying
information and evidence. EPD Norway shall not be liable with respect
to manufacturer information, life cycle assessment data and
evidences.​
Declared unit:
1 m LAPP ÖLFLEX® CLASSIC 110 2x0,75mm2 El.nr:1090415
Declared unit with option:
A1,A2,A3,A4,A5,C1,C2,C3,C4,D
Functional unit:
1 meter of ÖLFLEX® CLASSIC 2x0,75mm2 from cradle-to-grave,
including waste treatment at end-of-life.
General information on verification of EPD from EPD tools:
Independent verification of data, other environmental information
and the declaration according to ISO 14025:2010, § 8.1.3 and § 8.1.4.
Verification of each EPD is made according to EPD-Norway’s
guidelines for verification and approval requiring that tools are i)
integrated into the company's environmental management system, ii)
the procedures for use of the EPD tool are approved by EPD-Norway,
and iii) the process is reviewed annually by an independent third
party verifier. See Appendix G of EPD-Norway's General Programme
Instructions for further information on EPD tools
​
Verification of EPD tool:
Phone: +47 97 66 22 12 
e-mail: pkr@elektroskandia.no
Manufacturer:
Lapp Norway AS 
Eikringen 11 
3036 Drammen, Norway
Place of production:
Cableries Lapp S.a.r.l. 
Technopole Sud Forbach 
F - 57600 FORBACH, France
Management system:
ISO 14001, ISO 9001
Organisation no:
977 454 700
Issue date:
11.07.2023
Valid to:
11.07.2028
Year of study:
2021
Comparability:
EPD of construction products may not be comparable if they not 
comply with EN 15804 and seen in a building context.
Development and verification of EPD:
The declaration is created using EPD tool lca.tools ver EPD2022.03, 
developed by LCA.no. The EPD tool is integrated in the company's 
management system, and has been approved by EPD Norway. 
Approval number:
Developer of EPD: Lars Nilsen - Lapp Norway AS
Reviewer of company-specific input data and EPD: Petter Dahl - Lapp 
Norway AS
Approved:
Independent third party verification of the EPD tool, background data
and test-EPD in accordance with EPDNorway's procedures and
guidelines for verification and approval of EPD tools. Approval
number: NEPDT32.
Third party verifier:
Vito D’Incognito - Take Care International
(no signature required)
 2 / 12
==PAGE:340==
Product
Product description:
Benefits
Space-saving installation due to small cable diameters
High electrical performance due to 4 kV test voltage
Application range
Plant engineering
Industrial machinery
Heating and air-conditioning systems
Conveyor and transport systems
Product specification
Product Make-up
Fine-wire strand made of bare copper wires
PVC insulation LAPP P8/1
Cores twisted in layers
PVC outer sheath, grey
Materials
kg
%
Plastic - Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
0,02
61,76
Copper conductor
0,01
38,24
Total
0,03
Technical data:
Flame-retardant according IEC 60332-1-2
Good chemical resistance
Core identification code: Black with white numbers acc. to VDE 0293-334
Conductor stranding: Fine wire according to VDE 0295,
class 5/IEC 60228 class 5
Minimum bending radius: Occasional flexing: 15 x outer diameter
Fixed installation: 4 x outer diameter
Nominal voltage: U0/U: 300/500 V
Test voltage: 4000 V
Protective conductor: G = with GN-YE protective conductor
X = without protective conductor
Temperature range: Occasional flexing: -5°C to +70°C
Fixed installation: -40°C to +80°C
Market:
Norway
Reference service life, product
60 years. Estimation made to match the product service life and keep the EPD environmental impact calculations at the product level.
Reference service life, building or construction works
60 years. Standard lifetime for energy distribution network applications, provided in appendix 1 of PSR for wires, cables, and accessories of PEP
Ecopassport.
LCA: Calculation rules
Declared unit:
1 m LAPP ÖLFLEX® CLASSIC 110 2x0,75mm2 El.nr:1090415
Cut-off criteria:
All major raw materials and all the essential energy is included. The production processes for raw materials and energy flows with very small
amounts (less than 1%) are not included. These cut-off criteria do not apply for hazardous materials and substances.
Allocation:
 3 / 12
==PAGE:341==
The allocation is made in accordance with the provisions of EN 15804. Incoming energy and water and waste production in-house is allocated
equally among all products through mass allocation. Effects of primary production of recycled materials is allocated to the main product in which
the material was used. The recycling process and transportation of the material is allocated to this analysis.
Data quality:
Specific data for the product composition are provided by the manufacturer. The data represent the production of the declared product and were
collected for EPD development in the year of study. Background data is based on EPDs according to EN 15804 and different LCA databases. The
data quality of the raw materials in A1 is presented in the table below. 
Materials
Source
Data quality
Year
Copper conductor
ecoinvent 3.6
Database
2019
Plastic - Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
ecoinvent 3.6
Database
2019
 4 / 12
==PAGE:342==
System boundaries (X=included, MND=module not declared, MNR=module not relevant)
Product stage
Construction
installation stage
Use stage
End of life stage
Beyond the system
boundaries
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
C1
C2
C3
C4
D
X
X
X
X
X
MND
MND
MND
MND
MND
MND
MND
X
X
X
X
X
System boundary:
The flowchart below illustrates the system boundaries of the analysis:
Additional technical information:
This EPD includes only the spesific cable as named in the heading. For other cross sections EPD can be made on request.
Raw
materials
Transport
Manufacturing
Transport
Assembly
Use​
Maintenance
Repair
Replacement
Refurbishment
Operational
energy
use
Operational
water use
De-
construction
demolition
Transport
Waste
processing
Disposal
Reuse-Recovery-
Recycling-potential
 5 / 12
==PAGE:343==
LCA: Scenarios and additional technical information
The following information describe the scenarios in the different modules of the EPD.
Module A4 = In A4, a transport distance from the production site to Elektroskandia’s warehouse in Langhus was included. A distance of 300 km
was also added as additional transport to market.
Modules A5 = 5 % product losses during installation are estimated by the company. No energy use has been quantified since installation in
buildings is often done by manual labour. Use of portable electrical devices (e.g., drill) usually have low energy requirements falling under the cut-
off criterion of 1%. Cable drums are reused and also assumed under the cut-off criterion of 1%.
Module C1 = de-construction in buildings is often done by manual labour. Use of portable electrical devices (e.g., drill) usually have low energy
requirements falling under the cut-off criterion of 1%.
Module C2 = 300 km is added as an average distance to the waste facility
Modules C3 and C4 = Waste treatment of the product follows the default values provided in EN 50693, Product Category Rules for life cycle
assessments of electronic and electrical products and systems, table G.4. This table specified how different types of raw materials used in A1 will
likely be treated during the end-of-life of the product. Waste treatments in C3 include material recycling and incineration with and without energy
recovery and fly ash extraction. Disposal in C4 consist of landfilling of different waste fractions and of ashes.
Module D = The recyclability of metals and plastics allows the producers a credit for the net scrap that is produced at the end of a product’s life.
The benefits from recycling of net scrap are described in formula from EN 15804:2012+A2:2019. Substitution of heat and electricity generated by
the incineration with energy recovery of plastic insulation and other parts is also calculated in module D.
Transport from production place to user (A4)
Capacity utilisation
(incl. return) %
Distance (km)
Fuel/Energy Consumption
Unit
Value
(Liter/tonne)
Truck, over 32 tonnes, EURO 6 (km)
53,3 %
1956
0,023
l/tkm
44,99
Truck, over 32 tonnes, EURO 6 (km)
53,3 %
300
0,023
l/tkm
6,90
Assembly (A5)
Unit
Value
Units/DU
0,10
Product loss during installation (percentage of
cable)
Units/DU
0,02
Transport to waste processing (C2)
Capacity utilisation
(incl. return) %
Distance (km)
Fuel/Energy Consumption
Unit
Value
(Liter/tonne)
Truck, 16-32 tonnes, EURO 6 (km)
36,7 %
300
0,043
l/tkm
12,90
Waste processing (C3)
Unit
Value
Copper to recycling (kg)
kg
0,02
Waste treatment of polyvinylchloride (PVC),
incineration with energy recovery and fly ash
extraction (kg)
kg
0,01
Disposal (C4)
Unit
Value
Landfilling of ashes from incineration of
Polyvinylchloride (PVC), process per kg ashes and
residues (kg)
kg
0,00
Landfilling of copper (kg)
kg
0,01
Landfilling of plastic mixture (kg)
kg
0,01
Benefits and loads beyond the system
boundaries (D)
Unit
Value
Substitution of electricity, in Norway (MJ)
MJ
0,01
Substitution of primary copper with net scrap (kg)
kg
0,01
Substitution of thermal energy, district heating, in
Norway (MJ)
MJ
0,16
 6 / 12
==PAGE:344==
LCA: Results
The LCA results are presented below for the declared unit defined on page 2 of the EPD document.
Environmental impact
Indicator
Unit
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
C1
C2
C3
C4
D
GWP-total
kg CO2 -
eq
1,22E-01
4,89E-03
1,76E-01
6,69E-03
2,33E-02
0
1,67E-03
2,10E-02
1,79E-03
-3,36E-02
GWP-fossil
kg CO2 -
eq
1,20E-01
4,88E-03
1,73E-01
6,68E-03
2,30E-02
0
1,67E-03
2,10E-02
1,79E-03
-3,34E-02
GWP-biogenic
kg CO2 -
eq
1,64E-03
2,02E-06
2,91E-03
2,86E-06
3,19E-04
0
6,90E-07
8,57E-06
2,99E-07
-1,53E-04
GWP-luluc
kg CO2 -
eq
1,14E-04
1,74E-06
2,09E-04
2,04E-06
2,31E-05
0
5,93E-07
1,64E-06
1,46E-07
-6,67E-05
ODP
kg
CFC11 -
eq
3,07E-08
1,11E-09
6,77E-09
1,61E-09
2,88E-09
0
3,77E-10
6,91E-10
1,12E-10
-6,86E-05
AP
mol H+
-eq
3,56E-03
1,40E-05
5,02E-04
2,15E-05
2,88E-04
0
4,79E-06
1,22E-05
3,38E-06
-5,46E-03
EP-FreshWater
kg P -eq
2,90E-05
3,90E-08
2,62E-05
5,32E-08
3,88E-06
0
1,33E-08
6,19E-08
1,02E-08
-3,68E-05
EP-Marine
kg N -eq
2,59E-04
2,78E-06
7,77E-05
4,71E-06
2,45E-05
0
9,47E-07
2,97E-06
2,38E-06
-2,26E-04
EP-Terrestial
mol N -
eq
3,65E-03
3,11E-05
1,23E-03
5,25E-05
3,51E-04
0
1,06E-05
3,18E-05
1,28E-05
-3,50E-03
POCP
kg
NMVOC
-eq
9,59E-04
1,19E-05
2,33E-04
2,06E-05
8,68E-05
0
4,06E-06
9,01E-06
3,84E-06
-9,50E-04
ADP-
minerals&metals1
kg Sb -
eq
3,05E-05
1,35E-07
1,44E-06
1,19E-07
2,26E-06
0
4,60E-08
4,43E-08
3,48E-09
-3,05E-05
ADP-fossil1
MJ
2,05E+00
7,38E-02
2,35E+00
1,09E-01
3,24E-01
0
2,52E-02
2,77E-02
9,23E-03
-3,03E-01
WDP1
m3
6,16E+00
7,14E-02
2,37E+01
8,32E-02
2,15E+00
0
2,44E-02
5,65E-01
1,75E-01
1,61E+00
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential biogenic; GWP-luluc =
Global Warming Potential land use and land use change; ODP = Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone layer; AP = Acidification potential, Accumulated
Exceedance; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication potential, fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment: EP-marine = Eutrophication potential, fraction of
nutrients reaching marine end compartment; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication potential, Accumulated Exceedance; POCP = Formation potential of tropospheric ozone;
ADP-minerals&metals = Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil resources; ADP-fossil = Abiotic depletion for fossil resources potential; WDP = Water (user)
deprivation potential, deprivation-weighted water consumption
"Reading example: 9,0 E-03 = 9,0*10-3 = 0,009" 
*INA Indicator Not Assessed
1. The results of this environmental impact indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the
indicator 
Remarks to environmental impacts
 7 / 12
==PAGE:345==
Additional environmental impact indicators
Indicator
Unit
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
C1
C2
C3
C4
D
PM
Disease incidence
1,09E-08
2,99E-10
1,95E-09
6,14E-10
9,73E-10
0
1,02E-10
7,90E-11
5,10E-11
-1,14E-08
IRP2
kgBq U235 -eq
6,06E-03
3,23E-04
7,39E-03
4,74E-04
1,01E-03
0
1,10E-04
1,34E-04
5,40E-05
-4,46E-04
ETP-fw1
CTUe
4,04E+01
5,47E-02
2,01E+00
7,93E-02
3,65E+00
0
1,87E-02
1,33E+00
8,18E+00
-5,02E+01
HTP-c1
CTUh
7,25E-10
0,00E+00
5,20E-11
0,00E+00
5,50E-11
0
0,00E+00
3,00E-12
0,00E+00
-7,08E-10
HTP-nc1
CTUh
5,39E-08
6,00E-11
2,00E-09
7,70E-11
3,95E-09
0
2,00E-11
3,12E-10
2,30E-11
-6,07E-08
SQP1
dimensionless
8,92E-01
5,17E-02
5,57E-01
1,24E-01
1,17E-01
0
1,76E-02
1,01E-02
2,47E-02
-7,26E-01
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc =
Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Potential Soil Quality Index (dimensionless)
"Reading example: 9,0 E-03 = 9,0*10-3 = 0,009" 
*INA Indicator Not Assessed
1. The results of this environmental impact indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the
indicator 
2. This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due
to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from
radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator.
 8 / 12
==PAGE:346==
Resource use
Indicator
Unit
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
C1
C2
C3
C4
D
PERE
MJ
2,51E-01
1,06E-03
4,28E-01
1,37E-03
4,81E-02
0
3,61E-04
3,53E-03
9,42E-04
-1,99E-01
PERM
MJ
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
PERT
MJ
2,51E-01
1,06E-03
4,28E-01
1,37E-03
4,81E-02
0
3,61E-04
3,53E-03
9,42E-04
-1,99E-01
PENRE
MJ
1,59E+00
7,39E-02
2,35E+00
1,09E-01
2,92E-01
0
2,52E-02
2,77E-02
9,23E-03
-3,03E-01
PENRM
MJ
4,65E-01
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
9,49E-04
0
0,00E+00
-4,52E-01
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
PENRT
MJ
2,05E+00
7,39E-02
2,35E+00
1,09E-01
2,93E-01
0
2,52E-02
-4,24E-01
9,23E-03
-3,62E-01
SM
kg
2,73E-03
0,00E+00
2,63E-03
0,00E+00
3,80E-04
0
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
6,71E-05
9,50E-03
RSF
MJ
6,93E-03
3,78E-05
1,33E-01
4,77E-05
9,83E-03
0
1,29E-05
6,39E-05
2,04E-05
8,88E-04
NRSF
MJ
3,60E-04
1,35E-04
4,32E-04
1,60E-04
7,88E-05
0
4,61E-05
-1,73E-05
3,37E-05
-2,98E-03
FW
m3
2,02E-03
7,90E-06
1,07E-03
1,23E-05
2,65E-04
0
2,69E-06
6,62E-04
1,10E-05
-8,94E-04
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used
as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy
resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy
resources; SM = Use of secondary materials; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water
"Reading example: 9,0 E-03 = 9,0*10-3 = 0,009" 
*INA Indicator Not Assessed
 9 / 12
==PAGE:347==
End of life - Waste
Indicator
Unit
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
C1
C2
C3
C4
D
HWD
kg
1,19E-03
3,81E-06
2,37E-04
5,94E-06
1,63E-04
0
1,30E-06
9,40E-06
8,79E-04
-3,68E-04
NHWD
kg
3,38E-02
3,59E-03
9,89E-03
9,43E-03
6,03E-03
0
1,23E-03
1,07E-03
2,78E-02
-1,60E-02
RWD
kg
5,50E-06
5,03E-07
9,48E-06
7,41E-07
1,16E-06
0
1,72E-07
1,47E-07
6,10E-08
-3,96E-07
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed
"Reading example: 9,0 E-03 = 9,0*10-3 = 0,009" 
*INA Indicator Not Assessed
End of life - Output flow
Indicator
Unit
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
C1
C2
C3
C4
D
CRU
kg
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
MFR
kg
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
9,75E-04
0,00E+00
1,46E-03
0
0,00E+00
1,98E-02
1,58E-06
-3,72E-04
MER
kg
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
1,31E-03
0,00E+00
9,17E-05
0
0,00E+00
6,64E-07
1,75E-06
-4,89E-05
EEE
MJ
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
2,71E-04
0,00E+00
7,72E-04
0
0,00E+00
1,07E-02
1,64E-05
-1,20E-04
EET
MJ
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
4,10E-03
0,00E+00
1,17E-02
0
0,00E+00
1,63E-01
2,49E-04
-1,81E-03
CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported energy electrical; EET = Exported energy thermal
"Reading example: 9,0 E-03 = 9,0*10-3 = 0,009" 
*INA Indicator Not Assessed
Biogenic Carbon Content
Indicator
Unit
At the factory gate
Biogenic carbon content in product
kg C
0,00E+00
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging
kg C
0,00E+00
Note: 1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg CO2
 10 / 12
==PAGE:348==
Additional requirements
Greenhouse gas emissions from the use of electricity in the manufacturing phase
National production mix from import, low voltage (production of transmission lines, in addition to direct emissions and losses in grid) of applied
electricity for the manufacturing process (A3).
Electricity mix
Data source
Amount
Unit
ecoinvent 3.6
585,93
g CO2-eq/kWh
Dangerous substances
The product contains no substances given by the REACH Candidate list or the Norwegian priority list.
Indoor environment
No effect on indoor environment.
Additional Environmental Information
Additional environmental impact indicators required in NPCR Part A for construction products
Indicator
Unit
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
C1
C2
C3
C4
D
GWPIOBC
kg CO2 -eq
1,22E-01
4,89E-03
1,89E-01
6,69E-03
2,41E-02
0
1,67E-03
2,11E-02
6,44E-04
-1,64E-02
GWP-IOBC: Global warming potential calculated according to the principle of instantaneous oxidation. In order to increase the transparency of biogenic carbon​
contribution to climate impact, the indicator GWP-IOBC is required as it declares climate impacts calculated according to the principle of instantaneous oxidation.​
GWP-IOBC is also referred to as GWP-GHG in context to Swedish public procurement legislation.
 11 / 12
==PAGE:349==
Bibliography
ISO 14025:2010. Environmental labels and declarations - Type III environmental declarations - Principles and procedures. International
Organization for Standardization. 
ISO 14044:2006. Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Requirements and guidelines. International Organization for
Standardization.
EN 15804:2012+A2:2019. Environmental product declaration - Core rules for the product category of construction products. European
Committee for Standardization.
ISO 21930:2017. Sustainability in buildings and civil engineering works - Core rules for environmental product declarations of construction
products. International Organization for Standardization.
EN 50693:2019. Product category rules for life cycle assessments of electronic and electrical products and systems. European Committee for
Standardization.
Ecoinvent v3, 2019. Allocation, cut-off by classification. Swiss Centre of Life Cycle Inventories.
Iversen et al., (2021). eEPD v2021.09, background information for EPD generator tool system verification, LCA.no. Report number: 07.21. System
verification report. 
Philis et al., (2022). EPD generator for NPCR 027 part B for electrical wires and cables, background information for EPD generator application and
LCA data, LCA.no Report number: 03.22. PCR verification report.
EPD Norway (2022). NPCR Part A: Construction products and services. The Norwegian EPD foundation. Version 2.0 published 24.03.2021. 
EPD Norway (2022). NPCR 027 Part B for electrical cables and wires. The Norwegian EPD foundation. Version 2.0 published 01.03.2022.
Program operator and publisher
Phone: +47 23 08 80 00
The Norwegian EPD Foundation
e-mail: post@epd-norge.no
Post Box 5250 Majorstuen, 0303 Oslo, Norway
web:
www.epd-norge.no
Owner of the declaration:
Phone: +47 97 66 22 12
Elektroskandia Norge AS
e-mail: pkr@elektroskandia.no
Postboks 143, 1403 Langhus
web:
elektroskandia.no
Author of the Life Cycle Assessment
Phone: +47 916 50 916
LCA.no AS
e-mail: post@lca.no
Dokka 6B, 1671
web:
www.lca.no
Developer of EPD generator
Phone: +47 916 50 916
LCA.no AS
e-mail: post@lca.no
Dokka 6B,1671 Kråkerøy
web:
www.lca.no
ECO Platform
web:
www.eco-platform.org
ECO Portal
web:
ECO Portal
 12 / 12
==PAGE:350==
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Owner: 
Annebergs Limtræ A/S 
No.: 
MD-23224-EN 
Issued: 
05-03-2024 
Valid to: 
05-03-2029 
 
EPD 
VERIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION | ISO 14025 & EN 15804 
3 r d  P A R T Y  V E R I F I E D  
==PAGE:351==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 2 of 14 
 
Owner of declaration 
Annebergs Limtræ A/S  
Lundtangvej 16 
6830 Nørre Nebel, Denmark. 
VAT: DK19371530 
 
Programme 
EPD Danmark 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
☐ Industry EPD   
☒ Product EPD 
 
Declared product(s) 
Annebergs Limtræ A/S column and beam (glued-laminated spruce 
timber - glulam spruce) 
 
Number of  declared datasets/product variations: 2 
 
Production site 
Lundtangvej 16  
6830 Nørre Nebel, Denmark. 
Product(s) use 
The column and beam are used in housing constructions (façade, 
roof etc.). 
Declared/ functional unit 
1 m3 column or beam (glulam spruce) 
 
Year of production site data (A3) 
2022 
EPD version 
First edition 
 
Issued: 
05-03-2024 
Valid to: 
05-03-2029 
Basis of calculation 
This EPD is developed in accordance with the European 
standard EN 15804+A2.  
 
Comparability 
EPDs of construction products may not be comparable 
if they do not comply with the requirements in EN 
15804. EPD data may not be comparable if the 
datasets used are not developed in accordance with EN 
15804 and if the background systems are not based 
on the same database. 
 
Validity 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 
14025 and is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 
 
Use 
The intended use of an EPD is to communicate 
scientifically based environmental information for 
construction products, for the purpose of assessing the 
environmental performance of buildings. 
 
EPD type 
☒Cradle-to-gate with modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options, modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-grave and module D 
☐Cradle-to-gate 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Martha Katrine Sørensen 
EPD Danmark 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to EN ISO 14025 
☐ internal 
☒ external 
 
Third party verifier: 
 
 
Guangli Du 
 
 
Life cycle stages and modules (MND = module not declared) 
Product 
Construction 
process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond the system 
boundary 
Raw material 
supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery 
and recycling 
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
MND 
MND 
MND MND MND 
MND MND 
MND MND 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
==PAGE:352==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 3 of 14 
 
Product information 
Product description 
The main product components are shown in the 
table below.  
Material 
Weight-% of declared 
product 
Spruce wood 
97,6 
Adhesive 
1,5 
Hardner 
& 
other 
adhesive 
<1 
 
There are two variants: 
1. Annebergs Limtræ A/S column: Glued-
laminated spruce timber column 
2. Annebergs Limtræ A/S beam: Glued-
laminated spruce timber beam 
 
Product packaging: 
The composition of the sales- and transport 
packaging of the product is shown in the table 
below. 
Material 
Weight-% of packaging 
Spruce wood 
91-92 
LDPE film 
8-9 
 
Representativity 
This declaration, including data collection and the 
modeled foreground system including results, 
represents the production of Annebergs Limtræ 
A/S column and beam (glulam spruce) in 
Denmark. Product specific data are based on 
average values collected in the period 2022. 
where economic allocation is applied complying 
with EN 15804 and EN 16485. The EPD is a 
product specific EPD declaring two different 
product variants of glulam spruce column and 
beam. Background data are based on LCA for 
Experts (formerly known as GaBi) program 
version 10.7 with Sphera database and Ecoinvent 
3.8 and are less than 10 years old. Generally, the 
used background datasets are of high quality, and 
the majority of the datasets are only a couple of 
years old. 
The products are produced and sold in Denmark. 
Therefore, a Danish EoL scenario is included, and 
the geographical region covered is Denmark. 
 
Hazardous substances 
Annebergs Limtræ A/S column and beam (glulam 
spruce) does not contain substances listed on the 
”Candidate List of Substances of Very High 
Concern for authorisation” 
 (http://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table) 
 
Essential characteristics  
Annebergs Limtræ A/S column and beam 
products are covered by harmonised technical 
specification 
EN 
16485. 
Declaration 
of 
performance 
according 
to 
EU 
regulation 
305/2011 is available for all declared product 
variations. 
The products comply with the requirements of EN 
14080:2013 and according to material strength 
classes of GL24h, GL28h, and GL30h. The used 
wood is FSC certified. 
Further technical information can be obtained by 
contacting 
the 
manufacturer 
or 
on 
the 
manufacturers website: 
https://www.annebergs-limtrae.dk 
 
Reference Service Life (RSL) 
No RSL is declared. This EPD is based on a 
cradle to gate with modules C1-4 and D and 
does not include the use stage.
 
==PAGE:353==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 4 of 14 
 
 
Picture of product(s) 
Figure 1: Annebergs Limtræ A/S column and beam, made of glulam spruce, from left to right. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:354==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 5 of 14 
 
LCA background 
Declared unit 
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD relates to 1 
m3 of glulam spruce wood column and beam. 
Name 
Value 
Unit 
Declared unit 
1 
m3 
Density 
461 
kg/m3 
Conversion factor to 1 kg. 
0,0022 
- 
Moisture content 
12 
% 
 
Functional unit 
Not defined. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PCR 
This EPD is developed according to the core 
rules for the product category of construction 
products in EN 15804, and EN 16485:2014. 
 
Guarantee of Origin – certificates 
Foreground system: 
The product is produced using (modelled) 
residual grid mix electricity supply in Denmark at 
the production site in Lunde, Denmark. 
Background system: 
Upstream processes are modelled using residual 
grid mix. Downstream processes are modelled 
using consumption mix. 
 
 
 
 
Flowdiagram 
A1:
Extraction and pre-
processing of raw 
materials incl. forest 
activities
(Sweden)
A1:
Debarking, conversion, 
drying, etc.
(Sweden)
A3:
Cutting, trimming, 
gluing, hardener 
application
(Denmark)
C1:
Demolition and 
deconstruction of column 
and beams
C2:
Transport of 
deconstructed wood 
waste to waste treatment 
facility
C3 and C4:
Waste processing 
through incineration with 
energy recovery and 
recycling
D:
Substitution of electricity 
and thermal energy 
production, and wood 
chips production
A1:
Transport of raw 
materials
(Sweden)
Product stage (A1-A3)
End of life stage (C1-C4)
Benefits and loads (D)
A2:
Transport of spruce 
wood products
(to Denmark)
A1:
Extraction and 
preprocessing of 
materials for surface 
treatment and packaging 
(Sweden & Germany)
A2:
Transport of raw 
materials
(to Denmark)
A3:
Packaging of finished 
product
(Denmark)
==PAGE:355==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 6 of 14 
 
 
 
System boundary 
This EPD is based on a cradle-to-gate LCA with 
options, where modules C1-C4 and D are also 
considered, in which 100 %-weight of the product 
has been accounted for.  
The general rules for the exclusion of inputs and 
outputs follows the requirements in EN 15804, 
6.3.5, where the total of neglected input flows per 
module shall be a maximum of 5 % of energy 
usage and mass and 1 % of energy usage and 
mass for unit processes.  
 
Product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
A1 – Extraction and processing of raw materials 
A2 – Transport to the production site 
A3 – Manufacturing processes 
The product stage comprises the acquisition of all 
raw materials, products and energy, transport to 
the 
production 
site, 
packaging 
and 
waste 
processing up to the ”end-of-waste” state or final 
disposal.  
Annebergs Limtræ A/S receives spruce wood from 
Sweden. At the production site in Lunde, the 
spruce wood is treated with adhesive and 
hardner. This is the case for both column and 
beam, where it is followed by cutting processing 
to attain the column and beam shapes. 
Residual grid mix electricity supply (DK) is 
modelled for production. 
 
Construction 
process 
stage 
(A4-A5) 
includes: 
Modules are not included in this study. 
 
 
 
Use stage (B1-B7) includes: 
Modules are not included in this study. 
 
End of Life (C1-C4) includes: 
When the buildings are demolished the columns 
and beams are transported for recycling (into 
wood chips) and incineration in Denmark with 
energy recovery. 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
includes: 
During the incineration process, heat and 
electricity is produced.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:356==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 7 of 14 
 
LCA results 
The LCA results are separated into two sections, one for each variant, namely column and beam, made 
from glulam spruce.  
Annebergs Limtræ column (glulam spruce) 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m3 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-6,26E+02 
4,64E+01 
8,78E+01 
3,30E-01 
1,05E+01 
8,12E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,04E+02 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
1,05E+02 
4,67E+01 
2,63E+01 
3,28E-01 
1,06E+01 
9,74E+01 
0,00E+00 
-1,03E+02 
GWP-biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-7,32E+02 
-6,86E-01 
6,15E+01 
2,57E-03 
-1,55E-01 
7,14E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,58E+00 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
4,09E-01 
4,31E-01 
6,44E-03 
1,44E-04 
9,77E-02 
1,25E-03 
0,00E+00 
-5,84E-02 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 
eq.] 
1,71E-06 
6,06E-12 
1,19E-10 
2,70E-13 
1,37E-12 
7,23E-11 
0,00E+00 
-9,55E-10 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
5,76E-01 
6,60E-02 
3,38E-02 
1,44E-03 
4,23E-02 
2,26E-01 
0,00E+00 
-4,48E-01 
EP-freshwater 
[kg PO4 eq.] 
5,78E-03 
1,70E-04 
5,86E-05 
5,54E-07 
3,86E-05 
2,38E-05 
0,00E+00 
-2,18E-03 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
2,11E-01 
2,35E-02 
1,43E-02 
3,48E-04 
1,97E-02 
1,01E-01 
0,00E+00 
-1,50E-01 
EP-terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
2,31E+00 
2,80E-01 
1,64E-01 
3,83E-03 
2,21E-01 
1,23E+00 
0,00E+00 
-1,29E+00 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
6,38E-01 
5,77E-02 
3,72E-02 
1,36E-03 
3,83E-02 
2,59E-01 
0,00E+00 
-3,32E-01 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 
3,08E-04 
3,09E-06 
2,93E-07 
2,83E-08 
6,99E-07 
1,11E-06 
0,00E+00 
-3,27E-05 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
4,69E+03 
6,34E+02 
2,76E+02 
3,29E+01 
1,44E+02 
1,29E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,11E+03 
WDP1 
[m3 world eq. 
deprived] 
3,77E+01 
5,62E-01 
6,41E-01 
5,50E-03 
1,27E-01 
4,46E+01 
0,00E+00 
-2,41E+01 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming 
Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidification; 
EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – 
terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion 
Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the 
same as 1,12*10-11 or 0,0000000000112. 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
 
Additional environmental impacts, as declared in the project report of this EPD: 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m3 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
1,03E-04 
4,75E-07 
2,39E-07 1,16E-08 
2,18E-07 
7,35E-07 
0,00E+00 
-7,30E-06 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
1,50E+01 
1,78E-01 
2,28E+00 8,12E-03 
4,03E-02 
4,49E-01 
0,00E+00 
-6,51E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
7,89E+02 
4,54E+02 
3,13E+01 2,37E+01 1,03E+02 
2,61E+01 
0,00E+00 
-4,59E+02 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
7,28E-08 
9,21E-09 
2,06E-09 4,35E-10 
2,09E-09 
7,04E-09 
0,00E+00 
-4,36E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
8,76E-07 
4,10E-07 
9,59E-08 1,40E-08 
9,29E-08 
4,30E-07 
0,00E+00 
-9,09E-07 
SQP1 
-  
1,37E+05 
2,65E+02 
2,92E+01 2,06E-01 6,00E+01 
6,97E+01 
0,00E+00 
-1,13E+04 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human 
toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the 
same as 1,12*10-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It 
does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in 
underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured 
by this indicator. 
==PAGE:357==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 8 of 14 
 
RESOURCE USE PER m3 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
8,66E+03 
4,61E+01 
3,11E+01 
2,12E-01 
1,05E+01 
8,96E+01 
0,00E+00 
-7,81E+03 
PERM 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
8,66E+03 
4,61E+01 
3,11E+01 
2,12E-01 
1,05E+01 
8,96E+01 
0,00E+00 
-7,81E+03 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
4,69E+03 
6,36E+02 
2,76E+02 
3,30E+01 
1,44E+02 
1,29E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,11E+03 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
4,69E+03 
6,36E+02 
2,76E+02 
3,30E+01 
1,44E+02 
1,29E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,11E+03 
SM 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
1,05E+00 
5,05E-02 
1,20E-01 
2,47E-04 
1,15E-02 
1,06E+00 
0,00E+00 
-9,44E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = 
Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of 
non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM 
= Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net 
use of fresh water 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the same 
as 1,12*10-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER m3 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
-3,52E-08 
1,97E-09 
1,24E-08 
6,08E-11 
4,47E-10 
-2,06E-08 
0,00E+00 
4,39E-07 
NHWD 
[kg] 
5,50E-01 
9,70E-02 
3,40E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,20E-02 
3,04E+00 
0,00E+00 
-6,71E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
8,71E-02 
1,19E-03 
2,06E-02 
5,50E-05 
2,70E-04 
3,99E-03 
0,00E+00 
-5,67E-02 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,95E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
6,31E+02 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,72E+03 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = 
Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the 
same as 1,12*10-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER m3 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in column product 
(glulam spruce) 
[kg C] 
198,0 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying 
packaging for column product* 
[kg C] 
1,21 
Note 
1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg of CO2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:358==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 9 of 14 
 
Annebergs Limtræ beam (glulam spruce) 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m3 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-6,38E+02 
4,80E+01 
1,32E+02 
3,30E-01 
1,05E+01 
8,12E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,04E+02 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
1,18E+02 
4,83E+01 
1,94E+01 
3,28E-01 
1,06E+01 
9,74E+01 
0,00E+00 
-1,03E+02 
GWP-biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-7,57E+02 
-7,10E-01 
1,12E+02 
2,57E-03 
-1,55E-01 
7,14E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,58E+00 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,22E-01 
4,46E-01 
7,15E-03 
1,44E-04 
9,77E-02 
1,25E-03 
0,00E+00 
-5,84E-02 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
1,80E-06 
6,26E-12 
2,41E-11 
2,70E-13 
1,37E-12 
7,23E-11 
0,00E+00 
-9,55E-10 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
5,98E-01 
6,83E-02 
4,08E-02 
1,44E-03 
4,23E-02 
2,26E-01 
0,00E+00 
-4,48E-01 
EP-freshwater 
[kg PO4 eq.] 
6,15E-03 
1,76E-04 
5,65E-05 
5,54E-07 
3,86E-05 
2,38E-05 
0,00E+00 
-2,18E-03 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
2,25E-01 
2,43E-02 
1,83E-02 
3,48E-04 
1,97E-02 
1,01E-01 
0,00E+00 
-1,50E-01 
EP-terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
2,45E+00 
2,90E-01 
2,17E-01 
3,83E-03 
2,21E-01 
1,23E+00 
0,00E+00 
-1,29E+00 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
6,56E-01 
5,97E-02 
4,67E-02 
1,36E-03 
3,83E-02 
2,59E-01 
0,00E+00 
-3,32E-01 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 
3,27E-04 
3,19E-06 
1,72E-07 
2,83E-08 
6,99E-07 
1,11E-06 
0,00E+00 
-3,27E-05 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
4,77E+03 
6,56E+02 
7,20E+01 
3,29E+01 
1,44E+02 
1,29E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,11E+03 
WDP1 
[m3 world eq. deprived] 
3,45E+01 
5,82E-01 
3,58E+00 
5,50E-03 
1,27E-01 
4,46E+01 
0,00E+00 
-2,41E+01 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming 
Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-
freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; 
POCP = Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil 
fuels; WDP = water depletion potential 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the same 
as 1,12*10-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
Additional environmental impacts, as declared in the project report of this EPD: 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER m3 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
1,07E-04 
4,91E-07 
2,19E-07 
1,16E-08 
2,18E-07 
7,35E-07 
0,00E+00 
-7,30E-06 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
5,96E+00 
1,84E-01 
3,95E-01 
8,12E-03 
4,03E-02 
4,49E-01 
0,00E+00 -6,51E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
8,84E+02 
4,70E+02 
1,74E+01 
2,37E+01 
1,03E+02 
2,61E+01 
0,00E+00 -4,59E+02 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
7,85E-08 
9,53E-09 
1,75E-09 
4,35E-10 
2,09E-09 
7,04E-09 
0,00E+00 
-4,36E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
9,15E-07 
4,24E-07 
1,04E-07 
1,40E-08 
9,29E-08 
4,30E-07 
0,00E+00 
-9,09E-07 
SQP1 
-  
1,17E+05 
2,74E+02 
1,37E+01 
2,06E-01 
6,00E+01 
6,97E+01 
0,00E+00 -1,13E+04 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – 
cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the same 
as 1,12*10-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not 
consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. 
Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:359==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 10 of 14 
 
RESOURCE USE PER m3 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
9,04E+03 
4,77E+01 
1,16E+01 
2,12E-01 
1,05E+01 
8,96E+01 
0,00E+00 
-7,81E+03 
PERM 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
9,04E+03 
4,77E+01 
1,16E+01 
2,12E-01 
1,05E+01 
8,96E+01 
0,00E+00 
-7,81E+03 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
4,77E+03 
6,58E+02 
7,21E+01 
3,30E+01 
1,44E+02 
1,29E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,11E+03 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
4,77E+03 
6,58E+02 
7,21E+01 
3,30E+01 
1,44E+02 
1,29E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,11E+03 
SM 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
9,86E-01 
5,23E-02 
1,67E-01 
2,47E-04 
1,15E-02 
1,06E+00 
0,00E+00 
-9,44E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = 
Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of 
non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM 
= Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net 
use of fresh water 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the same 
as 1,12*10-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER m3 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
-9,08E-08 
2,04E-09 
8,62E-09 
6,08E-11 
4,47E-10 
-2,06E-08 
0,00E+00 
4,39E-07 
NHWD 
[kg] 
6,24E-01 
1,00E-01 
2,45E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,20E-02 
3,04E+00 
0,00E+00 
-6,71E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
5,06E-02 
1,23E-03 
3,53E-03 
5,50E-05 
2,70E-04 
3,99E-03 
0,00E+00 
-5,67E-02 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,56E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
6,31E+02 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,72E+03 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = 
Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; 
EET = Exported thermal energy 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the 
same as 1,12*10-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER m3 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in column product 
(glulam spruce) 
[kg C] 
198,0 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying 
packaging for column product* 
[kg C] 
1,21 
Biogenic carbon content in beam product 
(glulam spruce) 
[kg C] 
198,0 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying 
packaging for beam product* 
[kg C] 
1,28 
Note 
1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg of CO2 
 
==PAGE:360==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 11 of 14 
 
Additional information 
LCA interpretation 
The raw material which is of most importance is spruce wood, which is most of the column and beam 
products. The production in Denmark requires considerable amounts of raw materials and energy and 
leaves behind a share of waste that needs treatment. 
 
Technical information on scenarios 
 
End of life (C1-C4) 
Scenario information 
Column 
(glulam spruce) 
Beam 
(glulam spruce) 
Unit 
Collected separately 
461 
461 
kg 
Collected with mixed waste 
- 
- 
kg 
For reuse 
- 
- 
kg 
For recycling 
217 
217 
kg 
For energy recovery 
244 
244 
kg 
For final disposal 
- 
- 
kg 
Assumptions for scenario development 
- 
- 
As appropriate 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
Scenario information/Materiel 
Column 
(glulam spruce) 
Beam 
(glulam spruce) 
Unit 
Electricity from incineration 
631 
631 
MJ 
Heat from incineration 
2,72E3 
2,72E3 
MJ 
Wood chips (substitution) 
217 
217 
Kg 
 
 
==PAGE:361==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 12 of 14 
 
 
Indoor air  
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to indoor air because the 
horizontal standards on the relevant 
measurements are not available. Read more in 
EN15804+A1 chapter 7.4.1. 
Soil and water 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to soil and water because 
the horizontal standards on the relevant 
measurements are not available. Read more in 
EN15804+A1 chapter 7.4.2. 
 
 
==PAGE:362==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 13 of 14 
 
References 
 
Publisher 
 
 
www.epddanmark.dk 
Template version 2023.1 
Programme operator 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA-practitioner 
 
 
Mirko Miseljic 
Gritt Cortnum Andersen 
 
FORCE Technology  
Park Allé 345 
2605 Brøndby, Denmark. 
www.forcetechnology.com  
 
LCA software /background data 
 
LCA for Experts 10.7 incl. Sphera databases 
2023.1 & Ecoinvent 3.8 
https://sphera.com/product-sustainability-gabi-
data-search/  
3rd party verifier 
Guangli Du 
BUILD – Institut for Byggeri, By og Miljø, 
Aalborg Universitet København 
 
 
 
General programme instructions 
General Programme Instructions, version 2.0, spring 2020 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
EN 15804 
DS/EN 15804 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental  
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products” 
 
EN 16485 
DS/EN 16485:2014 – “Wood and wood-based products for use in construction”. 
 
EN 15942 
DS/EN 15942:2011 – ” Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – 
Communication format business-to-business” 
 
==PAGE:363==
 
 
 
 
MD-23224-EN | Annebergs Limtræ A/S | Page 14 of 14 
 
ISO 14025 
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmental declarations 
– Principles and procedures” 
 
ISO 14040 
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and 
framework” 
 
ISO 14044 
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and 
guidelines” 
==PAGE:364==
 
 
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION 
 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH  
EN 15804+A2+AC, 
ISO 14025, 
ISO 21930 
 
 
GEBERIT DUOFIX ELEMENT FOR WALL-HUNG WC, 
112 CM, WITH SIGMA CONCEALED CISTERN 12 CM 
Geberit International AG 
 
EPD HUB, HUB-0259 
Published: 
 02 February 2023 
Last updated:  02 February 2023 
Valid until: 
 02 February 2028 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
 
 
==PAGE:365==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
2 
 
 
 
 
971.711.00.0(00) 
 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
MANUFACTURER  
Manufacturer 
Geberit International AG 
Address 
Schachenstrasse 77, CH-8645 Jona 
Contact details 
sustainability@geberit.com 
Website 
www.geberit.com 
EPD STANDARDS, SCOPE AND VERIFICATION 
Programme 
operator 
EPD Hub, hub@epdhub.com 
Reference 
standards 
EN 15804+A2:2019+AC:2021 
ISO 14025 
ISO 21930 
PCR 
EPD Hub Core PCR version 1.0, 1 Feb 2022 
Sector 
Construction product 
Category of EPD 
Third-party-verified EPD 
Scope of the EPD 
Cradle to gate with options, A4-A5, and modules 
C1-C4 and D 
EPD author 
Georg Nauenburg 
EPD verification 
Independent verification of this EPD and data 
according to ISO 14025 
 Internal certification  External verification 
EPD verifier 
Elma Avdyli, as an authorized verifier acting for 
EPD Hub Limited 
 
The manufacturer has the sole ownership, liability, and responsibility for 
the EPD. EPDs within the same product category but from different 
programmes may not be comparable. EPDs of construction products may 
not be comparable if they do not comply with EN 15804 and if they are not 
compared in a building context. 
 
 
 
 
PRODUCT  
Product name 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-
hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma 
concealed cistern 12 cm  
Additional labels 
- 
Product reference 
111.300.00.5 
Place of production 
Pfullendorf, Germany 
St. Egidien, Germany 
Period for data 
2021 
Averaging in EPD 
Multiple products 
Variation in GWP-fossil for A1-A3 
22 % 
ENVIRONMENTAL DATA SUMMARY 
Declared unit 
1 piece Geberit Duofix element for 
wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma 
concealed cistern 12 cm 
Declared unit mass 
13.6 kg 
GWP-fossil, A1-A3 (kgCO2e) 
36.8 
GWP-total, A1-A3 (kgCO2e) 
37.0 
Secondary material, inputs (%) 
41.2 
Secondary material, outputs (%) 
96.7 
Total energy use, A1-A3 (kWh) 
142.0 
Total water use, A1-A3 (m3e) 
0.471 
 
 
==PAGE:366==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
3 
 
 
 
 
971.711.00.0(00) 
 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
PRODUCT AND MANUFACTURER 
ABOUT THE MANUFACTURER 
Geberit wants to play a leading role in the transition towards a sustainable 
sanitary industry. Sustainability has formed an integral component of the 
corporate strategy for more than 30 years. The Geberit Group has a group 
certificate 
in 
accordance 
with 
ISO 9001 
(quality), 
ISO 14001 
(environment) and ISO 45001 (occupational health and safety). The 
company prepared life cycle assessments for key products from an early 
stage, and eco-design has been an integral part of the product 
development process 
since 2007. You can find current and 
comprehensive information on sustainability in the current annual report 
or at https://www.geberit.com/company/sustainability 
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION 
Geberit Duofix elements are self-supporting installation elements for 
mounting sanitary appliances in drywall constructions. The elements are 
suitable for prewall and partition wall installation. The Geberit Duofix 
element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
has an installation height of 112 cm and consists of a self-supporting, 
powder-coated frame with adjustable, galvanized foot supports. In 
addition, the Sigma concealed cistern has the following features: 
• 
Two positions for water supply connection (rear or top centre) 
• 
Assembly and maintenance work can be carried out without 
tools  
• 
Protection cover for the service opening to protect against 
moisture and dirt  
• 
Single or dual flush with adjustable flush volume  
• 
Suitable for all Geberit Sigma actuator plates 
• 
Actuation from the front 
• 
Fully insulated against condensation  
• 
Defined electrical connection position 
• 
Conduit pipe for feed pipe for connection of Geberit AquaClean 
shower toilets 
After installation, a wall-hung WC and an actuator plate can be mounted 
on the Geberit Duofix element (not part of the product). 
Further information is available in the local online catalogue. 
PRODUCT RAW MATERIAL MAIN COMPOSITION 
Raw material category 
Amount, mass % 
Material origin 
Metals 
72 
Europe 
Minerals 
- 
- 
Fossil materials 
28 
Europe 
Bio-based materials 
- 
- 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT 
Product’s biogenic carbon content at the factory gate  
Biogenic carbon content in product, kg C 
0 
Biogenic carbon content in packaging, kg C 
0.026 
FUNCTIONAL UNIT AND SERVICE LIFE 
Declared unit 
1 
piece 
Geberit 
Duofix 
element for wall-hung WC, 
112 cm, 
with 
Sigma 
concealed cistern 12 cm 
Mass per declared unit 
13.6 kg 
Functional unit 
- 
Reference service life 
50 years 
REACH – SUBSTANCES OF VERY HIGH CONCERN (SVHC) 
The product does not contain any REACH SVHC substances in amounts 
greater than 0.1 % (1000 ppm). Single components are made of brass and 
can therefore contain up to 2.5 % lead (EC Number: 231-100-4, CAS 
Number: 7439-92-1). 
 
==PAGE:367==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
971.711.00.0(00) 
 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE 
SYSTEM BOUNDARY 
This EPD covers the life cycle modules listed in the following table. 
Product 
stage 
Construction 
stage 
Use  
stage 
End-of-life 
stage 
Beyond 
system 
boundaries 
A1 A2 A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 C2 C3 C4 
D 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
MND MND MND MND MND MND MND x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Raw materials 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy 
use 
Operational water 
use 
Deconstr./demol. 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Reuse 
Recovery 
Recycling 
Modules not declared = MND. Modules not relevant = MNR. 
MANUFACTURING AND PACKAGING (A1-A3) 
The environmental impacts considered for the product stage cover the 
manufacturing of raw materials used in the production as well as 
packaging materials and other ancillary materials. Also, fuels used by 
machines, and handling of waste formed in the production processes at 
the manufacturing facilities are included in this stage. The study also 
considers the material losses occurring during the manufacturing 
processes as well as losses during electricity transmission. 
The product consists of a metal frame, the cistern, assembly parts, a 
connection set and other components. The frame is made of hot-rolled 
steel that is powder-coated and has two feet attached for fixation on the 
floor. The cistern is made of blow-moulded high-density polyethylene and 
has a fill valve and a flush valve inside, which are assembled from several 
different injection-moulded plastic components. For the supply of raw 
materials, the total input of raw materials was mapped with corresponding 
European data. Further information on purchasing can be found in Geberit 
Annual Reports. 
The transports from suppliers to Geberit are modelled based on material 
class-specific transport distances. The individual transport distances of 
each supplier are averaged according to the corresponding sales 
volumes. Nearly all A2 transports are by lorry, however some components 
have also been transported by sea freight shipping before manufacturing. 
Transport by rail and air is not considered due to lack of relevance. On 
average, the transport distance from suppliers of raw and semifinished 
materials is about 450 km. 
Metalworking and powder coating take place at the production site in 
St. Egidien, Germany. Blow moulding, injection moulding, assembly and 
packaging take place at the production site in Pfullendorf, Germany. Both 
Geberit plants are certified according to ISO 9001, ISO 14001, ISO 45001 
and ISO 50001. A current ISO certificate can be downloaded from 
https://www.geberit.com/.  Material and production-related losses of up 
to 7.5 % are included. Production waste from metalworking is collected 
and recycled externally. Production waste from plastic components 
manufacturing is recycled internally. The production and provision of 
packaging material and production auxiliaries are also modelled in A3. The 
manufacturing process is modelled with the specific electricity 
consumption measured in the plant. Around 80 % of electricity consumed 
in the Pfullendorf plant comes from a renewable source (hydro and wind 
power plants). The consumption of additional additives and water is 
negligible, i.e. it falls under the cut-off rules. The finished product is 
packaged with cardboard, labels, small foils and the installation 
instructions. 
TRANSPORT AND INSTALLATION (A4-A5) 
Transportation impacts occurred from final products delivery to 
construction site (A4) cover fuel direct exhaust emissions, environmental 
impacts of fuel production, as well as related infrastructure emissions. 
Transport from Geberit to the customer within Europe is carried out by 
logistics partners via the modern, efficient Logistics Centre in Pfullendorf, 
Germany, which is certified according to ISO 9001, ISO 14001 and 
ISO 45001. Distribution to countries outside Europe is not taken into 
account.  
The following information has been considered: 
• 
The majority of transports within Europe are carried out by truck. 
Therefore, intercontinental transports by sea and air are not 
considered. 
• 
The majority of vehicles in use are > 32 t Euro 6 class (> 80 %). 
==PAGE:368==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
971.711.00.0(00) 
 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
• 
The average transport distance in Europe from the production 
site to the Logistics Centre and to the consumer is approximately 
950 km. 
Further information on logistics can be found in Geberit Annual Reports.  
There are no relevant environmental impacts during installation. The 
installation of Geberit products is simple and requires practically no 
energy or additional auxiliary materials. Therefore, only the preparation of 
the waste treatment of packaging materials is taken into account in A5. 
PRODUCT USE AND MAINTENANCE (B1-B7) 
The product use and maintenance phases are not considered. Air, soil, 
and water impacts during the use phase have not been studied. The 
product does not consume any electricity in use, all components work 
mechanically. Periodic maintenance is not necessary. In use, the cistern 
is filled with water. The flush valve allows adjusting the flushing volume 
and can therefore be set to a small water volume per flush. Thus, the 
product can contribute to water saving. The frame and cistern have a 
lifetime of about 50 years, which usually exceeds the average time until 
sanitary rooms are renovated. The design of the cistern and valves allows 
for easy maintenance. Repair and replacement of the fill and flush valves 
are possible. There is a spare part warranty of up to 25 years that depends 
on the country of sale. 
PRODUCT END-OF-LIFE (C1-C4, D) 
Since the consumption of energy and natural resources is negligible for 
disassembling the end-of-life product, the impacts of demolition are 
assumed to be nearly zero (C1). The end-of-life product is assumed to be 
sent to the closest waste disposal facilities by lorry, which is assumed to 
be 50 km away (C2). It is generally assumed that all waste is collected and 
professionally separated after demolition on the construction site. The 
type of waste treatment is determined on the basis of the material class. 
Metal, paper and cardboard are recycled. All other material classes are 
disposed of in the municipal waste incineration plant (i.e. plastics) or the 
inert material landfill (residues not recycled). For recycled material 
classes, a general recycling efficiency of 95 % is assumed, meaning that 
for every 1 kg of recycled material (steel, paper, cardboard), 5 % goes to 
landfill (C4), while 95 % goes to recycling and generates benefits (D). With 
72 % metals in the product of which 95 % is recycled, the overall mass 
that can be recycled is about 9.4 kg (69 %). The secondary material 
content of the recycled material is considered in order to avoid 
overcounting of benefits in module D. Steel has a secondary material 
content of 54 %, paper of 1.5 % and cardboard of 57 % according to the 
data sets used for modelling. Plastics and elastomers are thermally 
recycled in a waste incineration plant, with energy and heat produced 
from their incineration (D). Waste of packaging and installation materials 
in A5 have benefits and loads that are considered in module D. Although 
the plastic components of the product are basically suitable for recycling 
due to their material properties, they are conservatively modelled with 
thermal recycling. The product is not biodegradable. 
 
 
==PAGE:369==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
971.711.00.0(00) 
 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
 
MANUFACTURING PROCESS 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
      
      
      
P astic ra 
 ateria s
 e i nished
 roducts
Pac aging
 ateria s
 rans ort to the  anufacturer and
interna  trans orts
 n ection
 ou ding
 sse b y
Pac aging
 rans ort to the construction site and 
insta  ation into the bui ding
 se
Product
 aste treat ent
 
 ene ts and  oads
beyond syste  boundary
 anufacturing 
 aste treat ent
 nsta  ation and Pac aging
 aste treat ent
  o 
 ou ding
 eta 
 or ing
Po der coating
 eta ra 
 ateria s
                 
                 
==PAGE:370==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
971.711.00.0(00) 
 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT 
CUT-OFF CRITERIA 
The study does not exclude any modules or processes that are stated as 
mandatory in the reference standard and the applied PCR. The study does 
not exclude any hazardous materials or substances. The study includes 
all major raw material and energy consumption. All inputs and outputs of 
the unit processes for which data is available are included in the 
calculation. There is no neglected unit process with more than 1 % of total 
mass or energy flows. The module-specific total neglected input and 
output flows also do not exceed 5 % of energy use or mass. 
 
ALLOCATION, ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS 
Allocation is required if some material, energy, and waste data cannot be 
measured separately for the product under investigation. All allocations 
are made as per the reference standards and the applied PCR. In this 
study, allocations have been made in the following ways: 
Data type 
Allocation 
Raw materials 
No allocation 
Packaging materials 
No allocation 
Ancillary materials 
No allocation 
Manufacturing energy and 
waste 
Allocated by mass or volume 
 
 
AVERAGES AND VARIABILITY 
 
Type of average 
Multiple products 
Averaging method 
Not applicable 
Variation in GWP-fossil for A1-A3 
 22 % 
 
Primary data represents the manufacturing sites in St. Egidien, Germany 
and Pfullendorf, Germany. The data of a Geberit Duofix element for wall-
hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm (art. no. 
111.300.00.5) was chosen as a reference product. Products with an 
identical function and highly similar material composition are covered. 
The different articles are listed in Annex I. The variability of the primary 
data or the emissions between the different articles did not amount to 
more than 50 % in GWP-fossil. Variation in GWP-fossil for modules A1-A3 
for the articles that are most different to the reference product are in the 
range of +22 % (44.8 kg CO2e) and -7 % (34.2 kg CO2e). 
LCA SOFTWARE AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 
This EPD has been created using the One Click LCA EPD Generator. The 
LCA and EPD have been prepared according to the reference standards, 
ISO 14040 and ISO 14044. ecoinvent 3.6 and One Click LCA databases 
were used as sources of environmental data. 
 
 
==PAGE:371==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
971.711.00.0(00) 
 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT DATA 
CORE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT INDICATORS – EN 15804+A2, PEF 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP1)–total 
kg CO2e 
3,32E1 
9,44E‐1 
2,84E0 
3,7E1 
1,22E0 
1,75E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
3,3E‐11 
5,95E‐2 
1,1E1 
2,23E‐3 
‐1,85E1 
GWP–fossil 
kg CO2e 
3,3E1 
9,43E‐1 
2,85E0 
3,68E1 
1,24E0 
1,43E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
3,3E‐11 
5,94E‐2 
1,1E1 
2,23E‐3 
‐1,91E1 
GWP–biogenic 
kg CO2e 
2,45E‐1 
7E‐4 
‐1,91E‐2 
2,26E‐1 
9,37E‐4 
3,26E‐2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
9,17E‐15 4,5E‐5 
‐4,68E‐3 
6,27E‐6 
5,39E‐1 
GWP–luluc2) 
kg CO2e 
2,39E‐2 
2,9E‐4 
9,05E‐3 
3,32E‐2 
3,88E‐4 
2,83E‐5 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
2,79E‐15 1,87E‐5 
9,26E‐4 
5,54E‐7 
‐6,49E‐3 
Ozone depletion pot. 
kg CFC-11e 1,9E‐6 
2,27E‐7 
2,47E‐7 
2,37E‐6 
3,04E‐7 
1,14E‐8 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
7,12E‐18 1,46E‐8 
2,4E‐7 
1,03E‐9 
‐9,58E‐7 
Acidification potential 
mol H+e 
2,79E‐1 
3,48E‐3 
1,07E‐2 
2,93E‐1 
3,98E‐3 
4,31E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
3,45E‐13 1,91E‐4 
1,18E‐2 
2,15E‐5 
‐2,37E‐1 
EP3)-freshwater 
kg Pe 
2,26E‐3 
7,84E‐6 
2,5E‐4 
2,52E‐3 
1,05E‐5 
1,35E‐6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
1,33E‐16 5,04E‐7 
2,84E‐5 
2,24E‐8 
‐2,1E‐3 
EP-marine 
kg Ne 
3,56E‐2 
9,24E‐4 
3,06E‐3 
3,96E‐2 
8,74E‐4 
1,54E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
1,52E‐13 4,2E‐5 
4,57E‐3 
7,88E‐6 
‐2,24E‐2 
EP-terrestrial 
mol Ne 
5,45E‐1 
1,02E‐2 
3,11E‐2 
5,86E‐1 
9,72E‐3 
1,62E‐3 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
1,67E‐12 4,67E‐4 
4,95E‐2 
8,68E‐5 
‐2,8E‐1 
POCP4) (‘smog’)  
kg NMVOCe 1,51E‐1 
3,56E‐3 
7,06E‐3 
1,62E‐1 
3,82E‐3 
5,46E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
4,59E‐13 1,83E‐4 
1,39E‐2 
2,49E‐5 
‐9,3E‐2 
ADP-minerals & metals 
kg Sbe 
2,88E‐2 
1,64E‐5 
2,99E‐5 
2,89E‐2 
2,2E‐5 
2,51E‐6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
5,03E‐17 1,06E‐6 
2,14E‐5 
2,05E‐8 
‐7,99E‐3 
ADP5)-fossil resources 
MJ 
5,6E2 
1,5E1 
4,1E1 
6,16E2 
2,01E1 
9,05E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
4,54E‐10 9,65E‐1 
2,3E1 
6,92E‐2 
‐2,07E2 
Water use 
m3e depr. 
1,96E1 
5,58E‐2 
6,66E‐1 
2,03E1 
7,46E‐2 
1,09E‐2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
8,46E‐13 3,59E‐3 
7,52E‐1 
8,14E‐4 
‐7,18E0 
1) GWP = Global warming potential; 2) luluc = land use and land use change; 3) EP = Eutrophication potential; 4) POCP = Photochemical ozone creation potential; 5) ADP = Abiotic depletion potential 
 
ADDITIONAL (OPTIONAL) ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT INDICATORS – EN 15804+A2, PEF 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Particulate matter 
Incidence 
2,64E‐6 
8,4E‐8 
1,3E‐7 
2,85E‐6 
1,08E‐7 
7,86E‐9 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
9,14E‐18 5,21E‐9 
2,28E‐7 
4,47E‐10 ‐1,42E‐6 
Ionizing radiation 
kBq U235e 
1,08E0 
6,55E‐2 
1,14E‐1 
1,26E0 
8,78E‐2 
3,99E‐3 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
1,94E‐12 4,22E‐3 
8E‐2 
2,97E‐4 
‐7,26E‐1 
Ecotoxicity, freshwater 
CTUe 
1,9E3 
1,15E1 
1,75E2 
2,08E3 
1,53E1 
1,61E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
2,66E‐10 7,37E‐1 
3,78E1 
3,9E‐2 
‐1,83E3 
Human toxicity, cancer 
CTUh 
1,9E‐7 
2,91E‐10 1,21E‐9 
1,91E‐7 
3,86E‐10 7,53E‐11 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
9,53E‐21 1,86E‐11 2,43E‐9 
8,59E‐13 ‐6,01E‐8 
Human tox. non-cancer CTUh 
3,17E‐6 
1,33E‐8 
2,99E‐8 
3,22E‐6 
1,75E‐8 
1,34E‐9 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
2,35E‐19 8,42E‐10 5,57E‐8 
2,4E‐11 
‐4,88E‐7 
SQP6) 
- 
7,44E1 
2,26E1 
8,52E0 
1,06E2 
3,03E1 
1,61E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
1,16E‐11 1,46E0 
9,07E0 
1,21E‐1 
‐4,25E1 
6) SQP = Potential soil quality index 
 
==PAGE:372==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
9 
 
 
 
 
971.711.00.0(00) 
 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
USE OF NATURAL RESOURCES 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Renew. PER7) as energy 
MJ 
3,39E1 
1,89E‐1 
2,57E1 
5,99E1 
2,53E‐1 
3,46E‐2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
2,45E‐12 1,21E‐2 
8,9E‐1 
1,01E‐3 
‐4,57E1 
Renew. PER as material 
MJ 
0E0 
0E0 
5,58E‐1 
5,58E‐1 
0E0 
‐5,58E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
‐3,98E0 
Total use of renew. PER 
MJ 
3,39E1 
1,89E‐1 
2,63E1 
6,04E1 
2,53E‐1 
‐5,24E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
2,45E‐12 1,21E‐2 
8,9E‐1 
1,01E‐3 
‐4,96E1 
Non-ren. PER as energy 
MJ 
3,97E2 
1,5E1 
3,98E1 
4,52E2 
2,01E1 
9,05E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
4,54E‐10 9,65E‐1 
2,3E1 
6,92E‐2 
‐2,07E2 
Non-ren. PER as material 
MJ 
1,62E2 
0E0 
1,15E0 
1,63E2 
0E0 
‐1,15E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
‐1,62E2 
0E0 
0E0 
Total use of non-ren. PER 
MJ 
5,6E2 
1,5E1 
4,1E1 
6,16E2 
2,01E1 
‐2,49E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
4,54E‐10 9,65E‐1 
‐1,39E2 
6,92E‐2 
‐2,07E2 
Secondary materials 
kg 
5,58E0 
0E0 
3E‐2 
5,61E0 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
3,71E0 
Renew. secondary fuels 
MJ 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Non-ren. secondary fuels 
MJ 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Use of net fresh water 
m3 
4,23E‐1 
3,12E‐3 
4,48E‐2 
0.471 
4,18E‐3 
3,13E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
4,01E‐14 2,01E‐4 
2E‐2 
7,82E‐5 
‐1,57E‐1 
7) PER = Primary energy resources 
END-OF-LIFE – WASTE 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Hazardous waste 
kg 
7,68E0 
1,46E‐2 
1,26E‐1 
7,82E0 
1,95E‐2 
4,44E‐3 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
4,88E‐13 9,37E‐4 
0E0 
5,02E‐5 
‐4,08E0 
Non-hazardous waste 
kg 
1,27E2 
1,61E0 
9,44E0 
1,38E2 
2,16E0 
1,27E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
5,22E‐12 1,04E‐1 
0E0 
4,92E‐1 
‐1,2E2 
Radioactive waste 
kg 
9,45E‐4 
1,03E‐4 
1,18E‐4 
1,17E‐3 
1,38E‐4 
5,54E‐6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
3,18E‐15 6,63E‐6 
0E0 
4,69E‐7 
‐6,52E‐4 
END-OF-LIFE – OUTPUT FLOWS 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Components for reuse 
kg 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Materials for recycling 
kg 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
9,34E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Materials for energy rec. 
kg 
0E0 
0E0 
2,25E‐2 
2,25E‐2 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
3,82E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Exported energy 
MJ 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
8,52E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
1,18E2 
0E0 
0E0 
 
 
==PAGE:373==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
971.711.00.0(00) 
 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS – EN 15804+A1, CML / ISO 21930 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Global warming pot. 
kg CO2e 
3,14E1 
9,34E‐1 2,8E0 
3,52E1 
1,22E0 
1,5E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
3,27E‐11 5,89E‐2 
1,1E1 
2,19E‐3 
‐1,84E1 
Ozone depletion pot. 
kg CFC-11e 
1,74E‐6 1,8E‐7 
2,2E‐7 
2,14E‐6 2,41E‐7 
9,31E‐9 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
5,63E‐18 1,16E‐8 
2,01E‐7 
8,21E‐10 ‐8,97E‐7 
Acidification 
kg SO2e 
2,19E‐1 1,96E‐3 7,41E‐3 2,28E‐1 2,63E‐3 
3,2E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
4,87E‐14 1,26E‐4 
4,87E‐3 
7,08E‐6 
‐2,13E‐1 
Eutrophication 
kg PO43e 
9,82E‐2 3,96E‐4 7,79E‐3 1,06E‐1 5,3E‐4 
1,91E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
8,57E‐15 2,55E‐5 
4,05E‐3 
1,36E‐6 
‐8,78E‐2 
POCP (‘smog’) 
kg C2H4e 
1,62E‐2 1,18E‐4 4,4E‐4 
1,67E‐2 1,51E‐4 
2,08E‐5 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
5,01E‐15 7,26E‐6 
3,55E‐4 
5,54E‐7 
‐1,18E‐2 
ADP-elements 
kg Sbe 
2,88E‐2 1,64E‐5 2,99E‐5 2,89E‐2 2,2E‐5 
2,51E‐6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
5,03E‐17 1,06E‐6 
2,14E‐5 
2,05E‐8 
‐7,99E‐3 
ADP-fossil 
MJ 
5,6E2 
1,5E1 
4,1E1 
6,16E2 
2,01E1 
9,05E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
4,54E‐10 9,65E‐1 
2,3E1 
6,92E‐2 
‐2,07E2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:374==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
971.711.00.0(00) 
 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
ANNEX I 
ARTICLES COVERED BY THIS EPD 
 
 
Article number 
GWP-fossil, A1-A3 
[kg CO2e/item] 
111.300.00.5 
36.8 
111.305.00.5 
39.1 
111.306.00.5 
41.7 
111.308.00.5 
39.8 
111.309.00.5 
34.2 
111.311.00.5 
37.8 
111.320.00.5 
36.8 
111.342.00.2 
44.5 
111.349.00.5 
44.2 
111.355.00.5 
44.8 
111.364.00.5 
37.1 
111.374.00.5 
39.2 
111.383.00.5 
40 
111.900.00.5 
37.9 
 
 
==PAGE:375==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
12 
 
 
 
 
971.711.00.0(00) 
 
Geberit Duofix element for wall-hung WC, 112 cm, with Sigma concealed cistern 12 cm 
VERIFICATION STATEMENT 
VERIFICATION PROCESS FOR THIS EPD 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 14025 by an 
independent, third-party verifier. The process involved reviewing results, 
documents and compliance with reference standards, ISO 14025, 
ISO 14040 and ISO 14044 following the process and checklists of the 
program operator for: 
• 
This Environmental Product Declaration 
• 
The Life Cycle Assessment used in this EPD  
• 
The digital background data for this EPD 
Why does verification transparency matter? Read more online 
This EPD has been generated by the One Click LCA EPD generator, which 
has been verified and approved by the EPD Hub. 
THIRD-PARTY VERIFICATION STATEMENT 
I hereby confirm that, following detailed examination, I have not established 
any relevant deviations by the studied Environmental Product Declaration 
(EPD), its LCA and project report, in terms of the data collected and used in 
the LCA calculations, the way the LCA-based calculations have been 
carried out, the presentation of environmental data in the EPD, and other 
additional environmental information, as present with respect to the 
procedural and methodological requirements in ISO 14025:2010 and 
reference standard. 
 
 
 
 
I confirm that the company-specific data has been examined as regards 
plausibility and consistency; the declaration owner is responsible for its 
factual integrity and legal compliance. 
I confirm that I have sufficient knowledge and experience of construction 
products, this specific product category, the construction industry, 
relevant standards, and the geographical area of the EPD to carry out this 
verification. 
I confirm my independence in my role as verifier; I have not been involved 
in the execution of the LCA or in the development of the declaration and 
have no conflicts of interest regarding this verification. 
 
 
Elma Avdyli, as an authorized verifier acting for EPD Hub Limited 
02.02.2023 
 
 
==PAGE:376==
 
PAGE 1/24 
 
 
 
Environmental Product Declaration 
In accordance with ISO 14025:2006 and EN 15804:2012+A2:2019/AC:2021 for: 
 
EKOLUTION® HEMP FIBRE INSULATION 
 
From: 
Ekolution AB 
 
The EPD document from seed to finished insulation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Programme: 
The International EPD® System, www.environdec.com 
Programme operator: 
EPD International AB 
EPD registration number: 
S-P-10546 
Publication date: 
2023-08-31 
Revision date: 
2024-01-03 (Version 1.2) 
Valid until: 
2028-08-30 
 
An EPD should provide current information and may be updated if conditions change. The 
stated validity is therefore subject to the continued registration and publication at 
www.environdec.com 
 
 
==PAGE:377==
 
 
PAGE 2/24 
Programme information  
 
Programme: 
The International EPD® System 
 
EPD International AB 
Box 210 60  
SE-100 31 Stockholm 
Sweden 
 
www.environdec.com 
info@environdec.com 
 
Accountabilities for PCR, LCA and independent, third-party verification 
Product Category Rules (PCR) 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the Core Product Category Rules (PCR) 
Product Category Rules (PCR): Construction products, 2019:14, Version 1.3.1 
PCR review was conducted by: The Technical Committee of the International EPD® System. Claudia A. Peña. 
Contact via info@environdec.com 
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
LCA accountability: Fanni Végvári, CarbonZero AB 
Third-party verification 
Independent third-party verification of the declaration and data, according to ISO 14025:2006, via: 
 
☒ EPD verification by individual verifier 
 
Third-party verifier: Vladimír Kočí, LCA Studio, Czech Republic 
 
Approved by: The International EPD® System 
Procedure for follow-up of data during EPD validity involves third party verifier: 
 
☐ Yes 
☒ No 
The EPD owner has the sole ownership, liability, and responsibility for the EPD.  
 
EPDs within the same product category but registered in different EPD programmes, or not 
compliant with EN 15804, may not be comparable. For two EPDs to be comparable, they 
must be based on the same PCR (including the same version number) or be based on fully-
aligned PCRs or versions of PCRs; cover products with identical functions, technical 
performances and use (e.g. identical declared/functional units); have equivalent system 
boundaries and descriptions of data; apply equivalent data quality requirements, methods of 
data collection, and allocation methods; apply identical cut-off rules and impact assessment 
methods (including the same version of characterisation factors); have equivalent content 
declarations; and be valid at the time of comparison. For further information about 
comparability, see EN 15804 and ISO 14025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:378==
 
 
PAGE 3/24 
 
Company information 
Owner of the EPD:  
Ekolution AB 
 
Description of the company:  
Ekolution is a company that design, manufacture and distribute new innovative building 
materials and technologies for the construction industry. All raw materials, parts and products 
Ekolution manufactures are developed in close collaboration with the market. The resulting 
sustainable material and solutions are of the highest quality and with a low carbon footprint 
possible on the market currently.  
 
Ekolution develops and produces building insulation materials mainly from industrial hemp 
shives and hemp fibres for the construction industry. All our products are made from renewable, 
recycled and environmentally friendly materials. Ekolution's building materials are not only 
carbon-dioxide neutral, but carbon-negative (CO2-negative; there is more CO2 sequestered in 
the industrial hemp than emitted in the production of the final products), which differentiates 
Ekolution and its products from other conventional building and insulation products.  
 
This is achievable thanks to the exceptional properties of the industrial hemp plant and therefore 
is the core of many our building products. Ekolution strives to become a leader in sustainable 
construction, through continuous improvement and innovation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 3/18 
==PAGE:379==
 
 
PAGE 4/24 
Product information 
 
This EPD covers the production of insulation from bast fibres derived from the industrial hemp 
plant. The bast hemp fibres are a soft, woody fibre obtained from the hemp stems and have a 
very high tensile strength. The hemp fibres are often used as a reinforcement in bio-composites 
and has very good thermal and acoustic insulating capacity.  
 
Ekolution® Hemp fibre Insulation is thus a bio-composite material that is very suitable for the 
construction sector. Ekolution® Hemp fibre insulation has several technical and environmental 
advantages: 
 
• The industrial hemp binds large amounts of CO2 in a plant during its growth, faster 
than most other sources of biomass raw materials. 
• Low-embodied energy  
• High sorption capacity (moisture buffering) and effectively adjusting humidity levels 
• High specific heat inertia, means that hemp fibre takes longer to heat and cool, 
resulting in less temperature variations in the material 
• Reducing heat consumption and energy costs  
• Breathable with diffusion-open designs and building techniques.  
• Very good sound attenuating properties. 
• Natural, healthy and anti-bacterial   
• Ecological, zero harmful and non-toxic emissions. 
• Simplified production process, as the fibre is organic and comfortable against the skin 
and respiratory tract. 
• 100% recyclable and renewable product. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:380==
 
 
PAGE 5/24 
Declaration 
 
This Declaration describes a production volume/weighted average of the Hemp Fibre Insulation 
materials, which are produced with nonwoven machinery. The Hemp Fibre Insulation materials 
specified in the Declaration are used as insulating boards and as insulating materials for 
buildings.  
 
The main raw materials for the manufacturing process of the insulation are hemp fibre, recycled 
bi-component fibre from the textile industry and caustic soda. The most relevant technical 
information about the product:  
 
Product name:  
Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation 
 
UN CPC code:  
31449 Fibreboard of wood or other ligneous materials, other fibreboard 
 
Geographical scope:  
Europe
 
Delivery status: 
The following dimensions refer to standardised Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation product: 
 
Steel studs: 
• 
Width 470 x Length 1200. T= 45, 70, 95, 120, 145, 170, 195 and 220 mm  
• 
Width 620 x Length 1200. T= 45, 70, 95, 120, 145, 170, 195 and 220 mm  
 
Wood studs: 
• 
Width 425 x Length 1200. T= 45, 70, 95, 120, 145, 170, 195 and 220 mm  
• 
Width 575 x Length 1200. T= 45, 70, 95, 120, 145, 170, 195 and 220 mm  
 
Information about additional products specified within the scope of this EPD can be viewed at 
www.ekolution.se. 
 
Application  
Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation is highly versatile and can be used for thermal insulation for 
wall, roof and floor constructions. It can also be used as an acoustic board, insulation against step 
sound (sub floor insulation), airborne sound and as an insulation element that can be directly used 
in all construction parts.  
 
Placing on the market / Application rules  
Directive (EU) No.305/2011 applies for placing the product on the market in the EU/EFTA (except 
Switzerland). Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation materials require a Declaration of Performance 
taking into consideration the harmonised product standard EN 13171:2012 thermal insulation 
materials for buildings - Factory-made hemp fibre (WF) products - Specification. The relevant 
national provisions apply for the use of the products, the Centre of building engineering, Joint 
Stock Company for hemp fibre insulation materials in acc. with EDA 040005-00-1201.  
 
==PAGE:381==
 
 
PAGE 6/24 
Manufacturing of the product 
The manufacturing process of the product consists of the following steps. An infographic of the 
process can be found in Figure 1. 
 
• Processing of the raw hemp stalk from bale to lose fibre 
• Dust separation 
• Mixing hemp fibre with binder  
• Formation of the board through heating process 
• Cutting the board  
• Stacking, packaging 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Infographic of the manufacturing process 
 
Environment and health during manufacturing  
No other health protection measures are required beyond normal workwear and gloves.  
 
Product installation  
Depending on the board thickness and density, Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation materials can be 
adjusted to desirable fit using an insulation knife with wave cutting blade, alligator saw 
(recommended), circular saw, band saw or similar tools. Neither the processing nor the installation 
of Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation materials lead to environmental pollution. As far as 
environmental protection is concerned, no additional measures are required. 
 
Packaging  
For the packaging of Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation materials, foils made of polyethylene, 
stickers and wood are used. All packing materials are recyclable if unmixed, and/or can be 
recovered as energy.  
==PAGE:382==
 
 
PAGE 7/24 
 
 
Technical Data  
The following information refers to the Ekolution’s product range. Information about further 
products specified within the scope of this EPD can be viewed at www.ekolution.se:  
 
• 
Gross density (in acc. with DIN EN 1602) is 35 kg/m3.  
• 
Thermal conductivity λ = 0.04 W/(m2K)., declared value (in acc. to DIN EN 12667, EN ISO 10456)   
• 
Water vapour diffusion resistance factor (in acc. with DIN EN 12086) is 2.3 m. 
• 
Reaction to fire class (in acc. with /DIN EN 13501-1+A1) is D s1 d0. 
 
Technical properties: 
 
 
Basic Works Requirement 2: Safety in case of fire (BWR 2) 
1 
Reaction to fire 
(EN 13501-1+A1) 
 
Class D-s1, d0 
Classification Report 
No. PK-16-002 
 
Basic Works Requirement 3: Hygiene, health and the environment (BWR 3)* 
10 
Water vapour diffusion resistance μ 
(EN 12086)  
 
2.294 
Test Report  
Č. 15/1164/T064-A 
11 
Water absorption 
(EN 1609, method A)  
 
 
1.51 kg/m2   
Test Report  
Č. 15/1164/T064-A 
 
Basic Works Requirement 3: Hygiene, health and the environment (BWR 3) 
2 
Biological resistance (Growth of mould fungus) 
(ÖNORM B 6010; EAD 040005-00-1201, Annex B);  
EN ISO 846, method A, B, B’) 
There is no intensity of fungal 
growth 
Report No. 124009/2016 
 8 
Sound absorption  
(EN ISO 354, EN ISO 11654) 
- 
Sound absorption coefficient αs 
- 
Practical sound absorption coefficient αp 
 
  
 
Product thickness 100 mm 
Frequency 
[Hz] 
αs 
αp 
125 
0,40 
0,35 
250 
0,65 
0,60 
500 
0,82 
0,80 
1000 
0,81 
0,85 
2000 
0,89 
0,90 
4000 
1,03 
1,00 
 
 
Test Report  
Č. 15/086/A036 
 
- 
Weighted sound absorption coefficient αw 
- 
Class sound absorption B 
 
 
Thickness 
[mm] 
αw 
[-] 
100 
0,85 (H) 
  
18 
Tensile strength parallel** 
(EN 1608) 
- 
Thickness 50 mm 
- 
Thickness 200 mm 
- 
 
 
 
10,1 kPa 
10,2 kPa 
Test Report  
Č. 16/105/C005 A  
* Hemp Fibre Insulation materials have no soluble ingredients that are hazardous to water. Hemp fibre insulation materials are not permanently resistant to standing 
water. Depending on the damage symptoms, damaged areas must be replaced, either partially or extensively.  
** The product is mechanically resistant (pressure, tensile load) depending on the insulation material used. Hemp Fibre Insulation materials have no soluble 
ingredients that are hazardous to water. 
 
Condition of use  
The contents of the products apply for the average product under review. The proportions of the 
ingredients vary depending on the product range. During growth, approx. 6,3 kg CO2 per declared 
unit is bound in the product as biogenic carbon content. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:383==
 
 
PAGE 8/24 
 
 
Environment and health during use  
When Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation materials are used, there is no hazard potential for water, 
air or soil. When Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation materials are installed correctly, no health 
risks or impairments are to be expected. It is possible that small quantities of product substances 
as hemp dust may be released in the air.  
 
Reference to service life  
Due to the many different possible applications for Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation, service 
life of the product can be expected to be 60 years, based on the estimations from the product’s 
form stability. 
 
Reuse & Recycled phase  
When disassembled without damage, Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation materials may be re-used 
for the same application at the end of life or may be reused in the same application spectrum in an 
alternative location. Insofar as the Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation materials are not 
contaminated, the raw material can easily be materially recycled and recovered (e.g. re-admission 
to the production process).  
 
Disposal  
Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation materials can be used as renewable energy sources for e.g. in 
district heating plants. Process energy as well as electricity can be generated.  
 
 
 
PAGE 8/18 
==PAGE:384==
 
 
PAGE 9/24 
LCA information 
 
Declared unit:  
1 m2 of Hemp Fibre Insulation with a thickness of 100 mm and a weight of 3,5 kg/m2. 
 
Time representativeness:  
The data used to model product manufacturing correspond to 2019. The data from generic 
databases are from 2021 – 2022. No data used is older than 10 years. 
 
Database(s) and LCA software used:  
Calculation completed in LCA for Experts v.10.7 with an integrated Ecoinvent database 3.8. 
 
System diagram:  
 
 
 
Description of system boundaries:  
Cradle-to-grave with module D. 
 
Allocation:  
No by-products are produced besides Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation and no allocation 
procedure is necessary. All products are made at one factory in Hodonice, Czech Republic. 
 
Scenarios: 
The analysis is carried out using factory-specific data for use of energy and utilities and waste 
generation as well as product-specific data for use of raw materials. Therefore, the results 
represent the product system and no other scenarios are applied. 
 
 
==PAGE:385==
 
 
PAGE 10/24 
Data used: 
Site-specific production data have been retrieved from the production site for 2019. The 
upstream and downstream processes have been modelled based on data from generic databases, 
mostly Sphera’s database. 
 
Cut-off: 
The study applies a cut-off criterion of maximum 1% of the material and energy inputs of the 
system. 
 
Transportation: 
The transport of the raw materials to the production site is carried out by average European 
truck trailer with a 27t payload, average 61% capacity utilisation.  
 
Energy utilities: 
Only electricity is used at the final product manufacturing site in Central Europe. The electricity 
is obtained partly from the grid and from solar panels installed on the site. The electricity from 
the grid has been modelled using the Czech residual electricity grid mix from IEA 2021.  
 
Direct emissions from production site: 
No direct emissions are produced at the production site. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Ekolution hemp fibre insulation is appreciated by the carpenters because of the natural qualities of the material. 
Creating a less hazardous work environment. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:386==
 
PAGE 11/24 
Figure 3: Ekolution Hemp Fibre Insulation thicknesses are according to Swedish standards: 45,70,95,120,145,170,195 and 
220 mm. Width depends on the studs and distance between studs, 450 of 600 mm. 
Content declaration 
 
Material content:  
Apart from hemp fibres, hemp fibre insulation materials consist of binding agents and other 
additives. The proportions averaged from the various products for the Environmental Product 
Declaration are:  
 
• Hemp fibres 87 %  
• Bi-component fibres 10 %  
• Ammonium phosphate 3 %  
 
The bi-component fibres consist of recycled polyethylene and polypropylene. Ammonium 
sulphate is used as a flame retardant, which is a food grade mineral salt. The apparent density 
of the declared average hemp fibre insulation material is 35 kg/m3.  
 
The ingredients listed apply to the average product declared, and the proportions of the 
ingredients may vary depending on the product dimensions. During growth, approx. 7.08 kg 
CO2 is bound in the product.  
 
No substances that appear in the REACH candidate list of SVHC (Candidate List of Substances 
of Very High Concern) are present or used in the product concerning this EPD. 
 
Packaging: 
For the packaging of Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation, foils made of polyethylene is used. 
The packing materials is recyclable if unmixed, and/or can be recovered as energy. The final 
product is then transported on wooden pallets out to the installation site. 
 
Recycled material: 
The bi-component fibres used as raw material are 50% obtained from recycled post-consumer 
textile waste. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:387==
 
PAGE 12/24 
Product components 
Weight per FU (kg) 
Post-consumer 
material, weight-% 
Biogenic material, 
weight-% and kg C/kg 
Hemp fibres 
3,05 
0 
87 
Bi-component fibres 
0,35 
5 
0 
Ammonium phosphate 
0,105 
0 
0 
TOTAL 
3,5 
5 
87 
Packaging materials 
Weight per FU (kg) 
Weight-% (versus the 
product) 
Weight biogenic carbon, 
kg C/kg 
Pallet 
0,625 
17,8 
0,259 
PE 
0,0085 
0,243 
0 
TOTAL 
0,6335 
18,043 
0,259 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:388==
 
PAGE 13/24 
Modules declared, geographical scope, share of specific data (in GWP-GHG results) and data variation (in GWP-GHG results):  
*Note that it is discouraged to use the results of modules A1-A3 without considering the results of module C when module C is declared. 
 
The estimated impact results are only relative statements, which do not indicate the endpoints of the impact categories, exceeding threshold values, 
safety margins and/or risks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Product stage 
Assembly 
stage 
Use stage 
End of life stage 
Benefits & loads beoyond system 
boundary 
 
Raw materials 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Assembly 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy use 
Operational water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Reuse-Recovery-
Recycling-potential 
Module 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Modules declared* 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Geogprahy 
EU 
EU 
CZ 
EU 
SE 
SE 
SE 
SE 
SE 
SE 
SE 
SE 
SE 
SE 
SE 
SE 
SE 
Specific data used 
Specific data used 
in module A3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Variation products 
0% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Variation sites 
0% 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:389==
 
PAGE 14/24 
Environmental performance 
Core environmental impact indicators per m2 of Hemp Fibre Insulation with 100 mm thickness 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
-6,81E+00 
1,91E-01 
5,78E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,25E-02 
7,08E+00** 
1,70E-01 
2,57E+00 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
1,01E+00 
1,92E-01 
-1,60E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,26E-02 
0,00E+00 
2,24E-02 
-1,75E-01 
GWP-biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-7,88E+00 
-2,68E-03 
5,94E-01** 
0,00E+00 
-1,85E-04 
7,08E+00** 
1,48E-01 
2,82E+00 
GWP-LULUC 
kg CO2 eq. 
6,91E-02 
1,69E-03 
-1,25E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,16E-04 
0,00E+00 
8,77E-06 
-7,34E-02 
ODP 
kg CFC11 eq. 
4,16E-08 
1,74E-14 
-5,20E-14 
0,00E+00 
1,86E-15 
0,00E+00 
1,54E-14 
-1,69E-08 
AP 
mol H⁺ eq. 
5,39E-03 
6,98E-04 
-3,26E-05 
0,00E+00 
2,38E-05 
0,00E+00 
4,66E-05 
-3,52E-03 
EP-freshwater 
kg P eq. 
8,77E-04 
6,67E-07 
-2,31E-08 
0,00E+00 
4,66E-08 
0,00E+00 
4,09E-06 
-8,93E-04 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
5,30E-03 
2,25E-04 
-8,95E-06 
0,00E+00 
9,85E-06 
0,00E+00 
4,24E-05 
-5,07E-03 
EP-terrestial 
mol N eq. 
1,97E-02 
2,53E-03 
-9,55E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,12E-04 
0,00E+00 
1,69E-04 
-1,39E-02 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 
3,98E-03 
5,43E-04 
-3,52E-05 
0,00E+00 
2,12E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,02E-04 
-1,33E-03 
ADP-M&M 
kg Sb eq. 
4,15E-06 
1,19E-08 
-8,32E-10 
0,00E+00 
8,38E-10 
0,00E+00 
2,51E-10 
-2,76E-06 
ADP-fossil 
MJ 
2,14E+01 
2,60E+00 
-6,38E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,75E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,39E-01 
-1,86E+00 
WDP 
m³ 
5,64E+00 
2,15E-03 
-3,32E-03 
0,00E+00 
1,79E-04 
0,00E+00 
5,77E-04 
-5,89E+00 
GWP-total: Global Warming Potential; GWP-fossil: Global Warming Potential fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic: Global Warming Potential biogenic; GWP-LULUC: Global 
Warming Potential land use and land use change; ODP: Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone layer; AP: Acidification potential, Accumulated Exceedance; EP-
freshwater: Eutrophication potential, fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment; See “additional Norwegian requirements”  for indicator given as PO4 eq. 
EP-marine: Eutrophication potential, fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment; EP-terrestial: Eutrophication potential, Accumulated Exceedance; POCP: 
Formation potential of tropospheric ozone; ADP-M&M: Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil resources (minerals and metals); ADP-fossil: Abiotic depletion potential for 
fossil resources; WDP: Water deprivation potential, deprivation weighted water counsumption 
*The biogenic GWP value is from literature as Ecoinvent did not seem to provide with sufficient and accurate up to date information regarding the uptake of carbon from the hemp cultivation. 
The value for the biogenic is 2,023 kg CO2-eq. per kg of hemp. 
**The biogenic content in packaging and product contributing to the GWP-biogenic is balanced out in A5 and C3 as positive as the packaging and product leaves the system boundary. 
 
==PAGE:390==
 
PAGE 15/24 
Additional environmental impact indicators 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
Disease incidence 
2,06E-07 
8,23E-09 
-2,31E-10 
0,00E+00 
1,45E-10 
0,00E+00 
4,66E-10 
-2,00E-07 
IRP 
kBq U235 eq. 
8,36E-02 
6,59E-04 
-1,54E-03 
0,00E+00 
2,08E-04 
0,00E+00 
2,40E-04 
-8,55E-03 
ETP-fw 
CTUe 
2,01E+02 
1,83E+00 
-3,24E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,20E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,80E-01 
-2,10E+02 
HTP-c 
CTUh 
3,33E-09 
3,68E-11 
-7,48E-12 
0,00E+00 
2,51E-12 
0,00E+00 
8,06E-12 
-1,54E-09 
HTP-nc 
CTUh 
3,21E-08 
1,60E-09 
-2,40E-10 
0,00E+00 
1,07E-10 
0,00E+00 
6,92E-10 
5,71E-08 
SQP 
Dimensionless 
1,81E+02 
1,04E+00 
-2,38E-02 
0,00E+00 
7,38E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,31E-02 
-1,13E+02 
PM: Particulate matter emissions; IRP: Ionising radiation, human health; ETP-fw: Ecotoxicity (freshwater); ETP-c: Human toxicity, cancer effects; HTP-nc: Human toxicity, 
non-cancer effects; SQP: Land use related impacts / soil quality 
 
Resource use 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
RPEE 
MJ 
-1,21E+02 
1,80E-01 
-3,57E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,61E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,25E-02 
-3,77E+01 
RPEM 
MJ 
1,75E+02 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
TPE 
MJ 
5,29E+01 
1,80E-01 
-3,57E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,61E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,25E-02 
-3,77E+01 
NRPE 
MJ 
2,06E+01 
2,61E+00 
-6,39E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,75E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,39E-01 
-1,86E+00 
NRPM 
MJ 
7,41E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
TRPE 
MJ 
2,14E+01 
2,61E+00 
-6,39E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,75E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,39E-01 
-1,86E+00 
SM 
kg 
0,00E+00 
1,99E-04 
-9,18E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,91E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,79E-05 
-1,37E-01 
RSF 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
1,80E-01 
-3,57E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,61E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,25E-02 
-3,77E+01 
NRSF 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
W 
m3 
1,32E-01 
1,80E-01 
-3,57E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,61E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,25E-02 
-3,77E+01 
RPEE: Renewable primary energy resources used as energy carrier; RPEM: Renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; TPE: Total use of renewable primary 
energy resources; NRPE: Non-renewable primary energy resources used as energy carrier; NRPM: Non-renewable primary energy resources used as materials; TRPE: Total 
use of non-renewable primary energy resources; SM: Use of secondary materials; RSF: Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF: Use of non-renewable secondary fuels; W: Use 
of net fresh water 
 
==PAGE:391==
 
PAGE 16/24 
End of life - Waste 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HW 
kg 
2,65E-09 
8,72E-12 
-2,35E-11 
0,00E+00 
-2,15E-13 
0,00E+00 
1,15E-11 
0,00E+00 
NHW 
kg 
1,41E-02 
3,74E-04 
-1,74E-04 
0,00E+00 
2,98E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,40E-01 
0,00E+00 
RW 
kg 
3,94E-04 
4,87E-06 
-9,38E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,74E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,62E-06 
0,00E+00 
HW: Hazardous waste disposed; NHW: Non hazardous waste disposed; RW: Radioactive waste disposed 
 
End of life – output flow 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
CR 
kg 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
7,88E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MR 
kg 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,31E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,33E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
kg 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
ETE 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
CR: Components for reuse; MR: Materials for recycling; MER: Materials for energy recovery; EEE: Exported electric energy; ETE: Exported thermal energy 
 
Additional voluntary indicators 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-GHG1 
kg CO2 eq. 
1,17E+00 
1,95E-01 
-1,60E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,27E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,42E-01 
-3,41E-01 
 
________________________ 
1 This indicator accounts for all greenhouse gases except biogenic carbon dioxide uptake and emissions and biogenic carbon stored in the product. As such, the indicator is 
identical to GWP-total except that the CF for biogenic CO2 is set to zero. 
==PAGE:392==
 
PAGE 17/24 
Information describing the biogenic carbon content at the factory gate 
 
Biogenic carbon content* 
Unit 
Value 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
1,22E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in the accompanying packaging 
kg C 
3,27E-01 
*44/12 is the ratio between the molecular mass of CO2 and C molecule
==PAGE:393==
 
PAGE 18/24 
LCA: Interpretation 
The different life cycle stages have different impact on the total 
environmental impact from the production of hemp fibre insulation. 
The result of the GWP fossil during the product stage (A1-A3) is from 
the production of raw material (A1) that contributes to 68% of the 
total impact. Meanwhile, the A2 stage accounts for 11% and the A3 
stage for 21%. 
 
The raw material stage is declared including the CO2 sequestered in the product. The results of 
the LCA study show that the biogenic carbon dioxide sequestered during plant growth exceeds 
the emissions from the manufacturing of the product (A1-A3). A closer look on the data reveals 
that the bi-component fibre used as a binding agent stands for 46% of the total climate impact 
(GWP fossil) while the hemp fibre production only stands for 27%. 
 
Additional information 
 
Recyclability and reusability: 
All Ekolution® Hemp Fibre Insulation materials can be returned to the factory where they will 
be torn down and blended into new products. 100% of all insulation can be recycled to form 
new products. The insulation that is not reused can go directly to combustion in heating plants.  
 
Biogenic carbon uptake:  
Hemp is a crop that binds up to 24 tonnes of carbon dioxide per hectare (depends on the yield 
of harvest usually between 10-12 tons per hectare). Studies have obtained results concerning 
the amount of carbon dioxide that is sequestered per kilogram of products, but an average 2.023 
kg CO2 per kilogram of hemp fibre has been estimated. 
 
Hemp can be grown anywhere in the world, and it is possible to obtain a full harvest in about 
100 days. This means a much more time efficient growth rate if compared with other crops and 
biomass sources, e.g. boreal forests can take around 70 years for one full harvest. This property 
can make a significant difference in climate change mitigation, as climate impact depends 
heavily on the timing of the emissions and uptakes.  
 
Other properties: 
Almost all varieties of hemp are naturally resistant to insect pests and predators. Not only does 
this mean that harmful chemical pesticides – which can leach into the soil and waterways – 
need not be used. Hemp is an important plant for crop rotation for several reasons. Firstly, 
despite it being an annual crop, hemp’s roots reach deep down into the soil. This both helps to 
hold the soil together, reducing erosion, and to loosen the soil, allowing more delicate plants to 
grow afterwards. Secondly, hemp produces high quantities of biomass (a matter which returns 
to the soil and decomposes, feeding nutrients back into the ground). For this reason, hemp is 
often grown in rotation with winter cereals, which require high-quality soil.  
 
Moreover, no processing is necessary to extract natural bonding agents from naturally produced 
hemp fibres, making hemp a superior crop with potential applications in a broad range of 
products. The significant strength of the hemp fibres and its vapour permeability makes it a 
remarkable material to develop a wide range of construction products. 
 
 
==PAGE:394==
 
PAGE 19/24 
Climate effects of biogenic carbon storage: 
The GWP indicator presented in this EPD does not capture the difference made by the timing 
of the carbon dioxide uptake during growth. However, other methods exist to do this, one of 
them being Dynamic LCA where simplified estimations can be used to illustrate the benefits of 
hemp (Levasseur et al. 2010).  
 
Dynamic LCA is a method where the climate impact of greenhouse gas emissions and uptakes 
are assessed based on the time when they occur, with reference to a specific time horizon. 
Assuming that hemp sequesters 2.023 kg CO2 in year 1. One stand of boreal forest sequesters 
1.65 kg CO2 per kilogram of wood harvested. And that this is equally distributed throughout 
the 70 years of harvesting period, the following dynamic LCA results are obtained with a time 
horizon of 100 years for the climate impact of the biogenic carbon uptake per kg of product 
harvested:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The results in the table above show the cumulative radiative forcing, the phenomenon that 
causes climate change, avoided by the uptake of biogenic carbon by hemp fibres and wood 
during the first one hundred years after the harvesting. The hemp may absorb a lower amount 
of carbon dioxide per kilogram of fibres produced, but since the hemp does this in only one 
year, the cumulative effect in terms of radiative forcing avoided is higher (-1,43 W.m2) if 
compared with that of the wood from boreal forests (-1,03 W.m2).  
 
The wood from boreal forests absorbs the carbon dioxide much slower (through 70 years of 
harvesting periods), and therefore the cumulative radiative forcing is lower. These effects of 
the timing of emissions are not captured by the GWP indicators used in EPDs, since these 
indicators are calculated assuming that all the uptakes and emissions of carbon dioxide occur 
in the first year, which does not represent reality. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biomass source 
Cumulative radiative forcing (W.m2) 
 
Relative impact  
(kg CO2 eq) 
Industrial Hemp Plant 
 
-1,47E-13 
-1,5 
Wood from boreal forests 
 
-1,03E-13 
-1,2 
==PAGE:395==
 
PAGE 20/24 
Differences Versus Previous Versions 
 
2023-08-31 Version 1 
 
2023-10-03 Version 1.1 
Editorial change: Corrected GWP-GHG value. 
 
2024-01-03 Version 1.2 
Editorial change: Corrected factory name. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:396==
 
PAGE 21/24 
 
 
References 
 
Bos, U. and S. Deimling (2010) Development of a Complete Biogenous Insulating Material - 
LCA Results. LBP University of Stuttgart and PE International, Germany. 
 
EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 - Sustainability of construction works - Environmental product 
declaration - Core rules for the product category of construction products 
 
EPD International (2021) PCR 2019:14 Construction products and construction services, 
version 1.3.1. 
 
General Programme Instructions of the International EPD® System. Version 4.  
 
IEA, Czech Republic (2021) https://www.iea.org/countries/czech-republic 
Assessed 2023-05-31 
 
Ip, K. & Miller, A. (2012) ’Life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of hemp–lime wall 
constructions in the UK’. Resources, Conservation and Recycling vol 69 p 1-9.  
 
ISO 14020:2000 Environmental labels and declarations — General principles 
 
ISO 14025:2010 Environmental labels and declarations - Type III environmental declarations 
- Principles and procedures 
 
ISO 14044:2006 Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Requirements and 
guidelines 
 
Jankausskiene, Z., Butkute, B., Gruzdeviene, E., Ceseviciene, J., & Fernando, A. L. (2015) 
Chemical composition and physical properties of dew- and water-retted hemp fibers. 
Industrial Crops and Production 75 (206-211). 
 
Künzel, T., & Knodel, N. (2023) Carbon in Hemp Explained. HempConnect. 
 
Levasseur, A. et al. (2010) Considering Time in LCA: Dynamic LCA and Its Application to 
Global Warming Impact Assessments. Environmental Science & Technology 2010 44 (8), 
3169-3174 DOI: 10.1021/es9030003  
 
SCB (2020) Treated waste by treatment category and waste category. Every second year 2010 
- 2020 
https://www.statistikdatabasen.scb.se/pxweb/en/ssd/START__MI__MI0305/MI0305T003/ 
Assessed 2023-05-23 
==PAGE:397==
 
PAGE 22/24 
 
Zampori, L., Dotelli, G., and Vernelli, V. (2013) Life cycle assessment of hemp cultivation 
and use of hemp-based thermal insulator materials in buildings. Environmental Science & 
Technology 2013 47 (13), 7413-7420. DOI: 10.1021/es401326a 
 
Zampori, L., Dotelli, G., and Vernelli, V. (2017) Life cycle assessment of natural building 
materials: the role of carbonation, mixture components and transport in the environmental 
impacts of hempcrete blocks, Journal of Cleaner Production, vol 149 p 1051-1061. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:398==
 
PAGE 23/24 
Contact information 
EPD owner: 
 
 
 
EKOLUTION AB 
Address:      Henrik Smithsgatan 1, 211 56 Malmö  
Website:      www.ekolution.se 
Email:          info@ekolution.se                                      
Telephone:  +46 735 19 80 20  
Contact:       Naib Woldemariam (naib@ekolution.se)                    
LCA author: 
 
CarbonZero AB 
Address:     Tåstrupsgatan 2, 262 32 Ängelholm 
Contact:      Fanni Végvári (fanni.vegvari@eando.se) 
Telephone: +46 73 854 90 52 
Third party verifier: 
 
 
LCA Studio s.r.o 
Address:     Šárecká 1962/5, 160 00 Praha 6 
Contact:     Vladimír Kocí (vladimir.koči@lcastudio.cz) 
Telephone: +420 608 055 972 
Programme operator: 
 
 
 
EPD International AB 
info@environdec.com  
 
 
==PAGE:399==
 
 
 
 
 
                   
 
www.environdec.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.environdec.com 
==PAGE:400==
 
Confidential 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Owner: 
MicroShade A/S 
No.: 
MD-23167-EN 
Issued: 
21-12-2023 
Valid to: 
21-12-2023 
 
EPD 
VERIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION | ISO 14025 & EN 15804 
3 r d  P A R T Y  V E R I F I E D  
==PAGE:401==
 
 
 
 
MD-23167-EN | MicroShade A/S | Page 2 of 10 
 
Confidential 
Owner of declaration 
MicroShade 
Ejby Industrivej 70, 2600 
Glostrup, Denmark 
VAT no. 27492207 
 
Programme 
EPD Danmark 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
☐ Industry EPD   
☒ Product EPD 
 
Declared product(s) 
MicroShade® 
 
Number of declared datasets/product variations: 1 
 
Production site 
The main production site is in Glostrup, Denmark. Subprocesses 
take place in Belgium (BE) and Germany (DE). 
 
Product(s) use 
The EPD covers MicroShade® which provides integrated, passive 
solar shading which is to be installed into either a double or triple 
pane insulating glazing unit. 
 
Declared/ functional unit 
1 m2 of MicroShade®. 
Year of production site data (A3) 
2023 
EPD version 
Version 1, [21-12-2023] 
 
Issued: 
21-12-2023 
Valid to: 
21-12-2028 
Basis of calculation 
This EPD is developed in accordance with the European 
standard EN 15804+A2.  
 
Comparability 
EPDs of construction products may not be comparable 
if they do not comply with the requirements in EN 
15804. EPD data may not be comparable if the 
datasets used are not developed in accordance with EN 
15804 and if the background systems are not based 
on the same database. 
 
Validity 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 
14025 and is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 
 
Use 
The intended use of an EPD is to communicate 
scientifically based environmental information for 
construction products, for the purpose of assessing the 
environmental performance of buildings. 
 
EPD type 
☐Cradle-to-gate with modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options, modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-grave and module D 
☒Cradle-to-gate 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Martha Katrine Sørensen 
EPD Danmark 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to EN ISO 14025 
☐ internal 
☒ external 
 
Third party verifier: 
 
 
Guangli Du, Aalborg University 
 
 
Life cycle stages and modules (MND = module not declared) 
Product 
Construction 
process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond the system 
boundary 
Raw material 
supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery 
and recycling 
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
MND 
MND 
MND MND MND 
MND MND 
MND MND 
MND 
MND MND 
MND 
MND 
==PAGE:402==
 
 
 
 
MD-23167-EN | MicroShade A/S | Page 3 of 10 
 
Confidential 
Product information 
 
Product description 
 
The main product components are shown in the 
table below.  
 
Material 
Weight-% of 
declared product 
Polyester film 
41,6% 
Polyolefine liner 
29,3% 
Epoxyacrylate copolymer 
17,8% 
Acrylate copolymer 
10,8% 
Inorganic constituents 
0,4% 
 
 
Product packaging: 
 
The composition of the sales- and transport 
packaging of the product is shown in the table 
below. 
 
Material 
Weight-% of packaging 
Pallet 
53% 
Cardboard box 
32% 
Core board (cardboard)  
15% 
 
 
 
Representativity 
 
This declaration, including data collection and the 
modeled foreground system including results, 
represents 
the 
Cradle-to-gate 
impacts 
of 
producing 1 m2 MicroShade® at the production 
sites in Denmark, Belgium, and Germany. The 
product specific data, covering the production 
process and packaging of the products, as well as 
supplier location and information on inbound 
transport, has been collected for the first six 
months of year 2023. Allocation of manufacturing 
data was based on the bill of materials or 
allocated based on square meters. Background 
data is based on Ecoinvent 3.9.1. All datasets are 
valid for year 2023 and the overall data 
representativeness is assessed to be fair.
 
Hazardous substances 
 
MicroShade® does not contain substances listed 
on the ”Candidate List of Substances of Very High 
Concern for authorisation” 
 (http://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table) 
 
 
Essential characteristics  
 
Technical 
information 
can 
be 
obtained 
by 
contacting 
the 
manufacturer 
or 
on 
the 
manufacturers website: 
https://microshade.com/microshade/ 
 
 
Reference Service Life (RSL) 
 
Not relevant for this study. 
MicroShade® is integrated into the insulating 
glazing unit and the reference service life 
therefore depends on the service life of the 
glazing. 
 
 
Picture of product 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:403==
 
 
 
 
MD-23167-EN | MicroShade A/S | Page 4 of 10 
 
Confidential 
out of scope
Raw materials (A1)
Italy
Germany
Transport (A2)
Manufacturing (A3)
Transport (A4)
Installation (A5)
England
Denmark
Denmark
Truck
MicroShade A/S factory, DK
France
Belgium
Plane
Germany
Production partner 1, BE
Production partner 2, DE
Truck
Truck
Truck
MicroShade A/S factory, DK
IGU partner
- Lay-up process
Truck
Republic of Korea
Germany
Truck
Truck
Use (B1-B7)
End of life (C1-C4)
Deconstruction
Sorting facility
Glass recycling
Truck
Truck
Truck
Truck
*Confidential information*
LCA background 
 
Declared unit 
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD relates to the 
declared unit (1m2 MicroShade®). 
Name 
Value 
Unit 
Declared unit 
1 
m2 
Density 
0,22 
kg/m2 
Conversion factor to 1 kg. 
4,55 
m2/kg 
 
 
Functional unit 
Not relevant for the assessment. 
 
 
PCR 
This EPD is developed according to the core rules 
for the product category of construction products 
in EN 15804+A2:2019. 
 
 
Guarantee of Origin – certificates 
 
No certified green electricity  is used. 
 
Foreground system: 
Processes at production sites in Belgium and 
Germany is modelled using residual mix. 
 
Processes at the Danish site is modelled using 
specific residual mix (a mix of wind, biogas, and 
solar). 
 
Background system: 
Upstream processes (A1) are modelled using 
average global or European grid mix. 
 
 
 
Flow diagram 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:404==
 
 
 
 
MD-23167-EN | MicroShade A/S | Page 5 of 10 
 
Confidential 
System boundary 
 
This EPD is based on a cradle-to-gate LCA, in 
which ~97% of mass input flows have been 
accounted for. Generally, packaging materials are 
included in the assessment. However, specific 
packaging materials for goods supplied to the 
production partners in Germany and Belgium are 
excluded due to a lack of data, representing 
approximately 3% of the total mass. 
 
The general rules for the exclusion of inputs and 
outputs follows the requirements in EN 15804, 
6.3.5, where the total of neglected input flows per 
module shall be a maximum of 5 % of energy 
usage and mass and 1 % of energy usage and 
mass for unit processes. 
 
Product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
A1 – Extraction and processing of raw materials 
Include 
impacts 
from 
the 
extraction 
and 
production of raw materials and semifinished 
goods such as polymer films, coatings, and 
adhesives. The specific raw materials used are 
considered confidential and, therefore, are not 
listed in the flow diagram. Instead, the location of 
the supplier is indicated. 
 
A2 – Transport to the production site 
Include all transportation service from suppliers 
to the MicroShade production sites, including 
ship, aircraft, and lorry freight. 
 
A3 – Manufacturing processes 
The production of MicroShade® involves several 
steps. The Microstructure undergoes a 4-step 
process at the MicroShade A/S production factory 
in Glostrup. Once the microstructure is produced, 
a colour coating is applied, and finally, the 
product is laminated together with a window film.  
The completed product is then transported to a 
glazing partner, where MicroShade® is integrated 
into the glazing unit.  
 
This phase includes manufacturing process of the 
final product and the packaging materials (both 
raw materials, semi-finished goods, and the final 
product packaging). It includes the utilisation of 
electricity, water, gas, and auxiliary materials.  
Scrap and waste from production and the 
associated waste treatment is also accounted for 
up to the final disposal. 
 
 
End of Life (C1-C4): 
Following 
the 
EN 
15804+A2 
MicroShade® 
qualifies for exemption of modules C1-C4 and D 
due to the following reasons: (1) it is not a stand-
alone 
product 
but 
rather 
an 
integrated 
component used in combination with glazing in a 
window assembly and is inseparable at the end of 
life, (2) it follows the glazing’s end of life and is 
unidentifiable in a recycling process where glass 
is crushed and melted into new glass, and (3) 
MicroShade® does not contain biogenic carbon. 
 
It is worth mentioning that 86% of waste outflows 
are accounted for since they occur in A3. Only the 
finished product and its final packaging are not 
declared, constituting 14% of waste outflows. The 
majority of waste is, therefore, included as part 
of this EPD, even though the C-modules are not 
declared. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:405==
 
 
 
 
MD-23167-EN | MicroShade A/S | Page 6 of 10 
 
Confidential 
LCA results 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER 1 m
2 MicroShade® 
 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D   
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
14,69E+00 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
1,11E+01 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
GWP-
biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,51E+00 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
9,24E-02 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
1,24E-05 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
AP 
[mol H
+ eq.] 
5,01E-02 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
EP-
freshwater 
[kg P eq.] 
3,47E-03 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
1,06E-02 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
EP-
terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
1,18E-01 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
3,67E-02 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
ADPm
1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
2,84E-04 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
ADPf
1 
[MJ] 
2,21E+02 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
WDP
1 
[m
3 world eq. deprived] 
5,22E+00 
ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND ND   
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - 
biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = 
Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical 
zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water depletion 
potential 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*10
2 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the same as 
1,12*10
-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER 1 m
2 MicroShade® 
 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
5,19E-07 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
IRP
2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
3,45E+00 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ETP-fw
1 
[CTUe] 
1,70E+02 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
HTP-c
1 
[CTUh] 
1,03E-08 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
HTP-nc
1 
[CTUh] 
1,29E-07 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
SQP
1 
-  
9,20E+01 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer 
effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*10
2 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the same as 
1,12*10
-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not 
consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential 
ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
==PAGE:406==
 
 
 
 
MD-23167-EN | MicroShade A/S | Page 7 of 10 
 
Confidential 
 
RESOURCE USE PER 1 m2 MicroShade® 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
4,63E+01 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
PERM 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
PERT 
[MJ] 
4,63E+01 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
2,21E+02 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
2,21E+02 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
SM 
[kg] 
1,17E-01 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
RSF 
[MJ] 
6,45E-02 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
FW 
[m3] 
1,21E-01 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of 
non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of 
secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh 
water 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the 
same as 1,12*10-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
 
 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER 1 m
2 MicroShade® 
 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D   
HWD 
[kg] 
5,86E-01 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND   
NHWD 
[kg] 
1,13E+01 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND   
RWD 
[kg] 
8,30E-04 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND   
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND   
MFR 
[kg] 
1,11E-02 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND   
MER 
[kg] 
3,68E-04 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND   
EEE 
[MJ] 
6,74E-02 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND   
EET 
[MJ] 
1,61E-01 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND   
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components 
for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported 
thermal energy 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*10
2 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the same as 
1,12*10
-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
==PAGE:407==
 
 
 
 
MD-23167-EN | MicroShade A/S | Page 8 of 10 
 
Confidential 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER 1 m2 MicroShade® 
 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in 
product 
kg C 
0E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in 
accompanying packaging 
kg C 
5,50E-02 
Note 
1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg a CO2 
 
 
Additional information 
LCA interpretation 
The figure below illustrates the contributions by life cycle phase. It is noticeable that the majority of impacts 
occur in A1, where the impacts are caused by the purchased raw materials to be used in the production of 
MicroShade®. The exception is in the GWP-total category, where the A3 phase is the most impactful due 
to the emissions from the electricity use. A2 has a relatively small impact compared to A1 and A3. 
 
Focusing on GWP–total, it is observed that the A3 phase is the biggest contributor, followed closely by the 
A1 phase. The primary contributors across the phases are electricity use (40%), production of plastic 
granulate (16.7%), and waste incineration (11.5%). Other noteworthy contributors include the production 
of epoxy resins (10.2%) and potassium carbonate (3.8%). 
In A2, the GWP-total impact naturally results from combusting fossil fuels. The most impactful transport 
process involves transporting the special polymers from a supplier in Italy to MicroShade’s site in Denmark 
using a smaller truck/van. This process accounts for almost 4% of the GWP–total. 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Contribution by Life Cycle Phase
Raw Materials - A1
Transport - A2
Manufacture - A3
==PAGE:408==
 
 
 
 
MD-23167-EN | MicroShade A/S | Page 9 of 10 
 
Confidential 
 
Indoor air  
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to indoor air because the 
horizontal 
standards 
on 
the 
relevant 
measurements are not available. Read more in 
EN15804+A1 chapter 7.4.1. 
Soil and water 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to soil and water because 
the 
horizontal 
standards 
on 
the 
relevant 
measurements are not available. Read more in 
EN15804+A1 chapter 7.4.2. 
 
 
==PAGE:409==
 
 
 
 
MD-23167-EN | MicroShade A/S | Page 10 of 10 
 
Confidential 
References 
 
Publisher 
 
 
www.epddanmark.dk 
Template version 2023.1 
Programme operator 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA-practitioner 
 
 
Emil Fraenkel and Janus Kirkeby 
Ramboll Denmark 
Hannemanns Allé 53 
 
LCA software /background data 
 
Umberto 11 incl. ecoinvent EN15804 
3.9.1 database 
3rd party verifier 
Guangli Du 
BUILD – The Department of the Built 
Environment, Aalborg University Copenhagen 
gdu@build.aau.dk 
 
 
General programme instructions 
General Programme Instructions, version 2.0, spring 2020 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
EN 15804 
DS/EN 15804 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental  
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products” 
 
EN 15942 
DS/EN 15942:2011 – ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – 
Communication format business-to-business” 
 
ISO 14025 
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ”Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmental declarations – 
Principles and procedures” 
 
ISO 14040 
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ”Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and 
framework” 
 
ISO 14044 
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ”Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and 
guidelines” 
==PAGE:410==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In accordance with EN 15804+A2 and ISO 14025 
 
[Collective EPD: Loose fill cellulose insulation] 
 
Date of publication: 15/12/2023 
Version: 1 
Environmental Product Declaration 
==PAGE:411==
 
 
 
P a g e  | 2 
1. GENERAL INFORMATION 
Product name: 
Loose fill cellulose insulation 
• 
Open blowing for attics, 
• 
Blown into pitched roofs, 
• 
Blown into walls. 
Date of Issue: 
December 2023 
Date of verification: 
11 December 2023 
Validity: 
5 years 
Product unit: 
1 kg or 1 m2, depending on the application 
Owner of the declaration 
European Cellulose Insulation Association (ECIA) 
Dreve du Pressoir 38 1190 Forest Brussels, Belgium 
www.ecia.eu.com 
Conductor of the LCA 
WeLOOP 
254 rue du Bourg, 59130 Lambersart, France 
https://www.weloop.org/fr/ 
Verification: 
Independent verification by external third-party verifier Dr Frank 
Werner 
Type of EPD 
Collective 
Cradle-to-grave with module D 
 
Accountabilities for PCR, LCA and independent, third-party verification 
Product Category Rules (PCR) 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the Core Product Category Rules (PCR) 
Product Category Rules (PCR): Construction products, PCR 2019:14, version 1.2.5 ; 
Thermal insulation products (EN 16783:2017), C-PCR-005 (TO PCR 2019:14), version 2019-12-20 ; Thermal 
insulation products — Environmental Product declarations (EPD) — Product Category Rules (PCR) 
complementary to EN 15804 for factory made and in-situ formed products, prEN 16783:2022  
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
LCA accountability: Dr. Carolina Szablewski, Dr. Naeem Adibi, Sam Herlicq WeLOOP 
Third-party verification 
Independent third-party verification of the declaration and data, according to ISO 14025:2006, via: 
 
☒ EPD verification by individual verifier 
      
Third-party verifier: Dr. Frank Werner 
==PAGE:412==
 
 
 
P a g e  | 3 
1.1 PRODUCT DESCRIPTION 
The loose fill cellulose insulation products are made from recovered papers (including different recovered 
products from the paper industry like newsprint, papers, cardboard and fibre-based packaging) with mineral 
inorganic flame retardant additives. This insulation material is used for thermal and acoustic insulation of 
buildings. It is used to insulate walls, roofs, attics and mezzanine floors. Loose fill cellulose insulation products 
may be reused or recycled at the end-of-life. Products are recovered using a reverse installation process. 
1.2 GOAL AND SCOPE 
This study aims to gather data regarding the environmental impacts of loose fill cellulose insulation products 
during their lifespan, improving the understanding of the environmental impact over the complete lifecycle. 
The results can be used to eco-design the product. 
Furthermore, the results can be used to inform potential customers about the environmental impact of loose 
fill cellulose insulation products in all European countries. 
1.3 GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE 
The cellulose insulation materials that are assessed in the LCA study are coming from 15 production sites in 
Europe (Austria (2), Belgium (2), Czech Republic, Finland (2), France (2), Germany (2), Spain, Sweden (2) and 
Switzerland) as illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Production sites and markets covered by this EPD 
==PAGE:413==
 
 
 
P a g e  | 4 
1.4 PARTICIPATING COMPANIES 
• 
Aislanat - AISLANAT S.L., Spain (including Aislanat aislante de cellulosa products), 
• 
CIUR – CIUR a.s., Czech Republic (including Climatizer Plus product), 
• 
Climacell - CWA Cellulose Werk, Germany (Including Climacell "s", Climacell Loft and Climacell green 
nature products), 
• 
Ekovilla - Kiiminki, Kuusankoski and Ylistaro, Finland (including Ekovilla, Ekovilla IA, Ekovilla Puru, 
Isonem, Isolet, Nviro GreenWool, Ekovillalevy, Ekovilla Slab and Ekovilla Skivan products), 
• 
Igloo - Igloo France Cellulose (including Cellulose, IGLOO France, Ouatipi, WattLess, Grey Snow, 
CELLULO'PRO products), 
• 
Isocell - CPB AG Belgium, CPH Austria, Dämmstatt GmbH Germany, SCP AB Sweden (including 
Zellulosedämmstoff, Daemmstatt D, Klima-Tec-Flock, Isocell D, Isocell for you and Cellulose 
insulation products), 
• 
Isofloc – isofloc AG, Switzerland (including isofloc LM products), 
• 
ISOPROC – ISOPROC, Belgium (including ISOPROC loose fill insulation product), 
• 
Ouattitude – Ouattitude, France (including Ouattitude, Cloudy Cellulose, IGLOO France S and Isocell 
F products), 
• 
Termex - Termex-Saarijärvi, Finland (including Termex-Selluvilla products), 
• 
Warmfiber - Warmfiber Isolering AB, Sweden (including Warmfiber products), 
• 
Wolfinger – Wolfinger GmbH, Austria (including Wolfinger Zellulosedämmung products). 
 
1.5 REPRESENTATIVENESS OF THE PRODUCTION PROCESS 
This product is made following the companies' production protocols and national standards. The total output 
of the 15 studied production sites represents the main part of cellulose insulation material sold in Europe. 
2. FUNCTIONAL UNIT DESCRIPTION AND PRODUCT INFORMATION 
2.1 DECLARED UNIT 
The declared unit is 1 kg of cellulose loose fill insulation. The average density1 of the product in this EPD  is 41 
kg/m3. The declared unit is used instead of the functional unit when the precise function of the product is not 
defined or not covered among the functional units included in this report. 
2.2 FUNCTIONAL UNITS 
2.2.1 
Functional Unit for Open-Blowing Attics Applications 
Cellulose insulation is installed in open attics using a dry blowing process 
without adding glue or water, as shown in Figure 2. The functional unit in 
open attics is defined as: 
"The thermal insulation of 1m2 of attic (open blowing application), with 
a cellulose loose fill insulation (installed density of 32.0 kg/m3) thickness 
(266 mm) that gives an overall thermal resistance of 7 (m²∙K/W) (R-
value), with a designed lifespan of 50 years". 
 
 
1 Average density is obtained based on weighted average (based on sale volumes) of the declared density provided by the 
participating companies. 
Figure 2: Cellulose insulation in open attics
==PAGE:414==
 
 
 
P a g e  | 5 
Product description 
Average 
Units 
Lowest installed density 
27.3 
kg/m³ 
Highest installed density 
34.2 
kg/m³ 
Average installed density1 
32.0 
kg/m³ 
Lambda value (λ) 
0.038 
W/(m∙K) 
The duration/lifespan of the product 
50 
Years 
Table 1: Characteristics of cellulose insulation in open attic applications 
For open-blowing applications, the settlement of the blown layer is considered in the installed product's 
density. 
2.2.2 
Functional Unit for Pitched Roof Applications 
The cellulose insulation is installed in a pitched roof by blowing dry cellulose into the roof cavity 
(compartment) without adding glue or water, as shown in Figure 3. The functional unit of the pitched roof 
application is defined as: 
"The thermal insulation of 1m2 of pitched roof, with a cellulose loose fill insulation (installed density of 49.0 
kg/m3) thickness (266 mm) that gives an overall thermal resistance of 7 (m²∙K/W) (R-value), with a designed 
lifespan of 50 years". 
 
 
Figure 3: Cellulose insulation in a pitched roof 
Product description 
Average 
Units 
Lowest installed density 
43.9 
kg/m³ 
Highest installed density 
52.0 
kg/m³ 
Average installed density2 
49.0 
kg/m³ 
Lambda value (λ) 
0.038 
W/(m∙K) 
The duration/lifespan of the product 
50 
Years 
Table 2: Characteristics of cellulose insulation in pitched roof applications 
 
2.2.3 
Functional Unit for Wall Applications 
The cellulose insulation is installed in walls by blowing dry cellulose into the closed wall cavity (compartment), 
as shown in Figure 4. The functional unit of the wall applications is defined as:  
 
2 Average density is obtained based on weighted average (based on sale volumes) of the declared density provided by the 
participating companies. 
==PAGE:415==
 
 
 
P a g e  | 6 
"The thermal insulation of 1m2 of wall, with a cellulose loose fill insulation 
(installed density of 50.7 kg/m3) thickness (133 mm) that gives an overall 
thermal resistance of 3.5 (m²∙K)/W (R-value), with a designed lifespan of 50 
years". 
Product description 
Average 
Units 
Lowest installed density 
46.5 
kg/m³ 
Highest installed density 
56.9 
kg/m³ 
Average gross installed density2 
50.7 
kg/m³ 
Lambda value (λ) 
0.038 
W/(m.K) 
The duration/life span of the product 
50 
Years 
Table 3: Characteristics of cellulose insulation in wall applications 
2.3 COMPOSITION AND CONTENT 
The main components of the product are provided in Table 4. 
Material input 
% 
Recovered paper 
85-95 
Inorganic flame retardants 
5-15 
Table 4: Composition of cellulose insulation product 
The information on the lifespan of loose fill cellulose insulation products is provided by ECIA. If installed 
correctly according to the manufacturers' guidelines, loose fill cellulose insulation products need no further 
maintenance, repair, replacement or refurbishment during the full life span of the product. If the product is 
applied and maintained following the installation and maintenance instructions, the life span of 50 years is 
applicable based on the durability and the construction products directive from the European Commission. 
The loose fill cellulose insulation contains boric acid – SVHC substance registered at ECHA – in a concentration 
above 0.1% of final product mass, as a fire retardant. 
3. LCA STUDY 
3.1 SOFTWARE 
When calculating the environmental impact categories, SimaPro version 9.5.0.0 (July 2023) was used, as well 
as environmental data from the Ecoinvent database, version 3.9, released in November 2021. 
3.2 INFORMATION ON ALLOCATION 
No co-product allocation occurs in the product foreground system. No multi-input allocation occurs in the 
product system. The allocations from the background database are kept intact. 
3.3 INFORMATION ON CUT-OFF 
The companies reported data, and some plausibility and completeness assessments and checks were 
conducted for some inputs. For a few remaining data, no extended assessment was conducted, therefore 
accepting data gaps. In all cases, it is assumed that the cut-off criteria of EN 15804+A2 are met. 
Figure 4: Cellulose insulation in a wall 
==PAGE:416==
 
 
 
P a g e  | 7 
3.4 INFORMATION ON EXCLUDED PROCESSES 
The following processes were excluded from the inventory: 
- 
The effects of capital goods and infrastructural processes.  
- 
Flows related to human activities such as employee transport and administration activity. 
3.5 INFORMATION ON BIOGENIC CARBON MODELLING 
Loose fill cellulose insulation products are mainly made from recovered sorted papers with high biogenic 
carbon content. As long as the product is in use, this carbon is stored in the product. For loose fill cellulose 
insulation products, the amount is assessed based on the following formula and is provided in the overall LCA 
results: 
CO2 content kg in air = (paper content) / 1.1 (factor 10% > 0% moisture content) x 0,444 (IPCC, 2006) (carbon 
content) x 3,67 (mol ratio CO2 – C); presented in kg CO2 / kg cellulose materials. 
3.6 ADDITIONAL OR DEVIATING CHARACTERISATION FACTORS 
The impact assessment method used in this study is the EN 15804 + A2 (Simapro software) using the EF3.1 
indicators from the European Commission adjusted according to the requirement of EN 15804+A2.  
3.7 VARIABILITY CHECK 
For this EPD, the average results over modules A1-A3 were compared to variations of individual company results 
for three indicators: Climate Change – Total, Climate Change - Biogenic and Total Use of Non-Renewable 
Primary Energy Resources (PENRT). Variations are mainly due to the differences in proportions of virgin 
materials (paper versus additives). The difference in electricity mix between the different producers is also 
responsible for variations in PENRT. Average and individual results obtained are presented, and variations are 
documented in the confidential background report.  
3.8 INFORMATION ON MOST INFLUENCING PARAMETERS IN THE LCA 
- 
Composition of products (share of recycled paper content in the product), 
- 
Composition of additives, 
- 
Energy consumption and energy source in the manufacturing plant, 
- 
Density of product (specific for applications) and lambda value, 
- 
Transport density and distance (compression rate of product), 
- 
End-of-life scenario. 
3.9 DESCRIPTION OF THE MAIN DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE PRODUCTS COVERED BY THIS EPD 
- 
Similar composition and manufacturing processes, 
- 
Different energy mix for the production (company or country mix), 
- 
Similar installation and end-of-life, adapted to the country where the product is sold. 
3.10 COMPARABILITY 
A comparison or evaluation of EPD data is only possible if all datasets are made following EN 15804, applying 
the same relevant product category rules and for the same modules. 
==PAGE:417==
 
 
 
P a g e  | 8 
4. DATA 
4.1 DATA QUALITY 
The data used for the LCA are for a group of products manufactured in multiple production sites. The data 
about the process and products are based upon frequent contact with the production sites to guarantee that 
this EPD is based on the most up-to-date production data. Missing data was collected from Ecoinvent version 
3.9. 
4.2 PERIOD OF DATA COLLECTION 
The data was collected and updated in 2022 based on specific company impacts. Separate data was collected 
from each manufacturing site/company. The results are averaged according to the quantities sold by each 
plant after being assessed individually. 
4.3 DATABASE USED FOR BACKGROUND DATA 
Ecoinvent version 3.9 was used to cover the required background data. 
4.4 ENERGY MIX 
Company-specific energy mix (or country-specific grid mix) was used to produce the insulation product. The 
country of installation's energy mix is considered for installing the product in the building. The energy mix of 
the product's final application market is used to declare the benefits beyond the system boundaries (module D). 
4.5 QUALITATIVE NFORMATION 
Loose fill cellulose insulation products from the members of ECIA are made according to the production 
protocols of the companies, European technical specifications and their national standards. 
5. SYSTEM BOUNDARIES 
Product stage 
Construction 
installation stage 
Use 
stage 
End-of-life stage 
Beyond the 
system 
boundaries 
Raw materials 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Construction installation 
stage 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy use 
Operational water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Reuse-Recovery- 
Recycling-potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
☒ 
Table 5: Modules over the life cycle of a building material as determined in EN 15804+A2 
X = included in the EPD; MND = module not declared; IRR = module not relevant 
==PAGE:418==
 
 
 
P a g e  | 9 
6. LIFE CYCLE STAGES 
 
Figure 5: Flowchart illustrating the life cycle of cellulose insulation products 
6.1 PRODUCT STAGE (A1-3) 
The recovered paper is transported to the cellulose insulation production plant. The impurities are separated, 
and the paper is shredded. Paper, which still contains tiny amounts of impurities, is recycled into the process. 
When milling the shredded paper, fire retardants are added. The final product is packed and transported to 
the retailer or the construction site. 
6.2 CONSTRUCTION STAGE (A4-5) 
6.2.1 
Transport to building site (A4) 
The final product is packed and transported to the construction site. Wherever the case, the transport is 
volume-based as the insulation product has a low density. A compression factor of the material during 
transportation is considered. There is a wide variety of distances and vehicles used by the producers. The 
average transport distance from production to the building site is 353 km based on the average market share 
for loose fill cellulose insulation. 
6.2.2 
Installation of the product in the building (A5) 
The loose fill cellulose insulation is applied into the construction by a machine. Therefore, the energy 
consumption of the blowing or spraying machine is considered. 
6.3 USE STAGE (B1-7) 
If installed correctly according to the manufacturers' and suppliers' guidelines, loose fill cellulose insulation 
products need no further maintenance, repair, replacement or refurbishment during the full lifespan of the 
product. If the product is applied following the installation instructions, a lifespan of 50 years is applicable. 
6.4 END-OF-LIFE STAGE (C1-4) 
6.4.1 
Demolition (C1) 
The dismantling is very easy: the cellulose material can be sucked with a hose to a truck and may be reused or 
recycled if appropriate. This process is a fast reverse of the installation process. Although cellulose is easily 
==PAGE:419==
 
 
 P a g e  | 10 
reclaimed as recyclable and reusable, the current practice in each country is used as the basis for the modelling 
of the product. 
6.4.2 
Transport (C2) 
Assumptions for the transport phase: 50 km to the landfilling site and 100 km to the incineration site. Transport 
with a Euro 5, with a 16-32 t total weight lorry. 
6.4.3 
Waste processing (C3-C4) 
Although cellulose is easily recyclable and reusable, these scenarios are not yet mainstreamed in Europe. The 
waste scenario is defined as incineration with energy recovery, landfilling and a small share of recycling. 
Market share in different EU countries and different scenarios per country have been used. 
6.5 BENEFITS AND LOADS BEYOND THE SYSTEM BOUNDARY (D) 
The avoided energy production due to the incineration of the loose fill cellulose insulation products is 
considered a benefit beyond the system boundary. Avoided production of virgin materials due to recycling is 
also considered in this module. 
7. LIFE CYCLE ASSESSMENT RESULTS FOR LOOSE FILL CELLULOSE INSULATION PRODUCT 
7.1 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS FOR LOOSE FILL CELLULOSE INSULATION PRODUCTS 
The results of the LCIA are calculated by merging the results at the product level using the market shares. The 
results for 1kg of average insulation product are provided in Table 6, Table 7, Table 8, and Table 9. 
==PAGE:420==
 
 
 P a g e  | 11 
 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 
Refurbishment 
B6  Operational  
energy use 
B7  Operational  
water use 
C1 
Deconstruction / 
demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
 
GWP total 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
-1.28E+00 
4.23E-02 
-3.83E-02 
6.41E-02 
1.10E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.44E-03 
2.98E-02 
1.22E+00 
1.39E-01 
-3.86E-01 
 
GWP fossil 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
5.86E-02 
4.23E-02 
5.47E-02 
6.41E-02 
1.66E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.44E-03 
2.98E-02 
1.84E-02 
1.33E-03 
-2.31E-01 
 
GWP biogenic 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
-1.34E+00 
0.00E+00 
-9.34E-02 
0.00E+00 
9.34E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.20E+00 
1.38E-01 
-1.54E-01 
 
GWP luluc 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
9.35E-05 
2.02E-05 
3.98E-04 
3.05E-05 
8.04E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.91E-07 
1.42E-05 
1.67E-05 
3.10E-07 
-3.45E-04 
 
ODP  
(kg CFC 11 
equiv/FU) 
1.22E-09 
8.95E-10 
1.04E-09 
1.36E-09 
9.65E-11 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.90E-11 
6.32E-10 
4.57E-09 
3.30E-11 
-8.27E-09 
 
AP  
(mol H+ eq/FU) 
9.16E-04 
1.51E-04 
2.40E-04 
2.09E-04 
2.27E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.02E-05 
9.47E-05 
3.24E-04 
1.99E-05 
-5.14E-04 
 
EP - freshwater 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
2.87E-06 
3.29E-07 
2.30E-06 
4.99E-07 
1.74E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.57E-08 
2.32E-07 
5.56E-07 
1.18E-08 
-7.36E-06 
 
EP - marine 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
9.48E-05 
4.99E-05 
5.66E-05 
7.07E-05 
7.80E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.86E-05 
3.22E-05 
1.41E-04 
1.75E-04 
-9.55E-05 
 
EP - terrestrial 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
1.05E-03 
5.35E-04 
6.56E-04 
7.56E-04 
8.23E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.03E-04 
3.44E-04 
1.57E-03 
4.34E-05 
-1.10E-03 
 
POCP  
(kg Ethene 
equiv/FU) 
3.46E-04 
2.16E-04 
2.51E-04 
3.10E-04 
2.58E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.00E-05 
1.41E-04 
4.12E-04 
7.21E-05 
-5.13E-04 
 
ADP 
Elements (kg 
Sb equiv/FU) 
3.59E-05 
1.23E-07 
3.11E-07 
1.96E-07 
1.09E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.51E-09 
9.33E-08 
8.56E-08 
7.27E-09 
-6.52E-06 
 
ADP 
fossil fuels 
(MJ/FU) 
9.17E-01 
5.90E-01 
1.41E+00 
8.88E-01 
7.78E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.68E-02 
4.12E-01 
1.77E-01 
2.88E-02 
-4.71E+00 
 
WDP (m³ water 
eq deprived 
/FU) 
4.52E-02 
2.59E-03 
2.10E-02 
3.75E-03 
7.20E-04 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.25E-04 
1.70E-03 
9.08E-03 
1.49E-04 
-3.45E-02 
Table 6: Environmental impacts for 1 kg of loose fill insulation product 
GWP = GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL (CLIMATE CHANGE); ODP = OZONE DEPLETION POTENTIAL; AP = ACIDIFICATION POTENTIAL FOR SOIL AND WATER; EP = EUTROPHICATION POTENTIAL; POCP = PHOTOCHEMICAL OZONE 
CREATION; ADPE = ABIOTIC DEPLETION POTENTIAL – ELEMENTS; ADPF = ABIOTIC DEPLETION POTENTIAL – FOSSIL FUELS 
==PAGE:421==
 
 
 P a g e  | 12 
 
 
 
 
 
Production 
Construction process 
stage 
Use stage 
End-of-life stage 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction 
/ demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
PERE 
(MJ/UF, net calorific 
value) 
1.07E-01 
8.91E-03 
1.04E+00 
1.36E-02 
4.44E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.23E-04 
6.84E-03 
1.04E+01 
5.15E-03 
-9.32E-01 
PERM 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
1.33E+01 
0.00E+00 
7.56E-01 
0.00E+00 
-6.57E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-1.19E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.77E+00 
PERT 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
1.34E+01 
8.91E-03 
1.80E+00 
1.36E-02 
-2.13E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.23E-04 
6.84E-03 
-1.52E+00 
5.15E-03 
8.35E-01 
PENRE 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
1.08E+00 
6.00E-01 
1.52E+00 
9.03E-01 
3.22E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.67E-02 
4.49E-01 
2.18E-01 
2.91E-02 
-5.23E+00 
PENRM 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.90E-01 
0.00E+00 
-3.38E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.93E-02 
PENRT 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
1.08E+00 
6.00E-01 
1.91E+00 
9.03E-01 
-1.56E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.67E-02 
4.49E-01 
2.18E-01 
2.91E-02 
-5.13E+00 
SM 
(kg/UF) 
9.13E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-5.20E-04 
0.00E+00 
-1.04E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
(m³ eq. water /UF) 
-6.10E-03 
-2.07E-04 
-5.45E-03 
-3.27E-04 
-1.88E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-1.15E-05 
-1.66E-04 
-5.09E-04 
3.29E-05 
7.04E-02 
Table 7: Environmental impacts for 1 kg of loose fill insulation product - resource use indicators 
PERE = USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY EXCLUDING RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PERM = USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; 
PERT = TOTAL USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES; PENRE = USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY EXCLUDING NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PENRM = 
USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PENRT = TOTAL USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES; SM = USE OF SECONDARY MATERIAL; RSF = USE OF RENEWABLE 
SECONDARY FUELS; NRSF = USE OF NON-RENEWABLE SECONDARY FUELS; FW = NET USE OF FRESH WATER 
==PAGE:422==
 
 
 P a g e  | 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction / 
demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, recovery, 
recycling 
Hazardous waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 1.78E-06 0.00E+00 3.57E-09 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
Non hazardous waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 3.72E-05 0.00E+00 8.66E-03 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 1.05E-01 0.00E+00 
Radioactive waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 7.00E-09 0.00E+00 3.50E-11 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.22E-09 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
Components for reuse (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
Materials for recycling (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 4.96E-07 0.00E+00 1.93E-02 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 1.16E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 3.76E-02 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 7.11E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
Exported energy (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.00E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 3.11E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
Table 8: Environmental impacts for 1 kg of loose fill insulation product - waste categories & output flows 
==PAGE:423==
 
 
 P a g e  | 14 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Production 
Construction 
process stage 
Use stage 
End-of-life stage 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction 
/ demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
 
Particulate 
matter 
(desease 
inc.) 
1.12E-08 
3.57E-09 
2.95E-09 
5.12E-09 
2.62E-10 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.12E-09 
2.30E-09 
2.46E-09 
1.89E-10 
-3.76E-09 
 
Ionising 
radiation 
(kBq U-235 
eq) 
3.64E-03 
2.90E-04 
6.87E-03 
4.42E-04 
6.71E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.16E-05 
2.06E-04 
4.49E-04 
1.29E-04 
-2.81E-02 
 
Ecotoxicity, 
freshwater 
(CTUe) 
3.77E-01 
3.11E-01 
2.29E-01 
4.69E-01 
2.84E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.89E-02 
2.18E-01 
1.74E+00 
4.66E-01 
-4.55E-01 
 
Human 
toxicity, 
cancer 
(CTUh) 
3.72E-11 
1.84E-11 
7.33E-11 
2.81E-11 
1.03E-11 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.33E-12 
1.32E-11 
2.29E-10 
1.59E-12 
-9.68E-11 
 
Human 
toxicity, non-
cancer 
(CTUh) 
1.37E-09 
5.45E-10 
7.67E-10 
8.22E-10 
9.55E-11 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.92E-11 
3.81E-10 
6.26E-10 
3.72E-10 
-1.97E-09 
 
Land use (Pt) 
3.67E-01 
4.44E-01 
3.93E+00 
5.78E-01 
3.67E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.79E-03 
2.45E-01 
5.10E-02 
6.04E-02 
-2.48E+00 
Table 9: Environmental impacts for 1 kg of loose fill insulation product - additional indicators 
HTCE = HUMAN TOXICITY – CANCER EFFECTS;  
HTNCE = HUMAN TOXICITY – NON CANCER EFFECTS;  
ETF = ECOTOXICITY – FRESHWATER;  
PM = PARTICULATE MATTER;  
IRHH = IONIZING RADIATION – HUMAN HEALTH EFFECTS 
==PAGE:424==
 
 
 P a g e  | 15 
 
7.2 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS FOR LOOSE FILL CELLULOSE INSULATION PRODUCTS IN OPEN-BLOWING 
ATTICS APPLICATIONS 
The results of the LCIA are calculated for each application by merging the results at the product level using the 
market shares. The results for 1m2 of insulated open-blowing attics (with an R-value equal to 7 m².K/W) are 
provided inTable 10, Table 11, Table 12 and Table 13. The average installed density3 used for the calculation 
is 32.0 kg/m3 in an open-blowing application.
 
3 Average density is obtained based on weighted average (based on sale volume) of the declared density provided by the 
participating companies.  
==PAGE:425==
 
 
 P a g e  | 16 
 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 
Refurbishment 
B6  Operational  
energy use 
B7  Operational  
water use 
C1 
Deconstruction / 
demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
 
GWP total 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
-1.10E+01 
3.63E-01 
-3.28E-01 
5.49E-01 
9.42E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.80E-02 
2.56E-01 
1.04E+01 
1.19E+00 
-3.31E+00 
 
GWP fossil 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
5.02E-01 
3.63E-01 
4.69E-01 
5.49E-01 
1.42E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.80E-02 
2.55E-01 
1.58E-01 
1.14E-02 
-1.98E+00 
 
GWP biogenic 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
-1.15E+01 
0.00E+00 
-8.00E-01 
0.00E+00 
8.00E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.03E+01 
1.18E+00 
-1.32E+00 
 
GWP luluc 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
8.01E-04 
1.73E-04 
3.41E-03 
2.61E-04 
6.89E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.20E-06 
1.22E-04 
1.43E-04 
2.66E-06 
-2.95E-03 
 
ODP  
(kg CFC 11 
equiv/FU) 
1.05E-08 
7.66E-09 
8.94E-09 
1.16E-08 
8.26E-10 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.91E-10 
5.41E-09 
3.92E-08 
2.83E-10 
-7.09E-08 
 
AP  
(mol H+ eq/FU) 
7.84E-03 
1.30E-03 
2.05E-03 
1.79E-03 
1.94E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.44E-04 
8.11E-04 
2.77E-03 
1.70E-04 
-4.41E-03 
 
EP - freshwater 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
2.46E-05 
2.82E-06 
1.97E-05 
4.28E-06 
1.49E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.34E-07 
1.99E-06 
4.76E-06 
1.01E-07 
-6.30E-05 
 
EP - marine 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
8.12E-04 
4.27E-04 
4.85E-04 
6.05E-04 
6.68E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.59E-04 
2.76E-04 
1.21E-03 
1.50E-03 
-8.19E-04 
 
EP - terrestrial 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
9.00E-03 
4.58E-03 
5.62E-03 
6.48E-03 
7.05E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.73E-03 
2.95E-03 
1.35E-02 
3.71E-04 
-9.40E-03 
 
POCP  
(kg Ethene 
equiv/FU) 
2.97E-03 
1.85E-03 
2.15E-03 
2.66E-03 
2.21E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.14E-04 
1.21E-03 
3.53E-03 
6.17E-04 
-4.40E-03 
 
ADP 
Elements (kg 
Sb equiv/FU) 
3.07E-04 
1.06E-06 
2.66E-06 
1.68E-06 
9.30E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.30E-08 
7.99E-07 
7.34E-07 
6.23E-08 
-5.58E-05 
 
ADP 
fossil fuels 
(MJ/FU) 
7.85E+00 
5.06E+00 
1.21E+01 
7.61E+00 
6.67E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.86E-01 
3.53E+00 
1.52E+00 
2.47E-01 
-4.03E+01 
 
WDP (m³ water 
eq deprived 
/FU) 
3.88E-01 
2.22E-02 
1.80E-01 
3.21E-02 
6.17E-03 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.07E-03 
1.46E-02 
7.78E-02 
1.28E-03 
-2.95E-01 
Table 10: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in open blowing attics applications 
GWP = GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL (CLIMATE CHANGE); ODP = OZONE DEPLETION POTENTIAL; AP = ACIDIFICATION POTENTIAL FOR SOIL AND WATER; EP = EUTROPHICATION POTENTIAL; POCP = PHOTOCHEMICAL OZONE 
CREATION; ADPE = ABIOTIC DEPLETION POTENTIAL – ELEMENTS; ADPF = ABIOTIC DEPLETION POTENTIAL – FOSSIL FUELS 
==PAGE:426==
 
 
 P a g e  | 17 
 
 
 
 
 
Production 
Construction process 
stage 
Use stage 
End-of-life stage 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction 
/ demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
PERE 
(MJ/UF, net calorific 
value) 
9.18E-01 
7.63E-02 
8.91E+00 
1.17E-01 
3.80E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.77E-03 
5.86E-02 
8.89E+01 
4.41E-02 
-7.98E+00 
PERM 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
1.14E+02 
0.00E+00 
6.48E+00 
0.00E+00 
-5.63E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-1.02E+02 
0.00E+00 
1.51E+01 
PERT 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
1.15E+02 
7.63E-02 
1.54E+01 
1.17E-01 
-1.83E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.77E-03 
5.86E-02 
-1.31E+01 
4.41E-02 
7.16E+00 
PENRE 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
9.24E+00 
5.14E+00 
1.30E+01 
7.74E+00 
2.76E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.86E-01 
3.84E+00 
1.86E+00 
2.49E-01 
-4.48E+01 
PENRM 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.34E+00 
0.00E+00 
-2.89E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.51E-01 
PENRT 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
9.24E+00 
5.14E+00 
1.64E+01 
7.74E+00 
-1.33E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.86E-01 
3.84E+00 
1.86E+00 
2.49E-01 
-4.40E+01 
SM 
(kg/UF) 
7.82E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-4.45E-03 
0.00E+00 
-8.91E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
(m³ eq. water /UF) 
-5.23E-02 
-1.77E-03 
-4.67E-02 
-2.80E-03 
-1.61E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-9.84E-05 
-1.42E-03 
-4.36E-03 
2.82E-04 
6.03E-01 
Table 11: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in open blowing attics applications - resource use indicators 
PERE = USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY EXCLUDING RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PERM = USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; 
PERT = TOTAL USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES; PENRE = USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY EXCLUDING NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PENRM = 
USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PENRT = TOTAL USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES; SM = USE OF SECONDARY MATERIAL; RSF = USE OF RENEWABLE 
SECONDARY FUELS; NRSF = USE OF NON-RENEWABLE SECONDARY FUELS; FW = NET USE OF FRESH WATER 
==PAGE:427==
 
 
 P a g e  | 18 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction / 
demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, recovery, 
recycling 
Hazardous waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 1.53E-05 0.00E+00 3.06E-08 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Non hazardous waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 3.19E-04 0.00E+00 7.42E-02 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.01E-01 
0.00E+00 
Radioactive waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 5.99E-08 0.00E+00 3.00E-10 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.33E-08 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Components for reuse (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for recycling (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 4.25E-06 0.00E+00 1.65E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
9.91E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 3.22E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
6.10E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 1.71E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
2.66E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Table 12: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in open blowing attics applications - waste categories & output flows 
==PAGE:428==
 
 
 P a g e  | 19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Production 
Construction 
process stage 
Use stage 
End-of-life stage 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction 
/ demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
 
Particulate 
matter 
(desease 
inc.) 
9.64E-08 
3.06E-08 
2.53E-08 
4.38E-08 
2.25E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.60E-09 
1.97E-08 
2.11E-08 
1.62E-09 
-3.22E-08 
 
Ionising 
radiation 
(kBq U-235 
eq) 
3.12E-02 
2.48E-03 
5.89E-02 
3.79E-03 
5.75E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.95E-05 
1.77E-03 
3.84E-03 
1.11E-03 
-2.40E-01 
 
Ecotoxicity, 
freshwater 
(CTUe) 
3.23E+00 
2.66E+00 
1.96E+00 
4.01E+00 
2.44E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.48E-01 
1.86E+00 
1.49E+01 
3.99E+00 
-3.89E+00 
 
Human 
toxicity, 
cancer 
(CTUh) 
3.19E-10 
1.58E-10 
6.28E-10 
2.41E-10 
8.80E-11 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.14E-11 
1.13E-10 
1.96E-09 
1.37E-11 
-8.29E-10 
 
Human 
toxicity, non-
cancer 
(CTUh) 
1.17E-08 
4.67E-09 
6.57E-09 
7.04E-09 
8.18E-10 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.51E-10 
3.27E-09 
5.37E-09 
3.18E-09 
-1.69E-08 
 
Land use (Pt) 
3.14E+00 
3.81E+00 
3.37E+01 
4.95E+00 
3.14E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.25E-02 
2.10E+00 
4.37E-01 
5.17E-01 
-2.12E+01 
Table 13: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in open blowing attics applications - additional indicators 
HTCE = HUMAN TOXICITY – CANCER EFFECTS;  
HTNCE = HUMAN TOXICITY – NON CANCER EFFECTS;  
ETF = ECOTOXICITY – FRESHWATER;  
PM = PARTICULATE MATTER;  
IRHH = IONIZING RADIATION – HUMAN HEALTH EFFECTS 
==PAGE:429==
 
 
 P a g e  | 20 
 
7.3 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS FOR LOOSE FILL CELLULOSE INSULATION PRODUCTS IN ROOF 
APPLICATIONS (PITCHED ROOF) 
The results of the LCIA are calculated for each application by merging the results at the product level using the 
market shares. The results for 1m2 of the insulated pitched roof (with an R-value equal to 7 m².K/W) are 
provided in Table 14, Table 15, Table 16 and Table 17.The average installed density4 used for the calculation 
is 49.0 kg/m3 in a pitched roof application.
 
4 Average density is obtained based on weighted average (based on sale volume) of the declared density provided by the 
participating companies.  
==PAGE:430==
 
 
 P a g e  | 21 
 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 
Refurbishment 
B6  Operational  
energy use 
B7  Operational  
water use 
C1 
Deconstruction / 
demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
 
GWP total 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
-1.68E+01 
5.56E-01 
-5.02E-01 
8.41E-01 
1.44E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.83E-02 
3.92E-01 
1.60E+01 
1.83E+00 
-5.07E+00 
 
GWP fossil 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
7.69E-01 
5.55E-01 
7.18E-01 
8.41E-01 
2.18E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.83E-02 
3.91E-01 
2.42E-01 
1.74E-02 
-3.04E+00 
 
GWP biogenic 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
-1.76E+01 
0.00E+00 
-1.23E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.23E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.58E+01 
1.81E+00 
-2.03E+00 
 
GWP luluc 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
1.23E-03 
2.65E-04 
5.22E-03 
4.00E-04 
1.06E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.44E-06 
1.87E-04 
2.19E-04 
4.07E-06 
-4.52E-03 
 
ODP  
(kg CFC 11 
equiv/FU) 
1.60E-08 
1.17E-08 
1.37E-08 
1.78E-08 
1.27E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.05E-10 
8.29E-09 
6.00E-08 
4.33E-10 
-1.09E-07 
 
AP  
(mol H+ eq/FU) 
1.20E-02 
1.99E-03 
3.14E-03 
2.75E-03 
2.98E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.27E-04 
1.24E-03 
4.25E-03 
2.61E-04 
-6.75E-03 
 
EP - freshwater 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
3.77E-05 
4.32E-06 
3.02E-05 
6.55E-06 
2.28E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.06E-07 
3.05E-06 
7.30E-06 
1.55E-07 
-9.66E-05 
 
EP - marine 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
1.24E-03 
6.55E-04 
7.43E-04 
9.28E-04 
1.02E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.44E-04 
4.22E-04 
1.85E-03 
2.30E-03 
-1.25E-03 
 
EP - terrestrial 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
1.38E-02 
7.02E-03 
8.60E-03 
9.92E-03 
1.08E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.66E-03 
4.52E-03 
2.07E-02 
5.69E-04 
-1.44E-02 
 
POCP  
(kg Ethene 
equiv/FU) 
4.54E-03 
2.84E-03 
3.29E-03 
4.07E-03 
3.38E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.87E-04 
1.86E-03 
5.41E-03 
9.46E-04 
-6.73E-03 
 
ADP 
Elements (kg 
Sb equiv/FU) 
4.71E-04 
1.62E-06 
4.08E-06 
2.57E-06 
1.42E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.99E-08 
1.22E-06 
1.12E-06 
9.54E-08 
-8.56E-05 
 
ADP 
fossil fuels 
(MJ/FU) 
1.20E+01 
7.75E+00 
1.85E+01 
1.17E+01 
1.02E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.45E-01 
5.41E+00 
2.33E+00 
3.78E-01 
-6.18E+01 
 
WDP (m³ water 
eq deprived 
/FU) 
5.94E-01 
3.40E-02 
2.75E-01 
4.92E-02 
9.46E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.64E-03 
2.23E-02 
1.19E-01 
1.96E-03 
-4.52E-01 
Table 14: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in pitched roof applications 
GWP = GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL (CLIMATE CHANGE); ODP = OZONE DEPLETION POTENTIAL; AP = ACIDIFICATION POTENTIAL FOR SOIL AND WATER; EP = EUTROPHICATION POTENTIAL; POCP = PHOTOCHEMICAL OZONE 
CREATION; ADPE = ABIOTIC DEPLETION POTENTIAL – ELEMENTS; ADPF = ABIOTIC DEPLETION POTENTIAL – FOSSIL FUELS 
==PAGE:431==
 
 
 P a g e  | 22 
 
 
 
 
Production 
Construction process 
stage 
Use stage 
End-of-life stage 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction 
/ demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
PERE 
(MJ/UF, net calorific 
value) 
1.41E+00 
1.17E-01 
1.36E+01 
1.79E-01 
5.83E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.24E-03 
8.98E-02 
1.36E+02 
6.75E-02 
-1.22E+01 
PERM 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
1.75E+02 
0.00E+00 
9.93E+00 
0.00E+00 
-8.63E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-1.56E+02 
0.00E+00 
2.32E+01 
PERT 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
1.76E+02 
1.17E-01 
2.36E+01 
1.79E-01 
-2.80E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.24E-03 
8.98E-02 
-2.00E+01 
6.75E-02 
1.10E+01 
PENRE 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
1.42E+01 
7.88E+00 
1.99E+01 
1.19E+01 
4.23E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.45E-01 
5.89E+00 
2.86E+00 
3.82E-01 
-6.86E+01 
PENRM 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.12E+00 
0.00E+00 
-4.43E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.30E+00 
PENRT 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
1.42E+01 
7.88E+00 
2.51E+01 
1.19E+01 
-2.04E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.45E-01 
5.89E+00 
2.86E+00 
3.82E-01 
-6.73E+01 
SM 
(kg/UF) 
1.20E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-6.82E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.36E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
(m³ eq. water /UF) 
-8.01E-02 
-2.71E-03 
-7.15E-02 
-4.29E-03 
-2.47E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-1.51E-04 
-2.18E-03 
-6.68E-03 
4.32E-04 
9.24E-01 
Table 15: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in pitched roof applications - resource use indicators 
PERE = USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY EXCLUDING RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PERM = USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; 
PERT = TOTAL USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES; PENRE = USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY EXCLUDING NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PENRM = 
USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PENRT = TOTAL USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES; SM = USE OF SECONDARY MATERIAL; RSF = USE OF RENEWABLE 
SECONDARY FUELS; NRSF = USE OF NON-RENEWABLE SECONDARY FUELS; FW = NET USE OF FRESH WATER 
==PAGE:432==
 
 
 P a g e  | 23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction / 
demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, recovery, 
recycling 
Hazardous waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.34E-05 0.00E+00 4.68E-08 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Non hazardous waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 4.89E-04 0.00E+00 1.14E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.38E+00 
0.00E+00 
Radioactive waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 9.18E-08 0.00E+00 4.59E-10 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 8.17E-08 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Components for reuse (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for recycling (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 6.51E-06 0.00E+00 2.53E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
1.52E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 4.93E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
9.34E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.62E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
4.08E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Table 16: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in pitched roof applications - waste categories & output flows 
==PAGE:433==
 
 
 P a g e  | 24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Production 
Construction 
process stage 
Use stage 
End-of-life stage 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction 
/ demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
 
Particulate 
matter 
(desease 
inc.) 
1.48E-07 
4.69E-08 
3.88E-08 
6.72E-08 
3.44E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.47E-08 
3.02E-08 
3.23E-08 
2.48E-09 
-4.93E-08 
 
Ionising 
radiation 
(kBq U-235 
eq) 
4.78E-02 
3.81E-03 
9.02E-02 
5.80E-03 
8.81E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.52E-04 
2.71E-03 
5.89E-03 
1.69E-03 
-3.68E-01 
 
Ecotoxicity, 
freshwater 
(CTUe) 
4.95E+00 
4.08E+00 
3.00E+00 
6.15E+00 
3.73E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.79E-01 
2.86E+00 
2.28E+01 
6.12E+00 
-5.97E+00 
 
Human 
toxicity, 
cancer 
(CTUh) 
4.89E-10 
2.41E-10 
9.62E-10 
3.69E-10 
1.35E-10 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.74E-11 
1.73E-10 
3.01E-09 
2.09E-11 
-1.27E-09 
 
Human 
toxicity, non-
cancer 
(CTUh) 
1.80E-08 
7.15E-09 
1.01E-08 
1.08E-08 
1.25E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.84E-10 
5.01E-09 
8.22E-09 
4.88E-09 
-2.58E-08 
 
Land use (Pt) 
4.81E+00 
5.83E+00 
5.16E+01 
7.59E+00 
4.82E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.98E-02 
3.21E+00 
6.69E-01 
7.93E-01 
-3.25E+01 
Table 17: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in pitched roof applications - additional indicators 
HTCE = HUMAN TOXICITY – CANCER EFFECTS;  
HTNCE = HUMAN TOXICITY – NON CANCER EFFECTS;  
ETF = ECOTOXICITY – FRESHWATER;  
PM = PARTICULATE MATTER;  
IRHH = IONIZING RADIATION – HUMAN HEALTH EFFECTS 
==PAGE:434==
 
 
 P a g e  | 25 
 
7.4 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS FOR LOOSE FILL CELLULOSE INSULATION PRODUCTS IN WALL 
APPLICATIONS 
The results of the LCIA are calculated for each application by merging the results at the product level using the 
market shares. The results for 1m2 of the insulated wall (with an R-value equal to 3.5 m²∙K/W) are provided in 
Table 18, Table 19, Table 20 and Table 21. The average installed density5 used for the calculation is 50.7 kg/m3 
in wall application.
 
5 Average density is obtained based on weighted average (based on sale volume) of the declared density provided by the 
participating companies.  
==PAGE:435==
 
 
 P a g e  | 26 
 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 
Refurbishment 
B6  Operational  
energy use 
B7  Operational  
water use 
C1 
Deconstruction / 
demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
 
GWP total 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
-8.69E+00 
2.87E-01 
-2.60E-01 
4.35E-01 
7.46E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.01E-02 
2.02E-01 
8.28E+00 
9.47E-01 
-2.62E+00 
 
GWP fossil 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
3.98E-01 
2.87E-01 
3.71E-01 
4.35E-01 
1.13E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.01E-02 
2.02E-01 
1.25E-01 
8.99E-03 
-1.57E+00 
 
GWP biogenic 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
-9.09E+00 
0.00E+00 
-6.34E-01 
0.00E+00 
6.34E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.15E+00 
9.38E-01 
-1.05E+00 
 
GWP luluc 
(kg CO2 
equiv/FU) 
6.35E-04 
1.37E-04 
2.70E-03 
2.07E-04 
5.46E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.33E-06 
9.65E-05 
1.13E-04 
2.11E-06 
-2.34E-03 
 
ODP  
(kg CFC 11 
equiv/FU) 
8.28E-09 
6.07E-09 
7.08E-09 
9.21E-09 
6.55E-10 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.68E-10 
4.29E-09 
3.10E-08 
2.24E-10 
-5.61E-08 
 
AP  
(mol H+ eq/FU) 
6.22E-03 
1.03E-03 
1.63E-03 
1.42E-03 
1.54E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.73E-04 
6.43E-04 
2.20E-03 
1.35E-04 
-3.49E-03 
 
EP - freshwater 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
1.95E-05 
2.23E-06 
1.56E-05 
3.39E-06 
1.18E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.06E-07 
1.58E-06 
3.77E-06 
8.01E-08 
-4.99E-05 
 
EP - marine 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
6.43E-04 
3.39E-04 
3.84E-04 
4.80E-04 
5.30E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.26E-04 
2.18E-04 
9.55E-04 
1.19E-03 
-6.49E-04 
 
EP - terrestrial 
(kg (PO4)3- 
equiv/FU) 
7.13E-03 
3.63E-03 
4.45E-03 
5.13E-03 
5.59E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.37E-03 
2.34E-03 
1.07E-02 
2.94E-04 
-7.45E-03 
 
POCP  
(kg Ethene 
equiv/FU) 
2.35E-03 
1.47E-03 
1.70E-03 
2.11E-03 
1.75E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.07E-04 
9.60E-04 
2.80E-03 
4.89E-04 
-3.48E-03 
 
ADP 
Elements (kg 
Sb equiv/FU) 
2.43E-04 
8.36E-07 
2.11E-06 
1.33E-06 
7.37E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.03E-08 
6.33E-07 
5.81E-07 
4.93E-08 
-4.42E-05 
 
ADP 
fossil fuels 
(MJ/FU) 
6.22E+00 
4.01E+00 
9.59E+00 
6.03E+00 
5.28E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.85E-01 
2.80E+00 
1.20E+00 
1.95E-01 
-3.19E+01 
 
WDP (m³ water 
eq deprived 
/FU) 
3.07E-01 
1.76E-02 
1.42E-01 
2.55E-02 
4.89E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.50E-04 
1.15E-02 
6.16E-02 
1.01E-03 
-2.34E-01 
Table 18: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in wall applications 
GWP = GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIAL (CLIMATE CHANGE); ODP = OZONE DEPLETION POTENTIAL; AP = ACIDIFICATION POTENTIAL FOR SOIL AND WATER; EP = EUTROPHICATION POTENTIAL; POCP = PHOTOCHEMICAL OZONE 
CREATION; ADPE = ABIOTIC DEPLETION POTENTIAL – ELEMENTS; ADPF = ABIOTIC DEPLETION POTENTIAL – FOSSIL FUELS 
==PAGE:436==
 
 
 P a g e  | 27 
 
 
 
 
Production 
Construction process 
stage 
Use stage 
End-of-life stage 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction 
/ demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
PERE 
(MJ/UF, net calorific 
value) 
7.27E-01 
6.05E-02 
7.06E+00 
9.26E-02 
3.01E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.19E-03 
4.64E-02 
7.05E+01 
3.49E-02 
-6.33E+00 
PERM 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
9.03E+01 
0.00E+00 
5.13E+00 
0.00E+00 
-4.46E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-8.08E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.20E+01 
PERT 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
9.10E+01 
6.05E-02 
1.22E+01 
9.26E-02 
-1.45E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.19E-03 
4.64E-02 
-1.03E+01 
3.49E-02 
5.67E+00 
PENRE 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
7.32E+00 
4.07E+00 
1.03E+01 
6.13E+00 
2.19E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.85E-01 
3.04E+00 
1.48E+00 
1.98E-01 
-3.55E+01 
PENRM 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.65E+00 
0.00E+00 
-2.29E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.74E-01 
PENRT 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
7.32E+00 
4.07E+00 
1.30E+01 
6.13E+00 
-1.06E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.85E-01 
3.04E+00 
1.48E+00 
1.98E-01 
-3.48E+01 
SM 
(kg/UF) 
6.20E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
(MJ/UF,  net calorific 
value) 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-3.53E-03 
0.00E+00 
-7.06E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
(m³ eq. water /UF) 
-4.14E-02 
-1.40E-03 
-3.70E-02 
-2.22E-03 
-1.28E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-7.80E-05 
-1.13E-03 
-3.45E-03 
2.23E-04 
4.78E-01 
Table 19: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in wall applications - resource use indicators 
PERE = USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY EXCLUDING RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PERM = USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; 
PERT = TOTAL USE OF RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES; PENRE = USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY EXCLUDING NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PENRM = 
USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES USED AS RAW MATERIALS; PENRT = TOTAL USE OF NON-RENEWABLE PRIMARY ENERGY RESOURCES; SM = USE OF SECONDARY MATERIAL; RSF = USE OF RENEWABLE 
SECONDARY FUELS; NRSF = USE OF NON-RENEWABLE SECONDARY FUELS; FW = NET USE OF FRESH WATER 
==PAGE:437==
 
 
 P a g e  | 28 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction / 
demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, recovery, 
recycling 
Hazardous waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 1.21E-05 0.00E+00 2.42E-08 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Non hazardous waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.53E-04 0.00E+00 5.88E-02 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.14E-01 
0.00E+00 
Radioactive waste disposed EU 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 4.75E-08 0.00E+00 2.37E-10 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 4.22E-08 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Components for reuse (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for recycling (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 3.37E-06 0.00E+00 1.31E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
7.86E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
(kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.55E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
4.83E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy (kg/UF) 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 1.36E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
2.11E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Table 20: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in wall applications - waste categories & output flows 
==PAGE:438==
 
 
 P a g e  | 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Production 
Construction 
process stage 
Use stage 
End-of-life stage 
 
 
 
A1 Raw material 
A2 Transport 
A3 manufacturing 
A4 Transport 
A5 Installation 
B1 Use 
B2 Maintenance 
B3 Repairs 
B4 Replacement 
B5 Refurbishment 
B6 Operational  
energy use 
B7 Operational  
water use 
C1 Deconstruction 
/ demolition 
C2 Transport 
C3 Waste 
processing 
C4 Disposal 
D Reuse, 
recovery, 
recycling 
 
Particulate 
matter 
(desease 
inc.) 
7.64E-08 
2.43E-08 
2.01E-08 
3.47E-08 
1.78E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.61E-09 
1.56E-08 
1.67E-08 
1.28E-09 
-2.55E-08 
 
Ionising 
radiation 
(kBq U-235 
eq) 
2.47E-02 
1.97E-03 
4.66E-02 
3.00E-03 
4.56E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.88E-05 
1.40E-03 
3.04E-03 
8.76E-04 
-1.90E-01 
 
Ecotoxicity, 
freshwater 
(CTUe) 
2.56E+00 
2.11E+00 
1.55E+00 
3.18E+00 
1.93E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.96E-01 
1.48E+00 
1.18E+01 
3.16E+00 
-3.09E+00 
 
Human 
toxicity, 
cancer 
(CTUh) 
2.53E-10 
1.25E-10 
4.98E-10 
1.91E-10 
6.97E-11 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.01E-12 
8.95E-11 
1.56E-09 
1.08E-11 
-6.57E-10 
 
Human 
toxicity, non-
cancer 
(CTUh) 
9.30E-09 
3.70E-09 
5.20E-09 
5.58E-09 
6.48E-10 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.99E-10 
2.59E-09 
4.25E-09 
2.52E-09 
-1.34E-08 
 
Land use (Pt) 
2.49E+00 
3.02E+00 
2.67E+01 
3.92E+00 
2.49E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.57E-02 
1.66E+00 
3.46E-01 
4.10E-01 
-1.68E+01 
Table 21: Environmental impacts for 1 m2 of loose fill insulation product in wall applications - additional indicators 
HTCE = HUMAN TOXICITY – CANCER EFFECTS;  
HTNCE = HUMAN TOXICITY – NON CANCER EFFECTS;  
ETF = ECOTOXICITY – FRESHWATER;  
PM = PARTICULATE MATTER;  
IRHH = IONIZING RADIATION – HUMAN HEALTH EFFECTS 
==PAGE:439==
 
 
 P a g e  | 30 
 
8. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON RELEASE OF DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES TO INDOOR AIR, 
SOIL, AND WATER DURING THE USE STAGE  
8.1 INDOOR AIR 
The VOC emission test, as part of mandatory environmental labelling, was carried out according to NF 
ISO EN 16000-3, NF ISO EN 16000- 6, NF ISO EN 16000-9 and NF ISO EN 16000-11. The loose fill cellulose 
insulation is rated as A + or A depending on the product and its application (roof, wall, attic). 
 
8.2 SOIL AND WATER 
Not applicable as this product is not in contact with drinking water, runoff water, seepage water, or 
surface water. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:440==
 
 
 P a g e  | 31 
 
 
 
 
 
Owner of the EPD 
Responsible for data, LCA and 
information 
European Cellulose Insulation Association (ECIA) 
Dreve du Pressoir 38 
1190 Forest Brussels,  
Belgium 
www.ecia.eu.com 
 
 
Author(s) of the LCA and EPD 
WeLOOP 
254 Rue du Bourg  
59130 Lambersart  
France 
 
Project report 
Environmental Product Declaration Background Report – Loose Fill Cellulose 
Insulation, version 1 
Verification 
 
Name of the third-party verifier 
Date of verification 
NF EN 15804+A2  
 
Frank Werner 
11/12/2023 
 
==PAGE:441==
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Owner: 
Fischer International A/S 
No.: 
MD-22016-EN 
Issued: 
25-04-2022 
Valid to: 
25-04-2027 
 
EPD 
VERIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION | ISO 14025 & EN 15804 
3 r d  P A R T Y  V E R I F I E D  
==PAGE:442==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 2 of 29 
 
Owner of declaration 
Fischer International A/S  
Holmstrupgårdvej 4 
8220 Brabrand 
VAT: 20033290 
Programme 
EPD Danmark 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
☐ Industry EPD   
☒ Product EPD 
 
Declared product(s) 
The EPD covers all products below sold under the brand names 
Fischer, Blendex, Kvint Blendex and Fönsterdesign Blendex. 
The declared products are listed below 
• 
Screen System Zipper 95 Straight, 95 OV, 100i and 105i 
• 
Screen System Zipper D-95 and 3z-100 
• 
Screen System Zipper 125 Straight and 125 OV 
• 
Screen System Zipper D-125 and 3ZM-143 
• 
Screen System 65 Straight 
• 
Screen System D-65 and 3F-67 
• 
Screen System 95 Straight 
• 
Screen System D-95, D85 and 3D-97 
• 
Screen System 125 Straight 
• 
Screen System D-125 and D110 
 
Number of  declared datasets: 10 
Production site 
Fischer International’s production site in Lithuania 
Address: Siūlų g. 1, Kaunas 45202, Lithuania 
Products use 
Screen Systems are flexible exterior solar shading solutions for 
buildings. The main purpose is to keep the heat away from the 
inside of the building, hereby contributing to an improved indoor 
climate and a reduced energy consumption for cooling in the 
building. 
Declared/ functional unit 
1 m2 of screen 
Year of data 
2020 
 
Issued: 
25-04-2022 
Valid to: 
25-04-2027 
Basis of calculation 
This EPD is developed in accordance with the European 
standard EN 15804+A2.  
 
Comparability 
EPDs of construction products may not be comparable 
if they do not comply with the requirements in EN 
15804. EPD data may not be comparable if the 
datasets used are not developed in accordance with EN 
15804 and if the background systems are not based 
on the same database. 
 
Validity 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 
14025 and is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 
 
Use 
The intended use of an EPD is to communicate 
scientifically based environmental information for 
construction products, for the purpose of assessing the 
environmental performance of buildings. 
 
EPD type 
☒Cradle-to-gate with modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options, modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-grave and module D 
☐Cradle-to-gate 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martha Katrine Sørensen 
EPD Danmark 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to EN ISO 14025 
☐ internal 
☒ external 
 
Third party verifier: 
 
 
 
Ninkie Bendtsen 
 
 
Life cycle stages and modules (MND = module not declared) 
Product 
Construction 
process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond the system 
boundary 
Raw material 
supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery 
and recycling 
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
MND 
MND 
MND MND MND 
MND MND 
MND MND 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
==PAGE:443==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 3 of 29 
 
Product information 
Product description 
 
The main product components are shown in the 
table below.  
Material 
Weight-% of declared product 
Aluminium 
37% 
 -  46% 
Electric motor 
7% 
 -  22% 
Neoprene 
0% 
 -  0.03% 
Polyamide 
0% 
 -  4% 
Polypropylene 
0% 
 -  0.3% 
Rubber 
0% 
 -  0.1% 
Glass fiber/PVC vowen 
9% 
 -  14% 
Stainless steel 
0% 
 -  0.5% 
Steel 
17% 
 -  43% 
Sum 
100% 
 
The packaging composition is listed in the table 
below. 
 
Material 
Value 
Corrugated board 
46% 
- 
57% 
Tape 
0.3% 
- 
0.4% 
Foam 
2% 
- 
4% 
Wooden pallet 
40% 
- 
52% 
 
 
Representativity 
 
This declaration, including data collection and the 
modelled foreground system including results, 
represents the production of Screen Systems on 
the production site located in Kaunas, Lithuania. 
Product specific data are based on average values 
collected in the year 2020. Background data are 
based on the GaBi LCA software and are less than 
10 years old. Generally, the used background 
datasets are of high quality, and the majority of 
the datasets are only a couple of years old. 
Hazardous substances 
 
The Screen Systems do not contain substances 
listed in the ”Candidate List of Substances of Very 
High Concern for authorisation” 
 (http://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table) 
 
Essential characteristics  
 
There is no harmonized EN norm covering the 
screens as a product but the Screen Systems live 
up to the following directives for CE marking: 
- 2006/42/EF Machinery directive 
- 2014/35/EU Low Voltage Directive 
- 2014/30/EU EMC Directive 
 
Further technical information can be obtained by 
contacting 
the 
manufacturer 
or 
on 
the 
manufacturers website: 
https://fischer-
international.dk/products/screens/  
 
Reference Service Life (RSL) 
 
The lifetime of the rail and system installation is 
30 years. The lifetime of the electric motor and 
the screen fabric is 15 years. 
 
 
==PAGE:444==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 4 of 29 
 
Pictures of products 
The outline below shows how products are available in a D shaped version (left) and a Straight version 
(right) referring to the shape of the top box of the product installed. This specification is found in the 
product name. The photos on the following page show the Screen Zipper system and then the Screen 
System without zipper declared in the specified model codes from 65 to 125. 
 
 
 
The photo below shows the Zipper Screen System. 
 
 
==PAGE:445==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 5 of 29 
 
 
The photo below shows the Screen System without zipper. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:446==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 6 of 29 
 
LCA background 
 
Declared unit 
 
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD relates to 1 m2 of screen system 
Name 
Zipper 
95 
Straight 
Zipper 
D-95 
Zipper 
125 
Straight 
Zipper 
D-125 
65 
Straight 
D-65  
95 
Straight 
D-95 
125 
Straight 
D-125 
Delared unit, m2 
1 m2 
Mass per declared unit, 
kg/m2 
5.51 
5.44 
4.61 
4.42 
3.87 
3.78 
5.54 
5.38 
5.64 
5.34 
Conversion to 1 kg 
0.181 
0.184 
0.217 
0.226 
0.258 
0.265 
0.180 
0.186 
0.177 
0.187 
 
Functional unit and reference service life (RSL) 
 
The functional unit is not defined as the use stages B1-B7 are not declared 
 
The reference service life (RSL) is approx. 15 years on screen and electric motor and 30 years on remaining 
product. 
 
PCR 
 
This EPD is developed according to the core rules for the product category of construction products in EN 
15804 version A2:2019. 
 
Flowdiagram 
 
The process diagram below represents the life cycle of a Screen System product from Fishcer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Steel & stainless 
steel raw material
Aluminium raw 
material
Plastic & rubber 
raw material
Electric motor
Parts 
shaping/cutting and 
product assembly
A1
A3
Metal processing 
and finishing
Metal processing 
and finishing
Plastic processing 
and finishing
PVC and glass fiber 
raw material
Fabric production
C1 + C2
Product 
deconstruction (C1) 
and transport (C2)
Recycling (C3) or 
Disposal (C4) 
C3 + C4
Avoided production 
of metal and 
heat/electricity
D
Distribution (A4), 
Installation (A5), 
and use (B1-B7)
Not declared
A4 + A5 
+
B1-B7
A2
A2
A2
A2
A2
==PAGE:447==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 7 of 29 
 
System boundary 
 
This EPD is based on a cradle-to-grave LCA with 
modules C1-C4 and D, in which 100 weight-% has 
been accounted for.  
 
The general rules for the exclusion of inputs and 
outputs follows the requirements in EN 15804, 
6.3.5, where the total of neglected input flows per 
module shall be a maximum of 5 % of energy 
usage and mass and 1 % of energy usage and 
mass for unit processes. 
 
Product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
A1 – Extraction and processing of raw materials 
A2 – Transport to the production site 
A3 – Manufacturing processes 
 
The steel and stainless steel parts, as well as 
plastic/rubber 
parts, 
are 
manufactured 
by 
suppliers. Aluminium extruded side-rails are 
received in long shapes and cut into final length. 
Other aluminium parts are manufactured entirely 
at suppliers. 
 
Electric motor is received from suppliers as a 
complete unit. 
 
The screen fabric in woven PVC/glass fibre is 
received on large reels from suppliers. The fabric 
is cut into a pre-shape slightly larger than final 
cut. The pre-shape is allowed to rest for 24 hours 
before cutting into final shape to prevent material 
shrinking/deformation on the final product. 
 
 
 
End of Life (C1-C4) includes: 
The screens are assumed disposed of in Northern 
Europe. The screens are assumed dismantled 
using hand tools (C1) and transported to local 
recycling (C2). 
The fabric in PVC and glass fibre is landfilled (C4). 
 
The remaining product is dismantled in an 
industrial shredder assuming average recovery of 
materials (C3). 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
includes: 
The recycled metals are credited an avoided 
production of primary steel, stainless steel and 
aluminium. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:448==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 8 of 29 
 
LCA results 
Screen System Zipper 95 Straight 
x 
Screen System Zipper 95 Straight 
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
4,06E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,52E-02 
3,54E-01 
3,23E-02 
-2,31E+01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
4,12E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,49E-02 
3,50E-01 
3,27E-02 
-2,31E+01 
GWP-bio 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-6,38E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,61E-04 
3,01E-03 
-4,72E-04 
4,30E-03 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
2,18E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,23E-04 
4,37E-04 
4,21E-05 
-6,71E-03 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
7,67E-10 
0,00E+00 
2,98E-18 
7,34E-15 
8,93E-17 
-1,91E-12 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1,66E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,63E-05 
6,62E-04 
1,27E-04 
-8,55E-02 
EP-fw 
[kg P eq.] 
1,77E-04 
0,00E+00 
4,48E-08 
1,56E-06 
4,76E-06 
-1,99E-05 
EP-mar 
[kg N eq.] 
2,77E-02 
0,00E+00 
5,29E-06 
1,62E-04 
3,04E-05 
-1,46E-02 
EP-ter 
[mol N eq.] 
2,84E-01 
0,00E+00 
6,26E-05 
1,69E-03 
3,34E-04 
-1,59E-01 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
8,35E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,43E-05 
4,38E-04 
9,52E-05 
-4,49E-02 
ADP-mm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
3,38E-04 
0,00E+00 
1,34E-09 
9,14E-08 
2,43E-09 
-1,57E-04 
ADP-fos1 
[MJ] 
5,86E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,01E-01 
5,85E+00 
4,68E-01 
-2,99E+02 
WDP1 
[m3] 
1,33E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,40E-04 
5,15E-02 
4,35E-04 
-1,47E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-
bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use 
change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; 
EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = 
Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic 
Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
X 
Screen System Zipper 95 Straight 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
3,21E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,11E-10 
5,61E-09 
1,38E-09 
-8,62E-07 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
6,78E+00 
0,00E+00 
5,35E-05 
1,33E-01 
7,27E-04 
-4,35E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
3,97E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,49E-01 
2,39E+00 
4,10E-01 
-1,05E+02 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
6,81E-08 
0,00E+00 
3,02E-12 
7,09E-11 
2,38E-11 
-1,30E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,11E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,57E-10 
2,89E-09 
2,20E-09 
-2,13E-07 
SQP1 
-  
2,03E+02 
0,00E+00 
6,91E-02 
1,72E+00 
4,43E-02 
-1,69E+01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – 
freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = 
Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational 
exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from 
the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
X 
 
 
==PAGE:449==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 9 of 29 
 
Screen System Zipper 95 Straight 
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,70E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,16E-02 
2,51E+00 
3,98E-02 
-8,39E+01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
7,69E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,78E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,16E-02 
2,51E+00 
3,98E-02 
-8,39E+01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
5,67E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,02E-01 
5,85E+00 
4,68E-01 
-3,00E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1,90E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
5,86E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,02E-01 
5,85E+00 
4,68E-01 
-3,00E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
5,77E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
4,20E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,33E-05 
2,50E-03 
2,64E-05 
-1,85E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary 
fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
X 
Screen System Zipper 95 Straight 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1,68E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,06E-11 
1,51E-09 
7,74E-11 
-1,64E-08 
NHWD 
[kg] 
6,21E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,17E-05 
2,88E-02 
8,22E-01 
-4,29E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
3,57E-02 
0,00E+00 
3,66E-07 
8,11E-04 
5,33E-06 
-1,97E-02 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
6,10E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,65E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste 
disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy 
recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
X 
Screen System Zipper 95 Straight 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
0,00E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
2,48E-01 
X 
 
 
==PAGE:450==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 10 of 29 
 
Screen System Zipper D-95 
Screen System Zipper D-95 
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
4,00E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,51E-02 
3,50E-01 
3,23E-02 
-2,26E+01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
4,06E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,48E-02 
3,46E-01 
3,27E-02 
-2,26E+01 
GWP-bio 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-6,45E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,60E-04 
2,98E-03 
-4,71E-04 
4,35E-03 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
2,15E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,23E-04 
4,31E-04 
4,20E-05 
-6,55E-03 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
7,62E-10 
0,00E+00 
2,96E-18 
7,25E-15 
8,91E-17 
-1,91E-12 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1,64E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,62E-05 
6,54E-04 
1,27E-04 
-8,34E-02 
EP-fw 
[kg P eq.] 
1,75E-04 
0,00E+00 
4,45E-08 
1,55E-06 
4,77E-06 
-1,97E-05 
EP-mar 
[kg N eq.] 
2,73E-02 
0,00E+00 
5,25E-06 
1,60E-04 
3,04E-05 
-1,43E-02 
EP-ter 
[mol N eq.] 
2,80E-01 
0,00E+00 
6,22E-05 
1,67E-03 
3,33E-04 
-1,55E-01 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
8,25E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,42E-05 
4,33E-04 
9,49E-05 
-4,38E-02 
ADP-mm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
3,38E-04 
0,00E+00 
1,33E-09 
9,02E-08 
2,43E-09 
-1,57E-04 
ADP-fos1 
[MJ] 
5,76E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,00E-01 
5,78E+00 
4,68E-01 
-2,92E+02 
WDP1 
[m3] 
1,31E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,39E-04 
5,09E-02 
4,29E-04 
-1,44E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-
bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use 
change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; 
EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = 
Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic 
Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
X 
Screen System Zipper D-95 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
3,18E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,10E-10 
5,54E-09 
1,37E-09 
-8,42E-07 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
6,60E+00 
0,00E+00 
5,32E-05 
1,31E-01 
7,27E-04 
-4,22E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
3,89E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,48E-01 
2,36E+00 
4,09E-01 
-1,02E+02 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
6,79E-08 
0,00E+00 
3,00E-12 
7,01E-11 
2,37E-11 
-1,28E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,10E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,56E-10 
2,86E-09 
2,19E-09 
-2,08E-07 
SQP1 
-  
2,03E+02 
0,00E+00 
6,86E-02 
1,70E+00 
4,42E-02 
-1,64E+01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – 
freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = 
Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational 
exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from 
the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
X 
Screen System Zipper D-95 
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,66E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,15E-02 
2,48E+00 
3,97E-02 
-8,15E+01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
7,69E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,74E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,15E-02 
2,48E+00 
3,97E-02 
-8,15E+01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
5,58E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,00E-01 
5,78E+00 
4,68E-01 
-2,92E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1,90E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
5,77E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,00E-01 
5,78E+00 
4,68E-01 
-2,92E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
5,79E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
4,13E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,32E-05 
2,47E-03 
2,62E-05 
-1,80E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary 
fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
X 
==PAGE:451==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 11 of 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Screen System Zipper D-95 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1,68E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,06E-11 
1,50E-09 
7,73E-11 
-1,58E-08 
NHWD 
[kg] 
6,05E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,14E-05 
2,87E-02 
8,18E-01 
-4,16E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
3,47E-02 
0,00E+00 
3,63E-07 
8,01E-04 
5,33E-06 
-1,92E-02 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
5,99E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,59E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste 
disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy 
recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
X 
Screen System Zipper D-95 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
0,00E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
2,48E-01 
X 
 
 
==PAGE:452==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 12 of 29 
 
Screen System Zipper 125 Straight 
Screen System Zipper 125 Straight 
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,46E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,23E-02 
2,78E-01 
3,03E-02 
-1,93E+01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,49E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,21E-02 
2,76E-01 
3,07E-02 
-1,93E+01 
GWP-bio 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-3,32E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,31E-04 
2,36E-03 
-4,39E-04 
3,32E-03 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
1,80E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,00E-04 
3,52E-04 
3,91E-05 
-5,35E-03 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
7,43E-10 
0,00E+00 
2,42E-18 
5,92E-15 
8,35E-17 
-1,26E-12 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1,45E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,33E-05 
5,30E-04 
1,18E-04 
-7,08E-02 
EP-fw 
[kg P eq.] 
1,56E-04 
0,00E+00 
3,64E-08 
1,15E-06 
4,50E-06 
-1,47E-05 
EP-mar 
[kg N eq.] 
2,38E-02 
0,00E+00 
4,30E-06 
1,29E-04 
2,83E-05 
-1,22E-02 
EP-ter 
[mol N eq.] 
2,44E-01 
0,00E+00 
5,09E-05 
1,35E-03 
3,11E-04 
-1,33E-01 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
7,16E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,16E-05 
3,49E-04 
8,86E-05 
-3,74E-02 
ADP-mm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
2,07E-04 
0,00E+00 
1,09E-09 
7,35E-08 
2,28E-09 
-9,00E-05 
ADP-fos1 
[MJ] 
4,94E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,63E-01 
4,66E+00 
4,39E-01 
-2,49E+02 
WDP1 
[m3] 
1,20E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,14E-04 
4,12E-02 
3,86E-04 
-1,15E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-
bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use 
change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; 
EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = 
Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic 
Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
X 
Screen System Zipper 125 Straight 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
2,90E-06 
0,00E+00 
9,00E-11 
4,49E-09 
1,28E-09 
-7,15E-07 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
5,72E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,35E-05 
1,07E-01 
6,84E-04 
-3,67E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
3,42E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,21E-01 
1,91E+00 
3,85E-01 
-8,74E+01 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
1,93E-08 
0,00E+00 
2,45E-12 
5,63E-11 
2,22E-11 
-1,08E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,02E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,27E-10 
2,26E-09 
2,05E-09 
-1,78E-07 
SQP1 
-  
1,27E+02 
0,00E+00 
5,61E-02 
1,39E+00 
4,12E-02 
-1,36E+01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – 
freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = 
Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational 
exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from 
the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
X 
Screen System Zipper 125 Straight 
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,41E+02 
0,00E+00 
9,40E-03 
2,03E+00 
3,71E-02 
-7,07E+01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
4,51E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,45E+02 
0,00E+00 
9,40E-03 
2,03E+00 
3,71E-02 
-7,07E+01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
4,78E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,64E-01 
4,66E+00 
4,39E-01 
-2,49E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1,61E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
4,95E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,64E-01 
4,66E+00 
4,39E-01 
-2,49E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
3,65E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
3,67E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,08E-05 
2,01E-03 
2,42E-05 
-1,54E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary 
fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
X 
==PAGE:453==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 13 of 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Screen System Zipper 125 Straight 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1,67E-05 
0,00E+00 
8,64E-12 
1,21E-09 
7,28E-11 
-1,37E-08 
NHWD 
[kg] 
5,22E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,57E-05 
1,94E-02 
7,61E-01 
-3,65E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
3,01E-02 
0,00E+00 
2,97E-07 
6,55E-04 
5,01E-06 
-1,67E-02 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
5,14E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,83E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste 
disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy 
recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
X 
Screen System Zipper 125 Straight 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
0,00E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
1,45E-01 
X 
 
 
==PAGE:454==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 14 of 29 
 
Screen System Zipper D-125 
Screen System Zipper D-125 
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,28E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,20E-02 
2,68E-01 
3,01E-02 
-1,79E+01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,32E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,18E-02 
2,65E-01 
3,05E-02 
-1,79E+01 
GWP-bio 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-3,41E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,28E-04 
2,28E-03 
-4,35E-04 
3,45E-03 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
1,72E-02 
0,00E+00 
9,78E-05 
3,37E-04 
3,86E-05 
-4,93E-03 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
7,32E-10 
0,00E+00 
2,36E-18 
5,67E-15 
8,28E-17 
-1,25E-12 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1,39E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,30E-05 
5,08E-04 
1,17E-04 
-6,53E-02 
EP-fw 
[kg P eq.] 
1,49E-04 
0,00E+00 
3,56E-08 
1,12E-06 
4,50E-06 
-1,40E-05 
EP-mar 
[kg N eq.] 
2,28E-02 
0,00E+00 
4,19E-06 
1,24E-04 
2,80E-05 
-1,13E-02 
EP-ter 
[mol N eq.] 
2,33E-01 
0,00E+00 
4,96E-05 
1,30E-03 
3,08E-04 
-1,23E-01 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
6,87E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,13E-05 
3,35E-04 
8,78E-05 
-3,46E-02 
ADP-mm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
2,07E-04 
0,00E+00 
1,06E-09 
7,04E-08 
2,26E-09 
-8,98E-05 
ADP-fos1 
[MJ] 
4,68E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,59E-01 
4,47E+00 
4,37E-01 
-2,29E+02 
WDP1 
[m3] 
1,15E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,11E-04 
3,95E-02 
3,70E-04 
-1,06E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-
bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use 
change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; 
EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = 
Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic 
Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
X 
Screen System Zipper D-125 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
2,81E-06 
0,00E+00 
8,78E-11 
4,30E-09 
1,27E-09 
-6,61E-07 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
5,23E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,24E-05 
1,03E-01 
6,81E-04 
-3,34E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
3,19E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,18E-01 
1,83E+00 
3,84E-01 
-8,01E+01 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
1,87E-08 
0,00E+00 
2,39E-12 
5,41E-11 
2,20E-11 
-1,02E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
9,90E-07 
0,00E+00 
1,24E-10 
2,18E-09 
2,03E-09 
-1,64E-07 
SQP1 
-  
1,24E+02 
0,00E+00 
5,48E-02 
1,33E+00 
4,08E-02 
-1,23E+01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – 
freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = 
Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational 
exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from 
the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
X 
Screen System Zipper D-125 
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,30E+02 
0,00E+00 
9,17E-03 
1,94E+00 
3,69E-02 
-6,41E+01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
4,51E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,35E+02 
0,00E+00 
9,17E-03 
1,94E+00 
3,69E-02 
-6,41E+01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
4,52E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,60E-01 
4,47E+00 
4,37E-01 
-2,29E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1,61E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
4,68E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,60E-01 
4,47E+00 
4,37E-01 
-2,30E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
3,65E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
3,50E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,05E-05 
1,93E-03 
2,37E-05 
-1,41E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary 
fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
X 
==PAGE:455==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 15 of 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Screen System Zipper D-125 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1,67E-05 
0,00E+00 
8,43E-12 
1,16E-09 
7,25E-11 
-1,23E-08 
NHWD 
[kg] 
4,79E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,51E-05 
1,92E-02 
7,51E-01 
-3,32E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
2,76E-02 
0,00E+00 
2,90E-07 
6,27E-04 
4,98E-06 
-1,51E-02 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
4,87E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,65E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste 
disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy 
recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
X 
Screen System Zipper D-125 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
0,00E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
1,45E-01 
X 
 
 
==PAGE:456==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 16 of 29 
 
Screen System 65 Straight 
Screen System 65 Straight 
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,80E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,44E-02 
1,77E-01 
3,18E-02 
-1,74E+01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,92E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,42E-02 
1,75E-01 
3,22E-02 
-1,74E+01 
GWP-bio 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,31E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,53E-04 
1,50E-03 
-4,45E-04 
2,59E-03 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,09E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,17E-04 
2,36E-04 
3,92E-05 
-5,99E-03 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
7,43E-10 
0,00E+00 
2,83E-18 
3,98E-15 
8,63E-17 
-4,17E-13 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1,56E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,55E-05 
3,51E-04 
1,21E-04 
-6,69E-02 
EP-fw 
[kg P eq.] 
1,28E-04 
0,00E+00 
4,26E-08 
5,96E-07 
4,88E-06 
-9,72E-06 
EP-mar 
[kg N eq.] 
2,76E-02 
0,00E+00 
5,03E-06 
8,44E-05 
2,87E-05 
-1,11E-02 
EP-ter 
[mol N eq.] 
2,68E-01 
0,00E+00 
5,95E-05 
8,85E-04 
3,15E-04 
-1,20E-01 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
7,65E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,35E-05 
2,29E-04 
9,01E-05 
-3,37E-02 
ADP-mm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
4,19E-04 
0,00E+00 
1,27E-09 
4,92E-08 
2,37E-09 
-2,37E-04 
ADP-fos1 
[MJ] 
5,62E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,91E-01 
3,04E+00 
4,62E-01 
-2,22E+02 
WDP1 
[m3] 
6,38E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,33E-04 
2,72E-02 
3,03E-04 
-1,08E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-
bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use 
change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; 
EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = 
Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic 
Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
X 
Screen System 65 Straight 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
3,11E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,05E-10 
2,97E-09 
1,29E-09 
-6,64E-07 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
5,99E+00 
0,00E+00 
5,09E-05 
7,23E-02 
7,26E-04 
-3,41E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
6,34E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,42E-01 
1,26E+00 
4,10E-01 
-8,11E+01 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
2,48E-08 
0,00E+00 
2,87E-12 
3,65E-11 
2,29E-11 
-9,16E-09 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
9,24E-07 
0,00E+00 
1,49E-10 
1,42E-09 
2,09E-09 
-1,65E-07 
SQP1 
-  
3,79E+02 
0,00E+00 
6,57E-02 
9,35E-01 
4,18E-02 
-1,53E+01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – 
freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = 
Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational 
exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from 
the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
X 
Screen System 65 Straight 
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,85E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,10E-02 
1,36E+00 
3,84E-02 
-6,66E+01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
1,42E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,99E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,10E-02 
1,36E+00 
3,84E-02 
-6,66E+01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
5,50E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,92E-01 
3,04E+00 
4,62E-01 
-2,23E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1,27E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
5,62E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,92E-01 
3,04E+00 
4,62E-01 
-2,23E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
8,22E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
3,46E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,26E-05 
1,34E-03 
2,27E-05 
-1,42E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary 
fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
X 
==PAGE:457==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 17 of 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Screen System 65 Straight 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1,68E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,01E-11 
7,97E-10 
7,74E-11 
-1,38E-08 
NHWD 
[kg] 
5,31E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,01E-05 
7,14E-03 
7,54E-01 
-3,26E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
3,40E-02 
0,00E+00 
3,48E-07 
4,41E-04 
5,28E-06 
-1,55E-02 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
3,61E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,11E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste 
disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy 
recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
X 
Screen System 65 Straight 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
0,00E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
4,56E-01 
X 
 
 
==PAGE:458==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 18 of 29 
 
Screen System D-65  
Screen System D-65  
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,66E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,43E-02 
1,71E-01 
3,18E-02 
-1,67E+01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,79E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,40E-02 
1,69E-01 
3,22E-02 
-1,67E+01 
GWP-bio 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,31E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,52E-04 
1,44E-03 
-4,44E-04 
2,66E-03 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
2,97E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,16E-04 
2,28E-04 
3,91E-05 
-5,79E-03 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
7,39E-10 
0,00E+00 
2,81E-18 
3,85E-15 
8,62E-17 
-3,91E-13 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1,53E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,54E-05 
3,39E-04 
1,20E-04 
-6,43E-02 
EP-fw 
[kg P eq.] 
1,25E-04 
0,00E+00 
4,23E-08 
5,71E-07 
4,89E-06 
-9,27E-06 
EP-mar 
[kg N eq.] 
2,67E-02 
0,00E+00 
4,98E-06 
8,15E-05 
2,87E-05 
-1,06E-02 
EP-ter 
[mol N eq.] 
2,60E-01 
0,00E+00 
5,90E-05 
8,53E-04 
3,14E-04 
-1,15E-01 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
7,45E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,34E-05 
2,21E-04 
8,98E-05 
-3,23E-02 
ADP-mm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
4,20E-04 
0,00E+00 
1,26E-09 
4,75E-08 
2,36E-09 
-2,37E-04 
ADP-fos1 
[MJ] 
5,42E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,89E-01 
2,93E+00 
4,62E-01 
-2,13E+02 
WDP1 
[m3] 
6,33E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,32E-04 
2,62E-02 
2,96E-04 
-1,03E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-
bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use 
change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; 
EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = 
Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic 
Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
X 
Screen System D-65  
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
3,06E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,04E-10 
2,86E-09 
1,29E-09 
-6,38E-07 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
5,71E+00 
0,00E+00 
5,04E-05 
6,98E-02 
7,26E-04 
-3,25E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
5,95E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,41E-01 
1,22E+00 
4,10E-01 
-7,76E+01 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
2,45E-08 
0,00E+00 
2,84E-12 
3,52E-11 
2,28E-11 
-8,87E-09 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
9,14E-07 
0,00E+00 
1,48E-10 
1,37E-09 
2,09E-09 
-1,58E-07 
SQP1 
-  
3,74E+02 
0,00E+00 
6,51E-02 
9,02E-01 
4,17E-02 
-1,47E+01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – 
freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = 
Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational 
exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from 
the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
X 
Screen System D-65  
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,77E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,09E-02 
1,32E+00 
3,83E-02 
-6,35E+01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
1,42E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,91E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,09E-02 
1,32E+00 
3,83E-02 
-6,35E+01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
5,29E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,90E-01 
2,93E+00 
4,62E-01 
-2,13E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1,26E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
5,42E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,90E-01 
2,93E+00 
4,62E-01 
-2,13E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
8,17E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
3,36E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,25E-05 
1,29E-03 
2,25E-05 
-1,35E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary 
fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
X 
==PAGE:459==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 19 of 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Screen System D-65  
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1,69E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,00E-11 
7,70E-10 
7,74E-11 
-1,31E-08 
NHWD 
[kg] 
5,08E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,98E-05 
6,74E-03 
7,50E-01 
-3,10E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
3,24E-02 
0,00E+00 
3,45E-07 
4,26E-04 
5,28E-06 
-1,48E-02 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
3,48E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,02E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste 
disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy 
recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
X 
Screen System D-65  
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
0,00E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
4,56E-01 
X 
 
 
==PAGE:460==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 20 of 29 
 
Screen System 95 Straight 
Screen System 95 Straight 
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,99E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,71E-02 
2,66E-01 
3,31E-02 
-2,37E+01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
4,11E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,67E-02 
2,63E-01 
3,35E-02 
-2,37E+01 
GWP-bio 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,18E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,81E-04 
2,24E-03 
-4,82E-04 
4,90E-03 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
2,25E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,39E-04 
3,63E-04 
4,30E-05 
-7,40E-03 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
7,72E-10 
0,00E+00 
3,35E-18 
6,13E-15 
9,13E-17 
-3,49E-13 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1,71E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,84E-05 
5,37E-04 
1,30E-04 
-8,90E-02 
EP-fw 
[kg P eq.] 
1,86E-04 
0,00E+00 
5,04E-08 
8,07E-07 
4,89E-06 
-1,17E-05 
EP-mar 
[kg N eq.] 
2,82E-02 
0,00E+00 
5,95E-06 
1,28E-04 
3,11E-05 
-1,50E-02 
EP-ter 
[mol N eq.] 
2,89E-01 
0,00E+00 
7,04E-05 
1,35E-03 
3,41E-04 
-1,63E-01 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
8,44E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,60E-05 
3,48E-04 
9,73E-05 
-4,58E-02 
ADP-mm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
4,51E-04 
0,00E+00 
1,50E-09 
7,56E-08 
2,49E-09 
-2,40E-04 
ADP-fos1 
[MJ] 
5,74E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,26E-01 
4,62E+00 
4,79E-01 
-2,97E+02 
WDP1 
[m3] 
1,35E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,57E-04 
4,15E-02 
4,39E-04 
-1,31E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-
bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use 
change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; 
EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = 
Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic 
Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
X 
Screen System 95 Straight 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
3,32E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,24E-10 
4,53E-09 
1,41E-09 
-8,93E-07 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
6,93E+00 
0,00E+00 
6,02E-05 
1,11E-01 
7,45E-04 
-4,46E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
3,89E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,68E-01 
1,93E+00 
4,20E-01 
-1,07E+02 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
2,24E-08 
0,00E+00 
3,39E-12 
5,52E-11 
2,43E-11 
-1,36E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,11E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,76E-10 
2,12E-09 
2,25E-09 
-2,20E-07 
SQP1 
-  
2,90E+02 
0,00E+00 
7,77E-02 
1,44E+00 
4,53E-02 
-1,83E+01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – 
freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = 
Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational 
exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from 
the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
X 
Screen System 95 Straight 
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,82E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,30E-02 
2,10E+00 
4,07E-02 
-8,62E+01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
9,97E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,92E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,30E-02 
2,10E+00 
4,07E-02 
-8,62E+01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
5,62E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,27E-01 
4,62E+00 
4,80E-01 
-2,97E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1,24E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
5,74E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,27E-01 
4,62E+00 
4,80E-01 
-2,97E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
8,42E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
4,26E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,49E-05 
2,05E-03 
2,69E-05 
-1,85E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary 
fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
X 
==PAGE:461==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 21 of 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Screen System 95 Straight 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1,69E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,20E-11 
1,22E-09 
7,93E-11 
-1,69E-08 
NHWD 
[kg] 
6,40E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,56E-05 
7,26E-03 
8,38E-01 
-4,35E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
3,65E-02 
0,00E+00 
4,11E-07 
6,79E-04 
5,46E-06 
-2,03E-02 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
6,00E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,70E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste 
disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy 
recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
X 
Screen System 95 Straight 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
0,00E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
3,21E-01 
X 
 
 
==PAGE:462==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 22 of 29 
 
Screen System D-95 
Screen System D-95 
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,84E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,68E-02 
2,57E-01 
3,30E-02 
-2,24E+01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,96E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,65E-02 
2,54E-01 
3,34E-02 
-2,24E+01 
GWP-bio 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,20E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,78E-04 
2,17E-03 
-4,79E-04 
5,02E-03 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
2,20E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,37E-04 
3,51E-04 
4,27E-05 
-7,04E-03 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
7,63E-10 
0,00E+00 
3,30E-18 
5,92E-15 
9,10E-17 
-3,45E-13 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1,66E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,81E-05 
5,19E-04 
1,29E-04 
-8,42E-02 
EP-fw 
[kg P eq.] 
1,80E-04 
0,00E+00 
4,97E-08 
7,83E-07 
4,89E-06 
-1,11E-05 
EP-mar 
[kg N eq.] 
2,73E-02 
0,00E+00 
5,86E-06 
1,24E-04 
3,09E-05 
-1,42E-02 
EP-ter 
[mol N eq.] 
2,80E-01 
0,00E+00 
6,94E-05 
1,30E-03 
3,39E-04 
-1,54E-01 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
8,19E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,58E-05 
3,36E-04 
9,67E-05 
-4,33E-02 
ADP-mm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
4,51E-04 
0,00E+00 
1,48E-09 
7,30E-08 
2,48E-09 
-2,40E-04 
ADP-fos1 
[MJ] 
5,52E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,23E-01 
4,46E+00 
4,78E-01 
-2,80E+02 
WDP1 
[m3] 
1,31E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,55E-04 
4,01E-02 
4,26E-04 
-1,23E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-
bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use 
change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; 
EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = 
Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic 
Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
X 
Screen System D-95 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
3,25E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,23E-10 
4,38E-09 
1,40E-09 
-8,47E-07 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
6,51E+00 
0,00E+00 
5,93E-05 
1,08E-01 
7,44E-04 
-4,17E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
3,70E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,65E-01 
1,87E+00 
4,19E-01 
-1,00E+02 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
2,20E-08 
0,00E+00 
3,34E-12 
5,34E-11 
2,42E-11 
-1,31E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,09E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,74E-10 
2,05E-09 
2,24E-09 
-2,07E-07 
SQP1 
-  
2,90E+02 
0,00E+00 
7,66E-02 
1,39E+00 
4,50E-02 
-1,73E+01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – 
freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = 
Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational 
exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from 
the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
X 
Screen System D-95 
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,73E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,28E-02 
2,03E+00 
4,05E-02 
-8,05E+01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
9,97E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,83E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,28E-02 
2,03E+00 
4,05E-02 
-8,05E+01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
5,40E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,24E-01 
4,46E+00 
4,78E-01 
-2,80E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1,24E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
5,52E+02 
0,00E+00 
2,24E-01 
4,46E+00 
4,78E-01 
-2,80E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
8,47E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
4,11E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,47E-05 
1,98E-03 
2,65E-05 
-1,74E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary 
fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:463==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 23 of 29 
 
X 
Screen System D-95 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1,69E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,18E-11 
1,18E-09 
7,92E-11 
-1,57E-08 
NHWD 
[kg] 
6,03E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,51E-05 
7,15E-03 
8,31E-01 
-4,06E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
3,44E-02 
0,00E+00 
4,06E-07 
6,55E-04 
5,45E-06 
-1,89E-02 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
5,76E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,54E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste 
disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy 
recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
X 
Screen System D-95 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Unit 
  
At the 
factory 
gate 
  
  
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
0,00E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
3,21E-01 
X 
 
 
==PAGE:464==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 24 of 29 
 
Screen System 125 Straight 
Screen System 125 Straight 
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,91E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,50E-02 
2,96E-01 
3,16E-02 
-2,25E+01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,96E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,47E-02 
2,93E-01 
3,21E-02 
-2,25E+01 
GWP-bio 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-4,55E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,59E-04 
2,50E-03 
-4,69E-04 
5,42E-03 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
2,07E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,22E-04 
3,98E-04 
4,19E-05 
-6,29E-03 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
7,58E-10 
0,00E+00 
2,95E-18 
6,72E-15 
8,79E-17 
-5,96E-13 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1,62E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,62E-05 
5,91E-04 
1,26E-04 
-8,24E-02 
EP-fw 
[kg P eq.] 
1,68E-04 
0,00E+00 
4,43E-08 
9,73E-07 
4,60E-06 
-1,22E-05 
EP-mar 
[kg N eq.] 
2,68E-02 
0,00E+00 
5,23E-06 
1,42E-04 
3,02E-05 
-1,42E-02 
EP-ter 
[mol N eq.] 
2,74E-01 
0,00E+00 
6,19E-05 
1,49E-03 
3,31E-04 
-1,54E-01 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
8,06E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,41E-05 
3,84E-04 
9,44E-05 
-4,34E-02 
ADP-mm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
2,86E-04 
0,00E+00 
1,32E-09 
8,29E-08 
2,39E-09 
-1,40E-04 
ADP-fos1 
[MJ] 
5,47E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,99E-01 
5,11E+00 
4,58E-01 
-2,80E+02 
WDP1 
[m3] 
1,38E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,38E-04 
4,57E-02 
4,67E-04 
-1,17E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-
bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use 
change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; 
EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = 
Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic 
Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
X 
Screen System 125 Straight 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
3,15E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,09E-10 
4,99E-09 
1,37E-09 
-8,37E-07 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
6,40E+00 
0,00E+00 
5,29E-05 
1,22E-01 
7,09E-04 
-4,11E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
3,69E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,47E-01 
2,13E+00 
3,99E-01 
-9,87E+01 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
2,15E-08 
0,00E+00 
2,98E-12 
6,12E-11 
2,35E-11 
-1,36E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,09E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,55E-10 
2,37E-09 
2,18E-09 
-2,05E-07 
SQP1 
-  
1,81E+02 
0,00E+00 
6,83E-02 
1,58E+00 
4,39E-02 
-1,53E+01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – 
freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = 
Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational 
exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from 
the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
X 
Screen System 125 Straight 
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,58E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,14E-02 
2,30E+00 
3,92E-02 
-7,87E+01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
7,33E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,65E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,14E-02 
2,30E+00 
3,92E-02 
-7,87E+01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
5,34E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,99E-01 
5,11E+00 
4,58E-01 
-2,81E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1,34E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
5,47E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,99E-01 
5,11E+00 
4,58E-01 
-2,81E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
4,80E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
4,19E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,31E-05 
2,26E-03 
2,69E-05 
-1,71E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary 
fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
X 
==PAGE:465==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 25 of 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Screen System 125 Straight 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1,68E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,05E-11 
1,34E-09 
7,53E-11 
-1,48E-08 
NHWD 
[kg] 
5,91E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,13E-05 
1,10E-02 
8,22E-01 
-4,09E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
3,35E-02 
0,00E+00 
3,62E-07 
7,43E-04 
5,21E-06 
-1,86E-02 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
6,51E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,81E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste 
disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy 
recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
X 
Screen System 125 Straight 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the 
factory 
gate 
  
  
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
0,00E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
2,36E-01 
X 
 
 
==PAGE:466==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 26 of 29 
 
Screen System D-125 
Screen System D-125 
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,63E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,45E-02 
2,80E-01 
3,14E-02 
-2,02E+01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
3,68E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,43E-02 
2,77E-01 
3,18E-02 
-2,02E+01 
GWP-bio 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-4,69E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,54E-04 
2,36E-03 
-4,62E-04 
5,63E-03 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
1,95E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,18E-04 
3,74E-04 
4,13E-05 
-5,62E-03 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
7,40E-10 
0,00E+00 
2,85E-18 
6,32E-15 
8,70E-17 
-5,89E-13 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
1,52E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,57E-05 
5,56E-04 
1,24E-04 
-7,37E-02 
EP-fw 
[kg P eq.] 
1,56E-04 
0,00E+00 
4,30E-08 
9,29E-07 
4,60E-06 
-1,12E-05 
EP-mar 
[kg N eq.] 
2,51E-02 
0,00E+00 
5,07E-06 
1,34E-04 
2,98E-05 
-1,27E-02 
EP-ter 
[mol N eq.] 
2,58E-01 
0,00E+00 
6,00E-05 
1,40E-03 
3,27E-04 
-1,38E-01 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
7,59E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,37E-05 
3,62E-04 
9,31E-05 
-3,89E-02 
ADP-mm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
2,85E-04 
0,00E+00 
1,28E-09 
7,80E-08 
2,37E-09 
-1,39E-04 
ADP-fos1 
[MJ] 
5,05E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,93E-01 
4,81E+00 
4,55E-01 
-2,49E+02 
WDP1 
[m3] 
1,30E+01 
0,00E+00 
1,34E-04 
4,30E-02 
4,42E-04 
-1,04E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-
bio = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use 
change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; 
EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = 
Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic 
Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
X 
Screen System D-125 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
3,01E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,06E-10 
4,70E-09 
1,35E-09 
-7,51E-07 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
5,63E+00 
0,00E+00 
5,13E-05 
1,15E-01 
7,05E-04 
-3,58E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
3,33E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,43E-01 
2,00E+00 
3,97E-01 
-8,71E+01 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
2,06E-08 
0,00E+00 
2,89E-12 
5,77E-11 
2,32E-11 
-1,26E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,05E-06 
0,00E+00 
1,50E-10 
2,24E-09 
2,15E-09 
-1,82E-07 
SQP1 
-  
1,76E+02 
0,00E+00 
6,62E-02 
1,48E+00 
4,33E-02 
-1,33E+01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – 
freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = 
Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are 
high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational 
exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from 
the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
X 
Screen System D-125 
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,41E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,11E-02 
2,16E+00 
3,87E-02 
-6,83E+01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
7,33E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,48E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,11E-02 
2,16E+00 
3,87E-02 
-6,83E+01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
4,92E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,93E-01 
4,81E+00 
4,55E-01 
-2,49E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1,34E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
5,06E+02 
0,00E+00 
1,93E-01 
4,81E+00 
4,55E-01 
-2,49E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
4,78E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
3,92E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,27E-05 
2,12E-03 
2,62E-05 
-1,50E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary 
fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
X 
==PAGE:467==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 27 of 29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Screen System D-125 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1,67E-05 
0,00E+00 
1,02E-11 
1,26E-09 
7,50E-11 
-1,25E-08 
NHWD 
[kg] 
5,23E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,03E-05 
1,08E-02 
8,07E-01 
-3,56E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
2,96E-02 
0,00E+00 
3,51E-07 
6,99E-04 
5,18E-06 
-1,62E-02 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
6,08E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,52E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste 
disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy 
recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
X 
Screen System D-125 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
0,00E+00 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
2,36E-01 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:468==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 28 of 29 
 
Additional information 
Technical information on scenarios 
 
Reference service life 
RSL information 
Unit 
Reference service Life 
30 Years on frames, 15 years on electric motor and 
screen fabric 
Declared product properties 
Technical specifications and guidance can be obtained 
from direct contact to Fischer at +45 7015 4055 or  
fischer@fischer-international.dk 
Design application parameters 
Assumed quality of work 
Outdoor environment 
Indoor environment 
Usage conditions 
Maintenance 
 
Power consumption during use (B6) 
The power consumption of the electric motor is based on running 4 times per day for 30 seconds with a 90W electric motor, 365 days 
per year. This causes an annual consumption of approx. 1 kWh which can be modelled according to the national electricity grid mix at 
installation. 
 
End of life (C1-C4) 
Scenario 
information 
Zipper 95 
Straight 
Zipper D-
95 
Zipper 
125 
Straight 
Zipper D-
125 
65 
Straight 
D-65  
95 
Straight 
D-95 
125 
Straight 
D-125 
Unit 
Collected 
separately   
5,51 
5,44 
4,61 
4,42 
3,87 
3,78 
5,54 
5,38 
5,64 
5,34 kg 
Collected with 
mixed waste 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 kg 
For reuse 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 kg 
For recycling 
4,69 
4,62 
3,86 
4,17 
3,11 
3,03 
4,70 
4,55 
4,82 
4,54 kg 
For energy 
recovery   
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 kg 
For final 
disposal 
0,82 
0,82 
0,75 
0,25 
0,76 
0,74 
0,85 
0,83 
0,82 
0,80 kg 
Assumptions 
for scenario 
development 
Assumed dismantled using hand tools 
 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
Avoided 
production 
Zipper 95 
Straight 
Zipper D-
95 
Zipper 125 
Straight 
Zipper D-
125 
65 Straight D-65  
95 Straight D-95 
125 
Straight 
D-125 
Unit 
Stainless st. 
0,01 
0,01 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 
0,00 kg 
Steel 
1,93 
1,93 
1,60 
1,60 
1,11 
1,11 
2,07 
2,07 
2,35 
2,35 kg 
Aluminium 
2,35 
2,28 
1,99 
2,30 
1,84 
1,76 
2,41 
2,26 
2,23 
1,95 kg 
Copper 
0,06 
0,06 
0,03 
0,03 
0,08 
0,09 
0,09 
0,09 
0,05 
0,05 kg 
 
The avoided production is only calculated on the virgin fraction of the input material in A1-A3 
 
 
 
Indoor air 
The product is for outdoor installation only.  
Soil and water 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to soil and water because 
the horizontal standards on measurement of 
release of regulated dangerous substances from 
construction products using harmonised test 
methods according to the provisions of the 
respective technical committees for European 
product standards are not available. 
==PAGE:469==
 
 
 
 
 
MD-22016-EN | Fischer International A/S | Page 29 of 29 
 
References 
 
Publisher 
 
 
www.epddanmark.dk 
Programme operator 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA-practitioner 
 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA software /background data 
 
Thinkstep GaBi 10.6 
Database version 2021.2  
www.gabi-software.com 
3rd party verifier 
Ninkie Bendtsen 
NIRAS A/S 
Sortemosevej 19  
DK-3450 Allerød 
www.niras.dk 
 
General programme instructions 
Version 2.0 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
EN 15804 
DS/EN 15804 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental  
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products” 
 
EN 15942 
DS/EN 15942:2011 – ” Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – 
Communication format business-to-business” 
 
ISO 14025 
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmental declarations 
– Principles and procedures” 
 
ISO 14040 
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and 
framework” 
 
ISO 14044 
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and 
guidelines” 
==PAGE:470==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
1 / 15 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Product Declaration 
according to EN 15804+A1 and ISO 14025 
 
 
 
GROUND SCREWS: 
DIY EXTENDABLE GROUND SCREWS 65x2 
DIY FIXED GROUND SCREWS 65x2 
SEMI FIXED GROUND SCREWS 76x2 
PROFI FIXED GROUND SCREWS 76x3,6, 89x3,6 
PRO EXTENDABLE GROUND SCREWS NL 76x3,6 
PRO EXTENDABLE GROUND SCREWS PRM 76x5 
PRO EXTENDABLE GROUND SCREWS PRM 89x5 
SOLAR SCREWS 76x3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Organization: 
 
 
BAYO.S SE, Ocelářská 1354/35, 19000 Praha 9 
Programme operator: 
 
CENIA, Czech Environmental Information Agency 
Publication date: 
 
16.06.2022 
 
Valid until: 
 
 
16.06.2027 
 
Revision:  
 
 
0 
 
==PAGE:471==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
2 / 15 
1. GENERAL INFORMATION 
Manufacturing company 
BAYO.S SE 
Registration Nº: 01875744 
VAT Nº: CZ01875744 
Production site 
Design and sales office: 
Týmlova 229/14, 14000 Praha – Michle, Czech Republic 
External manufacturer: 
Filák s.r.o. 
Skopalova 2199/20 
750 02, Přerov, Czech Republic 
Address 
Ocelářská 1354/35,  
190 00 Praha 9 
Czech Republic 
Contacts 
Phone:   +420 272 761 943 
E-mail:    srejma@bayo-s.company 
Web:       https://www.bayo-s.com/ 
 
EPD Program 
National Environmental Labelling Program.  
For more information see www.cenia.cz  
 
CENIA, Czech Environmental Information Agency,  
Vršovická 1442/65, Prague 10, 100 10 Czech Republic 
Approval date 
16.06.2022 
Valid until 
16.06.2027 
PCR identification 
EN 15804:2012+A1:2013  Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product 
declarations  
(Core rules for the product category of construction products) 
serves as the Core Product Category Rules (PCR) 
The PCR is standardized by CEN 
LCA prepared by 
Lubos Nobilis, ECO trend s.r.o., Na Dolinach 128, 140 00 Prague 4, Czech Republic, 
nobilis@ecotrend.cz  
 
CEN standard EN 15804+A1 serves as the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and data, according to EN ISO 14025 
 
Internal                       External 
 
Internal verifier: 
Jan Šrejma - product and quality manager  
BAYO.S  
The EPD owner has the sole ownership, liability, and responsibility for the EPD.  
EPDs within the same product category but from different software may not be comparable. EPDs of construction products may not be 
comparable if they do not comply with EN 15804. For further information about comparability, see EN 15804 and ISO 14025. 
X
==PAGE:472==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
3 / 15 
About company 
BAYO.S SE is the world's leading manufacturer and innovator in the field of ground screws. We have been providing complex 
services from the development of our own design solutions, through production to installation using our own technology since 2007. 
 
We take an individual professional approach to the foundation of buildings, taking into account the specific conditions of the 
site and the project specification. By applying the results of tensile tests at the installation site, the design is optimised both structurally 
and economically. 
 
Continuous development and innovation are translated into a comprehensive system that includes a complex foundation 
design system, specialized installation and testing technology, expert project preparation and precise execution of the work. 
 
As the world's leading manufacturer, our goal is to deliver top quality products. By continuously improving the design and 
production of our system, we enable our customers to implement environmentally sustainable projects while maximizing environmental 
protection. 
 
BAYO.S designs individual products in accordance with valid European standards, in particular EN 1990, EN 1991, EN 1993, 
EN 1997, EN 1999. 
 
BAYO.S has all its products and processes certified by state-accredited authorized companies with regard to the specific 
markets where it markets its products. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:473==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
4 / 15 
2. PRODUCT 
2.1 Product description 
DIY GROUND SCREWS 
 
DIY EXTENDABLE GROUND SCREWS from the pipe 65x2 mm 
Ground screws designed for hobby construction: pergolas, gazebos, terraces, garden houses, etc. They are suitable for laying 
in more difficult conditions due to their variability. 
 
DIY FIXED GROUND SCREWS from the pipe 65x2 mm 
Ground screws designed for hobby construction: sheds, fences, children's kits, etc. The screws are suitable for structures with 
dynamic loads. 
 
SEMI FIXED GROUND SCREWS  
 
SEME GROUND SCREWS from the pipe 76x2,6 mm 
Ground screw for medium-sized projects such as industrial fences and gates, urban furniture, traffic signs, large terraces. 
The screws are mainly intended for wholesale and trained customers. 
 
PROFI GROUND SCREWS 
 
PROFI FIXED GROUND SCREWS from the pipe 76x3,6 mm 
Ground screws for large professional projects such as wooden buildings, storage halls, modules, containers, mobile homes. 
The screws are intended for professional machine installation only. 
 
PRO EXTENDABLE GROUND SCREWS NL from the pipe 76x3,6 mm 
Ground screws for large professional projects such as wooden buildings, storage halls, modules, containers, mobile homes. 
For foundation work in more complex conditions where ground leveling is required. 
The screws are intended for professional machine installation only. 
 
PRO EXTENDABLE GROUND SCREWS PRM from the pipe 76x5 mm 
PRO EXTENDABLE GROUND SCREWS PRM from the pipe 89x5 mm 
Ground screws for large professional projects such as wooden buildings, storage halls, modules, containers, mobile homes. 
For foundation work in more difficult conditions, where it is necessary to deal with ground leveling or for buildings where a higher load-
bearing capacity of the foundation is needed. 
The screws are intended for professional machine installation only. 
 
SOLAR SCREWS from the pipe 76x3 mm 
Ground screws designed specifically for the foundation of large solar power plant projects. Ground screws are designed 
specifically for anchoring structures to solar panels. 
The screws are intended for professional machine installation only. 
 
2.2 Application 
DIY GROUND SCREWS 
Ground screws designed to be installed in the ground using a hand wrench or 1:20 gear set. 
 
SEMI FIXED GROUND SCREWS 
Ground screws designed to be installed in the ground using a hand-held profi wrench or 1:150 gear set. 
 
PROFI GROUND SCREWS 
Ground screws designed to be installed in the ground using mechanisation such as an awl or crawler. 
 
SOLAR SCREWS 
Ground screws designed to be installed in the ground using mechanisation such as an awl or crawler. 
 
==PAGE:474==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
5 / 15 
2.3 Technical data 
ItemNo
Item name
Weight Kg
DIY EXTENDABLE SCREW pipe 65x2 mm
51101
SCREW TIP 500
1,87
51102 
SCREW TIP 600 
2,20 
51103
SCREW TIP 700
2,50
51201
EXTENSION 250
1,10
51202
EXTENSION 500
2,00
51301 
U-70 TOP 
1,10 
51302
U-80 TOP
1,10
51303
U-90 TOP
1,10
51304
U-100 TOP
1,20
51305 
U-120 TOP 
1,30 
51306
NUT TOP 3xM8
0,75
51307-M12
HEX TOP M12
1,20
51307-M16
HEX TOP M16
1,20
51308-M12 
FLAT TOP M12 
0,50 
51308-M16
FLAT TOP M16
0,50
51309
L TOP
0,80
51310
T TOP
0,80
51401 
CAP 70 
0,14 
51402
CAP 48
0,13
DIY SCREW pipe 65x2 mm
52101
SCREW U-80 600
2,80
52102 
SCREW U-100 600 
2,85 
52103
SCREW U-80 750
3,24
52104
SCREW U-100 750
3,30
52105
SCREW U-120 750
3,35
52106 
SCREW U-90 750 
3,40 
52107
SCREW U-110 750
3,50
52201
SCREW NUT-1 M6 60x550 RR
2,20
52202
SCREW NUT-3 M8 600
2,30
52203
SCREW NUT-3 M8 750
2,40
53001
SCREW FENCE 500
1,80
53002
SCREW FENCE 600
2,10
SEMI SCREW
53111
SCREW NUT-3 M16 76x2,6 800
4,10
53113
SCREW NUT-3 M16 76x2,6 1050
5,40
53114
SCREW NUT-4 M12 66-89x800 W
3,80
53115
SCREW HEX-120 M12 76x2,6x800
4,20
53116
SCREW HEX-120 M12 76x2,6x1050
5,60
PROFI SCREW
56113
SCREW NUT-3 M16 76x3,6x1250
8,50
56114
SCREW NUT-3 M16 76x3,6x1550
10,50
56115
SCREW NUT-3 M16 76x3,6x2050
14,00
==PAGE:475==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
6 / 15 
56121
SCREW NUT-4 M16 89x3,6x800
6,20
56122
SCREW NUT-4 M16 89x3,6x1050
8,20
56123
SCREW NUT-4 M16 89x3,6x1250
10,00
56213
SCREW HEX-120 M12 76x3,6x1250
8,90
56214
SCREW HEX-160 M16 76x3,6x1550
12,00
56215
SCREW HEX-160 M16 76x3,6x2050
15,50
56216 
SCREW HEX-160 M16 76x3,6x2400 
17,70 
56217
SCREW HEX-160 M16 76x5x2050
21,80
56225
SCREW HEX-160 M16 89x3,6x2050
17,90
56313
SCREW ROUND-200 M16 76x3,6x1250
10,20
56314 
SCREW ROUND-200 M16 76x3,6x1550 
12,10 
56315
SCREW ROUND-200 M16 76x3,6x2050
15,40
56443
SCREW RIM 76-140x3,6x1300 W
12,30
PROFI EXTENDABLE SCREW
55100NL 
NL SCREW TIP 76x3,6x1050 
6,90 
55101NL
NL SCREW TIP 76x3,6x1250
8,50
55102NL
NL SCREW TIP 76x3,6x1550
10,50
55103NL
NL SCREW TIP 76x3,6x2050
14,00
55202NL 
NL EXTENSION 76x3,6x650 
4,90 
55203NL
NL EXTENSION 76x3,6x900
6,50
55208NL
NL EXTENSION 76x3,6x1400
9,80
55209NL
NL EXTENSION 76x3,6x1900
13,00
55301NL 
NL HEX TOP M16 
2,70 
55303NL
NL ROUND TOP M16
2,90
57103
PRM SCREW TIP 76x5x1550
14,30
57104
PRM SCREW TIP 76x5x2050
19,00
57202 
PRM EXTENSION 76x5x750 
6,80 
57203
PRM EXTENSION 76x5x1000
9,00
57204
PRM EXTENSION 76x5x1500
13,40
57205
PRM EXTENSION 76x5x2000
17,80
57301 
PRM HEX TOP M16 76x5 
2,60 
57500
PRM COUPLING TO 76x5
1,80
58103
PRM SCREW TIP 89x5x1550
17,00
58104
PRM SCREW TIP 89x5x2050
22,20
58202 
PRM EXTENSION 89x5x750 
7,90 
58203
PRM EXTENSION 89x5x1000
10,40
58204
PRM EXTENSION 89x5x1500
15,50
58205
PRM EXTENSION 89x5x2000
20,70
58301 
PRM HEX TOP M16 89x5 
2,60 
58302
PRM ROUND TOP M16 89x5
2,90
58500
PRM COUPLING TO 89x5
1,70
SOLAR SCREW
493
SCREW NUT-3 M16 76x3x1250
7,00
494
SCREW NUT-3 M16 76x3x1550
9,00
 
==PAGE:476==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
7 / 15 
 
2.4 Base materials / Ancillary materials  
 
Product does not contain Substance of Very High Concern. 
Average products content declaration 
 
Materials / components 
Substances 
% 
Steel 
- 
96,5 % 
Zinc coat 
- 
3,5 % 
 
UN CPC Code: 
41287, 42190 
 
 
==PAGE:477==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
8 / 15 
3. LCA CALCULATION INFORMATION 
FUNCTIONAL UNIT / DECLARED UNIT 
Covering 1 kg of each of products 
to find out the results of the individual products, the values in chapt. 4 must 
be multiplied by their weight 
the results for individual products can be provided by the producer 
SYSTEM BOUNDARIES 
Cradle To Gate 
REFERENCE SERVICE LIFE (RSL) 
According to the service life of the building / part of building  
CUT-OFF RULES 
1% of primary energy and total mass input of the unit process 
<5% of energy usage and mass for neglected input flows per stage   
ALLOCATIONS 
Mass allocation of production has been applied for the input materials and 
energies 
GEOGRAPHICAL COVERAGE 
AND TIME PERIOD 
Scope includes manufacture in Czech Republic in 2020 
ELECTRICITY PROCESS USED 
The gross electricity generation mix of the Czech Republic in 2020 was used 
TRANSPORT SCENARIOS 
Specific data for transport of raw materials and internal transport were used 
for calculation of A2 phase. Transport of waste in A3 considers 50 km distance 
to a hypothetical disposal site. The 16-32 t load EURO5 trucks are considered 
as vehicles for transport of materials and wastes respectively 
DATABASE(S) AND LCA SOFTWARE USED: 
Ecoinvent 3.8 database installed in SimaPro 9.3 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
Further details regarding the certified product are available at the company 
website https://www.bayo-s.com/  
SYSTEM DIAGRAM: 
 
 
 
==PAGE:478==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
9 / 15 
 
 
 
==PAGE:479==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
10 / 15 
Description of the system boundary (X = included in the LCA, MND = Module Not Declared) 
Product 
stage 
Constructi
on 
stage 
Use 
stage 
End of life  
stage 
Benefits and 
loads 
beyond the 
system 
boundary 
Raw material supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Construction-Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy use 
Operational water use 
De-construction 
demolition
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Reuse-recovery 
A1 
A
2
A
3
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
X – module declared 
ND – module not declared
 
==PAGE:480==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
11 / 15 
4. LCA RESULTS 
4.1 Environmental impacts 
Impact category 
Unit 
Total 
A1 – A3 
A1 
A2 
A3 
Abiotic depletion 
kg Sb eq 
6.88E-05 
6.81E-05 
5.25E-07 
1.36E-07 
Abiotic depletion (fossil fuels) 
MJ 
3.56E+01 
3.01E+01 
5.31E+00 
1.48E-01 
Global warming (GWP100a) 
kg CO2 eq 
3.51E+00 
2.94E+00 
3.77E-01 
1.90E-01 
Ozone layer depletion (ODP) 
kg CFC-11 eq 
2.31E-07 
1.64E-07 
6.62E-08 
8.84E-10 
Photochemical oxidation 
kg C2H4 eq 
1.18E-03 
1.00E-03 
1.65E-04 
7.78E-06 
Acidification 
kg SO2 eq 
1.35E-02 
1.12E-02 
2.22E-03 
8.09E-05 
Eutrophication 
kg PO4 eq 
6.88E-05 
6.81E-05 
5.25E-07 
1.36E-07 
 
 
==PAGE:481==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
12 / 15 
4.2 Resource use 
 
Parameter 
Unit 
Total 
A1 – A3 
A1 
A2 
A3 
Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials 
MJ, net calorific value 
3.18E+00 
2.96E+00 
4.60E-02 
1.72E-01 
Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials 
MJ, net calorific value 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Total use of renewable primary energy resources (primary energy and primary energy 
resources used as raw materials) 
MJ, net calorific value 
3.18E+00 
2.96E+00 
4.60E-02 
1.72E-01 
Use of non- renewable primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources 
used as raw materials 
MJ, net calorific value 
4.37E+01 
3.78E+01 
5.71E+00 
1.95E-01 
Use of non- renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials 
MJ, net calorific value 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Total use of non- renewable primary energy resources (primary energy and primary energy 
resources used as raw materials) 
MJ, net calorific value 
4.37E+01 
3.78E+01 
5.71E+00 
1.95E-01 
Use of secondary material 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Use of renewable secondary fuels 
MJ, net calorific value 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Use of non-renewable secondary fuels 
MJ, net calorific value 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Use of net fresh water 
m3 
1.16E+00 
1.04E+00 
1.16E-02 
1.05E-01 
==PAGE:482==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
13 / 15 
 
4.3   Other environmental information describing waste categories and output flows 
Waste categories  
Parameter 
Unit 
Total 
A1 – A3 
A1 
A2 
A3 
Hazardous waste 
kg 
7.26E-04 
3.60E-04 
1.51E-05 
3.51E-04 
Non-hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
1.33E+00 
1.16E+00 
1.02E-01 
6.96E-02 
Radioactive waste disposed/stored 
kg 
1.73E-04 
1.35E-04 
3.71E-05 
7.84E-07 
 
Output flows  
Waste type 
Unit 
Total 
A1 – A3 
A1 
A2 
A3 
Components for re-use 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for recycling 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy 
MJ per energy 
carrier 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
 
==PAGE:483==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
14 / 15 
5. LCA: INTERPRETATION 
The following diagram the following graph shows the share of each phase (A1, A2, A3) in the results in all impact categories: 
 
 
The comparison shows that phase A1 has the main share in the results of all impact categories. Phase A1 is then of relatively 
little importance. This is due to the fact that the production of products takes place only by the treatment of intermediate products 
(steel roles and plates). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:484==
   
BAYO.S SE ● GROUND SCREWS 
WWW.BAYO-S.COM ● INFO@BAYO-S.COM  
15 / 15 
6. REFERENCES 
1. 
EN 15804:2012+A1:2013  Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declaration – Core rules of the 
product category of construction products 
2. 
ISO 14020: 2000 Environmental labels and declarations - General principles 
3. 
ISO 14025:2006  Environmental labels and declarations – Type III Environmental Declarations – Principles and 
procedures 
4. 
ISO 14040:2006  Environmental management – Life Cycle Assessment – Principles and framework 
5. 
ISO 14044:2006  Environmental management – Life Cycle Assessment – Requirements and guidelines 
==PAGE:485==
Ver. 1 2015
ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION
in accordance with ISO 14025 and EN 15804+A1
Owner of the declaration: 
Program operator: 
Publisher:
Declaration and registration number: 
Issue date:
Valid to:
SunPower
The Norwegian EPD Foundation 
The Norwegian EPD Foundation 
NEPD-3087-1726-EN
09.09.2021
09.09.2026
MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
SunPower
www.epd-norge.no
NEPD-3087-1726-EN MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
==PAGE:486==
1/7
General information
Product
MAXEON 3
MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
Program holder
The Norwegian EPD Foundation
Post Box 5250 Majorstuen, 0303 Oslo, Norway
Phone:
e-mail:
(+47) 23 08 80 00 
post@epd-norge.no
Declaration number
NEPD-3087-1726-EN
This declaration is based on Product Category Rules: 
NPCR 029 version 1.1
Statements
The owner of the declaration shall be liable for the underlying 
information and evidence.
EPD Norway shall not be liable with respect to manufacturer, 
life cycle assessment data and evidences.
Declared unit:
1m² of mono-crystalline solar panel
Declared unit with option:
N/A
Functional unit:
1 Wp of manufactured photovoltaic module, from cradle-to-
grave, with activities needed for a study period for a defined 
reference service life (≥80% of the labelled power output)
Verification:
Independent verification of the declaration and data, 
according to ISO14025:2010
☐internal
☒external
Third party verifier:
Michael M. Jenssen, Asplan Viak AS
(Independent verifier approved by EPD Norway)
Owner of the declaration
SunPower
Manufacturer
SunPower
12 Allée du Levant, 69890 La Tour de Salvagny, France
Phone:
(+33) 7 60 59 84 73
e-mail:
Karin.Alberto-Burkhardt@sunpower.com
Web:
www.sunpower.com
Place of production:
Prolongación Lazaro Cardenas, Agustín Sanguines 3101, Huertas 
de La Progreso, 21188 Mexicali, B.C
Mexico
Management system:
ISO 14001, ISO 9001
Organisation no:  
FR52344584818
Issue date
09.09.2021
Valid to
09.09.2026
Year of study:
2020
Comparability:
EPD of construction products may not be comparable 
if they do not comply with EN15804 and are seen in a 
building context
The EPD has been worked out by:
EVEA
11 rue Voltaire
44000 NANTES
FRANCE
Approved
NEPD-3087-1726-EN MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
==PAGE:487==
2/7
Product
Product description:
400Wp mono-crystalline solar photovoltaic 
module with back-contact conductivity, solid 
metal backing and thick connectors. The 
panels are designed to be installed on roofs 
or as stand-alone systems for local power 
production.
The 2 other products covered by the PEP 
differ only in colour for the BLK product and 
the connector type for the COM product. 
As the differences between products is 
minor, no averaging has been performed.
To produce their panels, SunPower sources 
silicon wafers from Norway and the US, 
which are sent to their factory in the 
Phillipines to produce the solar cells. These 
cells are then sent to their factory in 
Mexico, where they are assembled with the 
backsheet, frame and electrical connections 
to produce the finished solar module.
Product specification
Sold as individual panels, with an effective 
surface area of 1.77m². The packaging 
consists of LDPE film, PP, PET and a 
cardboard box, and the panels are 
delivered on a wooden pallet.
The product consists of the following 
materials per functional unit:
Technical data:
The panel considered for this EPD has a power rating of 400W.
1 complete panel has a mass of 19 kg without packaging.
The packaging per panel weighs 1.36 kg.
The overall dimensions are 1690x1046x40 mm.
Certified: IEC 61215, IEC 61730 Class 1 fire rated per UNI
9177
Market:
Norway / Europe / World
Reference service life:
25 years
Materials
kg / FU
%
 Copper
1,63E-04
0,31%
 Tin
6,52E-06
0,01%
 Silver
2,72E-07
0,00%
 Cell
1,19E-03
2,29%
 Label
1,23E-05
0,02%
 Junction BOX
5,49E-04
1,06%
 Backsheet PET
8,14E-04
1,57%
 EVA
3,52E-03
6,80%
 Aluminium
3,99E-03
7,72%
 Solar glass
3,81E-02
73,58%
 Packaging : LDPE
 Film
3,85E-07
0,00%
 Packaging : PP
4,09E-04
0,79%
 Packaging : PET
8,14E-04
1,57%
 Packaging :  
 Cardboard
2,56E-05
0,05%
 Packaging :  Pallet
2,17E-03
4,20%
NEPD-3087-1726-EN MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
==PAGE:488==
3/7
LCA: Calculation rules
Functional unit:
System boundary:
1 Wp of manufactured photovoltaic module, from cradle-to-grave, 
with activities needed for a study period for a defined reference 
service life (≥80% of the labelled power output)
Declared unit:
1 m² of photovoltaic module – 1 m² = 226 Wp
 The flow chart for the life cycle of SunPower Maxeon 
panels is shown below.
Data quality:
Specific data provided by SunPower for the year 2019.
The procedures defined by the PCR regarding the data quality 
have been respected according to the following criteria:
• Temporal factor: LCI data has been sourced from the database
ecoinvent 3.6, which was updated in 2019, and ELCD, updated in
2018. As such all LCI data has been updated within the last 10
years All primary data dates from product specific data collections
from within the last 5 years.
• Geographical factor: Datasets appropriate to the location of the
modelled flow have been selected when available. Certain
datasets have been modified to better reflect the specific energy
consumptions (see Appendix 2) of certain countries which are not
available in the database. When specific data for a country is not
available and could not be created, European processes were
selected for flows attributed to Europe, and Global or Rest of
World flows were used for all other flows.
• Technological factor: Datasets have been selected according to
the actual processes used by the manufacturer. For generic
products where no upstream data is available (e.g. packaging),
manufacturing has been modelled according current practices.
Allocation:
The allocation is made in accordance with the provisions of ISO 
14025. Incoming energy and water and waste production in-house is 
allocated equally among all products through mass allocation. Effects 
of primary production of recycled materials allocated to the main 
product in which the material was used. The recycling process and 
transportation of the material is allocated to this analysis.
Cut-off criteria: 
All major raw materials and all the essential energy is 
included. The production process for raw materials and 
energy flows that are included with very small amounts (<1%) 
are not included – this included certain packaging materials 
used for the transport of components to the main production 
facility. The infrastructure relating to the manufacturing facility 
has also been exclude as it has negligeable impacts when 
considering the quantity of panels produced.
This cut-off rule does not apply for hazardous materials and 
substances.
NEPD-3087-1726-EN MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
==PAGE:489==
4/7
LCA: Scenarios and additional technical information
The following information describe the scenarios in the different modules of the EPD. All data is provided per functional unit
The transports step A4 covers the transport from the factory in Mexico to Europe by boat and truck.
Transport from production place to assembly/user (A4)
Type
Capacity utilisation (incl. return) % Type of vehicle
Distance km
Fuel/Energy
Value
consumption
(tkm)
Truck
36
EURO5 16-32T
1000
0.0375 kg/tkm
0.09
Boat
50
Transoceanic Freight
8800
0.002 kg/tkm
0.79
Assembly (A5)
The installation of the product requires some metallic fasteners (screws). 
The waste from the products packaging is counted in this stage.
Unit
Value
Auxiliary (screws)
kg
2.34E-05
Material loss
kg
-
Output materials from waste treatment
kg
3.42E-03
Operational energy (B6) and water consumption (B7)
The panels produce electricity during their lifetime but require no inputs/outputs.
To calculate the expected energy production over the lifetime of the panels, the following formula may be used: 
𝐸𝑛𝑒𝑟𝑔𝑦=
25
∑
𝑘= 1
𝑃𝑦𝑖𝑒𝑙𝑑×
𝑃𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑
1000 × (𝜂𝑟‒ 0.0025𝑘)
Where: 
Energy = Total energy produced by one panel (kWh)
Pyield = Average electricity produced per kWp (kWh/kWp – values available from IEC 61853-3)
Prated = Energy rating of the panel (kWp)
ƞr = 1 - Efficiency of the panel, assumed to consistently decrease by 0,25% per year for 25 years (initial value at k=1 of 99,75% efficiency 
assumed for the degradation during the first year)
End of Life (C1, C3, C4)
The end of life scenario taken into account is that of the program 
PVCYCLE, to which SunPower subscribe. Panels are sent for 
processing and separated into their component parts for recycling 
or elimination.
Transport to waste processing (C2)
Unit
Value
Hazardous waste disposed
kg
-
Collected as mixed construction waste
kg
4,83E-02
Reuse
kg
-
Recycling
kg
4,34E-02
Energy recovery
kg
4,88E-03
To landfill
kg
1,23E-05
Type
Capacity utilisation (incl. return) %
Type of vehicle
Distance km
Fuel/Energy 
Consumption
Value
(tkm)
Truck
36
EURO5 16-32T
100
0.0375 kg/tkm
0.084
NEPD-3087-1726-EN MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
==PAGE:490==
5/7
LCA: Results
The LCA results show the environmental impacts and resource input and output flows calculated according to EN 15804:2012+A1.
The results are shown per functional unit, which for this declaration is 1Wp, as well as per declared unit, which for this declaration is 1 m².
The LCA results have been calculated using the LCA software SimaPro 9.
System boundaries (X=included, MND=module not declared, MNR=module not relevant)
Product stage
Assembly 
stage
Use stage
End of life stage
Beyond the
system
boundaries
Raw materials
  Transport
Manufacturing
Transport
Assembly
Use
Maintenance
Repair
Replacement
Refurbishment
Operational energy 
use
Operational water 
use
De-construction 
demolition
Transport
Waste processing
Disposal
Reuse-Recovery-
Recycling-potential
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
C1
C2
C3
C4
D
X
X
X
X
X
MNR
MNR
MNR
MNR
MNR
MNR
MNR
MNR
X
X
X
X
NEPD-3087-1726-EN MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
==PAGE:491==
6/7
Environmental impact – Functional Unit
Parameter
Unit
A1 – A3
A4
A5
C2
C3
C4
D
GWP
kg CO2 -eqv
3,42E-01
1,35E-02
8,56E-04
7,97E-04
5,73E-04
6,39E-06
-1,38E-01
ODP
kg CFC11-eqv
3,47E-07
2,28E-09
2,07E-11
1,46E-10
5,87E-11
4,56E-14
-9,02E-09
POCP
kg C2H4 -eqv
2,89E-04
1,13E-05
1,26E-07
4,15E-07
1,65E-07
2,58E-10
-4,84E-05
AP
kg SO2 -eqv
1,86E-03
1,33E-04
7,42E-07
2,55E-06
2,18E-06
2,74E-09
-5,57E-04
EP
kg PO43--eqv
2,60E-04
1,37E-05
1,55E-07
4,15E-07
3,05E-07
8,93E-10
-6,88E-05
ADPM
kg Sb-eqv
5,23E-05
2,39E-07
3,69E-09
2,18E-08
3,27E-09
3,58E-12
-1,43E-05
ADPE
3,95E+00
1,90E-01
2,06E-03
1,19E-02
5,37E-03
3,83E-06
-1,35E+00
3,83E-06
GWP Global warming potential; ODP Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone layer; POCP Formation potential of tropospheric 
photochemical oxidants; AP Acidification potential of land and water; EP Eutrophication potential; ADPM Abiotic depletion potential for non 
fossil resources; ADPE Abiotic depletion potential for fossil resources
RPEE Renewable primary energy resources used as energy carrier; RPEM Renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; 
TPE Total use of renewable primary energy resources; NRPE Non renewable primary energy resources used as energy carrier; NRPM 
Non renewable primary energy resources used as materials; TRPE Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM Use of 
secondary materials; RSF Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF Use of non renewable secondary fuels; W Use of net fresh water
End of life - Waste – Functional Unit
Parameter
Unit
A1 – A3
A4
A5
C2
C3
C4
D
HW
kg
2,51E-02
1,46E-04
3,44E-05
7,81E-06
3,28E-05
3,28E-06
-1,34E-03
NHW
kg
1,77E-01
7,54E-03
4,35E-04
6,38E-04
1,77E-04
1,56E-07
-3,92E-02
RW
kg
1,67E-05
1,31E-06
1,29E-08
8,28E-08
6,79E-08
1,42E-11
-4,46E-06
HW Hazardous waste disposed; NHW Non hazardous waste disposed; RW Radioactive waste disposed
End of life - Output flow – Functional Unit
Parameter
Unit
A1 – A3
A4
A5
C2
C3
C4
D
CR
kg
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
MR
kg
3,76E-03
0,00E+00
2,21E-03
0,00E+00
4,32E-02
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
MER
kg
1,61E-04
0,00E+00
5,68E-04
0,00E+00
4,88E-03
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
EEE
MJ
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
ETE
MJ
5,97E+00
1,99E-01
2,58E-03
1,23E-02
1,11E-02
4,14E-06
-2,02E+00
CR Components for reuse; MR Materials for recycling; MER Materials for energy recovery; EEE Exported electric energy; ETE Exported 
thermal energy
Reading example: 9,0 E-03 = 9,0*10-3 = 0,009
Resource use – Functional Unit
Parameter
Unit
A1 – A3
A4
A5
C2
C3
C4
D
RPEE
MJ
1,41E+00
3,53E-03
1,81E-04
1,71E-04
1,73E-03
1,31E-07
-4,73E-01
RPEM
MJ
4,11E-02
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
TPE
MJ
1,61E+00
3,53E-03
1,81E-04
1,71E-04
1,73E-03
1,31E-07
-4,73E-01
NRPE
MJ
4,56E+00
1,95E-01
2,40E-03
1,21E-02
9,37E-03
4,01E-06
-1,55E+00
NRPM
MJ
2,09E-01
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
TRPE
MJ
4,77E+00
1,95E-01
2,39E-03
1,21E-02
9,37E-03
4,01E-06
-1,55E+00
SM
kg
2,85E-03
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
RSF
MJ
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
NRSF
MJ
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
W
m3
1,63E-02
2,17E-05
2,19E-06
1,25E-06
1,11E-05
1,43E-08
-1,15E-03
NEPD-3087-1726-EN MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
==PAGE:492==
7/7
Environmental impact – Declared Unit (1 m²)
Parameter
Unit
A1 – A3
A4
A5
C2
C3
C4
D
GWP
kg CO2 -eqv
7,72E+01
3,04E+00
1,93E-01
1,80E-01
1,29E-01
1,45E-03
-3,12E+01
ODP
kg CFC11-eqv
7,84E-05
5,15E-07
4,67E-09
3,30E-08
1,33E-08
1,03E-11
-2,04E-06
POCP
kg C2H4 -eqv
6,53E-02
2,56E-03
2,84E-05
9,37E-05
3,73E-05
5,84E-08
-1,09E-02
AP
kg SO2 -eqv
5,87E-02
3,09E-03
3,51E-05
9,38E-05
6,90E-05
2,02E-07
-1,55E-02
EP
kg PO43--eqv
5,87E-02
3,09E-03
3,51E-05
9,38E-05
6,90E-05
2,02E-07
-1,55E-02
ADPM
kg Sb-eqv
1,18E-02
5,39E-05
8,35E-07
4,93E-06
7,38E-07
8,08E-10
-3,23E-03
ADPE
8,92E+02
4,29E+01
4,65E-01
2,69E+00
1,21E+00
8,65E-04
-3,06E+02
8,65E-04
GWP Global warming potential; ODP Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone layer; POCP Formation potential of tropospheric 
photochemical oxidants; AP Acidification potential of land and water; EP Eutrophication potential; ADPM Abiotic depletion potential for non 
fossil resources; ADPE Abiotic depletion potential for fossil resources
x
NEPD-3087-1726-EN MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
==PAGE:493==
8/7
Resource use – Declared Unit (1 m²)
Parameter
Unit
A1 – A3
A4
A5
C2
C3
C4
D
RPEE
MJ
3,19E+02
7,98E-01
4,09E-02
3,87E-02
3,90E-01
2,95E-05
-1,07E+02
RPEM
MJ
9,29E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
TPE
MJ
3,64E+02
7,98E-01
4,09E-02
3,87E-02
3,90E-01
2,95E-05
-1,07E+02
NRPE
MJ
1,03E+03
4,41E+01
5,41E-01
2,74E+00
2,12E+00
9,06E-04
-3,50E+02
NRPM
MJ
4,73E+01
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
TRPE
MJ
1,08E+03
4,41E+01
5,41E-01
2,74E+00
2,12E+00
9,06E-04
-3,49E+02
SM
kg
6,45E-01
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
RSF
MJ
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
NRSF
MJ
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
W
m3
3,69E+00
4,91E-03
4,96E-04
2,83E-04
2,50E-03
3,22E-06
-2,61E-01
RPEE Renewable primary energy resources used as energy carrier; RPEM Renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; 
TPE Total use of renewable primary energy resources; NRPE Non renewable primary energy resources used as energy carrier; NRPM 
Non renewable primary energy resources used as materials; TRPE Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM Use of 
secondary materials; RSF Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF Use of non renewable secondary fuels; W Use of net fresh water
End of life - Waste – Declared Unit (1 m²)
Parameter
Unit
A1 – A3
A4
A5
C2
C3
C4
D
HW
kg
5,68E+00
3,29E-02
7,78E-03
1,76E-03
7,41E-03
7,42E-04
-3,04E-01
NHW
kg
3,99E+01
1,70E+00
9,83E-02
1,44E-01
4,01E-02
3,52E-05
-8,86E+00
RW
kg
3,78E-03
2,96E-04
2,91E-06
1,87E-05
1,53E-05
3,21E-09
-1,01E-03
HW Hazardous waste disposed; NHW Non hazardous waste disposed; RW Radioactive waste disposed
End of life - Output flow – Declared Unit (1 m²)
Parameter
Unit
A1 – A3
A4
A5
C2
C3
C4
D
CR
kg
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
MR
kg
8,49E-01
0,00E+00
5,00E-01
0,00E+00
9,77E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
MER
kg
3,63E-02
0,00E+00
1,28E-01
0,00E+00
1,10E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
EEE
MJ
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
0,00E+00
ETE
MJ
1,35E+03
4,49E+01
5,82E-01
2,78E+00
2,51E+00
9,35E-04
-4,56E+02
CR Components for reuse; MR Materials for recycling; MER Materials for energy recovery; EEE Exported electric energy; ETE Exported 
thermal energy
NEPD-3087-1726-EN MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
==PAGE:494==
9/7
Additional Norwegian requirements
Greenhouse gas emission from the use of electricity in the manufacturing phase
National production mix from import, medium voltage (production of transmission lines, in addition to direct emissions and 
losses in grid) of applied electricity for the manufacturing process (A3).
Data source
Process
Amount
Unit
Mexico: Ecoinvent v3.6
Electricity, medium voltage {MX}| market for | Cut-off, U
0.583
CO2-eqv/kWh
Phillipines: Ecoinvent v3.6
Electricity, medium voltage {PH}| market for electricity, 
medium voltage | Cut-off, U
0.723
CO2-eqv/kWh
Germany: Ecoinvent v3.6
Electricity, medium voltage {DE}| market for | Cut-off, U
0.168
CO2-eqv/kWh
Norway: Ecoinvent v3.6
Electricity, medium voltage {NO}| market for | Cut-off, U
0.020
CO2-eqv/kWh
USA: Ecoinvent v3.6
Electricity, medium voltage {US}| market group for | Cut-off, U
0.558
CO2-eqv/kWh
Dangerous substances

The product contains no substances given by the REACH Candidate list or the Norwegian priority list.
Indoor environment
No tests have been carried out on the product concerning indoor climate.
Carbon footprint
Carbon footprint has not been worked out for the product.
Bibliography
ISO 14025:2010
Environmental labels and declarations - Type III environmental declarations - Principles and
procedures
ISO 14044:2006
Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Requirements and guidelines
EN 15804:2012+A1:2013
Sustainability of construction works - Environmental product declaration - Core rules for the
product category of construction products
ISO 21930:2007
Sustainability in building construction - Environmental declaration of building products
LCA Report
SUNPOWER MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE REPORT 
(EVEA, 2021)
LCA Report
Life Cycle Assessment – Modules production in Mexico, Ensenada (Solstyce SAS, 
2018)
PCR
NPCR 029 version 1.1
PCR – Part B for photovoltaic modules used in the building and construction industry, 
including production of cell, wafer, ingot block, solar grade silicon,
solar substrates, solar superstrates and other solar grade semiconductor materials
Other references
-
Program operator
Phone:
The Norwegian EPD Foundation
Post Box 5250 Majorstuen, 0303 Oslo
e-mail:
Norway
web
+47 23 08 80 00
post@epd-norge.no 
www.epd-norge.no
Publisher
Phone:
+47 23 08 80 00
The Norwegian EPD Foundation
Post Box 5250 Majorstuen, 0303 Oslo
e-mail:
post@epd-norge.no
Norway
web
www.epd-norge.no
Owner of the declaration
Phone:
+33 7 60 59 84 73
SunPower
12 Allée du Levant
69890 La Tour de Salvagny
e-mail:
Karin.Alberto-
Burkhardt@sunpower.co
m
France
web
www.sunpower.com
Author of the Life Cycle Assessment
Phone:
+33 2 28 07 87 00
EVEA
11 rue Voltaire
44000 Nantes
e-mail:
info@evea-conseil.com
France
web
www.evea-conseil.com
NEPD-3087-1726-EN MAXEON 3 MONO-CRYSTALLINE PHOTOVOLTAIC MODULE
==PAGE:495==
 
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH EN 15804+A2 & ISO 14025 / ISO 21930 
 
SWEDOOR ADVANCE-LINE, EXTERIOR DOORS, 77 mm, UNGLAZED, ECO 
ADVANCE-LINE Character, ADVANCE-LINE Classic, ADVANCE-LINE Function, ADVANCE-LINE custom designs 
JELD-WEN 
 
 
 
 
EPD HUB, HUB-0450 
Publishing date 12 May 2023, last updated on 12 May 2023, valid until 12 May 2028 
Created with One Click LCA 
==PAGE:496==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VP-005  
 
2 
SWEDOOR ADVANCE-LINE, Exterior Doors, 77 mm, Unglazed, ECO 
Created with One Click LCA 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
MANUFACTURER  
Manufacturer VP-001 
JELD-WEN 
Address VP-002 
Retford Road, Woodhouse Mill, Sheffield, South 
Yorkshire, S13 9WH 
Contact details VP-003 
eu_sustainability@jeldwen.com 
Website 
www.jeld-wen.biz 
EPD STANDARDS, SCOPE AND VERIFICATION 
Program operator 
EPD Hub, hub@epdhub.com 
Reference standard 
EN 15804+A2:2019 and ISO 14025 
PCR 
EPD Hub Core PCR version 1.0, 1 Feb 2022   
EN 17213 Windows and doors 
Sector 
Construction product 
Category of EPD 
Third party verified EPD 
Scope of the EPD 
Cradle to gate with options, A4-A5, and modules 
C1-C4, D 
EPD author VP-004 
Piia Peever 
EPD verification 
Independent verification of this EPD and data, 
according to ISO 14025: 
 Internal certification  External verification 
EPD verifier VP-055 
H.N, as an authorized verifier acting for EPD  
Hub Limited 
 
The manufacturer has the sole ownership, liability, and responsibility for 
the EPD. EPDs within the same product category but from different 
programs may not be comparable. EPDs of construction products may not 
be comparable if they do not comply with EN 15804 and if they are not 
compared in a building context. 
 
PRODUCT  
Product name VP-007 
SWEDOOR ADVANCE-LINE, 
Exterior Doors, 77 mm, Unglazed, 
ECO 
Additional labels 
ADVANCE-LINE Character, 
ADVANCE-LINE Classic,  
ADVANCE-LINE Function, 
ADVANCE-LINE custom designs 
Place of production  
Aizkraukle, Latvia 
Period for data 
Calendar year 2021 
Averaging in EPD  
No averaging 
ENVIRONMENTAL DATA SUMMARY 
Declared unit 
one square meter (m2) 
Declared unit mass 
23.46 kg 
GWP-fossil, A1-A3 (kgCO2e) 
6,79E1 
GWP-total, A1-A3 (kgCO2e) 
3,44E1 
Secondary material, inputs (%) 
0.911 
Secondary material, outputs (%) 
69.5 
Total energy use, A1-A3 (kWh) 
330.0 
Total water use, A1-A3 (m3e) 
9,38E‐1 
 
 
==PAGE:497==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VP-005  
 
3 
SWEDOOR ADVANCE-LINE, Exterior Doors, 77 mm, Unglazed, ECO 
Created with One Click LCA 
PRODUCT AND MANUFACTURER 
ABOUT THE MANUFACTURER 
Headquartered in Charlotte, N.C., USA, JELD-WEN is a leading global 
manufacturer of high-performance interior and exterior building products, 
offering one of the broadest selections of windows, interior and exterior 
doors, and wall systems. JELD-WEN delivers a differentiated customer 
experience, providing construction professionals with durable, energy-
efficient products and labor-saving services that help them maximize 
productivity and create beautiful, secure spaces for all to enjoy. The JELD-
WEN team is driven by innovation and committed to creating safe, 
sustainable 
environments 
for 
customers, 
associates, 
and 
local 
communities. The JELD-WEN family of brands includes JELD-WEN® 
worldwide; LaCantina™ and VPI™ in North America; Swedoor® and DANA® 
in Europe; and Corinthian®, Stegbar®, and Breezway® in Australia.   Visit 
JELD-WEN.com for more information. 
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION VP-009 
Advance-line exterior door 77 mm sandwich doorleaf with core of wood 
fibre, to be installed with either single or double-rebated frame. Suitable 
for use in both private and commercial buildings, main area of use is 1+2 
dwellings. The scope of this EDP is the doorleaf.   
The doors can be manufactured with classification options for 30 minute 
fire rating (EI1 30) and hot or cold smoke classification. Installing doorleaf 
with the frame with sealing would give a sound reducing effect. The 
specific technical standards and addition product information for each 
door design can be found on Swedoor website.  
Further information can be found at www.jeld-wen.biz. 
 
The scope of this EDP is the finished door with all the standard hardware 
and it does not include the frame set. For the whole set, please add the 
EPDs of the frame set of your choice to your project.  
The indicator results have been calculated for product size  
0,925 m x 2,033 m. Surface area of said door is 1,881 m2, which was used 
to obtain information for the declared unit, one square meter of the 
product.  
PRODUCT RAW MATERIAL MAIN COMPOSITION VP-010 
Raw material category 
Amount, mass- % 
Material origin 
Metals 
12 
EU 
Fossil materials 
6 
EU 
Bio-based materials 
82 
EU 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT VP-028-C 
Product’s biogenic carbon content at the factory gate  
Biogenic carbon content in product, kg C 
8.81 
Biogenic carbon content in packaging, kg C 
0.97 
FUNCTIONAL UNIT AND SERVICE LIFE 
Declared unit VP-011 
one square meter (m2) 
Mass per declared unit VP-012 
23.46 kg 
SUBSTANCES, REACH - VERY HIGH CONCERN VP-027-C 
The product does not contain any REACH SVHC substances in amounts 
greater than 0,1 % (1000 ppm). 
 
 
==PAGE:498==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VP-005  
 
4 
SWEDOOR ADVANCE-LINE, Exterior Doors, 77 mm, Unglazed, ECO 
Created with One Click LCA 
PRODUCT LIFE-CYCLE 
SYSTEM BOUNDARY 
This EPD covers the life-cycle modules listed in the following table. 
Product 
stage 
Assembly 
stage 
Use stage 
End of life stage 
Beyond the 
system 
boundaries 
A1 A2 A3 A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
MND MND MND MND MND MND MND x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Raw materials 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Assembly 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
Deconstr./demol. 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Reuse 
Recovery 
Recycling 
Modules not declared = MND. Modules not relevant = MNR. 
MANUFACTURING AND PACKAGING (A1-A3) VP-018 
The environmental impacts considered for the product stage cover the 
manufacturing of raw materials used in the production as well as packaging 
materials and other ancillary materials. Also, fuels used by machines, and 
handling of waste formed in the production processes at the 
manufacturing facilities are included in this stage. The study also considers 
the material losses occurring during the manufacturing processes as well 
as losses during electricity transmission. 
The product is made of solid wood, wood-based boards, metal parts, 
plastic parts and chemicals (glue and paint). The materials are transported 
to JELD-WENs production facility.  
The production of the door begins with the gluing and pressing of the door 
materials. The door leaf is then milled to the correct dimensions and the 
lock and hinge holes are milled. Next, the door leaf moves to the surface 
treatment, where the surface of the door leaf is primed and painted. After 
surface treatment, the lock, hinges and sealings are installed and the 
product will be packed. During the production process, wooden waste and 
chemical waste are being generated. Production waste and loss, including 
waste paint and cuttings of wood are sent to a waste management 
company to be incinerated; wastewater is treated in an average municipal 
treatment plant. Product packaging consist of plastic, cardboard, wood-
based board and wooden pallet. The products are packed on an automated 
packing line and the packed products are stacked on a wooden pallet. After 
packing, the product is ready to be shipped to end customer / construction 
site. 
TRANSPORT AND INSTALLATION (A4-A5) 
Transportation impacts occurred from final products delivery to 
construction site (A4) cover fuel direct exhaust emissions, environmental 
impacts of fuel production, as well as related infrastructure emissions. 
 
The transportation distance is calculated based on the product-specific 
sales data, taking into account the end customer locations; weighted 
average result is being used. The transportation method is assumed to be 
lorry and ferry. Vehicle capacity utilization volume factor is assumed to be 
1 which means full load. In reality, it may vary but as role of transportation 
emissions in total results is small, the variety in load is assumed to be 
negligible. Empty returns are not taken into account as it is assumed that 
return trip is used by the transportation company to serve the needs of 
other clients. Transportation does not cause losses as product are 
packaged properly. Installation includes the generated packaging waste. 
There is no loss on site during construction activities. Energy use during 
installation has not been taken into account, as installing the door only 
requires mounting and fastening. No additional materials are needed for 
installation. 
PRODUCT USE AND MAINTENANCE (B1-B7) VP-043-C 
Air, soil, and water impacts during the use phase have not been studied. 
 
 
==PAGE:499==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VP-005  
 
5 
SWEDOOR ADVANCE-LINE, Exterior Doors, 77 mm, Unglazed, ECO 
Created with One Click LCA 
PRODUCT END OF LIFE (C1-C4, D) VP-049-C 
Consumption of energy and natural resources in demolition process is 
assumed to be negligible.   
It is assumed that the waste is collected as mixed construction waste and 
transported to the waste treatment center. Transportation distance to 
treatment is assumed as 50 km and the transportation method is assumed 
to be lorry (C2).   
Per the end of life scenario of timber windows and doorsets (EN17213 
Annex B), the wood, metal, plastic, paint and glue are sorted. Module C3 
accounts for energy and resource inputs for sorting and treating these 
waste streams for recycling and incineration with energy recovery.  
Per the end of life scenario of timber windows and doorsets (EN17213 
Annex B), 5% of wood, 5% of metal, 5% of plastic and 5% of paint and glue 
waste goes to landfill. Additionally, hazardous waste that is incinerated is 
included in Module C4 while the flow not included in Module D for 
benefits.  
As specific national data is not used for timber / wooden products, then 
according to the end of life scenario of timber windows and doorsets 
(EN17213 Annex B), 100% of sorted timber materials goes to incineration.  
The wooden pallet, wooden board, cardboard packaging and plastic 
packaging used during transportation are also incinerated for energy 
recovery or recycled. The benefits and loads of incineration and recycling 
are included in Module D.  
 
 
 
 
MANUFACTURING PROCESS AND 
SYSTEM BOUNDARY  
 
==PAGE:500==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VP-005  
 
6 
SWEDOOR ADVANCE-LINE, Exterior Doors, 77 mm, Unglazed, ECO 
Created with One Click LCA 
LIFE-CYCLE ASSESSMENT 
CUT-OFF CRITERIA VP-020 
The study does not exclude any modules or processes which are stated 
mandatory in the reference standard and the applied PCR. The study does 
not exclude any hazardous materials or substances. The study includes all 
major raw material and energy consumption. All inputs and outputs of the 
unit processes, for which data is available for, are included in the 
calculation. There is no neglected unit process more than 1% of total mass 
or energy flows. The module specific total neglected input and output 
flows also do not exceed 5% of energy usage or mass. 
 
ALLOCATION, ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS VP-050-C 
Allocation is required if some material, energy, and waste data cannot be 
measured separately for the product under investigation. All allocations 
are done as per the reference standards and the applied PCR. In this study, 
allocation has been done in the following ways: 
 
 
Data type 
Allocation 
Raw materials 
No allocation 
Packaging materials 
Allocated by mass or volume 
Ancillary materials 
Allocated by mass or volume 
Manufacturing energy and 
waste 
Allocated by mass or volume 
AVERAGES AND VARIABILITY VP-026-C 
Type of average 
No averaging 
Averaging method 
Not applicable 
 
This EPD is product and factory specific and does not contain average 
calculations. 
 
LCA SOFTWARE AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 
This EPD has been created using One Click LCA EPD Generator. The LCA and 
EPD have been prepared according to the reference standards and ISO 
14040/14044. Ecoinvent and One Click LCA databases were used as 
sources of environmental data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:501==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
SWEDOOR ADVANCE-LINE, Exterior Doors, 77 mm, Unglazed, ECO 
Created with One Click LCA 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT DATA 
CORE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT INDICATORS – EN 15804+A2, PEF VP-029-C 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP – total1) 
kg CO2e 
8,66E0 
4,32E0 
2,14E1 
3,44E1 
5,58E0 
3,74E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,07E‐1 
3,23E1 
5,5E0 
‐7,48E0 
GWP – fossil 
kg CO2e 
4,58E1 
4,31E0 
1,77E1 
6,79E1 
5,62E0 
1,91E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,07E‐1 
1,55E0 
3,78E0 
‐3,82E1 
GWP – biogenic 
kg CO2e 
‐3,78E1 
2,19E‐3 
3,69E0 
‐3,41E1 
2,69E‐3 
3,55E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
7,74E‐5 
3,07E1 
1,72E0 
3,08E1 
GWP – LULUC 
kg CO2e 
5,66E‐1 
1,51E‐3 
4,69E‐3 
5,72E‐1 
2,1E‐3 
1,35E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
3,21E‐5 
7,84E‐4 
1,45E‐4 
‐5,59E‐2 
Ozone depletion pot. 
kg CFC-11e 
7,19E‐6 
9,76E‐7 
1,55E‐6 
9,72E‐6 
1,27E‐6 
2,37E‐8 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,51E‐8 
7,21E‐8 
5,92E‐8 
‐2,83E‐6 
Acidification potential mol H+e 
3,77E‐1 
2,15E‐2 
6,16E‐2 
4,61E‐1 
3,46E‐2 
7,17E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
4,48E‐4 
4,57E‐3 
8,62E‐3 
‐2,73E‐1 
EP-freshwater2) 
kg Pe 
3,4E‐3 
3,5E‐5 
2,4E‐4 
3,67E‐3 
4,54E‐5 
4,88E‐6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
8,67E‐7 
4,07E‐5 
5,28E‐5 
‐1,54E‐3 
EP-marine 
kg Ne 
5,04E‐2 
6,49E‐3 
1,57E‐2 
7,26E‐2 
9,64E‐3 
1,9E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,35E‐4 
7,78E‐4 
7,76E‐4 
‐3,65E‐2 
EP-terrestrial 
mol Ne 
6,24E‐1 
7,17E‐2 
2,05E‐1 
9,01E‐1 
1,07E‐1 
2,1E‐3 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,49E‐3 
9,06E‐3 
1,08E‐2 
‐4,22E‐1 
POCP (“smog”)3) 
kg NMVOCe 1,9E‐1 
2,13E‐2 
5,3E‐2 
2,64E‐1 
3,09E‐2 
6,59E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
4,79E‐4 
2,76E‐3 
6,62E‐3 
‐1,25E‐1 
ADP-minerals & metals4) 
kg Sbe 
2,54E‐3 
1,1E‐4 
2,84E‐5 
2,68E‐3 
1,44E‐4 
3,23E‐6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,82E‐6 
1,42E‐5 
2,25E‐6 
‐6,58E‐3 
ADP-fossil resources 
MJ 
5,41E2 
6,46E1 
2,63E2 
8,68E2 
8,39E1 
2,43E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,66E0 
9,98E0 
1,21E1 
‐4,32E2 
Water use5) 
m3e depr. 
1,84E2 
2,04E‐1 
1,76E1 
2,02E2 
2,63E‐1 
3,02E‐2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
6,17E‐3 
1,37E‐1 
7,44E‐2 
‐6,38E0 
ADDITIONAL (OPTIONAL) ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT INDICATORS – EN 15804+A2, PEF 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Particulate matter 
Incidence 
4,35E‐6 
3,32E‐7 
3,97E‐7 
5,08E‐6 
3,76E‐7 
1,05E‐8 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
9,64E‐9 
5,06E‐8 
7,6E‐8 
‐3,9E‐6 
Ionizing radiation6) 
kBq U235e 
2,15E0 
2,82E‐1 
8,37E‐1 
3,27E0 
3,66E‐1 
1,15E‐2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
7,25E‐3 
5,37E‐2 
1,75E‐2 
‐1,28E0 
Ecotoxicity (freshwater) 
CTUe 
1,23E3 
4,92E1 
1,62E2 
1,44E3 
6,39E1 
2,22E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,27E0 
2,2E1 
1,15E2 
‐8,88E2 
Human toxicity, cancer 
CTUh 
1,17E‐7 
1,47E‐9 
7,44E‐9 
1,26E‐7 
1,98E‐9 
1,43E‐10 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
3,24E‐11 1,4E‐9 
7,17E‐9 
‐4,99E‐8 
Human tox. non-cancer 
CTUh 
1,38E‐6 
5,51E‐8 
1,18E‐7 
1,56E‐6 
7,12E‐8 
2,61E‐9 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,5E‐9 
2,71E‐8 
1,08E‐7 
‐5,49E‐7 
SQP7) 
- 
8,48E1 
5,15E1 
8,42E0 
1,45E2 
6,57E1 
1,31E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,5E0 
3,25E0 
2,39E0 
‐4,3E1 
 
 
 
==PAGE:502==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
SWEDOOR ADVANCE-LINE, Exterior Doors, 77 mm, Unglazed, ECO 
Created with One Click LCA 
USE OF NATURAL RESOURCES 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Renew. PER as energy8) 
MJ 
2,91E2 
8,81E‐1 
8,17E1 
3,74E2 
1,14E0 
1,48E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,09E‐2 
1,18E0 
2,8E‐1 
‐1,05E2 
Renew. PER as material 
MJ 
3,99E2 
0E0 
‐1,31E1 
3,86E2 
0E0 
‐3,85E1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
‐3,31E2 
‐1,74E1 
0E0 
Total use of renew. PER 
MJ 
6,91E2 
8,81E‐1 
6,86E1 
7,6E2 
1,14E0 
‐3,84E1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,09E‐2 
‐3,29E2 
‐1,71E1 
‐1,05E2 
Non-re. PER as energy 
MJ 
4,96E2 
6,46E1 
2,51E2 
8,12E2 
8,39E1 
2,43E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,66E0 
9,98E0 
1,21E1 
‐4,32E2 
Non-re. PER as material 
MJ 
4,97E1 
0E0 
‐4,12E0 
4,56E1 
0E0 
‐1,13E1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
‐3,26E1 
‐1,72E0 
0E0 
Total use of non-re. PER MJ 
5,46E2 
6,46E1 
2,47E2 
8,58E2 
8,39E1 
‐8,87E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,66E0 
‐2,26E1 
1,03E1 
‐4,32E2 
Secondary materials 
kg 
2,07E‐1 
0E0 
6,91E‐3 
2,14E‐1 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
‐1,79E0 
Renew. secondary fuels 
MJ 
6,37E‐2 
0E0 
0E0 
6,37E‐2 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Non-ren. secondary fuels 
MJ 
3,22E‐2 
0E0 
0E0 
3,22E‐2 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Use of net fresh water 
m3 
8,6E‐1 
1,08E‐2 
6,73E‐2 
9,38E‐1 
1,39E‐2 
6,19E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
3,45E‐4 
4,03E‐3 
6,27E‐3 
‐1,59E‐1 
8) PER = Primary energy resources. 
END OF LIFE – WASTE 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Hazardous waste 
kg 
9,01E0 
6,58E‐2 
2,86E‐1 
9,36E0 
8,55E‐2 
8,43E‐3 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,61E‐3 
0E0 
3,42E‐1 
‐4,58E0 
Non-hazardous waste 
kg 
8,11E1 
4,33E0 
8,85E0 
9,43E1 
5,56E0 
3,23E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,78E‐1 
0E0 
1,8E0 
‐4,09E1 
Radioactive waste 
kg 
1,66E‐3 
4,44E‐4 
4E‐4 
2,5E‐3 
5,76E‐4 
1,35E‐5 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,14E‐5 
0E0 
2,51E‐5 
‐1,32E‐3 
END OF LIFE – OUTPUT FLOWS 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Components for re-use 
kg 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Materials for recycling 
kg 
4,44E‐2 
0E0 
0E0 
4,44E‐2 
0E0 
5,27E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
2,73E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Materials for energy rec kg 
6,75E‐4 
0E0 
0E0 
6,75E‐4 
0E0 
2,07E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
1,36E1 
0E0 
0E0 
Exported energy 
MJ 
0E0 
0E0 
3,69E1 
3,69E1 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
 
 
==PAGE:503==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
SWEDOOR ADVANCE-LINE, Exterior Doors, 77 mm, Unglazed, ECO 
Created with One Click LCA 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS – EN 15804+A1, CML / ISO 21930 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Global Warming Pot. 
kg CO2e 
4,47E1 4,28E0 1,73E1 6,62E1 5,58E0 
1,89E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,06E‐1 
1,52E0 
3,77E0 
‐3,7E1 
Ozone depletion Pot. 
kg CFC-11e 
6,95E‐6 7,76E‐7 1,23E‐6 8,95E‐6 1,01E‐6 
1,99E‐8 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,99E‐8 
6,52E‐8 
5,2E‐8 
‐2,4E‐6 
Acidification 
kg SO2e 
3,06E‐1 1,1E‐2 
4,41E‐2 3,61E‐1 2,1E‐2 
4,62E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,17E‐4 
3,69E‐3 
7,42E‐3 
‐2,31E‐1 
Eutrophication 
kg PO43e 
8,03E‐2 2E‐3 
1,09E‐2 9,32E‐2 3,34E‐3 
3,36E‐4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
4,38E‐5 
3,73E‐3 
4,5E‐3 
‐5,41E‐2 
POCP (“smog”) 
kg C2H4e 
2,1E‐2 
6,26E‐4 3,86E‐3 2,55E‐2 9,6E‐4 
3,23E‐5 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,37E‐5 
2,87E‐4 
2,66E‐3 
‐1,16E‐2 
ADP-elements 
kg Sbe 
2,54E‐3 1,1E‐4 
2,84E‐5 2,68E‐3 1,44E‐4 
3,23E‐6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,82E‐6 
1,42E‐5 
2,25E‐6 
‐6,58E‐3 
ADP-fossil 
MJ 
5,41E2 6,46E1 2,63E2 8,68E2 8,39E1 
2,43E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,66E0 
9,98E0 
1,21E1 
‐4,32E2 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS – FRENCH NATIONAL COMPLEMENTS 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
ADP-elements  
kg Sbe 
2,5E‐3 
1,1E‐4 
2,83E‐5 2,64E‐3 1,44E‐4 
3,23E‐6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,82E‐6 
1,42E‐5 
2,23E‐6 
‐6,58E‐3 
Hazardous waste disposed kg  
7,73E0 4,16E‐2 3,85E‐1 8,15E0 5,44E‐2 
6,35E‐3 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,02E‐3 
2,78E‐1 
8,7E‐2 
‐2,8E0 
Non-haz. waste disposed 
kg  
7,76E1 4,33E0 5,59E0 8,75E1 5,56E0 
3,23E‐1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,78E‐1 
3,54E0 
1,8E0 
‐4,09E1 
Air pollution 
m3 
8,18E3 4,35E2 1,01E3 9,63E3 5,75E2 
1,74E1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,37E1 
1,36E2 
9,74E2 
‐4,94E3 
Water pollution 
m3 
1,63E1 1,43E0 3,6E0 
2,14E1 1,86E0 
4,66E‐2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
3,68E‐2 
3,1E‐1 
1,25E0 
‐7,18E0 
 
 
==PAGE:504==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
SWEDOOR ADVANCE-LINE, Exterior Doors, 77 mm, Unglazed, ECO 
Created with One Click LCA 
VERIFICATION STATEMENT 
VERIFICATION PROCESS FOR THIS EPD 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 14025 by an 
independent, third-party verifier by reviewing results, documents and 
compliancy with reference standard, ISO 14025 and ISO 14040/14044, 
following the process and checklists of the program operator for: 
 
• 
This Environmental Product Declaration 
• 
The Life-Cycle Assessment used in this EPD  
• 
The digital background data for this EPD 
 
Why does verification transparency matter? Read more online 
This EPD has been generated by One Click LCA EPD generator, which has 
been verified and approved by the EPD Hub. 
THIRD-PARTY VERIFICATION STATEMENT 
I hereby confirm that, following detailed examination, I have not 
established any relevant deviations by the studied Environmental Product 
Declaration (EPD), its LCA and project report, in terms of the 
data 
collected and used in the LCA calculations, the way the LCA-based 
calculations have been carried out, the presentation of environmental data 
in the EPD, and other additional environmental information, as present 
with respect to the procedural and methodological requirements in ISO 
14025:2010 and reference standard. 
 
 
 
 
 
I confirm that the company-specific data has been examined as regards 
plausibility and consistency; the declaration owner is responsible for its 
factual integrity and legal compliance. 
 
I confirm that I have sufficient knowledge and experience of construction 
products, this specific product category, the construction industry, relevant 
standards, and the geographical area of the EPD to carry out this 
verification. 
 
I confirm my independence in my role as verifier; I have not been involved 
in the execution of the LCA or in the development of the declaration and 
have no conflicts of interest regarding this verification. 
 
HaiHa Nguyen, as an authorized verifier acting for EPD Hub Limited  
12.05.2023 
  
 
==PAGE:505==
 
Environmental product declaration 
In accordance with ISO 14025 and EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 for: 
Straw as insulation 
material- UK 
 
Up-Straw - School of Natural Building (SNaB) 
 
 
 
Calculation number: 
EPD-NIBE-20210706-20460 
EPD-registration number: 
S-P-03854 
Generation on: 
 
Issue date:  
Revision date: 
Valid until: 
 
 
Status: 
S-P-03854 
15-10-2021 
 
15-10-2021 
23-2-2022 (version 2) 
15-10-2026 
 
 
Valid 
==PAGE:506==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
2 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
Table of content 
 
 
1 
General ............................................................................................................................................... 3 
1.1 
COMPANY  INFORMATION  /  DECLARATION  OWNER ........................................... 3 
1.2 
EPD  INFORMATION............................................................................................................ 3 
1.3 
EPD  PUBLISHER ...................................................................................................................... 3 
1.4 
CALCULATION  BASIS ........................................................................................................ 3 
1.5 
PURPOSE AND TARGET GROUPS ....................................................................................... 3 
1.6 
SCOPE OF DECLARATION ............................................................................................. 4 
1.7 
VERIFICATION OF THE DECLARATION ....................................................................... 4 
1.8 
STATEMENT REVISIONS .......................................................................................................... 5 
2 
Product .............................................................................................................................................. 6 
2.1 
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 6 
2.2 
DESCRIPTION OF THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS ............................................ 6 
2.3 
REFERENCE SERVICE LIFE ................................................................................................. 7 
2.4 
PRODUCT FLOW DIAGRAM ........................................................................................... 7 
3 
Calculation rules .............................................................................................................................. 8 
3.3 
FUNCTIONAL AND DECLARED UNIT ......................................................................... 8 
3.4 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROFILE AND RATINGS REPRESENTIVE ................................ 8 
3.3 
ALLOCATION ....................................................................................................................... 9 
3.4 
SOURCE OF BACKGROUND DATA ........................................................................... 11 
4 
Results ............................................................................................................................................... 12 
4.2 
PRODUCT STAGE (A1 - 3) ................................................................................................ 14 
4.3 
CONSTRUCTION PROCESS STAGE (A4 - 5) ............................................................ 16 
4.4 
USE STAGE (B1 - 7) ............................................................................................................. 19 
4.5 
END OF LIFE STAGE (C1 - 4) .......................................................................................... 22 
5 
References ....................................................................................................................................... 28 
ISO 14040 ....................................................................................................................................... 28 
ISO 14044 ....................................................................................................................................... 28 
ISO 14025 ........................................................................................................................................ 28 
EN 15804+A1 .................................................................................................................................. 28 
EN 15804+A2 ................................................................................................................................. 28 
EN 16783 ......................................................................................................................................... 28 
 
==PAGE:507==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
 
1 General 
 
 
 
1.1 COMPANY  INFORMATION  /  DECLARATION  OWNER 
 
EPD owner: School of Natural Building (SNaB)  
Address: Hollinroyd Farm, Todmorden, OL14 8RJ, Great-Britain 
E-mail: barbara@schoolofnaturalbuilding.co.uk 
Website: http://www.nweurope.eu/projects/project-search/up-straw-
urban-and-public- buildings-in-straw/ 
Production Location: Interreg Up-Staw – UK 
Other: This LCA is made based on and in cooperation with 
the Up-Straw: Urban and Public Buildings in Straw research 
programme. 
 
1.2 EPD  INFORMATION 
 
Product name: Straw as insulation material- UK  
Calculation number: EPD-NIBE-20210706-20460 
Generation on: 15-10-2021 
Date of issue: 15-10-2021 
End of validity: 15-10-2026 
Version NIBE’s EPD Application: v2.0 
Version Environmental Proﬁle database: v3.04 (2021-07-06) 
PCR: EN15804:2019+A2 + EN 16783:2017 
 
1.3 EPD  PUBLISHER 
 
Programme: The International EPD® System, www.environdec.com 
Programme operator: EPD International AB 
EPD registration number: S-P-03854 
1.4 CALCULATION  BASIS 
 
LCA Method: EN15804:2019+A2 
LCA Software: Simapro 9.1.1 
Characterization method: EN 15804 +A2 Method v1.0 
LCA database proﬁles: EcoInvent version 3.6 
Version database: v3.04 (2021-07-06) 
 
1.5 PURPOSE AND TARGET GROUPS 
 
The purpose of this LCA is to compile environmental data of materials and products used  in 
the built environment. So that the environmental data can be used in calculations of 
buildings and / or civil works or an LCA of the ﬁnal product. 
The purpose of this report is to draw up a review dossier for the product accordance with 
the EN15804:2012+A2:2019. This standard deﬁnes a standardized method for a LCA in 
Europe, of a product used in the build environment. The review dossier is also in 
accordance with ISO14040 and ISO14044, as well as with other requirements as 
mentioned in General Programme Instructions in the International EPD® System. 
The target groups of this LCA study are users of EPD's in accordance with the 
EN15804:2012+A2:2019, ISO14040 and ISO14044, such as B2B. 
The EPD owner has the sole ownership, liability, and responsibility for the EPD.  
EPDs within the same product category but from different programmes may 
not be comparable. EPDs of construction products may not be comparable if 
they do not comply with EN 15804. For further information about 
comparability, see EN 15804 and ISO 14025. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
3 / 28 
==PAGE:508==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
4 / 28 
 
 
1 General 
 
 
 
1.6 SCOPE OF DECLARATION 
 
This is a cradle to grave with options EPD. The EPD is an average EPD: it is a national 
weighted average of the total UK national wheat and barley grain yields. It covers UK 
national averages of wheat and barley grain yields per hectare, with calculation of amount of 
straw per hectare;  quantities of wheat and barley straw removed from ﬁelds and calculation 
of nutrients removed (as part of straw); fertiliser use by type, per hectare and per kg grain, 
for wheat and barley; pesticide use by type, per hectare and per kg grain, for wheat and 
barley; fuel use per hectare for all cereal crops (information on individual cereal types is not 
found). The source for this information is the UK government database, June 20. 
 
 The life cycle stages included are as shown below: 
(X = included, MND = module not declared) 
 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
 
The modules of the EN15804 contain the following: 
 
Module A1 = Raw material supply 
Module B5 = Refurbishment 
Module A2 = Transport 
Module B6 = Operational energy use 
 
Module A3 = Manufacturing 
Module B7 = Operational water use 
Module A4 = Transport 
Module C1 = De-construction / Demolition 
 
Module A5 = Installation process 
Module C2 = Transport 
Module B1 = Emissions during use stage 
Module C3 = Waste Processing 
 
Module B2 = Maintenance 
Module C4 = Final Disposal 
Module B3 = Repair 
Module D = Beneﬁts and loads beyond the system boundaries 
Module B4 = Replacement 
 
1.7 VERIFICATION OF THE DECLARATION 
CEN standard EN 15804:2012 serves as the core PCR. PCR review was conducted by: Renuables Ltd, Andrew Norton, www.renuables.co.uk. 
EPDs of construction products may not be comparable if they do not comply with NEN-EN15804 and additional PCR. 
 
Independent third-party verification of the declaration and data, according to EN ISO 14025:2010. 
☐ 
Internal 
☒ 
External 
 
 
==PAGE:509==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
5 / 28 
 
 
1 General  
 
1.8 STATEMENT REVISIONS 
On 10-12-2021 changes have been made in the EPD and background report relating to the biogenic carbon content. It appeared that the numbers were exchanged in the table. The 
following overview shows where and what changes have been made. Both the old text as well as the new is described, where in the new the changes are underlined.  
 
Page 5 is the product description and also mentions the biogenic carbon content. The following sentence is changed “Biogenic carbon storage per kg is 0,3525 (kg C), 1,2925 (kg CO2), and 
per m3 is 129,25 (kg C), 35,25 (kg CO2), calculated according to the EN16449,  an extended description can be found in the background report paragraph 3.6.”.  
It now reads “Biogenic carbon storage per kg is 0,3525 (kg C), 1,2925 (kg CO2), and per m3 is 35,25 (kg C), 129,25 (kg CO2), calculated according to the EN16449, an extended description 
can be found in the background report paragraph 3.6.”. 
 
Page 9 and 10 of the report state how the calculation is made.  
- 
In the table the numbers are switched around, quantity stated 129,25 and CO2-equivalent stated 35,25. It now states: “Quantity 35,25 and CO2-equivalent 129,25”. 
 
Page numbers have changed, due to a double numbered page 4. Hence, the page numbers above in the statement revisions have been adjusted as well, from ‘page 8 and 9’ to ‘page 9 
and 10’.  
The revision date on the front page is adjusted to match the new revision date, and a version is added so it is clear it is the newest version.  
Eco platform has adjusted its logo and thus, this is changed as well. See front page, and page 3.  
 
 
==PAGE:510==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
 
2 Product 
 
 
2.1 PRODUCT DESCRIPTION 
In this LCA, the production, including harvest, of 1 m3 of straw for the English market with 
a density of 100kg/m3 and a moist content of 20% is modelled. This concerns the 
production of grains (wheat and barley and the like) and harvest of said grains to 
collect straw for use as a building insulation material.  
The pressed straw bales consist of wheat straw and barley and are tied with 
polypropylene cords. The agricultural method used for production is based on regular 
agriculture, i.e. the use of  fertilizers and pesticides in the A1 proﬁle for straw have been 
taken into account. There may therefore be a difference in the production of straw for 
other purposes or with  other agricultural methods. The product thereby complies with 
the physical reality of the product as far as possible, in  terms of geographical and 
technological coverage. 
Technical information: The standard density applied is 100kg/m3. The assumed standard 
size of a bale is 36 x 48 x 80cm, this corresponds to 0,13824 m3 and has a weight of 
13,824 kg. The standard thickness of straw when applied as insulation material is 37 cm, 
with a corresponding insulation value (R-value) of 7.1 Km2/ W. This results in a lambda-
value of 0,052 (0,37 / 7.1 = 0,05211). This information is needed to calculated the 
Biogenic Carbon Content and for the Functional Unit. 
Biogenic carbon storage per kg is 0,3525 (kg C), 1,2925 (kg CO2), and per m3 is 35,25 
(kg C), 129,25 (kg CO2), calculated according to the EN16449, an extended description 
can be found in the background report paragraph 3.6. 
 
2.2 DESCRIPTION OF THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS 
Production 
 
Straw proﬁle (Straw, Average production UK; 67% Wheat, 33% Barley) 
The data provided covers UK National averages of wheat and barley grain yields per 
hectare, with separate calculations of: 
 
• the amount of straw per hectare; 
• the quantities of wheat and barley straw removed from ﬁelds and a calculation of 
nutrients removed (as part of the straw) 
• fertiliser use by type, per hectare and per kg of grain, for wheat and barley; 
• fuel use per hectare for all cereal crops (information on individual cereal types is 
not found). 
The EcoInvent proﬁle for barley and wheat already include processes for: 
 
- Cultivating; 
- Sowing; 
- Wrapping; 
- Fertilisers and pesticides; 
- Irrigation; 
- Harvesting; 
 
Information is not obtained for all these processes separately, where possible the 
information is adjusted with information provided through the national averages, 
otherwise the information from the EcoInvent environmental processes is used. The 
following process are used and modiﬁed: 
 
1. Straw {CH}| barley production, Swiss integrated production, intensive | Cut-off, U; 
2. Straw {RoW}| wheat production | Cut-off, U. 
 
Construction 
The bales are manually stacked together with a assumed standard thickness of 37 cm. 
Corresponding in an insulation value (R-value) of 7.1 Km2/W, lambda-value of 0,052 
W/mK. After stacking the surface is ﬂattened with an (electric) saw. Losses from the 
sawing are collected and put together to ﬁll in holes between the bales. Therefore the 
amount of losses during construction are negligible and modelled as 0%, this deviates 
from the PCR as that states 2% waste during construction. The amount of energy required 
for the saw is expected to be very low and therefore it's assumed that it's within the cut-
of-criteria of 1%. 
The amount of attachment- and other installation materials, such as lath and battens, 
screws, plaster etc. depends on the construction technique. Due to the great variety in 
construction techniques it's decided to exclude these processes from the LCA. They 
need to be added when an EPD is made of the facade-system. 
In general the following products might be added if the straw is applied in a wall or roof: 
 
• A vapor barrier; 
• Wood frame (battens and/or thicker beams); 
• OSB panels or ﬁberboard (or the like); 
• Plaster (either lime or earth plasters). 
 
Transport to the construction stage consists the following: 
 
 
 
 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
6 / 28 
Transport conveyance 
Distance 
Weight x distance 
Lorry (Truck), unspeciﬁed (default) 
0 km 
0 tkm 
==PAGE:511==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
 
2 Product 
 
 
2.3 REFERENCE SERVICE LIFE 
RSL Product 
 
If the straw is processed dry and it is properly protected against rain and moisture, it will 
have a very long lifetime expectancy. There are examples of more than 100 years old 
straw buildings to prove this. The UK does not have speciﬁc requirements or regulations 
on standardised lifetime expectancy. Based on industry experience in the UK and in 
historic straw buildings in other countries we would say that straw as insulation would 
last the lifetime of the building it is used in (potentially beyond, if re-used in a new 
building). 
 
To be conservative, the lifespan for this LCA has been set at 75 years. 
 
RSL parts 
There are no separate product parts therefore a reference does not apply here 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.4 PRODUCT FLOW DIAGRAM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
7 / 28 
==PAGE:512==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
 
3 Calculation rules 
 
 
3.3 FUNCTIONAL AND DECLARED UNIT  
A cubic meter of straw applied as insulation material 
 
Declared unit: cubic meter (m3) 
 
One cubic meter of straw, corresponding to a density of 100 kg/m3, with a moist content 
of 20% and a lambda-value of 0,052 applied as insulation material for 75 years. 
Packaging material is included. Attachment- and other installation materials are 
excluded as they depend on the design..  
 
3.4 ENVIRONMENTAL PROFILE AND RATINGS REPRESENTIVE 
 
The input data are representative for Straw as insulation material- UK, a product of the 
research group Up-Straw. The data are representative for the United Kingdom. 
The input data is directly provided by the client or from literature of which the client has 
conﬁrmed that it's representative for their product. The scenarios included are currently in 
use and are representative for one of the most probable alternatives. 
 
All environment proﬁles are modelled using the background database EcoInvent 3.6. 
 
This material contains no materials listed in the Candidate List of Substances of Very High 
Concern (SVHC)  by REACH.  
 
Appropriateness of generic data 
Temporal - Very good (1): data is collected over the year 2019. 
 
Geographical - Very good (1): data is collected speciﬁcally for the United Kingdom. 
Technological - Fair (3): Data was not speciﬁed as extensively as some generic EcoInvent 
data. Where possible, generic data is replaced by more detailed information 
representative for the UK, such as the amount of N-fertilizers, for the non-speciﬁc data 
worst case assumptions have been made. 
3.5 CUT-OFF CRITERIA 
Production phase (A1-A3) 
The production stage consists of the production and extraction of raw materials, including 
all additional steps for the growth of straw, transportation of the raw materials, processing  
the raw materials into materials and the production of the product. The system boundary 
to nature is considered and included in the Eco-Invent processes. The required energy for 
production, external treatments, ancillary materials, packaging material and production 
emissions are included. 
 
Construction process phase (A4-A5) 
This stage consists the transport of the product from production plant / agricultural 
 
site to  the construction site. It also includes the loss of material during construction. 
The additional needed production, transport and end-of-life of the lost material 
during construction is included. 
 
The end-of-life of packaging material up to the end-of-waste state or disposal of ﬁnal 
residues is also included. 
 
The installation of the product including manufacture, transportation and end-of-life of 
ancillary materials and any energy or water use required for installation or operation of the 
construction site are taken into account. 
 
User phase (B1-B3) 
This stage consists of the impacts arising from components of the building and 
construction works during their use. These stages are not considered in this LCA, as the 
module is not relevant for the study of this LCA. 
The stage also covers the combination of all planned technical and associated 
administrative maintenance actions during the service life to maintain the product 
installed in a building, in a construction works or its parts in a state in which it can perform 
its required functional and technical performance, as well as preserve the aesthetic 
qualities of the product. This will include preventative and regular maintenance activities. 
Product replacement (B4) and renovation (B5) only apply when the product is considered 
in a lifespan (of a building, work , etc.). 
Operational water and energy use (B6-B7) are not considered. 
 
End of life phase (C1-C4) 
When the end of the life stage of the building is reached, the de-construction/demolition 
begins. This EPD includes de-construction/demolition (C1), the necessary transport (C2) 
from the demolition site to the sorting location and distance to ﬁnal disposal. The end of 
life stage includes the ﬁnal disposal to landﬁll (C4), incineration (C3) and needed recycling 
processes up to the end-of-waste point (C3). Loads and beneﬁts of recycling, re-use and 
exported energy are part of module D. 
 
The default end-of-life scenarios of the annex (November 2020) to the NMD Determination 
method v1.0 have been used for the various materials in the product and are described in 
more detail in chapter 5. 
 
Beneﬁts and Loads beyond the system boundary (Module D) 
This stage contains the potential loads and beneﬁts of recycling and re-use of raw 
materials/products. The loads contain the needed recycling processes from end-of-waste- 
point up to the point-of-equivalence of the substituted primary raw material and a load for 
secondary material that will be lost at the end-of-life stage. 
The loads and beneﬁts of recycling and reuse are included in this module. The beneﬁts are 
calculated based on the primary content and the primary equivalent. 
 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
8 / 28 
==PAGE:513==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
 
3 Calculation rules 
 
 
In addition, the beneﬁts of energy recovery are granted at this stage. The amount of 
avoided energy is based on the Lower Heating Values of the materials and the efﬁciencies 
of the incinerators as mentioned in the NMD Determination method v1.0 or EcoInvent 3.6 
(2019). 
 
List of excluded processes in this LCA: 
 
• Installation materials (A5) as they depend on design; 
• User-phase (module B) as the module is not relevant for the study of this LCA; 
• Deconstruction processes (C1) as they depend on design. 
 
3.3 ALLOCATION 
 
In the case of joint co-production, where the processes cannot be sub-divided, allocation 
shall respect the main purpose of the processes  studied, allocating all relevant products and 
functions appropriately. In the case of this study, straw cannot be produced without 
producing wheat and grains. 
The EN 15 804 states that allocation shall be based on physical properties (e.g. mass or 
volume) when the difference in revenue from the co-products is low, in other cases allocation 
shall be based on economic values. Information on the yields per hectare show that the 
difference in revenue between straw and grain yield are high, over 25%, therefore economic 
allocation is applied. 
 
Analysing the UK Government information gives a weighted average of the total UK 
national wheat and barley grain yields and is therefore reliable. This information 
represents the declared amounts in the EPD. 
Analysing this information results in an allocation of 86% to grain and 14% to straw. 
 
Barley 
The proﬁle-inputs in the EcoInvent process-card of straw are corrected with a factor of 
1,48005. This is done because the allocation between the Barley grain EcoInvent proﬁle (on 
which straw is based) and that of Barley-straw already contain an allocation factor (10%). 
But this allocation is smaller than given through the national data (15,18%). 10/15,18 = 
1,48005. Information on this step can be found in the “….. In- & output.xlsx”-ﬁles. 
Wheat 
The proﬁle-inputs in the EcoInvent process-card of straw are corrected with a factor of 
2,35629. This is done because the allocation between the wheat-grain EcoInvent proﬁle (on 
which straw is based) and that of wheat-straw already contain an allocation factor (5%). 
But this allocation is smaller than given through the national data (12,85%). 5/12,85 = 
2,35629. Information on this step can be found in the “….. In- & output.xlsx”-ﬁles. 
 
Reproducibility 
The full calculation and the modiﬁcation of the top processes is reported in the 
background ﬁle, which is shared separately with the veriﬁer.
 
 
 
Presentation and justiﬁcation 
Allocations in the use of secondary materials or secondary fuels as raw materials are 
not performed. 
Allocations in the plant (allocation between different products/production lines in a plant) 
is performed, “plant” is synonym for “on the ﬁeld”; where wheat and grains are cultivated 
and harvested. 
 
Allocation of multi-input processes (e.g. landﬁlling or incineration) is performed, and only 
calculated over the allocated input of A1-A3. 
 
Allocation process for reuse, recycling and recovery 
We assume that the process (straw) does not need to be worked up before the EOL 
stage is reached, meaning that the straw reaches its EOL stage directly after 
demolishing the real estate it is been processed in. 
The EcoInvent processes quoted in chapter 6 for C3-C4 and the selected substituted 
processes in Module D are considered representative for this LCA, no speciﬁc data 
is available for the United Kingdom. A sensitivity analysis is performed, see chapter 
9. 
 
The calculation of net ﬂows is based on a lower heat value of 14,67 MJ/kg, see 5.13 
Beneﬁts and loads beyond the system boundary (D). Thereby adhering to a conservative 
approach for the beneﬁts of energy recovering by selecting “wood chips” as most 
representative avoided energy source. 
 
Biogenic carbon content wheat-straw 
Biogenic carbon content of the straw has been calculated according to the EN16449: 
Wood and wood-based products - Calculation of the biogenic carbon content of wood 
and conversion to carbon dioxide. The formula to calculate the carbon content: 
PC=Cf*((Pw*Vw)/1+(W/100)) 
 
• PC: the biogenic carbon oxidized as carbon dioxide emission form the 
product system into the atmosphere (e.g. energy use at the end-of-life) 
(expressed in kg, used amount 37 kg) 
• Cf: the carbon fraction of biomass (oven dry mass), 0,423 as found in an 
Indian  research publication (Kumar et al. 2014, table 3) 
• Pw: the density of biomass of the product at that moisture content (expressed 
in kg/m3, used amount 100 kg/m3) 
• Vw: the volume of the product at that moisture content (expressed in kg/m3, 
used amount 0,37 kg/m3) 
 
 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
9 / 28
==PAGE:514==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
 
3 Calculation rules 
 
 
 
• W: the moisture content of the product (expressed in %, used amount 20%) 
• Results: 37 kg stores a carbon content of  13,04 kg C and 47,82 kg CO2. 
=((0,37*100)/(1+(20/100))*0,423*(44/12)) 
 
Information on biogenic carbon content 
Results per functional or declared unit (m3) 
BIOGENIC CARBON 
CONTENT 
Unit 
QUANTITY 
CO2-equivalent 
Biogenic carbon content in 
product 
kg C 
35,25 
129,25 
Biogenic carbon content in 
packaging 
kg C 
0 
0 
 
Note: 1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg CO2. 
There is a difference between the maintained straw profile used for the LCA (-0,22784239) 
and the generic waste treatment profile used in the LCA (1,46065496973853) and the 
calculated amount of emissions released as biogenic carbon (1,2925). As a result, the 
quantities in phase A1 and C3 do not match, although in reality these will have to be in 
balance. 
 
A correction factor is applied by adjusting the process used in A1. The process is adjusted 
in Simapro by adding emissions to air Carbon dioxide, biogenic. The process used already 
contains a negative biogenic carbon of -0,2278 kg. However, our calculation shows that is 
should be -1,2925 kg. Thus, an extra emission is added in the process in Simapro to correct 
this value: -1,2925 - -0,22784239 = -1,06465761. 
 
Emissions to air 
Value 
Unit 
Carbon dioxide, biogenic 
-1,06466 
kg/kg 
 
A correction factor is applied by adjusting the process used in C3. The process is 
adjusted in Simapro by adding emissions to air Carbon dioxide, biogenic. The process 
used in the waste scenario accounts for the burning of wood, this is an overestimation 
compared to straw. The original process shows that the carbon content is 1,46 kg CO2 
equivalent. Thus the process is adjusted to match our calculated value of 1,2925 kg; 
1,2925 - 1,46065497 = -0,16815497. 
 
Emissions to air 
Value 
Unit 
Carbon dioxide, biogenic 
-0,16815497 
kg/kg 
 
 
This way, the biogenic carbon content of the straw is corrected. However, sub-
processes used in the LCA may also contain biogenic content, such as the capital 
goods in the waste scenario. Therefore the end-value is not 0.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
10 / 28 
==PAGE:515==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
11 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
3 Calculation rules 
 
 
 
3.4 SOURCE OF BACKGROUND DATA 
 
 
Straw (UK) 
Straw A1-A3 UK (revisie allocatie juni 
2020) 
UK Straw (Straw, Average production UK; 67% Wheat, 33% 
Barley) 
NIBE/EcoInvent 
no 
3.6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:516==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
12 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
4.1 DECLARED UNIT (m3) 
Impact category 
Unit 
Total Amount 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eq. 
1,03E+01 
Global warming potential - Biogenic (GWP-b) 
kg CO2 eq. 
-2,58E+00 
Global warming potential - Land use and land use change (GWP-luluc) 
kg CO2 eq. 
-4,88E-02 
Global warming potential (GWP-total) 
kg CO2 eq. 
7,63E+00 
Ozone depletion (ODP) 
kg CFC 11 eq. 
-9,17E-08 
Acidification (AP) 
mol H+ eq. 
-4,71E-03 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg PO43- eq. 
ND 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg P eq. 
4,16E-03 
Eutrophication marine (EP-m) 
kg N eq. 
7,60E-02 
Eutrophication, terrestrial (EP-T) 
mol N eq. 
-1,56E-01 
Photochemical ozone formation - human health (POCP) 
kg NMVOC eq. 
-5,89E-02 
Resource use, minerals and metals (ADP-mm) 
kg Sb eq. 
3,32E-04 
Resource use, fossils (ADP-f) 
MJ 
5,78E+01 
Water use (WDP) 
m3 
7,73E+01 
Potential environmental impact – additional mandatory and voluntary indicators 
 
 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eq. 
1,03E-01 
Ecotoxicity, freshwater (ETP-fw) 
CTUe 
-1,31E+03 
Particulate Matter (PM) 
disease incidence 
-1,14E-06 
Human toxicity, cancer (HTP-c) 
CTUh 
2,35E-08 
Human toxicity, non-cancer (HTP-nc) 
CTUh 
-5,05E-08 
Ionising radiation, human health (IR) 
kBq U235 eqv. 
1,53E-01 
Land use (SQP) 
Pt 
-5,71E+03 
==PAGE:517==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
13 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
Parameter 
Unit 
Total Amount 
Use of resources 
 
 
renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
-2,73E+03 
renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
1,47E+03 
renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
-1,26E+03 
non-renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
6,23E+01 
non-renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
non-renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
6,23E+01 
use of secondary material 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
use of renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
use of non-renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
use of net fresh water 
M3 
2,30E+00 
Waste production and output flows 
Unit 
Total Amount 
Waste production 
 
 
hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
3,55E-05 
non hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
7,01E+00 
radioactive waste disposed 
Kg 
1,74E-04 
Output flows 
 
 
Components for re-use 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
Materials for recycling 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
Exported Energy Thermic 
MJ 
4,32E+02 
Exported Energy Electric 
MJ 
2,51E+02 
==PAGE:518==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
14 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
4.2 PRODUCT STAGE (A1 - 3) 
 
• A1. raw material extraction and processing. processing of secondary material input (e.g. recycling processes 
• A2. transport to the manufacturer 
• A3. Manufacturing 
• Environmental impacts are calculated for 1m3 of straw. 
 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eq. 
1,18E+01 
1,13E+00 
0,0E+00 
Global warming potential - Biogenic (GWP-b) 
Kg CO2 eq. 
-1,29E+02 
5,23E-04 
0,0E+00 
Global warming potential - Land use and land use change (GWP-luluc) 
kg CO2 eq. 
1,67E-02 
4,15E-04 
0,0E+00 
Global warming potential (GWP-total) 
kg CO2 eq. 
-1,17E+02 
1,13E+00 
0,0E+00 
Ozone depletion (ODP) 
kg CFC 11 eq. 
7,96E-07 
2,50E-07 
0,0E+00 
Acidification (AP) 
mol H+ eq. 
1,36E-01 
6,57E-03 
0,0E+00 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg PO43- eq. 
ND 
ND 
ND 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg P eq. 
4,68E-03 
1,14E-05 
0,0E+00 
Eutrophication marine (EP-m) 
kg N eq. 
1,05E-01 
2,32E-03 
0,0E+00 
Eutrophication, terrestrial (EP-T) 
mol N eq. 
5,25E-01 
2,55E-02 
0,0E+00 
Photochemical ozone formation - human health (POCP) 
kg NMVOC eq. 
3,75E-02 
7,29E-03 
0,0E+00 
Resource use, minerals and metals (ADP-mm) 
kg Sb eq. 
3,33E-04 
2,87E-05 
0,0E+00 
Resource use, fossils (ADP-f) 
MJ 
7,03E+01 
1,71E+01 
0,0E+00 
Water use (WDP) 
m3 
7,74E+01 
6,12E-02 
0,0E+00 
Potential environmental impact – additional mandatory and voluntary indicators 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eq. 
1,18E-01 
1,13E-02 
0,0E+00 
Ecotoxicity, freshwater (ETP-fw) 
CTUe 
4,46E+02 
1,52E+01 
0,0E+00 
Particulate Matter (PM) 
disease incidence 
8,99E-07 
1,02E-07 
0,0E+00 
Human toxicity, cancer (HTP-c) 
CTUh 
1,50E-08 
4,94E-10 
0,0E+00 
Human toxicity, non-cancer (HTP-nc) 
CTUh 
5,74E-07 
1,67E-08 
0,0E+00 
Ionising radiation, human health (IR) 
kBq U235 eqv. 
2,20E-01 
7,16E-02 
0,0E+00 
Land use (SQP) 
Pt 
1,47E+03 
1,48E+01 
0,0E+00 
==PAGE:519==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
15 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
Use of resources 
 
 
 
 
renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
-1,21E+03 
2,14E-01 
0,0E+00 
renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
1,47E+03 
0,00E+00 
0,0E+00 
renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
2,53E+02 
2,14E-01 
0,0E+00 
non-renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
7,56E+01 
1,82E+01 
0,0E+00 
non-renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,0E+00 
non-renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
7,56E+01 
1,82E+01 
0,0E+00 
use of secondary material 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,0E+00 
use of renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,0E+00 
use of non-renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,0E+00 
use of net fresh water 
M3 
2,27E+00 
2,08E-03 
0,0E+00 
Waste production and output flows 
Unit 
 
 
 
Waste production 
 
 
 
 
hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
1,34E-04 
4,33E-05 
0,0E+00 
non hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
1,09E+00 
1,08E+00 
0,0E+00 
radioactive waste disposed 
Kg 
2,79E-04 
1,12E-04 
0,0E+00 
Output flows 
 
 
 
 
Components for re-use 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,0E+00 
Materials for recycling 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,0E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,0E+00 
Exported Energy Thermic 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,0E+00 
Exported Energy Electric 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,0E+00 
==PAGE:520==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
16 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
4.3 CONSTRUCTION PROCESS STAGE (A4 - 5) 
 
• A4. transport to the building site 
• A5. installation into the building 
 
Impact category 
Unit 
A4 
A5 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Global warming potential - Biogenic (GWP-b) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Global warming potential - Land use and land use change (GWP-luluc) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Global warming potential (GWP-total) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Ozone depletion (ODP) 
kg CFC 11 eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Acidification (AP) 
mol H+ eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg PO43- eq. 
ND 
ND 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg P eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Eutrophication marine (EP-m) 
kg N eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Eutrophication, terrestrial (EP-T) 
mol N eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Photochemical ozone formation - human health (POCP) 
kg NMVOC eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Resource use, minerals and metals (ADP-mm) 
kg Sb eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Resource use, fossils (ADP-f) 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Water use (WDP) 
m3 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Potential environmental impact – additional mandatory and voluntary indicators 
 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Ecotoxicity, freshwater (ETP-fw) 
CTUe 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Particulate Matter (PM) 
disease incidence 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Human toxicity, cancer (HTP-c) 
CTUh 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Human toxicity, non-cancer (HTP-nc) 
CTUh 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Ionising radiation, human health (IR) 
kBq U235 eqv. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Land use (SQP) 
Pt 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
==PAGE:521==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
17 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
Parameter 
Unit 
A4 
A5 
Use of resources 
 
 
 
renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
non-renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
non-renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
non-renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
use of secondary material 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
use of renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
use of non-renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
use of net fresh water 
M3 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
Waste production and output flows 
Unit 
 
 
Waste production 
 
 
 
hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
non hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
radioactive waste disposed 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
Output flows 
 
 
 
Components for re-use 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
Materials for recycling 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
Materials for energy recovery 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
Exported Energy Thermic 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
Exported Energy Electric 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
 
TRANSPORT TO CONSTRUCTION SITE (A4) 
 
The average distance travelled from source to building site in the UK is 52 miles / 84 km. 
This is all by road, none by rail. Straw is directly transported from field to construction site, 
therefore transportation in A4  is left empty and transportation is modelled in phase A2. 
There is not an ofﬁcial source for this information, it comes from the Sustainable Building 
Consultancy. 
 
CONSTRUCTION STAGE (A5) 
 
The amount of attachment- and other installation materials, such as lath and battens, 
screws, plaster etc. depends on the construction technique. Due to the great variety in 
construction techniques it's decided to exclude these processes from the LCA. No 
scenarios are created. They need to be added when an EPD is made of the facade-system. 
For full transparency, the scenarios used in the Up-Straw project have been added to the 
project ﬁle for informative purposes. It is thereby not said that these will be considered in 
reality. 
 
Input ﬂow(s) construction stage: There are no (signiﬁcant) raw material, energy or transport 
inputs needed in the construction stage.  
 
Waste ﬂow(s) product: Waste output ﬂows as a result of losses at the construction site is 
assumed to be 0%. 
 
==PAGE:522==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
18 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
A4. transport to the building site 
 
 
Fuel type and consumption of vehicle – or – vehicle type used for transport 
not available 
Lorry (Truck), unspeciﬁed (default) 
 
 
Distance 
0 km 
Capacity utilisation (including empty returns) 
50 % (loaded up and return empty) 
 
Bulk density of transported products 
inapplicable 
Volume capacity utilisation factor 
1 
A5. installation of the product in the building 
Ancillary materials, water use and energy use for installation 
 
Waste materials on the building site before waste processing generated by the product’s installation 
Output materials as result of waste processing at the building site 
0% of Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
Parameter 
Unit / functional unit 
Parameter 
Unit / functional unit 
==PAGE:523==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
19 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
4.4 USE STAGE (B1 - 7) 
 
• B1, use or application of the installed product 
• B2, maintenance 
• B3, repair 
• B4, replacement (m.n.d.) 
• B5, refurbishment (m.n.d.) 
• B6, operational energy use (m.n.d.) 
• B7, operational water use (m.n.d.) 
 
Impact category 
Unit 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Global warming potential - Biogenic (GWP-b) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Global warming potential - Land use and land use change (GWP-luluc) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Global warming potential (GWP-total) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Ozone depletion (ODP) 
kg CFC 11 eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Acidification (AP) 
mol H+ eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg PO43- eq. 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND  
ND 
ND 
ND 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg P eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Eutrophication marine (EP-m) 
kg N eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Eutrophication, terrestrial (EP-T) 
mol N eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Photochemical ozone formation - human health (POCP) 
kg NMVOC eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Resource use, minerals and metals (ADP-mm) 
kg Sb eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Resource use, fossils (ADP-f) 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Water use (WDP) 
m3 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Potential environmental impact – additional mandatory and voluntary 
indicators 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eq. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Ecotoxicity, freshwater (ETP-fw) 
CTUe 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Particulate Matter (PM) 
disease incidence 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Human toxicity, cancer (HTP-c) 
CTUh 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Human toxicity, non-cancer (HTP-nc) 
CTUh 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Ionising radiation, human health (IR) 
kBq U235 eqv. 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Land use (SQP) 
Pt 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
==PAGE:524==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
20 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
Parameter 
Unit 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
Use of resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
non-renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
non-renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
non-renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
use of secondary material 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
use of renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
use of non-renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
use of net fresh water 
M3 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste production and output flows 
Unit 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Waste production 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
non hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
radioactive waste disposed 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Output flows 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Components for re-use 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Materials for recycling 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Materials for energy recovery 
Kg 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Exported Energy Thermic 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Exported Energy Electric 
MJ 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
0.00E+0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
==PAGE:525==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
21 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
B2 Maintenance 
Maintenance process and cycle 
 
Ancillary materials and energy input for maintenance 
 
 
B3 Repair 
Repair process 
Repair of the parts; 
 
Repair cycle 
Amount for product reference service life of 75 years: 
Waste materials resulting from repair 
Amount for product reference service life of 75 years: 
 
 
 
Reference Service Life 
Product: Straw as insulation material- UK 
75 years 
 
Straw (UK) | Straw A1-A3 UK (revisie allocatie juni 2020) 
75 years 
 
Parameter 
Unit / functional unit 
Parameter 
Unit / functional unit 
Parameter 
RSL 
==PAGE:526==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
22 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
4.5 END OF LIFE STAGE (C1 - 4) 
 
• C1. de-construction. Demolition (m.n.d.) 
• C2. transport to waste processing 
• C3. waste processing for reuse. recovery and/or recycling (m.n.d.) 
• C4. disposal 
 
Impact category 
Unit 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,0E+00 
1,99E+00 
8,35E-01 
3,00E-01 
Global warming potential - Biogenic (GWP-b) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,0E+00 
9,19E-04 
1,23E+02 
4,49E+00 
Global warming potential - Land use and land use change (GWP-luluc) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,0E+00 
7,29E-04 
2,25E-04 
9,01E-05 
Global warming potential (GWP-total) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
0,0E+00 
1,99E+00 
1,24E+02 
4,79E+00 
Ozone depletion (ODP) 
kg CFC 11 eq. 
0,0E+00 
4,39E-07 
1,07E-07 
1,80E-08 
Acidification (AP) 
mol H+ eq. 
0,0E+00 
1,15E-02 
2,97E-02 
8,98E-04 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg PO43- eq. 
ND 
ND 
ND 
ND 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg P eq. 
0,0E+00 
2,01E-05 
1,70E-05 
2,69E-05 
Eutrophication marine (EP-m) 
kg N eq. 
0,0E+00 
4,07E-03 
1,38E-02 
6,35E-03 
Eutrophication, terrestrial (EP-T) 
mol N eq. 
0,0E+00 
4,49E-02 
1,58E-01 
2,44E-03 
Photochemical ozone formation - human health (POCP) 
kg NMVOC eq. 
0,0E+00 
1,28E-02 
4,14E-02 
1,76E-03 
Resource use, minerals and metals (ADP-mm) 
kg Sb eq. 
0,0E+00 
5,04E-05 
5,07E-06 
7,46E-07 
Resource use, fossils (ADP-f) 
MJ 
0,0E+00 
3,00E+01 
8,62E+00 
1,70E+00 
Water use (WDP) 
m3 
0,0E+00 
1,07E-01 
3,04E-01 
5,92E-02 
Potential environmental impact – additional mandatory and voluntary indicators 
 
 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eq. 
0,0E+00 
1,99E-02 
8,35E-03 
3,00E-03 
Ecotoxicity, freshwater (ETP-fw) 
CTUe 
0,0E+00 
2,68E+01 
2,14E+01 
2,56E+01 
Particulate Matter (PM) 
disease incidence 
0,0E+00 
1,79E-07 
2,39E-07 
1,05E-08 
Human toxicity, cancer (HTP-c) 
CTUh 
0,0E+00 
8,68E-10 
2,80E-08 
1,60E-10 
Human toxicity, non-cancer (HTP-nc) 
CTUh 
0,0E+00 
2,93E-08 
8,86E-08 
7,75E-09 
Ionising radiation, human health (IR) 
kBq U235 eqv. 
0,0E+00 
1,26E-01 
2,18E-02 
6,82E-03 
Land use (SQP) 
Pt 
0,0E+00 
2,60E+01 
2,78E+00 
3,05E+00 
==PAGE:527==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
23 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
Parameter 
Unit 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
Use of resources 
 
 
 
 
 
renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
0,0E+00 
3,76E-01 
3,84E-01 
7,37E-02 
renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
0,0E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
0,0E+00 
3,76E-01 
3,84E-01 
7,37E-02 
non-renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
0,0E+00 
3,19E+01 
9,28E+00 
1,81E+00 
non-renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
0,0E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
non-renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
0,0E+00 
3,19E+01 
9,28E+00 
1,81E+00 
use of secondary material 
Kg 
0,0E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
use of renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0,0E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
use of non-renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0,0E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
use of net fresh water 
M3 
0,0E+00 
3,66E-03 
4,61E-02 
1,56E-03 
Waste production and output flows 
Unit 
 
 
 
 
Waste production 
 
 
 
 
 
hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
0,0E+00 
7,61E-05 
2,43E-05 
5,64E-06 
non hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
0,0E+00 
1,90E+00 
6,21E-01 
5,02E+00 
radioactive waste disposed 
Kg 
0,0E+00 
1,97E-04 
2,61E-05 
8,81E-06 
Output flows 
 
 
 
 
 
Components for re-use 
Kg 
0,0E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Materials for recycling 
Kg 
0,0E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
Kg 
0,0E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Exported Energy Thermic 
MJ 
0,0E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Exported Energy Electric 
MJ 
0,0E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
DE-CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION (C1) 
It's expected that deconstruction of the system is performed manually and therefore 
processes are excluded from the calculation.  
 
No inputs are needed for the product at the de-construction / demolition phase 
 
TRANSPORT END-OF-LIFE (C2) 
The waste scenario used in the full LCA for the Up-straw study for waste from phases A3, 
A5 and C3-4 is the NMD waste scenario ID38: organic material, other (i.a. insulation). 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:528==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
24 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
Scenario design 
The NMD waste scenario ID38: organic material, other (i.a. insulation), which consists of 
the following disquisition: 5% landﬁll and 95% incineration is determined by the Dutch LCA- 
community in the PCR: Determination method “Environmental performance Building” 
Version 1.0 (July 2020) and represents the current ﬂow of organic waste streams in the 
Netherlands. This standard waste-scenario includes prescribed transport-distances for 
every type of waste stream (landﬁll (100 km), incineration (150 km), recycling (50 km), re-
use* (0 km) or to be left (0 km)). In this disquisition, it is assumed that in the Netherlands 
there will be more, but smaller recycling stations, rather than landﬁll sites or incineration 
installations. Thus, the mileage differs. The transport distances in this LCA are based on 
Dutch averages, as there is no data on these transport distances in the UK it's assumed 
that this is similar for the end-of-life scenario of straw bales in the UK. 
 
*Re-use is assumed 0km, because the transportation needs to be included as A2 
transportation in a new life-cycle analysis according to the PCR. 
 
WASTE PROCESSING (C3) 
 
The waste scenario used in the full LCA for the Up-straw study for waste from phases A3, 
A5 and C3-4 is the NMD waste scenario ID38: organic material, other (i.a. insulation). 
 
Scenario design 
The NMD waste scenario ID38: organic material, other (i.a. insulation), which consists of the 
following disquisition: 5% landﬁll and 95% incineration is determined by the Dutch LCA- 
community in the PCR: Determination method “Environmental performance Building” 
Version 1.0 (July 2020) and represents the current ﬂow of organic waste streams in the 
Netherlands. The waste processing is based on the Dutch PCR as there is no data found on 
the waste processing in the UK. Thus, it's assumed that the distribution between landﬁll 
and incineration is the most representative information and applies to the UK as well.  
However, a correction for biogenic content is applied, as the scenario assumes 
incineration of wood, which has a higher carbon content, see allocation for the 
correction factor. 
 
This material contains no materials listed in the Candidate List of Substances of Very High 
Concern (SVHC)  by REACH and therefore incineration may be carried out. 
 
After demolition and transport of the waste streams to the applicable waste processing 
routes, the waste is processed for ﬁnal disposal or recycling and/or reuse. The calculated 
quantities and the applicable end-of-life scenario are shown below. 
 
 
 
 
FINAL DISPOSAL (C4) 
 
The waste scenario used in the full LCA for the Up-straw study for waste from phases A3, 
A5 and C3-4 is the NMD waste scenario ID38: organic material, other (i.a. insulation). 
 
Scenario design 
The NMD waste scenario ID38: organic material, other (i.a. insulation), which consists of 
the following disquisition: 5% landﬁll and 95% incineration is determined by the Dutch LCA- 
community in the PCR: Determination method “Environmental performance Building” 
Version 1.0 (July 2020) and represents the current ﬂow of organic waste streams in the 
Netherlands. The waste processing is based on the Dutch PCR as there is no data found 
on the waste processing in the UK. Thus, it's assumed that the distribution between landﬁll 
and incineration is the most representative information and applies to the UK as well. 
However, a correction for biogenic content is applied, as the scenario assumes 
incineration of wood, which has a higher carbon content, see allocation for the 
correction factor. 
 
This material contains no materials listed in the Candidate List of Substances of Very High 
Concern (SVHC)  by REACH and therefore incineration may be carried out. 
 
 
==PAGE:529==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
25 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
End - of - life 
 
 
Recovery system 
0.00 kg for re - use 
0.00 kg for recycling 
0.00 kg for energy recovery 
 
 
Disposal 
0.00 kg of materials used in the product 
 
 
4.6 BENEFITS AND LOADS BEYOND THE SYSTEM BOUNDARY (D) 
Impact category 
Unit 
D 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
-5,82E+00 
Global warming potential - Biogenic (GWP-b) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
-6,01E-01 
Global warming potential - Land use and land use change (GWP-luluc) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
-6,70E-02 
Global warming potential (GWP-total) 
kg CO2 eqv. 
-6,49E+00 
Ozone depletion (ODP) 
kg CFC 11 eq. 
-1,70E-06 
Acidification (AP) 
mol H+ eq. 
-1,89E-01 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg PO43- eq. 
ND 
Eutrophication, freshwater (EP-fw) 
kg P eq. 
-5,97E-04 
Eutrophication marine (EP-m) 
kg N eq. 
-5,54E-02 
Eutrophication, terrestrial (EP-T) 
mol N eq. 
-9,12E-01 
Photochemical ozone formation - human health (POCP) 
kg NMVOC eq. 
-1,60E-01 
Resource use, minerals and metals (ADP-mm) 
kg Sb eq. 
-8,56E-05 
Resource use, fossils (ADP-f) 
MJ 
-7,00E+01 
Water use (WDP) 
m3 
-6,23E-01 
Potential environmental impact – additional mandatory and voluntary indicators 
 
 
Global warming potential - Fossil (GWP-f) 
kg CO2 eq. 
-5,82E-02 
Ecotoxicity, freshwater (ETP-fw) 
CTUe 
-1,84E+03 
Particulate Matter (PM) 
disease incidence 
-2,57E-06 
Human toxicity, cancer (HTP-c) 
CTUh 
-2,11E-08 
Human toxicity, non-cancer (HTP-nc) 
CTUh 
-7,67E-07 
Ionising radiation, human health (IR) 
kBq U235 eqv. 
-2,93E-01 
Processes 
Unit / functional unit 
==PAGE:530==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
26 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
4 Results 
 
 
 
Parameter 
Unit 
D 
Use of resources 
 
 
renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
-1,51E+03 
renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
-1,51E+03 
non-renewable primary energy ex. raw materials 
MJ 
-7,44E+01 
non-renewable primary energy used as raw materials 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
non-renewable primary energy total 
MJ 
-7,44E+01 
use of secondary material 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
use of renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
use of non-renewable secondary fuels 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
use of net fresh water 
M3 
-1,86E-02 
Waste production and output flows 
Unit 
 
Waste production 
 
 
hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
-2,48E-04 
non hazardous waste disposed 
Kg 
-2,71E+00 
radioactive waste disposed 
Kg 
-4,49E-04 
Output flows 
 
 
Components for re-use 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
Materials for recycling 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
Kg 
0,00E+00 
Exported Energy Thermic 
MJ 
4,32E+02 
Exported Energy Electric 
MJ 
a2,51E+02 
 
BENEFITS AND LOADS BEYOND THE SYSTEM BOUNDARY (D) 
 
The waste scenario used in the full LCA for the Up-straw study for waste from phases A3, A5 
and C3-4 is the NMD waste scenario ID38: organic material, other (i.a. insulation). Which 
consists of the following disquisition: 5% landﬁll and 95% incineration. This distribution of 
waste scenarios is set up by the Dutch LCA-community in the PCR: Determination method 
“Environmental performance Building” Version 1.0 (July 2020), and represents the current 
ﬂow of organic waste streams in the Netherlands. No information is found for this particular 
waste stream in the UK and thus it is assumed that the distribution between landﬁll and 
incineration is the most representative information and applies to the UK as well. A 
sensitivity analysis is performed, see chapter 9. 
==PAGE:531==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
27 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
 
Module D of this standard waste scenario is based on avoided energy from the 
Netherlands. No data was found regarding the representativeness of the thermal/electrical 
ratio from the Netherlands to the UK. It's assumed that the ratio of thermal/ 
electrical energy avoided is similar in the UK as that of the Netherlands, as this is the most 
conservative yet substantiated assumption. 
A sensitivity analysis is performed, in which the Eco-Invent processes are switched for those 
representative for the UK, which showed that the impact did not deviate drastically. 
Everything until the allocation split is included in the calculation, no costs or beneﬁts are 
included in module D for the allocated co-products (A1-A3) which are not part of the end 
product. 
 
When materials are recycled or reused a beneﬁt may be taken into account in module D. 
According to the EN15804 the beneﬁt may only be calculated for the net primary content 
that comes available for the next life cycle stage. The amount assumed for recycling and 
re-use are listed per input in the table below. The amount of avoided production of 
primary material is also shown.
 
==PAGE:532==
Straw as insulation material- UK 
Environmental product declaration 
28 / 28 
Straw as insulation material- UK 
 
 
5 References 
 
 
 
ISO 14040 
ISO 14040:2006-10, Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Principles and 
framework; EN ISO 14040:2006 
 
ISO 14044 
ISO 14044:2006-10, Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Requirements 
and guidelines; EN ISO 14040:2006 
 
ISO 14025 
ISO 14025:2011-10: Environmental labels and declarations — Type III environmental 
declarations — Principles and procedures 
 
EN 15804+A1 
EN 15804+A1: 2013: Sustainability of construction works — Environmental Product 
Declarations — Core rules for the product category of construction products 
Environdec: PCR 2012:01 Construction products and construction services (EN 15804:A1) (2.33) 
 
EN 15804+A2 
EN 15804+A2: 2019: Sustainability of construction works — Environmental Product 
Declarations — Core rules for the product category of construction products 
Environdec: PCR 2019:14 Construction products (EN 15804:A2) (1.11) 
 
EN 16783 
EN 16783: 2017: Thermal insulation products — Product category rules (PCR) for factory 
made and in-situ formed products for preparing environmental product declarations 
Environdec: PCR 2019:14-c-PCR-005 c-PCR-005 Thermal Insulation products (EN 16783) (2019-
12-20) 
 
SBK-veriﬁcation protocol 
SBK-veriﬁcation protocol – inclusion data in the Dutch environmental database, Final 
Version 3.0, January 2019, SBK 
 
NMD Determination method 
NMD Determination method Environmental performance Construction works v1.0 July 
2020, foundation NMD 
 
LCA German straw (2019) 
EPD - ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION UMWELT-PRODUKTDEKLARATION 
nach ISO 14025 und EN 15804 
(BAU-EPD-Fasba-2019-1-GaBi-Baustrohballen-20191010) 
 
LCA French straw (2015) 
Rapport d'étude ACV / FDES conforme aux exigences de la norme NF EN 15804 
(150601_ACV_Paille_15804_vdef (002) LCA France.pdf) 
 
United Kingdom Government database (2019) 
UK Wheat, Barley and straw yields and speciﬁcations at June 2019 (data revised Decmeber 
2019) 
(LCA_Data_UK.Gov_stats.xlsx) 
 
ILCD Handbook (2010) 
ILCD Handbook: General guide for Life Cycle Assessment - Detailed guidance, p. 330-331. 
 
Carbon Content straw (2014) 
Kumar, Manoj & Singh, R. P. & Panigrahy, S. & Raghubanshi, Akhilesh. (2014). Carbon density 
and accumulation in agroecosystem of Indo-Gangetic Plains and Vindhyan highlands, India. 
Environmental monitoring and assessment. 186. 10.1007/ 
s10661-014-3752-3. Table 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:533==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:534==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Information 
EPD Programme Operator 
Applicable Product Category Rules 
BRE Global 
Watford, Herts 
WD25 9XX 
United Kingdom 
 
BRE Environmental Profiles 2013 Product Category Rules 
for Type III environmental product declaration of construction 
products to EN 15804:2012+A1:2013 
 
Commissioner of LCA study 
LCA consultant/Tool 
Mitsubishi Electric Europe BV - UK & Ireland 
Flavie Lowres on behalf of BRE/LINA 
Functional Unit 
Applicability/Coverage 
1 combined unit to produce either 5, 6, 8.5, 11.2 or 
14 kW of heating and hot water, according to the 
appropriate usage scenario defined in the EN 14825 
standard and during the 17-year reference lifetime 
of the product. 
Product Average. 
EPD Type 
Background database 
Cradle to Gate with options 
ecoinvent 
Demonstration of Verification 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core PCR a  
Independent verification of the declaration and data according to EN ISO 14025:2010 
☐Internal                                       ☒ External 
(Where appropriate b)Third party verifier: 
Roger Connick 
a: Product category rules 
b: Optional for business-to-business communication; mandatory for business-to-consumer communication (see EN ISO 14025:2010, 9.4) 
Comparability 
Environmental product declarations from different programmes may not be comparable if not compliant with 
EN 15804:2012+A1:2013. Comparability is further dependent on the specific product category rules, system boundaries 
and allocations, and background data sources. See Clause 5.3 of EN 15804:2012+A1:2013 for further guidance 
 
==PAGE:535==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Information modules covered 
Product 
Construction  
Use stage 
End-of-life 
 
Benefits and 
loads beyond 
the system 
boundary 
Related to the building fabric 
Related to 
the building 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Raw  materials supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport to site 
Construction – 
Installation 
Use  
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy 
use 
Operational water  
use 
Deconstruction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing  
Disposal 
Reuse, Recovery 
and/or  Recycling 
potential 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Ticks indicate the Information Modules declared. 
Manufacturing site(s) 
The unit is manufacturing at the following sites 
 
5kW, 6kW, 8.5kW, 11.2kW units 
14kW unit 
Mitsubishi Air Conditioning Systems Europe Ltd 
Nettlehill Road 
Houstoun Industrial Estate 
Livingston 
EH54 5EQ 
Mitsubishi Electric Corporation 
Shizuoka Works 
Chome-18-1 Oshika 
Suruga Ward 
Shizuoka 
422-8021 
Japan 
 
Construction Product: 
Product Description 
This EPD refers to the installation of a EHPT20X-MHEDW FTC6 Packaged Cylinder and either a 5 kW PUZ-
WM50VHA (-BS), a 6 kW PUZ-WM60VAA (-BS), a 8.5 kW PUZ-WM85VAA (-BS), a 11.2 kW PUZ-WM112VAA 
(-BS) or a 14 kW PUZ-HWM140VHA (-BS). The data has been calculated for a single combined unit of each 
product. The system is an air to water monobloc technology for heating and domestic hot water supply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:536==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Product image 
 
 
Technical Information for reference product of capacity of 5 kW, 6 kW, 8.5 kW, 11.2 
kW and 14 kW 
Property 
5 kW 
PUZ-WM50VHA 
(-BS)1 
6 kW 
PUZ-WM60VAA (-
BS)2 
8.5 kW 
PUZ-WM85VAA 
(-BS)3 
11.2 kW 
PUZ-WM112VAA 
(-BS)4 
14 kW 
PUZ-
HWM140VHA 
(-BS)5 
Heating (A-
7/W35) 
capacity 
5 kW 
6 kW 
8.5 kW 
11.2 kW 
14 kW 
Heating (A-
7/W35) COP 
3 
3.2 
2.6 
3 
2.45 
Heating 
capacity 
5 kWh 
6 kWh 
8.5 kWh 
11.2 kWh 
14 kWh 
Heating 
SCOP 
(MCS) 35dC 
4.62 
4.18 
4.84 
4.74 
4.33 
Heating 
SCOP 
(MCS) 55dC 
3.24 
3.57 
3.48 
3.34 
3.26 
Refrigerant 
R32 
R32 
R32 
R32 
R32 
 
1 Ecodan PUZ-WM50VHA Monobloc Air Source Heat Pump Product Information Sheet - Document Library - Mitsubishi Electric 
2 https://library.mitsubishielectric.co.uk/pdf/book/Ecodan_PUZ-
WM60VAA_Monobloc_Air_Source_Heat_Pump_Product_Information_Sheet?model_query=PUZ-WM60VAA-BS#page-1-2 
3 PUZ-WM85VAA TM65 Embodied Carbon Calculation - Document Library - Mitsubishi Electric  
4 https://library.mitsubishielectric.co.uk/pdf/book/Ecodan_PUZ-
WM112VAA_Monobloc_Air_Source_Heat_Pump_Product_Information_Sheet#page-1-2 
5 https://library.mitsubishielectric.co.uk/pdf/book/PUZ-HWM140VHA_-BS#page-1-2 
==PAGE:537==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Property 
5 kW 
PUZ-WM50VHA 
(-BS)6 
6 kW 
PUZ-WM60VAA (-
BS)7 
8.5 kW 
PUZ-WM85VAA 
(-BS)8 
11.2 kW 
PUZ-WM112VAA 
(-BS)9 
14 kW 
PUZ-
HWM140VHA 
(-BS)10 
Refrigerant 
Charge 
2 kg 
2.2 kg 
2.2 kg 
3 kg 
3.3 kg 
Hot Water 
Cylinder 
Volume 
200 L 
200 L 
200 L 
200 L 
200 L 
Product 
Weight 
without 
packaging 
165 kg/unit 
192 kg/unit 
192 kg/unit 
213 kg/unit 
226 kg/unit 
Main Product Contents 
Material/Chemical Input 
% 
Steel  
67-69% (80% for 14 kW) 
Plastic and rubber 
3-4% (9% for 14 kW) 
Copper and brass 
22-23% (10% for 14 kW) 
Printed board 
<1% 
Magnet 
<1% 
Lubricating oil  
<1% 
Aluminium 
<2% 
Refrigerant 
<1.5% 
 
Manufacturing Process 
An Air Source Heat Pump is made of components either directly manufactured and supplied by the 
manufacturer or components ready for assembly on site. The units are manufactured in Scotland (or Japan for 
the 14 kW unit) and distributed, installed and disposed of in UK and Ireland. 
 
6 Ecodan PUZ-WM50VHA Monobloc Air Source Heat Pump Product Information Sheet - Document Library - Mitsubishi Electric 
7 https://library.mitsubishielectric.co.uk/pdf/book/Ecodan_PUZ-
WM60VAA_Monobloc_Air_Source_Heat_Pump_Product_Information_Sheet?model_query=PUZ-WM60VAA-BS#page-1-2 
8 PUZ-WM85VAA TM65 Embodied Carbon Calculation - Document Library - Mitsubishi Electric  
9 https://library.mitsubishielectric.co.uk/pdf/book/Ecodan_PUZ-
WM112VAA_Monobloc_Air_Source_Heat_Pump_Product_Information_Sheet#page-1-2 
10 https://library.mitsubishielectric.co.uk/pdf/book/PUZ-HWM140VHA_-BS#page-1-2 
==PAGE:538==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Process flow diagram 
 
 
Construction Installation 
Products are manufactured in Livingston (or in Japan for the 14 kW unit) and distributed in the UK. The 
longest distance the unit can travel in the UK (1000 km) by lorry has been considered for this scenario. 
 
The installation of the combined PUZ-WM50VHA, PUZ-WM60VAA, PUZ-WM85VAA, PUZ-WM112VAA or 
HWM140VHA heat pump and EHPT20X-MHEDW Tank requires the installation of a anti vibration fixing foot 
(recycled tyre). 
The packaging of the units are disposed of during the installation of the combined units. Packaging includes 
(recycling rates from Defra: UK_stats_on_waste_dataset_July_2021_accessible_rev_v4.xlsx (live.com)): 
• 
corrugated cardboard: 65.6% recycled 
• 
polystyrene: 47.2% recycled 
• 
plain wood: 44.1% recycled 
• 
paper: 65.6% recycled 
• 
plastic: 47.2% recycled 
 
Use Information 
B1: It was assumed that 3 g of refrigerant was leaked per year but that it was not replaced as it is a closed 
loop system. 
B2: maintenance is carried out on a yearly basis and consist of a visual inspection of the unit. 
B3: If the unit is installed and maintained yearly in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements, the unit 
should not require repair throughout its reference lifetime. 
B4: the unit has a reference lifetime of 17 years and therefore no replacement is required providing the unit 
has been installed and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's requirement. 
B5: the unit has a reference lifetime of 17 years and therefore no refurbishment is required providing the unit 
has been installed and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's requirement. 
B6: the energy required to operate the unit was considered. 
B7: the unit is sealed. the water runs through the system to be heated and then fed back into the system. 
there is therefore no water input into the unit. 
 
==PAGE:539==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
End of Life 
C3: 65% of the refrigerant was reused at the end of the unit’s life 
C4: No information was provided, so a conservative estimate was made. It was assumed the following: 70% of 
metal and 50% of the plastics are recycled. 
 
Life Cycle Assessment Calculation Rules 
Functional unit description 
1 combined unit to produce either 5, 6, 8.5, 11.2 or 14 kW of heating and hot water, according to the 
appropriate usage scenario defined in the EN 14825 standard and during the 17-year reference lifetime of the 
product. 
System boundary 
In accordance with the modular approach as defined in EN15804:2012+A1:2013, this cradle-to-gate with 
options EPD includes the processes covered in the manufacturing site and product stage A1 to A3, use stage 
B1-B7 and disposal stage C3 and C4. 
Data sources, quality and allocation 
Specific primary data derived from the manufacturing of PUZ-WM50VHA, PUZ-WM60VAA, PUZ-WM85VAA, 
PUZ-WM112VAA or HWM140VHA heat pump and EHPT20X-MHEDW tank process in Livingston, UK factory 
(and in Japan for the 14 kW unit) have been modelled using Simapro v9.1 LCA software and the BRE LINA 
database v2.0.73 and data collected during the period of .1st April 2021 to 31st March 2022. In accordance with 
the requirements of EN15804, the most current available data has been used. The manufacturer-specific data 
for one unit of each. Secondary data has been obtained for all other upstream and downstream processes that 
are beyond the control of the manufacturer (i.e. raw material production) from the ecoinvent 3.2 database. All 
ecoinvent datasets are complete within the context used and conform to the system boundary and the criteria 
for the exclusion of inputs and outputs, according to the requirements specified in EN15804. The quantities of 
materials have been calculated based on the components used in the unit. The amount of water, energy and 
waste was allocated to each product based on the total number of units manufactured. 
 
Specific UK datasets have been selected from the ecoinvent LCI for this LCA (Japan dataset for energy were 
used for the 14 kW unit). The quality level of geographical and technical representativeness is therefore good. 
The quality level of time representativeness is good as the background LCI datasets are based on ecoinvent 
v3.2 which was compiled in 2015. Therefore, there is approximately 5-6 years between the ecoinvent LCI 
reference year and the time period for which the LCA was undertaken. 
Cut-off criteria 
The impact of the storage tank has been included. Transport distances to site were calculated as the distance 
from the supplier of the component to the UK (or in Japan for the 14 kW unit). 
 
==PAGE:540==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM50VHA 
(MND = module not declared; MND = module not declared; INA = indicator not assessed; AGG = aggregated) 
Parameters describing environmental impacts 
 
GWP 
ODP 
AP 
EP 
POCP 
ADPE 
ADPF 
kg CO2 
equiv. 
kg CFC 
11 equiv. 
kg SO2 
equiv. 
kg 
(PO4)3-
equiv. 
kg C2H4 
equiv. 
kg Sb 
equiv. 
MJ, net 
calorific 
value. 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
1.18E+03 
1.91E-02 
1.85E+01 
1.06E+01 
1.35E+00 
1.15E-01 
1.42E+04 
Transport 
A2 
1.09E+01 
1.85E-06 
1.71E-01 
2.05E-02 
1.30E-02 
1.13E-05 
1.59E+02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
-1.25E+01 
4.35E-06 
2.37E-01 
6.70E-02 
3.44E-02 
1.31E-04 
8.54E+02 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
1.18E+03 
1.91E-02 
1.89E+01 
1.07E+01 
1.40E+00 
1.15E-01 
1.52E+04 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
2.76E+01 
5.08E-06 
9.23E-02 
2.43E-02 
1.61E-02 
7.27E-05 
4.17E+02 
Construction 
A5 
1.69E+01 
1.25E-06 
5.56E-02 
6.80E-02 
1.42E-02 
4.02E-04 
3.33E+02 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
3.44E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
4.01E+04 
2.60E-03 
2.17E+02 
4.99E+01 
1.24E+01 
4.84E-02 
6.17E+05 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
5.56E+00 
2.93E-07 
5.23E-03 
4.78E-02 
1.39E-03 
3.65E-06 
1.72E+01 
 
GWP = Global Warming Potential;  
ODP = Ozone Depletion Potential;  
AP = Acidification Potential for Soil and Water;  
EP = Eutrophication Potential; 
POCP = Formation potential of tropospheric Ozone;  
ADPE = Abiotic Depletion Potential – Elements;  
ADPF = Abiotic Depletion Potential – Fossil Fuels;  
 
 
 
==PAGE:541==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM50VHA 
Parameters describing resource use, primary energy 
 
PERE 
PERM 
PERT 
PENRE 
PENRM 
PENRT 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
1.97E+03 
1.30E-01 
1.97E+03 
1.53E+04 
2.54E+02 
1.55E+04 
Transport 
A2 
3.36E+00 
5.25E-06 
3.36E+00 
1.61E+02 
0.00E+00 
1.61E+02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
8.85E+02 
1.21E-03 
8.85E+02 
1.03E+03 
0.00E+00 
1.03E+03 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
2.86E+03 
1.31E-01 
2.86E+03 
1.65E+04 
2.54E+02 
1.67E+04 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
5.53E+00 
2.06E-05 
5.53E+00 
4.14E+02 
0.00E+00 
4.14E+02 
Construction 
A5 
9.94E+00 
1.23E-04 
9.94E+00 
3.41E+02 
0.00E+00 
3.41E+02 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
5.34E+04 
9.63E-02 
5.34E+04 
8.22E+05 
0.00E+00 
8.22E+05 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
1.61E+00 
1.46E-06 
1.61E+00 
1.81E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.81E+01 
 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable 
primary energy used as raw materials;  
PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials;  
PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources;  
PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding non-
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials;  
PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials;  
PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy resource 
 
 
 
==PAGE:542==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM50VHA 
Parameters describing resource use, secondary materials and fuels, use of water 
 
SM 
RSF 
NRSF 
FW 
kg 
MJ 
net calorific value 
MJ 
net calorific value 
m3 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
5.46E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.07E+01 
Transport 
A2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.73E-02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.91E-01 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
5.46E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.11E+01 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.03E-02 
Construction 
A5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.12E-01 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.64E+02 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.98E-02 
 
SM = Use of secondary material; 
RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels;  
NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels;  
FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
 
==PAGE:543==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM50VHA 
Other environmental information describing waste categories 
 
HWD 
NHWD 
RWD 
kg 
kg 
kg 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
3.40E+02 
1.00E+02 
3.64E-02 
Transport 
A2 
6.68E-02 
2.47E+00 
1.08E-03 
Manufacturing 
A3 
3.90E-01 
2.24E+00 
4.47E-03 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
3.40E+02 
1.05E+02 
4.20E-02 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
1.75E-01 
1.94E+01 
2.87E-03 
Construction 
A5 
1.25E-01 
1.56E+01 
1.35E-03 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
9.39E+01 
1.00E+03 
4.53E+00 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction, 
demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
1.05E+00 
5.71E+01 
1.16E-04 
 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; 
NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed;  
RWD = Radioactive waste disposed  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:544==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM50VHA 
Other environmental information describing output flows – at end of life 
 
CRU 
MFR 
MER 
EE 
kg 
kg 
kg 
MJ per energy 
carrier 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Transport 
A2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Manufacturing 
A3 
0.00E+00 
8.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
0.00E+00 
8.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Construction 
A5 
0.00E+00 
1.44E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
1.40E+00 
1.17E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
 
CRU = Components for reuse;  
MFR = Materials for recycling 
MER = Materials for energy recovery;  
EE = Exported Energy 
 
 
==PAGE:545==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM60VAA 
(MND = module not declared; MND = module not declared; INA = indicator not assessed; AGG = aggregated) 
Parameters describing environmental impacts 
 
GWP 
ODP 
AP 
EP 
POCP 
ADPE 
ADPF 
kg CO2 
equiv. 
kg CFC 
11 equiv. 
kg SO2 
equiv. 
kg (PO4)3-
equiv. 
kg C2H4 
equiv. 
kg Sb 
equiv. 
MJ, net 
calorific 
value. 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
1.35E+03 
2.02E-02 
2.07E+01 
1.18E+01 
1.52E+00 
1.26E-01 
1.64E+04 
Transport 
A2 
1.18E+01 
2.01E-06 
1.81E-01 
2.19E-02 
1.39E-02 
1.27E-05 
1.72E+02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
-1.97E+01 
4.54E-06 
2.45E-01 
7.07E-02 
3.73E-02 
1.44E-04 
8.84E+02 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
1.34E+03 
2.02E-02 
2.11E+01 
1.19E+01 
1.57E+00 
1.26E-01 
1.75E+04 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
3.21E+01 
5.91E-06 
1.07E-01 
2.83E-02 
1.87E-02 
8.45E-05 
4.85E+02 
Construction 
A5 
1.76E+01 
1.25E-06 
5.59E-02 
7.51E-02 
1.43E-02 
4.02E-04 
3.33E+02 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
3.44E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
4.27E+04 
2.76E-03 
2.31E+02 
5.31E+01 
1.32E+01 
5.15E-02 
6.57E+05 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
5.74E+00 
3.19E-07 
5.69E-03 
4.84E-02 
1.47E-03 
3.90E-06 
1.89E+01 
 
GWP = Global Warming Potential;  
ODP = Ozone Depletion Potential;  
AP = Acidification Potential for Soil and Water;  
EP = Eutrophication Potential; 
POCP = Formation potential of tropospheric Ozone;  
ADPE = Abiotic Depletion Potential – Elements;  
ADPF = Abiotic Depletion Potential – Fossil Fuels;  
 
 
 
==PAGE:546==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM60VAA 
Parameters describing resource use, primary energy 
 
PERE 
PERM 
PERT 
PENRE 
PENRM 
PENRT 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
2.34E+03 
1.40E-01 
2.34E+03 
1.76E+04 
2.52E+02 
1.79E+04 
Transport 
A2 
3.61E+00 
5.77E-06 
3.61E+00 
1.74E+02 
0.00E+00 
1.74E+02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
1.00E+03 
1.29E-03 
1.00E+03 
1.07E+03 
0.00E+00 
1.07E+03 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
3.34E+03 
1.41E-01 
3.34E+03 
1.88E+04 
2.52E+02 
1.91E+04 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
6.44E+00 
2.40E-05 
6.44E+00 
4.82E+02 
0.00E+00 
4.82E+02 
Construction 
A5 
9.97E+00 
1.23E-04 
9.97E+00 
3.42E+02 
0.00E+00 
3.42E+02 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
5.68E+04 
1.03E-01 
5.68E+04 
8.75E+05 
0.00E+00 
8.75E+05 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
1.73E+00 
1.56E-06 
1.73E+00 
1.98E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.98E+01 
 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable 
primary energy used as raw materials;  
PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials;  
PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources;  
PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding non-
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials;  
PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials;  
PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy resource 
 
 
 
==PAGE:547==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM60VAA 
Parameters describing resource use, secondary materials and fuels, use of water 
 
SM 
RSF 
NRSF 
FW 
kg 
MJ 
net calorific value 
MJ 
net calorific value 
m3 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
5.20E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.33E+01 
Transport 
A2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.04E-02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.77E-01 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
5.20E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.38E+01 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.05E-01 
Construction 
A5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.13E-01 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.75E+02 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.17E-02 
 
SM = Use of secondary material; 
RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels;  
NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels;  
FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
 
==PAGE:548==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM60VAA 
Other environmental information describing waste categories 
 
HWD 
NHWD 
RWD 
kg 
kg 
kg 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
4.26E+02 
1.22E+02 
4.16E-02 
Transport 
A2 
7.24E-02 
2.82E+00 
1.18E-03 
Manufacturing 
A3 
4.28E-01 
2.42E+00 
4.60E-03 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
4.27E+02 
1.27E+02 
4.74E-02 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
2.03E-01 
2.26E+01 
3.34E-03 
Construction 
A5 
1.25E-01 
1.76E+01 
1.36E-03 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
9.99E+01 
1.06E+03 
4.82E+00 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
1.12E+00 
6.47E+01 
1.27E-04 
 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; 
NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed;  
RWD = Radioactive waste disposed  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:549==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM60VAA 
Other environmental information describing output flows – at end of life 
 
CRU 
MFR 
MER 
EE 
kg 
kg 
kg 
MJ per energy 
carrier 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Transport 
A2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Manufacturing 
A3 
0.00E+00 
8.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
0.00E+00 
8.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Construction 
A5 
0.00E+00 
1.65E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
1.48E+00 
1.34E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
 
CRU = Components for reuse;  
MFR = Materials for recycling 
MER = Materials for energy recovery;  
EE = Exported Energy 
 
 
==PAGE:550==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM85VAA 
(MND = module not declared; MND = module not declared; INA = indicator not assessed; AGG = aggregated) 
Parameters describing environmental impacts 
 
GWP 
ODP 
AP 
EP 
POCP 
ADPE 
ADPF 
kg CO2 
equiv. 
kg CFC 
11 equiv. 
kg SO2 
equiv. 
kg (PO4)3-
equiv. 
kg C2H4 
equiv. 
kg Sb 
equiv. 
MJ, net 
calorific 
value. 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
1.41E+03 
2.02E-02 
2.12E+01 
1.21E+01 
1.61E+00 
1.33E-01 
1.73E+04 
Transport 
A2 
1.22E+01 
2.07E-06 
1.88E-01 
2.27E-02 
1.44E-02 
1.29E-05 
1.77E+02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
-1.94E+01 
4.58E-06 
2.45E-01 
7.07E-02 
3.73E-02 
1.44E-04 
8.89E+02 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
1.40E+03 
2.02E-02 
2.16E+01 
1.22E+01 
1.66E+00 
1.33E-01 
1.84E+04 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
3.21E+01 
5.91E-06 
1.07E-01 
2.83E-02 
1.87E-02 
8.45E-05 
4.85E+02 
Construction 
A5 
1.76E+01 
1.25E-06 
5.59E-02 
7.51E-02 
1.43E-02 
4.02E-04 
3.33E+02 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
3.44E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
5.83E+04 
3.78E-03 
3.16E+02 
7.25E+01 
1.80E+01 
7.04E-02 
8.98E+05 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
7.56E+00 
3.28E-07 
6.05E-03 
5.98E-02 
1.84E-03 
3.98E-06 
1.96E+01 
 
GWP = Global Warming Potential;  
ODP = Ozone Depletion Potential;  
AP = Acidification Potential for Soil and Water;  
EP = Eutrophication Potential; 
POCP = Formation potential of tropospheric Ozone;  
ADPE = Abiotic Depletion Potential – Elements;  
ADPF = Abiotic Depletion Potential – Fossil Fuels;  
 
 
 
==PAGE:551==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM85VAA 
Parameters describing resource use, primary energy 
 
PERE 
PERM 
PERT 
PENRE 
PENRM 
PENRT 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
2.43E+03 
1.47E-01 
2.43E+03 
1.86E+04 
2.52E+02 
1.89E+04 
Transport 
A2 
3.73E+00 
5.91E-06 
3.73E+00 
1.79E+02 
0.00E+00 
1.79E+02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
1.00E+03 
1.29E-03 
1.00E+03 
1.07E+03 
0.00E+00 
1.07E+03 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
3.43E+03 
1.48E-01 
3.43E+03 
1.98E+04 
2.52E+02 
2.01E+04 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
6.44E+00 
2.40E-05 
6.44E+00 
4.82E+02 
0.00E+00 
4.82E+02 
Construction 
A5 
9.97E+00 
1.23E-04 
9.97E+00 
3.42E+02 
0.00E+00 
3.42E+02 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
7.76E+04 
1.40E-01 
7.76E+04 
1.20E+06 
0.00E+00 
1.20E+06 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
1.79E+00 
1.72E-06 
1.79E+00 
2.06E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.06E+01 
 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable 
primary energy used as raw materials;  
PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials;  
PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources;  
PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding non-
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials;  
PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials;  
PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy resource 
 
 
 
==PAGE:552==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM85VAA 
Parameters describing resource use, secondary materials and fuels, use of water 
 
SM 
RSF 
NRSF 
FW 
kg 
MJ 
net calorific value 
MJ 
net calorific value 
m3 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
5.20E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.48E+01 
Transport 
A2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.16E-02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.80E-01 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
5.20E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.53E+01 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.05E-01 
Construction 
A5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.13E-01 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.39E+02 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.26E-02 
 
SM = Use of secondary material; 
RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels;  
NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels;  
FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
 
==PAGE:553==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM85VAA 
Other environmental information describing waste categories 
 
HWD 
NHWD 
RWD 
kg 
kg 
kg 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
4.30E+02 
1.26E+02 
4.42E-02 
Transport 
A2 
7.46E-02 
2.85E+00 
1.21E-03 
Manufacturing 
A3 
4.29E-01 
2.42E+00 
4.61E-03 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
4.31E+02 
1.31E+02 
5.00E-02 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
2.03E-01 
2.26E+01 
3.34E-03 
Construction 
A5 
1.25E-01 
1.76E+01 
1.36E-03 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
1.37E+02 
1.45E+03 
6.59E+00 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
1.12E+00 
6.69E+01 
1.34E-04 
 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; 
NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed;  
RWD = Radioactive waste disposed  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:554==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM85VAA 
Other environmental information describing output flows – at end of life 
 
CRU 
MFR 
MER 
EE 
kg 
kg 
kg 
MJ per energy 
carrier 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Transport 
A2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Manufacturing 
A3 
0.00E+00 
8.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
0.00E+00 
8.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Construction 
A5 
0.00E+00 
1.65E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
1.48E+00 
1.33E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
 
CRU = Components for reuse;  
MFR = Materials for recycling 
MER = Materials for energy recovery;  
EE = Exported Energy 
==PAGE:555==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM112VAA 
(MND = module not declared; MND = module not declared; INA = indicator not assessed; AGG = aggregated) 
Parameters describing environmental impacts 
 
GWP 
ODP 
AP 
EP 
POCP 
ADPE 
ADPF 
kg CO2 
equiv. 
kg CFC 
11 equiv. 
kg SO2 
equiv. 
kg (PO4)3-
equiv. 
kg C2H4 
equiv. 
kg Sb 
equiv. 
MJ, net 
calorific 
value. 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
1.51E+03 
2.67E-02 
2.26E+01 
1.29E+01 
1.65E+00 
1.36E-01 
1.79E+04 
Transport 
A2 
1.35E+01 
2.29E-06 
2.11E-01 
2.53E-02 
1.61E-02 
1.39E-05 
1.96E+02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
-1.97E+01 
4.54E-06 
2.45E-01 
7.07E-02 
3.73E-02 
1.44E-04 
8.84E+02 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
1.50E+03 
2.67E-02 
2.31E+01 
1.30E+01 
1.70E+00 
1.36E-01 
1.90E+04 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
3.56E+01 
6.56E-06 
1.19E-01 
3.14E-02 
2.08E-02 
9.38E-05 
5.38E+02 
Construction 
A5 
1.76E+01 
1.25E-06 
5.59E-02 
7.51E-02 
1.43E-02 
4.02E-04 
3.33E+02 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
3.44E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
6.90E+04 
4.47E-03 
3.74E+02 
8.59E+01 
2.13E+01 
8.34E-02 
1.06E+06 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
7.13E+00 
3.94E-07 
6.86E-03 
5.40E-02 
1.76E-03 
5.07E-06 
2.27E+01 
 
GWP = Global Warming Potential;  
ODP = Ozone Depletion Potential;  
AP = Acidification Potential for Soil and Water;  
EP = Eutrophication Potential; 
POCP = Formation potential of tropospheric Ozone;  
ADPE = Abiotic Depletion Potential – Elements;  
ADPF = Abiotic Depletion Potential – Fossil Fuels;  
 
 
 
==PAGE:556==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM112VAA 
Parameters describing resource use, primary energy 
 
PERE 
PERM 
PERT 
PENRE 
PENRM 
PENRT 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
2.54E+03 
1.63E-01 
2.54E+03 
1.93E+04 
2.66E+02 
1.95E+04 
Transport 
A2 
4.16E+00 
6.50E-06 
4.16E+00 
1.99E+02 
0.00E+00 
1.99E+02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
1.00E+03 
1.29E-03 
1.00E+03 
1.07E+03 
0.00E+00 
1.07E+03 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
3.54E+03 
1.64E-01 
3.54E+03 
2.06E+04 
2.66E+02 
2.08E+04 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
7.14E+00 
2.66E-05 
7.14E+00 
5.34E+02 
0.00E+00 
5.34E+02 
Construction 
A5 
9.97E+00 
1.23E-04 
9.97E+00 
3.42E+02 
0.00E+00 
3.42E+02 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
9.19E+04 
1.66E-01 
9.19E+04 
1.42E+06 
0.00E+00 
1.42E+06 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
2.22E+00 
1.93E-06 
2.22E+00 
2.38E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.38E+01 
 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable 
primary energy used as raw materials;  
PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials;  
PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources;  
PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding non-
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials;  
PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials;  
PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy resource 
 
 
 
==PAGE:557==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM112VAA 
Parameters describing resource use, secondary materials and fuels, use of water 
 
SM 
RSF 
NRSF 
FW 
kg 
MJ 
net calorific value 
MJ 
net calorific value 
m3 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
5.72E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.54E+01 
Transport 
A2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.62E-02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.77E-01 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
5.72E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.59E+01 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.17E-01 
Construction 
A5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.13E-01 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.83E+02 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.60E-02 
 
SM = Use of secondary material; 
RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels;  
NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels;  
FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
 
==PAGE:558==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM112VAA 
Other environmental information describing waste categories 
 
HWD 
NHWD 
RWD 
kg 
kg 
kg 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
4.61E+02 
1.33E+02 
4.54E-02 
Transport 
A2 
8.27E-02 
3.06E+00 
1.34E-03 
Manufacturing 
A3 
4.28E-01 
2.42E+00 
4.60E-03 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
4.62E+02 
1.38E+02 
5.13E-02 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
2.25E-01 
2.51E+01 
3.71E-03 
Construction 
A5 
1.25E-01 
1.76E+01 
1.36E-03 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
1.62E+02 
1.72E+03 
7.81E+00 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
1.48E+00 
7.11E+01 
1.52E-04 
 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; 
NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed;  
RWD = Radioactive waste disposed  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:559==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of PUZ-WM112VAA 
Other environmental information describing output flows – at end of life 
 
CRU 
MFR 
MER 
EE 
kg 
kg 
kg 
MJ per energy 
carrier 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Transport 
A2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Manufacturing 
A3 
0.00E+00 
8.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
0.00E+00 
8.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Construction 
A5 
0.00E+00 
1.65E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
1.96E+00 
1.47E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
0.00E+00 
 
0.00E+00 
 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
 
CRU = Components for reuse;  
MFR = Materials for recycling 
MER = Materials for energy recovery;  
EE = Exported Energy 
 
 
==PAGE:560==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results for reference unit of capacity of HWM140VHA 
(MND = module not declared; MND = module not declared; INA = indicator not assessed; AGG = aggregated) 
Parameters describing environmental impacts 
 
GWP 
ODP 
AP 
EP 
POCP 
ADPE 
ADPF 
kg CO2 
equiv. 
kg CFC 
11 equiv. 
kg SO2 
equiv. 
kg (PO4)3-
equiv. 
kg C2H4 
equiv. 
kg Sb 
equiv. 
MJ, net 
calorific 
value. 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
1.68E+03 
3.08E-02 
2.83E+01 
1.66E+01 
1.98E+00 
1.65E-01 
2.01E+04 
Transport 
A2 
4.87E+01 
8.30E-06 
7.15E-01 
8.75E-02 
5.58E-02 
5.63E-05 
7.09E+02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
-3.21E+00 
5.09E-06 
2.71E-01 
5.97E-02 
3.99E-02 
9.84E-05 
9.05E+02 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
1.73E+03 
3.08E-02 
2.93E+01 
1.67E+01 
2.08E+00 
1.65E-01 
2.17E+04 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
7.96E+01 
1.38E-05 
9.80E-01 
1.28E-01 
8.19E-02 
1.17E-04 
1.17E+03 
Construction 
A5 
7.78E+01 
1.43E-06 
6.37E-02 
2.36E-01 
2.63E-02 
4.04E-04 
3.46E+02 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
3.44E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
9.63E+04 
6.23E-03 
5.22E+02 
1.20E+02 
2.97E+01 
1.16E-01 
1.48E+06 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
7.62E+00 
6.04E-07 
1.14E-02 
1.84E-01 
2.43E-03 
6.37E-06 
3.92E+01 
 
GWP = Global Warming Potential;  
ODP = Ozone Depletion Potential;  
AP = Acidification Potential for Soil and Water;  
EP = Eutrophication Potential; 
POCP = Formation potential of tropospheric Ozone;  
ADPE = Abiotic Depletion Potential – Elements;  
ADPF = Abiotic Depletion Potential – Fossil Fuels;  
 
 
 
==PAGE:561==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of HWM140VHA 
Parameters describing resource use, primary energy 
 
PERE 
PERM 
PERT 
PENRE 
PENRM 
PENRT 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
MJ 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
2.82E+03 
1.89E-01 
2.82E+03 
2.15E+04 
4.13E+02 
2.19E+04 
Transport 
A2 
1.46E+01 
2.44E-05 
1.46E+01 
7.17E+02 
0.00E+00 
7.17E+02 
Manufacturing 
A3 
8.28E+02 
1.12E-03 
8.28E+02 
9.29E+02 
0.00E+00 
9.29E+02 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
3.66E+03 
1.90E-01 
3.66E+03 
2.31E+04 
4.13E+02 
2.35E+04 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
2.22E+01 
4.40E-05 
2.22E+01 
1.18E+03 
0.00E+00 
1.18E+03 
Construction 
A5 
1.16E+01 
1.27E-04 
1.16E+01 
3.59E+02 
0.00E+00 
3.59E+02 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
1.28E+05 
2.31E-01 
1.28E+05 
1.97E+06 
0.00E+00 
1.97E+06 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction, 
demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
2.87E+00 
2.81E-06 
2.87E+00 
4.03E+01 
0.00E+00 
4.03E+01 
 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable 
primary energy used as raw materials;  
PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials;  
PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources;  
PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding non-
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials;  
PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials;  
PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy resource 
 
 
 
==PAGE:562==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of HWM140VHA 
Parameters describing resource use, secondary materials and fuels, use of water 
 
SM 
RSF 
NRSF 
FW 
kg 
MJ 
net calorific value 
MJ 
net calorific value 
m3 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
9.10E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.95E+01 
Transport 
A2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.66E-01 
Manufacturing 
A3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.02E-01 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
9.10E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.01E+01 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.69E-01 
Construction 
A5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.41E-01 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.95E+02 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction, 
demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.47E-02 
 
SM = Use of secondary material; 
RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels;  
NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels;  
FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
 
==PAGE:563==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of HWM140VHA 
Other environmental information describing waste categories 
 
HWD 
NHWD 
RWD 
kg 
kg 
kg 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
4.72E+02 
1.38E+02 
5.13E-02 
Transport 
A2 
2.99E-01 
1.28E+01 
4.85E-03 
Manufacturing 
A3 
4.08E-01 
2.17E+00 
2.08E-03 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
4.73E+02 
1.53E+02 
5.82E-02 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
4.92E-01 
2.83E+01 
8.01E-03 
Construction 
A5 
1.51E-01 
6.05E+01 
1.51E-03 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
2.25E+02 
2.40E+03 
1.09E+01 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction
, demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
1.71E+00 
1.59E+02 
2.60E-04 
 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; 
NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed;  
RWD = Radioactive waste disposed  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:564==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LCA Results (continued) for reference unit of capacity of HWM140VHA 
Other environmental information describing output flows – at end of life 
 
CRU 
MFR 
MER 
EE 
kg 
kg 
kg 
MJ per energy 
carrier 
Product stage 
Raw material 
supply 
A1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Transport 
A2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Manufacturing 
A3 
0.00E+00 
8.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Total (of 
product stage) 
A1-3 
0.00E+00 
8.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Construction 
A5 
0.00E+00 
1.35E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Maintenance 
B2 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Repair 
B3 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Replacement 
B4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Refurbishment 
B5 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
energy use 
B6 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Operational 
water use 
B7 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
End of life 
Deconstruction, 
demolition 
C1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Transport 
C2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
Waste 
processing 
C3 
2.26E+00 
3.33E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Disposal 
C4 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
 
CRU = Components for reuse;  
MFR = Materials for recycling 
MER = Materials for energy recovery;  
EE = Exported Energy 
 
 
==PAGE:565==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scenarios and additional technical information 
Scenarios and additional technical information 
Scenario 
Parameter 
Units 
Results 
A4 – Transport to the 
building site 
Products are manufactured in Livingston and distributed in the UK. The longest distance the 
unit can travel in the UK (1000 km) by lorry has been considered for this scenario. 
 
For the 14 kW HWM140VHA unit, the unit was assumed to be transported from Japan to the 
UK 
Lorry 
Litre of fuel type 
per distance or 
vehicle type 
0.227 
Distance for all units manufactured in Livingston 
Km  
1,000 
Distance for the 14 kW HWM140VHA – lorry 
Km 
1,000 
Distance for the 14 kW HWM140VHA – sea 
Km 
15,000 
 
Capacity utilisation (incl. empty returns) – lorry 
% 
50 
 
Capacity utilisation (incl. empty returns) – sea 
% 
65 
 
Fuel transoceanic freight ship 
g/tkm 
2.5 
A5 – Installation in 
the building 
For the purpose of this study, it was assumed that no unit were damaged on 
installation. 
 
The installation of the combined heat pumps and tank requires the installation of an anti 
vibration fixing foot (recycled tyre). 
 
The packaging of the unit is disposed of during installation. Packaging includes (recycling rates 
from Defra UK_stats_on_waste_dataset_July_2021_accessible_rev_v4.xlsx (live.com)): 
 
Corrugated cardboard 
Recycled 
65.6% 
 
Polystyrene 
Recycled 
47.2% 
 
Plain wood 
Recycled 
44.2% 
 
Paper 
Recycled 
65.6% 
 
Plastic  
Recycled 
47.2% 
B1 – Use 
This unit is hermetically sealed. It was estimated that 3 g 
of refrigerant leaked per year throughout its reference 
lifetime - providing the unit has been installed and 
maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's 
guidance. 
unit 
quantity 
 
Emission to air 
g per year 
3 
B2 – Maintenance 
The unit is maintained once a year repair throughout its 
reference lifetime. This maintenance requires a check of 
electrical circuits and the removal of any obstructions. No 
parts are removed or replaced during this maintenance - 
providing the unit has been installed and maintained in 
accordance with the manufacturer's guidance. 
N/A 
0 
==PAGE:566==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scenarios and additional technical information 
Scenario 
Parameter 
Units 
Results 
B3 – Repair  
The unit should not require repair throughout its reference 
lifetime - providing the unit has been installed and 
maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's 
guidance. 
N/A 
0 
B4 – Replacement 
The unit has a reference lifetime of 17 years. No 
replacements are required - providing the unit has been 
installed and maintained in accordance with the 
manufacturer's guidance. 
N/A 
0 
B5 – Refurbishment  
The unit has a reference lifetime of 17 years. No 
refurbishment is required - providing the unit has been 
installed and maintained in accordance with the 
manufacturer's guidance. 
N/A 
0 
B6 – Operational 
energy use  
Total energy consumption of the HP per functional unit 
over 17 years 
unit 
Value 
 
PUZ-WM50VHA 
kWh 
66,725 
 
PUZ-WM60VAA 
kWh 
71,009 
 
PUZ-WM85VAA 
kWh 
97,019 
 
PUZ-WM112VAA 
kWh 
114,920 
 
HWM140VHA 
kWh 
160,225 
B7 – Operational 
water use  
The unit is sealed. Water runs through the system to be 
heated and is then fed back into the system. There is 
therefore no water consumed by the unit throughout its 
reference lifetime.  
Litres 
0 
Reference service 
life 
Mitsubishi confirms that, providing the unit is installed and 
maintained in accordance with the appropriate procedure, 
the unit will have a service life of 17 years – as per 
guidelines in PEP Product Specific Rules 0013 
‘Thermodynamic Generators with Electric Compression’ 
(link). 
Years 
17 
C3 – Waste 
processing 
65% of the refrigerant has been reused 
% 
65 
C4 - End of life, 
Disposal 
Conservative figures were used for the disposal of the 
various components 
unit 
value 
 
% recycled metal 
% 
70 
 
% recycled plastic 
% 
50 
 
% landfill of other components 
% 
100 
 
% refrigerant recovered 
% 
65 
 
 
==PAGE:567==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
BSI. Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – Core rules for the product 
category of construction products. BS EN 15804:2012+A1:2013. London, BSI, 2013. 
 
BSI. Environmental labels and declarations – Type III Environmental declarations – Principles and procedures. 
BS EN ISO 14025:2010 (exactly identical to ISO 14025:2006). London, BSI, 2010. 
 
BSI. Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and framework.                                   
BS EN ISO 14040:2006. London, BSI, 2006. 
 
BSI. Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – requirements and guidelines.                             
BS EN ISO 14044:2006. London, BSI, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:568==
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Owner: 
Airmaster A/S 
No.: 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 
First issue: 
Issued: 
02-06-2023 
21-03-2024 
Valid to: 
22-02-2029 
EPD 
VERIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION | ISO 14025 & EN 15804 
3 r d  P A R T Y  V E R I F I E D  
==PAGE:569==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 2 of 23 
 
 
Owner of declaration 
Airmaster A/S,  
Industrivej 59, 9600 Aars 
CVR: 29527393 
Programme 
EPD Danmark 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
☐ Industry EPD   
☒ Product EPD 
 
Declared product(s) 
The declared products are listed below: 
• 
AM150 decentralised ventilation unit (DVU) 
• 
AM300 decentralised ventilation unit (DVU) 
• 
AM500 decentralised ventilation unit (DVU) 
• 
AM800 decentralised ventilation unit (DVU) 
• 
AM900 decentralised ventilation unit (DVU) 
• 
AM1000 decentralised ventilation unit (DVU) 
• 
AM1200 decentralised ventilation unit (DVU) 
 
In this document referred to as the DVUs. 
 
The EPD is an average EPD for the products: 
• 
AML150 
• 
AML300 
• 
AMP500 H, AMP500V, AML500 H, and AML500 V 
• 
AMP800 H, AMP800V, AML800 H, and AML800 V 
• 
AMP900 H and AMP900 V 
• 
AMP1000 
• 
AMP1200 H and AMP1200 V 
It has not been possible to group the datasets within +/-
10% of the average.  Therefore, the EPD is based on a 
‘reference worst case product’ within the aforementioned 
product range. For the AM150, AM300, and AM1000 the 
results are based on the versions AML150, AML300, and 
AMP1000. 
 
Number of  declared datasets/product variations: 7 
 
Production sites 
Industrivej 35, Industrivej 59, and Tolstrupbyvej 8,  
9600 Aars 
Denmark 
Product(s) use 
Decentralised ventilation unit for rooms. 
Declared/ functional unit 
One piece of decentralised ventilation unit with an air 
capacity of 115 – 1050 m3/h (varying per product). 
 
Year of production site data (A3) 
2021 
EPD version 
No. 2: Minor layout change in results table for “additional 
environmental impacts per AM150”. 
Issued: 
02-06-2023 
Valid to: 
22-02-2029 
Basis of calculation 
This EPD is developed in accordance with the 
European standard EN 15804+A2.  
 
Comparability 
EPDs 
of 
construction 
products 
may 
not 
be 
comparable 
if 
they 
do 
not 
comply 
with 
the 
requirements in EN 15804. EPD data may not be 
comparable if the datasets used are not developed in 
accordance with EN 15804 and if the background 
systems are not based on the same database. 
 
Validity 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 
14025 and is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 
 
Use 
The intended use of an EPD is to communicate 
scientifically based environmental information for 
construction products, for the purpose of assessing 
the environmental performance of buildings. 
 
EPD type 
☐Cradle-to-gate with modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options, modules C1-C4 and D 
☒Cradle-to-grave and module D 
☐Cradle-to-gate 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options 
 
 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and data, 
according to EN ISO 14025 
☐ internal 
☒ external 
 
Third party verifier: 
 
 
 
Mirko Miseljic 
 
 
 
 
Martha Katrine Sørensen 
EPD Danmark 
==PAGE:570==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 3 of 23 
 
Product information 
Life cycle stages 
 
Product description 
The dimensions (WxHxD) and weight of decentralised ventilation unit (DVUs) are listed in the following table:  
Ventilation unit 
Dimensions - WxHxD (mm) 
Weight (kg) 
Capacity at 30DB(A) (m3/h) 
AM150 
1170 x 261 x 862 
54.5 
115 
AM300 
1180 x 344 x 705 
83.9 
210 
AM500 
1600 x 439 x 779 
145.3 
430 
AM800 
1910 x 174 x 916 
166.6-168.5 
650 
AM900 
800 x 2323 x 602 
190.5 
690 
AM1000 
2325 x 561 x 1283 
322.4 
950 
AM1200 
496 x 2406 x 2427 
489.3 
1050 
 
The function of the DVUs is to provide fresh air by circulating air through supply and exhaust filters which removes 
dust and particles and lowers the CO2 levels in the indoor climate. The DVUs allow being installed on the wall and 
ceiling. The units are applicable for larger rooms with a higher activity of people such as classrooms, offices, and 
meeting rooms etc. The unit has an automatically adjustable supply that adjusts the diffusion of air in the room. 
The main product components are shown in the table below.  
DVUs 
AM150 
AM300 
AM500 
AM800 
AM900 
AM1000 
AM1200 
Material 
Weight-% of declared product 
Steel 
54% 
54% 
63% 
55% 
63% 
79% 
59% 
MDF 
9% 
8% 
9% 
7-8% 
5% 
0% 
20% 
Electronics 
14% 
12% 
16% 
21% 
15% 
10% 
14% 
Insulation 
18% 
23% 
8% 
11% 
13% 
7% 
4% 
Aluminium 
0% 
0% 
1% 
2-3% 
0% 
2% 
1% 
Plastics 
2% 
2% 
1% 
1% 
3% 
2% 
1% 
Other 
2% 
2% 
2% 
2-3% 
1% 
1% 
1% 
Total 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
 
 
Life cycle stages and modules (MND = module not declared) 
Product 
Constructi
on process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond the system 
boundary 
Raw material 
supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery 
and recycling 
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
==PAGE:571==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 4 of 23 
 
Product packaging: 
The composition of the sales- and transport packaging of the product is shown in the table below. 
 
Representativity 
This declaration, including data collection and the 
modelled 
foreground 
system 
including 
results, 
represents the production of the DVUs on the 
production sites located in Aars, Denmark. Airmaster 
has three production sites where the DVUs are 
assembled.  
Product specific data are based on values collected in 
the period January to December 2021. Background 
data are less than 10 years old and are based on GaBi 
Professional database and EcoInvent.  Generally, the 
used background datasets are of high quality. 
 
Hazardous substances 
The DVUs do not contain substances listed on the 
”Candidate List of Substances of Very High Concern for 
authorisation”. 
(http://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table) 
 
 
 
Essential characteristics  
The DVUs are covered by harmonised technical 
specification EN 1886:2008 and EN 13141-7:2010. 
Additionally, the DVUs comply with following EU 
directives: 
DIRECTIVE 
2006/42/EC, 
DIRECTIVE 
2014/30/EC, DIRECTIVE 2009/125/EC, and DIRECTIVE 
2011/65/EU. 
 
Further technical information can be obtained by 
contacting the manufacturer or on the manufacturer’s 
website: 
• 
https://airmaster.dk/produkter/vaeghaengte-
ventilationsanlaeg 
• 
https://airmaster.dk/produkter/ventilationsanlaeg-
gulvstaaende  
For the specific available options and models of the 
DVUs contact Airmaster A/S.  
Reference Service Life (RSL) 
The reference service life is set to 25 years, which is 
an estimated average lifetime based on BUILD Report 
2021:32 by Department of the Built Environment 
(Aalborg University).
 
 
DVUs 
AM150 
AM300 
AM500 
AM800 
AM900 
AM1000 
AM1200 
Materials for 
packaging 
kg 
Cardboard 
0.23 
0.23 
3.14 
6.21-6.68 
- 
0.44 
2.10 
EPS 
1.75 
2.00 
- 
- 
1.80 
- 
0.72 
LDPE 
0.28 
0.34 
- 
- 
0.77 
2.00 
1.20 
Polyethylene 
- 
- 
0.06 
0.08 
- 
0.10 
0.26 
PE foam 
- 
- 
0.01 
0.02 
- 
0.12 
- 
Wooden pallet 
7.50 
7.50 
14.50 
20.20 
32.35 
36.20 
42.98 
Total 
9.76 
10.08 
17.71 
26.51-26.98 
34.92 
38.86 
47.26 
==PAGE:572==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 5 of 23 
 
Picture of product(s) 
 
 
Figure 1 AM150 
 
 
 
Figure 2 AM300 
 
 
Figure 3 AM500 
 
 
Figure 4 AM800
 
 
Figure 5 AM900           Figure 6 AM1200 
 
 
 
Figure 7 AM1000 
 
 
 
==PAGE:573==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 6 of 23 
 
LCA background 
Declared unit 
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD relates to “One decentralised ventilation unit with an air capacity of 115 – 1050 
m3/h (varying per product)”. 
Name 
AM150 
AM300 
AM500 
AM800 
AM900 
AM1000 
AM1200 
Declared unit 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Density (kg) 
54.5 
83.9 
145.3 
166.6-168.5 
190.5 
322.4 
489.3 
Conversion 
factor to 1 kg 
0.018 
0.012 
0.007 
0.006 
0.005 
0.003 
0.002 
 
Functional unit 
One decentralised ventilation unit with an air capacity 
of 115 – 1050 m2/h (varying per product) at the 
reference flow rate of 70% of the maximum flow rate 
and an annual operating hours of 8760 hours. 
 
PCR 
This EPD is developed according to the core rules for 
the product category of construction products in PCR 
EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 and the following 
complementary PCR:  
- 
EN 50693:2019 
 
 
 
 
Guarantee of Origin – certificates 
Foreground system: 
The products are produced without using any GO’s.   
The energy process is modelled using ‘electricity, 
medium voltage, residual mix’ for Denmark from 
EcoInvent. 
Background system: 
Most of the upstream processes have electricity 
included modelled using the grid mix. For some 
specific processes where it has been possible to define 
the specific electricity mix, these were modelled using 
the 
country-specific 
residual 
mix. 
Downstream 
processes are modelled using electricity grid mix for 
RER.  
Geographical area 
The geographical area is Europe. 
==PAGE:574==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 7 of 23 
 
Flow diagram 
 
==PAGE:575==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 8 of 23 
 
System boundary 
This EPD is based on a cradle-to-gate with options, 
modules C1-C3 and module D cf. EN 15804 + A2, in 
which 100%-weight of the products have been 
accounted for.  
The general rules for the exclusion of inputs and 
outputs follows the requirements in EN 15804, 6.3.5, 
where the total of neglected input flows per module 
shall be a maximum of 5 % of energy usage and mass 
and 1 % of energy usage and mass for unit processes. 
Product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
A1 – Extraction and processing of raw materials 
A2 – Transport to the production site 
A3 – Manufacturing processes 
The product stage comprises the acquisition of all raw 
materials, products and energy, transport to the 
production site, packaging and waste processing up to 
the ”end-of-waste” state or final disposal. The LCA 
results are declared in aggregated form for the product 
stage, which means, that the sub-modules A1, A2 and 
A3 are declared as one module A1-A3. 
Steel: The DVUs have a steel cabinet which account 
for the majority of the weight. The scrap content in the 
steel varies from 17.4-18.2%. The cabinet sheets are 
bended, welded, and surface treated at the suppliers 
before arriving at Airmaster. A process has been 
included in module A1 to account for these processes. 
Additionally, small fixing parts is included in the steel. 
Aluminium:  The aluminium is modelled as primary 
aluminium.  
Plastic: There are several types of plastic components 
in the DVUs which are modelled using representative 
datasets on the plastic types. A process is included to 
account for the moulding and shaping of the plastic 
components.   
Electronic: As the DVUs are an electronic ventilation 
unit, several electronic components are present in the 
unit. These are modelled based on information from 
suppliers. 
Insulation: The DVUs are insulated using PE foam, PU 
foam and bonded foam. Bonded foam is a secondary 
material and thus included without any impacts. 
However, impacts associated with shredding and 
adhesive to mould bonded foam is included. 
Generally, 
the 
components 
of 
the 
DVUs 
are 
premanufactured and assembled manually at the 
production sites in Aars (DK). Airmaster has three 
different production sites in Aars where the DUVs are 
assembled. Energy from these sites has been allocated 
based on man-hours for the assembly of the units. 
Construction process stage (A4-A5) 
includes: 
Module A4 includes the impacts associated with the 
transport of the finished product. The finished product 
is distributed to different markets in EU. The utilization 
capacity of the truck (including empty return) is 
47.8%. Additionally, transportation with ship is also 
included. The utilization capacity is 70%. 
A weighted average distance has been calculated 
based on the market distribution. 
The installation of the DVUs is done manually. 
Therefore, the energy needed for this process is only 
associated with an electric screwdriver. Additionally, 
screws are needed for installation. These two 
processes are excluded due to the negligible impacts.  
Module A5 includes the end-of-life treatment of the 
packaging. Here, cardboard, LDPE foil and EPS are 
assumed recycled.  
AM150, AM300, and AM 1200 are distributed on EUR 
wooden pallets. Due to the durability of EUR-wooden 
pallets it is assumed that the pallets are reused 25 
times. Thus, 1/25 of the EUR pallet is attributed to 
these ventilation units. For AM500, AM800, AM 900, 
and AM1000 customised pallets are used. These are 
one time use due to customised dimensions and 
therefore the whole pallet is modelled. Wooden pallets 
are assumed incinerated after use.  
Use stage (B1-B7) includes: 
B1 + B3-B5 + B7: As this is an electronic component, 
all the b-modules must be declared.  
B1: During the use, no emissions to the environment 
are expected during the reference service life.  
B3-B5: No repair, replacement, or refurbishment due 
to damage is expected within the reference service life 
of 25 years (module B3-B5).  
B7: There is no operational water use to operate the 
DUVs, 
therefore 
no 
environmental 
impacts 
are 
included in module B7. 
B2: To maintain the performance of the DVUs and 
ensure a continuous supply of fresh, ventilated air 
continuously throughout their lifetime, it is necessary 
to replace ventilation filters. Airmaster recommends 
replacing both the supply and exhaust filters annually 
to maintain optimal DVU performance. The production 
of new filters is accounted for in B2 according to EN 
15804 + A2. Additionally, the waste treatment of used 
==PAGE:576==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 9 of 23 
 
filters is considered in B2. It is important to note that 
B2 is modelled for one year to align with the B 
modules and does not represent the estimated 
reference service life of 25 years. 
B6: 
The 
Ecodesign 
Directive 
(COMMISSION 
REGULATION (EU) No 1253/2014 of 7 July 2014 
implementing Directive 2009/125/EC of the European 
Parliament and of the Council with regard to Ecodesign 
requirements 
for 
ventilation 
units) 
is 
used 
to 
determine the reference capacity and thus the energy 
use 
of 
the 
ventilation 
units. 
The 
Ecodesign 
requirements determine that the reference flow rate as 
70% of the maximum flow rate. The annual operating 
hours are set to 8760 hours as a conservative 
approach which is in accordance with the default value 
that is used in the Ecodesign directive to calculate the 
SEC (specific energy consumption). For this EPD the 
reference scenario is based on the use of the filters 
ePM10 50%/ ePM10 50% with a 30 dB(A). The RER 
electricity mix has been applied to model the usage of 
energy for the DVUs, as the geographical scope is 
European. B6 is modelled for 1 year and does 
therefore not represent the estimated reference 
service life of 25 years. According to the Danish 
Building Regulation, B6 from EPDs is not used in the 
LCA modelling of buildings. Therefore, one year has 
been included to indicate an average electricity use for 
the given scenario.   
End of Life (C1-C4) includes: 
No impacts from dismantling have been included in 
module C1 as this is done manually. 
 
Module C2 includes the impacts associated with the 
transport of the waste from the dismantling to the 
waste handling. The product is placed on different 
European markets, average distances to waste 
handling for countries have been included to account 
for the different distances.  
 
Materials 
Truck (km) 
Steel 
500 
Aluminium 
500 
Copper 
450 
Plastic 
365 
Cardboard 
455 
Incineration 
50 
Inert materials (landfilling) 
250 
 
Module C3 contains the impacts of waste handling.  
The waste scenario is derived from EN 50693:2019 
Product Category Rules for the life cycle assessments 
of electronic and electrical products and systems. Due 
to uncertainties surrounding the disposal of electronic 
and electrical equipment (EEE) and variations in waste 
management practices across different European 
countries, the waste handling of these units is based 
on EN 50693:2019. The waste scenario is a default 
scenario, and the values will vary depending on the 
specific EEE product. Energy for shredding the DVUs 
are included. 
Module C4 covers the impacts of landfilling.  
 
Following waste treatment rates (recycling, 
incineration, and landfilling) are included in the waste 
treatment.  
 
Materials 
Recycling 
rate (%) 
Incineration 
rate (%) 
Landfilling 
Rate (%) 
Steel 
80 
0 
20 
Aluminium 
70 
0 
30 
Insulation 
0 
50 
50 
Plastics 
20 
40 
40 
Metals in 
electronics 
90 
0 
10 
Filters 
0 
100 
0 
 
Re-use, 
recovery 
and 
recycling 
potential (D) include: 
In module D potential benefits from recovery and 
recycling of materials in the product are calculated. 
The materials are either used as secondary materials 
in a new product system, thus substituting virgin 
materials, or incinerated with energy recovery. To 
avoid double counting, the amount of scrap in the 
steel and bonded foam is not credited in module D. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:577==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 10 of 23 
 
LCA results 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM150 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
2.32E+02 
4.84E+00 
8.72E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.40E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.56E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.91E-01 
2.43E+01 
6.10E-01 
-3.24E+01 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
2.40E+02 
4.79E+00 
1.34E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.40E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.52E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.82E-01 
1.59E+01 
6.17E-01 
-3.22E+01 
GWP-
biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-7.97E+00 
1.09E-02 
7.38E-01 
0.00E+00 
4.28E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.07E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.79E-03 
8.39E+00 
-7.62E-03 
-1.73E-01 
GWP-luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
2.73E-01 
4.48E-02 
9.44E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.35E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.84E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.32E-03 
1.23E-04 
5.60E-04 
-6.73E-03 
ODP 
kg CFC 11 eq. 4.66E-06 
6.29E-13 
2.05E-13 
0.00E+00 
1.89E-09 
0.00E+00 
6.51E-10 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.03E-13 
4.38E-12 
1.03E-12 
-2.31E-10 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
1.02E+00 
2.62E-02 
7.18E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.43E-03 
0.00E+00 
7.51E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.21E-03 
8.70E-03 
1.91E-03 
-1.19E-01 
EP-
freshwater 
kg P eq. 
1.13E-01 
1.77E-05 
3.28E-06 
0.00E+00 
6.15E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.32E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.89E-06 
1.11E-06 
6.85E-05 
-8.03E-05 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
2.22E-01 
1.26E-02 
3.31E-04 
0.00E+00 
5.91E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.80E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.03E-03 
3.77E-03 
4.56E-04 
-2.15E-02 
EP-
terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
2.38E+00 
1.40E-01 
3.53E-03 
0.00E+00 
6.36E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.88E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.25E-02 
4.57E-02 
5.01E-03 
-2.31E-01 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 
7.22E-01 
2.49E-02 
7.51E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.84E-03 
0.00E+00 
4.80E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.99E-03 
9.80E-03 
1.44E-03 
-7.31E-02 
ADPm1 
kg Sb eq. 
3.37E-02 
3.21E-07 
8.53E-09 
0.00E+00 
1.51E-06 
0.00E+00 
5.45E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.24E-08 
3.81E-08 
1.66E-08 
-8.78E-04 
ADPf1 
MJ 
3.83E+03 
6.59E+01 
1.92E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.85E+01 
0.00E+00 
7.40E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.08E+01 
8.77E+00 
9.23E+00 
-5.99E+02 
WDP1 
m3 world eq. 
deprived 
4.68E+01 
5.84E-02 
5.71E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.44E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.75E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.56E-03 
2.43E+00 
-8.59E-03 
-4.80E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global 
Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; 
EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone 
formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM150 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
9,10E-06 
1,34E-07 
4,16E-09 
0,00E+00 
1,89E-08 
0,00E+00 
6,32E-07 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,07E-08 
3,56E-08 
1,94E-08 
-1,49E-06 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
1,91E+01 
1,85E-02 
5,31E-03 
0,00E+00 
2,32E-02 
0,00E+00 
1,95E+01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
3,02E-03 
1,05E-01 
1,60E-02 
-4,43E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
3,21E+03 
4,72E+01 
1,29E+00 
0,00E+00 
9,62E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,06E+02 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
7,72E+00 
3,36E+00 
5,69E+00 
-2,29E+02 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
5,43E-07 
9,60E-10 
4,02E-11 
0,00E+00 
3,04E-10 
0,00E+00 
1,09E-08 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,57E-10 
2,46E-10 
3,71E-10 
-1,70E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
7,97E-06 
4,26E-08 
2,61E-09 
0,00E+00 
1,02E-08 
0,00E+00 
1,74E-07 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
6,97E-09 
7,42E-09 
3,18E-08 
-6,25E-07 
SQP1 
[Pt] 
1,33E+03 
2,75E+01 
6,81E-01 
0,00E+00 
1,10E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,92E+02 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,50E+00 
2,54E+00 
8,26E-01 
-1,72E+02 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – 
non cancer effects; Land use = LU; SQP = Soil Quality 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible 
nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some 
construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
RESOURCE USE PER AM150 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
3.56E+02 
4.79E+00 
2.32E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.03E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.43E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.84E-01 
2.79E+00 
8.31E-01 
-2.06E+02 
PERM 
[MJ] 
2.32E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
5.88E+02 
4.79E+00 
2.32E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.23E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.43E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.84E-01 
2.79E+00 
8.31E-01 
-2.06E+02 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
3.19E+03 
6.62E+01 
1.92E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.85E+01 
0.00E+00 
7.40E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.08E+01 
8.77E+00 
9.24E+00 
-6.00E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
6.50E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
3.84E+03 
6.62E+01 
1.92E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.88E+01 
0.00E+00 
7.40E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.08E+01 
8.77E+00 
9.24E+00 
-6.00E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
7.33E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
1.40E+00 
5.25E-03 
1.46E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.01E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.56E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.59E-04 
5.78E-02 
9.66E-05 
-2.89E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy 
resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
==PAGE:578==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 11 of 23 
 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER AM150 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
6.60E-05 
2.05E-10 
2.35E-11 
0.00E+00 
1.17E-09 
0.00E+00 
-5.79E-08 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.35E-11 
1.41E-10 
7.71E-10 
-1.90E-06 
NHWD 
[kg] 
1.01E+01 
1.01E-02 
2.56E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.33E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.43E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.65E-03 
6.25E-01 
1.08E+01 
-3.54E+00 
RWD 
[kg] 
5.22E-02 
1.24E-04 
3.28E-05 
0.00E+00 
9.57E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.17E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.02E-05 
6.51E-04 
1.09E-04 
-2.71E-02 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
3.18E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.67E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.14E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
1.20E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.79E-01 
0.00E+00 
5.62E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.99E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
2.73E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.22E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.05E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.13E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for 
recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM300 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
3.41E+02 
7.53E+00 
9.03E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.03E-01 
0.00E+00 
6.84E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.03E+00 
2.96E+01 
8.10E-01 
-6.36E+01 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
3.51E+02 
7.45E+00 
1.58E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.00E-01 
0.00E+00 
6.78E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.02E+00 
1.91E+01 
8.19E-01 
-6.33E+01 
GWP-
biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-1.01E+01 
1.70E-02 
7.44E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.14E-03 
0.00E+00 
5.91E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.34E-03 
1.05E+01 
-1.01E-02 
-2.86E-01 
GWP-luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
3.77E-01 
6.96E-02 
1.13E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.17E-04 
0.00E+00 
7.39E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.57E-03 
1.51E-04 
7.57E-04 
-1.51E-02 
ODP 
kg CFC 11 eq. 5.60E-06 
9.79E-13 
2.56E-13 
0.00E+00 
9.45E-10 
0.00E+00 
1.25E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.34E-13 
5.92E-12 
1.37E-12 
-3.52E-10 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
1.47E+00 
4.08E-02 
8.35E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.22E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.45E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.50E-03 
1.02E-02 
2.55E-03 
-2.54E-01 
EP-
freshwater 
kg P eq. 
1.36E-01 
2.75E-05 
3.79E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.08E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.54E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.78E-06 
1.48E-06 
7.66E-05 
-1.24E-04 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
3.16E-01 
1.96E-02 
3.85E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.96E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.46E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.65E-03 
4.35E-03 
6.14E-04 
-4.27E-02 
EP-
terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
3.38E+00 
2.18E-01 
4.12E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.18E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.62E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.94E-02 
5.31E-02 
6.75E-03 
-4.60E-01 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 1.04E+00 
3.87E-02 
8.61E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.42E-03 
0.00E+00 
9.23E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.21E-03 
1.13E-02 
1.94E-03 
-1.41E-01 
ADPm1 
kg Sb eq. 
4.14E-02 
4.98E-07 
1.03E-08 
0.00E+00 
7.57E-07 
0.00E+00 
1.05E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.85E-08 
5.12E-08 
2.21E-08 
-1.33E-03 
ADPf1 
MJ 
5.51E+03 
1.03E+02 
2.27E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.42E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.42E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.41E+01 
1.12E+01 
1.23E+01 
-1.07E+03 
WDP1 
m3 world eq. 
deprived 
6.17E+01 
9.08E-02 
5.78E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.72E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.49E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.25E-02 
2.97E+00 
-1.14E-02 
-9.48E+00 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming 
Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; 
EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone 
formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM300 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
1.46E-05 
2.08E-07 
4.79E-09 
0.00E+00 
9.45E-09 
0.00E+00 
1.22E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.70E-08 
4.35E-08 
2.62E-08 
-3.09E-06 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
2.83E+01 
2.87E-02 
6.77E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.16E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.76E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.94E-03 
1.47E-01 
2.13E-02 
-8.99E+00 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
4.17E+03 
7.34E+01 
1.53E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.81E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.96E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.01E+01 
4.19E+00 
6.93E+00 
-3.82E+02 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
6.71E-06 
1.49E-09 
4.63E-11 
0.00E+00 
1.52E-10 
0.00E+00 
2.10E-08 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.05E-10 
3.09E-10 
4.82E-10 
-3.45E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1.12E-05 
6.63E-08 
2.93E-09 
0.00E+00 
5.08E-09 
0.00E+00 
3.34E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.11E-09 
9.28E-09 
4.20E-08 
-1.10E-06 
SQP1 
[Pt] 
1.80E+03 
4.28E+01 
8.15E-01 
0.00E+00 
5.52E-01 
0.00E+00 
5.61E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.88E+00 
3.35E+00 
1.10E+00 
-2.54E+02 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – 
non cancer effects; Land use = LU; SQP = Soil Quality 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible 
nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some 
construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:579==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 12 of 23 
 
RESOURCE USE PER AM300 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
6.55E+02 
7.45E+00 
2.84E-01 
0.00E+00 
5.17E-01 
0.00E+00 
8.52E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.02E+00 
3.81E+00 
1.10E+00 
-3.96E+02 
PERM 
[MJ] 
2.55E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
9.10E+02 
7.45E+00 
2.84E-01 
0.00E+00 
5.17E-01 
0.00E+00 
8.52E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.02E+00 
3.81E+00 
1.10E+00 
-3.96E+02 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
4.61E+03 
1.03E+02 
2.28E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.42E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.42E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.41E+01 
1.12E+01 
1.23E+01 
-1.07E+03 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
9.11E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
5.52E+03 
1.03E+02 
2.28E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.42E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.42E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.41E+01 
1.12E+01 
1.23E+01 
-1.07E+03 
SM 
[kg] 
1.45E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
2.10E+00 
8.16E-03 
1.51E-03 
0.00E+00 
4.98E-03 
0.00E+00 
6.85E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.12E-03 
7.08E-02 
1.30E-04 
-6.63E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy 
resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER AM300 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1.13E-03 
3.19E-10 
2.34E-11 
0.00E+00 
5.87E-10 
0.00E+00 
-1.11E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.37E-11 
9.12E-11 
1.02E-09 
-4.01E-06 
NHWD 
[kg] 
1.96E+01 
1.57E-02 
2.89E-01 
0.00E+00 
3.67E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.05E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.15E-03 
7.53E-01 
1.48E+01 
-1.01E+01 
RWD 
[kg] 
9.27E-02 
1.92E-04 
4.18E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.79E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.26E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.64E-05 
9.06E-04 
1.44E-04 
-5.16E-02 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
4.77E+00 
4.77E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.24E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.68E+01 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
1.80E+00 
1.80E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.79E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.81E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.91E+01 
0.00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
4.10E+0
0 
4.10E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.22E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.27E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.78E+01 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for 
recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM500 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
6.30E+02 
1.23E+01 
2.40E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.13E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.04E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.92E+00 
4.44E+01 
1.44E+00 
-1.16E+02 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
6.72E+02 
1.22E+01 
6.13E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.12E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.03E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.90E+00 
2.39E+01 
1.46E+00 
-1.16E+02 
GWP-
biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-4.23E+01 
2.79E-02 
2.35E+01 
0.00E+00 
3.43E-03 
0.00E+00 
8.98E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.34E-03 
2.05E+01 
-1.80E-02 
-3.82E-01 
GWP-luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
6.86E-01 
1.14E-01 
1.91E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.01E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.12E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.78E-02 
2.49E-04 
1.37E-03 
-3.17E-02 
ODP 
kg CFC 11 eq. 4.33E-05 
1.60E-12 
2.57E-12 
0.00E+00 
1.51E-09 
0.00E+00 
1.90E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.50E-13 
1.03E-11 
2.43E-12 
-6.58E-10 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
2.92E+00 
6.68E-02 
4.98E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.95E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.20E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.02E-02 
2.66E-02 
4.57E-03 
-4.72E-01 
EP-
freshwater 
kg P eq. 
2.65E-01 
4.50E-05 
2.71E-06 
0.00E+00 
4.92E-05 
0.00E+00 
3.86E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.02E-06 
2.67E-06 
1.13E-04 
-2.42E-04 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
6.28E-01 
3.22E-02 
1.65E-03 
0.00E+00 
4.76E-04 
0.00E+00 
5.26E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.92E-03 
1.25E-02 
1.11E-03 
-7.96E-02 
EP-
terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
6.78E+00 
3.58E-01 
2.18E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.13E-03 
0.00E+00 
5.50E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.47E-02 
1.44E-01 
1.22E-02 
-8.57E-01 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 1.91E+00 
6.34E-02 
4.16E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.28E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.40E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.69E-03 
3.21E-02 
3.49E-03 
-2.51E-01 
ADPm1 
kg Sb eq. 
8.02E-02 
8.16E-07 
3.67E-08 
0.00E+00 
1.21E-06 
0.00E+00 
1.59E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.27E-07 
8.87E-08 
3.95E-08 
-1.38E-03 
ADPf1 
MJ 
9.37E+03 
1.68E+02 
8.95E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.28E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.16E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.62E+01 
2.08E+01 
2.18E+01 
-1.58E+03 
WDP1 
m3 world eq. 
deprived 
1.21E+02 
1.49E-01 
2.60E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.75E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.27E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.32E-02 
4.65E+00 
-2.02E-02 
-1.57E+01 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global 
Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; 
EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone 
formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:580==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 13 of 23 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM500 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
3.09E-05 
3.41E-07 
3.18E-08 
0.00E+00 
1.52E-08 
0.00E+00 
1.85E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.02E-08 
9.25E-08 
4.74E-08 
-5.68E-06 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
5.02E+01 
4.70E-02 
6.03E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.86E-02 
0.00E+00 
5.71E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.33E-03 
2.49E-01 
3.78E-02 
-1.80E+01 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
7.19E+03 
1.20E+02 
4.51E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.71E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.02E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.87E+01 
7.22E+00 
1.13E+01 
-4.54E+02 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
1.07E-05 
2.45E-09 
3.00E-10 
0.00E+00 
2.43E-10 
0.00E+00 
3.18E-08 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.81E-10 
5.01E-10 
8.44E-10 
-5.95E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
2.03E-05 
1.09E-07 
1.64E-08 
0.00E+00 
8.14E-09 
0.00E+00 
5.07E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.69E-08 
1.66E-08 
7.46E-08 
-1.76E-06 
SQP1 
[Pt] 
6.54E+03 
7.01E+01 
3.01E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.90E-01 
0.00E+00 
8.53E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.09E+01 
5.81E+00 
1.98E+00 
-4.98E+02 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – 
non cancer effects; Land use = LU; SQP = Soil Quality 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible 
nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some 
construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
RESOURCE USE PER AM500 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1.32E+03 
1.22E+01 
1.81E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.28E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.29E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.90E+00 
6.57E+00 
1.97E+00 
-8.01E+02 
PERM 
[MJ] 
5.45E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.87E+03 
1.22E+01 
1.81E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.28E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.29E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.90E+00 
6.57E+00 
1.97E+00 
-8.01E+02 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
8.85E+03 
1.69E+02 
8.96E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.28E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.16E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.63E+01 
2.08E+01 
2.19E+01 
-1.58E+03 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
5.45E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
9.39E+03 
1.69E+02 
8.96E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.28E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.16E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.63E+01 
2.08E+01 
2.19E+01 
-1.58E+03 
SM 
[kg] 
1.69E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
4.11E+00 
1.34E-02 
6.13E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.96E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.04E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.09E-03 
1.11E-01 
2.34E-04 
-1.29E+00 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy 
resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER AM500 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1.76E-03 
5.22E-10 
1.39E-10 
0.00E+00 
9.39E-10 
0.00E+00 
-1.69E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.13E-11 
5.49E-10 
1.82E-09 
-1.82E-06 
NHWD 
[kg] 
4.03E+01 
2.57E-02 
5.83E-01 
0.00E+00 
5.86E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.59E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.00E-03 
1.27E+00 
2.73E+01 
-2.13E+01 
RWD 
[kg] 
1.54E-01 
3.15E-04 
3.76E-04 
0.00E+00 
7.66E-05 
0.00E+00 
3.43E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.91E-05 
1.54E-03 
2.56E-04 
-1.03E-01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
7.96E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.05E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.30E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
3.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.28E+01 
0.00E+00 
4.49E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.14E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
6.83E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.91E+01 
0.00E+00 
8.43E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.10E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for 
recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:581==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 14 of 23 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM800 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
7.51E+02 
1.48E+01 
3.36E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.04E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.67E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.15E+00 
5.84E+01 
1.86E+00 
-2.11E+02 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
8.03E+02 
1.46E+01 
9.41E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.03E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.65E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.12E+00 
3.79E+01 
1.88E+00 
-2.10E+02 
GWP-
biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-5.16E+01 
3.33E-02 
2.96E+01 
0.00E+00 
6.20E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.44E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.86E-03 
2.05E+01 
-2.32E-02 
-7.31E-01 
GWP-luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
7.36E-01 
1.36E-01 
3.35E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.40E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.80E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.99E-02 
2.82E-04 
1.74E-03 
-5.03E-02 
ODP 
kg CFC 11 eq. 5.26E-05 
1.92E-12 
3.74E-12 
0.00E+00 
2.74E-09 
0.00E+00 
3.05E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.80E-13 
1.22E-11 
3.13E-12 
-8.11E-10 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
3.39E+00 
8.01E-02 
7.40E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.56E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.53E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.14E-02 
3.13E-02 
5.83E-03 
-9.52E-01 
EP-
freshwater 
kg P eq. 
2.22E-01 
5.38E-05 
4.81E-06 
0.00E+00 
8.91E-05 
0.00E+00 
6.19E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.86E-06 
3.24E-06 
1.73E-04 
-3.03E-04 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
7.14E-01 
3.86E-02 
2.51E-03 
0.00E+00 
6.21E-04 
0.00E+00 
8.46E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.49E-03 
1.45E-02 
1.41E-03 
-1.46E-01 
EP-
terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
7.72E+00 
4.29E-01 
3.28E-02 
0.00E+00 
6.68E-03 
0.00E+00 
8.84E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.11E-02 
1.67E-01 
1.54E-02 
-1.58E+00 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 2.16E+00 
7.60E-02 
6.27E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.99E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.25E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.08E-02 
3.73E-02 
4.43E-03 
-4.52E-01 
ADPm1 
kg Sb eq. 
6.64E-02 
9.76E-07 
5.73E-08 
0.00E+00 
2.19E-06 
0.00E+00 
2.56E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.43E-07 
1.06E-07 
5.07E-08 
-3.62E-03 
ADPf1 
MJ 
1.13E+04 
2.01E+02 
1.37E+01 
0.00E+00 
4.12E+01 
0.00E+00 
3.47E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.93E+01 
2.47E+01 
2.81E+01 
-2.83E+03 
WDP1 
m3 world eq. 
deprived 
1.43E+02 
1.78E-01 
3.62E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.99E-01 
0.00E+00 
3.64E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.60E-02 
6.08E+00 
-2.60E-02 
-3.25E+01 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming 
Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; 
EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone 
formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM800 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
3.76E-05 
4.09E-07 
4.67E-08 
0.00E+00 
1.99E-08 
0.00E+00 
2.97E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.61E-08 
1.11E-07 
6.00E-08 
-1.04E-05 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
6.86E+01 
5.64E-02 
8.85E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.44E-02 
0.00E+00 
9.17E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.19E-03 
3.08E-01 
4.86E-02 
-3.17E+01 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
6.91E+03 
1.44E+02 
7.12E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.39E+01 
0.00E+00 
9.65E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.10E+01 
8.31E+00 
1.58E+01 
-7.71E+02 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
1.33E-05 
2.93E-09 
4.40E-10 
0.00E+00 
3.19E-10 
0.00E+00 
5.12E-08 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.25E-10 
6.23E-10 
1.10E-09 
-1.10E-07 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
3.00E-05 
1.30E-07 
2.40E-08 
0.00E+00 
1.47E-08 
0.00E+00 
8.14E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.89E-08 
2.01E-08 
9.64E-08 
-3.20E-06 
SQP1 
[Pt] 
8.20E+03 
8.40E+01 
4.69E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.16E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.37E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.22E+01 
7.04E+00 
2.53E+00 
-6.21E+02 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – 
non cancer effects; Land use = LU; SQP = Soil Quality 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible 
nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some 
construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
RESOURCE USE PER AM800 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
2.03E+03 
1.46E+01 
2.70E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.09E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.08E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.13E+00 
7.89E+00 
2.52E+00 
-1.31E+03 
PERM 
[MJ] 
7.11E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
2.74E+03 
1.46E+01 
2.70E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.09E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.08E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.13E+00 
7.89E+00 
2.52E+00 
-1.31E+03 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
1.05E+04 
2.02E+02 
2.69E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.13E+01 
0.00E+00 
3.47E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.94E+01 
2.47E+01 
2.81E+01 
-2.71E+03 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
8.94E+02 
0.00E+00 
1.37E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
1.14E+04 
2.02E+02 
1.64E+01 
0.00E+00 
4.13E+01 
0.00E+00 
3.47E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.94E+01 
2.47E+01 
2.81E+01 
-2.71E+03 
SM 
[kg] 
1.83E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
5.92E+00 
1.60E-02 
8.57E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.05E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.67E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.33E-03 
1.44E-01 
2.97E-04 
-2.49E+00 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy 
resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
 
 
==PAGE:582==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 15 of 23 
 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER AM800 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
2.19E-03 
6.26E-10 
1.94E-10 
0.00E+00 
1.23E-09 
0.00E+00 
-2.72E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.08E-11 
6.20E-10 
2.34E-09 
-2.97E-06 
NHWD 
[kg] 
7.56E+01 
3.06E-02 
8.81E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.06E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.55E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.48E-03 
1.54E+00 
3.41E+01 
-4.45E+01 
RWD 
[kg] 
2.62E-01 
3.78E-04 
5.51E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.01E-04 
0.00E+00 
5.52E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.49E-05 
1.90E-03 
3.29E-04 
-1.70E-01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
7.96E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.44E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.00E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.02E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
3.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.57E+01 
0.00E+00 
5.91E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.60E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
6.83E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.24E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.11E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.54E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for 
recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM900 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
6.52E+02 
1.71E+01 
5.28E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.46E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.91E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.54E+00 
5.66E+01 
2.07E+00 
-1.08E+02 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
7.19E+02 
1.69E+01 
1.13E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.45E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.90E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.51E+00 
4.05E+01 
2.09E+00 
-1.07E+02 
GWP-
biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-6.67E+01 
3.85E-02 
5.17E+01 
0.00E+00 
7.50E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.65E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.74E-03 
1.62E+01 
-2.58E-02 
-5.81E-01 
GWP-luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
7.40E-01 
1.58E-01 
2.33E-03 
0.00E+00 
4.40E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.07E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.35E-02 
4.90E-04 
1.93E-03 
-2.11E-02 
ODP 
kg CFC 11 eq. 1.48E-05 
2.22E-12 
5.41E-12 
0.00E+00 
3.31E-09 
0.00E+00 
3.51E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.30E-13 
1.45E-11 
3.49E-12 
-8.31E-10 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
2.59E+00 
9.24E-02 
9.88E-03 
0.00E+00 
4.28E-03 
0.00E+00 
4.04E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.35E-02 
3.16E-02 
6.50E-03 
-3.86E-01 
EP-
freshwater 
kg P eq. 
2.16E-01 
6.22E-05 
4.04E-06 
0.00E+00 
1.08E-04 
0.00E+00 
7.11E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.28E-06 
3.80E-06 
1.99E-04 
-2.75E-04 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
6.04E-01 
4.45E-02 
3.07E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.04E-03 
0.00E+00 
9.69E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.50E-03 
1.46E-02 
1.57E-03 
-7.06E-02 
EP-
terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
6.51E+00 
4.95E-01 
4.23E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.12E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.01E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.23E-02 
1.69E-01 
1.72E-02 
-7.57E-01 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 1.89E+00 
8.77E-02 
7.98E-03 
0.00E+00 
4.99E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.58E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.28E-02 
3.76E-02 
4.93E-03 
-2.76E-01 
ADPm1 
kg Sb eq. 
6.59E-02 
1.13E-06 
6.55E-08 
0.00E+00 
2.65E-06 
0.00E+00 
2.93E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.68E-07 
1.25E-07 
5.64E-08 
-1.82E-03 
ADPf1 
MJ 
1.02E+04 
2.32E+02 
1.66E+01 
0.00E+00 
4.98E+01 
0.00E+00 
3.98E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.46E+01 
2.89E+01 
3.13E+01 
-1.65E+03 
WDP1 
m3 world eq. 
deprived 
1.01E+02 
2.06E-01 
5.78E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.02E-01 
0.00E+00 
4.18E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.07E-02 
5.85E+00 
-2.90E-02 
-1.41E+01 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global 
Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; 
EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone 
formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM900 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
3.05E-05 
4.72E-07 
6.42E-08 
0.00E+00 
3.31E-08 
0.00E+00 
3.40E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.64E-08 
1.22E-07 
6.68E-08 
-4.71E-06 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
4.34E+01 
6.50E-02 
1.25E-01 
0.00E+00 
4.07E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.05E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.68E-03 
3.28E-01 
5.43E-02 
-1.58E+01 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
6.68E+03 
1.66E+02 
7.81E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.69E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.11E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.48E+01 
1.15E+01 
1.78E+01 
-5.46E+02 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
8.52E-07 
3.38E-09 
6.13E-10 
0.00E+00 
5.32E-10 
0.00E+00 
5.87E-08 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.03E-10 
7.15E-10 
1.23E-09 
-5.20E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1.40E-05 
1.50E-07 
3.33E-08 
0.00E+00 
1.78E-08 
0.00E+00 
9.35E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.24E-08 
2.87E-08 
1.07E-07 
-1.84E-06 
SQP1 
[Pt] 
1.04E+04 
9.69E+01 
5.40E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.95E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.57E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.44E+01 
7.93E+00 
2.82E+00 
-6.13E+02 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – 
non cancer effects; Land use = LU; SQP = Soil Quality 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible 
nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some 
construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:583==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 16 of 23 
 
RESOURCE USE PER AM900 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1.20E+03 
1.69E+01 
3.64E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.81E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.39E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.52E+00 
9.09E+00 
2.82E+00 
-7.59E+02 
PERM 
[MJ] 
7.61E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.96E+03 
1.69E+01 
3.64E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.81E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.39E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.52E+00 
9.09E+00 
2.82E+00 
-7.59E+02 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
8.90E+03 
2.33E+02 
2.33E+02 
0.00E+00 
2.33E+02 
0.00E+00 
2.33E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.33E+02 
2.33E+02 
2.33E+02 
2.33E+02 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1.37E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
1.03E+04 
2.33E+02 
2.33E+02 
0.00E+00 
2.33E+02 
0.00E+00 
2.33E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.33E+02 
2.33E+02 
2.33E+02 
2.33E+02 
SM 
[kg] 
3.71E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
3.36E+00 
1.85E-02 
1.36E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.74E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.92E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.76E-03 
1.40E-01 
3.31E-04 
-9.84E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy 
resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER AM900 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
7.73E-05 
7.22E-10 
3.05E-10 
0.00E+00 
2.05E-09 
0.00E+00 
-3.12E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.07E-10 
5.63E-10 
2.61E-09 
-3.01E-06 
NHWD 
[kg] 
3.12E+01 
3.55E-02 
1.16E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.28E-01 
0.00E+00 
2.93E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.29E-03 
2.54E+00 
3.77E+01 
-1.33E+01 
RWD 
[kg] 
1.36E-01 
4.36E-04 
7.83E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.68E-04 
0.00E+00 
6.33E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.49E-05 
2.05E-03 
3.67E-04 
-9.76E-02 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
9.55E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.44E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.15E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
3.60E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.32E+01 
0.00E+00 
9.83E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.48E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
8.20E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.32E+02 
0.00E+00 
1.84E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.53E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for 
recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM1000 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
1.35E+03 
2.73E+01 
5.91E+01 
0.00E+00 
4.49E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.46E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.62E+00 
4.21E+01 
3.25E+00 
-2.62E+02 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
1.41E+03 
2.70E+01 
1.26E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.48E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.44E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.57E+00 
4.21E+01 
3.29E+00 
-2.61E+02 
GWP-
biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-5.49E+01 
6.17E-02 
5.78E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.37E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.13E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.05E-02 
7.87E-03 
-4.07E-02 
-1.12E+00 
GWP-luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
1.30E+00 
2.53E-01 
2.54E-03 
0.00E+00 
7.51E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.66E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.28E-02 
3.18E-04 
3.14E-03 
-6.09E-02 
ODP 
kg CFC 11 eq. 6.84E-05 
3.55E-12 
6.03E-12 
0.00E+00 
6.04E-09 
0.00E+00 
4.51E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.01E-13 
1.62E-11 
5.47E-12 
-1.51E-09 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
5.25E+00 
1.48E-01 
1.10E-02 
0.00E+00 
7.79E-03 
0.00E+00 
5.20E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.46E-02 
2.70E-02 
1.03E-02 
-1.06E+00 
EP-
freshwater 
kg P eq. 
3.26E-01 
9.97E-05 
4.17E-06 
0.00E+00 
1.97E-04 
0.00E+00 
9.14E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.69E-05 
3.96E-06 
2.04E-04 
-4.83E-04 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
1.18E+00 
7.13E-02 
3.42E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.89E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.25E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.18E-02 
1.24E-02 
2.53E-03 
-1.76E-01 
EP-
terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
1.27E+01 
7.93E-01 
4.72E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.03E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.30E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.32E-01 
1.43E-01 
2.78E-02 
-1.90E+00 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 3.58E+00 
1.41E-01 
8.90E-03 
0.00E+00 
9.09E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.32E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.33E-02 
3.20E-02 
7.95E-03 
-5.67E-01 
ADPm1 
kg Sb eq. 
1.02E-01 
1.81E-06 
7.26E-08 
0.00E+00 
4.84E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.77E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.06E-07 
1.37E-07 
8.93E-08 
-2.19E-03 
ADPf1 
MJ 
1.87E+04 
3.72E+02 
1.85E+01 
0.00E+00 
9.10E+01 
0.00E+00 
5.12E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.30E+01 
2.68E+01 
4.92E+01 
-3.64E+03 
WDP1 
m3 world eq. 
deprived 
1.89E+02 
3.30E-01 
6.47E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.10E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.37E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.58E-02 
4.42E+00 
-4.53E-02 
-3.37E+01 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global 
Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; 
EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone 
formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:584==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 17 of 23 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM1000 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
6.06E-05 
7.56E-07 
7.17E-08 
0.00E+00 
6.04E-08 
0.00E+00 
4.37E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.21E-07 
1.02E-07 
1.08E-07 
-1.25E-05 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
8.60E+01 
1.04E-01 
1.40E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.43E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.35E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.76E-02 
4.22E-01 
8.51E-02 
-3.91E+01 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
1.05E+04 
2.67E+02 
8.65E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.08E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.42E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.51E+01 
9.07E+00 
2.33E+01 
-1.08E+03 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
2.26E-05 
5.42E-09 
6.84E-10 
0.00E+00 
9.72E-10 
0.00E+00 
7.54E-08 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.17E-10 
6.13E-10 
1.87E-09 
-1.36E-07 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
2.97E-05 
2.41E-07 
3.72E-08 
0.00E+00 
3.25E-08 
0.00E+00 
1.20E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.07E-08 
2.11E-08 
1.68E-07 
-3.97E-06 
SQP1 
[Pt] 
1.05E+04 
1.55E+02 
5.99E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.53E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.02E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.63E+01 
8.23E+00 
4.49E+00 
-9.70E+02 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – 
non cancer effects; Land use = LU; SQP = Soil Quality 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible 
nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some 
construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
RESOURCE USE PER AM1000 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
2.55E+03 
2.70E+01 
4.05E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.31E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.07E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.58E+00 
1.06E+01 
4.43E+00 
-1.78E+03 
PERM 
[MJ] 
6.60E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
3.21E+03 
2.70E+01 
4.05E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.31E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.07E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.58E+00 
1.06E+01 
4.43E+00 
-1.78E+03 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
1.77E+04 
3.74E+02 
1.85E+01 
0.00E+00 
9.11E+01 
0.00E+00 
5.12E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.32E+01 
2.68E+01 
4.92E+01 
-3.65E+03 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1.11E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
1.88E+04 
3.74E+02 
1.85E+01 
0.00E+00 
9.11E+01 
0.00E+00 
5.12E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.32E+01 
2.68E+01 
4.92E+01 
-3.65E+03 
SM 
[kg] 
4.42E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
7.26E+00 
2.96E-02 
1.52E-01 
0.00E+00 
3.18E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.47E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.02E-03 
1.07E-01 
5.32E-04 
-2.91E+00 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy 
resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER AM1000 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
3.82E-03 
1.16E-09 
3.41E-10 
0.00E+00 
3.75E-09 
0.00E+00 
-4.01E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.96E-10 
-5.65E-11 
4.09E-09 
-5.82E-06 
NHWD 
[kg] 
9.02E+01 
5.69E-02 
1.28E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.34E-01 
0.00E+00 
3.76E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.63E-03 
1.54E+00 
6.33E+01 
-4.88E+01 
RWD 
[kg] 
3.20E-01 
6.99E-04 
8.72E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.06E-04 
0.00E+00 
8.13E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.18E-04 
2.58E-03 
5.76E-04 
-2.24E-01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
1.59E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.43E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.38E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
6.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.19E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.80E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.12E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
1.37E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.48E+02 
0.00E+00 
3.37E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.29E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for 
recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
 
 
 
==PAGE:585==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 18 of 23 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM1200 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
1.54E+03 
4.02E+01 
3.09E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.73E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.05E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.89E+00 
2.09E+02 
3.78E+00 
-3.93E+02 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
1.70E+03 
3.98E+01 
3.32E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.71E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.03E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.82E+00 
4.73E+01 
3.82E+00 
-3.92E+02 
GWP-
biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-1.58E+02 
9.08E-02 
2.77E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.36E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.77E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.33E-02 
1.61E+02 
-4.72E-02 
-1.60E+00 
GWP-luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
1.52E+00 
3.72E-01 
2.53E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.38E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.22E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.46E-02 
6.15E-04 
3.67E-03 
-8.90E-02 
ODP 
kg CFC 11 eq. 5.82E-05 
5.22E-12 
4.74E-13 
0.00E+00 
1.04E-08 
0.00E+00 
3.76E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.67E-13 
2.63E-11 
6.34E-12 
-1.97E-09 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
6.32E+00 
2.18E-01 
1.95E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.34E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.33E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.14E-02 
1.09E-01 
1.20E-02 
-1.61E+00 
EP-
freshwater 
kg P eq. 
2.68E-01 
1.47E-04 
2.63E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.38E-04 
0.00E+00 
7.62E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.15E-05 
6.94E-06 
2.22E-04 
-6.69E-04 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
1.40E+00 
1.05E-01 
8.38E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.27E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.04E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.51E-02 
5.17E-02 
2.95E-03 
-2.63E-01 
EP-
terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
1.53E+01 
1.17E+00 
9.75E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.52E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.09E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.68E-01 
5.97E-01 
3.24E-02 
-2.84E+00 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 4.24E+00 
2.07E-01 
1.76E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.57E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.77E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.97E-02 
1.33E-01 
9.26E-03 
-8.29E-01 
ADPm1 
kg Sb eq. 
8.58E-02 
2.66E-06 
2.20E-08 
0.00E+00 
8.32E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.14E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.91E-07 
2.40E-07 
1.04E-07 
-3.07E-03 
ADPf1 
MJ 
2.27E+04 
5.47E+02 
4.69E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.57E+02 
0.00E+00 
4.27E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.03E+01 
6.91E+01 
5.71E+01 
-5.40E+03 
WDP1 
m3 world eq. 
deprived 
2.35E+02 
4.85E-01 
3.12E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.89E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.47E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.12E-02 
2.13E+01 
-5.26E-02 
-5.23E+01 
Caption 
GWP-total = Global Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming 
Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; 
EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone 
formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER AM1200 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
6.90E-05 
1.11E-06 
1.06E-08 
0.00E+00 
1.04E-07 
0.00E+00 
3.65E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.54E-07 
3.39E-07 
1.26E-07 
-1.88E-05 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
1.13E+02 
1.53E-01 
1.21E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.28E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.13E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.25E-02 
5.97E-01 
9.88E-02 
-6.11E+01 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
1.03E+04 
3.92E+02 
3.09E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.30E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.19E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.75E+01 
2.26E+01 
2.65E+01 
-1.56E+03 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
2.75E-05 
7.97E-09 
9.14E-11 
0.00E+00 
1.67E-09 
0.00E+00 
6.28E-08 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.17E-09 
1.68E-09 
2.16E-09 
-2.03E-07 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
2.53E-05 
3.54E-07 
4.51E-09 
0.00E+00 
5.60E-08 
0.00E+00 
1.00E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.19E-08 
3.77E-08 
1.94E-07 
-5.57E-06 
SQP1 
[Pt] 
1.09E+04 
2.28E+02 
1.84E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.12E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.68E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.35E+01 
1.77E+01 
5.22E+00 
-1.45E+03 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – 
non cancer effects; Land use = LU; SQP = Soil Quality 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible 
nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some 
construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
RESOURCE USE PER AM1200 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
3.28E+03 
3.98E+01 
5.56E-01 
0.00E+00 
5.69E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.56E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.84E+00 
1.65E+01 
5.14E+00 
-2.66E+03 
PERM 
[MJ] 
2.56E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
5.84E+03 
3.98E+01 
5.56E-01 
0.00E+00 
5.69E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.56E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.84E+00 
1.65E+01 
5.14E+00 
-2.66E+03 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
2.15E+04 
5.49E+02 
4.70E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.57E+02 
0.00E+00 
4.27E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.06E+01 
6.91E+01 
5.72E+01 
-5.41E+03 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
1.21E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
2.27E+04 
5.49E+02 
4.70E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.57E+02 
0.00E+00 
4.27E+03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.06E+01 
6.91E+01 
5.72E+01 
-5.41E+03 
SM 
[kg] 
5.26E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
9.99E+00 
4.36E-02 
7.61E-03 
0.00E+00 
5.48E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.06E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.40E-03 
5.04E-01 
6.20E-04 
-4.54E+00 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used 
as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy 
resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
 
 
==PAGE:586==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 19 of 23 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER AM1200 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3-B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
4.54E-03 
1.70E-09 
2.44E-11 
0.00E+00 
6.45E-09 
0.00E+00 
-3.34E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.49E-10 
3.88E-09 
4.75E-09 
-3.87E-06 
NHWD 
[kg] 
1.33E+02 
8.37E-02 
1.72E-01 
0.00E+00 
4.03E-01 
0.00E+00 
3.14E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.23E-02 
2.63E+00 
7.40E+01 
-7.85E+01 
RWD 
[kg] 
4.64E-01 
1.03E-03 
7.50E-05 
0.00E+00 
5.27E-04 
0.00E+00 
6.78E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.51E-04 
3.74E-03 
6.68E-04 
-3.41E-01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
2.39E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.27E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.84E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
9.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.89E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.09E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.60E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
2.05E+01 
0.00E+00 
7.02E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.80E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.65E+02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for 
recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER DECLARED UNIT 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
AM150 
AM300 
AM500 
AM800 
AM900 
AM1000 
AM1200 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
[kg C] 
1.6 
2.0 
4.0 
4.0 
3.1 
0.0 
31.2 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
[kg C] 
9.1 
9.1 
6.7 
9.9-10.1 
8.9 
13.1 
9.1 
Note 
1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg of CO2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:587==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 20 of 23 
 
Additional information 
LCA interpretation 
The results of the EPD shows the environmental impact associated with the DVUs. Through a contribution analysis, the 
production of the steel cabinet is generally the most dominant source of impact in several of the impact categories. 
Next to steel, the production of printed circuit board contributes the most. The packaging materials (wooden pallets 
and cardboard) and MDF contribute to a biogenic CO2 uptake in respectively A1 and A3 and appertaining CO2 release in 
A5 and C3. 
Technical information on scenarios 
 
Transport to the building site (A4) 
Scenario information 
Truck 
Ship 
Unit 
Fuel type 
Diesel 
Diesel 
- 
Vehicle type 
Truck, Euro 5, 28 - 32t gross 
weight / 18.4t payload capacity 
Container ship, 5,000 to 
200,000 dwt payload 
capacity, ocean going 
- 
Transport distance 
704 (average) 
12 (average) 
km 
Capacity utilisation (including empty runs) 
61 
70 
% 
Gross density of products transported (incl. packaging) 
64.3 – 536.6 
kg/unit 
 
Installation of the product in the building (A5) 
Scenario information 
AM150 
AM300 
AM500 
AM800 
AM900 
AM1000 
AM1200 
Unit 
Waste materials (from packaging) 
9.8 
10.1 
17.7 
26.5-27 
34.9 
38.9 
47.3 
kg 
 
Reference service life 
RSL information 
Unit 
Reference service Life 
25 
Years 
Declared product properties 
The declared unit is one piece of decentralised ventilation unit with 
an air capacity of 115-1050 m3/h. 
Assumed quality of work 
Technical specifications and guidance can be obtained at 
https://airmaster-as.com/products/ventilation-units-wall-mounted 
and https://airmaster-as.com/products/ventilation-units-floor-
standing or by directly contacting Airmaster A/S. 
Maintenance 
The DVUs require change of filters once a year during its reference 
service life. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:588==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 21 of 23 
 
Use (B1-B7)  
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
B2 - Maintenance 
Maintenance process 
To maintain the DVUs, it is necessary to replace filters once a year throughout its reference service 
life. 
Maintenance cycle 
1 
/year 
Unit 
AM150 
AM300 
AM500 
AM800 
AM900 
AM1000 
AM1200 
 
Ancillary materials for 
maintenance (filters) 
0.40 
0.19 
0.32 
0.42-0.58 
0.66 
1.28 
2.40 
kg/cycl
e 
Waste materials resulting from 
maintenance (filters) 
0.40 
0.19 
0.32 
0.42-0.58 
0.66 
1.28 
2.40 
kg 
B6 + B7 – Use of energy and water 
Unit 
AM150 
AM300 
AM500 
AM800 
AM900 
AM1000 
AM1200 
 
Electricity 
114 
219 
333 
534 
613 
788 
657 
kWh 
Further assumptions for scenario 
development 
The filter class is ePM10 50% (ISO 16890 compliant). A European energy mix is used to model the 
use of energy. The scenarios are based on Ecodesign requirements which determines a reference 
flow rate of 70% of the maximum flow rate. The annual operating hours are set to 8760 hours as a 
conservative approach which is in accordance with the default value in the Ecodesign directive for 
calculating SEC (specific energy consumption) 
 
 
End of life (C1-C4) 
Scenario information 
AM150 
AM300 
AM500 
AM800 
AM900 
AM1000 
AM1200 
Unit 
Collected separately 
54.5 
83.8 
145.3 
166.6-168.5 
190.5 
322.4 
489.3 
kg 
Collected with mixed waste 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
kg 
For reuse 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
kg 
For recycling 
29.2 
45.7 
91.5 
98.7-98.9 
115.6 
234.9 
287.7 
kg 
For energy recovery 
13.8 
18.9 
25.7 
31.9-33.6 
33.7 
22.1 
122.1 
kg 
For final disposal 
11.5 
19.3 
28.2 
35.9-36 
41.3 
65.4 
79.5 
kg 
Assumptions 
for 
scenario 
development 
The geographical scope of the waste treatment scenario is Europe. European grid mix is used to model 
the energy for shredding. 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
Scenario information 
(energy recovery) 
AM150 
AM300 
AM500 
AM800 
AM900 
AM1000 
AM1200 
Unit 
Module A5 
1.90 
1.90 
92 
128 
205 
230 
10.9 
MJ 
Module B2 
1.62 
0.81 
1.29 
2.34 
2.83 
5.17 
9.69 
MJ 
Module C3 
111 
137 
172 
240 
237 
200 
702 
MJ 
 
Scenario information 
(recycling) 
AM150 
AM300 
AM500 
AM800 
AM900 
AM1000 
AM1200 
Unit 
Module A5 
1.67 
2.24 
3.05 
6.44 
2.44 
2.43 
4.07 
kg 
Module C3 
31.4 
46.8 
93 
99-102 
115 
238 
293 
kg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:589==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 22 of 23 
 
Indoor air  
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to indoor air because the 
horizontal standards on the relevant 
measurements are not available. Read more in 
EN15804+A1 chapter 7.4.1. 
Soil and water 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to soil and water because 
the horizontal standards on the relevant 
measurements are not available. Read more in 
EN15804+A1 chapter 7.4.2. 
 
 
==PAGE:590==
 
 
 
 
MD-23078-EN_rev2 | Airmaster A/S | Page 23 of 23 
 
References 
Publisher 
 
 
www.epddanmark.dk 
Programme operator 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA-practitioner 
 
 
Mathilde Sørensen Nilsson 
Artelia A/S 
Mariane Thomsens Gade 1c  
8000 Aarhus C 
Denmark 
LCA software /background data 
 
Sphera LCA for Experts, professional database, version 
2023.2 and EcoInvent vers. 3.10. 
3rd party verifier 
Mirko Miseljic 
Force Technology  
General programme instructions 
General Programme Instructions, version 2.0, spring 2020 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
EN 15804 
DS/EN 15804 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental  
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products” 
 
EN 15942 
DS/EN 15942:2011 – ” Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – Communication 
format business-to-business” 
 
ISO 14025 
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmental declarations – Principles 
and procedures” 
 
ISO 14040 
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and framework” 
 
ISO 14044 
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and guidelines” 
 
EN 50693:2019 
EN 50693:2019 – “Product category rules for life cycle assessments of electronic and electrical products and systems” 
Sphera LCA for Experts (formerly GaBi) 
Professional Database, version 2023.2 https://sphera.com/product-sustainability-software/ 
 
EcoInvent  
Ecoinvent version 3.10 
==PAGE:591==
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Owner: 
Woodfiber 
No.: 
MD-22017-EN 
Issued: 
13-09-2022 
Valid to: 
13-09-2027 
 
EPD 
VERIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION | ISO 14025 & EN 15804 
3 r d  P A R T Y  V E R I F I E D  
==PAGE:592==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 2 of 19 
 
Owner of declaration 
Woodfiber 
Digemosevej 4 DK-4340 Tølløse 
DK-36978627 
 
Programme 
EPD Danmark 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
☐ Industry EPD   
☒ Product EPD 
 
Declared product(s) 
Woodfiber AIR 
 
 
Number of declared datasets/product variations: 4 (variations 
concern modules A4-A5, C1-C4 and D) 
 
Production site 
Hjälmarsnäsvägen 4B 
681 95 Kristinehamn 
Sweden 
Product(s) use 
Loose fill Insulation 
Declared/ functional unit 
The declared unit is 1 kg insulation material (Woodfiber AIR) at 
factory gate. Certified green electricity is used at production site 
 
Note: for calculations at the building level, different densities may 
be assumed depending on the application. 
Year of data 
2020 
EPD version 
1st  
 
Issued: 
13-09-2022 
Valid to: 
13-09-2027 
Basis of calculation 
This EPD is developed in accordance with the European 
standard EN 15804+A2.  
 
Comparability 
EPDs of construction products may not be comparable 
if they do not comply with the requirements in EN 
15804. EPD data may not be comparable if the 
datasets used are not developed in accordance with EN 
15804 and if the background systems are not based 
on the same database. 
 
Validity 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 
14025 and is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 
 
Use 
The intended use of an EPD is to communicate 
scientifically based environmental information for 
construction products, for the purpose of assessing the 
environmental performance of buildings. 
 
EPD type 
☐Cradle-to-gate with modules C1-C4 and D 
☒Cradle-to-gate with options, modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-grave and module D 
☐Cradle-to-gate 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Martha Katrine Sørensen  
EPD Danmark 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to EN ISO 14025 
☐ internal 
☒ external 
Third party verifier: 
 
 
 
Ninkie Bendtsen 
 
 
Life cycle stages and modules (MND = module not declared) 
Product 
Construction 
process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond the system 
boundary 
Raw material 
supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery 
and recycling 
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
MND MND MND 
MND MND 
MND MND 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
==PAGE:593==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 3 of 19 
 
Product information 
Product description 
Woodfiber AIR is a loose-fill insulation material 
made from wooden fibers, meant for installation 
in horizontal as well as vertical constructions. The 
product is suitable for new buildings as well as for 
renovation projects. 
The main product components are shown in the 
table below.  
Material 
Weight-% of declared 
product 
Wood pulp 
92 
Ammonium 
polyphosphate 
5 
Water 
3 
 
Material 
Amount per declared 
unit [kg] 
LDPE Plastic bag/wrap 
0,0087 
Wood EUR-pallet 
0,0079 
 
Waste wood is taken from the Swedish forest and 
made to Woodfiber pulp. The pulp is shredded 
and mixed with flame retardant / dust binder in a 
semi-automated and energy efficient process 
whereafter it is brought to the marked.  
Representativity 
This declaration, including data collection and the 
modeled foreground system including results, 
represents the production of 1 kg of Woodfiber 
AIR 
on 
the 
production 
site 
located 
in 
Kristinehamn, Sweden. Product specific data are 
based on average values collected for the year 
2020. Background data are based on GaBi 
10.6.0.110 and Ecoinvent 3.8 and are less than 
10 years old. Generally, the used background 
datasets are of high quality, and the majority of 
the datasets are only a couple of years old. 
Hazardous substances 
Woodfiber AIR does not contain substances listed 
in the ”Candidate List of Substances of Very High 
Concern for authorisation” 
 (http://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table) 
Essential characteristics  
Fire resistance: In accordance with EN 13501-
1:2007 +A1:2009, B-s2, d0. 
Further technical information can be obtained by 
contacting 
the 
manufacturer 
or 
on 
the 
manufacturers. 
website: www.woodfiber.dk 
Reference Service Life (RSL) 
The reference service life is not declared, as this 
EPD is based on a cradle to gate with options, 
modules C1–C4, and module D where the 
service life is not relevant. 
Picture of product(s) 
==PAGE:594==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 4 of 19 
 
 
 
LCA background 
Declared unit 
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD relates to 1 
kg of Woodfiber AIR leaving the factory gate.  
Name 
Value 
Unit 
Declared unit 
1 
kg 
Density 
26-43 
kg/m3 
Conversion factor to 1 kg 
1 
 
 
 
Functional unit 
N/A 
PCR 
This EPD is developed according to the core 
rules for the product category of construction 
products in EN 15804. 
 
Flow diagram 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:595==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 5 of 19 
 
System boundary 
This EPD is based on a cradle-to-gate LCA with 
options modules A4, A5, C1-C4 and D, in which 
100 weight-% has been accounted for.  
The general rules for the exclusion of inputs and 
outputs follows the requirements in EN 15804, 
6.3.5, where the total of neglected input flows per 
module shall be a maximum of 5 % of energy 
usage and mass and 1 % of energy usage and 
mass for unit processes. 
Allocation procedures are applied as described in 
section 6.4.3. of the DS/EN 15804+A2. Woodfiber 
AIR is produced at the Kristinehamn production 
site which has provided site specific data on 
energy and material use for Woodfiber AIR 
production.  
Product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
A1 – Extraction and processing of raw materials 
A2 – Transport to the production site 
A3 – Manufacturing processes 
The product stage comprises the acquisition of all 
raw materials, products and energy, transport to 
the 
production 
site, 
packaging 
and 
waste 
processing up to the ”end-of-waste” state or final 
disposal. The LCA results are declared in 
aggregated form for the product stage, which 
means, that the sub-modules A1, A2 and A3 are 
declared as one module A1-A3. 
Construction 
process 
stage 
(A4-A5) 
includes: 
A4 – Transport to customer 
There are four assumed markets in this report, 
including Zealand and Jutland (Denmark), Austria 
and England. The assumed distances from the 
production site in Kristinehamn to various 
construction sites are 608 km by truck to 
Zealand, 440 km by truck and 67 km by ship to 
Jutland, 1699 km by truck to Austria and 80 km 
by ship and 1687 km by truck to England. 
A5 – Installation 
On site installation is calculated based on the 
energy consumption of a “worst case” machine to 
install Woodfiber AIR. The energy consumption 
differs for the two applications (wall and attic) and 
a weighted average is used in the calculation. The 
energy consumption during the installation 
process is modelled using the country specific grid 
mix for the assumed markets (Austria, Denmark 
and England).   
Woodfiber AIR waste at the installation site is 
assumed to be 1% which is expected to be sent 
to incineration in all three markets. The extra 
production (A1-A3) and transportation (A4) of 
Woodfiber AIR for the wasted product at the 
construction site is accounted for in A5. 
Woodfiber AIR packaging waste (wood pallet and 
plastic) are disposed off be incinerated for all 
countries. The benefit from this process is 
accounted for in module D. 
 
 
==PAGE:596==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 6 of 19 
 
End of Life (C1-C4) includes: 
The same machine used for installation is used for 
deconstruction process. The energy consumption 
during the installation process is modelled using 
the country specific grid mix for the assumed 
markets (Austria, Denmark and England).   
The end-of-life of Woodfiber AIR comprises of 
100% incineration. 
 
The burden from the incineration process is 
recorded in module C3 and the benefits from the 
recovered energy replacing heat and electricity 
that would have been produced from other 
sources are recorded in module D. 
 
In this study, 1% of product waste produced in 
module A5 and is sent to incineration with 
energy recovery, assumed to take place in the 
same market as the product is used in (Austria, 
Denmark and England). 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
includes: 
When Woodfiber AIR is incinerated in the product 
system, electricity and heat are produced. The 
energy is recovered and assumed to replace 
electricity and heat that would have been 
produced from other sources. It was assumed 
that the alternative electricity production consists 
of the average electricity mix for the assumed 
markets (Austria, Denmark and England). For 
heat, the market is more regionalized and a 
national average thermal energy mix is not as 
representative. As a simplified assumption, it is 
therefore assumed that heat from natural gas 
would be replaced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:597==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 7 of 19 
 
LCA results 
The results for Woodfiber AIR are presented in four set of tables, representing each of the four markets. 
The markets presented are:   
1. Jutland (Denmark)  
2. Sealand (Denmark)  
3. Austria  
4. England  
 
Result for Woodfiber AIR - Jutland  
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,00E+00 
3,50E-02 
5,20E-02 
1,76E-03 
7,69E-03 
1,53E+00 
-4,66E-01 
 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
5,19E-01 
3,43E-02 
3,47E-02 
1,75E-03 
7,55E-03 
2,67E-02 
-4,65E-01 
 
GWP-biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,52E+00 
3,65E-04 
1,72E-02 
6,97E-06 
8,15E-05 
1,51E+00 
-7,23E-04 
 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
6,87E-04 
2,80E-04 
1,38E-05 
4,27E-06 
6,25E-05 
1,72E-05 
-4,22E-04 
 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 
eq.] 
4,70E-08 
6,81E-18 
4,62E-10 
5,71E-17 
1,51E-18 
2,37E-16 
-5,60E-15 
 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
3,70E-03 
5,19E-05 
4,73E-05 
3,05E-06 
8,28E-06 
2,57E-04 
-4,54E-04 
 
EP-freshwater 
[kg P eq.] 
1,02E-04 
1,02E-07 
1,02E-06 
1,09E-08 
2,27E-08 
3,25E-08 
-1,07E-06 
 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
1,12E-03 
1,75E-05 
1,44E-05 
1,03E-06 
2,68E-06 
8,45E-05 
-1,67E-04 
 
EP-terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
6,10E-03 
2,03E-04 
1,07E-04 
1,00E-05 
3,17E-05 
1,23E-03 
-1,72E-03 
 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC 
eq.] 
1,67E-03 
4,75E-05 
2,52E-05 
2,47E-06 
7,22E-06 
2,30E-04 
-4,37E-04 
 
ADPm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
7,69E-06 
3,05E-09 
7,66E-08 
8,70E-10 
6,78E-10 
3,62E-09 
-8,69E-08 
 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
1,30E+01 
4,63E-01 
1,63E-01 
2,11E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,93E-01 
-6,98E+00 
 
WDP1 
[m3] 
4,45E-01 
3,18E-04 
1,04E-02 
1,65E-04 
7,10E-05 
1,87E-01 
-1,62E-02 
 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming 
Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = 
Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = 
Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone formation; ADPm = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = 
Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:598==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 8 of 19 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
3,15E-08 
5,73E-10 
3,84E-10 
2,81E-11 
5,61E-11 
1,29E-09 
-3,66E-09 
 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
1,28E+00 
1,22E-04 
1,29E-02 
2,10E-04 
2,71E-05 
3,46E-03 
-2,06E-02 
 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
2,01E+01 
3,43E-01 
2,12E-01 
7,45E-03 
7,56E-02 
1,70E-01 
-7,41E-01 
 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
8,77E-10 
6,93E-12 
9,83E-12 
7,74E-13 
1,53E-12 
1,14E-11 
-1,03E-10 
 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,09E-08 
3,60E-10 
1,40E-10 
1,65E-11 
7,94E-11 
4,08E-10 
-1,73E-09 
 
SQP1 
-  
3,60E+01 
1,57E-01 
3,93E-01 
3,44E-02 
3,50E-02 
1,08E-01 
-3,37E+00 
 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human 
toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It 
does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in 
underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured 
by this indicator. 
 
 
RESOURCE USE PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,08E+01 
2,62E-02 
3,17E-01 
4,26E-02 
5,86E-03 
4,89E+00 
-4,17E+00 
 
PERM 
[MJ] 
4,93E+00* 
0,00E+00 
-1,17E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
-4,81E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,58E+01 
2,62E-02 
2,00E-01 
4,26E-02 
5,86E-03 
7,63E-02 
-4,17E+00 
 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
1,28E+01 
4,64E-01 
5,48E-01 
2,11E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,94E-01 
-6,98E+00 
 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
3,82E-01* 
0,00E+00 
-3,82E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
1,32E+01 
4,64E-01 
1,65E-01 
2,11E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,94E-01 
-6,98E+00 
 
SM 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
FW 
[m3] 
2,98E-02 
3,01E-05 
4,49E-04 
1,75E-05 
6,71E-06 
4,40E-03 
-1,73E-03 
 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use 
of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of 
fresh water 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:599==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 9 of 19 
 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
2,85E-09 
2,41E-11 
7,29E-11 
4,28E-11 
5,39E-12 
7,10E-11 
-4,57E-09 
NHWD 
[kg] 
1,28E-01 
7,24E-05 
1,68E-03 
8,35E-05 
1,60E-05 
1,30E-02 
-8,87E-03 
RWD 
[kg] 
2,82E-03 
8,37E-07 
3,03E-05 
1,89E-06 
1,85E-07 
2,18E-05 
-1,85E-04 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
4,22E-03* 
0,00E+00 
1,72E-05 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,05E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,41E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,87E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,32E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = 
Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy 
* The Material for Recyling is from the pulp packaging recyling. 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER [1 KG WOODFIBER AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
4,60E-01 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
3,97E-03 
 
 
 
==PAGE:600==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 10 of 19 
 
Result for Woodfiber AIR – Sealand 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,00E+00 
4,75E-02 
5,20E-02 
1,76E-03 
7,69E-03 
1,53E+00 
-4,66E-01 
 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
5,19E-01 
4,67E-02 
3,47E-02 
1,75E-03 
7,55E-03 
2,67E-02 
-4,65E-01 
 
GWP-biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,52E+00 
5,04E-04 
1,72E-02 
6,97E-06 
8,15E-05 
1,51E+00 
-7,23E-04 
 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
6,87E-04 
3,86E-04 
1,38E-05 
4,27E-06 
6,25E-05 
1,72E-05 
-4,22E-04 
 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 
eq.] 
4,70E-08 
9,33E-18 
4,62E-10 
5,71E-17 
1,51E-18 
2,37E-16 
-5,60E-15 
 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
3,70E-03 
5,12E-05 
4,73E-05 
3,05E-06 
8,28E-06 
2,57E-04 
-4,54E-04 
 
EP-freshwater 
[kg P eq.] 
1,02E-04 
1,40E-07 
1,02E-06 
1,09E-08 
2,27E-08 
3,25E-08 
-1,07E-06 
 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
1,12E-03 
1,66E-05 
1,44E-05 
1,03E-06 
2,68E-06 
8,45E-05 
-1,67E-04 
 
EP-terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
6,10E-03 
1,96E-04 
1,07E-04 
1,00E-05 
3,17E-05 
1,23E-03 
-1,72E-03 
 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC 
eq.] 
1,67E-03 
4,46E-05 
2,52E-05 
2,47E-06 
7,22E-06 
2,30E-04 
-4,37E-04 
 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 
7,69E-06 
4,19E-09 
7,66E-08 
8,70E-10 
6,78E-10 
3,62E-09 
-8,69E-08 
 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
1,30E+01 
6,30E-01 
1,63E-01 
2,11E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,93E-01 
-6,98E+00 
 
WDP1 
[m3] 
4,45E-01 
4,39E-04 
1,04E-02 
1,65E-04 
7,10E-05 
1,87E-01 
-1,62E-02 
 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming 
Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; 
EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – 
terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone formation; ADPm = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion 
Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:601==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 11 of 19 
 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
3,15E-08 
3,47E-10 
3,84E-10 
2,81E-11 
5,61E-11 
1,29E-09 
-3,66E-09 
 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 
eq.] 
1,28E+00 
1,68E-04 
1,29E-02 
2,10E-04 
2,71E-05 
3,46E-03 
-2,06E-02 
 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
2,01E+01 
4,67E-01 
2,12E-01 
7,45E-03 
7,56E-02 
1,70E-01 
-7,41E-01 
 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
8,77E-10 
9,45E-12 
9,83E-12 
7,74E-13 
1,53E-12 
1,14E-11 
-1,03E-10 
 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,09E-08 
4,91E-10 
1,40E-10 
1,65E-11 
7,94E-11 
4,08E-10 
-1,73E-09 
 
SQP1 
-  
3,60E+01 
2,16E-01 
3,93E-01 
3,44E-02 
3,50E-02 
1,08E-01 
-3,37E+00 
 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human 
toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It 
does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in 
underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured 
by this indicator. 
 
 
RESOURCE USE PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,08E+01 
3,62E-02 
3,17E-01 
4,26E-02 
5,86E-03 
4,89E+00 
-4,17E+00 
 
PERM 
[MJ] 
4,93E+00* 
0,00E+00 
-1,17E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
-4,81E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,58E+01 
3,62E-02 
2,00E-01 
4,26E-02 
5,86E-03 
7,63E-02 
-4,17E+00 
 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
1,28E+01 
6,32E-01 
5,48E-01 
2,11E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,94E-01 
-6,98E+00 
 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
3,82E-01* 
0,00E+00 
-3,82E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
1,32E+01 
6,32E-01 
1,65E-01 
2,11E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,94E-01 
-6,98E+00 
 
SM 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
FW 
[m3] 
2,98E-02 
4,15E-05 
4,49E-04 
1,75E-05 
6,71E-06 
4,40E-03 
-1,73E-03 
 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use 
of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = 
Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use 
of fresh water 
 
 
==PAGE:602==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 12 of 19 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
2,85E-09 
3,33E-11 
7,29E-11 
4,28E-11 
5,39E-12 
7,10E-11 
-4,57E-09 
NHWD 
[kg] 
1,28E-01 
9,91E-05 
1,68E-03 
8,35E-05 
1,60E-05 
1,30E-02 
-8,87E-03 
RWD 
[kg] 
2,82E-03 
1,15E-06 
3,03E-05 
1,89E-06 
1,85E-07 
2,18E-05 
-1,85E-04 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
4,22E-03* 
0,00E+00 
1,72E-05 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,05E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,41E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,87E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,32E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = 
Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy 
*The Material for Recyling is from the pulp packaging recyling. 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER [1 KG WOODFIBER AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
4,60E-01 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
3,97E-03 
 
 
 
==PAGE:603==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 13 of 19 
 
Result for Woodfiber AIR – Austria 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,00E+00 
1,33E-01 
5,25E-02 
2,23E-03 
7,69E-03 
1,53E+00 
-5,54E-01 
 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
5,19E-01 
1,30E-01 
3,52E-02 
2,21E-03 
7,55E-03 
2,67E-02 
-5,51E-01 
 
GWP-biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,52E+00 
1,41E-03 
1,73E-02 
1,95E-05 
8,15E-05 
1,51E+00 
-3,16E-03 
 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
6,87E-04 
1,08E-03 
1,46E-05 
5,13E-06 
6,25E-05 
1,72E-05 
-5,17E-04 
 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
4,70E-08 
2,61E-17 
4,62E-10 
5,93E-17 
1,51E-18 
2,37E-16 
-5,81E-15 
 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
3,70E-03 
1,43E-04 
4,80E-05 
3,73E-06 
8,28E-06 
2,57E-04 
-5,65E-04 
 
EP-freshwater 
[kg P eq.] 
1,02E-04 
3,92E-07 
1,02E-06 
1,07E-08 
2,27E-08 
3,25E-08 
-1,08E-06 
 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
1,12E-03 
4,63E-05 
1,44E-05 
1,08E-06 
2,68E-06 
8,45E-05 
-1,92E-04 
 
EP-terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
6,10E-03 
5,48E-04 
1,08E-04 
1,11E-05 
3,17E-05 
1,23E-03 
-2,04E-03 
 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
1,67E-03 
1,25E-04 
2,55E-05 
2,70E-06 
7,22E-06 
2,30E-04 
-5,18E-04 
 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 
7,69E-06 
1,17E-08 
7,66E-08 
8,69E-10 
6,78E-10 
3,62E-09 
-1,15E-07 
 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
1,30E+01 
1,76E+00 
1,71E-01 
2,90E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,93E-01 
-8,42E+00 
 
WDP1 
[m3] 
4,45E-01 
1,23E-03 
1,03E-02 
8,72E-05 
7,10E-05 
1,87E-01 
-8,72E-03 
 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming 
Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = 
Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = 
Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone formation; ADPm = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf 
= Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
3,15E-08 
9,69E-10 
3,86E-10 
3,03E-11 
5,61E-11 
1,29E-09 
-4,50E-09 
 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
1,28E+00 
4,68E-04 
1,28E-02 
1,49E-04 
2,71E-05 
3,46E-03 
-1,47E-02 
 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
2,01E+01 
1,31E+00 
2,15E-01 
9,80E-03 
7,56E-02 
1,70E-01 
-1,01E+00 
 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
8,77E-10 
2,64E-11 
9,98E-12 
9,19E-13 
1,53E-12 
1,14E-11 
-1,21E-10 
 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,09E-08 
1,37E-09 
1,43E-10 
1,98E-11 
7,94E-11 
4,08E-10 
-5,35E-09 
 
SQP1 
-  
3,60E+01 
6,05E-01 
3,83E-01 
2,43E-02 
3,50E-02 
1,08E-01 
-2,39E+00 
 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human 
toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It 
does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in 
underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured 
by this indicator. 
 
==PAGE:604==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 14 of 19 
 
 
RESOURCE USE PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,08E+01 
1,01E-01 
3,08E-01 
3,34E-02 
5,86E-03 
4,89E+00 
-3,28E+00 
 
PERM 
[MJ] 
4,93E+00* 
0,00E+00 
-1,17E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
-4,81E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,58E+01 
1,01E-01 
1,91E-01 
3,34E-02 
5,86E-03 
7,63E-02 
-3,28E+00 
 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
1,28E+01 
1,77E+00 
5,56E-01 
2,90E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,94E-01 
-8,42E+00 
 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
3,82E-01* 
0,00E+00 
-3,82E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
1,32E+01 
1,77E+00 
1,73E-01 
2,90E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,94E-01 
-8,42E+00 
 
SM 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
FW 
[m3] 
2,98E-02 
1,16E-04 
4,52E-04 
2,09E-05 
6,71E-06 
4,40E-03 
-2,06E-03 
 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use 
of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = 
Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use 
of fresh water 
 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
2,85E-09 
9,30E-11 
4,39E-11 
1,38E-11 
5,39E-12 
7,10E-11 
-3,33E-09 
NHWD 
[kg] 
1,28E-01 
2,77E-04 
1,64E-03 
4,21E-05 
1,60E-05 
1,30E-02 
-6,00E-03 
RWD 
[kg] 
2,82E-03 
3,20E-06 
3,03E-05 
1,89E-06 
1,85E-07 
2,18E-05 
-1,86E-04 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
4,22E-03* 
0,00E+00 
1,72E-05 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,05E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,41E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,87E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,32E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = 
Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy 
* The Material for Recyling is from the pulp packaging recyling. 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER [1 KG WOODFIBER AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
4,60E-01 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
3,97E-03 
==PAGE:605==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 15 of 19 
 
Result for Woodfiber AIR – England 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,00E+00 
1,33E-01 
5,25E-02 
2,25E-03 
7,69E-03 
1,53E+00 
-5,18E-01 
 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
5,19E-01 
1,30E-01 
3,52E-02 
2,20E-03 
7,55E-03 
2,67E-02 
-5,13E-01 
 
GWP-biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-1,52E+00 
1,40E-03 
1,73E-02 
5,12E-05 
8,15E-05 
1,51E+00 
-5,07E-03 
 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
6,87E-04 
1,07E-03 
9,90E-06 
3,95E-07 
6,25E-05 
1,72E-05 
-4,41E-05 
 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
4,70E-08 
2,60E-17 
4,62E-10 
7,65E-17 
1,51E-18 
2,37E-16 
-7,53E-15 
 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
3,70E-03 
1,60E-04 
4,84E-05 
4,12E-06 
8,28E-06 
2,57E-04 
-5,81E-04 
 
EP-freshwater 
[kg P eq.] 
1,02E-04 
3,90E-07 
1,01E-06 
1,68E-09 
2,27E-08 
3,25E-08 
-1,69E-07 
 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
1,12E-03 
5,26E-05 
1,45E-05 
1,22E-06 
2,68E-06 
8,45E-05 
-1,95E-04 
 
EP-terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
6,10E-03 
6,17E-04 
1,10E-04 
1,31E-05 
3,17E-05 
1,23E-03 
-2,12E-03 
 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
1,67E-03 
1,42E-04 
2,62E-05 
3,44E-06 
7,22E-06 
2,30E-04 
-5,54E-04 
 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 
7,69E-06 
1,16E-08 
7,65E-08 
7,73E-10 
6,78E-10 
3,62E-09 
-7,97E-08 
 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
1,30E+01 
1,76E+00 
1,90E-01 
4,76E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,93E-01 
-9,71E+00 
 
WDP1 
[m3] 
4,45E-01 
1,22E-03 
1,03E-02 
1,12E-04 
7,10E-05 
1,87E-01 
-1,11E-02 
 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming 
Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = 
Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = 
Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone formation; ADPm = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf 
= Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
3,15E-08 
1,35E-09 
3,93E-10 
3,77E-11 
5,61E-11 
1,29E-09 
-5,90E-09 
 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
1,28E+00 
4,66E-04 
1,33E-02 
6,68E-04 
2,71E-05 
3,46E-03 
-6,57E-02 
 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
2,01E+01 
1,30E+00 
2,35E-01 
3,06E-02 
7,56E-02 
1,70E-01 
-3,03E+00 
 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
8,77E-10 
2,63E-11 
9,61E-12 
5,52E-13 
1,53E-12 
1,14E-11 
-6,93E-11 
 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
1,09E-08 
1,37E-09 
1,49E-10 
2,55E-11 
7,94E-11 
4,08E-10 
-2,63E-09 
 
SQP1 
-  
3,60E+01 
6,00E-01 
3,67E-01 
7,76E-03 
3,50E-02 
1,08E-01 
-7,68E-01 
 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human 
toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It 
does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in 
underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured 
by this indicator. 
 
 
==PAGE:606==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 16 of 19 
 
RESOURCE USE PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1,08E+01 
1,01E-01 
3,00E-01 
2,62E-02 
5,86E-03 
4,89E+00 
-2,60E+00 
 
PERM 
[MJ] 
4,93E+00* 
0,00E+00 
-1,17E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
-4,81E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1,58E+01 
1,01E-01 
1,84E-01 
2,62E-02 
5,86E-03 
7,63E-02 
-2,60E+00 
 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
1,28E+01 
1,76E+00 
5,74E-01 
4,76E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,94E-01 
-9,71E+00 
 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
3,82E-01* 
0,00E+00 
-3,82E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
1,32E+01 
1,76E+00 
1,92E-01 
4,76E-02 
1,02E-01 
3,94E-01 
-9,71E+00 
 
SM 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
FW 
[m3] 
2,98E-02 
1,15E-04 
4,46E-04 
1,54E-05 
6,71E-06 
4,40E-03 
-1,54E-03 
 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use 
of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = 
Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use 
of fresh water 
 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER [1 KG Woodfiber AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
C1 
C2 
C3 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
2,85E-09 
9,25E-11 
4,47E-11 
1,46E-11 
5,39E-12 
7,10E-11 
-2,01E-09 
NHWD 
[kg] 
1,28E-01 
2,76E-04 
1,64E-03 
4,80E-05 
1,60E-05 
1,30E-02 
-5,46E-03 
RWD 
[kg] 
2,82E-03 
3,19E-06 
3,53E-05 
6,92E-06 
1,85E-07 
2,18E-05 
-6,80E-04 
CRU 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
4,22E-03 
0,00E+00 
1,72E-05 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,05E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,41E+00 
0,00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,87E-01 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
4,32E+00 
0,00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = 
Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EE = Exported energy 
* The Material for Recyling is from the pulp packaging recyling. 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER [1 KG WOODFIBER AIR] 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
4,60E-01 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
3,97E-03 
 
 
==PAGE:607==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 17 of 19 
 
 
Additional information 
Technical information on scenarios 
 
Transport to the building site by Truck (A4) 
Scenario information 
Zealand 
Jutland 
Austria 
England 
Unit 
Fuel type 
Diesel, 6.35 wt.% 
bio components 
Diesel, 6.35 wt.% 
bio components 
Diesel, 6.35 wt.% 
bio components 
Diesel, 6.35 wt.% bio 
components 
- 
Vehicle type 
Truck, Euro 6 
Truck, Euro 6 
Truck, Euro 6 
Truck, Euro 6 
- 
Transport distance 
608 
440 
1699 
1687 
km 
Capacity utilization (including empty runs) 
61 
61 
61 
61 
% 
Gross density of products transported 
158 
158 
158 
158 
kg/m3 
 
Transport to the building site by Ship (A4) 
Scenario information 
Jutland 
England 
Unit 
Fuel type 
Heavy fuel oil, 1.0 wt.% S 
Heavy fuel oil, 1.0 wt.% S 
- 
Vehicle type 
Container ship 
Container ship 
- 
Transport distance 
67 
80 
km 
Capacity utilization (including empty runs) 
70 
70 
% 
 
Installation of the product in the building (A5) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Ancillary materials 
- 
kg 
Water use 
- 
m3 
Other resource use 
- 
kg 
Energy type and consumption 
Electricity: 0,00712 
kWh 
Waste materials 
0,0266 
kg 
Output materials 
- 
kg 
Direct emissions to air, soil or water 
- 
kg 
 
 
End of life (C1-C4) 
Scenario information 
Incineration scenario 
Unit 
Collected separately 
1 
kg 
Collected with mixed waste 
0 
kg 
For reuse 
0 
kg 
For recycling 
0 
kg 
For energy recovery 
1 
kg 
For final disposal 
0 
kg 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
Scenario information/Material 
Incineration scenario 
Unit 
Reuse benefit (replacing new production of Woodfiber AIR) 
0 
kg 
Thermal benefit (Incineration of Woodfiber AIR and packaging material) 
4,51 
MJ 
Electricity benefit (Incineration of Woodfiber AIR and packaging material) 
2,51 
MJ 
 
 
==PAGE:608==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 18 of 19 
 
 
Indoor air 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to indoor air because the 
horizontal standards on measurement of release 
of regulated dangerous substances from 
construction products using harmonised test 
methods according to the provisions of the 
respective technical committees for European 
product standards are not available. 
Soil and water 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to soil and water because 
the horizontal standards on measurement of 
release of regulated dangerous substances from 
construction products using harmonised test 
methods according to the provisions of the 
respective technical committees for European 
product standards are not available. 
 
 
==PAGE:609==
 
 
 
 
MD-22017-EN | Woodfiber | Page 19 of 19 
 
References 
 
Publisher 
 
 
www.epddanmark.dk 
Programme operator 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA-practitioner 
 
 
Frida 
Dahlberg, 
Niclas 
Silfverstrand 
and 
Yevgeniya Arushanyan 
Ramboll Sweden AB 
Krukmakargatan,21 
10462 Stockholm 
e-mail: yevgeniya.arushanyan@ramboll.se  
 
LCA software /background data 
 
GaBi 10.6.0.110  
3rd party verifier 
Ninkie Bendtsen 
NIRAS 
Sortemosevej 19 
3450 Allerød 
Danmark 
e-mail: ninb@niras.dk 
 
General programme instructions 
Version 2.0 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
EN 15804 
DS/EN 15804 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental  
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products” 
 
EN 15942 
DS/EN 15942:2011 – ” Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – 
Communication format business-to-business” 
 
ISO 14025 
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmental declarations 
– Principles and procedures” 
 
ISO 14040 
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and 
framework” 
 
ISO 14044 
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and 
guidelines” 
==PAGE:610==
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Owner: 
Knauf A/S 
No.: 
MD-21087-EN 
Issued: 
11-02-2022 
Valid to: 
11-02-2027 
 
EPD 
VERIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION | ISO 14025 & EN 15804 
3 r d  P A R T Y  V E R I F I E D  
==PAGE:611==
 
 
 
 
MD-21087-EN | Knauf A/S | Page 2 of 10 
 
Owner of declaration 
Knauf A/S 
Kløvermarksvej 6  
DK-9500 Hobro  
CVR: 5405 0313 
Programme 
EPD Danmark 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
☐ Industry EPD   
☒ Product EPD 
 
Declared product(s) 
Classic Board 
Number of  declared datasets/product variations: 1 
 
The Knauf Classic Board is a glass fiber reinforced gypsum 
plasterboard. The EPD is valid for all variations carrying the Knauf 
Classic 1 Board and Knauf Danogips Classic 3 Board name. 
The range includes products with different edge profiles such as 
tapered, square and beveled edges.  
 
The calculations cover similar products (variation <5%) and are 
based on the product with the highest environmental impact within 
the product group (article number 11990). 
Production site 
Knauf’s production site in Hobro; Kløvermarksvej 6, DK-9500 
Hobro, Denmark 
Product use 
The product is used for general indoor building construction of 
walls and ceilings. 
Declared/ functional unit 
1 m2 
Year of data 
2019 
 
 
Issued: 
11-02-2022 
Valid to: 
11-02-2027 
Basis of calculation 
This EPD is developed in accordance with the European 
standard EN 15804+A2.  
 
Comparability 
EPDs of construction products may not be comparable 
if they do not comply with the requirements in EN 
15804. EPD data may not be comparable if the 
datasets used are not developed in accordance with EN 
15804 and if the background systems are not based 
on the same database. 
 
Validity 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 
14025 and is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 
 
Use 
The intended use of an EPD is to communicate 
scientifically based environmental information for 
construction products, for the purpose of assessing the 
environmental performance of buildings. 
 
EPD type 
☐Cradle-to-gate with modules C1-C4 and D 
☒Cradle-to-gate with options, modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-grave and module D 
☐Cradle-to-gate 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Martha Katrine Sørensen 
EPD Danmark 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to EN ISO 14025 
☐ internal 
☒ external 
 
Third party verifier: 
 
 
 
Ninkie Bendtsen 
 
 
Life cycle stages and modules (MND = module not declared) 
Product 
Construction 
process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond the system 
boundary 
Raw material 
supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery 
and recycling 
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
X 
MND 
MND MND MND 
MND MND 
MND MND 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
==PAGE:612==
 
 
 
 
MD-21087-EN | Knauf A/S | Page 3 of 10 
 
Product information 
Product description 
The main product components and packaging are 
shown in the tables below.  
Material 
Weight-% of 
declared product 
Paper 
4% 
Stucco 
87% 
Fibre glass 
<1% 
Additives 
<1% 
Glue 
<1% 
Water 
8% 
 
Packaging 
Weight-% 
Ceiling_board 
99.1% 
PE film 
0.9% 
 
Representativity 
This declaration, including data collection and the 
modeled foreground system including results, 
represents the production of gypsum board on 
the production site located in Hobro. Product 
specific data are based on average values 
collected in the period 2019. Background data are 
based on the GaBi 2021.2 database and are less 
than 10 years old except for two detergents 
<0.05% (w/w). Generally, the used background 
datasets are of high quality, and the majority of 
the datasets are only a couple of years old. 
Hazardous substances 
Knauf Classic boards do not contain substances 
listed in the ”Candidate List of Substances of Very 
High Concern for authorisation” 
 (http://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table) 
 
Essential characteristics  
According to EN 520:2009 the Classic Board is 
classified as type A (plasterboard with a face to 
which suitable gypsum plasters or decoration may 
be applied).   
 
Further technical information can be obtained by 
contacting Knauf or on the website: 
www.knauf.dk 
 
Reference Service Life (RSL) 
The RSL is defined as 60 years according to NPCR 
010 version 3.0. 
Picture of product(s) 
 
 
 
==PAGE:613==
 
 
 
 
MD-21087-EN | Knauf A/S | Page 4 of 10 
 
LCA background 
Declared unit 
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD relates to 1 
m2 
Name 
Value 
Unit 
Declared unit 
1 
m2 
Area density 
8.3 
kg/m2 
Conversion factor to 1 kg. 
0.120 
- 
Not defined 
 
PCR 
This EPD is developed according to the core 
rules for the product category of construction 
products in EN 15804, and NPCR 010 version 
3.0.  
 
Flowdiagram 
The diagram below shows the system boundaries of the EPD. A detailed illustration of A3 is shown later. 
 
Raw gypsum mining
Gyspum from Flue Gas 
Desulphurization (FGD)
Gypsum from 
recovered boards
Tap water
Mixing stucco with 
water and additives 
to create gypsum 
A1
A3
C1 + C2
Stucco production: 
Milling and heating 
for calcination
Product 
deconstruction (C1) 
and transport (C2)
Recycling (C3) or 
Disposal (C4) 
C3 + C4
Avoided production 
of gypsum and 
heat/electricity
D
Recycled paper
A2
Additives
Basic plate 
production: 
Gypsum 
sandwiched 
between face 
papers + drying and 
cutting 
A2
A2
A4
A2
Installation (A5) 
and use (B1-B7)
Not declared
A5 
+
B1-B7
==PAGE:614==
 
 
 
 
MD-21087-EN | Knauf A/S | Page 5 of 10 
 
System boundary 
This EPD is based on an LCA including cradle-to-
gate with options, modules C1-C4, and module D. 
100 % (w/w) of the product has been accounted 
for.  
The general rules for the exclusion of inputs and 
outputs follows the requirements in EN 15804, 
6.3.5, where the total of neglected input flows per 
module shall be a maximum of 5 % of energy 
usage and mass and 1 % of energy usage and 
mass for unit processes. 
 
Product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
The product stage comprises the acquisition of all 
raw materials, products and energy, transport to 
the 
production 
site, 
packaging 
and 
waste 
processing up to the ”end-of-waste” state or final 
disposal. The LCA results are declared in 
aggregated form for the product stage, which 
means, that the sub-modules A1, A2 and A3 are 
declared as one module A1-A3. 
A1 – Extraction and processing of raw materials 
The raw gypsum is mined in Spain. All other raw 
materials are produced mainly in Northern 
Europe. 
A2 – Transport to the production site 
The inbound transport includes all incoming 
material from suppliers. This includes the 
transport of Flue-Gas Desulfurization (FGD) from 
coal-based power plants, as well as transport of 
raw natural gypsum from Spain. 
A3 – Manufacturing processes 
The natural, recycled or FGD based gypsum is 
heated/calcinated to bring the gypsum to the 
hemihydrate state known as stucco. The stucco is 
mixed with water and other additives and 
sandwiched between the front and back liner. 
After initial hardening, the plates are cut into 
shape and heated in the curing oven. 
Construction 
process 
stage 
(A4-A5) 
includes: 
A weighted average for the transport distance of 
237 km is included for the average Danish market 
situation. 
The installation phase (A5) is not included. 
 
Use stage (B1-B7) includes: 
Not included 
 
End of Life (C1-C4) includes: 
The board is dismantled by hand (C1) and 
transported to municipal collection facilities, and 
from here to a recycling company (C2). 
The gypsum part of the plate (gypsum and 
additives) is split from the paper liners using 
electricity-based machinery (C3). The paper part 
is assumed incinerated with energy recovery (C4) 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
includes: 
The gypsum part of the product is recycled as 
gypsum and avoids mining and production of 
natural gypsum. This can be done at Knauf and 
recycled in new Knauf boards. 
The recovered energy from incineration of paper 
avoids the production of primary heat or 
electricity at power plants. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:615==
 
 
 
 
MD-21087-EN | Knauf A/S | Page 6 of 10 
 
LCA results 
The LCIA results are calculate using GaBi 10.6 with database version 2021.2, and using the characterization 
model defined in GaBi as EN15804+A2 for classifying and characterizing input and output flows. 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
A4 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
1.23E+00 
1.56E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.28E-01 
3.70E-02 
4.71E-01 
-1.72E-01 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
1.79E+00 
1.53E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.25E-01 
3.67E-02 
1.17E-02 
-1.71E-01 
GWP-bio 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-5.62E-01 
1.65E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.35E-03 
3.12E-04 
4.59E-01 
-8.53E-04 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
1.57E-03 
1.26E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.04E-03 
5.19E-05 
8.05E-06 
-1.37E-04 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
4.13E-09 
3.05E-17 
0.00E+00 
2.51E-17 
8.78E-16 
9.06E-17 
-1.96E-15 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
4.04E-03 
1.68E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.37E-04 
7.63E-05 
1.31E-04 
-2.55E-04 
EP-fw 
[kg P eq.] 
3.82E-05 
4.60E-07 
0.00E+00 
3.77E-07 
9.83E-08 
1.64E-08 
-2.31E-07 
EP-mar 
[kg N eq.] 
1.77E-03 
5.42E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.45E-05 
1.81E-05 
4.75E-05 
-7.95E-05 
EP-ter 
[mol N eq.] 
1.89E-02 
6.42E-04 
0.00E+00 
5.27E-04 
1.90E-04 
5.93E-04 
-8.63E-04 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
5.03E-03 
1.46E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.20E-04 
4.92E-05 
1.26E-04 
-2.23E-04 
ADP-mm1 
[kg Sb eq.] 
1.38E-06 
1.37E-08 
0.00E+00 
1.13E-08 
1.08E-08 
1.39E-09 
-2.87E-08 
ADP-fos1 
[MJ] 
2.84E+01 
2.06E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.69E+00 
6.52E-01 
1.50E-01 
-2.94E+00 
WDP1 
[m3] 
2.94E-01 
1.44E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.18E-03 
5.88E-03 
5.82E-02 
-1.28E-02 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-bio = Global 
Warming Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone 
Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic 
marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion 
Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water use 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as 
there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
A4 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease incidence] 
8.08E-08 
1.14E-09 
0.00E+00 
9.31E-10 
6.43E-10 
7.21E-10 
-3.49E-08 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
4.33E-02 
5.49E-04 
0.00E+00 
4.50E-04 
1.59E-02 
1.18E-03 
-3.45E-02 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
5.49E+00 
1.53E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.25E+00 
2.74E-01 
7.03E-02 
-6.44E-01 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
6.43E-10 
3.09E-11 
0.00E+00 
2.54E-11 
7.77E-12 
3.79E-12 
-2.84E-11 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
7.49E-09 
1.61E-09 
0.00E+00 
1.32E-09 
2.93E-10 
1.68E-10 
-1.15E-09 
SQP1 
-  
8.46E+00 
7.08E-01 
0.00E+00 
5.81E-01 
2.06E-01 
3.91E-02 
-4.94E-01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = 
Human toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as 
there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
  
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the 
nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to 
radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some 
construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
RESSOURCE CONSUMPTION PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
A4 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
4.36E+00 
1.19E-01 
0.00E+00 
9.73E-02 
3.01E-01 
2.84E-02 
-6.69E-01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
6.63E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.10E+01 
1.19E-01 
0.00E+00 
9.73E-02 
3.01E-01 
2.84E-02 
-6.69E-01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
2.81E+01 
2.07E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.70E+00 
6.52E-01 
1.50E-01 
-2.95E+00 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
3.45E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
2.85E+01 
2.07E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.70E+00 
6.52E-01 
1.50E-01 
-2.95E+00 
SM 
[kg] 
5.07E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
1.13E-02 
1.36E-04 
0.00E+00 
1.11E-04 
2.93E-04 
1.37E-03 
-6.46E-04 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = 
Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy 
resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as 
raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of 
non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; 
NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
 
==PAGE:616==
 
 
 
 
MD-21087-EN | Knauf A/S | Page 7 of 10 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Enhed 
A1-A3 
A4 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
3.98E-06 
1.09E-10 
0.00E+00 
8.94E-11 
1.72E-10 
2.78E-11 
-6.58E-10 
NHWD 
[kg] 
2.21E-02 
3.25E-04 
0.00E+00 
2.66E-04 
4.63E-04 
1.48E-02 
-1.38E-03 
RWD 
[kg] 
2.99E-04 
3.75E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.08E-06 
9.71E-05 
7.61E-06 
-2.11E-04 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
5.48E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.32E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.12E-01 
EET 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.29E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = 
Components for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical 
energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER PER PRODUKT PER M2 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
1.44E-01 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
kg C 
5.00E-02 
 
 
 
==PAGE:617==
 
 
 
 
MD-21087-EN | Knauf A/S | Page 8 of 10 
 
Additional information 
Technical information on scenarios 
 
 
Transport to the building site (A4) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Fuel type 
Diesel 
- 
Vehicle type 
Truck, Euro 6, 28 - 32t 
gross weight / 22t 
payload capacity 
- 
Transport distance 
237 
km 
Capacity utilisation (including empty runs) 
61 
% 
Gross density of products transported 
664 
kg/m3 
Capacity utilisation volume factor 
1 
- 
 
 
Reference service life 
RSL information 
Unit 
Reference service Life 
 60 years 
Declared product properties 
Information on the technical characteristics, design 
and construction guidelines, as well as conditions 
during use can be found on the website of Knauf at 
www.knauf.dk  
Design application parameters 
Assumed quality of work 
Outdoor environment 
Indoor environment 
Usage conditions 
Maintenance 
 
End of life (C1-C4) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Collected separately 
8.3 
kg 
Collected with mixed waste 
0 
kg 
For reuse 
0 
kg 
For recycling 
8.0 
kg 
For energy recovery 
0.3 
kg 
For final disposal 
0 
kg 
Assumptions for scenario development 
The gypsum part is assumed recycled and paper part 
incinerated 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
Scenario information/Materiel 
Value 
Unit 
Gypsum 
8.0 
kg 
Electric energy 
0.7 
MJ 
Thermal energy 
1.3 
MJ 
 
 
==PAGE:618==
 
 
 
 
MD-21087-EN | Knauf A/S | Page 9 of 10 
 
 
Indoor air 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to indoor air because the 
horizontal standards on measurement of release 
of regulated dangerous substances from 
construction products using harmonised test 
methods according to the provisions of the 
respective technical committees for European 
product standards are not available. 
 
Classic Board is covered by the Danish Indoor 
Climate Labelling, Certificate no. 009.  
Soil and water 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to soil and water because 
the horizontal standards on measurement of 
release of regulated dangerous substances from 
construction products using harmonised test 
methods according to the provisions of the 
respective technical committees for European 
product standards are not available. 
 
 
==PAGE:619==
 
 
 
 
MD-21087-EN | Knauf A/S | Page 10 of 10 
 
References 
 
Publisher 
 
 
www.epddanmark.dk 
Programme operator 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA-practitioner 
 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA software /background data 
 
Thinkstep GaBi 10.6 
Database version 2021.2  
www.gabi-software.com 
3rd party verifier 
Ninkie Bendtsen 
NIRAS A/S 
Sortemosevej 19  
DK-3450 Allerød 
www.niras.dk 
General programme instructions 
Version 2.0 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
EN 15804 
DS/EN 15804 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental  
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products” 
 
NPCR 010 version 3.0. 
NPCR 010 version 3.0. “PCR – Part B for Building boards”  
 
EN 15942 
DS/EN 15942:2011 – ” Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – 
Communication format business-to-business” 
 
ISO 14025 
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmental declarations 
– Principles and procedures” 
 
ISO 14040 
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and 
framework” 
 
ISO 14044 
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and 
guidelines” 
==PAGE:620==
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Owner: 
Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS 
No.: 
MD-23199-EN 
Issued: 
22-02-2024 
Valid to: 
22-02-2029 
 
EPD 
VERIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION | ISO 14025 & EN 15804 
3 r d  P A R T Y  V E R I F I E D  
==PAGE:621==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 2 of 13 
 
Owner of declaration 
Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS 
Ankervej 1 
4800 Nykøbing F, Denmark 
CVR: 39002299 
 
Programme 
EPD Danmark 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
☐ Industry EPD   
☒ Product EPD 
 
Declared product(s) 
1 kg of ground screws 
 
Number of  declared datasets/product variations: 1 
 
Production site 
Ankervej 1 
4800 Nykøbing F, Denmark 
 
No green certificate has been applied in module A3 
Product(s) use 
Foundational ground screws 
Declared/ functional unit 
1 kg of ground screw 
 
Year of production site data (A3) 
2022 
EPD version 
Version 1 
 
Issued: 
22-02-2024 
Valid to: 
22-02-2029 
Basis of calculation 
This EPD is developed in accordance with the European 
standard EN 15804+A2.  
 
Comparability 
EPDs of construction products may not be comparable 
if they do not comply with the requirements in EN 
15804. EPD data may not be comparable if the 
datasets used are not developed in accordance with EN 
15804 and if the background systems are not based 
on the same database. 
 
Validity 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 
14025 and is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 
 
Use 
The intended use of an EPD is to communicate 
scientifically based environmental information for 
construction products, for the purpose of assessing the 
environmental performance of buildings. 
 
EPD type 
☒Cradle-to-gate with modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options, modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-grave and module D 
☐Cradle-to-gate 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Martha Katrine Sørensen 
EPD Danmark 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to EN ISO 14025 
☐ internal 
☒ external 
 
Third party verifier: 
 
 Guangli Du 
 
 
Life cycle stages and modules (MND = module not declared) 
Product 
Construction 
process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond the system 
boundary 
Raw material 
supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery 
and recycling 
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
MND 
MND 
MND MND MND 
MND MND 
MND MND 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
==PAGE:622==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 3 of 13 
 
Product information 
Product description 
The product assessed in this study is foundational 
ground screws in steel, ready to be installed with 
the instructions of Bayo.S Skruefundamenter 
ApS. 
The main product components are shown in the 
table below.  
Material 
Weight-% of declared 
product 
Steel 
96.45 
Zinc 
3.55 
 
Product packaging: 
The composition of the sales- and transport 
packaging of the product is shown in the table 
below. Materials account for 100% of the mass of 
the declared product packaging. 
Material 
Weight-% of packaging 
Steel 
100 
 
Representativity 
This declaration, including data collection and the 
modeled foreground system including results, 
represents 
the 
production 
of 
Bayo.S 
Skruefundamenter ApS production site in the 
Czech 
Republic, 
and 
its 
warehouse 
and 
administration 
sites 
in 
Denmark. 
The 
geographical area covered is Europe. Product 
specific data are based on average values 
collected at the production site for the year 2022. 
Background data is based on Ecoinvent 3.9.1 
(published 01-2023) and complies with EN 
15804:2012 + A2:2019, section 6.3.8.2, by being 
less than 10 years old. Almost all datasets are 
locally and/or regionally representative (e.g., 
Denmark, Czech Republic, or Europe), and 
electricity is country-specific, reflecting practices 
for A3. Generally, the datasets utilized are of 
good quality, with a reference year of 2022 in line 
with the publication of the Ecoinvent database.  
Hazardous substances 
The foundational ground screws does not contain 
substances listed on the ”Candidate List of 
Substances 
of 
Very 
High 
Concern 
for 
authorisation” 
(http://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table) 
 
Essential characteristics  
Bayo.S ground screws are produced in the EU and 
have a CE marking. The screws are zinc 
galvanized cf. EN ISO 1461:2022, quality assured 
cf. SBi 271, and DS1140, and can document 
carrying capacity cf. Eurocode 7.  
Further technical information can be obtained by 
contacting 
the 
manufacturer 
or 
on 
the 
manufacturer's website: 
https://www.bayosystem.com/ 
 
Reference Service Life (RSL) 
No reference service life (RSL) has been declared 
since the scope of this EPD is cradle-to-gate with 
modules C1-C4 and D. As a result, the use stage 
(B1-B7) of the declared product is not included. 
 
 
==PAGE:623==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 4 of 13 
 
Picture of product(s) 
 
 
 
LCA background 
Declared unit 
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD relates to 1 kg of galvanized foundational ground screw, ready for 
installation. The declared unit embodies 83 ground screw products, which differs in length, screw tip, and 
top mount, depending on intended use. 
Name 
Value 
Unit 
Foundational ground screw 
1 
kg 
 
PCR 
This EPD is developed according to the core rules for the product category of construction products in EN 
15804+A2, and use no supporting cPCR. 
 
Guarantee of Origin – certificates 
No GO certificates are being used in Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS production, and electricity is modelled 
by utilizing residual electricity mixes. 
Foreground system: 
The production at Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS (A3) is modelled based on site-specific data for the year 
2022. The electricity consumption is modeled with residual electricity mixes for Denmark and the Czech 
==PAGE:624==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 5 of 13 
 
Republic. The remaining activities are modelled with average supply mixes representing the individual 
countries (e.g. DK or CZ) or regions (e.g. EU) pertaining to the specific processes in the value chain.   
Background system: 
The database, Ecoinvent 3.9.1 (published 01-2023) is utilized for the background system. As the results 
both upstream- and downstream activities are based on average supply mixes for the specific country or 
region depending on the given dataset.  
 
Flowdiagram 
 
==PAGE:625==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 6 of 13 
 
 
 
System boundary 
This EPD is based on a cradle-to-gate with 
modules C1-C4 and D, in which 100 weight-% has 
been accounted for. The general rules for 
exclusion of inputs and outputs follow the 
requirements in EN 15804, 6.3.5, where the total 
of neglected input flows per module shall be a 
maximum of 5 % of energy usage and mass and 
1 % of energy usage and mass for unit processes. 
 
Product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
The product stage comprises the acquisition of all 
raw materials, products, and energy, transport to 
the 
production 
site, 
packaging 
and 
waste 
processing up to the end-of-waste state, or final 
disposal. The LCA results are declared in 
aggregated form for the product stage, which 
means modules A1, A2, and A3 are declared as 
one module A1-A3. A European supply mix is 
applied 
for 
A1, 
based 
on 
Bayo.S 
Skruefundamenter ApS largest suppliers of steel. 
The steel is transported to production in the 
Czech Republic, with an applied weighted average 
distance based on the supply mix. The steel is 
primarily 
procured 
in 
pipes 
and 
press-
formed/drawn into the screw shape during A3. 
Some pieces of the ground screws, e.g., the top 
parts, are procured in sheets and pressed, and 
stamped to their desired form. The screw thread 
is welded on by electric arc welding, while the 
small coupling points at the top of the screw is cut 
using a laser. 3% of steel waste is generated 
during production (primarily during the screw tip 
cut/laser cut). The 3% leftover scrap waste 
generated in production is sent for recycling. The 
shaped ground screws are subsequently zinc 
galvanized cf. EN ISO 1461:2022 by a galvanizing 
service provider located near the production site. 
After galvanization, the finished products are 
shipped to Denmark by truck (959 km in total), 
with water crossing by ferry between Rostock 
(DE) and Gedser (DK), before arriving in Toreby 
L (DK) where the warehouse is located. Admin 
offices located in Nykøbing F are also included in 
A3.  
For packaging, both for intermediate shipping 
between the production site and galvanization 
and for storage and transport to customer, a 
custom made steel cage is used. This is retrieved 
back and reused once it has in circulation. 
 
End of Life (C1-C4) includes: 
The deconstruction of the products covered by 
this study is assumed to be done by means of 
manually removing it from the ground, or with 
assistance from a machine specially purposed to 
install and uninstall the ground screws which 
utilize 1.2 liters of diesel/hour when uninstalling 
screws (40% less fuel consumption compared to 
installation).  
The 
uninstalled 
ground 
screws 
are 
then 
transported 50 km by truck to a waste treatment 
facility where they are to be recycled by being 
scrapped, pressed, and made ready to be 
remelted at a metallurgical plant. No processes 
related to C4 are included in this study, as 
separation of zinc and steel is made before 
remelting, as this occurs at remelting and is 
considered out of the system boundary.  
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
includes: 
Emissions related to module D – Benefits beyond 
the boundary are calculated cf. the equation 
stated in EN 15804+A2 D.3.4 for secondary 
materials, utilizing EF 3.1. The iron scrap content 
(M, MRin) is 18.40 % in the steel Bayo.S 
produces, leaving 82.60% (M, MRout – M,MRin) 
of the material to be accounted for in the system. 
82.60% of secondary materials substitute the 
production of unalloyed steel in Europe. Recovery 
of zinc is not applied in module D due to reasons 
stated in EoL C1-C4. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:626==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 7 of 13 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:627==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 8 of 13 
 
LCA results 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER 1 kg of ground screw 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total [kg CO2 
eq.] 
2.32E+00 
3.57E-01 
9.25E-03 
6.08E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.84E+00 
GWP-fossil [kg CO2 
eq.] 
2.31E+00 
3.57E-01 
9.24E-03 
6.08E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.83E+00 
GWP-
biogenic 
[kg CO2 
eq.] 
4.00E-03 
8.20E-05 
8.46E-06 
3.48E-06 
0.00E+00 
-4.87E-03 
GWP-luluc [kg CO2 
eq.] 
1.15E-03 
4.02E-05 
4.56E-06 
3.67E-06 
0.00E+00 
-8.64E-04 
ODP 
[kg CFC 
11 eq.] 
5.23E-08 
5.68E-09 
2.01E-10 
1.76E-10 
0.00E+00 
-3.39E-08 
AP 
[mol H+ 
eq.] 
8.95E-03 
3.31E-03 
2.02E-05 
4.58E-05 
0.00E+00 
-7.91E-03 
EP-
freshwater 
[kg P 
eq.] 
1.10E-03 
1.10E-05 
6.57E-07 
5.06E-07 
0.00E+00 
-9.11E-04 
EP-marine 
[kg N 
eq.] 
2.16E-03 
1.53E-03 
5.09E-06 
1.76E-05 
0.00E+00 
-1.73E-03 
EP-
terrestrial 
[mol N 
eq.] 
2.30E-02 
1.67E-02 
5.18E-05 
1.88E-04 
0.00E+00 
-1.85E-02 
POCP 
[kg 
NMVOC 
eq.] 
1.09E-02 
4.94E-03 
3.13E-05 
6.56E-05 
0.00E+00 
-8.60E-03 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb 
eq.] 
5.64E-05 
1.25E-07 
3.02E-08 
8.44E-09 
0.00E+00 
-1.77E-05 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
2.71E+01 
4.68E+00 
1.31E-01 
1.51E-01 
0.00E+00 
-1.91E+01 
WDP1 
[m3 world 
eq. 
deprived] 
5.53E-01 
1.01E-02 
5.41E-04 
6.69E-03 
0.00E+00 
-3.70E-01 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential - 
biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidifcation; EP-freshwater = 
Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical 
zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = water depletion 
potential 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the same as 
1,12*10-11 or  0,0000000000112. 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER 1 kg of ground screw 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
1.66E-07 
9.23E-08 
6.88E-10 
1.00E-09 
0.00E+00 
-1.41E-07 
IRP2 
[kBq 
U235 eq.] 
1.68E-01 
2.22E-03 
1.78E-04 
9.59E-05 
0.00E+00 
-7.24E-02 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
4.56E+01 
4.47E+00 
1.30E-01 
1.42E-01 
0.00E+00 
-1.35E+01 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
2.38E-08 
2.19E-10 
8.42E-12 
5.17E-12 
0.00E+00 
-2.37E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
6.25E-08 
1.52E-09 
1.86E-10 
6.47E-11 
0.00E+00 
-4.43E-08 
SQP1 
-  
7.76E+00 
3.15E-01 
7.93E-02 
3.01E-01 
0.00E+00 
-6.41E+00 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human toxicity – cancer effects; 
HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the same as 1,12*10-
11 or  0,0000000000112. 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experienced with 
the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider 
effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing 
radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
 
 
 
RESOURCE USE PER 1 kg of ground screw 
==PAGE:628==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 9 of 13 
 
Parameter Unit 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1.16E+00 
2.66E-02 
2.06E-03 
1.28E-03 
0.00E+00 
-2.16E+00 
PERM 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.16E+00 
2.66E-02 
2.06E-03 
1.28E-03 
0.00E+00 
-2.16E+00 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
2.89E+00 
3.30E-02 
2.91E-03 
1.61E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.20E+00 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
2.42E+01 
4.65E+00 
1.28E-01 
1.50E-01 
0.00E+00 
-1.79E+01 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
2.71E+01 
4.68E+00 
1.31E-01 
1.51E-01 
0.00E+00 
-1.91E+01 
SM 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
[m3] 
5.37E-01 
1.01E-02 
5.39E-04 
6.69E-03 
0.00E+00 
-4.19E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable 
primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable 
primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy 
resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use 
of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh water 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the same as 1,12*10-
11 or  0,0000000000112. 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER 1 kg of ground screw 
Parameter Unit 
A1-A3 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
1.57E-03 
9.32E-06 
2.45E-06 
1.06E-06 
0.00E+00 
-3.09E-04 
NHWD 
[kg] 
5.42E-01 
6.69E-03 
6.52E-03 
1.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-8.89E-01 
RWD 
[kg] 
4.15E-05 
5.13E-07 
4.31E-08 
2.24E-08 
0.00E+00 
-1.83E-05 
 
 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MFR 
[kg] 
2.89E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
[kg] 
1.82E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EET 
[MJ] 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for re-
use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, fx 1,95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1,95*102 or 195, while 1,12E-11 is the same as 1,12*10-
11 or  0,0000000000112. 
 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER 1 kg of ground screw 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic  
carbon 
content in 
product 
[kg C] 
0.00 
Biogenic 
carbon 
centent in 
accompanying 
packagaing 
[kg C] 
0.00 
Note 
1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg of CO2 
 
 
 
==PAGE:629==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 10 of 13 
 
Additional information 
LCA interpretation 
The production of upstream processes such as pig iron, is the largest contributor in the system in terms of 
GWP. The zinc galvanization proves to be a significant factor for the environmental impacts, despite its 
relatively low material contribution. Lastly, transport does influence the system, but is not detrimental to 
the vast majority of environmental impact categories. 
Technical information on scenarios 
 
End of life (C1-C4) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Collected separately 
0.00 
kg 
Collected with mixed waste 
0.00 
kg 
For reuse 
0.00 
kg 
For recycling 
1.00 
kg 
For energy recovery 
0.00 
kg 
For final disposal 
0.00 
kg 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
Scenario information/Materiel 
Value 
Unit 
Displaced material  
0.82 
kg 
 
 
==PAGE:630==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 11 of 13 
 
 
Indoor air  
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to indoor air because the 
horizontal standards on the relevant 
measurements are not available. Read more in 
EN15804+A1 chapter 7.4.1. 
Soil and water 
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to soil and water because 
the horizontal standards on the relevant 
measurements are not available. Read more in 
EN15804+A1 chapter 7.4.2. 
 
 
==PAGE:631==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 12 of 13 
 
References 
 
 
 
General programme instructions 
General Programme Instructions, version 2.0, spring 2020 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
EN 15804 
DS/EN 15804 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental  
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products” 
 
EN 15942 
DS/EN 15942:2011 – ” Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – 
Communication format business-to-business” 
 
ISO 14025 
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmental declarations 
– Principles and procedures” 
 
ISO 14040 
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and 
framework” 
Publisher 
 
 
www.epddanmark.dk 
Template version 2023.1 
Programme operator 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA-practitioner 
 
 
 
 
www.EnergySolution.dk 
True Møllevej 1, 8381 Tilst 
Project Lead: Jesper Kokborg Lassen 
Project Support: Philip Mckay Boyle 
LCA software /background data 
 
SimaPro 9.5 
ecoinvent 3.9.1 allocation, cut-off by 
classification 
EN 15804 reference package 3.1 
3rd party verifier 
Guangli Du 
Department of the Built Environment, Aalborg 
University, Denmark 
==PAGE:632==
 
 
 
 
MD-23094-EN | Bayo.S Skruefundamenter ApS | Page 13 of 13 
 
 
ISO 14044 
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and 
guidelines” 
==PAGE:633==
                                                                                                                                                     
         
 
 
In accordance with ISO 14025, ISO 21930 and EN 15804+A2 for: 
 
Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, 
Murisolering 34 
 
From 
 
 
Program: 
The International EPD® System 
www.environdec.com 
Programme operator: 
EPD International AB 
EPD registration number: 
S-P-10779 
Publication date: 
2023-10-23 
Validity date: 
2028-10-23 
     ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT 
               DECLARATION 
==PAGE:634==
 
2 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                               
Programme-related information and verification 
 
The EPD owner has the sole ownership, liability, and responsibility for the EPD.  
 
EPDs following EN 15804+A2 should be compared with those of the same standard. EPDs of 
construction products may not be comparable if they do not comply with EN 15804+A2. For further 
information about comparability, see EN 15804+A2 and ISO 14025. 
 
Programme: 
The International EPD® System 
EPD International AB 
Box 210 60  
SE-100 31 Stockholm 
Sweden 
www.environdec.com 
info@environdec.com 
EPD registration number: 
S-P-10779 
Published: 
2023-10-23 
Valid until: 
2028-10-23 
EPD owner 
Knauf Insulation Sprl 
Rue de Maestricht 95 
4600 Visé (Belgium)  
Product Category Rules: 
PCR 2019 :14. Construction products (EN 15804+A2) 
Version 1.2.5 
Sub-PCR-005 Thermal insulation products (EN 16783: 
2017) Version: 2019-12-20 
Product group classification: 
UN CPC 37 
Reference year for plant data: 
Bernburg (2022) and St. Helens (2022) 
Geographical application scope: 
Europe 
 
CEN standard EN 15804+A2 serves as the Core Product Category Rules (PCR) 
Product category rules (PCR): PCR 2019:14. Construction products (EN 15804+A2) Version 1.2.5 
Sub-PCR-005 Thermal insulation products (EN 16783: 2017) Version: 2019-12-20 
PCR review was conducted by: The Technical Committee of the International EPD@ System 
Independent third-party verification of the declaration and data, according to ISO 14025:2006. 
 
☒ EPD verification by EPD Process Certification* 
 
Third-party verification: Viktor Hakkarainen, Bureau Veritas (Certificate number: SE008541-1) an
approved certification body accountable for third-party verification. 
 
Third-party verifier is accredited by: SWEDAC - Sverige AB 1236 
 
*For EPD Process Certification, an accredited certification body certifies and reviews the management 
process and verifies EPDs published on a regular basis. For details about third-party verification
procedure of the EPDs, see the GPI. 
Procedure for follow-up of data during EPD validity involves third party verifier: 
☒ Yes 
☐ No 
An EPD should provide current information and may be updated if conditions change. The stated 
validity is therefore subject to the continued registration and publication at www.environdec.com. 
==PAGE:635==
 
3 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                               
General information 
 
Information about the company 
 
Description of the organisation:  
Knauf Insulation is a leading provider of glass and rock mineral wool, as well as wood wool insulation 
solutions. With more than 40 years of experience in the insulation industry, it is one of the most respected 
names in insulation worldwide.    
  
As part of the Knauf Group, a €15.4bn turnover family-owned global manufacturer of building materials 
and construction systems, Knauf Insulation employs more than 6,000 employees and has 28 
manufacturing sites in 15 countries, with a turnover of €2.5bn.  
  
Knauf Insulation’s mission is to challenge conventional thinking and create innovative insulation 
solutions that shape the way we live and build in the future, with care for the people who make them, 
the people who use them and the world we all depend on. Its vision is to lead the change in smarter 
insulation solutions for a better world. 
 
 
 
 
The Headquarters are located in Visé, in Belgium. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:636==
 
4 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                               
Product-related or management system-related certifications:  
All Knauf Insulation sites which are covered by EPD process certification system, including the sites 
considered for this EPD, are ISO 9001, ISO 14001, ISO 50001 and ISO 45001 certified under the scope 
"Design, Development and Production of Insulation Materials and Systems". 
 
Knauf Insulation supports the Ten Principles of the United Nations Global Compact on human rights, 
labor, environment and anti-corruption.  
 
Name and location of production site:  
The intended application of this product in the construction industry is within the Nordics. The data 
utilised for the production stage life cycle assessment is related to production plants located in Bernburg 
(Germany) and St. Helens (United Kingdom). 
 
Weststraße 1, 06406 Bernburg (Saale), Germany 
PO Box 10, Stafford Road, St. Helens, WA10 3NS, Merseyside, UK 
 
 
Information about Glass Mineral Wool production 
 
Knauf Insulation glass mineral wool products (GMW) are available in the form of rolls, slabs and blowing 
wool. 
Typically, the density of glass mineral wool falls within the range of 10 to 85 kg/m³, and it comprises a 
minimum of 92% inert materials. The inert part primarily comprises recycled glass (external cullet), which 
constitutes up to 80% of the composition. Sand and dolomite are introduced to the mix, and the entire 
blend is melted together in a furnace. 
For slabs and rolls, the residual fraction, which accounts for up to 8%, is composed of bio-based binder 
components. At Knauf Insulation, the binder used for the glass mineral wool products is the ECOSE® 
Technology binder. ECOSE® Technology contains no added formaldehyde or phenol. Additionally, this 
binder is derived from rapidly renewable natural raw materials, specifically plant starch. 
Blowing wool insulation is a non-bonded, virgin fibrous insulation material, manufactured as a loose-fill 
product without the use of binders. In contrast, rolls and slabs of insulation are bonded and cured in an 
oven. 
 
==PAGE:637==
 
5 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                               
 
Product information 
Product 
name: 
Trestenderplate 
34, 
Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34  
 
Product identification: The declared insulation 
consists of Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34 
and Murisolering 34 unfaced glass mineral wool 
slabs of 1m2. 
For the placement of the products on the 
construction market in the European Union/ 
EFTA (with exception of Switzerland and UK), 
the Regulation/ (EU) No 305/2011/ applies. The 
products concerned need Declarations of 
Performance 
/ 
DoP 
G4207MPCPR, 
G4335MPCPR taking into consideration the 
harmonized product standard EN 13162 and 
the CE-mark. 
 
Product description: The main applications for 
the products on this EPD are: 
- 
Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34 - 
external wall or roof structures (both at 
rafter and ceiling level). Could also be used 
for interior partition walls. 
- 
Murisolering 34 - external full-fill masonry 
cavity walls. 
 
Geographical scope:  The manufacturing is in 
Bernburg (Germany) and St. Helens (United 
Kingdom). 
Energy-related 
information 
is 
described in the next section. The product is 
mainly marketed in the Nordics. 
 
Technical Characteristics: 
Parameter 
Value 
Thermal 
conductivity/ 
EN 
12667 
0.034W/(mK) at 10°C 
 
Water 
vapor 
diffusion 
resistance (EN 12086) 
1 
Thermal   Resistance       
 (ISO 8301) 
2.80 m2K/W 
Reaction to fire (EN 13501-1) 
A1  
Declared density range/ EN 
1602 
21.6 kg/m³ (+/-10%) 
 
UN CPC code:  
37990: Non-metallic mineral products (including 
mineral wool, expanded mineral materials, 
worked mica, articles of mica, non-electrical 
articles of graphite or other carbon and articles 
of peat).  
 
LCA information 
Functional unit / declared unit   
The declared unit is 1m2 of unfaced glass 
mineral wool Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 
34, Murisolering 34 with R-value of 2.80 m2K/W 
(for a thickness of 95 mm and a declared 
lambda of 0.034W/mK).  
 
Reference service life: The RSL or durability of   
Trestenderplate 
34, 
Formstykker 
34, 
Murisolering 34 is as long as the lifetime of the 
building equipment in which it is used (at least 
50 years). 
 
Time representativeness & Information on 
Specific Data:  
The complete reference year used for the plant 
production data is 2022. The product group 
considered in this EPD is produced in multiple 
Knauf Insulation manufacturing sites with equal 
weight. 
 
The data which is used to carry out the LCA 
calculations contains more than 90% specific 
data and less than 10% generic data. 
 
Database(s) and LCA software used:  
The LCA model, the data aggregation and 
environmental impacts are calculated with the 
software LCA for Experts (GaBi) 10.7 and its 
content version 2023.2. The impact models 
used 
are 
those 
indicated 
in 
EN 
15804:2012+A2:2019. 
 
Gas information 
Gas input (reference year: 2019) from Germany 
and United Kingdom is selected for Bernburg 
(Germany) and St. Helens (United Kingdom). 
 
Electricity information 
Plants 
(countries) 
Electricity 
mixes 
Locations 
(electricity) 
Dataset 
Reference 
Year 
Impact (kg 
CO2/kwh) 
Bernburg 
(Germany) 
Renewable 
Energy 
Certificates 
Europe 
2019 
0.014 
St. Helens 
(United 
Kingdom) 
United 
Kingdom 
0.037 
==PAGE:638==
 
6 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                               
 
System diagram:  
 
 
Description of system boundaries: 
The system boundary of the EPD follows the 
modularity approach defined by the EN 
15804:2012+A2:2019. 
 
The type of EPD is cradle-to-grave.  
A comprehensive list and detailed explanations 
of each stage within the EPD are available as 
follows. 
 
The product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
- 
A1 – raw material extraction and processing, 
processing of secondary material input (e.g., 
recycling processes), 
- 
A2 – transport to the manufacturer and 
- 
A3 – manufacturing. 
 
This includes provision of all materials, products 
and energy, packaging processing and its 
transport, as well as waste processing up to the 
end-of-waste state or disposal of final residues 
during the product stage. 
 
The 
LCA 
results 
are 
presented 
in 
an 
aggregated format for the product stage, where 
modules A1, A2, and A3 are consolidated into a 
single module, denoted as A1-A3. 
 
Product Parameters 
Value 
Glass mineral wool weight  
2.05 kg 
Area 
1m² 
Thickness 
95 mm  
Volume 
0.10 m3 
Packaging - PE film 
0.06 kg 
Packaging - Wooden pallet 
0.14  kg 
 
The construction process stage includes: 
- 
A4 - transport to the construction site and 
- 
A5 - installation into the building. 
 
 
The transport to the building site (A4) and 
installation (A5) included in this LCA use the 
following parameters: 
 
Parameter 
Value 
Average 
transport 
distance 
(truck) 
600 km 
Type of fuel and vehicle used for 
transport (truck) 
Truck Euro 6 (28 – 32 
t / 22 t payload).  
Truck 
capacity 
utilisation 
(including 30% of empty returns)  
16.38 % of the weight 
capacity 
Loss of materials on site 
2% 
Packaging - PE film 
40% recycled, 60% 
incinerated 
Packaging - Wooden pallet 
40% recycled, 60% 
incinerated 
 
The treatment and the transport of the 
packaging waste after the installation of the 
product (A5) has been considered.  
 
The Use stage (B1-B7) includes: 
- 
B1: Use 
- 
B2: Maintenance 
- 
B3: Repair 
- 
B4: Replacement 
- 
B5: Refurbishment 
- 
B6: Operational Energy Use 
- 
B7: Operational Water Use 
 
Once installation is complete, no actions or 
technical operations are required during the use 
stages until the end of life. Therefore, the 
mineral wool has no impact (excluding potential 
energy savings) on this stage. 
 
The end-of-life stage includes: 
- 
C1 – de-construction, demolition,  
- 
C2 – transport to waste processing, 
- 
C3 – waste processing for reuse, recovery 
and/or recycling and 
- 
C4 – disposal. 
 
This includes provision of all transport, 
materials, products and related energy and 
water use. The common manual dismantling 
impact of insulation is considered as very small 
and can be neglected in C1.  
 
Although glass mineral wool products from 
Knauf Insulation are partly recycled at their end-
of-life, an established collection system does 
not yet exist. Therefore, the assumption chosen 
in this study, 100% landfill (C4) after the use 
phase, is the most conservative approach. 
 
==PAGE:639==
 
7 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                               
Parameter 
Value 
Disposal type (mineral 
wool) 
100% landfill 
Average 
transport 
distance waste (C2)  
50 km 
Type of fuel and vehicle 
consumption or type of 
vehicle 
used 
for 
transport. 
Truck-trailer, Euro 6, 34 - 40t 
gross weight / 27t payload 
capacity/ 40 L for 100 km. (if 
100 % utilisation). 
Truck capacity utilisation 
50 % of the weight capacity 
 
 
 
Module D includes reuse, recovery and/or 
recycling 
potentials. 
According 
to 
EN 
15804:2012+A2:2019 any declared benefits 
and loads from net flows leaving the product 
system not allocated as co-products and having 
passed the end-of waste state shall be included 
in module D. The benefits considered in module 
D originate from packaging recycling or 
incineration. 
 
 
Recycled material 
The mineral wool waste generated during the 
manufacturing process is recycled internally 
and fed back into the mineral wool production 
process at multiple stages.  
 
The external cullet input for the production site 
in Bernburg (2022) and St. Helens (2022) is 
accounted for in the assessment. 
The 
average 
recycled 
content 
for 
the 
manufacturing 
plants 
and 
products 
in 
consideration has been calculated at 70% in 
Bernburg (2022) and St. Helens (2022) 
according to the cullet market availability. The 
calculation 
is 
completed 
following 
EN 
15804+A2 
Use 
of 
Resources 
indicator 
Secondary Material (SM), taking into account 
the % of secondary materials from external 
supply input into the batch against virgin raw 
materials 
supply. 
The 
external 
waste 
considerations are also following the ISO 14021 
norm. 
Additional information:  
All raw materials used in the manufacture of the 
declared product, the required energy, water 
consumption and the resulting emissions are 
considered in the LCA. As a result, recipe 
components with a share of less than 1% are 
included. All neglected processes contribute 
less than 5% to the total mass or less than 5% 
to 
the 
total 
energy 
consumption. 
For 
information, the impact of the glass mineral 
wool plant construction or manufacturing 
equipment is not taken into account in the life 
cycle assessment. Allocation criteria with by-
products (mineral wool for ceiling tiles) are 
based on cost. 
 
Materials required for fixing and installation are 
not included in the scope of this LCA. The 
impact of any additional construction products 
or materials not included in this EPD should be 
accounted for at building level. Regarding 
installation, 
this 
EPD 
only 
includes 
the 
environmental impacts relating to the product 
itself, such as material losses and packaging 
disposal. 
 
Knauf 
Insulation 
adopts 
a 
conservative 
approach in its EPDs.  
 
The conversion factor used in this EPD involves 
multiplying the results by 0.49 to obtain 
Environmental Impact Indicator results for 1 kg. 
An insulation product should always be 
characterized by its thickness and R-value.  
Solely considering the product’s weight could 
potentially lead to misinterpretations. 
 
More information:  
www.knaufinsulation.com 
 
Name and contact information of LCA 
practitioner:  
Clara del Val 
Knauf Insulation Sprl 
Rue de Maestricht 95 
4600 Visé 
Belgium 
Contact : sustainability@knaufinsulation.com 
 
 
 
==PAGE:640==
 
8 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                               
Content Declaration  
The product does not contain substances on the "Candidate List of Substances of Very High Concern 
for Authorisation" under the REACH regulation (if above 0.1% of the mass). 
 
Product components 
 
Weight 
% 
Pre-consumer 
material, weight - % 
(out of total) 
Post- costumer 
% (out of total) 
Renewable material, 
weight- % 
(out of total) 
Mineral Materials 
20 – 60 
0 
0 
0 
Recycled Glass 
40 - 80 
0-25 
75-100 
0 
Bio - based binder 
2 - 15 
0 
0 
0 
Additives 
< 1 
0 
0 
0 
Packaging Materials 
Weight, kg/ DU or FU 
Weight -% (versus the product) 
Packaging - PE film 
(0-50% recycled content) 
0.06  
3.02%  
Packaging - Wooden pallet 
0.14   
6.82%  
TOTAL 
0.20   
9.84%  
 
 
Declared Modules, geography, share of specific data (in GWP-GHG indicator) & data variation 
 
Life cycle stages as defined in the European standard EN 15978 :2011 and the description of the system 
boundaries for the reference product LCA (X = included in the LCA, MND = module is not declared) 
 
 
 
*Variation regarding the average EPD result in terms of GWP-GHG indicator amongst products covered 
with this EPD  
**Variation regarding the average EPD result in terms of GWP-GHG indicator 
==PAGE:641==
 
9 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                                                  
Environmental performance 
Potential environmental impacts: 1m² of glass mineral wool Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34 with a thickness of 95 mm and 
the R-value of 2.80 m2K/W. 
 
These results are representative of all the products mentioned in this EPD. 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-3*** 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D** 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
1.86E+00 
3.38E-01 
1.45E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.94E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.30E-02 
-1.12E-01 
GWP-biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-4.18E-01 
0.00E+00 
1.30E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-2.78E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.29E-01 
9.67E-02 
GWP-luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
1.19E-03 
3.04E-03 
1.19E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.15E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.44E-04 
-9.02E-06 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
1.44E+00 
3.46E-01 
2.75E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.99E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.62E-01 
-1.54E-02 
ODP 
kg CFC 11 eq. 
3.01E-12 
4.27E-14 
9.50E-14 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.00E-15 
0.00E+00 
1.89E-14 
-5.65E-13 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
1.58E-02 
3.74E-04 
3.72E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.25E-06 
0.00E+00 
2.45E-04 
-1.92E-04 
EP-freshwater  
kg P eq. 
2.75E-05 
1.20E-06 
6.19E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.82E-08 
0.00E+00 
7.05E-07 
3.18E-08 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
2.53E-03 
1.22E-04 
6.59E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.58E-06 
0.00E+00 
6.76E-05 
-6.23E-05 
EP-terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
5.77E-02 
1.46E-03 
1.38E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.11E-05 
0.00E+00 
7.21E-04 
-6.89E-04 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 
5.27E-03 
3.73E-04 
1.49E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.01E-06 
0.00E+00 
1.97E-04 
-2.16E-04 
ADP-
minerals&metals* 
kg Sb eq. 
6.27E-07 
2.18E-08 
1.38E-08 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.12E-10 
0.00E+00 
3.42E-09 
-5.60E-09 
ADP-fossil* 
MJ 
2.90E+01 
4.47E+00 
8.09E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.05E-01 
0.00E+00 
4.43E-01 
-2.91E+00 
WDP 
m3 
1.94E-01 
3.97E-03 
2.80E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.33E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.54E-03 
-1.27E-02 
Acronyms 
GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential land use and land use 
change; ODP = Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone layer; AP = Acidification potential, Accumulated Exceedance; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication potential, 
fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment; EP-marine = Eutrophication potential, fraction of nutrients reaching marine end compartment; EP-terrestrial = 
Eutrophication potential, Accumulated Exceedance; POCP = Formation potential of tropospheric ozone; ADP-minerals&metals = Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil 
resources; ADP-fossil = Abiotic depletion for fossil resources potential; WDP = Water (user) deprivation potential, deprivation-weighted water consumption 
 
* Disclaimer: The results of this environmental impact indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties of these results are high or as there is limited experience with the indicator. 
**: [Life Cycle D stage covers benefits and loads beyond the system boundary stage (reuse, recovery and recycling potential) therefore, when summing up results, this stage should be considered 
separately]. 
*** The indicator's results are calculated using a reference product, with equal weighting between plants.  A product sourced from a single plant may have a variation of more than 10% from the 
reference product (concerning A1- A3).   
==PAGE:642==
 
10 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                                                  
 
Potential environmental impact – additional mandatory and voluntary indicators 
Indicator 
Unit 
Tot.A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-GHG [2] 
kg CO2 eq. 
1.89E+00 
3.43E-01 
1.46E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.04E-03 
0.00E+00 
3.34E-02 
-1.14E-01 
 
[2] The indicator includes all greenhouse gases included in GWP-total but excludes biogenic carbon dioxide uptake and emissions and biogenic carbon stored in the product. This indicator is 
thus equal to the GWP indicator originally defined in EN 15804:2012+A1:2013. 
 
Use of resources: 1m² of  glass mineral wool Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34 with a thickness of 95 mm and the R-value of 
2.80 m2K/W. 
 
These results are representative of all the products mentioned in this EPD. 
RESOURCES USE 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-3*** 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D* 
PERE [MJ] 
MJ 
2.12E+01 
3.26E-01 
4.64E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.65E-03 
0.00E+00 
5.17E-02 
-1.63E+00 
PERM [MJ] 
MJ 
4.76E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.52E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PERT [MJ] 
MJ 
2.60E+01 
3.26E-01 
5.59E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.65E-03 
0.00E+00 
5.17E-02 
-1.63E+00 
PENRE [MJ] 
MJ 
2.64E+01 
4.49E+00 
7.58E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.06E-01 
0.00E+00 
4.43E-01 
-2.91E+00 
PENRM [MJ] 
MJ 
2.64E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.29E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
PENRT [MJ] 
MJ 
2.91E+01 
4.49E+00 
8.11E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.06E-01 
0.00E+00 
4.43E-01 
-2.91E+00 
SM 
kg 
1.43E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.91E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
m3 
7.60E-03 
3.57E-04 
7.31E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.38E-06 
0.00E+00 
8.44E-05 
-4.46E-04 
Acronyms 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources 
used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding non-renewable primary 
energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non-renewable 
primary energy re-sources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels; FW = Use of 
net fresh water 
 
*: [Life Cycle D stage covers benefits and loads beyond the system boundary stage (reuse, recovery and recycling potential) therefore, when summing up results, this stage should be considered 
separately]. 
*** The indicator's results are calculated using a reference product, with equal weighting between plants.  A product sourced from a single plant may have a variation of more than 10% from the 
reference product (concerning A1- A3).   
==PAGE:643==
 
11 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                                                  
Waste production and output flows: 1m² of  glass mineral wool Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34 with a thickness of 95 mm 
and the R-value of 2.80 m2K/W. 
 
These results are representative of all the products mentioned in this EPD. 
OUTPUT FLOWS AND WASTE CATEGORIES 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-3*** 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D* 
Hazardous waste 
disposed 
kg 
-8.02E-09 
1.39E-11 
-1.89E-11 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.27E-13 
0.00E+00 
7.01E-09 
-1.58E-10 
Non-hazardous 
waste disposed 
kg 
7.47E-02 
6.85E-04 
5.47E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.61E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.06E+00 
1.71E-03 
Radioactive waste 
disposed 
kg 
2.17E-04 
8.40E-06 
8.23E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.98E-07 
0.00E+00 
6.05E-06 
-1.02E-04 
Components for 
reuse 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Material for 
recycling 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.09E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for 
energy recovery 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.21E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy, 
electricity 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.60E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy, 
thermal 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.47E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
 
*: [Life Cycle D stage covers benefits and loads beyond the system boundary stage (reuse, recovery and recycling potential) therefore, when summing up results, this stage should be considered 
separately]. 
*** The indicator's results are calculated using a reference product, with equal weighting between plants.  A product sourced from a single plant may have a variation of more than 10% from the 
reference product (concerning A1- A3).   
  
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:644==
 
12 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                                                  
Additional impact categories and indicators: 1m² of  glass mineral wool Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34 with a 
thickness of 95 mm and the R-value of 2.80 m2K/W. 
 
These results are representative of all the products mentioned in this EPD. 
ADDITIONAL IMPACT CATEGORIES AND INDICATORS 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-3*** 
A4 
A5 
B1-B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D* 
PM 
Disease 
Incidence 
1.85E-07 
2.67E-09 
4.22E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.07E-11 
0.00E+00 
2.99E-09 
-2.81E-09 
IRP 
kBq U235 eq. 
2.74E-02 
1.25E-03 
1.12E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.95E-05 
0.00E+00 
5.85E-04 
-1.70E-02 
ETP- fw 
CTUe 
4.48E+01 
3.20E+00 
1.06E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.53E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.68E-01 
-9.79E-01 
HTP-c 
CTUh 
1.28E-09 
6.50E-11 
3.16E-11 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.53E-12 
0.00E+00 
3.40E-11 
-3.24E-11 
HTP- nc 
CTUh 
5.90E-08 
2.89E-09 
1.56E-09 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.80E-11 
0.00E+00 
3.60E-09 
-8.70E-10 
SQP 
dimensionless 
9.33E+01 
1.87E+00 
1.98E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.39E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.04E-01 
-9.56E-01 
Acronyms 
PM = Particulate matter emissions; IRP= Ionising radiation, human health; ETP-fw: Ecotoxicity (freshwater); ETP-c: Human toxicity, cancer effects; HTP-nc: Human toxicity, 
non-cancer effects; SQP: Land use related impacts / soil quality 
 
Information on biogenic carbon content 
Results per functional or declared unit 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT 
Unit 
QUANTITY 
Biogenic carbon content in product  
kg C 
4.10E-02 
Biogenic carbon content in packaging 
kg C 
7.00E-02 
 
Note: 1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg CO2. 
*: [Life Cycle D stage covers benefits and loads beyond the system boundary stage (reuse, recovery and recycling potential) therefore, when summing up results, this stage should be considered 
separately]. 
*** The indicator's results are calculated using a reference product, with equal weighting between plants.  A product sourced from a single plant may have a variation of more than 10% from the 
reference product (concerning A1- A3).
==PAGE:645==
 
13 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                               
 
LCA interpretation 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS 
 
All impact categories except the Abiotic Depletion Potential for Non-Fossil Resources (ADP- minerals 
&metals) and the Depletion Potential of the Stratospheric Ozone layer (ODP) are dominated by the 
production. This is mainly due to the consumption of energy (electricity and natural gas) during the 
production of glass mineral wool. 
 
The Global Warming Potential (GWP-total) is clearly dominated by the production, mostly due to 
energy consumption but significantly reduced through the use of electricity from renewable sources. 
 
The Depletion Potential of the Stratospheric Ozone layer (ODP) is mostly influenced by the 
manufacturing phase (module A1-A3) and significantly influenced using electricity.   
 
The Acidification Potential (AP) is also dominated by the production due to the process’s emissions 
and the electricity consumption. Most of the impact is by emissions of sulphur dioxide, ammonia and 
nitrogen oxides. 
  
The Eutrophication Potential (all EP indicators in total) is significantly influenced by production due 
to emissions from the curing oven, furnace and other unit processes. The glucose for the binder 
production also has an impact because of crops fertilizers use.  
 
The Formation Potential of Tropospheric Ozone (POCP) is dominated by emissions from the 
manufacturing processes (including energy use) and raw materials. 
 
The Abiotic Depletion Potential for Non-Fossil Resources (ADP- minerals &metals) is dominated 
by the raw materials production. 
 
The Abiotic Depletion Potential for Fossil Resources Potential (ADP-fossil) is dominated by energy 
consumption for the production. The packaging (plastic) and the binder have also a non-negligible 
impact. 
 
 
 
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
GWP-total (kg CO2 eq.)
ODP (kg CFC 11 eq.)
AP (mol H+ eq.)
EP-freshwater (kg P eq.)
POCP (kg NMVOC eq.)
ADP-fossil (MJ)
ADP-minerals&metals (kg Sb eq.)
A1-A3
A4 Transport
A5  Installation
C2  Transport
C4  Disposal
D Credit
==PAGE:646==
 
14 
EPD  Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34                                                                                                                                               
 
The variation in Global Warming Potential (GWP) results (A1-A3) between the manufacturing sites 
covered by this EPD and the average results is 8%. Bernburg plant has a lower environmental impact 
compared to St Helens plant due to variations in energy and raw material consumption. 
 
RESOURCES USE 
 
Total Use of Non-Renewable Primary Energy Resources (PENRT) is dominated by the production of 
glass mineral wool products (especially due to the energy consumption) and with little influence of raw 
materials, binder and packaging. 
 
Total Use of Renewable Primary Energy Resources (PERT) is dominated by the binder (bio-based), the 
production process (electricity from REGOs) and the packaging (wooden pallets). 
 
For the Use of Secondary Material (SM), there is a lot of external cullet used into the batch process 
(recycled glass from windows, bottles and jars) up to 80% depending on plants.
==PAGE:647==
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
 
International EPD® System 
General Programme Instructions of the International EPD® System. Version 4.0. 
Product category rules (PCR): PCR 2019:14 v1.2.5. Construction products (EN 15804:A2) Version 1.0 
c-PCR-005 Thermal insulation products (EN 16783: 2017) Version: 2019-12-20 
 
LCA for Experts 10.7 
LCA for Experts 10.7: Software and database for life cycle engineering. LBP, University of Stuttgart 
and Sphera, 2023. 
 
EN 16783:2017 
Thermal insulation products - Product category rules (PCR) for factory made and in-situ formed 
products for preparing environmental product declarations. 
 
DoP G4207MPCPR, G4335MPCPR 
Declaration of Performance 
www.dopki.com 
 
EN 12086 
EN 12086: 2013 Thermal insulating products for building applications –determination of water vapour 
transmission properties. 
 
EN 15978: 2011 
EN 15978: 2011 Sustainability of construction works - Assessment of environmental performance of 
buildings - Calculation method. 
 
ISO 21930:2017 
Sustainability in buildings and civil engineering works — Core rules for environmental product 
declarations of construction products and services. 
 
ISO 14021 
ISO 14021:2016 Environmental labels and declarations — Self-declared environmental claims (Type II 
environmental labelling). 
 
ISO 14025 
DIN EN ISO 14025:2011-10: Environmental labels and declarations — Type III environmental 
declarations — Principles and procedures. 
 
EN 15804 
EN 15804:2012-04+A2 2013: Sustainability of construction works — Environmental Product 
Declarations — Core rules for the product category of construction products. 
 
EN 1602: 
EN1602: 2013 Thermal insulation products for building applications – Determination of the apparent 
density. 
 
EN 12667 
EN 12667: 2001 Thermal performance of building materials and products - Determination of thermal 
resistance by means of guarded hot plate and heat flow meter methods - Products of high and 
medium thermal resistance. 
==PAGE:648==
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EN 13162   
EN 13162:2012 Thermal insulation products for buildings - Factory made mineral wool (MW) products 
– Specification. 
 
EN 13501-1 
EN 13501-1: 2009 Fire classification of construction products and building elements - Part 1: 
Classification using test data from reaction to fire tests. 
 
DIN 4102-17 
Fire behaviour of building materials and building components - Part 17: Melting point of mineral wool 
insulating materials - Terms and definitions, requirements and test. 
 
EN 12086 
EN 12086: 2013 Thermal insulating products for building applications –determination of water vapour 
transmission properties. 
 
ISO 8301:1991 
Thermal insulation — Determination of steady-state thermal resistance and related properties — Heat 
flow meter apparatus. 
 
2023_09_15_Trestenderplate 34, Formstykker 34, Murisolering 34_Bernburg_St. Helens (I-
report) 
I-report is an interactive report created with GaBi based on the scenario. More details on the product 
characteristics, plant allocation and scenario can be found in the i-report. 
 
BR_GMW_2023 (Background Report) 
Calculation rules for the Life Cycle Assessment and Requirements and more details about the 
production on the Background Report. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:649==
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contact information: 
 
EPD owner: 
 
Knauf Insulation 
Rue de Maestricht 95 
4600 Visé 
Belgium  
www.knaufinsulation.com 
Contact :  
 
LCA support: 
 
 
CO2 Logic 
Cantersteen 47 
1000 Brussels 
Belgium 
 
  
Sphera Solutions GmbH 
Hauptstraße 111-113 
70771 Leinfelden-Echterdingen 
Germany 
Programme operator: 
 
EPD International AB 
info@environdec.com  
Certification body 
 
Fabriksgatan 13, 
41250 Göteborg 
Sweden 
 
 
==PAGE:650==
 
PAGE 1/14 
Environmental 
Product 
Declaration 
In accordance with ISO 14025 and EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 for: 
 
Plywood from pine 
from 
Saint-Gobain Building Distribution (SGDS) 
 
Program: 
The International EPD® System, www.environdec.com 
Program operator: 
EPD International AB 
EPD registration number: 
S-P-05929 
Publication date: 
2022-05-30 
Valid until: 
2027-05-30 
 
 
An EPD should provide current information and may be updated if conditions change. The stated 
validity is therefore subject to the continued registration and publication at www.environdec.com 
==PAGE:651==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 2/14 
General information 
Program information 
Program: 
The International EPD® System 
Address: 
EPD International AB  
Box 210 60  
SE-100 31 Stockholm 
Sweden 
Website: 
www.environdec.com 
E-mail: 
info@environdec.com 
 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the Core Product Category Rules (PCR) 
Product category rules (PCR): PCR 2019:14 Construction products. Version 1.11, date 2021-02-05 
PCR review was conducted by: The Technical Committee of the International EPD® System. Chair: 
Claudia A. Peña. Contact via info@environdec.com 
Independent third-party verification of the declaration and data, according to ISO 14025:2006: 
 
☐ EPD process certification  ☒ EPD verification 
Third party verifier: Carl-Otto Nevén, Nevén Miljökonsult (the LCA part), David Althoff Palm, Ramboll
(the EPD document) 
Procedure for follow-up of data during EPD validity involves third party verifier: 
 
☒ Yes 
☐ No 
 
The EPD owner has the sole ownership, liability, and responsibility for the EPD.  
 
EPDs within the same product category but from different programs may not be comparable. EPDs of 
construction products may not be comparable if they do not comply with EN 15804. EPDs made 
according to EN15804+A1 and EN15804+A2 are not comparable, especially since a majority of the 
environmental indicators are based on different versions. For further information about comparability, 
see EN 15804 and ISO 14025. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:652==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 3/14 
Company information 
Owner of the EPD 
Saint-Gobain Distribution Sweden 
Contact 
 
SGDS - Beriar Maroof (beriar.maroof@sgdsgruppen.se) 
Optimera - Henrik Björk (henrik.bjork@optimera.se) 
Description of the 
organisation 
 
SGDS Gruppen - specialists in collaboration for more efficient business in 
construction and installation. SGDS Gruppen AB is the head company of 
some of Sweden's leading trading companies in construction, sheet metal, 
tiles and installation. All the companies have a long and solid industry 
experience and provide most of Sweden's craftsmen with materials for 
various projects. Customers in different companies can also buy support 
items from the sister companies in the group, and in selected cases we take 
joint projects to facilitate the logistics of the supply of goods, which is then 
often critical for a smooth construction project. 
 
Optimera - construction trade for professional carpenters 
 
Dahl – heat, plumbing and sanitary specialist 
 
Bevego - building sheet metal, ventilation and technical insulation 
 
Kakelspecialisten and Konradsson’s Tiles - tiles, tiling and bathroom 
fittings 
 
The company’s focus on sales and services with direct contact to about 
150,000 customers regularly.  
 
Saint-Gobain Distribution Sweden group (SGDS) is owned by Saint-Gobain 
with presence in 64 countries and having over 190 000 employees 
worldwide. 
Name and 
location of 
production site 
The plywood is produced by the supplier Palmasola in Brazil: 
Palmasola S/A Madeiras e Agricultura, Palma Sola, SC - Brazil 
 
 
 
==PAGE:653==
 
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 4/14 
Product information 
Product name 
K-plywood CE2+ 
Product 
identification 
Uncoated and untreated pine plywood 
 
The EPD is a specific EPD for this product and not an average 
Product description 
 
Optimeras plywood product is made of pine and is excellent as construction 
panels, mostly used indoor behind gypsum walls making the wall stronger. 
Optimeras plywood consists of thin sheets of pine wood which are laid 
crosswise and glued. Then they are heat-treated and pressed under high 
pressure and finally the surface is brushed and the plywood is cut into the 
right size. The plywood is certified (CE) and classed with the standard 
CE2+. 
UN CPC code 
HS, 2012 - Code 441239 
Use 
K-plywood CE2+ is for example excellent as construction panels with 
applications behind gypsum walls in purpose of making the wall stronger, or 
for use in roof or floor structures. 
 
 
Product data 
Density: 470 kg/m3. 
 
Bending properties (characteristics) 
Technical specification: EN310 type testing 
Product type 
 
12 mm 
15 mm 
18 mm 
21 mm 
Bending strength (N/mm2) (MOR) 
Fk, 0 
37,85 
30,24 
33,46 
30,27 
 
Fk 90 
18,17 
13,31 
16,55 
15,13 
Bending stiffness (N/mm2) (MOE) 
Fk, 0 
4138,01 
2834,75 
4545,80 
5096,10 
 
Fk, 90 
1174,06 
1121,21 
1890,96 
1593,78 
F/E-class 
 
F 20/10 
F20/5 
F20/10 
F20/10 
 
 
Emissions data 
The K-plywood CE2+ meets limits in accordance with current regulations and is measured in 
accordance with EN 16000-9. 
 
Table over the emission rate carried out over a 28 days’ test. Emission test according to standard SS-
EN ISO 16000-9:2006/SS-EN ISO 16000-3:2011. Evaluation according to standard EN 16516:2017 
(EU-LCI values). 
Compounds 
Emissions rate 
(μg/m2h) 
Concentration in reference 
room (wall area scenario) 
(μg/m3) 
TVOC 
62 
130 
Σ Carcinogenic VOCs 
< 1 
< 1 
Σ VOC with LCI 
125 
260 
Σ VOC without LCI 
< 2 
< 5 
Σ VVOC 
14 
29 
Formaldehyde 
4 
8 
Σ SVOC 
< 2 
< 5 
R = Σ Ci / LCIi 
0.32 
0.32 
 
==PAGE:654==
 
 
 
 
PAGE 5/14 
LCA information
Functional unit / declared unit 
1 m3 of plywood corresponding to 470 kg 
Reference service life 
Not applicable 
Database(s) and LCA software 
used 
The LCA was modelled using the LCA software GaBi and 
corresponding database (2021.2) provided by sphera. 
System boundaries 
Cradle to gate (A1-A3) with modules C1-C4, module D and with 
optional module A4. 
 
 
 
Optimera purchases the plywood from a supplier in Brazil and has no own activities. The plywood 
manufacturer (Palmasola) uses no fossil fuels (only wood fuels and electricity from hydropower) and 
since the production of the electricity is accounted for in A1, the plywood manufacturing (A3) has a 
zero contribution to the fossil climate change and to quite many other indicators as well. 
 
The transport from Brazil to Sweden has been accounted for in A3 and the transport to the Optimera 
warehouses in Sweden in A4.  
 
The end of life reflects the Swedish market.  
The plywood is assumed to be entirely incinerated (C3) and therefore disposal (C4) is not relevant. For 
the credit for recovered electricity and heat (D), Swedish average conditions have been considered. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:655==
 
 
 
 
PAGE 6/14 
Modules declared, geographical scope, share of specific data (in GWP-GHG indicator) and data 
variation 
Life cycle 
stage 
Module 
Modules 
declared (1) 
Optimera Plywood, 
Palmasola 
Variation - 
products 
Variation - 
sites 
Geography 
Specific 
data used 
Product stage 
Raw material supply 
A1 
X 
BR (2) 
9% 
Not relevant 
since only one 
product 
Not relevant 
since only one 
core site 
Transport 
A2 
X 
BR (3) 
6% 
Manufacturing 
A3 
X 
BR (4) 
33% 
Construction 
process stage 
Transport 
A4 
X 
SE (5) 
2% 
Construction installation 
A5 
MND 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Use stage 
Use 
B1 
MND 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Maintenance 
B2 
MND 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Repair 
B3 
MND 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Replacement 
B4 
MND 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Refurbishment 
B5 
MND 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Operational energy use 
B6 
MND 
- 
- 
- 
- 
Operational water use 
B7 
MND 
- 
- 
- 
- 
End of life stage 
De-construction demolition 
C1 
X 
SE 
0% 
- 
- 
Transport 
C2 
X 
SE 
0% 
- 
- 
Waste processing 
C3 
X 
SE 
0% 
- 
- 
Disposal 
C4 
MND 
Not relevant 
- 
- 
- 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Resource recovery 
stage 
Reuse-Recovery-
Recycling-potential 
D 
X 
SE 
0% 
- 
- 
  
  
    
Total 
50% 
  
  
(1) 
Modules included in the EPD (X) and the modules not declared (MND). 
(2) 
The raw materials are mainly wood and the adhesive (phenolic resin) and in A1 also the production of the external electricity (hydro power) 
is accounted for. Site specific data corresponds to the wood forestry (also for externally purchased wood used as fuel) and the hydro power 
sourced electricity, while the data applied for the production of adhesive is generic and not included in the percentage above. 
(3) 
All raw material transportation data is specific in terms of distances and transport modes. Relevant transports are within Brazil. Generic data 
is applied for the fuel use and emissions from the combustion of the fuel. 
(4) 
The plywood manufacturing in BR as well as the transport of the plywood from BR to SE are accounted for in A3. In the manufacturing there 
are no fossil CO2 emissions, so the value is entirely associated with the transport from BR to SE. The transportation data is specific in terms 
of distances and transport modes. Generic data is applied for the fuel use and emissions from the combustion of the fuel. 
(5) 
The transportation data is specific in terms of distances and transport modes (average distance from the port in Varberg to the Optimera 
warehouses in Sweden (200 km by truck)). Generic data is applied for the fuel use and emissions from the combustion of the fuel. 
 
Data 
Site specific data was collected from the supplier of the plywood (use of raw materials, energy use, 
emissions etc.), the forestry (wood logs for the manufacturing and for energy use) and related 
transportation (transport type, distances etc.). Generic database data was used for production of 
==PAGE:656==
 
 
 
 
PAGE 7/14 
energy (electricity and fuels), transportation and production of other raw materials than wood, such as 
the adhesive (phenolic resin). 
 
For the end of life (module C) generic data has been used to estimate C1 Deconstruction, C2 
Transport (150 km by truck) and for C3 Waste processing, where the plywood is assumed to be 
incinerated. Generic database data was used for this incineration, but the biogenic CO2 was adjusted 
to reflect the biogenic carbon content of the plywood and the same was done for the fossil CO2 (fossil 
CO2 arising from the phenolic resin in the plywood). 
 
Time representativeness 
The site specific data used for the product manufacturing corresponds to 2021. The age of data from 
generic databases varies from 2017 – 2020. No data used is older than 10 years. 
 
Data quality 
The data quality for the plywood production and corresponding forestry operations is assessed to be 
very good since based on site specific data, corresponding to about 50% of the GWP-GHG indicator 
as declared above. For the production of the adhesive (phenolic resin), which is based on database 
data, the data quality is probably between fair and good. It would have been desired to use specific 
supplier data since the phenolic resin is of major importance for the result.  
 
Allocation 
No co-product allocation has been applied since no co-products are generated and therefore 
allocation has not been relevant. 
Cut-off criteria 
The general rules for the exclusion of inputs and outputs follows the requirements in EN 15804. The 
raw material flour (mixed with the adhesive and water to make the glue) corresponds to 0.8% of the 
raw material inputs and could therefore had been considered as negligible. Due to lack of data, data 
from an EPD was used as input data to the LCA (Molino Grassi 2020), but only for GWP fossil since 
the EPD was not compliant with the versions of indicators required according to the PCR (and 
EN15804+A2). This was considered as a better approach than to keep the data gap and the flour 
contributed with less than 2% to the fossil GWP (A1-A3). 
Production of packging material was omitted since corresponds to less than 0.15% in relation to 1 kg 
of plywood. 
Biogenic carbon balance 
The biogenic carbon has been accounted for so that the net result is zero for the life cycle by 
equalizing the “uptake” of biogenic carbon dioxide with the emissions of biogenic carbon dioxide. The 
uptake of biogenic carbon dioxide is relevant for the plywood raw material in terms of wood logs as 
well as wood logs for wood chips used as an external fuel in the plywood production. The emissions of 
biogenic carbon dioxide occur at the plywood production site from combustion of the external wood 
fuel, but also from the part of the wood logs raw material not becoming plywood, but waste used as 
internal fuel. Biogenic carbon dioxide emissions are also generated in C3 where the plywood is 
assumed to be incinerated after use. If the net value for the biogenic GWP is not exactly zero from A1 
to C3 this is due to small biogenic CO2 emissions present in database data, but if focusing on the 
wood raw material and wood fuel used in A3, the biogenic carbon has been equalized between uptake 
and emissions throughout the life cycle. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:657==
 
 
 
 
PAGE 8/14 
Content declaration 
 
Content 
Content declaration (1) 
Amount 
Renewable 
material 
Comment 
  
weight-% 
weight-% 
  
Wood 
86% 
86% 
As dry wood 
Water  
8% 
8% 
Moisture content 
Phenolic resin  
4% 
- 
As dry content 
Flour 
2% 
2% 
As dry content 
Total 
100% 
96% 
  
 
No substances that appear in the REACH candidate list of SVHC (Candidate List of Substances of 
Very High Concern) are present or used in the product concerning this EPD. 
 
Information on biogenic carbon content 
Biogenic carbon content (1) 
Unit per DU 
Amount 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
2.01E+02 
Biogenic carbon content in packaging (2) 
kg C 
0.00E+00 
(1) 1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg CO2. 
  
  
(2) No renewable materials are used as packaging materials. 
  
  
 
Information on energy content 
Energy content 
Unit per DU 
Amount 
Energy content in product 
MJ 
8.58E+03 
 
 
 
==PAGE:658==
 
 
 
PAGE 9/14 
Environmental Information 
Potential environmental impact – mandatory indicators according to EN 15804 
 
(1) The GWP-GHG indicator includes all greenhouse gases included in GWP-total but excludes biogenic carbon dioxide uptake and emissions and biogenic carbon stored in the product. This indicator is thus almost equal to the GWP indicator originally defined in EN 15804:2012+A1:2013. 
(2) Disclaimer: The results of this environmental impact indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties of these results are high or as there is limited experience with the indicator. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Results per functional or declared unit: 1 m3 of plywood corresponding to 470 kg 
Indicator 
Acronyms 
Unit 
A1 
Raw material 
supply 
A2 
Transport 
A3 
Manufacturing 
(including trp BR-
SE) 
Total 
(A1-A3) 
A4 
Transport to 
customer 
C1 
Deconstruction 
C2 
Transport 
C3 
Plywood 
incineration 
C4 
Disposal (not 
relevant) 
D 
Benefits 
Global warming potential (GWP), excl biogenic 
carbon 
GWP-GHG (1) 
kg CO2 eq 
1,30E+02 
1,31E+01 
7,06E+01 
2,14E+02 
4,33E+00 
1,55E-01 
4,16E+00 
5,12E+01 
0,00E+00 
-8,16E+01 
Climate Change - total 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq 
-2,10E+03 
1,35E+01 
1,56E+03 
-5,25E+02 
4,92E+00 
1,58E-01 
4,29E+00 
7,90E+02 
0,00E+00 
-8,55E+01 
Climate Change - fossil 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq 
1,33E+02 
1,32E+01 
7,14E+01 
2,18E+02 
3,67E+00 
1,57E-01 
4,20E+00 
5,15E+01 
0,00E+00 
-8,41E+01 
Climate Change - biogenic 
GWP-biogenic 
kg CO2 eq 
-2,24E+03 
1,33E-01 
1,49E+03 
-7,46E+02 
1,23E+00 
-2,02E-04 
4,24E-02 
7,39E+02 
0,00E+00 
-9,07E-01 
Climate Change - land use and land use change 
GWP-luluc 
kg CO2 eq 
1,19E-01 
1,41E-01 
1,47E-03 
2,61E-01 
1,90E-02 
1,30E-03 
4,49E-02 
5,26E-03 
0,00E+00 
-5,01E-01 
Ozone depletion 
ODP 
kg CFC-11 eq 
3,37E-13 
2,16E-15 
7,34E-15 
3,47E-13 
5,74E-15 
2,02E-17 
6,87E-16 
5,02E-14 
0,00E+00 
-3,74E-13 
Acidification 
AP 
mole H+ eq 
2,61E-01 
1,46E-02 
2,82E+00 
3,10E+00 
3,44E-02 
9,12E-04 
4,78E-03 
4,17E-01 
0,00E+00 
-5,04E-01 
Eutrophication aquatic freshwater 
EP-freshwater 
kg P eq 
1,82E-04 
9,69E-05 
1,60E-05 
2,95E-04 
2,67E-04 
4,70E-07 
3,09E-05 
1,70E-05 
0,00E+00 
-4,34E-03 
Eutrophication aquatic marine 
EP-marine 
kg N eq 
9,72E-02 
4,17E-03 
7,44E-01 
8,45E-01 
3,33E-03 
4,47E-04 
1,39E-03 
1,90E-01 
0,00E+00 
-1,88E-01 
Eutrophication terrestrial 
EP-terrestrial 
mole N eq 
1,01E+00 
5,64E-02 
8,14E+00 
9,21E+00 
1,53E-01 
4,94E-03 
1,87E-02 
2,28E+00 
0,00E+00 
-1,52E+00 
Photochemical ozone formation 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq 
2,82E-01 
1,07E-02 
2,07E+00 
2,37E+00 
8,93E-03 
8,60E-04 
3,54E-03 
4,86E-01 
0,00E+00 
-4,00E-01 
Depletion of abiotic resources - minerals and 
metals 
ADP-minerals & metals (2) 
kg Sb eq 
2,27E-05 
1,27E-06 
2,14E-06 
2,61E-05 
1,15E-06 
1,21E-08 
4,05E-07 
1,27E-06 
0,00E+00 
-3,25E-05 
Depletion of abiotic resources - fossil fuels 
ADP-fossil* 
MJ 
3,36E+03 
1,69E+02 
8,65E+02 
4,39E+03 
4,56E+01 
2,11E+00 
5,39E+01 
2,29E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,87E+03 
Water use 
WDP 
m3 
1,46E+01 
1,87E-01 
1,09E-01 
1,49E+01 
4,08E-01 
1,38E-03 
5,95E-02 
8,55E+01 
0,00E+00 
-3,47E+01 
  
Acronyms 
GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential land use and land use change; ODP = Depletion potential of the stratospheric 
ozone layer; AP = Acidification potential, Accumulated Exceedance; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication potential, fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment; EP-marine = Eutrophication potential, fraction of nutrients 
reaching marine end compartment; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication potential, Accumulated Exceedance; POCP = Formation potential of tropospheric ozone; ADP-minerals&metals = Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil 
resources; ADP-fossil = Abiotic depletion for fossil resources potential; WDP = Water (user) deprivation potential, deprivation-weighted water consumption 
==PAGE:659==
 
 
 
PAGE 10/14 
Use of resources 
Results per functional or declared unit: 1 m3 of plywood corresponding to 470 kg 
Indicator 
Acronyms 
Unit 
A1 
Raw material 
supply 
A2 
Transport 
A3 
Manufacturing 
(including trp 
BR-SE) 
Total 
(A1-A3) 
A4 
Transport to 
customer 
C1 
Deconstruction 
C2 
Transport 
C3 
Plywood 
incineration 
C4 
Disposal (not 
relevant) 
D 
Benefits 
Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as 
raw materials 
PERE 
MJ 
1,15E+04 
1,78E+01 
2,97E+00 
1,15E+04 
1,90E+01 
1,18E-01 
5,67E+00 
4,24E+01 
0,00E+00 
-3,81E+03 
Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials 
PERM 
MJ 
2,53E+04 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
2,53E+04 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Total use of renewable primary energy resources (primary energy and primary energy 
resources used as raw materials) 
PERT 
MJ 
3,61E+02 
1,78E+01 
2,97E+00 
3,82E+02 
1,90E+01 
1,18E-01 
5,67E+00 
4,24E+01 
0,00E+00 
-3,81E+03 
Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources 
used as raw materials 
PENRE 
MJ 
3,36E+03 
1,70E+02 
8,66E+02 
4,39E+03 
4,57E+01 
2,11E+00 
5,40E+01 
2,29E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,87E+03 
Use of non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials 
PENRM 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Total use of non-renewable primary energy resources (primary energy and primary energy 
resources used as raw materials) 
PENRT 
MJ 
3,36E+03 
1,70E+02 
8,66E+02 
4,39E+03 
4,57E+01 
2,11E+00 
5,40E+01 
2,29E+02 
0,00E+00 
-1,87E+03 
Use of secondary material 
SM 
kg 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Use of renewable secondary fuels 
RSF 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Use of non-renewable secondary fuels 
NRSF 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Net use of fresh water 
FW 
m3 
1,85E+00 
2,29E-02 
4,84E-03 
1,88E+00 
2,01E-02 
1,35E-04 
7,29E-03 
2,05E+00 
0,00E+00 
-2,49E+00 
  
Acronyms 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT 
= Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of 
non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy re-sources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable 
secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non-renewable secondary fuels; FW = Use of net fresh water 
 
 
 
==PAGE:660==
 
 
 
PAGE 11/14 
Waste and output flows 
Waste 
Results per functional or declared unit: 1 m3 of plywood corresponding to 470 kg 
Indicator 
Acronyms 
Unit 
A1 
Raw material 
supply 
A2 
Transport 
A3 
Manufacturing 
(including trp 
BR-SE) 
Total 
(A1-A3) 
A4 
Transport to 
customer 
C1 
Deconstruction 
C2 
Transport 
C3 
Plywood 
incineration 
C4 
Disposal (not 
relevant) 
D 
Benefits 
Hazardous waste disposed 
HWD 
kg 
4,01E-07 
8,81E-09 
6,71E-09 
4,17E-07 
7,67E-09 
1,06E-10 
2,81E-09 
4,03E-08 
0,00E+00 
-5,00E-06 
Non-hazardous waste disposed 
NHWD 
kg 
1,23E+00 
3,88E-02 
8,69E-02 
1,36E+00 
8,42E-02 
3,14E-04 
1,24E-02 
5,66E+00 
0,00E+00 
-4,94E+00 
Radioactive waste disposed 
RWD 
kg 
2,23E-02 
2,55E-04 
9,63E-04 
2,36E-02 
7,58E-04 
2,55E-06 
8,11E-05 
1,55E-02 
0,00E+00 
-4,44E-01 
 
Output flows 
Results per functional or declared unit: 1 m3 of plywood corresponding to 470 kg 
Indicator 
Acronyms 
Unit 
A1 
Raw material 
supply 
A2 
Transport 
A3 
Manufacturing 
(including trp 
BR-SE) 
Total 
(A1-A3) 
A4 
Transport to 
customer 
C1 
Deconstruction 
C2 
Transport 
C3 
Plywood 
incineration 
C4 
Disposal (not 
relevant) 
D 
Benefits 
Components for re-use 
CRU 
kg 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Materials for recycling 
MFR 
kg 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Material for energy recovery 
MER 
kg 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Exported electrical energy 
EEE 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Exported thermal energy  
EET 
MJ 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
 
 
 
==PAGE:661==
 
 
 
 
PAGE 12/14 
Disclaimers 
ILCD classification 
Indicator 
Disclaimer 
ILCD Type 1 
Global warming potential (GWP) 
None 
Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone layer (ODP) 
None 
Potential incidence of disease due to PM emissions (PM) 
None 
ILCD Type 2 
Acidification potential, Accumulated Exceedance (AP) 
None 
Eutrophication potential, Fraction of nutrients reaching 
None 
freshwater end compartment (EP-freshwater) 
Eutrophication potential, Fraction of nutrients reaching 
None 
marine end compartment (EP-marine) 
Eutrophication potential, Accumulated Exceedance 
None 
(EP-terrestrial) 
Formation potential of tropospheric ozone (POCP) 
None 
Potential Human exposure efficiency relative to U235 (IRP) 
1 
ILCD Type 3 
Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil resources (ADP-minerals&metals) 
2 
Abiotic depletion potential for fossil resources (ADP-fossil) 
2 
Water (user) deprivation potential, deprivation-weighted 
2 
water consumption (WDP) 
Potential Comparative Toxic Unit for ecosystems (ETP-fw) 
2 
Potential Comparative Toxic Unit for humans (HTP-c) 
2 
Potential Comparative Toxic Unit for humans (HTP-nc) 
2 
Potential Soil quality index (SQP) 
2 
Disclaimer 1 – This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human 
health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure 
nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon 
and from some construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
Disclaimer 2 – The results of this environmental impact indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these 
results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:662==
 
 
 
 
PAGE 13/14 
References 
EN 15804:2012+A2:2019, Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – 
Core rules for the product category of construction products, European Committee for Standardization 
 
GaBi Software System and database for Life Cycle Engineering version 10, sphera, Leinfelden-
Echterdingen, Germany 
 
General Programme Instructions for the International EPD® System. Version 3.01 of 2019-09-18 
 
Hallberg, L., LCA methodology report for Optimera plywood, As basis for publication of EPD, March 
2022 
 
Molino Grassi EPD 2020, La Farina Bio, S-P-00666, EPD International 
 
PCR 2019:14 CONSTRUCTION PRODUCTS. Version 1.11 of 2021-02-05 
 
 
 
 
Contact information 
 
EPD owner: 
 
 
Email: tks@sgdsgruppen.com 
 
 
Telephone: +46 20-583000  
 
Address: SGDS gruppen AB, Bryggerivägen 9, 168 67 Bromma  
 
LCA author: 
 
 
 
IVL Swedish Environmental Research Institute, Box 210 60  
SE-100 31 Stockholm, www.ivl.se. 
Contact:  
Lisa Hallberg (lisa.hallberg@ivl.se) 
 
Program operator: 
 
 
 
EPD International AB 
info@environdec.com  
 
 
==PAGE:663==
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.environdec.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:664==
  
 
 
1 
 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACOUSTIC SILENCE 700 
SCAN UNDERLAY 
Programme:  
The International EPD® 
System, 
www.environdec.com  
Programme operator: 
 EPD International AB 
EPD 
registration 
number: 
S-P-09703 
Publication 
date: 
2023-06-29 
Valid until: 
2028-06-26 
Geographical 
scope: 
EU 
 
An EPD should provide current information and may be updated if conditions change. The stated validity is 
therefore subject to the continued registration and publication at www.environdec.com.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL  
PRODUCT DECLARATION 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH EN 15804+A2 & ISO 14025 / ISO 21930 
 
==PAGE:665==
  
 
 
2 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
MANUFACTURER INFORMATION 
Manufacturer 
Scan Underlay 
Address 
Ursusvej 16, 8464 Galten, Denmark 
Contact details 
hello@scanunderlay.com 
Website 
https://scanunderlay.com/ 
 
PRODUCT IDENTIFICATION 
Product name  
Acoustic Silence 700 
Additional 
label(s) 
- 
Product number 
/ reference 
700 
Place(s) of 
production 
Bizonvej 2, 8464 Galten, Denmark 
CPC code 
362 - Other rubber products 
 
The International EPD System 
EPDs within the same product category but from different programmes may not be comparable.  
 
 
EPD INFORMATION 
The EPD owner has the sole ownership, liability, and responsibility for the EPD. 
Construction products EPDs may not be comparable if they do not comply with EN 
15804 and if they are not compared in a building context. 
EPD program 
operator 
The International EPD System 
EPD standards 
This EPD is in accordance with EN 15804+A2, ISO 
14025 standards and ISO 21930. 
Product category 
rules 
The CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core 
PCR. In addition, the Int´l EPD System PCR 
2019:14 Construction products, version 1.11 
(05.02.2021) is used.                                                       
Product specific complementary category rules 
have not been applied in this EPD 
EPD author 
Christian Hansen, Scan Underlay 
EPD verification 
Independent verification of this EPD and data, 
according to ISO 14025: 
£ Internal certification þ External verification 
Verification date 
2023-06-26 
EPD verifier 
Sergio A. Ballén Zamora 
EPD number 
S-P-09703 
ECO Platform nr. 
- 
Publishing date 
2023-06-29 
EPD valid until 
2028-06-26 
==PAGE:666==
  
 
 
3 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
PRODUCT INFORMATION 
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION 
Acoustic Silence 700 is made of upcycled rubber from used car tires, 
produced using renewable energy sources. They provide exceptional 
durability and long-lasting performance, are easy to install and maintain, 
and are eco-friendly and sustainable solutions for noise reduction that 
meet PAHs and Reach regulations. They are suitable for use in DGNB-
certified buildings and designed to reduce impact noise transmission in 
inter-floor and inter-room applications, creating a comfortable and 
peaceful environment for building inhabitants. 
 
PRODUCT APPLICATION 
Acoustic sound insulation is used in inter-floor and inter-room 
applications to mitigate the transmission of impact-induced vibrations. It 
is applied to decrease the audibility of footfall and other impact noise, 
which can be disruptive and bothersome in multi-level and multi-room 
buildings, by reducing the noise transmission to lower floors and 
neighboring rooms, thereby increasing privacy and comfort for residents 
and employees. Additionally, it can aid in increasing the overall sound 
isolation of the building and reducing noise from foot traffic and other 
walking-related activities. 
 
 
 
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS 
Impact-sound reduction (EN ISO 10140-3): ΔLw ≥18 dB  
Dynamic stiffness (DIN EN 29052-1): S ≤ 139 MN/m3  
Compressive strength (EN 826): 26,4 kPa  
Lambda value λ24 (EN 12667): 0,0584 W/mK  
  
*Please note that the technical properties outlined in this report are 
based on current production methods and may be subject to 
improvement through optimization and advancements in techniques. Any 
such modifications will not affect the validity or accuracy of the provided 
Environmental Product Declaration (EPD). 
 
PRODUCT STANDARDS 
EN ISO 10140-3, Acoustics – Laboratory measurement of sound insulation 
of building elements – Part 3: Measurement of impact sound insulation  
EN 29052-1:1993, Acoustics – Determination of dynamic stiffness – Part 
1: Materials used under floating floors in dwellings  
EN 826:2013, Thermal insulating products for building applications – 
Determination of compression behaviour  
EN 12667:2001, Thermal performance of building materials and products 
– Determination of thermal resistance by means of guarded hot plate and 
heat flow meter methods – Products of high and medium thermal 
resistance 
 
 
 
==PAGE:667==
  
 
 
4 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF THE PRODUCT 
Thickness: 2 mm  
Weight: 700 g/m2  
Length: 15 m (+5-15 cm)  
Coverage: 15 m2 
 
ADDITIONAL TECHNICAL INFORMATION 
Further information can be found at https://scanunderlay.com/. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRODUCT RAW MATERIAL COMPOSITION 
Product and Packaging 
Material 
Weight, 
kg 
Post-
consumer 
% 
Renewable 
% 
Country 
Region of 
origin 
Polypropylene textile 
0,02 
0 
50 
DK 
Fiberbinder 
0,068 
0 
100 
DK 
Recycled rubber powder 
0,612 
100 
100 
DK 
SUBSTANCES, REACH - VERY HIGH CONCERN 
The product does not contain any REACH SVHC substances in amounts 
greater than 0,1 % (1000 ppm). 
==PAGE:668==
  
 
 
5 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
PRODUCT LIFE-CYCLE 
MANUFACTURING AND PACKAGING (A1-A3) 
The environmental impacts considered in the product stage include the 
manufacturing of raw materials, packaging, and additional ancillary 
materials. Material losses occurring during the manufacturing processes 
are considered, which encompasses a 2.5% production loss due to side 
trim. These trim cut-offs are subsequently recycled and reintegrated into 
the production cycle. 
The acoustic sound insulation material is crafted from used tires received 
as granulated powder and combined with a binding fiber. The main 
components of the product are granulated rubber powder, polyethylene 
terephthalate fibers, and spun-bound textile. The constituents are 
delivered to the manufacturing site in Denmark by lorry 16-32 metric ton, 
euro5 class trucks, ensuring an efficient mode of transportation. 
Packaging materials include a wooden pallet and film, enabling secure 
transport of the acoustic material to the marketplace or construction site. 
The manufacturing process operates solely on wind-generated electricity, 
supported by a certificate of origin, and natural gas exclusively used for 
heating. Notably, our manufacturing process does not require water, thus 
eliminating the need for wastewater treatment. 
 
 
 
 
TRANSPORT AND INSTALLATION (A4-A5) 
Transportation impacts occurred from final products delivery to 
construction site (A4) cover fuel direct exhaust emissions, environmental 
impacts of fuel production, as well as related infrastructure emissions. 
The transportation distance is defined according to the PCR. The average 
distance of transportation from the production plant to retailers site is 
assumed as 177 km and the transportation method is assumed to be 
lorry. Vehicle capacity utilization volume factor is assumed to be 1, which 
means full load. In reality, it may vary, but as the role of transportation 
emissions in total results is small, the variation in load is assumed to be 
negligible. Empty returns are not taken into account as it is assumed that 
return trip is used by the transportation company to serve the needs of 
other clients. (Empty returns are considered in the ecoinvent database.) 
Transportation does not cause losses as product is packaged properly. 
Environmental impacts from installation into the building include 
generation of waste packaging materials (A5) and release of biogenic 
carbon dioxide from wooden materials such as eur-flat pallets and 
stabilisation planks. The impacts of material production, its processing 
and its disposal as installation waste are also included. Electricity 
consumption for installation of the material is considered. 
 
PRODUCT USE AND MAINTENANCE (B1-B7) 
This EPD does not cover the use phase. 
Air, soil, and water impacts during the use phase have not been studied. 
 
 
==PAGE:669==
  
 
 
6 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MANUFACTURING PROCESS 
 
 
 
 
 
PRODUCT END OF LIFE (C1-C4, D) 
Consumption of energy in de-construction process is considered. It is 
assumed that the waste is collected separately and transported to the 
waste treatment plant, with a recycling share of 99%. Transportation 
distance to treatment is assumed to be 177 km taken from the average 
distance between production plant and retailer site and the transportation 
method is assumed to be lorry (C2). Module C3 accounts for energy and 
resource inputs for sorting and treating these waste streams for recycling 
and incineration with energy recovery with efficiency greater than 60%. 
Additionally, waste that is incinerated without energy recovery or 
landfilled is included in Module C4. Due to the material and energy 
recovery potential of parts in the end of life product and packaging, 
recycled raw materials lead to avoided virgin material production, while 
the energy recovered from incineration replaces electricity and heat 
production (D). The benefits and loads of incineration and recycling are 
included in Module D. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:670==
  
 
 
7 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
LIFE-CYCLE ASSESSMENT 
LIFE-CYCLE ASSESSMENT INFORMATION 
Period for data 
2022 
DECLARED AND FUNCTIONAL UNIT 
Declared unit 
1 m2 
Mass per declared unit 
0.7 kg 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT 
Product’s biogenic carbon content at the factory gate  
Biogenic carbon content in product, kg C 
0 
Biogenic carbon content in packaging, kg C 
0.04 
 
 
 
SYSTEM BOUNDARY 
This EPD covers the cradle-to-gate with modules C1–C4, module D and 
optional modules; A1 (Raw material supply), A2 (Transport) and A3 
(Manufacturing), A4 (Transport to the building site), A5 (Installation into 
the building) as well as C1 (Deconstruction), C2 (Transport at end-of-life), 
C3 (Waste processing) and C4 (Disposal). In addition, module D - benefits 
and loads beyond the system boundary is included. 
Product 
stage 
Assembl
y stage 
Use stage 
End of life stage 
Beyond the 
system 
boundaries 
A1 A2 A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
D 
D 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Geography, by two-letter ISO country code or regions. The International EPD System only. 
EU EU EU 
EU 
EU 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
EU EU EU EU 
EU 
Raw materials 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Assembly 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
Deconstr./demol. 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Reuse 
Recovery 
Recycling 
Modules not declared = MND. Modules not relevant = MNR. 
CUT-OFF CRITERIA 
The study does not exclude any modules or processes which are stated 
mandatory in the EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 and the applied PCR. The study 
does not exclude any hazardous materials or substances. 
The study includes all major raw material and energy consumption. All 
inputs and outputs of the unit processes, for which data is available for, 
are included in the calculation. There is no neglected unit process more 
than 1% of total mass or energy flows. The module specific total neglected 
input and output flows also do not exceed 5% of energy usage or mass. 
The collected data covered all raw materials, consumables and packaging 
materials; associated transport to the manufacturing site; process energy 
and water use; direct production wastes; emissions to air and water. 
According to EN 15804 and the PCR, flows can be omitted (cut off) from a 
core process in the LCA up to a maximum of 1% of the total mass of 
material inputs or 1% of the total energy content of fuels and energy 
carriers; some ancillary materials used in small quantities within the 
process and amounting, in combination, to <0.1% of total input materials 
were omitted from the LCA underpinning this EPD. 
==PAGE:671==
  
 
 
8 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
ALLOCATION, ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS 
Allocation is required if some material, energy, and waste data cannot be 
measured separately for the product under investigation. 
In this study, as per EN 15804, allocation is conducted in the following 
order; 
1. Allocation should be avoided. 
2. Allocation should be based on physical properties (e.g. mass, volume) 
when the difference in revenue is small. 
3. Allocation should be based on economic values. 
In the background data, the ecoinvent default allocation is applied to all 
processes except those in which secondary materials are used, where the 
cut-off allocation is applied. This ensures that secondary materials are free 
of upstream burdens that arise prior to their reaching the end of waste 
state, in accordance with Section 6.3.4.2 of EN 15804. When the product 
reaches the end of its life, half of the textile remains bound to the concrete 
and is disposed of with the concrete, while the other half of the textile is 
recycled with the rest of the product. This allocation of textile waste is 
taken into account in the end-of-life calculations. 
Allocation used in Ecoinvent 3.6 environmental data sources follows the 
methodology ‘allocation, cut-off by classification’. This methodology is in 
line with the requirements of the EN 15804 -standard. 
 
 
AVERAGES AND VARIABILITY 
There is no average result considered for most aspects of this study, as the 
EPD refers to a group of similar products produced in one production plant. 
However, an exception is made for the energy and gas consumption. The 
average result is calculated by considering the energy and gas 
consumption from the factory over the entire year across these similar 
products. It should be noted that the energy and gas consumption is 
consistent across all the products in this group. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The International EPD System additional data requirements 
Data specificity and GWP-GHG variability for GWP-GHG for A1-A3. 
Supply-chain specific data for GWP-GHG 
>90 % 
Variation in GWP-GHG between products 
- 
Variation in GWP-GHG between sites 
- 
 
==PAGE:672==
  
 
 
9 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT DATA 
Note: additional environmental impact data may be presented in annexes. 
CORE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT INDICATORS – EN 15804+A2, PEF 
Impact category Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP – total 
kg CO2e 
2,88E-1 
6,13E-3 
-7,74E-2 
2,17E-1 
1,23E-2 
1,44E-1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,04E-2 
2,27E-3 
4E-5 
-3,11E-1 
GWP – fossil 
kg CO2e 
2,91E-1 
7,62E-3 
5,83E-2 
3,57E-1 
1,25E-2 
8,29E-3 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,04E-2 
2,27E-3 
4E-5 
-3,1E-1 
GWP – biogenic 
kg CO2e 
-2,89E-3 
3,27E-6 
-1,36E-1 
-1,39E-1 
0E0 
1,36E-1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,09E-5 
6,31E-7 
1,11E-8 
-1,02E-1 
GWP – LULUC 
kg CO2e 
2,17E-4 
2,7E-6 
8,74E-5 
3,07E-4 
3,75E-6 
1,38E-6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
7,24E-6 
1,92E-7 
3,38E-9 
-1,74E-4 
Ozone depletion pot. 
kg CFC-11e 
1,54E-8 
1,73E-9 
6,65E-9 
2,38E-8 
2,93E-9 
5,77E-11 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
4,64E-9 
4,9E-10 
8,64E-12 
-1,62E-8 
Acidification potential 
mol H+e 
1,28E-3 
3,11E-5 
2,07E-4 
1,51E-3 
5,23E-5 
4,36E-6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
8,34E-5 
2,37E-5 
4,18E-7 
-1,57E-3 
EP-freshwater3) 
kg Pe 
9,37E-6 
6,37E-8 
1,68E-6 
1,11E-5 
1,01E-7 
6,42E-8 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
1,71E-7 
9,17E-9 
1,62E-10 
-1,05E-5 
EP-marine 
kg Ne 
2,22E-4 
9,25E-6 
4,78E-5 
2,79E-4 
1,58E-5 
9,24E-7 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,48E-5 
1,05E-5 
1,85E-7 
-2,49E-4 
EP-terrestrial 
mol Ne 
2,44E-3 
1,02E-4 
5,39E-4 
3,08E-3 
1,74E-4 
1,06E-5 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,74E-4 
1,15E-4 
2,03E-6 
-2,79E-3 
POCP (“smog”) 
kg NMVOCe 
8,84E-4 
3,13E-5 
2,14E-4 
1,13E-3 
5,6E-5 
2,66E-6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
8,38E-5 
3,16E-5 
5,57E-7 
-9,44E-4 
ADP-minerals & metals 
kg Sbe 
4,97E-6 
2,06E-7 
6,65E-7 
5,84E-6 
2,13E-7 
3,52E-9 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
5,52E-7 
3,46E-9 
6,11E-11 
-4,24E-6 
ADP-fossil resources 
MJ 
6,96E0 
1,15E-1 
1,05E0 
8,13E0 
1,94E-1 
1,3E-2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
3,08E-1 
3,12E-2 
5,51E-4 
-6,36E0 
Water use2) 
m3e depr. 
1,5E-1 
3,7E-4 
1,36E-2 
1,64E-1 
7,21E-4 
1,68E-4 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
9,91E-4 
5,82E-5 
1,03E-6 
-1,17E-1 
1) GWP = Global Warming Potential; EP = Eutrophication potential; POCP = Photochemical ozone formation; ADP = Abiotic depletion potential. 2) EN 15804+A2 disclaimer for Abiotic depletion and Water use and optional 
indicators except Particulate matter and Ionizing radiation, human health. The results of these environmental impact indicators shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 3) Required characterisation method and data are in kg P-eq. Multiply by 3,07 to get PO4e. 
USE OF NATURAL RESOURCES 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Renew. PER as energy 
MJ 
2,96E-1 
1,62E-3 
7,98E-1 
1,1E0 
2,44E-3 
2,08E-3 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
4,34E-3 
1,69E-4 
2,98E-6 
-4,92E-1 
Renew. PER as material 
MJ 
0E0 
0E0 
1,31E0 
1,31E0 
0E0 
-1,31E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Total use of renew. PER 
MJ 
2,96E-1 
1,62E-3 
2,1E0 
2,4E0 
2,44E-3 
-1,3E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
4,34E-3 
1,69E-4 
2,98E-6 
-4,92E-1 
Non-re. PER as energy 
MJ 
4,59E0 
1,15E-1 
9,3E-1 
5,64E0 
1,94E-1 
1,3E-2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
3,08E-1 
3,12E-2 
5,51E-4 
-4,05E0 
Non-re. PER as material 
MJ 
3,32E0 
0E0 
4,05E-2 
3,36E0 
0E0 
-1,21E-1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
4,63E-1 
==PAGE:673==
  
 
 
10 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
Total use of non-re. PER 
MJ 
7,91E0 
1,15E-1 
9,7E-1 
9E0 
1,94E-1 
-1,09E-1 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
3,08E-1 
3,12E-2 
5,51E-4 
-3,58E0 
Secondary materials 
kg 
6,28E-1 
0E0 
3,97E-5 
6,28E-1 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
-8,17E-4 
Renew. secondary fuels 
MJ 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Non-ren. secondary fuels 
MJ 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Use of net fresh water 
m3 
1,32E-3 
1,96E-5 
1,71E-4 
1,51E-3 
4,03E-5 
5,66E-6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
5,26E-5 
2,76E-6 
4,86E-8 
-1,21E-3 
6) PER = Primary energy resources 
 
END OF LIFE – WASTE 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Hazardous waste 
kg 
1,27E-2 
1,17E-4 
2,15E-3 
1,5E-2 
1,88E-4 
9,66E-5 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
3,13E-4 
0E0 
5,93E-7 
-1,61E-2 
Non-hazardous waste 
kg 
3,95E-1 
8,01E-3 
6,36E-2 
4,67E-1 
2,08E-2 
5,34E-3 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,15E-2 
0E0 
6,33E-6 
-4,81E-1 
Radioactive waste 
kg 
8,59E-6 
7,87E-7 
1,62E-6 
1,1E-5 
1,33E-6 
8,07E-8 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,11E-6 
0E0 
3,86E-9 
-7,73E-6 
 
END OF LIFE – OUTPUT FLOWS 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Components for re-use 
kg 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Materials for recycling 
kg 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Materials for energy rec 
kg 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
Exported energy 
MJ 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
8,87E-2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
0E0 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS – GWP-GHG - THE INTERNATIONAL EPD SYSTEM 
Impact category Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-GHG 
kg CO2e 
2,91E-1 
7,62E-3 
5,83E-2 
3,57E-1 
1,25E-2 
8,29E-3 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,04E-2 
2,27E-3 
4E-5 
-3,1E-1 
8) This indicator includes all greenhouse gases excluding biogenic carbon dioxide uptake and emissions and biogenic carbon stored in the product as defined by IPCC AR 5 (IPCC 2013) This indicator Is almost equal to the GWP 
indicator originally defined in EN 15804:2012+A1:2013. 
==PAGE:674==
  
 
 
11 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
SCENARIO DOCUMENTATION 
Manufacturing energy scenario documentation 
Scenario parameter 
Value 
Electricity data source and quality 
Electricity production, wind 
Electricity CO2e / kWh 
0,0023 
District heating data source and quality 
Heat production, natural gas 
District heating CO2e / kWh 
0,0078 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
ISO 14025:2010 Environmental labels and declarations – Type III 
environmental declarations. Principles and procedures. 
ISO 14040:2006 Environmental management. Life cycle assessment. 
Principles and frameworks. 
ISO 14044:2006 Environmental management. Life cycle assessment. 
Requirements and guidelines. 
Ecoinvent database v3.6 (2019) and One Click LCA database. 
EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 Sustainability in construction works – 
Environmental product declarations – Core rules for the product 
category of construction products. 
ISO 21930:2017 Sustainability in buildings and civil engineering works — 
Core rules for environmental product declarations of construction 
products and services 
Int´l EPD System PCR 2019:14 Construction products, version 1.11 
(05.02.2021) 
EPD. General Programme Instructions of the international EPD® system. 
Version 4.0  
Acoustic Silence 700 LCA background report 01.05.2023
==PAGE:675==
  
 
 
12 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABOUT THE MANUFACTURER 
Scan Underlay, a Danish company, specializes in producing eco-friendly acoustic underlays 
from recycled tires. Established in 2015, the firm focuses on innovation, sustainability, and 
competitive pricing. By repurposing used tires, Scan Underlay actively reduces CO2 emissions, 
preventing landfill waste and tire incineration.  
  
The versatile products are suitable for a range of applications, including under-screed insulation as 
well as laminate, vinyl, carpet, and wooden flooring. With a commitment to cutting-edge technology 
and environmental responsibility, Scan Underlay strives to make a positive impact on sustainable 
flooring solutions. 
 
EPD AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS 
 
Manufacturer 
Scan Underlay 
EPD author 
Christian Hansen, Scan Underlay 
EPD verifier 
Sergio A. Ballén Zamora 
EPD program 
operator 
The International EPD System 
Background data 
This EPD is based on Ecoinvent 3.6 (cut-off) and 
One Click LCA databases. 
LCA software 
The LCA and EPD have been created using One 
Click LCA Pre-Verified EPD Generator for 
Construction products 
==PAGE:676==
  
 
 
13 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
VERIFICATION STATEMENT 
VERIFICATION PROCESS FOR THIS EPD 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 14025 by an 
independent, third-party verifier by reviewing results, documents and 
compliancy with EN 15804, ISO 14025 and ISO 14040/14044, following 
the process and checklists of the program operator for: 
- 
This Environmental Product Declaration 
- 
The Life-Cycle Assessment used in this EPD  
- 
The background report (project report) for this EPD 
Why does verification transparency matter? Read more online. 
VERIFICATION OVERVIEW 
Following independent third party has verified this specific EPD:  
EPD verification information 
Answer 
Independent EPD verifier 
Sergio A. Ballén Zamora 
EPD verification started on 
2023-05-04 
EPD verification completed on 
2023-06-26 
Supply-chain specific data % 
>90 
Approver of the EPD verifier  
The International EPD System 
Author & tool verification 
Answer 
EPD author 
Christian Hansen, Scan Underlay 
EPD author training completion 
2023-05-03 
EPD Generator module 
Construction products 
Independent software verifier  
Ugo Pretato, Studio Fieschi 
Software verification date  
2021-05-11 
 
THIRD-PARTY VERIFICATION STATEMENT 
I hereby confirm that, following detailed examination, I have not 
established any relevant deviations by the studied Environmental 
Product Declaration (EPD), its LCA and project report, in terms of 
 
- 
the data collected and used in the LCA calculations, 
- 
the way the LCA-based calculations have been carried out, 
 
- 
the presentation of environmental data in the EPD, and  
- 
other additional environmental information, as present 
with respect to the procedural and methodological requirements in ISO 
14025:2010 and EN 15804:2012+A2:2019. 
 
 
I confirm that the company-specific data has been examined as regards 
plausibility and consistency; the declaration owner is responsible for its 
factual integrity and legal compliance.  
I confirm that I have sufficient knowledge and experience of 
construction products, this specific product category, the construction 
industry, relevant standards, and the geographical area of the EPD to 
carry out this verification. 
I confirm my independence in my role as verifier; I have not been 
involved in the execution of the LCA or in the development of the 
declaration and have no conflicts of interest regarding this verification. 
 
 
 
Sergio A. Ballén Zamora
==PAGE:677==
  
 
 
14 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
VERIFICATION AND REGISTRATION (ENVIRONDEC)
 
ISO standard ISO 21930 and CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core Product Category Rules 
(PCR) 
PCR 
PCR 2019:14 Construction products, version 1.11 
(05.02.2021) 
 
PCR review was conducted 
by:  
 
The Technical Committee of the International EPD® 
System. See www.environdec.com/TC for a list of 
members. Review chair: Claudia A. Peña, University of 
Concepción, Chile. The review panel may be contacted 
via the Secretariat www.environdec.com/contact.  
 
Independent third-party 
verification of the 
declaration and data, 
according to ISO 
14025:2006:  
 
Independent verification of this EPD and data, according 
to ISO 14025: 
£ Internal certification þ External verification 
Third party verifier  
 
Sergio A. Ballén Zamora 
 
Approved by: The International EPD® System Technical 
Committee, supported by the Secretariat  
 
Procedure for follow-up 
during EPD validity involves 
third party verifier  
 
£ yes    þ no 
 
 
EPD International AB, Box 210 60, SE-100 31 Stockholm, Sweden, E-mail: 
info@environdec.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:678==
  
 
 
15 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
ANNEX 1 : ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS – EN 15804+A1, CML / ISO 21930 
Impact category Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Global Warming Pot. 
kg CO2e 
2,74E-1 
7,55E-3 
5,65E-2 
3,38E-1 
1,23E-2 
8,28E-3 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,02E-2 
2,25E-3 
3,97E-5 
-2,94E-1 
Ozone depletion Pot. 
kg CFC-11e 
1,45E-8 
1,38E-9 
5,26E-9 
2,11E-8 
2,33E-9 
6,59E-11 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
3,69E-9 
3,88E-10 6,84E-12 -1,44E-8 
Acidification 
kg SO2e 
1,08E-3 
1,53E-5 
1,6E-4 
1,25E-3 
2,53E-5 
3,57E-6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
4,09E-5 
3,35E-6 
5,91E-8 
-1,34E-3 
Eutrophication 
kg PO43e 
3,38E-4 
3,14E-6 
5,61E-5 
3,97E-4 
5,12E-6 
2,6E-6 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
8,41E-6 
5,9E-7 
1,04E-8 
-3,67E-4 
POCP (“smog”) 
kg C2H4e 
6,16E-5 
1,01E-6 
1,58E-5 
7,84E-5 
1,61E-6 
1,29E-7 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
2,69E-6 
3,45E-7 
6,08E-9 
-7,05E-5 
ADP-elements 
kg Sbe 
4,97E-6 
2,06E-7 
6,65E-7 
5,84E-6 
2,13E-7 
3,52E-9 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
5,52E-7 
3,46E-9 
6,11E-11 -4,24E-6 
ADP-fossil 
MJ 
6,96E0 
1,15E-1 
1,05E0 
8,13E0 
1,94E-1 
1,3E-2 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0E0 
3,08E-1 
3,12E-2 
5,51E-4 
-6,36E0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:679==
  
 
 
16 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
ANNEX 6 : LIFE-CYCLE ASSESSMENT RESULT VISUALIZATION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:680==
  
 
 
17 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:681==
  
 
 
18 
Acoustic Silence 700 
Environmental Product Declaration created with One Click LCA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:682==
 
 
  
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH EN 15804+A2 & ISO 14025 / ISO 21930 
 
SWEDOOR INTERIOR CLASSIFIED 40MM DOORS 
JELD-WEN 
 
 
EPD HUB, EPD HUB-0968 
Published on 18.12.2023, last updated on 18.12.2023, valid until 18.12.2028 
==PAGE:683==
Swedoor interior classified 
40mm doors 
Created with One Click LCA 
 
2 
 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
MANUFACTURER 
Manufacturer VP-001 
JELD-WEN 
Address VP-002 
Europavej 1, 7280 Sønder Felding, Denmark 
Contact details VP-003 
ksellik@jeldwen.com 
Website 
www.jeld-wen.biz 
EPD STANDARDS, SCOPE AND VERIFICATION 
Program operator 
EPD Hub, hub@epdhub.com 
Reference standard EN 15804+A2:2019 and ISO 14025 
PCR 
EPD Hub Core PCR version 1.0, 1 Feb 2022   
EN 17213 Windows and doors 
Sector 
Construction product 
Category of EPD 
Third party verified EPD 
Scope of the EPD 
Cradle to gate with options, A4-A5, and modules 
C1-C4, D 
EPD author VP-004 
Katren Sellik, JELD-WEN 
EPD verification 
Independent verification of this EPD and data, 
according to ISO 14025: 
⬜ Internal certification 🗹 External verification 
EPD verifier VP-055 
Haiha Nguyen, as an authorized verifier acting 
for EPD Hub Limited 
 
The manufacturer has the sole ownership, liability, and responsibility for 
the EPD. EPDs within the same product category but from different 
programs may not be comparable. EPDs of construction products may not 
be comparable if they do not comply with EN 15804 and if they are not 
compared in a building context. 
 
 
 
 
PRODUCT 
Product name VP-007 
Swedoor interior classified 40mm 
doors 
Additional labels 
Solid Core Door – LO 
Solid Core Door 
EI30/BD30/R’w25/25dB/Sa – L 
Solid Core Door 
EI30/BD30/R’w30/30dB/Sa – OL 
Solid Core Door 
EI30/BD30/R’w35/35dB/Sa - ML 
Product reference 
- 
Place of production VP-008 
Sdr Felding 
Period for data VP-013 
Calendar year 2021 
Averaging in EPD VP-024-C 
No averaging 
Variation in GWP-fossil for A1-A3  
0 % 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL DATA SUMMARY 
Declared unit 
1 square meter 
Declared unit mass 
19.35 kg 
GWP-fossil, A1-A3 (kgCO2e) 
3,32E+01 
GWP-total, A1-A3 (kgCO2e) 
2,85E+00 
Secondary material, inputs (%) 
1.11 
Secondary material, outputs (%) 
65.6 
Total energy use, A1-A3 (kWh) 
454.0 
Total water use, A1-A3 (m3e) 
5,21E+00 
 
==PAGE:684==
Created with One Click LCA 
Swedoor interior classified 
40mm doors 
 
3  
PRODUCT AND MANUFACTURER 
ABOUT THE MANUFACTURER 
Headquartered in Charlotte, N.C., USA, JELD-WEN is a leading global 
manufacturer of high-performance interior and exterior building products, 
offering one of the broadest selections of windows, interior and exterior 
doors, and wall systems. JELD-WEN delivers a differentiated customer 
experience, providing construction professionals with durable, energy-
efficient products and labor-saving services that help them maximize 
productivity and create beautiful, secure spaces for all to enjoy. The JELD-
WEN team is driven by innovation and committed to creating safe, 
sustainable 
environments 
for 
customers, 
associates, 
and 
local 
communities. The JELD-WEN family of brands includes JELD-WEN® 
worldwide; LaCantina™ and VPI™ in North America; Swedoor® and DANA® 
in Europe; and Corinthian®, Stegbar®, and Breezway® in Australia.   Visit 
JELD-WEN.com for more information. 
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION VP-009 
Interior performance doors manufactured with a 40mm non-rebated 
wood-based solid core construction built for professional demands and is 
commonly used e.g. for Schools, Daycares and Offices.   
  
The doors can be manufactured with and without glass and includes 
classification options for 30 minute fire rating, up to 35dB sound reduction 
(Rw 38dB) and cold smoke classification.  
  
The specific technical standards and addition product information for each 
door design can be found on Swedoor website.  
 
Further information can be found at www.jeld-wen.biz. 
 
 
 
PRODUCT RAW MATERIAL COMPOSITION -010 
Raw material category 
Amount, mass- % 
Material origin 
Metals 
3,2 
EU 
Minerals 
- 
- 
Fossil materials 
7,7 
EU 
Bio-based materials 
89,1 
EU 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT VP-028-C 
Product’s biogenic carbon content at the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product, kg C 
7.28 
Biogenic carbon content in packaging, kg C 
0.99 
The indicator results have been calculated for product size 0,926 m x 2,04 
m. Surface area of said door is 1,889 m2, which were used to obtain infor-
mation for 1 m2 of the product. 
FUNCTIONAL UNIT AND SERVICE LIFE 
Declared unit VP-011 
1 square meter 
Mass per declared unit VP-012 
19.35 kg 
Functional unit 
- 
Reference service life 
- 
SUBSTANCES, REACH - VERY HIGH CONCERN VP-027-C 
The product does not contain any REACH SVHC substances in amounts 
greater than 0,1 % (1000 ppm). 
==PAGE:685==
Created with One Click LCA 
Swedoor interior classified 
40mm doors 
 
4  
PRODUCT LIFE-CYCLE 
SYSTEM BOUNDARY 
This EPD covers the life-cycle modules listed in the following table. 
Product stage 
Assembly 
stage 
Use stage 
End of life stage 
Beyond 
the 
system 
boundar
ies 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
MN
D 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
Raw materials 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Assembly 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy use 
Operational water use 
Deconstr./demol. 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Reuse 
Recovery 
Recycling
Modules not declared = MND. Modules not relevant = MNR. 
MANUFACTURING AND PACKAGING (A1-A3) VP-018 
The environmental impacts considered for the product stage cover the 
manufacturing of raw materials used in the production as well as packaging 
materials and other ancillary materials. Also, fuels used by machines, and 
handling of waste formed in the production processes at the 
manufacturing facilities are included in this stage. The study also considers 
the material losses occurring during the manufacturing processes as well 
as losses during electricity transmission. 
 
The product is made of solid wood, wood-based boards, paper, metal 
parts, plastic parts and chemicals. The materials are transported to JELD-
WENs production facility.  
The production of the door begins with the gluing and pressing of the door 
materials. The door leaf is then milled to the correct dimensions and the 
lock and hinge holes are milled. Edge band is glued to the edge of the door. 
Next, the door leaf moves to the surface treatment. After surface 
treatment, the lock and hinges are installed and the product will be 
packed.  
During the production process, wooden waste and chemical waste are 
being generated. Production waste and loss, including waste paint and 
cuttings of wood are sent to a waste management company to be 
incinerated; wastewater is treated in an average municipal treatment 
plant.  
Product packaging consist of plastic, cardboard, wood-based board and 
wooden pallet. The products are packed on an automated packing line and 
the packed products are stacked on a wooden pallet.  
After packing, the product is ready to be shipped to end customer / 
construction site. 
TRANSPORT AND INSTALLATION (A4-A5) 
Transportation impacts occurred from final products delivery to 
construction site (A4) cover fuel direct exhaust emissions, environmental 
impacts of fuel production, as well as related infrastructure emissions. 
 
The transportation distance is calculated based on the product-specific 
sales data, taking into account the end customer locations; weighted 
average result is being used. The transportation method is assumed to be 
lorry. Vehicle capacity utilization volume factor is assumed to be 1 which 
means full load. In reality, it may vary but as role of transportation 
emissions in total results is small, the variety in load is assumed to be 
negligible. Empty returns are not taken into account as it is assumed that 
return trip is used by the transportation company to serve the needs of 
other clients. Transportation does not cause losses as product are 
packaged properly.    
  
Installation includes the generated packaging waste. There is no loss on 
site during construction activities.    
Energy use during installation has not been taken into account, as installing 
the door only requires mounting and fastening. No additional materials are 
needed for installation. 
==PAGE:686==
Created with One Click LCA 
Swedoor interior classified 
40mm doors 
 
5  
PRODUCT USE AND MAINTENANCE (B1-B7) VP-043-C 
N/A 
Air, soil, and water impacts during the use phase have not been studied. 
PRODUCT END OF LIFE (C1-C4, D) VP-049-C 
Consumption of energy and natural resources in demolition process is 
assumed to be negligible.   
It is assumed that the waste is collected as mixed construction waste and 
transported to the waste treatment center. Transportation distance to 
treatment is assumed as 50 km and the transportation method is assumed 
to be lorry (C2).   
Per the end of life scenario of timber windows and doorsets (EN17213 
Annex B), the wood, paper, steel, plastic, paint and glue are sorted. Module 
C3 accounts for energy and resource inputs for sorting and treating these 
waste streams for recycling and incineration with energy recovery.  
Per the end of life scenario of timber windows and doorsets (EN17213 
Annex B), 5% of wood, 5% of paper, 5% of steel, 5% of plastic and 5% of 
paint and glue waste goes to landfill. Additionally, hazardous waste that is 
incinerated is included in Module C4 while the flow not included in Module 
D for benefits.  
As specific national data is not used for timber / wooden products, then 
according to the end of life scenario of timber windows and doorsets 
(EN17213 Annex B), 100% of sorted timber materials goes to incineration.  
The wooden pallet, wooden board, cardboard packaging and plastic 
packaging used during transportation are also incinerated for energy 
recovery or recycled. The benefits and loads of incineration and recycling 
are included in Module D.  
==PAGE:687==
Created with One Click LCA 
Swedoor interior classified 
40mm doors 
 
6  
MANUFACTURING PROCESS AND SYSTEM 
BOUNDARY-019 
==PAGE:688==
Created with One Click LCA 
Swedoor interior classified 
40mm doors 
 
7  
LIFE-CYCLE ASSESSMENT 
CUT-OFF CRITERIA VP-020 
The study does not exclude any modules or processes which are stated 
mandatory in the reference standard and the applied PCR. The study does 
not exclude any hazardous materials or substances. The study includes all 
major raw material and energy consumption. All inputs and outputs of the 
unit processes, for which data is available for, are included in the 
calculation. There is no neglected unit process more than 1% of total mass 
or energy flows. The module specific total neglected input and output 
flows also do not exceed 5% of energy usage or mass. 
 
ALLOCATION, ESTIMATES AND ASSUMPTIONS VP-050-C 
Allocation is required if some material, energy, and waste data cannot be 
measured separately for the product under investigation. All allocations 
are done as per the reference standards and the applied PCR. In this study, 
allocation has been done in the following ways: 
 
 
Data type 
Allocation 
Raw materials 
No allocation 
Packaging materials 
No allocation 
Ancillary materials 
Allocated by mass or volume 
Manufacturing energy and 
waste 
Allocated by mass or volume 
 
 
AVERAGES AND VARIABILITY VP-026-C 
Type of average 
No averaging 
Averaging method 
Not applicable 
Variation in GWP-fossil for A1-A3 
0 % 
 
This EPD is product and factory specific and does not contain average 
calculations. 
LCA SOFTWARE AND BIBLIOGRAPHY 
This EPD has been created using One Click LCA EPD Generator. The LCA and 
EPD have been prepared according to the reference standards and ISO 
14040/14044. Ecoinvent v3.8 and One Click LCA databases were used as 
sources of environmental data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:689==
Created with One Click LCA 
Swedoor interior classified 
40mm doors 
 
8  
 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT DATA 
CORE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT INDICATORS – EN 15804+A2, PEF VP-029-C 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP – total1) 
kg CO2e 
‐3,72E+00 3,83E+00 2,73E+00 2,85E+00 2,05E+00 3,76E+00 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 9,66E‐02 
2,67E+01 5,66E+00 ‐6,34E+01 
GWP – fossil 
kg CO2e 
2,30E+01 3,83E+00 6,35E+00 3,32E+01 2,05E+00 1,15E‐01 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 9,65E‐02 
1,08E+00 4,31E+00 ‐1,09E+01 
GWP – biogenic 
kg CO2e 
‐2,69E+01 7,41E‐04 
‐3,63E+00 ‐3,05E+01 8,18E‐04 
3,64E+00 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 5,66E‐06 
2,56E+01 1,35E+00 ‐5,24E+01 
GWP – LULUC 
kg CO2e 
1,36E‐01 
1,52E‐03 
4,99E‐03 
1,43E‐01 
8,05E‐04 
4,79E‐05 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 3,56E‐05 
3,91E‐04 
1,69E‐04 
‐2,32E‐02 
Ozone depletion pot. 
kg CFC-11e 
3,08E‐06 
8,84E‐07 
3,85E‐07 
4,35E‐06 
4,74E‐07 
1,47E‐08 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 2,22E‐08 
3,61E‐08 
3,20E‐07 
‐5,92E‐07 
Acidification potential 
mol H+e 
4,05E‐01 
1,76E‐02 
4,88E‐02 
4,71E‐01 
8,32E‐03 
6,86E‐04 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 4,09E‐04 
1,40E‐03 
4,11E‐03 
‐9,17E‐02 
EP-freshwater2) 
kg Pe 
2,77E‐03 
2,66E‐05 
3,10E‐04 
3,10E‐03 
1,44E‐05 
1,31E‐06 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 7,90E‐07 
1,56E‐05 
4,64E‐06 
‐4,37E‐04 
EP-marine 
kg Ne 
1,94E‐01 
5,15E‐03 
9,75E‐03 
2,09E‐01 
2,49E‐03 
2,81E‐04 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,21E‐04 
2,54E‐04 
6,44E‐04 
‐9,53E‐03 
EP-terrestrial 
mol Ne 
1,53E+00 5,68E‐02 
1,04E‐01 
1,69E+00 2,74E‐02 
3,00E‐03 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,34E‐03 
2,84E‐03 
6,94E‐03 
‐1,18E‐01 
POCP (“smog”)3) 
kg NMVOCe 1,24E‐01 
1,71E‐02 
2,93E‐02 
1,70E‐01 
8,39E‐03 
7,86E‐04 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 4,29E‐04 
8,32E‐04 
2,27E‐03 
‐3,48E‐02 
ADP-minerals & metals4) kg Sbe 
2,32E‐04 
1,34E‐05 
1,08E‐05 
2,56E‐04 
7,26E‐06 
4,72E‐07 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 2,26E‐07 
2,59E‐06 
2,47E‐06 
‐2,53E‐05 
ADP-fossil resources 
MJ 
2,84E+02 5,67E+01 3,06E+01 3,71E+02 3,04E+01 1,17E+00 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,45E+00 4,80E+00 1,91E+01 ‐1,54E+02 
Water use5) 
m3e depr. 
2,78E+02 2,61E‐01 
5,52E+00 2,84E+02 1,41E‐01 
1,85E‐01 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 6,49E‐03 
1,03E‐01 
8,70E‐02 
‐9,60E‐01 
1) GWP = Global Warming Potential; 2) EP = Eutrophication potential. Required characterisation method and data are in kg P-eq. Multiply by 3,07 to get PO4e; 3) POCP = Photochemical ozone formation; 4) ADP = Abiotic depletion 
potential; 5) EN 15804+A2 disclaimer for Abiotic depletion and Water use and optional indicators except Particulate matter and Ionizing radiation, human health. The results of these environmental impact indicators shall be used 
with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited experience with the indicator. 
ADDITIONAL (OPTIONAL) ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT INDICATORS – EN 15804+A2, PEF 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Particulate matter 
Incidence 
3,36E‐06 
3,27E‐07 
8,24E‐07 
4,51E‐06 
1,77E‐07 
1,01E‐08 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,11E‐08 
1,28E‐08 
3,66E‐08 
‐9,16E‐07 
Ionizing radiation6) 
kBq U235e 1,27E+00 2,96E‐01 
2,13E+00 3,70E+00 1,59E‐01 
5,69E‐03 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 6,91E‐03 
8,52E‐02 
9,28E‐02 
‐3,48E+00 
Ecotoxicity (freshwater) 
CTUe 
1,17E+03 4,69E+01 1,14E+02 1,33E+03 2,52E+01 1,60E+00 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,30E+00 5,37E+00 1,88E+01 ‐2,86E+02 
Human toxicity, cancer 
CTUh 
2,09E‐07 
1,47E‐09 
7,55E‐09 
2,18E‐07 
7,82E‐10 
1,72E‐10 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 3,20E‐11 
1,46E‐09 
8,45E‐09 
2,39E‐09 
Human tox. non-cancer 
CTUh 
‐8,11E‐07 4,74E‐08 
7,51E‐08 
‐6,88E‐07 2,56E‐08 
6,54E‐09 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,29E‐09 
6,49E‐09 
1,53E‐08 
‐4,22E‐08 
SQP7) 
- 
1,31E+03 3,92E+01 2,40E+02 1,59E+03 2,13E+01 7,66E‐01 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,67E+00 1,65E+00 3,12E+00 ‐1,30E+02 
==PAGE:690==
Created with One Click LCA 
Swedoor interior classified 
40mm doors 
 
9  
6) EN 15804+A2 disclaimer for Ionizing radiation, human health. This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due 
to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured 
by this indicator; 7) SQP = Land use related impacts/soil quality. 
USE OF NATURAL RESOURCES 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Renew. PER as energy8) 
MJ 
1,18E+03 
8,06E‐01 
2,30E+01 
1,20E+03 
4,36E‐01 
3,03E‐02 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 
1,63E‐02 
5,44E‐01 
1,37E‐01 
‐4,05E+01 
Renew. PER as material 
MJ 
2,31E+02 
0,00E+00 
3,14E+01 
2,62E+02 
0,00E+00 
‐3,14E+01 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 ‐2,19E+02 ‐1,16E+01 ‐3,14E+01 
Total use of renew. PER 
MJ 
1,41E+03 
8,06E‐01 
5,44E+01 
1,46E+03 
4,36E‐01 
‐3,14E+01 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 
1,63E‐02 
‐2,19E+02 ‐1,14E+01 ‐7,20E+01 
Non-re. PER as energy 
MJ 
2,46E+02 
5,67E+01 
1,14E+02 
4,16E+02 
3,04E+01 
1,17E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 
1,45E+00 4,80E+00 
1,91E+01 
‐1,49E+02 
Non-re. PER as material 
MJ 
2,87E+01 
0,00E+00 
7,27E+00 
3,60E+01 
0,00E+00 
‐7,27E+00 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 ‐2,73E+01 ‐1,44E+00 ‐7,15E+00 
Total use of non-re. PER 
MJ 
2,74E+02 
5,67E+01 
1,21E+02 
4,52E+02 
3,04E+01 
‐6,10E+00 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 
1,45E+00 ‐2,25E+01 1,77E+01 
‐1,56E+02 
Secondary materials 
kg 
2,14E‐01 
1,91E‐02 
3,62E‐01 
5,95E‐01 
1,02E‐02 
1,58E‐03 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 
4,03E‐04 
2,73E‐03 
7,19E‐03 
6,27E‐01 
Renew. secondary fuels 
MJ 
2,68E+00 
2,07E‐04 
1,72E+01 
1,99E+01 
1,12E‐04 
8,32E‐06 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 
4,06E‐06 
2,13E‐05 
1,69E‐05 
‐4,76E‐04 
Non-ren. secondary fuels MJ 
1,37E‐02 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
1,37E‐02 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
0,00E+00 
Use of net fresh water 
m3 
5,11E+00 
7,08E‐03 
8,48E‐02 
5,21E+00 
3,83E‐03 
‐3,79E‐04 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 
1,88E‐04 
2,95E‐03 
2,29E‐03 
‐1,32E‐01 
8) PER = Primary energy resources. 
 
END OF LIFE – WASTE 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Hazardous waste 
kg 
3,72E+00 6,38E‐02 
3,40E‐01 
4,12E+00 3,41E‐02 
2,61E‐03 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,92E‐03 
1,23E‐01 
1,22E+00 ‐1,21E+00 
Non-hazardous waste 
kg 
3,89E+01 1,12E+00 1,21E+01 5,22E+01 6,06E‐01 
2,71E+00 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 3,16E‐02 
1,51E+00 9,68E‐01 
‐2,17E+01 
Radioactive waste 
kg 
6,07E‐04 
3,91E‐04 
8,42E‐04 
1,84E‐03 
2,10E‐04 
5,42E‐06 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 9,70E‐06 
3,33E‐05 
0,00E+00 ‐9,58E‐04 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:691==
Created with One Click LCA 
Swedoor interior classified 
40mm doors 
 
10  
END OF LIFE – OUTPUT FLOWS 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Components for re-use 
kg 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 
Materials for recycling 
kg 
1,88E‐02 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 1,88E‐02 
0,00E+00 3,20E‐01 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 5,78E‐01 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 
Materials for energy rec 
kg 
2,86E‐04 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 2,86E‐04 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 
Exported energy 
MJ 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 2,07E+00 2,07E+00 0,00E+00 2,26E+01 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS – EN 15804+A1, CML / ISO 21930 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
Global Warming Pot. 
kg CO2e 
2,33E+01 3,80E+00 6,26E+00 3,33E+01 2,03E+00 1,14E‐01 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 9,56E‐02 
1,07E+00 4,36E+00 ‐1,07E+01 
Ozone depletion Pot. 
kg CFC-11e 
2,82E‐06 
7,01E‐07 
3,11E‐07 
3,83E‐06 
3,76E‐07 
1,19E‐08 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,76E‐08 
2,93E‐08 
2,54E‐07 
‐4,85E‐07 
Acidification 
kg SO2e 
2,56E‐01 
1,37E‐02 
4,06E‐02 
3,10E‐01 
6,46E‐03 
5,01E‐04 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 3,18E‐04 
1,16E‐03 
3,47E‐03 
‐7,86E‐02 
Eutrophication 
kg PO43e 
2,18E‐01 
2,90E‐03 
1,27E‐02 
2,34E‐01 
1,47E‐03 
4,77E‐04 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 7,23E‐05 
3,10E‐03 
3,26E‐03 
‐1,49E‐02 
POCP (“smog”) 
kg C2H4e 
1,28E‐02 
5,33E‐04 
2,18E‐03 
1,55E‐02 
2,65E‐04 
2,04E‐05 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,24E‐05 
6,02E‐05 
1,48E‐04 
‐3,80E‐03 
ADP-elements 
kg Sbe 
2,25E‐04 
1,31E‐05 
1,63E‐05 
2,54E‐04 
7,10E‐06 
4,53E‐07 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 2,19E‐07 
2,56E‐06 
2,31E‐06 
‐2,54E‐05 
ADP-fossil 
MJ 
2,79E+02 5,67E+01 1,21E+02 4,57E+02 3,04E+01 1,17E+00 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,45E+00 4,80E+00 1,91E+01 ‐1,54E+02 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS – FRENCH NATIONAL COMPLEMENTS 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
ADP-elements 
kg Sbe 
2,11E‐04 
1,31E‐05 
1,63E‐05 
2,41E‐04 
7,10E‐06 
4,53E‐07 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 2,19E‐07 
2,56E‐06 
2,31E‐06 
‐2,54E‐05 
Hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
3,60E+00 6,38E‐02 
5,60E‐01 
4,22E+00 3,41E‐02 
2,61E‐03 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,92E‐03 
1,23E‐01 
1,22E+00 ‐1,21E+00 
Non-haz. waste disposed 
kg 
3,77E+01 1,12E+00 2,30E+00 4,11E+01 6,06E‐01 
2,71E+00 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 3,16E‐02 
1,51E+00 9,68E‐01 
‐2,17E+01 
Air pollution 
m3 
1,44E+04 5,17E+02 9,47E+02 1,59E+04 2,74E+02 1,99E+01 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,73E+01 5,92E+01 5,94E+01 ‐4,96E+03 
Water pollution 
m3 
3,62E+02 5,14E+00 8,53E+00 3,76E+02 2,78E+00 7,32E‐01 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 1,02E‐01 
2,75E+01 7,56E+00 ‐1,93E+01 
 
 
 
==PAGE:692==
Created with One Click LCA 
Swedoor interior classified 
40mm doors 
 
11  
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS – GWP-GHG - THE INTERNATIONAL EPD SYSTEM 
Impact category 
Unit 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-GHG9) 
kg CO2e 
2,30E+01 3,83E+00 6,35E+00 
3,32E+01 2,05E+00 1,15E‐01 MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
MND 
0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 0,00E+00 
‐
1,09E+0
1 
9) This indicator includes all greenhouse gases excluding biogenic carbon dioxide uptake and emissions and biogenic carbon stored in the product as defined by IPCC AR 5 (IPCC 2013). In addition, the characterisation 
factors for the flows - CH4 fossil, CH4 biogenic and Dinitrogen monoxide - were updated in line with the guidance of IES PCR 1.2.5 Annex 1. This indicator is identical to the GWP-total of EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 except 
that the characterization factor for biogenic CO2 is set to zero. 
==PAGE:693==
Created with One Click LCA 
Swedoor interior classified 
40mm doors 
 
12  
VERIFICATION STATEMENT 
VERIFICATION PROCESS FOR THIS EPD 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 14025 by an independent, 
third-party verifier by reviewing results, documents and compliancy with 
reference standard, ISO 14025 and ISO 14040/14044, following the process 
and checklists of the program operator for: 
 
● This Environmental Product Declaration 
● The Life-Cycle Assessment used in this EPD 
● The digital background data for this EPD 
 
Why does verification transparency matter? Read more online 
This EPD has been generated by One Click LCA EPD generator, which has 
been verified and approved by the EPD Hub. 
THIRD-PARTY VERIFICATION STATEMENT 
I hereby confirm that, following detailed examination, I have not established 
any relevant deviations by the studied Environmental Product Declaration 
(EPD), its LCA and project report, in terms of 
 the data collected and 
used in the LCA calculations, the way the LCA-based calculations have been 
carried out, the presentation of environmental data in the EPD, and other 
additional environmental information, as present with respect to the 
procedural and methodological requirements in ISO 14025:2010 and 
reference standard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I confirm that the company-specific data has been examined as regards 
plausibility and consistency; the declaration owner is responsible for its 
factual integrity and legal compliance. 
 
I confirm that I have sufficient knowledge and experience of construction 
products, this specific product category, the construction industry, relevant 
standards, and the geographical area of the EPD to carry out this 
verification. 
 
I confirm my independence in my role as verifier; I have not been involved 
in the execution of the LCA or in the development of the declaration and 
have no conflicts of interest regarding this verification. 
 
HaiHa Nguyen, as an authorized verifier acting for EPD Hub Limited  
18.12.2023 
 
 
==PAGE:694==
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
Owner: 
Plastmo A/S 
No.: 
MD-22036-EN_rev1 
Issued: 
Issued first time: 
03-03-2023 
20-12-2022 
Valid to: 
20-12-2027 
 
EPD 
VERIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION | ISO 14025 & EN 15804 
3 r d  P A R T Y  V E R I F I E D  
==PAGE:695==
 
 
 
 
MD-22036-EN | Plastmo A/S | Page 2 of 11 
 
Owner of declaration 
Plastmo A/S 
Odinsvej 9-11 
4100 Ringsted 
Denmark 
CVR-nr.: 33 05 16 62 
  
Programme 
EPD Danmark 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
☐ Industry EPD   
☒ Product EPD 
 
Declared product 
Steel Plus and Black Steel Rain Gutter System 
 
 
Number of  declared datasets/product variations: 1 
 
Table with conversion factors included under adittional information 
for other sizes. 
 
Production site 
Odinsvej 9-11 
4100 Ringsted 
Denmark 
 
 
Product use 
Rain gutters for buildings 
Declared/ functional unit 
30 meter Steel Plus Rain Gutter System 
 
Year of production site data (A3) 
2021 
EPD version 
No. 2, first revision 03-03-2023: B modules with value 0 had been 
added instead of ‘MNR’ for clarification. 
 
Issued: 
03-03-2023 
Valid to: 
20-12-2027 
Basis of calculation 
This EPD is developed in accordance with the European 
standard EN 15804+A2.  
 
Comparability 
EPDs of construction products may not be comparable 
if they do not comply with the requirements in EN 
15804. EPD data may not be comparable if the 
datasets used are not developed in accordance with EN 
15804 and if the background systems are not based 
on the same database. 
 
Validity 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 
14025 and is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 
 
Use 
The intended use of an EPD is to communicate 
scientifically based environmental information for 
construction products, for the purpose of assessing the 
environmental performance of buildings. 
 
EPD type 
☐Cradle-to-gate with modules C1-C4 and D 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options, modules C1-C4 and D 
☒Cradle-to-grave and module D 
☐Cradle-to-gate 
☐Cradle-to-gate with options 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Martha Katrine Sørensen 
EPD Danmark 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to EN ISO 14025 
☐ internal 
☒ external 
 
                             
                         
Linda Høibye 
Third party verifier 
 
Life cycle stages and modules (MND = module not relevant) 
Product 
Construction 
process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond the system 
boundary 
Raw material 
supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery 
and recycling 
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
==PAGE:696==
 
 
 
 
MD-22036-EN | Plastmo A/S | Page 3 of 11 
 
Product information 
Product description 
Steel Plus and Black Steel Rain gutters are 
produced in 0.7 mm quality steel. The surface is 
coated with a combination of zinc, aluminum and 
magnesium, this coating means that the surface 
looks like a zinc rain gutter. Inside the material 
has a painted layer, which ensures that no zinc 
particles are discharged to the groundwater. 
Available in both a quarter and half round 
dimension and in several sizes, and in the colors 
black and steel. The environmental impact result 
in this EPD is related to the Steel plus Rain Gutter 
System No. 11/ ø75. The number e.g. “No. 11” 
indicates the shape which for example can be half 
round or a quarter round. Ø75/Ø90 indicates the 
diameter, which can be 75mm or 90mm.  
Conversion factors to other sizes can be found 
under additional information. Suitable for modern 
building design. 
Since a gutter system consists of different parts, 
an average scenario has been chosen as 
functional unit for which components normally is 
used for 30 meter roof on a one story building and 
includes all parts e.g. rain gutter, down pipe etc. 
In case of another scenario, the environmental 
impacts can be calculated based on weight. 
Steel 
Plus 
rain 
gutters 
are 
the 
perfect 
combination of the strength of the steel and the 
beautiful surface as known from patinated zinc. 
The surface of Steel Plus is so comparable to the 
original zinc look that it is indistinguishable to the 
naked eye.  
The main product components are shown in the 
table below.  
Material 
Weight-% of declared 
product 
Primary Steel 
75% 
Scrap Steel 
25% 
 
Product packaging: 
The composition of the sales- and transport 
packaging of the product is shown in the table 
below. 
Material 
Weight-% of packaging 
LDPE folie 
5-10 % 
Cardboard 
<1 % 
EUR Pallet 
90-95 % 
 
Essential characteristics  
Normally a gutter system consists of different 
parts depending on the building. Therefore, an 
average scenario has been chosen as functional 
unit for which components normally is used for 30 
meter roof on a one story building. 
The system sizes are adapted to different house 
types. A size 10 gutter is installed on smaller 
buildings, such as holiday homes and terrace. Str. 
11 is used for traditional house types, and size 12 
is installed on larger buildings, such as rental 
properties as well as warehouse and industrial 
premises. To ensure that you have sufficient 
drainage capacity, you should calculate the roof 
area and decide on the placement of the down 
pipe. The drainage area for the different types of 
Steel Plus rain gutters (No. 10, 11, 12 and 14) 
depends on the placement of the down pipe.  
Rain gutter 
Placing 
 
Drainage area (m2)  
No. 
10 
No. 11 
No. 12 
No. 14 
A
128 
200 
295 
365 
B
85 
128 
195 
262 
C
64 
95 
148 
197 
 
Further technical information about installation, 
use and disposal can be obtained by contacting 
the manufacturer or on the manufacturer's 
website: www.plastmo.dk 
Placement A 
Placement B 
Placement C 
==PAGE:697==
 
 
 
 
MD-22036-EN | Plastmo A/S | Page 4 of 11 
 
Reference Service Life (RSL) 
The reference service life is 25 years, which is set 
according to the guarantee Plastmo A/S gives on 
the product.  
 
Representativity 
This declaration, including data collection and the 
modeled foreground system including results, 
represents the production of 30 meter Steel Plus 
Gutter System on the production site located in 
Denmark. Product specific data are based on 
average values collected in the period January to 
December 2021 and delivered by Plastmo and 
their suppliers. Background data are based on the 
GaBi database, EcoInvent and an EPD on steel 
delivered to Plastmo and are less than 10 years 
old. Generally, the used background datasets are 
of high quality, and the majority of the datasets 
are only a couple of years old. 
Picture of product 
 
Hazardous substances 
The Steel Plus Rain Gutter System does not 
contain substances listed on the ”Candidate List 
of 
Substances 
of 
Very 
High 
Concern 
for 
authorization” 
 (http://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:698==
 
 
 
 
MD-22036-EN | Plastmo A/S | Page 5 of 11 
 
LCA background 
Declared unit 
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD relates to 
one item of "30 meter Steel Plus Rain Gutter 
System". 
Name 
Value 
Unit 
Declared unit 
1 
item 
Density 
67.2 
kg/item 
Conversion factor to 1 kg. 
0.0149 
- 
 
Functional unit 
30 meter Steel Plus Rain Gutter System. 
PCR 
This EPD is developed according to the core 
rules for the product category of construction 
products in PCR EN 15804:2012+A2:2019. 
Geographical area 
The geographical area is EU. 
Flow diagram 
 
The flow diagram with the system boundaries of 
the entire life cycle of the Steel Plus Rain Gutter 
System is divided into the relevant modules with 
the following color coding; White: inputs to the 
system, blue: transport, green: production and 
installation (A modules), yellow: modules after 
installation (B, C and D modules) 
System boundary 
This EPD is based on a cradle-to-gate with options 
LCA, in which 100 weight-% of the product has 
been accounted for.  
The cut-off criteria, which are the general rules 
for the exclusion of inputs and outputs, follows 
the requirements in EN 15804, 6.3.5, where the 
total of neglected input flows per module shall be 
a maximum of 5 % of energy usage and mass and 
1 % of energy usage and mass for unit processes. 
Product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
A1 – Extraction and processing of raw materials 
A2 – Transport to the production site 
A3 – Manufacturing processes 
To produce the Steel Plus Rain Gutter System, 
Plastmo A/S buy steel from their Danish and 
Norwegian suppliers, where all surface 
treatments are done before the steel is delivered 
at Plastmo A/S's production site. The average 
scrap content in the delivered steel is 25% and 
is based on cold-rolled steel manufactured via 
the primary route (blast furnace, BOF basic 
oxygen furnace) and hot dip galvanized. When 
Plastmo A/S receives the galvanized steel, it is 
pruned and shaped at Plastmo A/S's production 
site in Ringsted, Denmark. After production of 
the Steel Plus Rain Gutter System, it is packed 
and distributed. The product stage A1-A3 
comprises the acquisition of all raw materials, 
products and energy, transport to the production 
site, packaging and waste processing.  
Module A1 comprise impacts from extraction and 
processing of raw materials and production of the 
steel pre-product that are delivered to Plastmo 
A/S.  
Module 
A2 
comprise 
the 
impacts 
from 
transportation of raw materials to Plastmo A/S' 
production site, which includes extraction and 
==PAGE:699==
 
 
 
 
MD-22036-EN | Plastmo A/S | Page 6 of 11 
 
production of the fuel as well as the combustion 
of the fuel during the transport. The capacity 
utilization (including empty runs) is 61%. 
Module A3 comprise the impacts related to the 
production that takes place at Plastmo A/S' 
production site including impacts related to 
production of electricity and natural gas used at 
the production site which are allocated to the 
product based on weight and total production at 
the site. 1% steel waste is sold as scrap steel. 
Module A3 also includes raw materials for 
packaging. 
The LCA results are declared in aggregated form 
for the product stage, which means, that the sub-
modules A1, A2 and A3 are declared as one 
module A1-A3. 
Construction 
process 
stage 
(A4-A5) 
includes: 
Module A4 includes impacts from transportation 
of the finished product to an assumed installation 
site in Denmark. The module includes extraction 
of the fuels and the combustion of the fuel during 
the transport. The capacity utilization (including 
empty runs) is 61%. 
The Steel Plus Rain Gutter System is manually 
installed, so no inputs are included in Module A5.  
Module A5 also includes the end-of-life treatment 
of packaging including the benefits from recycling 
of packaging materials. Cardboard and LDPE folie 
are assumed to be recycled, whereas 1/20 of an 
EUR pallet is assumed sent to municipal waste 
incineration, from where energy and heat credit 
are reported in module D. The recycling of the 
EUR pallet is not reported to avoid double 
crediting, since 19/20 of the input for the EUR 
pallet is set to be secondary material due to the 
assumed 20-time reuse. 
Use stage (B1-B7) includes: 
The Steel Plus Rain Gutter System is maintenance 
free. If dirt and leaves accumulate in the gutter, 
it can be manually removed with a brush. Dirt on 
the outside of the rain gutters can for sight’s sake 
be removed with water on a cloth. It is assumed 
that the rain gutters are washed every 5 year and 
10L of water is used each time, given 50L of water 
over a 25 year period. 
The municipal wastewater treatment of the water 
is also included in B2. 
End of Life (C1-C4) includes: 
No impacts from dismantling have been included 
in module C1 since it is done manually.  
Module 
C2 
comprise 
the 
impacts 
from 
transportation of waste from the deconstructed 
product after end-of-life to the waste handling 
site. An estimate of 50 km with truck are used. 
Module C3 comprise the impacts from waste 
handling. It is assumed that 95% of the product 
are recycled.  
The substitution potential of primary steel by a 
recycling scenario is declared in D. 95% of the 
product are assumed to be recycled. 
Module C4 comprise of the impacts related to 
landfill. The 5% of the product that is not 
assumed recycled is assumed to be disposed as 
landfill. 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
includes: 
In module D potential benefits from re-use, 
recovery and recycling of steel and packaging is 
modeled. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:700==
 
 
 
 
MD-22036-EN | Plastmo A/S | Page 7 of 11 
 
 LCA results 
Environmental Impacts 
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [30 meter Steel Plus Rain Gutter System] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B2 
B1, B3-
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
1.93E+02 
6.04E-01 
2.35E+00 
5.41E-02 
0 
0 
4.82E-01 
0 
1.61E-01 
-1.09E+02 
GWP-fossil 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
1.95E+02 
6.06E-01 
1.23E-01 
2.74E-02 
0 
0 
4.80E-01 
0 
1.62E-01 
-1.09E+02 
GWP-biogenic 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
-2.31E+00 
-5.94E-03 
2.23E+00 
2.67E-02 
0 
0 
-1.26E-03 
0 
-1.70E-03 
1.81E-01 
GWP-luluc 
[kg CO2 eq.] 
9.79E-02 
4.10E-03 
4.78E-06 
5.97E-06 
0 
0 
3.27E-03 
0 
9.77E-05 
-3.24E-03 
ODP 
[kg CFC 11 eq.] 
1.00E-08 
5.97E-14 
1.85E-13 
1.51E-13 
0 
0 
4.76E-14 
0 
2.14E-13 
-4.40E-08 
AP 
[mol H+ eq.] 
4.21E-01 
6.82E-04 
5.66E-04 
6.56E-05 
0 
0 
1.72E-03 
0 
5.12E-04 
-2.36E-01 
EP-freshwater 
[kg P eq.] 
2.11E-04 
2.17E-06 
4.53E-08 
3.15E-05 
0 
0 
1.73E-06 
0 
1.25E-07 
-1.78E-04 
EP-marine 
[kg N eq.] 
9.67E-02 
2.20E-04 
2.22E-04 
1.36E-04 
0 
0 
7.93E-04 
0 
1.25E-04 
-4.21E-02 
EP-terrestrial 
[mol N eq.] 
1.03E+00 
2.63E-03 
2.81E-03 
1.94E-04 
0 
0 
8.87E-03 
0 
1.37E-03 
-3.74E-01 
POCP 
[kg NMVOC eq.] 
3.26E-01 
5.87E-04 
5.83E-04 
4.92E-05 
0 
0 
1.55E-03 
0 
3.95E-04 
-1.75E-01 
ADPm1  
[kg Sb eq.] 
9.88E-04 
6.13E-08 
4.62E-09 
3.28E-09 
0 
0 
4.89E-08 
0 
1.13E-08 
-2.63E-04 
ADPf1 
[MJ] 
2.23E+03 
7.98E+00 
5.42E-01 
2.62E-01 
0 
0 
6.36E+00 
0 
2.30E+00 
-1.09E+03 
WDP1 
[m3 world eq. 
deprived] 
5.54E+01 
6.80E-03 
2.46E-01 
1.03E-02 
0 
0 
5.42E-03 
0 
-1.53E-03 
-2.34E+01 
Caption 
GWP-total = Globale Warming Potential - total; GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential - fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming 
Potential - biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential - land use and land use change; ODP = Ozone Depletion; AP = Acidification; 
EP-freshwater = Eutrophication – aquatic freshwater; EP-marine = Eutrophication – aquatic marine; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication – 
terrestrial; POCP = Photochemical zone formation; ADPm  = Abiotic Depletion Potential – minerals and metals; ADPf = Abiotic Depletion 
Potential – fossil fuels; WDP = Water Depletion Potential 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, e.g., 1.95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1.95*102 or 195, while 1.12E-11 is 
the same as 1.12*10-11 or 0.0000000000112. 
Disclaimer 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
 
 
 
Additional Environmental Impacts 
ADDITIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER [30 meter Steel Plus Rain Gutter System] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B2 
B1, B3-
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
[Disease 
incidence] 
5.28E-06 
4.68E-09 
2.27E-09 
6.84E-10 
0 
0 
9.96E-09 
0 
5.48E-09 
-3.30E-06 
IRP2 
[kBq U235 eq.] 
1.58E+00 
2.25E-03 
4.77E-03 
0.00395 
0 
0 
1.79E-03 
0 
4.10E-03 
-1.52E+02 
ETP-fw1 
[CTUe] 
3.94E+02 
5.65E+00 
2.27E-01 
4.24 
0 
0 
4.51E+00 
0 
6.83E-01 
-9.71E+01 
HTP-c1 
[CTUh] 
9.06E-08 
1.17E-10 
2.24E-11 
1.46E-10 
0 
0 
9.29E-11 
0 
8.10E-11 
-7.93E-08 
HTP-nc1 
[CTUh] 
2.72E-06 
6.34E-09 
1.42E-09 
1.5E-08 
0 
0 
5.82E-09 
0 
8.19E-09 
-1.45E-06 
SQP1 
-  
8.07E+02 
3.38E+00 
1.47E-01 
0.0712 
0 
0 
2.69E+00 
0 
1.79E-01 
-2.24E+01 
Caption 
PM = Particulate Matter emissions; IRP = Ionizing radiation – human health; ETP-fw = Eco toxicity – freshwater; HTP-c = Human 
toxicity – cancer effects; HTP-nc = Human toxicity – non cancer effects; SQP = Soil Quality (dimensionless) 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, e.g., 1.95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1.95*102 or 195, while 1.12E-11 is 
the same as 1.12*10-11 or 0.0000000000112. 
Disclaimers 
1 The results of this environmental indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these results are high or as there is limited 
experienced with the indicator. 
2 This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health of the nuclear fuel cycle. It 
does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to radioactive waste disposal in underground 
facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some construction materials is also not measured by this 
indicator. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:701==
 
 
 
 
MD-22036-EN | Plastmo A/S | Page 8 of 11 
 
 
 
Resource Use 
RESOURCE USE PER [30 meter Steel Plus Rain Gutter System] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B2 
B1, B3-
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PERE 
[MJ] 
1.20E+02 
5.53E-01 
1.17E-01 
9.65E-02 
0 
0 
4.41E-01 
0 
1.88E-01 
4.87E+01 
PERM 
[MJ] 
2.17E+01 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.42E+02 
5.53E-01 
1.17E-01 
9.65E-02 
0 
0 
4.41E-01 
0 
1.88E-01 
4.87E+01 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
2.23E+03 
8.01E+00 
5.42E-01 
2.62E-01 
0 
0 
6.39E+00 
0 
2.30E+00 
-1.09E+03 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
4.76E+01 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
2.28E+03 
8.01E+00 
5.42E-01 
2.62E-01 
0 
0 
6.39E+00 
0 
2.30E+00 
-1.09E+03 
SM 
[kg] 
3.78E+01 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
FW 
[m3] 
1.37E+00 
6.39E-04 
5.79E-03 
2.83E-04 
0 
0 
5.09E-04 
0 
3.23E-05 
-5.33E-01 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of 
non renewable primary energy excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non 
renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use 
of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Net use of fresh 
water 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, e.g., 1.95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1.95*102 or 195, while 1.12E-11 is 
the same as 1.12*10-11 or 0.0000000000112. 
 
 
 
Waste Categories and Output Flows 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER [30 meter Steel Plus Rain Gutter System] 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B2 
B1, B3-
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HWD 
[kg] 
7.42E-06 
4.24E-11 
5.64E-11 
2.19E-11 
0 
0 
3.38E-11 
0 
3.48E-10 
-8.94E-09 
NHWD 
[kg] 
7.34E+00 
1.31E-03 
1.88E-02 
4.83E-02 
0 
0 
1.04E-03 
0 
3.37E+00 
1.46E+01 
RWD 
[kg] 
2.18E-03 
1.49E-05 
2.93E-05 
2.42E-05 
0 
0 
1.19E-05 
0 
2.78E-05 
-8.80E-04 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
CRU 
[kg] 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
MFR 
[kg] 
6.72E-01 
0 
2.25E+01 
0 
0 
0 
0 
6.39E+01 
0 
0 
MER 
[kg] 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
EEE 
[MJ] 
0 
0 
3.50E+00 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
EET 
[MJ] 
0 
0 
6.29E+00 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Caption 
 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non-hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components 
for re-use; MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal 
energy 
 
The numbers are declared in scientific notation, e.g., 1.95E+02. This number can also be written as: 1.95*102 or 195, while 1.12E-11 is 
the same as 1.12*10-11 or 0.0000000000112. 
 
 
 
Biogenic Carbon Content 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT PER [30 meter Steel Plus Rain Gutter System] 
Parameter 
Unit 
At the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
[kg C] 
0 
Biogenic carbon content in accompanying packaging 
[kg C] 
0.5 
Note: 1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg of CO₂ 
==PAGE:702==
 
 
 
 
MD-22036-EN | Plastmo A/S | Page 9 of 11 
 
 
 
Additional information 
LCA interpretation 
The results in this EPD relate to 30 meter Steel Plus Rain Gutter System, produces with an average scrap 
content of 25% scrap steel. The calculated environmental impacts clearly reflect the environmental impacts 
from the production of primary steel in module A1 as the dominant source to impact.  
 
Conversion to other Steel Plus Rain Gutter Systems 
The results are related to the rain gutter system size No.11/ø75. If other system sizes is used, the EPD 
results can be used by multiplying the environmental impact results with the conversion factor below. 
Rain gutter system size 
Quantity (kg) 
Conversion factor 
No. 10 / ø75 
60.9 
0.91 
No. 11 / ø75 
67.2 
1 
No. 11 / ø90 
69.2 
1.03 
No. 12 / ø75 
77.1 
1.15 
No. 12 / ø90 
79.1 
1.18 
No. 14 / ø90 
93.9 
1.4 
 
 
Technical information on scenarios 
 
Transport to the building site (A4) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Fuel type 
Diesel 
- 
Vehicle type 
EURO 6 truck, 20-26t gross 
weight with 17.3t payload 
capacity 
- 
Transport distance 
100 
km 
Capacity utilisation (including empty runs) 
61 
% 
Bulk density of transported products 
67.2 
Kg/item 
Volumen capacity utilization factor 
1 
- 
 
 
Installation of the product in the building (A5) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Ancillary materials 
<0.3 (glue and wipes) 
kg 
Water use 
0 
m3 
Other resource use 
0 
kg 
Energy type and consumption 
0 
kWh 
Waste materials 
23.6 (packaging) 
kg 
Output materials 
0 
kg 
Direct emissions to air, soil or water 
0 
kg 
 
 
Reference service life 
RSL information 
 
Unit 
Reference service Life 
25 
Years 
Declared product properties 
30 meter Steel Plus Rain Gutter System 
- 
Assumed quality of work 
Instruction are available at 
www.plastmo.dk  
- 
 
 
==PAGE:703==
 
 
 
 
MD-22036-EN | Plastmo A/S | Page 10 of 11 
 
 
 
End of life (C1-C4) 
Scenario information 
Value 
Unit 
Collected separately 
67.2 
kg 
Collected with mixed waste 
0 
kg 
For reuse 
0 
kg 
For recycling 
63.9 
kg 
For energy recovery 
0 
kg 
For final disposal 
3.36 
kg 
Assumptions for scenario development 
50 km with a EURO 6 truck to 
waste handling. 
- 
 
 
Re-use, recovery and recycling potential (D) 
Scenario information/Materiel 
Value 
Unit 
Product sent for recycling from module C3: The input I A1 added as burden free is removed before module D 
60.7 
kg 
Packaging sent for recycling from module A5: Cardboard and LDPE film 
1.59 
kg 
Incineration of the 1/10 pallet that reach end of life from module A5 
1.1 
kg 
Incineration of wipes from module A5 
0.2 
kg 
 
 
Indoor air  
The EPD does not give information on release of 
dangerous substances to indoor air because the 
horizontal standards on the relevant 
measurements are not available. Read more in 
EN15804+A2 chapter 7.4.1. 
Soil and water 
Regarding the claim of no release of Zinc to 
groundwater, the Danish Technological Institute 
have done test on Zinc release to groundwater 
from the Steel Plus Rain Gutter System. For 
more information, contact Plastmo A/S. 
Besides that, the EPD does not give information 
on release of dangerous substances to soil and 
water because the horizontal standards on the 
relevant measurements are not available. Read 
more in EN15804+A2 chapter 7.4.2. 
 
 
==PAGE:704==
 
 
 
 
MD-22036-EN | Plastmo A/S | Page 11 of 11 
 
References 
 
Publisher 
 
 
www.epddanmark.dk 
Programme operator 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA-practitioner 
 
 
Rikke Zuwa Kempf Bernberg, Freja Jeppesen 
and Cinzia Giampieriand 
 
COWI A/S 
Parallelvej 2 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby 
LCA software /background data 
GaBi Professional 2022 and ecoinvent 3.8 
3rd party verifier 
Linda Høibye 
Life Cycle Assessment Consulting 
 
General programme instructions 
General Programme Instructions, version 2.0, spring 2020 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
EN 15804 
DS/EN 15804 + A2:2019 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental  
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products” 
 
EN 15942 
DS/EN 15942:2011 – ” Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – Communication 
format business-to-business” 
 
ISO 14025 
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmental declarations – Principles 
and procedures” 
 
ISO 14040 
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and framework” 
 
ISO 14044 
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and guidelines” 
 
GaBi Professional 
GaBi 2022 Professional Database, version 2022.2 http://www.gabi-software.com/nw-eu-danish/databases/gabi-
databases/professional/ 
 
EcoInvent 
Ecoinvent version 3.8 
==PAGE:705==
in accordance with ISO 14025 and EN 15804+A1 for:
Environmental 
product declaration
3M™ Flexible Air Sealing Tape 
FAST-D 8069E
FAST-D 8069E Seal Hold Tape 20 mm x 25 m
FAST-D 8069E Seal Hold Tape 25 mm x 25 m
Programme: The International EPD®  System
Programme operator: EPD International AB 
www.environdec.com
S-P-00990
Version  2.0
Publication date: 2020-03-24
Revision date: 2020-07-07
Expiration date: 2025-07-06
Geographical scope: Global
==PAGE:706==
2
==PAGE:707==
3
Contents
1	
Programme Information	
4
2	
Company Information	
5
3	
Product Information	
8
	
3.1	
Product description	
8
	
3.2	
Content declaration	
10
	
	
3.2.1	    Product composition	
10
	
	
3.2.2	   Packaging	
10
	
	
3.2.3	   Recycling	
12
	
3.3	
Manufacturing	
12
4	
Life Cycle Assessment	
13
	
4.1	
Declared unit	
13
	
4.2	
System boundaries	
13
	
	
4.2.1	    Product stage (A1-A3)	
13
	
	
4.2.2	   Downstream processes (A4-A5, B1-B7, C1-C4)	
13
	
	
4.2.3	   Resource recovery stage (D)	
13
	
	
4.2.4		 Flow diagram	
15
	
4.3	
Data collection and quality	
15
	
4.4	
Calculation procedure	
15
5	
Environmental Performance	
16
	
5.1	
Potential environmental impact	
16
	
5.2	
Use of resources	
17
	
5.3	
Output flows and waste categories	
17
	
5.4	
Release of dangerous substances during the use stage	
17
6	
Additional Information	
18
	
6.1	
Other environmental information	
18
	
	
6.1.1	    LCA results interpretation	
18
	
	
6.1.2     Uncertainty on the environment indicators	
19
	
6.2	
Social and economic aspects	
19
	
6.3	
Validity of the EPD and changes versus previous version	
19
	
6.4	
Acronyms	
20
	
6.5	
Variation ranges	
23
	
6.6	
References	
23
==PAGE:708==
4
EPD operator
EPD International AB (info@environdec.com)
Box 210 60, SE-100 31 Stockholm, Sweden
Product Category Rules (PCRs)
EN 15804:2012+A1:2013 - Sustainability of construction works - Environmental 
Product Declarations - Core rules for the product category of construction 
products
PCR 2012:01 v2.31 - Construction Products and Construction Services in 
accordance with ISO 14025 (Multiple CPC codes, date: 2019-12-20, valid until: 
2020-09-01)
Generic PCR review conducted 
by
The Technical Committee of the International EPD® System.
Chair: Massimo Marino (info@environdec.com)
Comparisons of EPD
EPD of construction products may not be comparable if they do not comply 
with EN 15804.
Environmental product declarations within the same product category from 
different programs may not be comparable.
Independent Verification
  EPD verification      
  EPD process certification
Verified and approved by
SGS Italia S.p.A.
Via Caldera, 21, Milan 20153, Italy
Accredited by ACCREDIA
Accreditation number DAP N° 006H
Certificate N. IT14/0823
Data follow-up
Procedure for follow-up of data during EPD validity involves third-party 
verifier:
  Yes                           
  No
Goal of the study
A cradle-to-gate LCA study has been conducted in accordance with ISO 
14040:2006 and ISO 14044:2006 and the requirements stated in the 
General Programme Instructions by The International EPD® System, and 
abovementioned PCRs.
The goal of the LCA study is to assess the potential environmental impact for 
the product family of 3M™ 8069E FAST-D Seal Hold Tape 25 mm or smaller 
range which is represented by reference product FAST-D 8069E Seal Hold 
Tape 20 mm x 25 m  (7100087075) in this EPD.
Disclaimer
The owner of the EPD is 3M.
All values provided in this EPD are a direct result from the use of 
characterisation factors and calculation rules as defined in the GaBi™ software 
from thinkstep GmbH, a spheraTM company and the requirements of the 
product category rules as mentioned above.
For more information about this EPD or its contents, contact Jonas Depelchin, 
EPD publisher and process owner, at jdepelchin@mmm.com.
1	
Programme Information
==PAGE:709==
117,
over
patents
billion global sales
$3
over
8,1
scientists globally
96,000
countries
employees in
7
5
2	
Company Information
Over the last century 3M has grown into a global 
powerhouse, developing products that improve lives 
around the world. It began life as a small-scale mining 
venture in Northern Minnesota back in 1902, then named 
Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company. 
3M’s success and longevity weren’t apparent from the 
start. Our five founders were looking for corundum, a 
mineral ideal for making sandpaper and grinding wheels. 
It turns out, what they thought was corundum was really 
a low-grade mineral. Despite the early setback they 
persevered with their operation, gained the trust of 
important investors and built up sales, giving birth to the 
spirit of innovation and collaboration that still shapes 3M 
today.
Over the following decades scientific, technical and 
marketing innovations produced success upon success, 
eventually making 3M a constant name on the Fortune 
500 list. Today, more than 60,000 3M products are 
used in homes, businesses, schools, hospitals and other 
industries.
With operations employing over 96,000 employees in 
more than 70 countries, and products sold in nearly 200 
countries, 3M is a diverse technology company with 
global sales in excess of $30 billion. 3M’s commitment 
to innovation is reflected by the 8,100 scientists working 
around the world. The company now has well over 
117,000 patents in its name.
3M brings solutions to different markets through four 
separate business groups, each one represents a core 
area of the company, with ideas and innovations shared 
between them. This collaborative approach has led 
to unexpected solutions by enabling designers to see 
problems from different perspectives. 
Safety & Industrial is our biggest earning business 
group, with a vast range of products used in industrial 
production, electrical and safety markets. This includes 
automotive, bonding and protecting surfaces in 
construction, securing things together and developing 
lightweight parts to help reduce weight and increase 
efficiency, whilst protecting people at work, and 
enhancing visual and design communication.
Transportation & Electronics provides solutions for 
improving road safety and creating a more connected 
world, such as developing global telecommunications 
and power grids, restoring underground pipelines and 
locating key underground infrastructure. It’s known for 
integrating with customers to create innovative solutions 
and providing opportunities for energy conservation and 
generation.
Healthcare provides innovations which are pioneering 
medical advancements in hospitals, emergency rooms 
and dental clinics around the world. It features a range 
of products designed for preventing infections and 
protecting wounds, improving oral health and ensuring 
food quality.
And finally, Consumer business group features many of 
our most familiar products and brands, including Post-
It®, Scotch® and Command™. It develops solutions to 
make life easier and more productive at home and in the 
office, such as simplifying communication, cleaning and 
protecting surfaces, making home improvement easy 
and inspiring hobbies, crafts and creativity.
==PAGE:710==
6
At 3M, we innovate with purpose. We empower 
individuals to address issues they want to impact, and 
collaborate with our customers and communities to take 
on shared global challenges – bringing value to both our 
business and society as a whole. We call this purpose-
driven business. It’s an exciting path forward because 
we know that with creativity, collaboration and a shared 
sense of purpose, no problem is unsolvable. Working 
together, we can improve every life. 
We look at sustainability in terms of shared global needs 
and the future of our business. As the population grows, 
particularly in emerging economies, challenges like 
energy availability and security, raw material scarcity, 
human health and safety, education, and development 
must be addressed to ensure people across the world can 
lead healthy, fulfilling lives. Every day, 3M innovations 
aim to tackle some of the world’s most pressing areas 
of concern: raw materials; water; energy and climate; 
health and safety, and education and development. 
Setting goals to drive sustainability progress is nothing 
new at 3M. We’ve been setting global environmental 
goals since 1990. A strong part of our company history, 
these goals have helped dramatically reduce our own 
environmental footprint and established us as a leader 
in environmental stewardship. 3M’s iconic Pollution 
Prevention Pays (3P) programme has been running since 
1975. The programme has prevented more than 2 million 
tons of pollutants and saved over $2 billion based on 
aggregated data from the first year of each 3P project.
Over the last two decades, as 3M’s revenues have 
doubled, we have reduced our greenhouse gas emissions 
by nearly 70%, and moved 35% of our manufacturing 
sites to zero waste. At the same time, we’ve intensified 
our focus on creating a range of innovative solutions that 
help our customers be more sustainable — from glass 
bubbles that enable lower vehicle weight and improved 
fuel economy, to films that make homes, businesses, 
and electronics more energy efficient. In 2019 alone, 3M 
Science helped our customers avoid 17 million metric 
tons of emissions, which is the equivalent of taking more 
than three million cars off the road.
Another initiative led by 3M is the Sustainability Value 
Commitment, which ensures that every new product 
made by 3M from 2019 onwards is manufactured with 
sustainability in mind. It commits our product developers 
to focus on reusability, recyclability, energy, waste, 
water savings, responsible sourcing, and/or renewable 
materials appropriate to the specific product, from the 
beginning to the end of each product’s lifecycle.
Since February 2014, 3M has become a signatory of the 
United Nations Global Compact. While 3M has always 
acted in accordance with the core values represented by 
the Compact, we are proud to formalise our commitment 
to its 10 principles in the areas of human rights, labour, 
environmental and anti-corruption and to grow our 
partnership with the organisation.
==PAGE:711==
7
==PAGE:712==
8
3	
Product Information
3.1 	 Product description
The following products are covered by this EPD:
3M™ Flexible Air Sealing Tape FAST-D 8069E  is a 
double-sided tape that conforms and seals over and 
around irregular surfaces. The proprietary acrylic 
adhesive sticks and stays stuck to a wide variety of 
difficult-to-stick-to surfaces, such as concrete, wood 
and plastic sheeting, anodized aluminium, galvanized 
metal, exterior gypsum and plywood without the use 
of any adhesion promoters. The liner is made from an 
easy-releasing, tear-resistant polyethylene polymer. 
Application temperatures may range from -18° C to 80° 
C. The tape is suited for splicing, installation, joining and 
sealing of construction foils and is made of polyethylene, 
which acts as water vapour barrier. Multilayer Elastomeric 
Film backing seals around nails and staples to prevent 
moisture intrusion. The product is available in different 
sizes and with different liners.
FAST-D 8069E Seal Hold Tape 20 mm x 25 m 
(7100087075) is selected as main reference product 
because differences between the mandatory impact 
indicators compared to the other reference are lower 
than 10%. An overview of variation ranges between the 
references can be found in section 6.5.  
As such, FAST-D 8069E Seal Hold Tape 20 mm x 25 m 
will represent the other reference throughout the study. 
Differences between the references are related to the 
converting and packaging processes, e.g. different 
product dimensions and varying reference flows. The 
liner and film used are polyethylene-based for both.
3M FAST-D 8069E is classified under code 36920 (Self-
adhesive plates, sheets, film, foil, tape, strip and other 
flat shapes, of plastics) in the United Nations Central 
Product Classification (CPC) System.
Product name
Reference
FAST-D 8069E Seal Hold Tape 20 mm x 25 m
7100087075/UU004246516
FAST-D 8069E Seal Hold Tape 25 mm x 25 m
7100087488/UU004868780
Depending on its application, the product covered 
by this Environmental Product Declaration can 
be considered a construction product as per the 
definition in European Regulation (EU) No 305/2011 
laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing 
of construction products. This regulation defines 
construction products as “any product or kit which is 
produced and placed on the market for incorporation 
in a permanent manner in construction works or parts 
thereof and the performance of which has an effect 
on the performance of the construction works with 
respect to the basic requirements for construction 
works”. Consequently, PCR 2012:01 v2.31 and EN 
15804:2012+A1:2013 apply. It is important to note that 
due to the absence of so-called harmonised technical 
specifications, the requirements for CE marking and 
declaration of performance as described in the same 
regulation do not apply.
==PAGE:713==
9
==PAGE:714==
3.2.2	 Packaging
The packaging materials of the included 3M FAST-D 
8069E references are described in the table below. 
Values are given in kg for both the product and the 
packaging materials and relate to the declared unit.
All packaging materials are sourced externally and the 
products are packaged at 3M Wrocław (Poland). The 
products are unpacked at the construction site.
Dimensions
3M 8069E 
[kg]
Paper core 
[kg]
Corrugated 
paper sheet 
[kg]
Paper tube 
[kg]
Paper slotted 
container [kg]
Plastic wafer 
[kg]
20 mm x 25 m
0.495
0.0360
0.0133
0.00292
0.0798
0.0876
25 mm x 25 m
0.495
0.0158
0.0133
0.00292
0.0798
0.0701
10
3.2 	 Content declaration
3.2.1	 Product composition
3M FAST-D 8069E covered by this Environmental 
Product Declaration does not contain Substances of Very 
High Concern (SVHC) as defined by article 59 (10) of 
Regulation (CE) n° 1907/2006 (dated 2020-06-25), also 
known as the REACH candidate list, at a concentration 
at or above 0.1% in weight. The table below reports the 
product composition. The pie chart at the bottom of the 
page gives the composition of 3M FAST-D 8096E.
Liner
Material
Weight %
Acrylic adhesive
50
Polyethylene film
25
Polyethylene liner
25
Film
Adhesive
==PAGE:715==
11
==PAGE:716==
3.2.3	 Recycling
3M has been recycling since 1975 when we established 
the Corporate Environmental Policy and adopted a 
voluntary Pollution Prevention Pays (3P) program based 
on the then-novel idea that pollution prevention is 
more environmentally effective, technically sound and 
economically advantageous than pollution control.
Today 3M practices responsible waste management at 
every company location to reduce the amount of waste 
materials generated, and deal with hazardous waste in 
the most efficient way possible. 
Every location has a Waste Management Coordinator 
and is required to manage all returned, recycled and 
waste materials from the time of generation until reused, 
recycled, treated or disposed.
3.3 	 Manufacturing
At 3M, we approach our sustainability goals and strategy 
by delivering excellence in operations and across our 
supply chain, innovating to improve lives with our 
customers and partners, and enriching the communities 
where we live and work. Our ambition, working 
collaboratively, is to realise a world where every life is 
improved, where natural resources are reliably available, 
where people everywhere have access to education and 
opportunity, and where communities are safe, healthy, 
connected and thriving.
When it comes to fabrication, assembly or processing, 
3M understand that increasing efficiency is vital for 
our selling partners and their bottom line. From ultra-
strong abrasives that keep processes running smoothly 
to futuristic materials that can literally lighten your 
workload, we provide innovative solutions that help 
businesses and employees improve efficiency. 
3M’s International Environmental Operations group 
enhances and integrates our global environmental 
management system which guarantees compliance with 
environmental regulations and prepares facilities to meet 
the requirements of international standards.
 
3M FAST-D 8069E references covered by this 
Environmental Product Declaration are manufactured by 
3M Wrocław (Poland), a production site manufacturing 
products for IATD, a division of the Safety & Industrial 
Business Group (SIBG) within the 3M Company. 
Our manufacturing location in 
Wrocław, Poland is
ISO9001 and
ISO14001 certified
12
==PAGE:717==
13
4	
Life Cycle Assessment
4.1 	 Declared unit
The declared unit in this Environmental Product 
Declaration is 1 square meter of packaged 3M FAST-D 
8069E. This unit equates to a reference flow of 0.495 kg 
tape and a respective packaging material weight of 0.22 
kg  (for 20 mm x 25 m) and 0.182 kg (for 25 mm x 25 m).
4.2 	 System boundaries
The Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) study supporting this 
Environmental Product Declaration is a cradle-to-gate 
analysis, including the life cycle stages listed in the 
table below. Due to the exclusion of the use phase, the 
reference service life (RSL) is not included in the study.
Product stage
Construction 
process stage
Use stage
End-of-life stage
Resource 
recovery 
stage 
Raw material supply
Transport
Manufacturing
Transport
Construction installation
Use
Maintenance 
Repair
Replacement
Refurbishment
Operational energy use
Operational water use
Deconstruction / demolition
Waste processing
Disposal
Reuse - recovery - recycling
potential
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
C1
C3
C4
D
X
X
X
MND
MND
MND MND MND MND MND MND MND MND MND MND
MND
(X = declared module; MND = module not declared)
A1 = Upstream module; A2-A3 = Core module; A4-C4 = Downstream module; D = Other environmental information
4.2.1	 Product stage (A1-A3)
Raw material supply includes the acquisition of raw 
materials from nature to create usable intermediates, 
as well as the packaging used to ship the raw materials. 
All raw materials are transported from the source to the 
3M manufacturing site by truck and/or boat. Most of the 
time, raw materials need to be packed for transportation. 
Loading and unloading of raw materials are not included 
in the study. 
Production also includes all steps carried out at 3M 
manufacturing sites to produce the finished product, 
including utilities used and waste produced. The 
environmental profile of these energy carriers is 
modelled for local conditions. Machines and facilities 
(capital goods) required for and during production are 
excluded, as is transportation of employees.
4.2.2	 Downstream stages (A4-A5, B1-B7, C1-C4)
Downstream stages are excluded from the scope of the 
LCA study because 3M FAST-D 8069E has multiple 
different applications and there is only limited data 
available.
4.2.5	 Resource recovery stage (D)
This stage is excluded because of the exclusion of 
downstream processes and the application of the cut-off 
approach. 
==PAGE:718==
14
==PAGE:719==
15
4.3 	 Data collection and quality
Specific data was gathered by 3M for the core processes 
and are based on 2018-2019 production volumes and 
extrapolations of measurements on specific machines. 
Generic data for upstream processes are used as 
available in the GaBi software and databases.
Data quality analysis is performed based on the EU 
Product Environmental Footprint (PEF) Guidance. The 
overall data quality is at least good meaning that each 
indicator can be used in this EPD.
4.4 	 Calculation procedure
The LCA model was created using the GaBi software 
(version 9.2.0.58 DB 8.7, Service Pack 36) system for 
life cycle engineering, developed by thinkstep GmbH, 
a spheraTM company. The modelling process used both 
primary data collected from the actual manufacturing 
process, and secondary data available in the GaBi 
databases 
including 
industry-average 
data, 
data 
available from literature studies and data available from 
published databases. Last update of the database was 
2019.
Legend:            = packaging materials           = utilities              = waste             = emissions
Upstream (RMs)
Core (Production)
Raw 
materials
3M adhesive
production
IN
OUT
IN
3M tape
production
Packed 
product
OUT
IN
External film 
production
IN
OUT
External liner 
production
OUT
4.2.4	Flow diagram
==PAGE:720==
16
5	
Environmental Performance
The 
environmental 
parameters 
are 
declared 
for 
upstream and core processes. The overall impact of the 
product is divided into potential environmental impacts, 
use of resources and other indicators. All environmental 
impacts are reported per declared unit.
5.1	
Potential environmental impact
The reported environmental impacts, as required per 
PCR 2012:01 v2.31 result from characterisation models 
applied to the life cycle stages considered in the study. 
Total pollutant emissions from the operations included 
in the system boundaries are reported as potential 
environmental impacts, using the Jan. 2016 version 
of CML2001 characterisation factors as opposed to 
the EN 15804 reference to the (October 2012) version. 
More recent versions of characterisation factors are 
more likely to have a higher level of accuracy in today’s 
society. Data refer to the declared unit.
National addition to NF EN 15804+A1 (XP P01-064/
CN) requires two additional environmental impacts to 
be reported, air pollution and water pollution which are 
calculated based on characterisation factors specifically 
reported in tables C.10 and C.11 of the standard 
respectively.
National supplement to NBN EN 15804+A1 (NBN/DTD 
B 08-001:2017) requires eight additional environmental 
impacts to be reported. Apart from MAETP and TETP, 
which are calculated based on CML2001 characterisation 
factors, all  other indicators are calculated following the 
EU Product Environmental Footprint (PEF) Guidance.
It’s important to mention that in addition to EN15804 
and PCR 2012:01, only the additional environmental 
indicators of NF EN 15804+A1 and NBN EN 15804+A1 
are included in the study, whilst other additional 
requirements are not in scope of the EPD.
Upstream
Core
A1
A2
A3
PCR 2012:01 v2.31
ADPE [kg Sb eq.]
4.65E-06
3.89E-08
2.73E-06
ADPF [MJ]
4.88E+01
5.78E+00
1.22E+01
AP [kg SO2 eq.]
1.66E-02
2.78E-03
1.59E-03
EP [kg PO4
3- eq.]
9.20E-03
4.77E-04
2.93E-01
GWP [kg CO2 eq.]
2.17E+00
4.28E-01
4.43E-01
ODP [kg CFC11 eq.]
1.33E-12
1.65E-14
2.04E-11
POCP [kg C2H2 eq.]
7.35E-04
1.62E-04
1.50E-04
National addition to NF EN 15804+A1 (XP P01-064/CN)
AirP [m³]
3.13E+02
2.85E+01
7.69E+01
WP [m³]
3.02E+01
1.35E-01
1.86E-01
ADPEc [kg Sb eq.]
4.64E-06
3.86E-08
2.73E-06
National supplement to NBN EN 15804+A1 (NBN/DTD B 08-001)
ETFW [CTUe]
2.02E+00
7.31E-02
1.16E-01
HT_c [CTUh]
9.48E-08
3.30E-09
1.25E-08
HT_nc [CTUh]
4.46E-07
2.62E-08
1.08E-06
LU [kg C deficit eq.]
2.92E+01
2.46E-01
9.03E-01
PM/RI [kg PM2.5 eq.]
1.04E-03
1.65E-04
9.41E-05
RDW [m³ eq.]
2.66E-01
5.21E-04
1.17E-02
MAETP [kg DCB eq.]
3.60E+02
6.23E+00
4.00E+01
TETP [kg DCB eq.]
1.40E-02
5.81E-04
3.62E-02
See section 6.4 for a list acronyms used in this table
==PAGE:721==
17
Upstream
Core
A1
A2
A3
PERE [MJ]
2.90E+01
2.58E-01
7.77E+00
PERM [MJ]
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
PERT [MJ]
2.90E+01
2.58E-01
7.77E+00
PENRE [MJ]
3.01E+01
5.81E+00
6.87E+00
PENRM [MJ]
2.12E+01
0.00E+00
6.59E+00
PENRT [MJ]
5.12E+01
5.81E+00
1.35E+01
SM [kg]
5.96E-02
0.00E+00
1.26E-01
RSF [MJ]
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
NRSF [MJ]
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
FW [m³]
1.18E+00
5.18E-04
4.04E-03
See section 6.4 for a list acronyms used in this table
5.2	 Use of resources
The main resource consumption contributors for 3M 
FAST-D 8069E are reported in the table below. Use of 
resources without energy content is expressed in kg or 
m³ per declared unit. Energy data are expressed in MJ 
per declared unit and as net calorific value. 
The net calorific value or lower heating value is calculated 
by subtracting the heat of vaporisation of water from the 
higher heating value. The results from the tables should 
be interpreted over the different modules and as they are 
calculated by the GaBi software.
Upstream
Core
A1
A2
A3
HWD [kg]
4.08E-03
2.49E-07
1.12E-02
NHWD [kg]
8.55E-02
3.97E-04
3.00E-01
RWD [kg]
9.80E-04
1.17E-05
4.93E-04
CRU [kg]
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
MFR [kg]
2.48E-03
0.00E+00
1.37E-01
MER [kg]
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
EEE [MJ]
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
EET [MJ]
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
See section 6.4 for a list acronyms used in this table
5.3	 Output flows and waste categories
The important output flows and waste categories for 
3M FAST-D 8069E are reported in the tables below. 
All material flows are expressed in kg per declared unit 
while the exported energy data is expressed in MJ per 
declared unit and as net calorific value. CRU, MFR, 
MER, EEE and EET are required to be reported as per 
EN 15804. It should be noted that 3M processes do not 
generate radioactive waste and the values are presented 
as calculated in the GaBi software.
5.4	 Release of dangerous substances 
during the use stage
As this product is a passive product, the use stage (B1-
B7) is excluded from the study. 
As a result, no information is provided in this section for 
the release of dangerous substances to indoor air, soil 
and water during this stage. 
==PAGE:722==
18
6 	
Additional Information
6.1	
Other environmental information
6.1.1	 LCA results interpretation
Raw material supply (A1) and manufacturing (A3) have 
a significant global warming potential as shown in the 
chart above, but A1 has a considerably higher impact 
compared to A3. A1 is also the module with highest 
impact on energy consumption and has the only 
significant impact on water use. Another life cycle stage 
with a considerable impact on energy consumption is 
manufacturing (A3). Both A1 and A3 modules have a 
significant impact on waste. 
Note that A1 does not only contain the raw material 
production, but also the generation of energy used during 
manufacturing which may suggest a skewed result for 
this module. Module A2 which relates to transportation 
is not significant.
(1)  Relates to CML2001 global warming potential (GWP)
(2) Relates to the total use of primary energy (PERT + PENRT)
(3) Relates to the fresh water use (FW)
(4) Relates to the total amount of waste generated (HWD + NHWD + RWD)
DU = Declared Unit
A1
A2
A3
Total
Global warming1
2.17E+00
1.09E+00
0.00E+00
3.04 E+00
kg CO2 eq./DU
Energy2
8.02E+01
4.01E+01
0.00E+00
1.07 E+02
MJ/DU
Water3
1.18E+00
5.88E-01
0.00E+00
1.18 E+00
m³/DU
Waste4
3.12E-01
1.56E-01
0.00E+00
4.03 E-01
kg/DU
 
[MJ]
[m3]
[kg]
[kg CO2 eq.]
==PAGE:723==
19
6.1.2 	 Uncertainty on the environmental indicators
Data quality and uncertainty are mutually dependent. The 
precision of the data depends on measuring tolerance, 
assumptions, completion, comprehensiveness of the 
considered system and the representativeness of 
the data. Uncertainty is also introduced in the impact 
assessment phase of the study, and will vary according 
to the impact categories considered.
To get an idea of the uncertainty of the potential 
environmental impact, it is calculated for each reference 
and midpoint based on a pedigree matrix, using six 
different data quality indicators, and Monte Carlo 
analysis. The uncertainty results are presented below 
and are calculated for the totals of the different modules 
and only for the potential environmental indicators of 
PCR 2012:01.
Min
Max
Base
∆%
ADPE [kg Sb eq.]
6.25E-06
8.83E-06
7.42E-06
19%
ADPF [MJ]
6.10E+01
7.35E+01
6.68E+01
10%
AP [kg SO2 eq.]
1.84E-02
2.38E-02
2.09E-02
14%
EP [kg PO4
3- eq.]
2.72E-01
3.33E-01
3.02E-01
10%
GWP [kg CO2 eq.]
2.76E+00
3.41E+00
3.05E+00
12%
ODP [kg CFC11 eq.]
1.98E-11
2.37E-11
2.17E-11
10%
POCP [kg C2H2 eq.]
9.45E-04
1.17E-03
1.05E-03
11%
6.2	 Social and economic aspects
As a company which operates around the world, 
including many underdeveloped areas, 3M has grown 
into a global leader in helping others. For many years 
we’ve been investing our people and resources to 
make a positive impact through schemes like 3Mgives, 
focusing on helping improve education, communities 
and the environment.
3Mgives 
improves 
lives 
and 
builds 
sustainable 
communities through social investments and thoughtful 
engagement of 3Mers worldwide. 3M was one of the 
first companies to establish a foundation in 1953, and 
since then we’ve contributed over $1.45 billion in cash 
and in-kind gifts to our community partners. 
Our employees regularly take on challenges to raise 
money through charity events and share their skills 
through 3M’s Impact programme, with diverse teams 
of 3Mers travelling to communities around the world to 
spend two immersive weeks collaborating with a local 
non-profit organisation, social enterprise or government 
agency to contribute to a solution for a pressing social or 
environmental issue.
3M also has a strong culture of inclusion and diversity, 
which is an essential driver of our continual innovation. To 
encourage this, we regularly form strategic partnerships 
with many professional associations, colleges and 
universities to help identify diverse candidates and 
regularly participate in campus recruiting activities.
	
	
	
If changes in the product’s life cycle result in potential 
environmental 
impacts 
varying 
more 
than 
10% 
from the numbers reported in the sections above, 
the Environmental Product Declaration is revised 
accordingly.
Regardless, the Environmental Product Declaration shall 
be reviewed when approaching the end of its validity 
period. At that stage, a new version of the Environmental 
Product Declaration shall be published as appropriate.
6.3 Validity of the EPD and changes
versus previous version
This version of the Environmental Product Declaration is
valid until 2025-07-06.
Compared to the previous version of the Environmental
Product Declaration, the following changes were made
to the supporting Life Cycle Assessment:
•
Updated some transportation modes and distances
•
Updated reference year for 3M adhesive production
Throughout its validity, on a yearly basis, or upon
modifications in the production process, the supply
chain is evaluated to assess the need for an update of the
supporting Life Cycle Assessment and corresponding
Environmental Product Declaration.
==PAGE:724==
20
Acronym
Meaning
3M
Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing
3P
Pollution Prevention Pays
ADPE
Abiotic Depletion Potential, elements
ADPEc
Abiotic Depletion Potential, elements with complementary factors
ADPF
Abiotic Depletion Potential, fossil
AirP
Air Pollution
AP
Acidification Potential
B
Belgium
BE
Belgium
CE
Conformité Européenne
C2H2
Acetylene
CFC-11
Trichlorofluoromethane
CML
Center of Environmental Science of Leiden University
CN
China
CO2
Carbon Dioxide
CPC
Construction Products and Construction Services/ Central Product Classification
CRU
Components for re-use
CTUh
Comparative Toxic Unit for human
CTUe
Comparative Toxic Unit for aquatic ecotoxicity impacts
DB
Database
DTD
Document Type Definition
DU
Declared unit
EEE
Exported electrical energy
EET
Exported thermal energy
EMEA
Europe, the Middle East, and Africa
EN
European Norm
EoL
End of Life
EP
Eutrophication Potential
EPD®
Environmental Product Declaration
eq.
Equivalent
ETFW
Ecotoxicity Freshwater
EU
European Union
Euro
Europe
FAST
Flexible Air Sealing Tape
FW
Use of net fresh water
GaBi
Ganzheitliche Bilanzierung (German for holistic balancing)
GmbH
Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung
GWP
Global Warming Potential
HT_c
Human toxicity (carcinogenic effects)
HT_nc
Human toxicity (non-carcinogenic effects)
HWD
Hazardous waste disposed
IATD
Industrial Adhesives and Tapes Division
ISO
International Organization for Standardization
IT
Italy
6.4	 Acronyms
==PAGE:725==
21
kg
Kilogram
LCA
Life Cycle Analysis
LU
Land Use
m
Meter
m3
Cubic meter
mm
Millimeter
MAETP
Marine Aquatic Ecotoxicity Potential
MER
Materials for energy recovery
MFR
Materials for recycling
MJ
Megajoule
MND
Module Not Declared
N/A
Not Applicable
NBN
Bureau of Normalization (Belgium)
NF
Bureau of Normalization (France)
NRSF
Use of non-renewable secondary fuels
NSAI
National Standards Authority of Ireland
ODP
Ozone Depletion Potential
PCR 
Product Category Rules
PEF
Product Environmental Footprint
PENRE
Use of non-renewable primary energy as energy carrier
PENRM
Use of non-renewable primary energy as raw materials
PENRT
Total use of non-renewable primary energy
PERE
Use of renewable primary energy as energy carrier
PERM
Use of renewable primary energy as raw materials
PERT
Total use of renewable primary energy
PM/RI
Particulate Matter/ Respiratory Inorganics
PO4
Phosphate
POCP
Photochemical Ozone Creation Potential
RDW
Resource Depletion Water
REACh
Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals
RM
Raw Material
RSF
Use of renewable secondary fuels
RSL
Reference service life
RWD
Radioactive waste disposed
Sb
Antimony
SIBG
Safety & Industrial Business Group
SDS
Safety Data Sheet
SGS
Société Générale de Surveillance
SM
Use of secondary material
SO2
Sulphur Dioxide
S.p.A
Società per azioni
SVHC
Substances of Very High Concern
TDS
Technical Data Sheet
TETP
Terrestric Ecotoxicity Potential
ts
thinkstep GmbH
 
==PAGE:726==
22
==PAGE:727==
23
6.6	 References
Softa K., Tibax D., LCA report “Project Vesta” (EPD0004, 
version 2), 3M Internal, Diegem, 2020.
SGS Italia S.p.A., EPD Process Certification, Certificate 
N. IT14/0823, (2020-09-18).
International 
Standardization 
Organization, 
Environmental Management - Life Cycle Assessment - 
Principles and Framework (ISO 14040:2006), Dublin 9: 
NSAI, 2006.
International 
Standardization 
Organization, 
Environmental Management - Life Cycle Assessment - 
Requirements and Guidelines (ISO 14044:2006), Dublin 
9: NSAI, 2006. 
International 
Standardization 
Organization, 
Environmental labels and declarations - Type III 
environmental declarations - Principles and procedures 
(ISO 14025:2006), La Plaine Saint-Denis: Afnor, 2013.
European Standard, Sustainability of construction works 
- Environmental Product Declarations - Core rules for 
the product category of construction products (EN 
15804:2012+A1:2013), La Plaine Saint-Denis: Afnor, 
2013.
The International EPD® System, General Programme 
Instructions (version 3.01), Stockholm, 2019. 
The International EPD® System, Construction Products 
and Construction Services for multiple CPC codes (PCR 
2012:01, version 2.31), Stockholm, 2019. 
National addition to NF EN 15804+A1, Sustainability of 
construction works - Environmental product declarations 
- Core rules for the product category of construction (XP 
P01-064/CN), La Plaine Saint-Denis: Afnor, 2016.
National supplement to NBN EN 15804+A1, Sustainability 
of 
construction 
works 
- 
Environmental 
product 
declarations - Core rules for the product category of 
construction (NBN/DTD B 08-001), Brussels: NBN, 
Bureau for Standarisation, 2017.
3M Building Envelope Product Portfolio PowerPoint 
presentation - Safety & Industrial Business Group.
Technical Datasheet 3M FAST-D 8069E: http://
multimedia.3m.com/mws/media/1302953O/flexible-
air-sealing-tape-8069e-fast-d.pdf.
Reference product (FAST-D 8069E Seal 
Hold Tape 20 mm x 25 m)
FAST-D 8069E Seal Hold Tape 25 mm 
x 25 m
ADPE [kg Sb eq.]
7.42E-06
6.83E-06
8%
ADPF [MJ]
6.68E+01
6.35E+01
5%
AP [kg SO2 eq.]
2.09E-02
2.03E-02
3%
EP [kg PO4
3- eq.]
3.02E-01
2.97E-01
2%
GWP [kg CO2 eq.]
3.04E+00
2.90E+00
5%
ODP [kg CFC11 eq.]
2.17E-11
2.09E-11
4%
POCP [kg C2H2 eq.]
1.05E-03
1.00E-03
5%
6.5	 Variation ranges
In the table shown below, comparisons between the 
reference product and the other product are given in a % 
difference below the absolute impact values.
Differences between the reference product and the 
other reference do not exceed the 10% threshold, thus 
substantiating the selection of the reference product to 
represent the other reference in the EPD.
==PAGE:728==
Please recycle.
© 3M 2020. All rights reserved.
More information on Sustainability at 3M:
http://www.3M.com/Sustainability
3M Sustainability
Europe, Middle East & Africa
Hermeslaan 7
1831 Diegem, Belgium
Phone	 +32 2 722 4584
Web	
http://www.3M.com/Sustainability
==PAGE:729==
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Owner: 
Træ.dk 
c/o 
Træ- 
og 
Møbelindustrien 
No.: 
MD-20004-EN 
Issued: 
22-04-2020 
Valid to: 
22-04-2025 
EPD 
VERIFIED ENVIRONMENTAL PRODUCT DECLARATION | ISO 14025 & EN 15804 
3 r d  P A R T Y  V E R I F I E D  
==PAGE:730==
 
 
 
 
MD-20004-EN | Træ.dk | Page 2 of 9 
 
Owner of declaration 
Træ.dk c/o Træ- og 
Møbelindustrien 
H.C. Andersens Boulevard 18, 
1553 København V 
VAT no. 13513104 
 
Programme operator 
Danish Technological Institute 
www.dti.dk 
 
Programme 
EPD Danmark 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
Declared products 
Planed construction wood products of pine and spruce. 
Production site 
Multiple production sites throughout Sweden, Norway and 
Finland. 
Products use 
Products are used as construction wood in many different 
types of constructions and for a variety of different 
functions such as for example beams, boards or pillars. 
The products are used within the constructions and are 
not exposed to the outdoor environment. 
Declared unit 
1 m3 of average construction wood in various dimensions.  
 
 
Issued: 
22-04-2020 
Valid to: 
22-04-2025 
Basis of calculation 
This EPD is developed in accordance with the 
European standards EN 15804 and EN 16485.  
 
Comparability 
EPDs of construction products may not be comparable 
if they do not comply with the requirements in EN 
15804. EPD data may not be comparable if the 
datasets used are not developed in accordance with 
EN 15804 and if the background systems are not 
based on the same database. 
 
Validity 
This EPD has been verified in accordance with ISO 
14025 and is valid for 5 years from the date of issue. 
 
Use 
The intended use of an EPD is to communicate 
scientifically based environmental information for 
construction products, for the purpose of assessing 
the environmental performance of buildings. 
 
EPD type 
☐Cradle-to-gate   
☒Cradle-to-gate with options 
☐Cradle-to-grave 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Henrik Fred Larsen 
EPD Danmark 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the core PCR 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to EN ISO 14025 
☐ internal 
☒ external 
 
Third party verifier: 
 
 
David Althoff Palm, Ramboll  
 
Life cycle stages and modules (MND = module not declared) 
Product 
Construction 
process 
Use 
End of life 
Beyond the system 
boundary 
Raw material 
supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Installation 
process 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational 
energy use 
Operational 
water use 
De-construction 
demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Re-use, recovery 
and recycling 
potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
X 
MND 
MND MND MND 
MND MND 
MND MND 
MND 
X 
X 
X 
X 
==PAGE:731==
 
 
 
 
MD-20004-EN | Træ.dk | Page 3 of 9 
 
Product information 
Product description 
The main product components are shown in the table below.  
 
Material 
Weight-% of declared product 
Wood 
84 ± 2 
Moisture 
16 ± 2 
 
Wood from certified sources is used to produce the products. 
Representativity 
This declaration, including data collection and the modeled foreground 
system including results, represents the general production of 
construction wood products from multiple producers with multiple 
production sites throughout Sweden, Norway and Finland for sale in 
Denmark. Resource use and environmental impacts were calculated 
based on a weighted average taking into account the average import 
from these countries in the year 2017. Background data are based on 
published EPD’s and on GaBi ts database version 8.7 and are less than 
10 years old. Generally, the used background datasets are of high 
quality, and the majority of the datasets are only a couple of years old. 
Dangerous substances 
The construction wood does not contain substances listed in the 
”Candidate List of Substances of Very High Concern for authorisation” 
 
 (http://echa.europa.eu/candidate-list-table)  
Essential characteristics 
(CE) 
The products are covered by EN 14081-1+A1:2011.  
 
Reference Service Life 
(RSL) 
No RSL is declared. This EPD is based on a crade-to-gate with options 
assessment and does not include the use stage.  
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:732==
 
 
 
 
MD-20004-EN | Træ.dk | Page 4 of 9 
 
LCA background 
Declared unit 
The LCI and LCIA results in this EPD relates to one cubic meter of general 
dried and sawn construction wood of varying dimensions.  
 
Name 
Value 
Unit 
Declared unit 
1 
m3 
Density 
456 
kg/m3 
PCR 
This EPD is developed according to the core rules for the product category 
of construction products in EN 15804 and the PCR EN16485. 
Flow diagram 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
System boundaries 
This EPD is based on a cradle-to-gate with options LCA, in which 100 
weight-% has been accounted for.  
 
The general rules for the exclusion of inputs and outputs follows the 
requirements in EN 15804, 6.3.5, where the total of neglected input flows 
per module shall be a maximum of 5 % of energy usage and mass and 1 
% of energy usage and mass for unit processes. In practice no components 
are excluded. 
 
Product stage (A1-A3) includes: 
 
A1 – Extraction and processing of raw materials 
A2 – Transport to the production site 
A3 – Manufacturing processes 
 
The product stage comprises acquisition of nordic wood logs from forestry 
as well as all other raw materials, products and energy, transport to the 
production site, packaging and waste processing up to the ”end-of-waste” 
==PAGE:733==
 
 
 
 
MD-20004-EN | Træ.dk | Page 5 of 9 
 
state or final disposal. The LCA results are declared in aggregated form for 
the product stage, which means, that the sub-modules A1, A2 and A3 are 
declared as one module A1-A3. 
 
Production processes include debarking, sawing, drying, sorting, planing 
and packaging. 
 
Construction process stage (A4-A5) includes: 
 
A4 – Transport to the building site: 
 
Construction wood transport to building site 
Type of transport 
and 
payload 
capacity 
Capacity 
utilized 
incl. 
return (%) 
Distance 
(km) 
Diesel 
consumption 
(l/tonkm) 
Truck (25t) 
61 
600 
2.2E-2 
Ferry (1,500t) 
65 
170 
6.8E-3 
 
 
End of life stage (C1-C4) includes: 
 
C2-C3 – Transportation and waste processing: 
 
End of life includes two different scenarios. One assumes 100% collection 
with mixed construction waste for incineration of the products with energy 
recovery. The other scenario assumes 100% separate collection for 
recycling into particleboards. Neither of these scenarios are likely, but a 
mix is likely. The exact mix of incineration vs. recycling is unknown. 
Transport from building site to incineration assumes 100km transport and 
to recycling assumes a distance of 150km.  
There is no disposal in C4. 
 
Benefits and loads beyond the system boundariies (D) includes: 
 
For the incineration scenario, module D includes net impacts and benefits 
from avoided Danish average electricty production and thermal energy 
recovery. 
For the recycling scenario, module D includes net impacts and benefits 
from avoided production of new residual wood shavings for particleboard 
production. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:734==
 
 
 
 
MD-20004-EN | Træ.dk | Page 6 of 9 
 
LCA results  
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS PER M3 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
C2 
(incineration) 
C3 
(incineration) 
D 
(incineration) 
C2 
(recycling) 
C3 
(recycling) 
D 
(recycling) 
GWP-fossil 
(range) 
[kg CO2-eq.] 
4.46E+01 
(41-70) 
1.92E+01 
3.71E+00 
1.27E+01 
-3.71E+02 
5.56E+00 
2.25E+00 
5.31E+01 
GWP 
[kg CO2-eq.] 
-6.70E+02 
1.92E+01 
3.71E+00 
7.28E+02 
-3.71E+02 
5.56E+00 
7.17E+02 
-7.68E+02 
ODP 
[kg CFC11-eq.] 
1.00E-05 
3.14E-15 
6.13E-16 
1.36E-13 
-2.75E-12 
9.19E-16 
8.19E-14 
-3.89E-06 
AP 
[kg SO2-eq.] 
2.94E-02 
5.09E-02 
9.40E-03 
1.00E-01 
-2.53E-01 
1.41E-02 
2.88E-03 
2.60E-01 
EP 
[kg PO43--eq.] 
7.41E-02 
1.24E-02 
2.28E-03 
1.91E-02 
-5.04E-02 
3.43E-03 
5.38E-04 
-1.03E-01 
POCP 
[kg ethene-eq.] 
2.30E-02 
-1.25E-02 
-3.27E-03 
6.52E-03 
-2.98E-02 
-4.91E-03 
2.73E-04 
-2.37E-02 
ADPE 
[kg Sb-eq.] 
3.46E-04 
1.35E-06 
2.64E-07 
1.75E-06 
-3.99E-05 
3.96E-07 
1.13E-06 
-1.31E-04 
ADPF 
[MJ] 
6.64E+02 
2.58E+02 
5.03E+01 
1.55E+02 
-5.73E+03 
7.54E+01 
2.16E+01 
-7.50E+02 
Caption 
GWP = Global warming potential; ODP = Ozone depletion potential; AP = Acidification potential of soil and water; EP = Eutrophication potential; POCP = 
Photochemical ozone creation potential; ADPE = Abiotic depletion potential for non fossil resources; ADPF = Abiotic depletion potential for fossil resources 
 
RESOURCE USE PER M3 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
C2 
(incineration) 
C3 
(incineration) 
D 
(incineration) 
C2 
(recycling) 
C3 
(recycling) 
D 
(recycling) 
PERE 
[MJ] 
4.49E+03 
1.50E+01 
2.93E+00 
5.83E+01 
INA 
4.39E+00 
5.07E+01 
INA 
PERM 
[MJ] 
6.79E+03 
0 
0 
-6.79E+03 
6794.1 
0 
6.79E+03 
-6.79E+03 
PERT 
[MJ] 
1.13E+04 
1.50E+01 
2.93E+00 
-6.74E+03 
INA 
4.39E+00 
6.84E+03 
INA 
PENRE 
[MJ] 
1.03E+03 
2.59E+02 
5.05E+01 
1.65E+02 
INA 
7.57E+01 
2.75E+01 
INA 
PENRM 
[MJ] 
0 
0 
0 
0 
INA 
0 
0 
INA 
PENRT 
[MJ] 
1.03E+03 
2.59E+02 
5.05E+01 
1.65E+02 
INA 
7.57E+01 
2.75E+01 
INA 
SM 
[kg] 
0 
0 
0 
0 
INA 
0 
0 
INA 
RSF 
[MJ] 
0 
0 
0 
0 
INA 
0 
0 
INA 
NRSF 
[MJ] 
0 
0 
0 
0 
INA 
0 
0 
INA 
FW 
[m3] 
1.58E+01 
2.54E-02 
4.95E-03 
1.91E+00 
INA 
7.42E-03 
2.53E-02 
INA 
Caption 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary 
energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non renewable primary energy 
excluding non renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; PENRT = Total use of non renewable primary energy resources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; 
NRSF = Use of non renewable secondary fuels; FW = Use of net fresh water 
 
WASTE CATEGORIES AND OUTPUT FLOWS PER M3 
Parameter 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
C2 
(incineration) 
C3 
(incineration) 
D 
(incineration) 
C2 
(recycling) 
C3 
(recycling) 
D 
(recycling) 
HWD 
[kg] 
7.81E-02 
1.44E-05 
2.82E-06 
3.41E-07 
-2.49E-06 
4.23E-06 
4.78E-08 
-2.82E-06 
NHWD 
[kg] 
1.60E+00 
2.10E-02 
4.10E-03 
1.08E+01 
-4.21E+00 
6.15E-03 
1.05E-01 
-4.10E-03 
RWD 
[kg] 
9.61E+00 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
 
 
CRU 
[kg] 
INA 
INA 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
MFR 
[kg] 
INA 
INA 
0 
0 
0 
0 
4.56E+02 
-4.56E+02 
MER 
[kg] 
INA 
INA 
0 
4.56E+02 
-4.56E+02 
0 
0 
0 
EEE 
[MJ] 
INA 
INA 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
EET 
[MJ] 
INA 
INA 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Caption 
HWD = Hazardous waste disposed; NHWD = Non hazardous waste disposed; RWD = Radioactive waste disposed; CRU = Components for re-use; 
MFR = Materials for recycling; MER = Materials for energy recovery; EEE = Exported electrical energy; EET = Exported thermal energy 
==PAGE:735==
 
 
 
 
MD-20004-EN | Træ.dk | Page 7 of 9 
 
Additional information 
 
Indoor air 
The EPD does not give information on release of dangerous substances 
to indoor air because the horizontal standards on measurement of 
release of regulated dangerous substances from construction products 
using harmonised test methods according to the provisions of the 
respective technical committees for European product standards are not 
available. 
Soil and water 
The EPD does not give information on release of dangerous substances 
to soil and water because the horizontal standards on measurement of 
release of regulated dangerous substances from construction products 
using harmonised test methods according to the provisions of the 
respective technical committees for European product standards are not 
available. 
 
 
==PAGE:736==
 
 
 
 
MD-20004-EN | Træ.dk | Page 8 of 9 
 
References 
 
Publisher 
 
 
http://www.epddanmark.dk 
Programme operator 
 
Danish Technological Institute 
Buildings & Environment 
Gregersensvej 
DK-2630 Taastrup 
http://www.teknologisk.dk 
LCA-practitioner 
 
 
 
FORCE Technology 
Applied Environmental Assessment 
Park Allé 345 
DK-2605 Brøndby 
https://forcetechnology.com/da 
LCA software /background data 
 
GaBi ts database version 8.7 incl. databases + 
Ecoinvent 3 
3rd party verifier 
David Althoff Palm, Ramboll Sweden AB 
 
 
 
General programme instructions 
Version 1.9 
www.epddanmark.dk 
 
EN 15804 
DS/EN 15804 + A1:2013 - ”Sustainability of construction works – Environmental  
product declarations – Core rules for the product category of construction products” 
 
EN 15942 
DS/EN 15942:2011 – ” Sustainability of construction works – Environmental product declarations – 
Communication format business-to-business” 
 
ISO 14025 
DS/EN ISO 14025:2010 – ” Environmental labels and declarations – Type III environmental declarations 
– Principles and procedures” 
 
ISO 14040 
DS/EN ISO 14040:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and 
framework” 
 
==PAGE:737==
 
 
 
 
MD-20004-EN | Træ.dk | Page 9 of 9 
 
ISO 14044 
DS/EN ISO 14044:2008 – ” Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and 
guidelines” 
 
EN 16485:2014 
DS/EN 16485:2014 – ”Round and sawn timber – Environmental Product Declarations – Product category 
rules for wood and wood-based products for use in construction” 
 
EN 14081-1+A1:2011 
DS/EN 14081-1+A1:2011 – ” Timber structures – Strenght graded structural timber with rectangular 
cross section – Part 1: General requirements” 
 
==PAGE:738==
Environmental Product Declaration 
In accordance with 14025 and EN15804 +A2 
Høiax Connected 200 Water Heater
Owner of the declaration: 
Høiax AS 
Product name: 
Høiax Connected 200 Water Heater  
Functional unit: 
Produce 1 litre of stored domestic hot water at a 
temperature at 40°C equivalent according to the 
reference use scenario and with a product 
reference lifetime of 17 years. 
Product category /PCR: 
NPCR Part A:2021 Construction products and 
services Version 2.0 and PEP Ecopassport PSR-
0004-ed4.0-EN-2019 03 14 
Program holder and publisher: 
The Norwegian EPD foundation 
Declaration number: 
NEPD-5319-4616-EN
Registration number: 
NEPD-5319-4616-EN
Issue date: 09.11.2023  
Valid to:    09.11.2028 
The Norwegian 
EPD Foundation 
==PAGE:739==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
2 
Product: 
Høiax Connected 200 Water Heater 
Program Operator: 
The Norwegian EPD Foundation 
Post Box 5250 Majorstuen, 0303 Oslo, Norway 
Phone: 
+47 23 08 80 00
e-mail:
post@epd-norge.no 
Declaration Number: 
NEPD-5319-4616-EN
This declaration is based on Product 
Category Rules: 
NPCR Part A:2021 Construction products and services 
Version 2.0 and PEP Ecopassport PSR-0004-ed4.0-EN-
2019 03 14. 
Statements: 
The owner of the declaration shall be liable for the 
underlying information and evidence. EPD Norway 
shall not be liable with respect to manufacturer, life 
cycle assessment data and evidences. 
Declared unit: 
- 
Declared unit with option: 
- 
Functional unit: 
Produce 1 litre of stored domestic hot water at a 
temperature at 40°C equivalent according to the 
reference use scenario and with a product reference 
lifetime of 17 years. 
Verification: 
Independent verification of the declaration and 
data, according to ISO14025:2010 
internal 
External   
Elisabet Amat 
Independent verifier approved by EPD Norway 
Owner of the declaration: 
Høiax AS 
Contact person: Berit Pinderöd 
Phone: +47 47 79 01 23 
e-mail: berit.pinderod@hoiax.no
Manufacturer: 
Høiax AS 
Trippeveien 5, 1618 Fredrikstad 
Phone:  
 
+47 69 35 55 00
e-mail:
post@hoiax.no 
Place of production: 
Fredrikstad, Norway 
Management system: 
ISO 9001:2015 and ISO 14001:2015 
Organisation no: 
936 030 327 
Issue date: 
09.11.2023 
Valid to: 
09.11.2028 
Year of study: 
2022 
Comparability: 
EPDs from other programmes than EPD Norway may 
not be comparable. 
The EPD has been worked out by: 
Mafalda Silva and Anne Rønning 
Approved 
Manager of EPD Norway 
General information 
X
==PAGE:740==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
3 
Product description: 
The Høiax Connected 200 is a stainless-steel water heater designed for heating domestic water using 
electrical energy. 
The electronic thermostat is designed so the water heater can be controlled via an app. The utilizer 
can then set up schedules for when the water heater should be switched on. This in turn means that 
the utilizer can use the water heater during the time periods when the electricity is most affordable 
and by so doing, heating the water in a more intelligent way. 
The water heater is produced only in one plant. It has a lifespan of 20-25 years. 
This declaration can be used to represent the following products by using the scaling factors given in 
the table on page 13: Høiax Connected 300, Titanium Eco 120, Titanium Extreme Eco 120, Titanium 
Eco 200, Titanium Extreme Eco 200, Titanium Extreme Eco 200 cl, Titanium Express Eco 200, Titanium 
Expand Eco 200/25, Titanium ECO 200 Carbon Light, Titanium Eco 200 Liggende, Titanium Eco 250, 
Titanium Eco 300, Titanium Extreme Eco 300, Titanium Express Eco 300, Titanium Expand Eco 300/25 
and Titanium Eco 300 Liggende. 
Product specification: 
Materials 
kg 
% 
Steel 
20.43 
65.9 
Brass 
0.68 
2.2 
Plastic 
4.69 
15.5 
Insulation material 
4.55 
14.3 
Electronic material 
0.52 
1.7 
Bitumen seal 
0.01 
0.0 
Graphic paper 
0.13 
0.4 
Total 
31.0 
100 
Expanded polystyrene 
0.23 
Cardboard 
2.38 
Plastic 
0.02 
Wood pallet 
2.75 
Total product + packaging 
36.37 
Technical data: 
Høiax Connected 200 
Logistics [m3] 
0.443 
Effect [kW] 
2 
Tank-volume [L] 
190 
Energy efficiency class 
C 
Energy efficiency [%] 
94.90 
Quantity of mixed water at 40 °C [V40] 
282.1 
Annual electricity cons. [kWh/year] 
4361.0 
Product 
==PAGE:741==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
4 
For more information from the product data sheet and Energy label please see: www.hoiax.no 
Market: 
Norway 
Reference service life, product: 
17 years 
Functional unit: 
Produce 1 litre of stored domestic hot water at a temperature at 40°C equivalent according to the 
reference use scenario and with a product reference lifetime of 17 years. 
Data quality: 
The manufacturing data for Høiax was collected in 2023 and represents an average for 2022. Other 
data are from Ecoinvent v3.9, released in 2022, but with some changes to improve representativeness. 
The LCA software used is SimaPro version 9.5. 
Allocation: 
The allocation is made in accordance with the provisions of EN 15804. Energy and water use, as well 
as in-house generated waste are distributed among products from the factory using physical 
allocation based on the total number of units produced annually. This means that all products, 
regardless of what they are made of, are given the same load per piece produced from these flows. 
Flowchart: 
The top and bottom parts are assembled as well as the tank are produced separately and then 
mechanically assembled. After this step, the water heater is filled with water to check and repair 
possible water leakages. The water is reused. Thereafter, the insulation material and wiring harnesses 
are installed, and a 100 % quality assessment of the product is performed. If the product presents no 
defect, it is packaged to be sent to the customer.  
~ 21%
A1
A2
A3
A4
Transport
Installation
A5
Use
End of life
B1-B7
C1-C4
Reuse, Recovery, 
Recycling Potential
D
Recycling
Landfilling
Incineration
Brass
Plastic
Isolation material
Electronic material
Bitumen seal
Steel
Graphic paper
Expanded polystyrene
Cardboard
Plastic
Wood pallet
Transport
Transport
Transport
Transport
Transport
Transport
Transport
Transport
Transport
Transport
Transport
Incineration
~ 17%
~ 62%
100%
Recycling
~ 60%
~ 40%
Production & 
assembly of top 
and bottoms
Production & 
assembly of inner 
tank 
Intallation of 
insulation 
materials
Installation of 
wiring harness
Packaging
Check & repare 
possible water 
leckages
LCA: Calculation rules 
==PAGE:742==
 
EPD for the best environmental decision 
 
5 
System boundary: 
This EPD represents a cradle-to-grave and module D analysis. The analysis comprises all modules A, B, 
C and D.  Modul D is also declared with material and energy substitution from net recovery. 
Cut-off criteria: 
All major raw materials and all the essential energy are included. The production process for raw 
materials and energy flows that are included with very small amounts (<1%) are not included. This 
cut-off rule does not apply for hazardous materials and substances. 
 
The following information describes the scenarios in the different modules of the EPD. 
Transport from production place to assembly (A4) 
The product is transported directly to the customer. As most of Høiax customers are located in the 
Oslo area, the transport of the product over an average distance og 97.4 km was considered the most 
representative one. 
Type 
Capacity utilisation 
(incl. return) [%] 
Type of vehicle 
Distance [km] 
Fuel/Energy 
consumption 
Unit 
Truck 
53 
16-32 metric ton, EURO6 
97.4 
0.0431 
l/tkm 
Assembly (A5) 
The installation process does not comprise energy, additional materials use or product wastage as it 
is a manual process. Therefore, only packaging waste is included in the life cycle stage. The scenarios 
used to model the packaging waste processing are based on information provided by Høiax and by 
considering the Norwegian practice.   
Scenario information 
Unit 
Value 
Water consumption 
m3 
0 
Electricity use 
kWh 
0 
Other energy carriers 
MJ 
0 
Material loss 
kg 
0 
Output materials to waste treatment - Packaging, cardboard, recycling 
kg 
2.38 
Output materials to waste treatment - Packaging, wood pallet, incineration 
kg 
2.75 
Output materials to waste treatment - Packaging, Plastic strip, incineration 
kg 
0.02 
Output materials to waste treatment - Packaging, EPS, recycling 
kg 
0.23 
Use (B1) 
There are no LCA-related environmental impacts during use. 
Maintenance (B2)/Repair (B3) 
It is assumed there is no need for maintenance nor repair under a normal scenario. 
 
LCA: Scenarios and additional technical information 
==PAGE:743==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
6 
Replacement (B4)/Refurbishment (B5) 
It is assumed there is no need for replacement nor refurbishment under a normal scenario. 
Operational energy (B6) and water consumption (B7) 
The energy and water consumption during the use stage are reported below. The energy consumption 
was calculated by following the requirements of the Directive 2009/125/EC which are further specified 
in EN 50440 Efficiency of domestic electrical storage water heaters and testing methods. The water 
consumption was calculated based on the following assumptions: average consumption of water per 
day in a Norwegian household is 50 liters and an average of 2.12 persons per household per day 
(Statistics Norway, 2022). The quantity of mixed water at 40 °C given in the energy label test of Høiax 
Connected 200 was then considered to calculate the water consumption of the water heater over its 
lifetime. 
Scenario information 
Unit 
Value 
Net fresh water consumption 
m3 
657 730 
Electricity 
kWh 
74 137 
Other energy carriers 
MJ 
0 
Power output of equipment 
kW 
0 
End of Life (C1, C3, C4) 
The deinstallation process does not comprise energy nor additional inputs as it is a manual process. 
Therefore, C1 life cycle stage has no associated environmental burdens. Regarding the waste 
processing scenario is based on information provided by Høiax As and Norwegian practice. 
Scenario information 
Unit 
Value 
Hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
0 
Collected as mixed construction waste 
kg 
0 
Reuse 
kg 
0 
Recycling, Steel 
kg 
20.43 
Recycling, brass 
kg 
0.68 
Recycling, Insulation material 
kg 
0.13 
Recycling, Electric and electronic material 
kg 
0.52 
Recycling, Paper and board waste 
kg 
0.13 
Energy recovery, Plastic, mixture 
kg 
4.69 
Energy recovery, bitumen seal 
kg 
0.01 
To landfill 
kg 
4.42 
Transport to waste processing (C2) 
According to information provided by Høiax AS, at the end-of-life, the product is either sent back to 
Høiax production site or collected by RENAS, whose mail goal is to motivate consumers and customers 
to deliver the product for recycling at the end of its life cycle to an approved recycling center or to the 
manufacturer's location for recycling. Therefore, it is assumed that the device is transported to a 
waste management plant over an average transport distance of 107 km. 
==PAGE:744==
 
EPD for the best environmental decision 
 
7 
Type 
Capacity utilisation 
(incl. return) [%] 
Type of vehicle 
Distance [km] 
Fuel/Energy 
consumption 
Unit 
Truck 
53 
16-32 metric ton, EURO6 
107 
0.0431 
l/tkm 
Benefits and loads beyond the system boundaries (D) 
The benefits and loads beyond system boundaries are calculated from the net flows shown in the 
table below. The benefits beyond life cycle are calculated by substituting energy production. 
The thermal energy exported due to the incineration of insulation material and bitumen seal is 
assumed to substitute district heating and therefore the 2022 energy mix (Statistics Norway, 2022b) 
is used. In addition to substituting district heating, the export of electric energy is assumed to 
substitute the Norwegian electricity mix, medium voltage, as used for waste generated electricity in 
Ecoinvent v3.9. The amount of energy and materials substituted are calculated in C3 and declared as 
output flows. For the substituted materials, conservative recycled shares have been used as described 
in the table below. In addition, the transport from end-of-waste state (after sorting and shredding) to 
the point of substitution (to the remelting facility assumed to be in Germany) is included. 
Scenario information 
Unit 
Value 
Substitution of electric energy, Plastic, mixture 
MJ 
11.76 
Substitution of electric energy, Bitumen seal 
MJ 
0.01 
Substitution of electric energy, Wood pallet 
MJ 
3.03 
Substitution of thermal energy, Plastic, mixture 
MJ 
134.53 
Substitution of thermal energy, Bitumen seal 
MJ 
0.16 
Substitution of thermal energy, Wood pallet 
MJ 
37.4 
Substitution of raw materials, Steel (45 % virgin and 55 % recycled) 
kg 
8.09 
Substitution of raw materials, Brass (80% virgin and 20 % recycled zinc and copper) 
kg 
0.37 
Substitution of raw materials, Insulation materials (88 % virgin and 12 % recycled) 
kg 
0.21 
Substitution of raw materials, Other insulation materials (70 % virgin and 30 % recycled) 
kg 
0.05 
Substitution of raw materials, Electric and electronic material (90 % virgin and 10 % recycled) 
kg 
0.19 
Substitution of raw materials, Paper and board (50 % virgin and 50 % recycled) 
kg 
1.33 
Substitution of fuels 
kg 
0 
Substitution of products 
kg 
0 
 
As specified in the PCR and EN 15804:2012+A2:2019, the LCA results are presented in the following 
tables for the environmental impact categories, resource indicators, and waste and outflow indicators. 
The impacts have been analyzed excluding long-term emissions.  
LCA results refer to a functional unit of pproducing 1 litre of stored domestic hot water at a 
temperature at 40°C equivalent according to the reference use scenario and with a product reference 
lifetime of 17 years. The reference use scenario is the following: the device supplies a residence with 
2.12 inhabitants at a daily consumption rate of 50 litres.  
 
LCA: Results 
==PAGE:745==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
8 
System boundaries (X=included, MND= module not declared, MNR=module not relevant) 
Product stage 
Assembly 
stage 
Use stage 
End of life stage 
Benefits 
& loads 
beyond 
system 
boundary 
Raw materials 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Assembly 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy use 
Operational water use 
De-construction 
demolition
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
Reuse-Recovery-
Recycling-potential 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Core environmental impact indicators 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B5 
B6 
B7 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
2.94E-04 
9.96E-07 
6.45E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.92E-03 
8.49E-05 
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
3.00E-04 
9.95E-07 
3.49E-07 
0.00E+00 
3.78E-03 
7.54E-05 
GWP-biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-6.41E-06
9.12E-10 
6.11E-06 
0.00E+00 
1.17E-04 
9.47E-06 
GWP-LULUC 
kg CO2 eq. 
3.95E-07 
4.91E-10 
1.65E-10 
0.00E+00 
2.54E-05 
7.61E-08 
ODP 
kg CFC11 eq. 
7.29E-12 
2.17E-14 
1.44E-14 
0.00E+00 
1.11E-10 
4.30E-12 
AP 
mol H⁺ eq. 
2.28E-06 
2.18E-09 
2.00E-09 
0.00E+00 
4.06E-05 
5.34E-07 
EP-freshwater 
kg P eq. 
1.87E-08 
8.08E-12 
5.62E-12 
0.00E+00 
2.59E-07 
3.22E-09 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
3.48E-07 
5.36E-10 
7.87E-10 
0.00E+00 
3.79E-06 
9.31E-08 
EP-terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
3.55E-06 
5.58E-09 
8.91E-09 
0.00E+00 
4.92E-05 
1.07E-06 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 
1.25E-06 
3.38E-09 
2.71E-09 
0.00E+00 
1.45E-05 
3.71E-07 
ADP-M&M 
kg Sb eq. 
1.86E-08 
3.25E-12 
8.85E-13 
0.00E+00 
4.25E-07 
9.06E-10 
ADP-fossil 
MJ 
4.53E-03 
1.41E-05 
3.79E-06 
0.00E+00 
7.37E-02 
2.28E-03 
WDP 
m³ 
1.00E-04 
5.83E-08 
4.16E-08 
0.00E+00 
3.27E-03 
1.38E-03 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
9.33E-07 
1.68E-05 
1.82E-05 
-2.63E-05
GWP-fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
9.32E-07 
1.68E-05 
1.82E-05 
-2.96E-05
GWP-biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
8.54E-10 
1.81E-09 
2.93E-09 
3.26E-06 
GWP-LULUC 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
4.60E-10 
4.67E-10 
2.29E-10 
-3.86E-08
ODP 
kg CFC11 eq. 
0.00E+00 
2.03E-14 
1.04E-13 
3.67E-14 
-9.62E-13
AP 
mol H⁺ eq. 
0.00E+00 
2.04E-09 
4.64E-09 
1.57E-08 
-1.52E-07
EP-freshwater 
kg P eq. 
0.00E+00 
7.57E-12 
1.49E-11 
6.85E-12 
-3.22E-09
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
0.00E+00 
5.01E-10 
1.88E-09 
8.81E-09 
-3.53E-08
==PAGE:746==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
9 
EP-terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
0.00E+00 
5.22E-09 
2.04E-08 
8.41E-08 
-4.13E-07
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 
0.00E+00 
3.16E-09 
5.37E-09 
2.07E-08 
-1.67E-07
ADP-M&M 
kg Sb eq. 
0.00E+00 
3.05E-12 
2.26E-12 
1.87E-12 
-3.42E-09
ADP-fossil 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
1.32E-05 
4.38E-06 
1.01E-05 
-3.52E-04
WDP 
m³ 
0.00E+00 
5.46E-08 
1.99E-07 
1.91E-07 
-5.52E-06
GWP-total: Global Warming Potential; GWP-fossil: Global Warming Potential fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic: Global Warming 
Potential biogenic; GWP-LULUC: Global Warming Potential land use and land use change; ODP: Depletion potential of the 
stratospheric ozone layer; AP: Acidification potential, Accumulated Exceedance; EP-freshwater: Eutrophication potential, 
fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment; See “additional Norwegian requirements”  for indicator given as 
PO4 eq. EP-marine: Eutrophication potential, fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment; EP-terrestrial: 
Eutrophication potential, Accumulated Exceedance; POCP: Formation potential of tropospheric ozone; ADP-M&M: Abiotic 
depletion potential for non-fossil resources (minerals and metals); ADP-fossil: Abiotic depletion potential for fossil resources; 
WDP: Water deprivation potential, deprivation weighted water consumption 
Additional environmental impact indicators 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B5 
B6 
B7 
PM 
Disease incidence 
2.19E-11 
1.12E-12 
5.71E-13 
0.00E+00 
2.57E-10 
7.09E-12 
IRP 
kBq U235 eq. 
1.36E-05 
1.36E-06 
1.31E-06 
0.00E+00 
1.49E-03 
3.96E-05 
ETP-fw 
CTUe 
3.89E-03 
1.52E-04 
9.83E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.52E-02 
6.94E-04 
HTP-c 
CTUh 
1.66E-12 
1.51E-14 
1.32E-14 
0.00E+00 
9.82E-12 
3.99E-13 
HTP-nc 
CTUh 
2.08E-11 
6.40E-13 
5.53E-13 
0.00E+00 
4.62E-10 
5.87E-12 
SQP 
Dimensionless 
3.25E-03 
2.16E-04 
1.40E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.49E-02 
5.14E-04 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
PM 
Disease incidence 
0.00E+00 
6.91E-14 
3.48E-14 
5.77E-14 
-2.93E-12
IRP 
kBq U235 eq. 
0.00E+00 
6.71E-09 
1.30E-08 
6.16E-09 
-8.62E-07
ETP-fw 
CTUe 
0.00E+00 
7.01E-06 
4.19E-05 
4.71E-05 
-2.93E-04
HTP-c 
CTUh 
0.00E+00 
4.25E-16 
3.39E-15 
1.14E-15 
-1.29E-13
HTP-nc 
CTUh 
0.00E+00 
1.20E-14 
3.43E-14 
5.39E-14 
-1.33E-12
SQP 
Dimensionless 
0.00E+00 
8.00E-06 
1.53E-06 
2.71E-06 
-5.49E-04
PM: Particulate matter emissions; IRP: Ionising radiation, human health; ETP-fw: Ecotoxicity (freshwater); ETP-c: Human 
toxicity, cancer effects; HTP-nc: Human toxicity, non-cancer effects; SQP: Land use related impacts / soil quality 
Classification of disclaimers to the declaration of core and additional environmental 
impact indicators 
ILCD classification 
Indicator 
Disclaimer 
ILCD type / level 1 
Global warming potential (GWP) 
None 
Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone layer (ODP) 
None 
Potential incidence of disease due to PM emissions (PM) 
None 
ILCD type / level 2 
Acidification potential, Accumulated Exceedance (AP) 
None 
Eutrophication potential, Fraction of nutrients reaching marine end compartment 
(EP-marine) 
None 
Eutrophication potential, Accumulated Exceedance (EP-terrestrial) 
None 
==PAGE:747==
 
EPD for the best environmental decision 
 
10 
Formation potential of tropospheric ozone (POCP) 
None 
Potential Human exposure efficiency relative to U235 (IRP) 
1 
ILCD type / level 3 
Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil resources (ADP-minerals&metals) 
2 
Abiotic depletion potential for fossil resources (ADP-fossil) 
2 
Water (user) deprivation potential, deprivation-weighted water consumption (WDP) 
2 
Potential Comparative Toxic Unit for ecosystems (ETP-fw) 
2 
Potential Comparative Toxic Unit for humans (HTP-c) 
2 
Potential Comparative Toxic Unit for humans (HTP-nc) 
2 
Potential Soil quality index (SQP) 
2 
Disclaimer 1 – This impact category deals mainly with the eventual impact of low dose ionizing radiation on human health 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It does not consider effects due to possible nuclear accidents, occupational exposure nor due to 
radioactive waste disposal in underground facilities. Potential ionizing radiation from the soil, from radon and from some 
construction materials is also not measured by this indicator. 
Disclaimer 2 – The results of this environmental impact indicator shall be used with care as the uncertainties on these 
results are high or as there is limited experienced with the indicator 
 
Resource use 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B5 
B6 
B7 
RPEE 
MJ 
1.25E-03 
2.23E-07 
8.54E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.54E-01 
1.44E-03 
RPEM 
MJ 
1.25E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
TPE 
MJ 
1.38E-03 
2.23E-07 
8.54E-05 
0.00E+00 
4.54E-01 
1.44E-03 
NRPE 
MJ 
4.54E-03 
1.41E-05 
4.84E-06 
0.00E+00 
7.38E-02 
2.28E-03 
NRPM 
MJ 
1.23E-05 
0.00E+00 
-1.05E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
TRPE 
MJ 
4.55E-03 
1.41E-05 
3.79E-06 
0.00E+00 
7.38E-02 
2.28E-03 
SM 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
W 
m3 
6.17E-06 
2.04E-09 
2.92E-09 
0.00E+00 
3.21E-03 
1.00E-03 
 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
RPEE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
2.08E-07 
4.14E-07 
2.57E-07 
-2.49E-04 
RPEM 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
TPE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
2.08E-07 
4.14E-07 
2.57E-07 
-2.49E-04 
NRPE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
1.32E-05 
3.11E-04 
1.01E-05 
-3.52E-04 
NRPM 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-3.07E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
TRPE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
1.32E-05 
4.38E-06 
1.01E-05 
-3.52E-04 
SM 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
RSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
W 
m3 
0.00E+00 
1.91E-09 
8.29E-09 
2.70E-08 
-5.07E-07 
==PAGE:748==
 
EPD for the best environmental decision 
 
11 
RPEE Renewable primary energy resources used as energy carrier; RPEM Renewable primary energy resources used as raw 
materials; TPE Total use of renewable primary energy resources; NRPE Non renewable primary energy resources used as 
energy carrier; NRPM Non renewable primary energy resources used as materials; TRPE Total use of non renewable primary 
energy resources; SM Use of secondary materials; RSF Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF Use of non renewable 
secondary fuels; W Use of net fresh water 
End of life – Waste 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B5 
B6 
B7 
HW 
kg 
1.82E-08 
8.99E-11 
1.68E-11 
0.00E+00 
1.45E-07 
5.36E-09 
NHW 
kg 
6.41E-04 
8.30E-07 
2.35E-07 
0.00E+00 
1.42E-02 
7.19E-05 
RW 
kg 
9.60E-09 
4.65E-12 
5.44E-12 
0.00E+00 
6.81E-07 
2.18E-08 
 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
HW 
kg 
0.00E+00 
8.42E-11 
1.92E-11 
8.32E-11 
-4.73E-09 
NHW 
kg 
0.00E+00 
7.77E-07 
3.41E-07 
7.62E-06 
-2.25E-05 
RW 
kg 
0.00E+00 
4.35E-12 
1.02E-11 
4.14E-12 
-5.25E-10 
HW Hazardous waste disposed; NHW Non hazardous waste disposed; RW Radioactive waste disposed 
End of life – output flow 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B5 
B6 
B7 
CR 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MR 
kg 
4.72E-06 
0.00E+00 
4.28E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MER 
kg 
2.07E-06 
0.00E+00 
4.22E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
EEE 
MJ 
2.21E-05 
0.00E+00 
6.18E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
ETE 
MJ 
1.78E-05 
0.00E+00 
7.74E-07 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
CR 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
MR 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.34E-05 
0.00E+00 
3.72E-05 
MER 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.15E-06 
0.00E+00 
1.13E-05 
EEE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.79E-05 
0.00E+00 
-2.29E-05 
ETE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.04E-04 
0.00E+00 
-2.62E-04 
CR Components for reuse; MR Materials for recycling; MER Materials for energy recovery; EEE Exported electric energy; ETE 
Exported thermal energy 
Reading example: 9.0E-03 = 9.0*10-3 = 0.009 
Information describing the biogenic carbon content at the factory gate 
Biogenic carbon content 
Unit 
Value 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
5.19E-09 
Biogenic carbon content in the accompanying packaging 
kg C 
1.45E-07 
Note: 1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 (approx. 3.67) kg CO2 
==PAGE:749==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
12 

The biogenic carbon content in the Høiax water heaters is linked to the graphic paper comprised in 
the product. Regarding the biogenic carbon in the accompanying packaging, it is linked to the 
cardboard box and wood pallet.  
Greenhous gas emission from the use of electricity in the manufacturing phase 
National production mix from import, low voltage (production of transmission lines, in addition to 
direct emissions and losses in grid) used for modelling the production process is from ecoinvent v3.9, 
which was released in 2022. The manufacturing takes place in Norway.  
National electricity grid 
Data source 
GWP-total 
[kg CO2 eq/kWh] 
Electricity, low voltage {NO}| market for | Cut-off, U 
Ecoinvent V3.9 
0.0348 
Additional environmental impact indicators required in NPCR Part A for construction 
products 
In order to increase the transparency of biogenic carbon contribution to climate impact, the indicator 
GWP-IOBC is required as it declares climate impacts calculated according to the principle of 
instantaneous oxidation. GWP-IOBC is also referred to as GWP-GHG in context to Swedish public 
procurement legislation.  
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1-B5 
B6 
B7 
GWP-IOBC 
kg CO2 eq. 
2.94E-04 
9.96E-07 
5.90E-06 
0.00E+00 
3.92E-03 
8.49E-05 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
D 
GWP-IOBC 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
9.33E-07 
1.68E-05 
1.82E-05 
-2.63E-05
GWP-IOBC Global warming potential calculated according to the principle of instantaneous oxidation. 
Hazardous substances 
The declaration is based upon reference to threshold values and/or test results and/or material safety 
data sheets provided to EPD verifiers. Documentation available upon request to EPD owner. 
The product contains no substances given by the REACH Candidate list or the Norwegian 
priority list. 
□ The product contains substances given by the REACH Candidate list or the Norwegian priority
list that are less than 0.1 % by weight.
□
The product contains dangerous substances, more than 0.1% by weight, given by the REACH
Candidate List or the Norwegian Priority list, see table.
□
The product contains no substances given by the REACH Candidate list or the Norwegian
priority list. The product is classified as hazardous waste (Avfallsforskriften, Annex III), see
table.
Indoor environment 
The product has no emission to indoor environment.
Additional requirements 

==PAGE:750==
 
EPD for the best environmental decision 
 
13 
Core indicators applied for additional Høiax products  
The core indicators in this EPD can be scaled to represent other Høiax water heaters by using the scaling factors provided in the table below. This is done by 
multiplying the given scaling factor by the result given to Høiax Connected 200 for the different environmental core indicators (A1-A3 modules). The use of 
scaling factors takes into account the fact that the material composition of the other considered Høiax water heaters is the same as for the Høiax Connected 
200, only presenting small variations in the weight of the steel, insulation materials and paperboard packaging for some of them. For the Høiax water heaters 
given in the table below a full EPD data can be provided by request. 
Reading example for Høiax Connected 300, GWP-total: 1.70 x 2.94E-04 = 4.99E-04 kg CO2 eq. per functional unit 
  
GWP-
total 
GWP-
fossil 
GWP-
biogenic 
GWP-
LULUC 
ODP 
AP 
EP-
freshwater 
EP-
marine 
EP-
terrestrial 
POCP 
ADP-
M&M 
ADP-
fossil 
WDP 
Høiax Connected 200 
2.94E-04 
3.00E-04 
-6.41E-06 
3.95E-07 
7.29E-12 
2.28E-06 
1.87E-08 
3.48E-07 
3.55E-06 
1.25E-06 
1.86E-08 
4.53E-03 
1.00E-04 
Titanium Eco 120  
0.70 
0.71 
1.17 
0.75 
0.77 
0.80 
0.78 
0.75 
0.75 
0.74 
0.90 
0.75 
0.82 
Titanium Extreme Eco 120 
0.74 
0.75 
1.11 
552.76 
0.80 
0.82 
0.81 
0.79 
0.79 
0.78 
0.92 
0.78 
0.84 
Titanium Eco 200  
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
Titanium Extreme Eco 200 
1.06 
1.06 
0.92 
1.04 
1.03 
1.04 
1.04 
1.05 
1.05 
1.05 
1.02 
1.05 
1.03 
Titanium Extreme Eco 200 cl 
1.08 
1.07 
0.90 
1.05 
1.04 
1.05 
1.05 
1.06 
1.06 
1.06 
1.02 
1.06 
1.04 
Titanium Express Eco 200 
1.07 
1.06 
0.91 
1.05 
1.04 
1.04 
1.05 
1.05 
1.05 
1.06 
1.02 
1.05 
1.03 
Titanium Expand Eco 200/25 
1.44 
1.42 
0.40 
1.32 
1.25 
1.29 
1.32 
1.33 
1.35 
1.36 
1.14 
1.35 
1.22 
Titanium ECO 200 Carbon Light 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
1.00 
Titanium Eco 200 Liggende 
1.12 
1.11 
0.84 
1.08 
1.06 
1.08 
1.08 
1.09 
1.09 
1.09 
1.04 
1.09 
1.06 
Titanium Eco 250  
1.20 
1.19 
0.74 
1.14 
1.14 
1.13 
1.15 
1.16 
1.16 
1.16 
1.06 
1.16 
1.13 
Titanium Eco 300  
1.66 
1.63 
0.57 
1.41 
1.51 
1.36 
1.35 
1.45 
1.46 
1.55 
1.15 
1.57 
1.30 
Titanium Extreme Eco 300 
1.66 
1.64 
0.56 
1.42 
1.51 
1.36 
1.35 
1.46 
1.47 
1.56 
1.15 
1.57 
1.31 
Titanium Express Eco 300 
1.74 
1.71 
0.47 
1.46 
1.56 
1.40 
1.40 
1.51 
1.52 
1.62 
1.17 
1.63 
1.34 
 Titanium Expand Eco 300/25 
2.04 
2.00 
0.13 
1.66 
1.74 
1.58 
1.58 
1.72 
1.75 
1.87 
1.26 
1.88 
1.47 
Titanium Eco 300 Liggende 
1.55 
1.53 
0.43 
1.41 
1.40 
1.37 
1.41 
1.44 
1.45 
1.46 
1.17 
1.46 
1.36 
Høiax Connected 300 
1.70 
1.67 
0.52 
1.44 
1.53 
1.38 
1.37 
1.48 
1.49 
1.59 
1.16 
1.60 
1.32 
==PAGE:751==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
14 
CEN, 2016 
EN 50440:2016 Efficiency of domestic electrical storage water heaters 
and testing methods. Brussels, Belgium, European Committee for 
Electrotechnical Standardization. 
CEN, 2019 
EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 Sustainability of construction works - 
Environmental product declarations - Core rules for the product 
category of construction products. Brussels, Belgium, European 
Committee for Standardization 
Directive 2009/125 
Directive (EU) 2009/125 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 21 October 2009 establishing a framework for the setting 
of 
ecodesign 
requirements 
for 
energy-related 
products. 
http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2009/125/oj. 
Ecoinvent V3.9. 2022 
 Ecoinvent version 3.9. Swiss, Centre for Life Cycle Inventories, 
Dübendorf, Switzerland. 
ISO 9001:2015 
Quality management systems — Requirements. 
ISO 14001:2015 
Environmental management systems — Requirements with guidance 
for use. 
ISO 14025:2006 
Environmental labels and declarations - Type III environmental 
declarations - Principles and procedures.  
ISO 14044:2006 
Environmental management - Life cycle assessment - Requirements 
and guidelines.  
NPCR PART A: 2021 
 Construction products and services. Part A version 2.0, March 2021. 
EPD-Norge. 
PEP Ecopassport PSR 
Specific rules for individual, standalone devices for production of 
stored domestic water only, online version 2019 03 14. PSR-0004-
ed4.0-EN-2019 03 14. 
Statistics Norway. 2022a 
Familier og husholdninger. Personer per privathusholdning i 2022. 
https://www.ssb.no/befolkning/barn-familier-og-
husholdninger/statistikk/familier-og-husholdninger. 
Statistics Norway. 2022b 
Table 09469: Net production of district heating, by type of heat 
central 
(GWh) 
1999 
– 
2022, 
2022. 
https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/09469/. 
Silva, M., Rønning, A. 2023 
OR.19.23. LCA report for EPD verification - Høiax water heaters. 
Bibliography 
==PAGE:752==
EPD for the best environmental decision 
15 
Program Operator 
Phone: 
+47 23 08 80 00
The Norwegian EPD Foundation 
Post Box 5250 Majorstuen, 0303 Oslo 
e-mail:
post@epd-norge.no 
Norway 
Website: 
www.epd-norge.no 
Publisher 
Phone: 
+47 23 08 80 00
The Norwegian EPD Foundation 
Post Box 5250 Majorstuen, 0303 Oslo 
e-mail:
post@epd-norge.no 
Norway 
Website: 
www.epd-norge.no 
Owner of the declaration 
Phone: 
+47 69 35 55 00
Høiax AS 
Fax: 
- 
Trippeveien 5, 1618 Fredrikstad 
e-mail:
post@hoiax.no 
Norway 
Website: 
www.hoiax.no 
Author of the life cycle assessment 
Phone: 
+47 69 35 11 00
Mafalda Silva and Anne Rønning 
Fax: 
+47 69 34 24 94
NORSUS 
e-mail:
post@norsus.no 
Stadion 4, 1671 Kråkerøy, Norway 
Website: 
www.norsus.no 
ECO Platform 
ECO Portal 
Website: 
Website: 
www.eco-platform.org 
ECO Portal 
==PAGE:753==
 
PAGE 1/27 
Environmental 
Product 
Declaration 
In accordance with ISO 14025 and EN 15804:2012+A2:2019 for: 
 
iQ Range homogeneous vinyl flooring from 
TARKETT  
 
Programme: 
The International EPD® System. www.environdec.com 
Programme operator: 
EPD International AB 
EPD registration number: 
S-P-01346 
Publication date: 
2018-12-06 
Revision date: 
2023-09-25 (version 3) 
Valid until: 
2026-07-21 
 
 
An EPD should provide current information and may be updated if conditions change. The stated 
validity is therefore subject to the continued registration and publication at www.environdec.com 
 
==PAGE:754==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 2/27 
  
General information 
Programme information  
Programme: 
The International EPD® System 
Address: 
EPD International AB  
Box 210 60  
SE-100 31 Stockholm 
Sweden 
Website: 
www.environdec.com 
E-mail: 
info@environdec.com 
 
CEN standard EN 15804 serves as the Core Product Category Rules (PCR) 
Product category rules (PCR): PCR 2019:14 version 1.11 and Sub-PCR-F Resilient textile and laminate 
floor coverings (EN 16810) 
PCR review was conducted by: The Technical Committee of the International EPD® System lead by
Claudia A Peña. A full list of members available on www.environdec.com. The review panel may be
contacted via info@environdec.com.  
Independent third-party verification of the declaration and data. according to ISO 14025:2006: 
 
☐ EPD process certification  ☒ EPD verification 
Third party verifier: M. Damien Prunel from LCIE Bureau Veritas 
Procedure for follow-up of data during EPD validity involves third party verifier: 
 
☒ Yes 
☐ No 
 
The EPD owner has the sole ownership, liability, and responsibility for the EPD.  
 
EPDs within the same product category but from different programs may not be comparable. EPDs of 
construction products may not be comparable if they do not comply with EN 15804. For further 
information about comparability, see EN 15804 and ISO 14025. 
 
This EPD was reviewed in July 2021 to extend product range and include progresses on energy mix 
used in the A3 phase. The EPD also now includes several end-of-life scenario, including a recycling 
scenario at post-consumer stage. 
 
Differences versus previous version  
 
2022-09-17 Version 1  
Editorial change : Spelling corrections. 
 
2023-06-20 Version 2  
Editorial change: Expansion in the product range (addition of iQ Toro SC and iQ Granit SD). 
 
2023-09-25 Version 3  
Editorial change: Update in the iQ range. Removal of a product group (iQ Granit Acoustic) and a 
commercial reference (iQ Optima Multisafe). Renaming of a product (iQ Granit Multisafe to Granite 
Multisafe). Addition of a commercial reference (Granit Safe T). Change of contact information. 
==PAGE:755==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 3/27 
  
Company information 
Owner of the EPD: Tarkett 
Contact: Marcelo MARTINS MEIRA : marcelo.martinsmeira@tarkett.com. Tarkett La Défense, 1 
Terrasse Bellini 92400 Paris 
Description of the organisation:  
 
With an international coverage and a wide range of products, Tarkett has over 130 years of experience 
in providing integrated solutions for floorings to professionals and end users.  
Many of the most important architectural firms in the world and building professionals have chosen 
Tarkett for the value of its products and for its consultation and service abilities. Therefore, Tarkett 
floorings and sport surfaces are present in several prestigious architectural reference points. Tarkett 
offers integrated solutions for floorings able to meet the needs of customers. Our wide range of designs, 
colours and models provide, an infinite series of possibilities, contributing to create a positive 
environment and a better quality of life for people.  
Tarkett operates with the utmost respect for the environment towards the realization of eco-friendly 
products.  
Tarkett’s commitment to the environment is woven throughout its business. Cradle-to-Cradle principles 
are, in fact, the basis of the design and production of every solution. Particularly, the lifecycle analysis 
is used to continuously improve the production process, and so, the products until their use stage. 
disposal and recycling. The commitment to the environment is also proven by the accession to the 
Circular Economy 100 program. where Tarkett group, with a network of companies, is working to 
develop a circular economy model based on the reuse of materials and preservation of natural 
resources. The development of products that can be reused within internal production cycles, or external 
ones in case of other individuals, has been an integral part of the business strategy aimed at 
sustainability for many years. The WCM (World Class Manufacturing) management system has been 
developed in 2009, and it includes the environmental pillar aimed to the elimination of losses and to the 
growth of process efficiency. 
 
Product-related or management system-related certifications: ISO 9001, ISO 14001, ISO 50001, WCM 
manufacturing site. 
Name and location of production site(s): Ronneby, Sweden 
 
 
Product information 
Product Name: iQ Megalit, iQ Eminent, iQ Granit, Granit Multisafe, Granit Safe T, iQ Optima, iQ 
Surface, iQ Toro SC, iQ Granit SD. 
Product identification: Homogeneous poly (vinyl chloride) floor covering (ISO 10581)  
Product description: iQ Range products are homogeneous vinyl floorings. They are tough and ultra-
durable solutions for heavy and very heavy traffic areas, especially recommended for applications in 
healthcare and education for their resistance and ease of cleaning. Composed of a single compact 
layer of vinyl, homogeneous vinyl floors are glued to the subfloor and welded for optimal durability and 
hygiene. The service lifetime recommended by Tarkett is 30 years 
UN CPC code: APE/NAF - 2223Z
 
LCA information 
Functional unit / declared unit: 1m2 of floor covering with a reference service life (RSL) of 1 year for 
specified characteristics application and use areas according to ISO 10581 and EN ISO 10874. 
Reference service life: 30 years 
Time representativeness: 2020 
Database(s) and LCA software used: Ecoinvent3.6. SimaPro 9.1 
Description of system boundaries: Cradle to grave and module D (A + B + C + D) 
 
==PAGE:756==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 4/27 
  
System diagram: 
 
 
More information: The product is classified in accordance with EN ISO 10874. EN 685 and in reference 
to the FCSS (Floor Covering Standard Symbols) to be installed in various areas of application, such as: 
healthcare, education, commercial, education. The area of use according to the ISO 10874 is very heavy 
(34) for commercial classification and heavy (43) for industrial classification. 
 
  
 
==PAGE:757==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 5/27 
  
Modules declared. geographical scope. share of specific data (in GWP-GHG indicator) and data 
variation: 
 
Product 
stage 
Construction 
process stage 
Use stage 
End of life stage 
Resource 
recovery 
stage 
Raw material supply 
Transport 
Manufacturing 
Transport 
Construction installation 
Use 
Maintenance 
Repair 
Replacement 
Refurbishment 
Operational energy use 
Operational water use 
De-construction demolition 
Transport 
Waste processing 
Disposal 
 
Reuse-Recovery-Recycling-
potential 
Module 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1 
C2 
C3 
C4 
 
D 
Modules 
declared 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
Geography 
European technology and process coverage 
 
European 
Specific 
data used 
- 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
100% For 
recycling 
process 
 
100% For 
recycling 
process 
Variation – 
products 
Compact iQs: -5% to +7% 
Multisafe iQs: +1% 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
Variation – 
sites 
- 
- 
- 
European average 
for Tarkett 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
- 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:758==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 6/27 
  
Content information 
According to PCR 2019:14 v1.11. several similar products can be included in the same EPD if 
”differences between the mandatory impact indicators lower than ±10% (concerning A1-A3) could be 
presented using the impacts of a representative product”. The next table presents how products are 
grouped : 
Product 
Weight. 
kg/m² 
Representative product group 
iQ Eminent 
2.75E+00 
iQ Range - Compact 
iQ Granit 
2.75E+00 
iQ Megalit 
2.50E+00 
iQ Optima 
2.70E+00 
iQ Surface 
2.80E+00 
iQ Toro SC 
2.80E+00 
iQ Granit SD 
2.80E+00 
Granit Multisafe 
3.01E+00 
iQ Range - Multisafe 
Granit Safe T 
2.95E+00 
 
 
==PAGE:759==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 7/27 
  
The components for iQ Range compact group are detailed here: 
iQ Range – Compact products 
Product components 
Weight. 
kg/m² 
Post-consumer material. 
weight-% 
Renewable material. 
weight-% 
PVC Suspension 
1.30E+00 
0% 
0% 
Plasticizer 
4.04E-01 
0% 
0% 
Epoxidised soya bean oil 
1.29E-01 
0% 
83% 
Mineral fillers 
8.07E-01 
0% 
0% 
Stabilizer CaZn 
1.80E-03 
0% 
0% 
Titanium dioxide 
3.20E-02 
0% 
0% 
Pigments 
3.00E-03 
0% 
0% 
Surface Treatment 
1.90E-02 
0% 
0% 
Post-installation and Post-
consumer recycled flooring 
1.20E-02 
100% 
0% 
Additives 
9.00E-03 
0% 
0% 
TOTAL 
2.72E+00 
0.4% 
4% 
Packaging materials 
Weight. 
kg/m² 
Weight-% (versus the product) 
Product Packaging Cardboard 
4.02E-02 
1.5% 
Product Packaging PEHD 
1.52E-02 
0.6% 
Product Packaging PELD 
1.52E-02 
0.6% 
TOTAL 
5.22E-03 
0.2% 
 
 
==PAGE:760==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 8/27 
  
The components for iQ Range Multisafe group are detailed here: 
iQ Range – Multisafe products 
Product components 
Weight. 
kg/m² 
Post-consumer material. 
weight-% 
Renewable material. 
weight-% 
PVC Suspension 
1.37E+00 
0% 
0% 
Plasticizer 
4.33E-01 
0% 
0% 
Epoxidised soya bean oil 
1.36E-01 
0% 
83% 
Mineral fillers 
9.28E-01 
0% 
0% 
Stabilizer CaZn 
1.80E-03 
0% 
0% 
Titanium dioxide 
4.10E-02 
0% 
0% 
Pigments 
2.00E-03 
0% 
0% 
Surface Treatment 
1.90E-02 
0% 
0% 
Post-installation and Post-
consumer recycled flooring 
1.20E-02 
100% 
0% 
Additives 
9.00E-03 
0% 
0% 
TOTAL 
2.95E+00 
0.4% 
4% 
Packaging materials 
Weight. 
kg/m² 
Weight-% (versus the product) 
Product Packaging Cardboard 
4.02E-02 
1.4% 
Product Packaging PEHD 
1.52E-02 
0.5% 
Product Packaging PELD 
1.52E-02 
0.5% 
TOTAL 
5.22E-03 
0.2% 
 
 
 
==PAGE:761==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 9/27 
  
Product manufacturing 
Production process 
The production of the homogeneous resilient flooring is divided into the following stages: 
- Extrusion: Raw materials is blended and extruded to obtain a malleable material. 
- Calendaring: Rolls are then calendered to get the desired shape. 
- Pressing: Rolls are cut at the desired characteristics. 
- Packaging: The final product is placed into cardboard cases with discs and plastic hangers positioned 
at the ends. The cardboard cases are then wrapped in plastic film. 
Production waste 
 
NB: Post manufacturing recycling concerns the recycling of the losses inside the plant production. 
Therefore. there is no end-of-life impact on losses (except the recycling preparation). Post-
manufacturing recycled content is 25%. 
 
Electricity mix 
 
The electricity mix purchased at the manufacturing facility has the following carbon footprint: 
Indicator 
Amount 
Unit 
GWP-GHG 
1.50E-02 
kgCO2eq/Kwh 
 
Waste type 
Amount 
Unit 
Internal recycling - Post 
manufacturing - Own production 
7.81E-01 
kg/m² 
Non-hazardous waste to 
external incineration 
4.07E-02 
kg/m² 
Non-hazardous waste to 
external recycling 
3.95E-03 
kg/m² 
Non-hazardous waste to 
external treatment 
4.78E-03 
kg/m² 
Hazardous waste to external 
recycling 
5.70E-03 
kg/m² 
Hazardous waste to incineration 
3.72E-03 
kg/m² 
Hazardous waste to external 
treatment 
3.80E-03 
kg/m² 
Non-hazardous wastewater to 
external treatment 
9.22E-04 
kg/m² 
Hazardous wastewater to 
external incineration 
1.47E-04 
kg/m² 
==PAGE:762==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 10/27 
  
Health. safety and environmental aspects during production 
iQ Range production site complies with the ISO 14001 Environmental Management System and the ISO 
9001 Quality Management System. 
 
 
Delivery and installation 
Delivery 
The average distribution distance between the factory and the installation site is 766 km. It has been 
calculated considering the average distance between European countries where Tarkett is selling the 
iQ Range products and the factory plant in Ronneby (Sweden). The distribution is made by truck. 
Installation 
The product is glued on the subfloor. then the different parts of the flooring are welded together. 
 
Description 
Amount 
Unit 
Electricity consumption 
3.35E-02 
kWh/m² 
Acrylic adhesive consumption 
2.50E-01 
kg/m² 
 
Waste 
During the installation approximately 10% of the flooring is lost as off-cuts. Thanks to the Restart 
program, Tarkett offers to all its customer flooring installers a free take-back system for installation off-
cuts. including equipment. logistics and recycling. This analysis therefore considers a recycling scenario 
of the offcuts[1] 
 Packaging 
50 % of the packaging materials goes to incineration and 50 % goes to landfill. 
 
 
 
 
[1] Current recycling rate for iQ Range offcuts is 4% 
==PAGE:763==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 11/27 
  
Use Stage 
Reference Service Life (RSL) 
 
For this product. the stated RSL is 1 year. It should be noted, however, that the service life of a 
Homogeneous polyvinylchloride floor covering may vary depending on the amount and nature of floor 
traffic and the type and frequency of maintenance. The manufacturer has provided this service life on 
the basis of his experience of flooring manufacture and supply. This RSL is applicable as long as the 
product use complies with that defined by ISO 14041 and ISO10874 in accordance with the product’s 
classification. The service lifetime recommended by Tarkett is 30 years. 
 
Cleaning and maintenance 
 
Cleaning regime is based on traditional cleaning protocol integrating manual and mechanical 
operations. Depending on premises considered, these consumptions may vary. The considered 
regime fits high traffic areas. The maintenance scenario is : 
 
▪ 
Common maintenance: 4 times a week 
▪ 
Periodic maintenance: twice a year  
 
Description 
Amount 
Unit 
Electricity consumption 
1.13E-01 
kWh/year/m2 
Water consumption 
5.14E+00 
L/year/m2 
Detergent consumption 
7.00E-02 
L/year/m2 
 
Prevention of structural damage 
 
To avoid excessive wear, usage should be restricted to the stated areas of application as outlined by 
the norm ISO 10874. 
 
 
==PAGE:764==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 12/27 
  
 
End of Life 
3 distinct End-of-Life scenarios have been modeled for iQ Range. Tarkett recommend using the ReStart 
program at End-of-Use to recycle the product. However, to showcase the value of Tarkett’s recycling 
activities, environmental impacts of two alternative scenarios have been calculated. 
 
Recycling /R 
100% of the iQ products can be recycled at its end of use stage, thanks to the ReStart® program, 
enabling Tarkett to collect installation losses and post-use flooring from construction sites to recycle it 
and/or re-use it as high quality raw material back in Tarkett plants. Tarkett has developped a new 
technology that cleans, shreds and recycles previously unusable post-consumer vinyl. Thus, iQ 
Range is recycled back at the Ronneby plant. and the transport between construction site and recycling 
facility is 766 km by truck. Environmental impacts of recycling are presented in module C/R. 
 
Incineration with energy recovery /I 
Incineration with energy recovery is a rising waste management method in many of the countries in wich 
iQ Range is sold. While Tarkett wishes to recycle 100% of sold iQ Range, incineration with energy 
recovery is an alternative option if recycling is impossible. Environmental impacts of incineration with 
energy recovery are presented in module C/I. 
 
Landfilling /L 
Landfilling waste is still a proheminent waste management scenario. This option is however not 
recommanded by Tarkett. Environmental impacts of landfilling are presented in module C/L. 
 
Benefits and loads beyond system boundary 
 
Recycling /R 
The benefit is due to the recycling post-use flooring that allows avoiding the emissions of virgin materials. 
iQ Range can be 100% recycled at post-installation and post-consumer stage. Post-consumer recycling 
process currently has an efficiency of 90%. Benefits from avoided raw material production and avoided 
transport are calculated in module D/R. 
 
Incineration with energy recovery /I 
Benefits from installation offcuts recycling and incineration energy recovery are calculated in D/I. 
 
Landfilling /L 
Benefits accounted in this scenario exclusively come from installation offcuts recycling and are 
presented in D/L
==PAGE:765==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 13/27 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Results for product group 1 
 
iQ Eminent 
iQ Granit 
iQ Megalit 
iQ Optima 
iQ Surface 
iQ Toro SC 
iQ Granit SD
==PAGE:766==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 14/27 
  
Environmental Information. 
Potential environmental impact in case of recycling at End-of-use  
Results per functional or declared unit in case of recycling - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1/R 
C2/R 
C3/R 
C4/R 
D/R 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
5.24E+00 
2.51E-01 
1.32E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.30E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.11E-01 
5.95E-01 
8.77E-01 
-5.29E+00 
GWP-Fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
5.17E+00 
2.51E-01 
1.24E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.27E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.11E-01 
5.94E-01 
0.00E+00 
-5.25E+00 
GWP- biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-8.35E-01 
1.34E-04 
-1.50E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.96E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.26E-04 
4.18E-05 
8.77E-01 
8.39E-01 
GWP- Luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
9.07E-01 
8.79E-05 
9.12E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.00E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.14E-04 
3.28E-06 
0.00E+00 
-8.86E-01 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
3.07E-02 
1.02E-03 
1.19E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.27E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.50E-03 
1.37E-04 
0.00E+00 
-3.03E-02 
ODP 
kgCFC11 eq 
1.93E-06 
5.71E-08 
2.74E-07 
0.00E+00 
1.73E-08 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.39E-07 
1.41E-09 
0.00E+00 
-1.70E-06 
EP-freshwater 
kg P eq 
1.81E-03 
1.84E-05 
4.74E-04 
0.00E+00 
8.39E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.47E-05 
1.69E-06 
0.00E+00 
-1.81E-03 
EP-freshwater 
kg PO4 eq 
5.55E-03 
5.66E-05 
1.46E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.58E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.37E-04 
5.20E-06 
0.00E+00 
-5.57E-03 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
9.93E-03 
3.05E-04 
1.83E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.10E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
7.49E-04 
7.71E-05 
0.00E+00 
-9.38E-03 
EP-terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
5.98E-02 
3.34E-03 
1.37E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.02E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.19E-03 
6.58E-04 
0.00E+00 
-5.67E-02 
POCP 
kg NMVOC 
eq. 
1.89E-02 
1.02E-03 
4.71E-03 
0.00E+00 
5.96E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.51E-03 
1.59E-04 
0.00E+00 
-1.84E-02 
ADP-
minerals&metals* 
kg Sb eq. 
4.72E-04 
6.81E-06 
6.30E-05 
0.00E+00 
5.24E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.65E-05 
1.99E-07 
0.00E+00 
-4.68E-04 
ADP-Fossil* 
MJ 
1.65E+02 
3.79E+00 
2.84E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.88E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.22E+00 
1.08E-01 
0.00E+00 
-1.05E+02 
WDP 
m3 
7.44E+00 
1.06E-02 
1.38E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.28E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.56E-02 
2.82E-02 
0.00E+00 
-6.34E+00 
Acronyms 
GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential land use and land use change; ODP = Depletion potential 
of the stratospheric ozone layer; AP = Acidification potential. Accumulated Exceedance; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication potential. fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment; EP-
marine = Eutrophication potential. fraction of nutrients reaching marine end compartment; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication potential. Accumulated Exceedance; POCP = Formation potential of 
tropospheric ozone; ADP-minerals&metals = Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil resources; ADP-fossil = Abiotic depletion for fossil resources potential; WDP = Water (user) deprivation potential. 
deprivation-weighted water consumption 
 
==PAGE:767==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 15/27 
  
 
Environmental Information. 
Potential environmental impact in case of recycling at End-of-use  
Results per functional or declared unit in case of recycling - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1/R 
C2/R 
C3/R 
C4/R 
D/R 
PERE 
MJ 
1.48E+01 
5.35E-02 
2.45E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.69E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.30E-01 
4.12E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.28E+01 
PERM 
MJ 
5.23E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.23E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.29E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-4.64E+00 
PERT 
MJ 
2.00E+01 
5.35E-02 
2.97E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.60E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.30E-01 
4.12E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.75E+01 
PENRE 
MJ 
1.36E+02 
3.79E+00 
1.76E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.21E+00 
1.08E-01 
0.00E+00 
-7.70E+01 
PENRM 
MJ. 
2.95E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.08E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-2.86E+01 
PENRT 
MJ 
1.66E+02 
3.79E+00 
2.84E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.21E+00 
1.08E-01 
0.00E+00 
-1.06E+02 
SM 
kg 
1.20E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.20E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.98E+00 
RSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
m3 
1.49E-01 
3.92E-04 
3.16E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.04E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.51E-04 
8.79E-04 
0.00E+00 
-1.13E-01 
Acronyms 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary 
energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy re-sources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non-
renewable secondary fuels; FW = Use of net fresh water 
 
 
==PAGE:768==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 16/27 
  
 
Waste production and output flows in case of recycling at End-of-use 
Waste production 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of recycling - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1/R 
C2/R 
C3/R 
C4/R 
D/R 
Hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
2.50E-01 2.44E-03 1.17E-01 0.00E+00 1.31E-02 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 5.93E-03 1.42E-02 0.00E+00 
-2.14E-01 
Non-hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
1.85E+00 1.99E-01 6.87E-01 0.00E+00 5.45E-02 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 4.84E-01 3.56E-03 0.00E+00 
-1.77E+00 
Radioactive waste disposed 
kg 
1.05E-03 2.58E-05 1.49E-04 0.00E+00 1.01E-05 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 6.28E-05 2.82E-07 0.00E+00 
-1.08E-04 
 
Output flows 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of recycling - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1/R 
C2/R 
C3/R 
C4/R 
D/R 
Components for re-use 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Material for recycling 
kg 
3.95E-03 0.00E+00 2.72E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.45E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.50E-01 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy. electricity 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.36E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy. thermal 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.36E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Additional indicator 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of recycling - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1/R 
C2/R 
C3/R 
C4/R 
D/R 
GWP-GHG1 
kg CO2 eq. 
6.08E+00 
2.51E-01 
1.33E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.27E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.11E-01 
5.94E-01 
0.00E+00 
-6.13E+00 
 
1 GWP-GHG is the sum of GWP-Fossil and GWP-LULUC indicators 
==PAGE:769==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 17/27 
  
 
Additional information – Potential impacts and flows in case of incineration 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of incineration - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/I 
C2/I 
C3/I 
C4/I 
D/I 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
1.49E-02 
6.35E+00 
3.48E-03 
-3.11E+00 
GWP-Fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
1.49E-02 
5.46E+00 
3.48E-03 
-3.07E+00 
GWP- biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
7.92E-06 
8.86E-01 
6.89E-06 
5.79E-02 
GWP- Luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
5.19E-06 
5.78E-04 
9.69E-07 
-9.25E-02 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
0.00E+00 
6.07E-05 
4.52E-03 
3.30E-05 
-1.30E-02 
ODP 
kgCFC11 eq 
0.00E+00 
3.37E-09 
1.92E-07 
1.43E-09 
-4.95E-07 
EP-freshwater 
kg P eq 
0.00E+00 
1.09E-06 
2.66E-04 
3.57E-07 
-1.05E-03 
EP-freshwater 
kg PO4 eq 
0.00E+00 
7.61E-08 
1.86E-05 
2.50E-08 
-7.35E-05 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
0.00E+00 
1.82E-05 
1.34E-03 
1.14E-05 
-2.49E-03 
EP-terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
0.00E+00 
1.99E-04 
1.23E-02 
1.25E-04 
-2.14E-02 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 0.00E+00 
6.10E-05 
3.38E-03 
3.63E-05 
-6.42E-03 
ADP-minerals&metals* 
kg Sb eq. 
0.00E+00 
4.02E-07 
3.08E-05 
3.18E-08 
-5.00E-05 
ADP-Fossil* 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
2.24E-01 
9.10E+00 
9.72E-02 
-5.29E+01 
WDP 
m3 
0.00E+00 
6.23E-04 
8.37E+00 
4.36E-03 
-8.64E-01 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of incineration - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/I 
C2/I 
C3/I 
C4/I 
D/I 
PERE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
3.16E-03 
8.16E-01 
7.86E-04 
-4.67E+00 
PERM 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
-4.64E-01 
PERT 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
3.16E-03 
8.16E-01 
7.86E-04 
-5.14E+00 
PENRE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
2.24E-01 
9.09E+00 
9.72E-02 
-4.98E+01 
PENRM 
MJ. 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
-2.86E+00 
PENRT 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
2.24E-01 
9.08E+00 
9.72E-02 
-5.27E+01 
SM 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
2.71E-01 
RSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
m3 
0.00E+00 
2.31E-05 
2.53E-01 
1.03E-04 
-2.72E-02 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of incineration - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/I 
C2/I 
C3/I 
C4/I 
D/I 
Hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
1.44E-04 
1.57E+00 
5.73E-05 
-4.78E-02 
Non-hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
1.18E-02 
3.10E-01 
6.60E-01 
-6.50E-01 
Radioactive waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
1.53E-06 
4.36E-05 
6.38E-07 
-1.99E-04 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of incineration - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/I 
C2/I 
C3/I 
C4/I 
D/I 
Components for re-use 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Material for recycling 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.97E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy. electricity 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 3.98E+01 0.00E+00 
-5.19E+00 
Exported energy. thermal 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 3.98E+01 0.00E+00 
-1.53E+01 
==PAGE:770==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 18/27 
  
 
Additional information – Potential impacts and flows in case of landfilling 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of landfilling - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/L 
C2/L 
C3/L 
C4/L 
D/L 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
1.49E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.12E+00 
-4.97E-01 
GWP-Fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
1.49E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.43E-01 
-4.94E-01 
GWP- biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
7.92E-06 
0.00E+00 
8.77E-01 
8.76E-02 
GWP- Luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
5.19E-06 
0.00E+00 
6.14E-06 
-9.06E-02 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
0.00E+00 
6.07E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.23E-04 
-2.94E-03 
ODP 
kgCFC11 
eq 
0.00E+00 
3.37E-09 
0.00E+00 
9.24E-09 
-1.71E-07 
EP-freshwater 
kg P eq 
0.00E+00 
1.09E-06 
0.00E+00 
2.73E-06 
-1.72E-04 
EP-freshwater 
kg PO4 eq 
0.00E+00 
  
  
  
  
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
0.00E+00 
1.82E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.16E-03 
-9.41E-04 
EP-terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
0.00E+00 
1.99E-04 
0.00E+00 
8.94E-04 
-5.60E-03 
POCP 
kg NMVOC 
eq. 
0.00E+00 
6.10E-05 
0.00E+00 
3.07E-04 
-1.79E-03 
ADP-minerals&metals* 
kg Sb eq. 
0.00E+00 
4.02E-07 
0.00E+00 
2.21E-07 
-4.69E-05 
ADP-Fossil* 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
2.24E-01 
0.00E+00 
6.74E-01 
-1.10E+01 
WDP 
m3 
0.00E+00 
6.23E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.08E-03 
-6.73E-01 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of landfilling - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/L 
C2/L 
C3/L 
C4/L 
D/L 
PERE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
3.16E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.58E-02 
-1.48E+00 
PERM 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-4.64E-01 
PERT 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
3.16E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.58E-02 
-1.94E+00 
PENRE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
2.24E-01 
0.00E+00 
6.73E-01 
-8.21E+00 
PENRM 
MJ. 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-2.86E+00 
PENRT 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
2.24E-01 
0.00E+00 
6.73E-01 
-1.11E+01 
SM 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.71E-01 
RSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
m3 
0.00E+00 
2.31E-05 
0.00E+00 
8.29E-04 
-1.31E-02 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of landfilling - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/L 
C2/L 
C3/L 
C4/L 
D/L 
Hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
1.44E-04 
0.00E+00 
6.68E-04 
-2.16E-02 
Non-hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
1.18E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.98E+00 
-1.74E-01 
Radioactive waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
1.53E-06 
0.00E+00 
4.40E-06 
-2.18E-05 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of landfilling - iQ Range Compact 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/L 
C2/L 
C3/L 
C4/L 
D/L 
Components for re-use 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Material for recycling 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy. electricity 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy. thermal 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
==PAGE:771==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 19/27 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Results for product group 2 
 
Granit Multisafe 
Granit Safe T
==PAGE:772==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 20/27 
  
Environmental Information. 
Potential environmental impact in case of recycling at End-of-use  
Results per functional or declared unit in case of recycling - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1/R 
C2/R 
C3/R 
C4/R 
D/R 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
5.62E+00 
2.72E-01 
1.36E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.30E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.59E-01 
5.95E-01 
8.97E-01 
-5.67E+00 
GWP-Fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
5.51E+00 
2.72E-01 
1.28E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.27E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.58E-01 
5.94E-01 
0.00E+00 
-5.58E+00 
GWP- biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
-8.70E-01 
1.45E-04 
-1.85E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.96E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.51E-04 
4.18E-05 
8.97E-01 
8.70E-01 
GWP- Luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
9.76E-01 
9.52E-05 
9.82E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.00E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.30E-04 
3.28E-06 
0.00E+00 
-9.54E-01 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
3.34E-02 
1.11E-03 
1.22E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.27E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.69E-03 
1.37E-04 
0.00E+00 
-3.30E-02 
ODP 
kgCFC11 eq 
2.04E-06 
6.18E-08 
2.86E-07 
0.00E+00 
1.73E-08 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.50E-07 
1.41E-09 
0.00E+00 
-1.80E-06 
EP-freshwater 
kg P eq 
1.93E-03 
1.99E-05 
4.86E-04 
0.00E+00 
8.39E-05 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
4.82E-05 
1.69E-06 
0.00E+00 
-1.93E-03 
EP-freshwater 
kg PO4 eq 
5.92E-03 
6.12E-05 
1.49E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.58E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.48E-04 
5.20E-06 
0.00E+00 
-5.93E-03 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
1.06E-02 
3.30E-04 
1.90E-03 
0.00E+00 
1.10E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.07E-04 
7.71E-05 
0.00E+00 
-1.00E-02 
EP-terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
6.38E-02 
3.61E-03 
1.42E-02 
0.00E+00 
4.02E-03 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.83E-03 
6.58E-04 
0.00E+00 
-6.06E-02 
POCP 
kg NMVOC 
eq. 
2.02E-02 
1.11E-03 
4.86E-03 
0.00E+00 
5.96E-04 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.70E-03 
1.59E-04 
0.00E+00 
-1.97E-02 
ADP-
minerals&metals* 
kg Sb eq. 
5.20E-04 
7.37E-06 
6.79E-05 
0.00E+00 
5.24E-06 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.78E-05 
1.99E-07 
0.00E+00 
-5.15E-04 
ADP-Fossil* 
MJ 
1.72E+02 
4.10E+00 
2.92E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.88E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.93E+00 
1.08E-01 
0.00E+00 
-1.11E+02 
WDP 
m3 
7.90E+00 
1.14E-02 
1.43E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.28E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.76E-02 
2.82E-02 
0.00E+00 
-6.75E+00 
Acronyms 
GWP-fossil = Global Warming Potential fossil fuels; GWP-biogenic = Global Warming Potential biogenic; GWP-luluc = Global Warming Potential land use and land use change; ODP = Depletion potential 
of the stratospheric ozone layer; AP = Acidification potential. Accumulated Exceedance; EP-freshwater = Eutrophication potential. fraction of nutrients reaching freshwater end compartment; EP-
marine = Eutrophication potential. fraction of nutrients reaching marine end compartment; EP-terrestrial = Eutrophication potential. Accumulated Exceedance; POCP = Formation potential of 
tropospheric ozone; ADP-minerals&metals = Abiotic depletion potential for non-fossil resources; ADP-fossil = Abiotic depletion for fossil resources potential; WDP = Water (user) deprivation potential. 
deprivation-weighted water consumption 
 
==PAGE:773==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 21/27 
  
 
Environmental Information. 
Potential environmental impact in case of recycling at End-of-use  
Results per functional or declared unit in case of recycling - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1/R 
C2/R 
C3/R 
C4/R 
D/R 
PERE 
MJ 
1.57E+01 
5.80E-02 
2.55E+00 
0.00E+00 
8.69E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.40E-01 
4.12E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.36E+01 
PERM 
MJ 
5.62E+00 
0.00E+00 
5.62E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.29E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-5.04E+00 
PERT 
MJ 
2.14E+01 
5.80E-02 
3.11E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.60E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.40E-01 
4.12E-03 
0.00E+00 
-1.86E+01 
PENRE 
MJ 
1.42E+02 
4.10E+00 
1.82E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.93E+00 
1.08E-01 
0.00E+00 
-8.16E+01 
PENRM 
MJ. 
3.12E+01 
0.00E+00 
1.10E+01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-3.03E+01 
PENRT 
MJ 
1.73E+02 
4.10E+00 
2.92E+01 
0.00E+00 
2.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
9.92E+00 
1.08E-01 
0.00E+00 
-1.12E+02 
SM 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
3.25E+00 
RSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
m3 
1.58E-01 
4.24E-04 
3.26E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.04E-02 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
1.02E-03 
8.79E-04 
0.00E+00 
-1.20E-01 
Acronyms 
PERE = Use of renewable primary energy excluding renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERM = Use of renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PERT = Total use of 
renewable primary energy resources; PENRE = Use of non-renewable primary energy excluding non-renewable primary energy resources used as raw materials; PENRM = Use of non-renewable primary 
energy resources used as raw materials; PENRT = Total use of non-renewable primary energy re-sources; SM = Use of secondary material; RSF = Use of renewable secondary fuels; NRSF = Use of non-
renewable secondary fuels; FW = Use of net fresh water 
 
 
==PAGE:774==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 22/27 
  
 
Waste production and output flows in case of recycling at End-of-use 
Waste production 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of recycling - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1/R 
C2/R 
C3/R 
C4/R 
D/R 
Hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
2.69E-01 2.64E-03 1.19E-01 0.00E+00 1.31E-02 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 6.38E-03 1.42E-02 0.00E+00 
-2.33E-01 
Non-hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
2.00E+00 2.16E-01 7.06E-01 0.00E+00 5.45E-02 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 5.22E-01 3.56E-03 0.00E+00 
-1.92E+00 
Radioactive waste disposed 
kg 
1.07E-03 2.80E-05 1.51E-04 0.00E+00 1.01E-05 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 6.77E-05 2.82E-07 0.00E+00 
-1.12E-04 
 
Output flows 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of recycling - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1/R 
C2/R 
C3/R 
C4/R 
D/R 
Components for re-use 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Material for recycling 
kg 
3.95E-03 0.00E+00 2.95E-01 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.66E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.50E-01 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy. electricity 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.36E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy. thermal 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 2.36E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Additional indicator 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of recycling - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
A1-A3 
A4 
A5 
B1 
B2 
B3 
B4 
B5 
B6 
B7 
C1/R 
C2/R 
C3/R 
C4/R 
D/R 
GWP-GHG2 
kg CO2 eq. 
6.49E+00 
2.72E-01 
1.38E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.27E-01 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
6.58E-01 
5.94E-01 
0.00E+00 
-6.54E+00 
 
2 GWP-GHG is the sum of GWP-Fossil and GWP-LULUC indicators 
==PAGE:775==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 23/27 
  
 
Additional information – Potential impacts and flows in case of incineration 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of incineration – Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/I 
C2/I 
C3/I 
C4/I 
D/I 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 1.60E-02 6.83E+00 3.48E-03 
-3.33E+00 
GWP-Fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 1.60E-02 5.92E+00 3.48E-03 
-3.29E+00 
GWP- biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 8.54E-06 
9.07E-01 
6.89E-06 
5.93E-02 
GWP- Luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 5.59E-06 
6.27E-04 
9.69E-07 
-9.96E-02 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
0.00E+00 6.54E-05 
4.89E-03 
3.30E-05 
-1.40E-02 
ODP 
kgCFC11 eq 
0.00E+00 3.64E-09 
2.08E-07 
1.43E-09 
-5.29E-07 
EP-freshwater 
kg P eq 
0.00E+00 1.17E-06 
2.88E-04 
3.57E-07 
-1.12E-03 
EP-freshwater 
kg PO4 eq 
0.00E+00 3.60E-06 
8.84E-04 
1.10E-06 
-3.45E-03 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
0.00E+00 1.96E-05 
1.44E-03 
1.14E-05 
-2.67E-03 
EP-terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
0.00E+00 2.15E-04 
1.33E-02 
1.25E-04 
-2.29E-02 
POCP 
kg NMVOC eq. 0.00E+00 6.57E-05 
3.66E-03 
3.63E-05 
-6.88E-03 
ADP-minerals&metals* 
kg Sb eq. 
0.00E+00 4.33E-07 
3.34E-05 
3.18E-08 
-5.49E-05 
ADP-Fossil* 
MJ 
0.00E+00 2.41E-01 9.86E+00 9.72E-02 
-5.66E+01 
WDP 
m3 
0.00E+00 6.72E-04 9.08E+00 4.36E-03 
-9.23E-01 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of incineration - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/I 
C2/I 
C3/I 
C4/I 
D/I 
PERE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 3.41E-03 
8.85E-01 
7.86E-04 
-5.00E+00 
PERM 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
-5.04E-01 
PERT 
MJ 
0.00E+00 3.41E-03 
8.85E-01 
7.86E-04 
-5.50E+00 
PENRE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 2.41E-01 9.85E+00 9.72E-02 
-5.34E+01 
PENRM 
MJ. 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
-3.03E+00 
PENRT 
MJ 
0.00E+00 2.41E-01 9.84E+00 9.72E-02 
-5.64E+01 
SM 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
2.95E-01 
RSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
m3 
0.00E+00 2.49E-05 
2.75E-01 
1.03E-04 
-2.92E-02 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of incineration - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/I 
C2/I 
C3/I 
C4/I 
D/I 
Hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 1.55E-04 1.70E+00 5.73E-05 
-5.17E-02 
Non-hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 1.27E-02 
3.36E-01 
6.60E-01 
-7.00E-01 
Radioactive waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 1.65E-06 
4.73E-05 
6.38E-07 
-2.13E-04 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of incineration - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/I 
C2/I 
C3/I 
C4/I 
D/I 
Components for re-use 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 3.20E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Material for recycling 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 4.30E+01 0.00E+00 
-5.63E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
kg 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 4.30E+01 0.00E+00 
-1.66E+01 
Exported energy. electricity 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy. thermal 
MJ 
0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
==PAGE:776==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 24/27 
  
 
Additional information – Potential impacts and flows in case of landfilling 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of landfilling - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/L 
C2/L 
C3/L 
C4/L 
D/L 
GWP-total 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
1.60E-02 
0.00E+00 
1.16E+00 
-4.97E-01 
GWP-Fossil 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
1.60E-02 
0.00E+00 
2.62E-01 
-4.94E-01 
GWP- biogenic 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
8.54E-06 
0.00E+00 
8.97E-01 
8.76E-02 
GWP- Luluc 
kg CO2 eq. 
0.00E+00 
5.59E-06 
0.00E+00 
6.62E-06 
-9.06E-02 
AP 
mol H+ eq. 
0.00E+00 
6.54E-05 
0.00E+00 
2.41E-04 
-2.94E-03 
ODP 
kgCFC11 
eq 
0.00E+00 
3.64E-09 
0.00E+00 
9.95E-09 
-1.71E-07 
EP-freshwater 
kg P eq 
0.00E+00 
1.17E-06 
0.00E+00 
2.94E-06 
-1.72E-04 
EP-freshwater 
kg PO4 eq 
0.00E+00 
3.60E-06 
0.00E+00 
9.02E-06 
-5.29E-04 
EP-marine 
kg N eq. 
0.00E+00 
1.96E-05 
0.00E+00 
1.25E-03 
-9.41E-04 
EP-terrestrial 
mol N eq. 
0.00E+00 
2.15E-04 
0.00E+00 
9.63E-04 
-5.60E-03 
POCP 
kg NMVOC 
eq. 
0.00E+00 
6.57E-05 
0.00E+00 
3.30E-04 
-1.79E-03 
ADP-minerals&metals* 
kg Sb eq. 
0.00E+00 
4.33E-07 
0.00E+00 
2.38E-07 
-4.69E-05 
ADP-Fossil* 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
2.41E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.26E-01 
-1.10E+01 
WDP 
m3 
0.00E+00 
6.72E-04 
0.00E+00 
3.32E-03 
-6.73E-01 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of landfilling - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/L 
C2/L 
C3/L 
C4/L 
D/L 
PERE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
3.41E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.78E-02 
-1.48E+00 
PERM 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-4.64E-01 
PERT 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
3.41E-03 
0.00E+00 
2.78E-02 
-1.94E+00 
PENRE 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
2.41E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.25E-01 
-8.21E+00 
PENRM 
MJ. 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
-2.86E+00 
PENRT 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
2.41E-01 
0.00E+00 
7.25E-01 
-1.11E+01 
SM 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
2.94E-01 
RSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
NRSF 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
FW 
m3 
0.00E+00 
2.49E-05 
0.00E+00 
8.93E-04 
-1.31E-02 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of landfilling - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/L 
C2/L 
C3/L 
C4/L 
D/L 
Hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
1.55E-04 
0.00E+00 
7.20E-04 
-2.16E-02 
Non-hazardous waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
1.27E-02 
0.00E+00 
3.21E+00 
-1.74E-01 
Radioactive waste disposed 
kg 
0.00E+00 
1.65E-06 
0.00E+00 
4.74E-06 
-2.18E-05 
Results per functional or declared unit in case of landfilling - Granit Multisafe / Granit Safe T 
Indicator 
Unit 
C1/L 
C2/L 
C3/L 
C4/L 
D/L 
Components for re-use 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Material for recycling 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Materials for energy recovery 
kg 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy. electricity 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
Exported energy. thermal 
MJ 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
0.00E+00 
==PAGE:777==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 25/27 
  
 
Information on biogenic carbon content for all groups 
Results per functional or declared unit 
BIOGENIC CARBON CONTENT 
Unit 
QUANTITY 
Biogenic carbon content in product 
kg C 
1.32 
Biogenic carbon content in packaging 
kg C 
<0.002 
 
Note: 1 kg biogenic carbon is equivalent to 44/12 kg CO2. 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:778==
 
 
 
 
 
PAGE 26/27 
  
References 
General Program Instructions of the International EPD® System. Version 4.0. 2021-03-29. 
PCR 2019:14. Construction products. Version 1.11 
c-PCR-004. Resilient. Textile and Laminate floor coverings. Version 2019-12-20 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:779==
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
www.environdec.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
www.environdec.com 
==PAGE:780==
Environmental Product Declaration
Information Disclosure Summary
In accordance with ISO 14025 and EN 15804 for
and
Zhejiang Daocheng Bamboo Industry Co., Ltd
Xinhe, Linpu, Xiaoshan, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China 311251
T: 86-571-57163765
W: dassoGroup.com
E: info@dassoGroup.com
From
 The International EPD® System 
EPD International AB
Bill Kung, Ecovane Environmental
Zhejiang Daocheng Bamboo Industry Co., Ltd
dassoXTR and dassoCTECH
S-P-01928
2020-4-1
2025-4-1 (5 years)
EPD programme
Programme operator
Third-Party Verifier
EPD Owner
Product Name
EPD registration number
Publication date
Valid until
==PAGE:781==
SCOPE AND GOAL
EPD Scope:  “cradle-to-gate with options”, including transport to building site and end of Life stage. 
Geographical scope: Global
Declared Unit: the declared unit aims at providing a reference to which the data inputs and outputs are normalized in 
such a way that the same level of service is represented. The declared unit for this study is 1 kilogram (kg) of dassoXTR 
and dassoCTECH boards (decking, cladding, soffit, lumber & panel) for exterior use.
EPD Goal: according to the data analysis, it indicates the potential environmental impact of dassoXTR and dassoCTECH 
during the whole lifespan (40 years).
 
Through dasso’s patented “heat treatment” technology, dasso processes fused bamboo into dassoXTR for exterior use in 
classic “Espresso” color; With the application of Ceramix Technology, dassoCTECH exterior materials have wonderful 
performance outdoor while retaining the original color- Cognac.
dassoXTR and dassoCTECH fused bamboo are both extremely durable and stable to use in exterior field of commercial, 
residential and public projects. They can be processed into decking, cladding, soffit, fence, lumber and panel. Applica-
tions in Scenarios like walkway in garden/sea side/ public area, pool decking, rest area of hotel/ resort, gallery frame, 
pergola barrier, outdoor furnishings, street bench, facade decorative, etc.
 
LCA refers to life cycle assessment, it assesses environmental impacts associated with all the stages of the life-cycle of 
dasso bamboo product. The goal of LCA is to analyze the environmental effects of products by quantifying all inputs and 
outputs of material flows and assessing how these material flows affect the environment.
PRODUCT & APPLICATION
LCA DESCRIPTION
LCA-MODULES
Product Stage
Use Stage
End of life stage
Resource 
recovery
 stage
Construction
process stage
Raw Material
Transport
Transport
Transport
Waste processing
disposal
Reuse-Recovery-
recycling-potential
Use
Maintenance
Repair
Replacement
Refurbushment
Operational energy use
Operational water use
De-constryction and 
demolition
Manufacturing
Assembly/Install
A1
A2
A3
A4
C1
C2
C3
C4
D
A5
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
B6
B7
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
MND
MND
MND
MND
MND
MND
MND
MND
Description of the System Boundary(X=INCLUDED IN LCA/MND=MODULE NOT DECLARED) 
The life cycle stages below have been covered:
A1-A3: Product stage (raw material acquisition, transport to manufacturing site and manufacturing)
A4: Construction stage (transport to user site)
C1-C4: End-of-life stage (deconstruction, transport, waste processing and disposal)
D: Resource recovery stage (reuse, recovery, recycling)
Excluded lifecycle stages:
The installation stage on the construction site and the usage stage of the product are excluded from this study.
==PAGE:782==
LCA RESULT
dassoXTR - Potential Environmental Impacts:  The results presented below are for the listed environmental categories for 
1 kg of dassoXTR bamboo board and are aggregated for A1-A4, C1-C4 and D stages. The results are presented for 
dassoXTR decking, cladding, soffit, lumber & panel. 
dassoCTECH - Potential Environmental Impacts:  The results presented below are for the listed environmental categories 
for 1 kg of dassoXTR bamboo board and are aggregated for A1-A4, C1-C4 and D stages. The results are presented for 
dassoXTR decking, cladding, soffit, lumber & panel. 
Additional environmental information
The formaldehyde emission of dassoXTR and dassoCTECH is no more than 0.1 mg/m2h and the products reach therefore 
the emission class E1 according to GB/T 17657-2013 (Test methods of evaluating the properties of wood-based panels 
and surface decorated wood-based panels).
Please notice this is the information disclosure summary, contact info@dassogroup.com or visit www.environdec.com to 
get the official EPD report. 
PARAMETER
UNIT
Product stage
Costruction  
process stage
End of life stage
A1
A2
A3
A4
C2
C3-CN
C3-EU
Global warming potential (GWP)
kg CO2 eq.
7.80E-01
4.90E-02
1.90E-01
2.20E-01
2.29E-02
-2.22E+00
-7.44E-01
Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone 
layer (ODP)
kg CFC 11 eq.
1.50E-08
5.80E-09
7.90E-09
3.90E-08
3.78E-09
4.82E-07
3.84E-07
Acidiﬁcation potential (AP)
kg SO2 eq.
5.20E-03
2.00E-04
7.50E-04
1.90E-03
8.84E-05
-1.78E-02
9.04E-04
Eutrophication potential (EP)
kg PO43- eq.
8.10E-04
5.90E-05
1.90E-04
2.90E-04
3.39E-05
4.89E-04
-8.90E-04
Formation potential of tropospheric ozone 
(POCP)
kg C2H4 eq.
3.40E-04
8.10E-06
3.00E-05
6.70E-05
4.02E-06
-5.60E-04
1.48E-04
Abiotic depletion potential – Elements
kg Sb eq.
1.20E-06
7.00E-08
8.40E-08
4.70E-07
1.59E-08
2.47E-05
2.45E-05
Abiotic depletion potential – Fossil resources
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
1.70E+01
7.50E-01
1.90E+00
3.50E+00
3.62E-01
-8.53E+00
4.25E-01
Primary energy 
resources – 
Renewable
Use as energy carrier
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
8.60E-02
2.40E-02
3.50E-01
8.50E-02
1.90E-02
3.60E+00
1.70E+00
Used as raw materials
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
TOTAL
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
8.60E-02
2.40E-02
3.50E-01
8.50E-02
1.90E-02
3.60E+00
1.70E+00
Primary energy 
resources – Non-
renewable
Use as energy carrier
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
4.50E-02
1.60E-03
3.30E-02
3.80E-03
8.20E-04
-1.50E-01
1.80E-01
Used as raw materials
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
TOTAL
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
4.50E-02
1.60E-03
3.30E-02
3.80E-03
8.20E-04
-1.50E-01
1.80E-01
Secondary material
kg
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Renewable secondary fuels
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Non-renewable secondary fuels
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Net use of fresh water
m3
1.50E-04
0.00E+00
9.30E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
PARAMETER
UNIT
Product stage
Costruction  
process stage
End of life stage
A1
A2
A3
A4
C2
C3-CN
C3-EU
Global warming potential (GWP)
kg CO2 eq.
7.80E-01
4.90E-02
1.90E-01
2.20E-01
2.29E-02
-2.22E+00
-7.44E-01
Depletion potential of the stratospheric ozone 
layer (ODP)
kg CFC 11 eq.
1.50E-08
5.80E-09
7.90E-09
3.90E-08
3.78E-09
4.82E-07
3.84E-07
Acidiﬁcation potential (AP)
kg SO2 eq.
5.20E-03
2.00E-04
7.50E-04
1.90E-03
8.84E-05
-1.78E-02
9.04E-04
Eutrophication potential (EP)
kg PO43- eq.
8.10E-04
5.90E-05
1.90E-04
2.90E-04
3.39E-05
4.89E-04
-8.90E-04
Formation potential of tropospheric ozone 
(POCP)
kg C2H4 eq.
3.40E-04
8.10E-06
3.00E-05
6.70E-05
4.02E-06
-5.60E-04
1.48E-04
Abiotic depletion potential – Elements
kg Sb eq.
1.20E-06
7.00E-08
8.40E-08
4.70E-07
1.59E-08
2.47E-05
2.45E-05
Abiotic depletion potential – Fossil resources
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
1.70E+01
7.50E-01
1.90E+00
3.50E+00
3.62E-01
-8.53E+00
4.25E-01
Primary energy 
resources – Renewable
Use as energy carrier
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
8.60E-02
2.40E-02
3.50E-01
8.50E-02
1.90E-02
3.60E+00
1.70E+00
Used as raw materials
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
TOTAL
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
8.60E-02
2.40E-02
3.50E-01
8.50E-02
1.90E-02
3.60E+00
1.70E+00
Primary energy 
resources – Non-
renewable
Use as energy carrier
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
4.50E-02
1.60E-03
3.30E-02
3.80E-03
8.20E-04
-1.50E-01
1.80E-01
Used as raw materials
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
TOTAL
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
4.50E-02
1.60E-03
3.30E-02
3.80E-03
8.20E-04
-1.50E-01
1.80E-01
Secondary material
kg
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Renewable secondary fuels
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Non-renewable secondary fuels
MJ, net caloriﬁc value
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
Net use of fresh water
m3
1.50E-04
0.00E+00
9.30E-04
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
0.00E+00
