==PAGE:1==
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
Carina Schoenmaker
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
Master Thesis
June 23, 2024
Written by
Carina Adriana Anna Schoenmaker
Head supervisor
Martin Dufva
Additional supervisors
Alexander Jönsson
Louise Wildfang
Hakan Gürbüz
Helene Ringvig
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Carina Schoenmaker, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Ørsteds Pl., Building 345C, 2800
Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Cardiovascular diseases, particularly those related to atherosclerosis such as stroke and
heart attack, are leading causes of global mortality. The development of atherosclerotic
plaques is related to disturbed blood flow, although the precise mechanisms remain un­
clear. Current in vitro models have limitations regarding simplicity, accessibility, and re­
producibility, necessitating the development of new in vitro models.
The aims of this thesis were twofold: to investigate the effectiveness of a simple fluidic
model in simulating shear stress on endothelial cells and to elucidate the molecular path­
ways activated by such forces. A platform was designed and manufactured consisting of
a 12­well plate with 3D­printed inserts. Initially, an orbital shaker was used to induce flow
in the system, but due to technical issues it was replaced during the course of research
by a 3D rotator. In a series of experiments, human umbilical vein endothelial cells where
grown in the model under flow. Cells that had undergone flow­morphological changes
were to be used in a gene expression analysis.
Due to a lack of cell quantity, the results on the effectiveness of the model proved to
be inconclusive. Because the experiments did not provide any sequencing data, gene
expression analysis was performed with data from Caco­2 epithelial cells grown on the
same platform.
Alterations in gene expression in Caco­2 were associated with actin polymerization, mole­
cule transport, and metabolic pathways, and possibly cancer characteristics. Principal
Component Analysis and clustering further confirmed genetic modifications under dy­
namic conditions, emphasizing the necessity of cell adaptation to flow prior to experi­
mentation.
Furthermore, a transcription factor binding analysis identified key transcription factors
TCF7L2, AP­1, FOXO1, and FOXC2, implicated in shear stress­induced gene expres­
sion changes, involving KLF2 in atheroprotection and the Hippo pathway in arterial dys­
function. These factors present potential targets for therapeutic interventions that address
endothelial inflammation and dysfunction related to shear stress. Despite challenges, this
thesis demonstrates the potential of the 3D rotator platform to improve in vitro models for
cardiovascular research and provides valuable information on the molecular mechanisms
underlying vascular responses to mechanical forces.
ii
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:4==
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Martin Dufva for supervising me throughout this thesis, for encourag­
ing me to think creatively, and for reminding me that a thesis project is mainly about the
learning process and not about the results that are gained. I would like to thank Alexan­
der Jönsson, for helping with all my questions about the device and materials; thank
you Helene Ringvig, Louise Wildfang and Hakan Gürbüz for guiding me through the lab
and HUVEC cell difficulties; thank you Alexandra­Bianca Fericean and August Gundelach
Rossing for working together on this project and sharing the challenge of growing our cells;
thank you to Marlene Danner Dalgaard and Dana Neumann for sequencing the samples
and providing me with data; and last but not least, thank you to Tim van Haeringen and
Gaia Dellarole for improving my thesis and the process of writing by emotional support as
well as proofreading.
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
iii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Aim
1
2
Introduction
2
3
Mechanotranduction pathways activated by shear stress
4
3.1
Mechanosensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Pathways and important components
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Epithelial pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Transcription factors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
4
Materials and Methods
10
4.1
Construction of flow platform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
4.2
Physiological parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Cell culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.4
Experimental optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4.5
Transcriptomics analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.6
Transcription factor binding analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
5
Results
16
5.1
Shear stress and flow trajectory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
5.2
Cell culture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
5.3
Transcriptomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.4
Transcription factor promoter region binding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
5.5
Transcription Factor binding pathways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
6
Discussion
28
6.1
Gravity­induced flow using a platform on a 3D rotator or orbital shaker . . . 28
6.2
Genetic analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
6.3
Transcription factor binding analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
6.4
Conclusion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Bibliography
31
A Appendix
40
A.1 Insert design alterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
A.2 Calculations shear stress and Reynolds number
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
A.3 HUVEC alignment due to high shear ­ by Reinitz et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
A.4 Transcriptomics pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
A.5 Phenotying Caco­2 cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.6 GO analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.7 Quality Nanopore .FASTQ files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
iv
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:6==
1
Aim
The flow­induced shear stress plays an important role in physiological systems, triggering
vascular and intestinal modulations. Systems that initiate flow in physiological models
are often complex and shear­activated mechanotransduction pathways that lead to gene
activation are not fully uncovered. Despite an abundance of genetic expression data, we
lack an understanding of how transcription factor (TF) activity regulates expression. The
two main objectives of this thesis were to investigate the effect of a simple fluidic model
in inducing shear stress in endothelial cells and to explore the activated molecular path­
ways. Due to difficulties in obtaining results with endothelial cells, data from a previous
experiment with epithelial cells was used for the analysis of the pathway.
The simple fluidic model to be tested was a 3D­printed growth plate on a 3D rotator. This
system was designed to overcome some of the complexity and scalability problems of
current flow systems by using gravity to create flow in an easy­to­produce flow chamber.
To test the effectiveness of this model, we employed two lines of investigation. Firstly, we
investigated the flow inside the model when no cells were present to obtain an indication
whether the model was accurate in reproducing the flow in blood vessels, and to fine­tune
the model for higher accuracy. Secondly, this model was applied to the growth of human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), with the aim of measuring its effectiveness in
achieving the morphological changes that are known to occur in endothelial cells under
shear stress.
Initially, the aim was to sequence the transcriptome of cells that had undergone the ex­
pected morphological changes in our experiment with the simple fluidic model and to use
these data to investigate the molecular pathways activated (in HUVECs) under shear
stress. However, because of mechanical breakdown of the rotator and difficulties in cell
growth, HUVECs could not be used for sequencing. Instead, epithelial cells (Caco­2)
adapted to flow in a previous experiment in our laboratory were used for sequencing and
analysis. Gene expression profiling was performed using Galaxy EU bioinformatics tools,
uncovering differentially expressed (DE) genes as a result of shear stress. Finally, a TF
binding site analysis was performed in the promoter regions of shear­induced genes, us­
ing Caco­2 DE genes and a set of genes obtained from various cell lines in a collective of
perfusion studies. Novel targets for shear stress­induced pathways were suggested from
DE genes and TFs binding to their promotor regions.
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
1
==PAGE:7==
2
Introduction
Flow in physiological systems plays an important role in homeostasis through cytoskele­
tal remodeling, cellular migration, inflammatory regulation, and barrier function [1] [2].
Therefore, it is not surprising that disturbed flow has been associated with inflammatory
processes that can lead to atherosclerosis in the cardiovascular system or autophagy in
the intestines [3][4]. Although there is ample evidence on the protective and disrupting
effects of flow in endothelium and epithelium, the precise mechanisms and genetic acti­
vation are not fully understood [5].
Endothelial cells line the circulatory system, from the largest arteries with a lumen > 10
mm diameter in adults, to capillaries with a lumen of 5­10 µm [6]. These cells are spindle­
shaped and about 30­50 µm in length and 10­30 µm in width [7], forming a cobblestone­
like layer that responds to stressors [8]. The endothelium serves as a semipermeable
barrier to control the transfer of molecules. It has many synthetic properties; the formation
of matrix products, anti thrombotic factors, pro coagulant factors, inflammatory mediators,
vasomotor factors, and growth factors; moreover, it plays a role in lipid metabolism, an­
giogenesis, and vasculogenesis [9]. Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) are
used as an important model for endothelial characteristics and diseases [10].
The inner lining of the gastrointestinal tract is the intestinal epithelium, consisting of ab­
sorptive enterocytes, mucus­secreting goblet cells, enteroendocrine cells, and antimicro­
bial Paneth cells [11]. Cancer colon cells (Caco­2) are frequently used to model the human
epithelium, due to their ability to spontaneously differentiate into an enterocyte phenotype,
including villus formation and absorptive properties [12].
Shear stress activates a complex network of molecular pathways in Caco­2 and HUVEC,
including the PI3K / Akt pathway, which promotes cell survival and nitric oxide production
[13]; the ERK pathway, which regulates gene expression and cell growth [14]; and the
NF­κB pathway, involved in inflammatory responses [15]. The PECAM­1, VE­Cadherin
endothelial mechanosensors, epithelial polycystin transmembrane proteins, ion channels
and integrins are known to detect shear stress and initiate these signaling cascades [16]
[17] [18]. Key transcription factors (TF) involved in shear stress­induced endothelial cells
have been uncovered, however, with significant gaps in understanding gene activation [2].
Chapter 3 explores the mechanomodulatory pathways in the endothelium and epithelium
in more depth.
The properties of endothelium and epithelium vary greatly depending on signals from the
environment. Blood vessels are subjected to two types of mechanical forces: transmural
pressure, caused by blood pressure internally and extravascular pressures, and shear
stress, a friction force due to blood flow [19]. Shear stress is measured in dyne/cm2. In
the largest veins, values below 1 dyne/cm2 are measured, while in venules, shear stress
values range from 60 to 80 dyne/cm2 [20]. In epithelium, the optiumum levels of shear
stress are approximately 0.02 dyne/cm2 [21]. The levels of shear and flow trajectories in­
teract with the molecular pathways involved in cell remodeling, causing cellular alignment
and actin cytoskeletal rearrangement [22] [23]. In Caco­2 cells, laminar shear stress re­
sulted in increased cell sizes, improved wound healing, and cell adhesion [24]. In HUVEC,
it caused vasodilation, cell alignment, and a decrease of inflammation and proliferation
[18]. Oscillatory shear stress increased inflammation, proliferation, and oxidation [2]. It is
proposed that remodeling is not only a passive process due to frictional forces, but forces
2
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:8==
are maintained at a fixed point by active remodelling of endothelial cells [25] [19] and cell
migration, leading to stabilization of flow [26]. Different human­like systems are used to
understand the mechanisms that mediate flow.
The animal model is still the most widely used, is, however, criticized due to a lack of
simplicity, accessibility, and reproducibility, and is most of all ethically questionable [27].
The rise of Transwell 2D cultures and 3D multicellular systems has overcome many of
these issues; however, they are not able to capture the dynamic nature of tissues [28].
With the development of 3D bioprinting, pluripotent stem cell technology, and organoid
coculture, microfluidic systems emerged. They mimic microenvironments while allowing
control over the system to provide a dynamic environment [29][30]. Current microphysio­
logical systems (MPSs) take many different forms. The most used are parallel plate flow
chambers and cone plate viscometers [31]. The parallel plate flow chamber contains a
rectangular channel of uniform height and uses a pump to create flow [32]. The cone plate
viscometer consists of a flat plate and a cone­shaped plate, between which flow is cre­
ated by rotation of the cone perpendicular to the flat plate [33]. In these types of system,
a laminar flow can be created at a wide range of magnitudes by changing the shape and
size of the rectangular channel and the cone. However, they are often bulky and com­
plex to operate, while using large amounts of medium [34][35]. These drawbacks have
resulted in a slow adoption of MPS by the pharmaceutical industry [36], furthermore, there
is little consistency in the results obtained from various methods currently available [37].
For large­scale activities, there is a need for a simpler system that could be broadly imple­
mented. Passive flow­based MPSs that use gravity, osmosis or surface tension use less
complex equipment and smaller amounts of medium [38]. 3D rotators or orbital shaker
can be used to induce unidirectional and circular flow on a large number of cells in si­
multaneous experiments [39][40]. This type of gravity­based system has high­throughput
production potential for application in a wide range of fields.
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
3
==PAGE:9==
3
Mechanotranduction pathways
activated by shear stress
Shear stress activates many different pathways in endothelial cells, resulting in a complex
process of intersecting cascades and genetic activation [2]. A brief overview is given here
for the purpose of understanding the main components discovered so far.
3.1
Mechanosensors
Figure 3.1: The most relevant mechanosensors in responding to to shear stress in en­
dothelial cells.
All activate different transduction pathways eventually resulting in cy­
toskeletal and junction remodelling, proliferation, migration, inflammation, vasodilation,
cell alignment or growth.
Mechanosensors activated by shear stress in endothelial cells include a variety of recep­
tors and channels that convert mechanical stimuli into biochemical signals. The primary
junction mechanosensors are Platelet Endothelial Cell Adhesion Molecule­1 (PECAM­1),
Vascular Endothelial Cadherin (VE­Cad) and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Recep­
tors (VEGFR) [25] [16]. In response to shear, PECAM­1, VE­Cad and VEGFR­2 form a
complex, which senses extracellular matrix alterations and responds by initiating down­
stream signaling pathways such as Akt, AMPK, KLF2/4 and eNOS, contributing to angio­
genesis and cell alignment.
G­protein Coupled Receptors (GPCRs) activated by extracellular stimuli regulate down­
stream signaling pathways through heterotrimeric G proteins and β­arrestins. G proteins,
composed of α, β, and γ subunits, act as molecular switches, with GTP binding activating
them and GDP binding inactivating them. Gα subunits are divided into four families (Gs,
Gi, Gα12/13, Gαq/11), each regulating various signaling pathways after GPT activation [41].
Gs activates adenylyl cyclase, producing cAMP, while Gi inhibits it [42]. Gαq/11 activates
PLC, leading to IP3 production and Ca2+ release [43], and Gα12/13 activates the small GT­
Pase Rho [44]. Among mechanosentitive GPCRs are GPR68, H1R, S1PR1 and B2R. All
are involved in activating the PLC/IP3/Ca2+ pathway, resulting in endothelium­dependent
hyperpolarization and vasodilation [45][46]. GPR68 also activates the ERK1 / 2 and JNK
pathways, as well as the release of cAMP [47][48]. Furthermore, it is associated with
4
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:10==
PECAM­1, activating Akt [49]. H1R enables phospholipase A2 activation, permitting pro­
duction of cGMP and NO [50]. Binding of S1PR1 to Gi leads to NO release through the
PI3, Erk / Akt and PLC /Ca2+ pathways [46] [51]. B2R also stimulates NO release through
PLC and PI3/Akt, and furthermore triggers Ca2+ influx through the ion receptor TRPV4
[52]. Lastly, Receptor Tyrosine Kinases (RTK) such as EFGR, VEGFR2/3 and PDGFR
activate the Ras / Ras / Mek / ERK pathway, assisted by GPCRs.
Multiple ion channels are activated by shear stress, mainly allowing Ca2+ influx, of which
Piezo1 might be the best characterized [17]. Ca2+ influx due to Piezo1 activation through
laminar or pulsative flow leads to phosphorylation of eNOS, Akt, ERK1/2 and VEGFR2.
Piezo1 is involved in secondary activation of the enzyme eNOS through the activation
of the transient receptor potential (TRPV4), also a Ca2+ channel, and the receptor tyro­
sine kinase P2Y2R, associated with the activation of PECAM1, Src and VEGFR2 [49].
Piezo1­mediated influx of Ca2+ and calmodulin­dependent protein kinase (CaMK) acti­
vation regulate transcription factors NFAT, Foxc2 [53], CREB [54]. P2X purinoceptor 4
(P2RX4) also plays an important role in Ca2+ influx, mediated by the transcription factor
Sp1 and downregulated by shear stress [55].
Transmembrane receptor integrins mediate attachment to the extracellular matrix (ECM).
In response to shear stress, they undergo conformational changes, leading to the activa­
tion of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) and Src family kinases. These kinases then propa­
gate the activation of several pathways, including Ras/MAPK, PKA/PI3K, PKC/PI3K, Ak­
t/eNOS, NFκB regulate the reorganization of the cytoskeleton, cell alignment, and nitric
oxide (NO) production by activating endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) [2] [15].
3.2
Pathways and important components
3.2.1
eNOS
The activation of endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase (eNOS) involves a sophisticated inter­
play of mechanical and biochemical signals, which collectively regulate its enzymatic ac­
tivity to produce nitric oxide (NO). Akt, activated by PECAM­1 through the PI3K/Akt path­
way, AMPK, resulting from a complex formed by VE­Cad and the membrane­associated
guanylate kinase with inverted domain structure 1 (MAGI1), and PKA, activated by inte­
grins, are all shown to enhance Ca2+ dependent activation of eNOS, through phospho­
rylation at S1179 [56]. The MAGI1 complex activates the pathways for AMPK and KLF4
transcription factors [57].
3.2.2
PLC/IP3
Similarly, G­protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) for ligands such as bradykinin and acetyl­
choline activate G­proteins upon ligand binding. These activated G­proteins, particularly
Gq, stimulate phospholipase C (PLC), leading to the production of inositol triphosphate
(IP3) and diacylglycerol (DAG). IP3 binds to its receptors in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER), causing the release of Ca2+ into the cytoplasm, while the influx of Ca2+ from ex­
tracellular sources occurs through mechanosensitive channels such as Piezo1 and store­
operated Ca2+ entry channels (SOCE). The increased intracellular Ca2+ binds to calmod­
ulin, a Ca2+­binding messenger protein. The Ca2+­calmodulin complex then associates
with eNOS, inducing a conformational change that activates the enzyme. [58]
3.2.3
MAPK/ERK
The extracellular signal­regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) pathway in endothelial cells is ini­
tiated by receptor tyrosine kinases and integrins that detect shear stress from blood flow.
Active Ras initiates a kinase cascade by activating Raf, which phosphorylates MEK. MEK
then phosphorylates ERK, activating it. Activated ERK translocates to the nucleus to
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
5
==PAGE:11==
phosphorylate transcription factors Elk­l, c­Myc, STATs, Jun, Fos, ATF2, and Max. ERK
is involved in gene expression changes that mediate endothelial cell responses to shear
stress, including inflammatory responses by macrophage production TGF −β1, differ­
entiation and proliferation, thus maintaining vascular homeostasis and function. [14] [59]
[47]
3.2.4
PI3K/Akt
The PI3K/Akt pathway in endothelial cells begins with the activation of mechanosensors
such as PECAM­1, VE­Cadherin (VE­Cad) and integrins in response to shear stress from
blood flow [16]. These mechanosensors initiate signaling cascades that activate phos­
phatidylinositol 3­kinase (PI3K). PI3K phosphorylates the membrane lipid PIP2 to gener­
ate PIP3, which serves as a binding site for the serine/threonine kinase Akt (also known as
protein kinase B) and its upstream activator PDK1. PDK1 phosphorylates and activates
Akt. Activated Akt then translocates to the nucleus, where it phosphorylates mTOR, an
important protein translation regulator that activates SREBP transcription factors [60] [61].
This phosphorylation cascade leads to various cellular responses, such as the activation
of endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase (eNOS) and the production of nitric oxide (NO), which
is crucial for vascular dilation and homeostasis [13]. In addition, Akt promotes cell sur­
vival, proliferation, and angiogenesis, thus playing a vital role in maintaining endothelial
function and vascular health.
3.2.5
NFκB
The NFκB pathway in endothelial cells is activated by mechanosensors such as PECAM­
1, VE­Cad, and integrins in response to shear stress from blood flow [16]. These mechano­
sensors activate a signaling cascade that involves kinases of the Src family and focal ad­
hesion kinase (FAK). These kinases activate the release of NFκB dimers, from the IκB
complex, allowing them to translocate into the nucleus. Once in the nucleus, NFκB binds
to specific DNA sequences and activates the transcription of target genes involved in in­
flammatory responses, cell survival, proliferation, and adhesion molecule expression [62]
[15]. NFκB is involved in the activation of the transcription factors STAT1 [63] and RELA
[64].
3.2.6
YAP/TAZ (The Hippo pathway)
The Hippo pathway regulates YAP/TAZ by a phosphorylation cascade involving MST1 /
2, SAV1, MOB1A / B and LATS1, ultimately sequestering YAP / TAZ in the cytoplasm or
targeting them for degradation. When Hippo signaling is inactive, YAP/TAZ translocate to
the nucleus to act as transcriptional coactivators with TEAD, promoting genes involved in
proliferation, migration, and survival. YAP/TAZ also respond to mechanical stimuli sensed
by GPCRs or integrins, which enhance their nuclear translocation by altering cytoskeletal
and focal adhesion dynamics. Furthermore, cell­cell junctions and integrin­based adhe­
sions influence YAP/TAZ localization through mechanisms involving β­catenin, FAK, and
SRC kinases. These pathways have been extensively studied in epithelial and tumor cells
and are thought to similarly regulate YAP/TAZ in endothelial cells. [65]
3.2.7
AMPK
The enzyme AMP protein kinase (AMPK) is regulated by the liver kinase B1 (LKB1) gene
and CaMKKβ under the influence of NO and Ca2+ [66]. AMPK is important for the acti­
vation of eNOS and FoxO­mediated reduction of ANG II and HCR [67], LKB1 and AMPK
regulate glycocalyx metabolism [68], and AMPK triggers the downstream activation of the
mitochondrial transcription factor NRF1 [69].
6
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:12==
3.2.8
Wnt
Wnt signaling can be divided into three pathways: the canonical pathway leading to gene
transcription regulation, the Wnt / calcium pathway leading to calcium release, and the
non­canonincal Wnt/PCP pathway, regulating cytockeletal modulation. They are inter­
connected and respond to shear stress, activated through Frizzled family receptors and
LRP co­receptors. In the canonical pathway, β­catenin is accumulated by the receptors,
translocated to the nucleus where it acts as a TCF and LEF transcription factor activator.
The non­canonical pathways act via the JNK/AP­1 pathway, the PLC/IP3/Ca2+ pathway
and RhoA GTPases and transcription factors CUX1 and E2F1 to regulate cytoskeletal
dynamics, cell polarity, and proliferation. [70] [71]
Figure 3.2: The most relevant transcription factor pathways, in a very simplified overview.
Mechanosensors respond to shear stress on endothelial surface membrane, activating
pathways
3.3
Epithelial pathways
Many of the pathways in response to shear in epithelium are similar to those described in
the epithelium, where the main ones described are TGF­β, MAPK/ERK, AMPK, mTOR,
Wnt and Calcium pathways [18] [72]. Important differences from endothelium are the
absence of the PECAM­1/VE­Cad complex in epithelial cells and the influx of calcium
through polystin (PC1 and PC2) transmembrane proteins instead of Piezo1 channels.
Furthermore, epithelial remodeling is driven by F­actin rearrangement, The result of stress
is remodelling and morphological changes such as an increase in the size of Caco­2 cells
[73] and improved wound healing due to increased migration and proliferation [74].
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
7
==PAGE:13==
3.4
Transcription factors
Crucial atheroprotective TFs in response to laminar or healthy pulsative flow are Kruppel­
like factors (KLF2 and KLF4) [2]. TFs often described in dysfunction­related shear path­
ways are AP­1, NF­κB, FOXO1, FOXC2, and TEAD, induced by YAP/TAZ resulting from
the Hippo pathway. An overview of an important selection of TFs is given in figure 3.2 In
table 3.1 an overview of TFs to regulate homeostasis is given, and in table 3.2 an overview
of TFs active in dysfunctional endothelial cells.
Transcription factor
Pathway
Function
Ref
KLF2/4
Piezo1, MAGI1 receptors
AMPK/MEF2/ERK5
Decrease glycolysis
Regulate eNOS
Atheroprotection
[57][75]
SP1
Piezo1 Ca2+
Regulate P2RX4
Vascular tone
Homeostasis
[55]
NRF1/2
NO, AMPK
Mitochondrial function
[69]
Table 3.1: Transcription factors enriched under laminar and pulsative flow, functioning in
maintaining homeostasis.
8
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:14==
Transcription factor
Pathway
Function
Ref
NFκB
NO,
PECAM/VE­Cad/VEGFR,
FAK/IKK, JNK (AP­1)
Inflammation, glycolysis
oxidative gene expression
[15]
TEAD1­4
Hippo pathway
Proliferation, migration
[65]
YAP/TAZ
Hippo pathway
Proliferation, migration
[65]
NFAT
Piezo1, Ca2+
Immune response
[53]
Foxc2
Piezo1, Ca2+
Valve development
[53]
FoxO1
AMPK
Reduce ANG II and HCR,
Reduction of inflammation,
Increase vasodilation
[67]
LKB1
NO
Decrease AMPK,
Glycocalyx dysfunction
[68]
AP­1 (c­Jun/c­Fos)
NO,
PPAR­α inhibition
Inflammation, plasticity
[76] [77]
CREB
cAMP from GPCRs,
Ca2+/CaMK
Increase c­Fos expression
[54]
SREBP
PI3/AKT/mTOR
Inflammation
[60]
SRF
Ca2+, RhoA
CREB interaction,
Regulation of c­Fos
[54]
STAT1
NFκB
NO decrease,
Inflammation,
Heterogeneity,
Plasticity
[63][76]
RELA
NFκB, JNK, ATF2
Inflammation,
Heterogeneity,
Plasticity
[64][76]
TCF7L2
Wnt, RhoA,
PLC/IP3/Ca2+
Alignment, Proliferation,
Angiogenesis
[70]
LEF1
Wnt, RhoA,
PLC/IP3/Ca2+
Alignment, Proliferation,
Angiogenesis
[70]
CUX1
Rho
Cell cycle
[71]
E2F1
Rho
Cell cycle
[71]
HIF­1α
NO, cross­interacting
with SRF and FoxO1
Inflammation
[2][78]
Table 3.2: Transcription factors enriched under disturbed or pathological low flow, result­
ing in oxidative stress, inflammation and cell cycle progression with possible cell dysfunc­
tion.
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
9
==PAGE:15==
4
Materials and Methods
This thesis consisted of several experimental phases. Firstly, a platform was designed
and constructed to induce flow. Then it was tested in the absence of cells to determine
the flow strength and trajectory. Afterwards, an experimental optimization was followed
in which human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) were subjected to flow in the
platform in an attempt to obtain optimal shear stress­induced cell morphology. Due to
a lack of results in HUVEC, flow­subsistent epithelial cell (Caco­2) data were used for
genetic expression profiling and transcription factor binding analysis.
4.1
Construction of flow platform
To induce shear stress in cells in this experiment, a platform for flow activation was de­
signed by Alexander Jönsson and adjusted by Alexandra­Bianca Fericean, August Gun­
delach Rossing and me. The platform consists of a 12­well polystyrene plate (Corning,
Costar®, product #3737), with a 3D printed insert in each well. The inserts were de­
signed in Fusion 360 and printed using a Form 3B 3D printer loaded with biomed black
resin (product code: RS­F2­BMBL­01) and biomed clear resin (RS­F2­BMCL­01). The in­
serts were designed to form a growth region in ring shape of 3mm width outside the insert.
They sit on the bottom of the well and are clamped on the sides of the top of the well with
wings. The original design was 10mm high, with triangular shaped wings, which caused
the wings to disturb fluid flow, therefore the height was adjusted to 17mm and the wings
were made rectangular to reach as little as possible. See the Appendix for a comparison
with the original design A.1. Before use, the inserts are wet autoclaved in milliQ­water to
avoid leeching, and afterwards, the inserts are dry autoclaved for sterilization. The plates
were placed on a 3D rotator (VWR® Signature™3D Rotator Waver) at an angle of 20
◦and a speed of 30 rpm (maximum angle and speed of this rotator), and on an orbital
shaker (VXR basic Vibrax®) at a speed of 160 or 200 rpm to induce flow.
Figure 4.1: A. Full overview of the insert, consisting of a cylinder with a closed bottom
and protruding wings that lock the insert in place inside a well of a 12­well plate. On the
outer edge of the cylinder forms a space of width 3 mm , to allow for cell growth. B. Top
view including outside and inside radius. C. Side view. Height of the insert is 17 mm,
equal to the height of the insert to allow for maximum fluid motion without disturbance of
the wings. The diameter at the top of the well is slightly larger (22.65 mm) compared to to
bottom diameter (22.11 mm), due to the fabrication process of the well plate. Therefore,
the wing is also slightly larger (3.27 mm) than the width of the cell growth region (3 mm).
10
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:16==
Figure 4.2: A. 12­well plate including inserts, top view. Growth region of 3mm width lies
on the outer edge of the insert, inside the wells. B. Depiction of the plate on a VXR orbital
shaker, making circular motions with an orbital radius of 4mm. The first experiments were
performed using the VWR 3D rotator, not depicted here. The 3D rotator differs from the
orbital shaker in that the rotator tilts around the length and width axes of the platform,
creating a circular motion, whereas the shaker creates a horizontal circular motion.
4.2
Physiological parameters
The estimation of shear stress and laminar flow is crucial to verify whether the system ac­
curately replicates an in vivo environment. The shear stress (τ) and the Reynolds number
(Re) are calculated, as well as estimated [39][79]. Shear stress is the force required to
accelerate the mass over a surface. The Reynolds number defines the degree of turbu­
lence of the fluid; values below 2000 are considered to be laminar [80]. The magnitude of
the shear stress is calculated using the function 4.1, and the laminar flow was calculated
using function 4.2. The calculations were compared with estimates using implementation
of velocity measurements, to account for assumptions. 4.3 and 4.4 [81] [79].
To measure the velocity of fluid in the wells with inserts, a solution of 55 µm polyamide
microparticles (LaVision, 1108947) and milliQ water was inserted into the platform up to
a height of 3.3 mm. The platform was then placed on the 3D rotator or orbital shaker.
The beads were recorded with a Dino­Lite Edge Digital Microscope (AF7915MZTL) at a
horizontal angle to capture the flow at the bottom of the well, where the cells would be
located. The flow velocity at different heights in the fluid was analyzed using Loggerpro
3.16.2.
Functions for calculations of τ and Re:
τ = α ·
√
η · ρ · (2 · π · f)3,
(4.1)
where α is the orbital radius of the shaker, η is the dynamic viscosity of the growth medium,
ρ is the density of the medium, and f is the orbital speed in rounds per second.
Re = H · α · 2 · π · f · ρ
η
,
(4.2)
in which H is the height of the fluid.
Functions for estimations of τ and Re, using velocity:
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
11
==PAGE:17==
τ = 1/8 · ρ · fD · v2,
(4.3)
where ρ is the density of the medium and fD is the Darcy­Weisbach friction factor (fD =
64/Re).
Re = ρ
µ · v · D,
(4.4)
with µ the dynamic viscosity and D the hydraulic diameter of the pipe.
4.3
Cell culture
The human umbilical vein endothelial cells (CI­huvec, INS­CI­1002, InSCREENex, pas­
sages 7­16) were cultured with complete endothelial growth medium (INS­ME­1011), sup­
plemented with 5.5% HUVEC medium supplements (INS­ME­1011BS, InSCHREENex)
and 2.8% penicillin/streptomycin (VWRMS01TQ, VWR). Culture was incubated in p­75
flasks coated with 0.5% gelatin (INS­SU­1015, InSCHREENex), at 37 ◦with 5% CO2. The
medium was changed every 3­4 days, when cells reached 80% confluency, cell splitting
was done by washing with Dulbecco phosphate buffered saline (DPBS) (Sigma­Aldrich,
D8537) and detaching with Trypsin­EDTA (Sigma­Aldrich, T3924). Cell count was per­
formed using a NucleoCounter® NC­200™(Chemometec, Denmark) with ia1­Cassette™
(Chemometec, Denmark). Cells were seeded at densities between 10­15 ·103 cells/cm2
[82].
4.4
Experimental optimization
The experiment of growing HUVECs in the laminar flow­inducing platform was conducted
together with Alexandra­Bianca Fericean and August Gundelach Rossing, who aimed
to eventually design a disturbed flow­inducing platform. We faced several difficulties in
optimizing cell growth in the device. A complete overview is given in 4.3. For every
experiment, cells were first seeded on the platform and were allowed to reach a confluent
state for 3 days. After that, the rotator or shaker was turned on to induce flow for 3 days.
Medium was changed every 3 days.
In the first experiment, 1 cm high inserts were used, and 50 · 103 cells/cm2 cell density
were used to ensure rapid confluence (1). This experiment resulted in cell death and was
therefore repeated. After cells died again in the second attempt (2), we hypothesized
that the incubator was contaminated or that the inserts were too low, causing the medium
to reach the wings and disturbing the flow. To test the incubator, we split our culture
and kept the cultures in the original and a different incubator. A third experiment was
conducted in the original incubator (3), using inserts of 1.7 cm height instead of 1 cm.
During this experiment, the 3D rotator broke. For the fourth experiment (4), the 3D rotator
was replaced with an orbital shaker at 200 rpm [83]. This yielded alignment results in 3 of
the 12 wells. We hypothesized that the shear stress was too high and the flow could be
disturbed [39], therefore, the next experiment was carried out at a lower speed of 160 rpm
(5). This resulted in cell death; therefore we reverted to the original speed. To investigate
the effect of the concentration of gelatin or insert material, two different concentrations
(0.5% and 20%) and two different resins (Biomed black and Biomed clear) were tested
(6), which resulted in alignment in a few samples. Cell growth progress was recorded
using a light miscroscope at magnifications of 4x and 10x.
12
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:18==
Figure 4.3: Experimental optimization pathway, showing complications in cell cultures
(illustrated with a cell flask) and experiments (illustrated with a 12­well plate). In the first
five experiments, cells were seeded at a density of 5 · 105 cells/cm2 on 0.5% gelatin and
inserts were made from Biomed Black resin. Only in the sixth experiment, cells were
seeded at a density of 2.5·105 cells/cm2 on the 20% gelatin, to counterbalance the elevated
cell concentration in the central region of the curved gelatin shape. In the sixth experiment,
half of the inserts were made from Biomed Clear resin.
4.5
Transcriptomics analysis
4.5.1
Data
To determine gene expression modulations due to shear stress, transcriptomics was per­
formed. Due to difficulties with the HUVEC experiments, data from a shear stress study
were used for Caco­2 cells [24]. Cells were grown on the same platform, on a 3D rotator
at an angle of 10 ◦and 3 rpm to achieve a shear stress of 0.043­0.089 dyne/cm2. Dynam­
ically grown cells were adapted to shear for multiple cycles, 4 sample groups were used:
1 week statically grown cells (1S), 3 weeks statically grown cells (3S), 1 week dynamically
grown cells (1D) and 3 weeks dynamically grown cells (3D).
RNA was isolated from cells using the RNA RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN, 74106) and the
RNase­Free DNase Set (QIAGEN, 79256). RNA concentration and quality were assessed
using the Biotek Synergy HT Microplate Reader (Agilent, California, USA) and the Agilent
RNA 6000 Nano Kit (Agilent, 5067­1511) and the 2100 Bioanalyzer Instrument (Agilent,
USA). The RNA was then reverse transcribed to cDNA with the PCR­cDNA Barcoding
Kit (Nanopore, SQK­PCB111.24) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The cDNA
libraries were sequenced on the PromethION 2 Solo (Nanopore, Uniter Kingdom) with
MinKnow (vers. 23.04.06, Nanopore). The FAST5 files are basecalled and multiplexed
into FASTQ files using minKNOW [24].
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
13
==PAGE:19==
4.5.2
Method
Then a transcriptomics analysis was performed, using Galaxy EU and a training pipeline
for RNA­seq data analysis written by Batut et al. [84], and described by D. Neumann [24],
which was adjusted for this thesis. See an overview of the pipeline in figure 4.4. First,.fastq
sequencing sample files were uploaded to Galaxy EU and a quality assessment was
performed using FastQC. The samples were then aligned to the human genome (hg38)
using minimap2 and quality control of the mapping was performed. From the mapped
sequences, genes were counted using featureCounts and subsequently, DESeq2 was
used to do statistical quantification and normalize counts. Differentially Expressed (DE)
genes were selected for significance (p<0.05 and abs(log(FC))>1), and were visualized
in a volcano plot using Volcano Plot, a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) using gg­
plot2, and a heatmap using heatmap2. Biological processes were reviewed using a
Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes or KEGG analysis using Pathview, and a
Gene Ontology (GO) analysis using goseq. A full description of the pipeline can be found
in Appendix A.4.
Figure 4.4: Galaxy EU pipeline for long read Oxford Nanopore RNA sequencing data.
An important adaptation made in the pipeline used by Neumann was the factor selection
for sample groups in the DESeq2 quantification. The 4 sample groups 1S, 3S, 1D and 3D
were in Neumanns analysis selected as equal. However, there is a hierarchy in impor­
tance, where treatment (static or dynamic) is more important than duration (1 week or 3
weeks). In factor selection, this distinction should be made by selecting the treatment as
the first factor and the duration as the second. The analysis of KEGG pathways was added
to be able to compare with the pathways found in the literature. The calcium, MAPK, PI3K­
AKT, AMPK, VEGF, RAS NFκB and Hippo signaling pathways were reviewed, as well as
’fluid shear stress and atherosclerosis’, these pathways were described in literature as
influenced by shear stress.
14
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:20==
4.6
Transcription factor binding analysis
4.6.1
Data
In order to discover new targets for shear pathway investigation, gene activation by tran­
scription factor (TF) binding is investigated. TF binding profiles are compared with pro­
moter regions of shear­activated genes to find binding sites. For TFs associated with
shear stress as described in 3, TF matrix profiles were obtained from the JASPAR database
[85] and compared with two different sets of coactivated genes. The first set was 187 DE
genes identified in Caco­2 data analyzed in this thesis (p­value < 0.05 and |log(FC)| >
1). As background genes, a set of 200 non­DE genes in Caco­2 were utilized (p­value >
0.95 and |log(FC)| < 1). The second set of genes was obtained from a meta­analysis that
compared 146 static and perfused models. This study identified 145 genes regulated as a
response to shear in perfused models from 5 different cell types: epithelium, endothelium,
hepatocytes, stem cells and bone cells [37]. This study identified 14 unregulated genes;
these were used as background genes.
4.6.2
Method
CiiiDER is used for analysis, a tool for predicting transcription factor binding sites [86].
A region of 1500 bp upstream and 500 pb downstream of the transcription start site of a
gene was investigated. CiiiDER utilizes the MATCH algorithm, measuring the quality of
a match between a TF binding profile and binding site, ranging from a MATCH score of
0 (not a match) to 1 (perfect match). For this analysis a deficit value of 0.15 was used,
meaning that the TF binding profile had a MATCH score of at least 0.85.
TF binding sites in regulated genes and background genes were compared in an enrich­
ment analysis using a Mann­Whitney U test. The enrichment of a TF describes the ratio
of the proportion bound to the genes of interest compared to the background genes. TF
binding sites can be over­ and underrepresented in genes when compared to background
genes. The proportion bound describes an absolute measure of how many binding sites
correspond to a TF. TFs with a significant enrichment of p < 0.1 were included as ’enriched
TFs’. The biological relevance of the most enriched binding sites is compared with
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
15
==PAGE:21==
5
Results
5.1
Shear stress and flow trajectory
The velocity (v) of the flow in the platform on a 3D rotator is visualized in figure 5.1 for a fluid
height of 0.33 cm and 5.2 for a fluid height of 0.45 cm, measured at various height levels
(y). 0.33 cm was the minimum height at which the cells would be covered with medium all
around the growth region when the platform was tilted at an angle of 20 degrees. It can
be seen that the flow follows a wave trajectory for all measured heights in both low level
and high level fluid. In figure 5.3 the turbulence of the flow due to the waves is depicted.
The relationship between y and v is non­linear. The flow trajectory is less turbulent for
low fluid height when compared to high fluid height, especially for measurements taken
at average heights of 0.2, 0.27 and 0.44 cm. However, not enough data points could be
collected to complete both graphs.
Figure 5.1:
Velocity of flow for low fluid
height 0.33 cm.
Measurements taken at
different heights between 0 and 1 cm (y).
Note that fluid measurements above 0.33
are recorded at the height of the wave.
Figure 5.2: Velocity of flow for high fluid
height 0.45 cm.
Measurements taken at
different heights between 0 and 1 cm (y).
Note that fluid measurements above 0.45
are recorded at the height of the wave.
Table 5.1 contains the data for estimated shear stress as a result of simulations. Shear
stress is estimated at levels between 0.18 and 0.5 dyne/cm2 and Reynolds numbers are
between 19.8 and 54.9, indicating that the flow is laminar. When shear stress is calculated
Growth region 0.3 cm, fluid height 0.45 cm
Mean y
0.20
0.27
0.44
0.57
Mean v
1.20
0.67
0.78
1.85
τ
0.32
0.18
0.21
0.50
Re
35.51
19.75
23.09
54.95
Growth region 0.3 cm, fluid height 0.33 cm
Mean y
0.16
0.27
0.45
0.69
Mean v
1.14
0.99
1.43
0.79
τ
0.31
0.27
0.38
0.21
Re
33.75
29.56
42.22
23.31
Table 5.1: Table velocity calculations
16
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:22==
Figure 5.3: Flow in the 3D rotator at a fluid height of 4.5 mm. Red arrow indicates bidi­
rectional downward flow, yellow arrow indicates laminar flow.
using function 4.1, a growth region of 3 mm resulted in shear stress levels of 2.9 dyne/cm2.
And function 4.2 gives a Reynolds number of 204.7. These values differ, likely as a result
of assumptions.
For Caco­2 cells grown in this device, the estimated levels of shear were 0.043­0.089
dyne/cm2 [24], which is higher than the optimal level of 0.02 [21]. In contrast, for HUVECs,
the estimated levels ranging from 0.18­0.5 dyne/cm2 or calculated 2.9 dyne/cm2, lie much
lower than levels of 60­80 reported in small venules.
5.2
Cell culture
The objective of this thesis was to culture HUVECs under conditions of low shear stress to
the point of morphological changes. Despite our efforts, no conclusive results of aligned
cells were obtained. A few initial findings will be presented here. In experiment (4), using
the 1.7 cm inserts and an orbital shaker, alignment in the direction of flow was visible in
3 out of 12 wells. In experiment (6) alignment is observed only for low gelatin concentra­
tions, also using the 1.7 cm inserts and orbital shaker. Resin type did not influence cell
growth. These results are visualized in figure 5.4a.
Alignment has been shown in cells grown in wells with inserts under shear, in figure 5.4a.
However, when compared to control groups, depicted in figures 5.4b and 5.4c, cell density
has decreased. In figure 5.4c, cells grown under dynamic conditions but without inserts in
the wells, cells density has not seem to decreased when compared to static controls, as
seen in figure 5.4b. The dynamic cells show some alignment, but this is very little when
compared to references in which higher levels of shear were applied, from 8­16 dyne/cm2,
images can be viewed in appendix A.3 [87].
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
17
==PAGE:23==
(a) Alignment results at dynamic conditions of 200 rpm on the orbital shaker, Biomed
Black inserts, 0.5% gelatin. (A) Alignment after experiment (4) and (B) alignment after
experiment (6). Arrow indicates direction of flow.
(b) Cells grown under static conditions. (A) 10x magnification, (B) 4x magnification.
(c) Cells grown under dynamic conditions, 200 rpm on the orbital shaker, without in­
serts.
18
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:24==
5.3
Transcriptomics
5.3.1
Pipeline results
Due to an absence of transcriptomic data from the HUVEC experiments, data from the
Caco­2 study done by Dana Neumann was used for an analysis of gene expression due
to flow [24]. For analysis of the Nanopore gene expression data, a Galaxy EU workflow
developed by Batut et al. was used [84]. Galaxy EU is a platform for molecular diag­
nostics analysis of high­throughput data. It is user friendly and reproducible, with tools
for quality control, genome aligning and statistical analysis, and data modifications and
plotting. The platform takes care of both computation and data storage itself, such that
no local requirements are necessary.
The workflow starts with a quality control. The number of sequences in our data was below
1 million per sample, while 5 up to a 100 million are advised for precise quatification of
genes [88]. Also, for most samples the phred score was below 20, indicating a basecall
accuracy below 99% [89]. The samples were not of the highest quality, for reference
see figures in Appendix A.5. Alignment was performed using minimap2, a read mapper
designed to handle long reads obtained from Nanopore sequencing, faster than frequently
used aligning tools such as BWA­MEM and Bowtie2 [84]. After alignment, the number of
reads per gene were counted and quatified using the tools featurecounts and DESeq2.
5.3.2
Genetic expression profile
Figure 5.5: Significantly up­ and downregulated genes are shown in the volcano plot
(p<0.05). Blue depicts downregulated genes as a result to flow with a log fold change
smaller than ­1, red shows upregulated genes with a log fold cange larger than 1. The
top 20 genes are labeled.
The pipeline yielded 187 differentially expressed (DE) genes, of which a principal com­
ponent analysis (PCA), heatmap and volcano plot, a Gene Ontology (GO) analysis and
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
19
==PAGE:25==
GeneID
Full gene name
Expression location [91]
log(FC)
P­value
TMSB4XP8
Thymosin beta 4
X­linked pseudogene 8
Ubiquitous
1.13
2.96e­24
SLC2A3
(GLUT3)
Solute carrier
family 2 member 3
Ubiquitous
2.63
3.40e­14
TMSB4X
Thymosin beta 4
X­linked
Ubiquitous
1.09
5.30e­14
FXYD3
FXYD domain
containing ion
transport regulator 3
Colon, stomach,
prostate, bladder
1.32
7.66e­12
LGALS14
Galectin 14
Placenta
2.62
7.35e­11
SPAG4
Sperm associated
antigen 4
Ubiquitous
2.55
1.25e­09
PLAC8
Placenta associated 8
Bone marrow, Colon,
Spleen, Stomach
1.11
3.78e­09
CKB
Creatine Kinase B
Colon, Prostate,
Brain, Stomach
2.58
2.04e­08
APOA4
Apolipoprotein A4
Small intestine
4.12
6.39e­08
LDHA
Lactate
dehydrogenase A
Ubiquitous
1.58
1.35e­07
SLC2A1
Solute carrier
family 2 member 1
Placenta
2.34
4.25e­07
Table 5.2: Most upregulated genes found in Caco­2 cells as a result to flow adaptation.
Analysis done by considering static and dynamic samples as main factor groups, 1 and 3
week adaptation was considered as a secondary factor.
a KEGG pathway analysis were done. The differentially expressed genes are shown in
table 5.2 and 5.3. Also in figure 5.5, a volcano plot is shown that depicts all up­ and
downregulated genes.
The most significantly expressed gene is TMSB4XP8, a pseudogene for TMSB4X, in­
volved in the regulation of actin polymerization, proliferation, migration and differentia­
tion. TMSB4X is also associated with tumor progression, in TGF­β pathways facilitated
by transcription factors TCF7 and SRF [90].
Many genes function in cell signalling pathways such as SLC2A3, enabling transmem­
brane transport, FXYD3, regulating ion pumps, SCGN, functioning in calcium pathways
and proliferation, MTND6P3, enabling mitochondrial electron transport, clusterin (CLU
gene), a cell cytosol chaperone functioning in cell death and tumor progression, and
PLAC8, functioning in chromatin binding and thermogenesis.
The following genes also play a role in metabolic pathways, CKB, regulating energy home­
ostasis, LDHA, catalyzing the conversion of pyruvate to lactate, SLC2A1, enabling glu­
cose transport and SPTSSB, regulating lipid metabolism. Lastly, the subsequent genes
appear mainly in the liver. Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) is produced by the fetal yolk sac and
liver, and is associated with hepatocarcinoma, and gastric cancer. Also carrier protein
albumin (ALB), blood clot component fibrinogen (encoded by FGG), Apolipoprotein H
(APOH), a plasma lipoprotein component, all originate from the liver. [91]
20
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:26==
GeneID
Full gene name
Expression
location [91]
log(FC)
P­value
AFP
Alpha fetoprotein
Kidney and liver
­2.94
5.53e­19
ALB
Albumin
Liver
­3.64
4.25e­12
MTND6P3
Mitochondrially encoded
NADH:ubiquinone
oxidoreductase core
subunit 6 pseudogene 3
Ubiquitous
­2.25
6.43e­10
CLU
Clusterin
Ubiquitous
­1.07
3.42e­09
FGG
Fibrinogen
gamma chain
Liver
­1.12
6.39e­08
APOH
Apolipoprotein H
Liver
­1.93
3.92e­07
SCGN
Secretagogin,
EF­hand calcium
binding protein
Stomach, Colon,
Pancreas, Duodenum,
Small intestine
­1.51
4.23e­07
SPTSSB
Serine
palmitoyltransferase
small subunit B
Stomach, Skin, Bladder
­1.92
1.27e­06
Table 5.3: Most downregulated genes found in Caco­2 cells as a result to flow adaptation.
Analysis done by considering static and dynamic samples as main factor groups, 1 and 3
week adaptation was considered as a secondary factor.
Figure 5.6: Principal component analysis of 4 different sample groups of Caco­2 cells
grown in different conditions. Green X1D shows cells adapted to flow for 1 week, orange
X3D shows cells adapted to flow for 3 weeks, and ligt and dark blue shows cells grown
under static conditions for 1 or 3 weeks respectively. Static and dynamic groups as well
as 1 and 3 week groups are mostly clustered.
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
21
==PAGE:27==
To see correlations between samples, a dimension reduction was performed by a PCA,
and a heat map was made. A component pattern plot is given in 5.6 of the first two prin­
cipal components. The PCA clusters the 4 sample groups almost completely (apart from
sample X3S2), showing clear correlations within groups. Principal component 1 (PC1)
also separates the dynamically grown cells from the statically grown, and PC2 separates
the cells adapted to flow for 1 week from the cells adapted to flow for 3 weeks. This re­
lationship is less strong for the static samples. The principal components are ranked in
order of importance, 73.35% of the variance in the data can be explained by PC1, and
only 10.01% by PC2. Thus, differences between the dynamic and static groups are much
greater than the difference between the 1 week and 3 week dynamic groups.
The heat map also shows a clear distinction between the dynamic samples to the static
samples, in line with the clustering seen in the PCA. Again sample X3S2 belongs to the
dynamic cluster. Differences between 1 and 3 week adaptation are not noticeable in either
groups, again consistent with the PCA and order of the principal components.
Figure 5.7: Genetic expression heat map of dynamic samples (left 10 sample) and static
samples (right 9 samples).
A KEGG analysis was perfomed to asses the molecular function and pathways from the
differentially expressed genes. In the KEGG analysis, 2 shear induced pathways found in
the literature are shown, the RAS pathway and the MAPK pathway (figure 5.8) including a
few genes that are found significantly differentially expressed in Caco­2 cells. In the Ras
and MAPKP pathways, the Ras protein is upregulated, as well as Jun in the MAPK. Growth
factors are downregulated, as well as the vescicle trafficking component SEC5 and tissure
repair promoting HSP72. The ugregulation of the Ras protein could be explained by the
upregulation of RRAS (log(FC) = 2.33). The expression of Ras GTPases NRAS and
KRAS [92], remains unchanged (log(FC) = 0.04 and log(FC) = 0.13). RRAS is a Ras
related oncogene, involved in angiogenesis, vascular homeostasis and cell adhesion,
regulating actin cytoskeletal organization. It has been reported as upregulated by shear
activity in renal epithelial cells [72].
22
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:28==
Figure 5.8: KEGG molecular pathways including differentially expressed genes. Green
depicts downregulated genes, red depicts upregulated.
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
23
==PAGE:29==
5.4
Transcription factor promoter region binding
The transcription factors enriched in promoter regions of Caco­2 DE genes and DE genes
from the collective study are depicted in table 5.4. TCF7L2, SREBF1 and NFAT5 ap­
peared in analysis with both studies. TCF7L2 is activated by the Wnt pathway, SREBF1
via PI3/AKT/mTOR and NFAT5 by Ca2+ from Piezo1 activation.
Especially TCF7L2 is of interest, as it is most signifantly enriched in both datasets. In the
neonatal heart, TCF7L2, has been found to activate the SPTLC2 gene, which plays a role
in metabolism of the plasma membrane component sphingolipid. Furthermore, TCF7L2
has been found activated by TEAD2 via the Hippo pathway [93]. TCF7L2 has also been
found to play a role in TMSB4X gene transcription via TGF­β pathways [90]. Genes
SPTLC2 and TMSB4X are both found differentially expressed in Caco­2 cells under flow
in this study (log(FC) = 1.39 and log(FC) = 1.09 respectively).
In figures 5.9 and 5.10 the enrichment in the respective genes is shown, compared to a set
of background genes of non­differential expressed genes. The proportion bound on the
x­axis compares the bound regions to the total number of regions. On the y­axis the en­
richment is shown, the bound regions compared to the background genes. Color depicts
statistical significance, orange if the TF is overrepresented and blue if underrepresented
compared to background. ETS1, ELK1 and KLF4 are underrepresented transcription fac­
tors in the co­expressed gene sets here investigated.
Transcription factor
p­value
Caco­2 genes
Collective genes [37]
TCF7L2
0.05
x
x
SREBF1
0.1
x
x
NFAT5
0.1
x
x
FOS
0.01
x
JUN
0.01
x
AP­1 (FOS­JUN)
0.01
x
CUX1
0.01
x
FoxO1
0.05
x
FoxC2
0.05
x
NFATC2
0.1
x
TEAD2,3
0.1
x
STAT1
0.1
x
SP1
0.1
x
SREBF2
0.1
x
Table 5.4: Transcription factor with overrepresented binding sites in Caco­2 co­expressed
genes and/or a collection of upregulated genes in different perfusion models.
5.5
Transcription Factor binding pathways
The transcription factor (TF) enrichment analysis shows TFs that are likely to be involved
in binding co­expressed gene sets activated by shear. A large amount of data was com­
pared (187 Caco­2 genes, 145 genes from a collection of cells and 46 TFs), resulting in a
set of TFs with significantly increased binding sites in co­expressed genes as a response
to flow. The most significantly enriched TFs were TCF7L2, CUX1, FOXO1, FOXC2 and
AP­1 (comprised of Fos and Jun). I looked into the associations between these TFs and
DE expressed genes in both Caco­2 cells and the collection of cells from perfusion studies.
Shear activated genes TMSB4X, SPTLC2, SLC2A3, BNIP3, MMP9 and LOX­1 showed
24
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:30==
Figure 5.9: Transcription factor binding sites for gene set from Caco­2 epithelial cells [24].
Figure 5.10: Transcription factor binding sites for gene set from collective genes [37].
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
25
==PAGE:31==
to have associations with the TFs, thus I described possible activation pathways.
Figure 5.11: Pathways activated via TCF7 and a connection with the Hippo pathway.
TMSB4X is a gene involved in actin polymerization, proliferation, migration and differenti­
ation. SPTLC2 is involved in sphingolipid synthesis and SLC2A3 enables transmembrane
transport [91].
TCF7 has been described to be involved in activation of genes TMSB4X and SPTLC2
in TGF­β pathways [90] [93]. Both genes SPTLC2 and TMSB4X have binding sites for
TCF7L2. TEAD2, stimulated via the Hippo pathway, has an enriched motif in TCF7L2­
bound regions, suggesting TEAD2 as a costimulator of TCF7L2 [93]. TEAD2 has also
been shown to interact with inflammatory factor AP­1 [65]. YAP, another Hippo pathway
TF, stimulates the transcription of the SLC2A3 gene. SLC2A3 has been found to be
regulated by HIF­1α related to glycolysis processes [78]. A pathway is suggested in figure
5.11 in which all connections are visualised.
Figure 5.12: FOX01 activates BNIP3, a
pro­apoptotic and mTOR inhibiting gene
[94].
Figure 5.13:
FOXC2 negative feedback
with Hippo pathway activated YAP/TAZ.
Genes activated are Ctgf,
involved in
proliferation, differentiation, cell adhesion,
Cyr61, encoding a a cell adhesion protein,
and Ankrd1, involved in myofribillar stretch
[91].
From the mTOR pathway, FOXO1 was found to be enhanced via laminar flow­activated
Sirt1 upregulation, and directly binds a BNIP3 promoter region [94]. The pathway is de­
26
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:32==
picted in figure 5.12. The negative feedback loop between FOXC2 and YAP/TAZ, is reg­
ulated in part by shear. Oscillatory shear stress can increase nuclear translocation of
YAP/TAZ, and laminar induced FOXC2 can block the hyperproliferative effects of TAZ.
TAZ target genes Ctgf, Cyr61 and Ankrd1 are of interest for binding of FOXC2 [95], as
depicted in figure 5.13.
KLF2 is often mentioned in the literature as being upregulated under shear stress and
having atheroprotective effects, and was therefore also included in this analysis. KLF2
is found to inhibit inflammatory effects of AP­1, NFκB and ATF2, all TFs activated by
disturbed flow [96]. AP­1 induces MMP9 and LOX­1 expression and ATF2 activates TNF­
α due to shear stress, with atherosclerotic implications. Pathway is depicted in figure 5.14.
It is unclear whether KLF2 targets genes directly, or secondary inhibition via TF occurs
[97]. In a proximal enrichment analysis of AP­1, KLF2 was shown to have binding regions
close to AP­1 binding regions, suggesting a blocking effect by conformation change.
Figure 5.14: KLF2 blocks the activation of inflammatory factors NFκB, AP­1 and ATF2 and
genes MMP9, involved in extracellular matrix breakdown and LOX­1, a gene encoding for
a lipoprotein receptor involved in degradation of oxidized lipoproteins [91].
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
27
==PAGE:33==
6
Discussion
6.1
Gravity­induced flow using a platform on a 3D rotator or
orbital shaker
Flow inducing models are useful tools for modeling of mechanisms in healthy and dis­
eased endothelium or epithelium. The device developed for this study has been shown to
induce low levels of shear in endothelium, mimicking the flow values of large veins [19].
The device is based on a simple design which can be produced in a lab with a 3D printer
and autoclave. It is easy to handle using only an orbital shaker and is not dependent
on complex equipment. Morphological changes in endothelial and epithelial cells have
appeared as a result of low levels of shear stress, resulting in alignment in HUVECs and
enlargement of Caco­2s. An increase in rotation speed could provide higher levels of
shear and more consistent results, especially in endothelium, which has been shown to
repond to levels of shear of 8­16 dyne/cm2 [87].
Declining proliferation rates were observed when cells were exposed to flow in the plat­
forms, both on the 3D shaker and on the orbital shaker. The same decline in growth rate
was also observed in Caco­2 cells [24]. This could be caused by a non­uniform and possi­
bly disturbed flow, a phenomenon more often observed in experiments using 3D or orbital
shakers [39]. In orbital shakers, a variety of wave patterns, such as rotation and break­
ing waves, is observed [98]. This nonuniform flow could have resulted in an insufficient
distribution of nutrients and oxygen. Another explanation for nonoptimal growth could be
a sensitivity to levels of shear, which were reported to be higher than optimal for Caco­2
and relatively low for HUVEC. Low and oscillatory shear have been shown to cause a
dysfunction in the endothelium [2]. An enhancement in the measurement of shear stress
levels and laminar flow in the device could improve control over the system and improve
declining proliferation rates. This could be done using a sensor based on optical Doppler
velocimetry [39].
6.2
Genetic analysis
The genetic expression profiling was performed in Caco­2 cells that show significantly
altered expression as a result of flow. I found 187 differentially expressed (DE) genes in
dynamic samples. These DE genes were mainly involved in non­epithelial specific cell
signalling processes and metabolic pathways. However, among the upregulated genes
of the gut epithelium, specific genes were also MUC13 and ALPI, which function in mucus
secretion and intestinal alkaline gut mucosal defense [91]. Upregulation of these genes
suggests that shear stress improves mucus barrier function.
Among the genes downregulated were genes expressed in hepatocytes, thus not typical
to appear in Caco­2 cells. The onset of this expression could be explained as a charac­
teristic of the cancer cell line, showing unexpected behavior. AFP and FGG have been
recorded in Caco­2 cells in the past [99] [100]. However, contamination with hepatocytes
used in the same laboratory is not impossible. In an attempt to reject this possibility, I
performed a phenotyping analaysis on static sequencing data, by comparing the full ex­
pression profile with the literature. However, variations in culture conditions and the use of
different Caco­2 cell lines in various laboratories complicate the comparison of the results
reported in the literature. When comparing the expression of our Caco­2 cells with the
transcription expression of different cell lines (Caco­2, hepatocyte HUH­7, and ovarian
28
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:34==
cells A2780) [101], there was no greater similarity to the Caco­2 cells than to HUH­7 and
A2780. The complete phenotyping analysis is described in the Appendix A.5.
The principal component analysis (PCA) and heat map support the findings of the genetic
expression profile, showing a strong clustering of dynamic and static samples. There was
no clustering for adaptation in the static group, which is to be expected since cells are not
expected to change morphology to unchanged surroundings. The PCA did show cluster­
ing between the groups adapted to flow for 1 or 3 weeks. Thus, a genetic modification
occurs in cells when they are subjected to flow and this modification continues in the first
weeks of flow activation. This shows that it is important to adapt cells to flow before con­
ducting an experiment to minimize the impact of adaptation. And the results shown here
are inconclusive about the effect of flow after 3 weeks, possibly a longer adaptation period
is necessary. More research is needed to gain insight into this.
6.3
Transcription factor binding analysis
Four pathways were suggested for shear activated TF binding of gene promotor regions,
which could be possible targets for shear stress­related dysfunction. Although the main
focus of this thesis was endothelial and epithelial cells, the suggested pathways are likely
applicable to more cell types. Shear­induced genes from hepatocyes, stem cells, and
bone cells were also included in the analysis, and descriptions of transcription binding
to genes from the literature were also from several cell types. This provides a general
perspective of shear­induced pathways.
Due to the large size of the compared data sets, a general overview of the TFs with the
most binding to shear­induced genes was given. However, this does not imply that TF
binding profiles corresponding to fewer gene promoter regions are not involved in shear­
induced pathways. A broad proximal enrichment analysis of TFs could provide insight on
coactivation. Furthermore, secondary activation of transcription factors could be investi­
gated by including genes that encode TF. To gain an understanding of the specific binding
and action of TFs, a CHiP analysis could be performed on transcription factors of interest
and the differentially expressed genes discussed.
6.3.1
Limitations
Firstly, the setup we used to measure the velocity and shear stress in the platform on a
3D rotator, using a dinolite camera and polyamide beads, was not optimal. The frame
rate of the camera was too low to follow the beads. The selection of beads may also
have influenced the flow, as there were many beads stationary at the bottom of the well,
making it difficult to track moving beads. The use of less beads or a smaller size may
have resolved this issue; however, in our case the resolution of the camera was a limiting
factor. Measurement of flow in the orbital shaker was difficult as a result of the low frame
rate and resolution.
A second limitation was the assumptions made in calculating the shear stress using the
function 4.1 and the Reynolds number using function 4.2. The same mathematical model
was used for the system using a 3D rotator as for the use of an orbital shaker, whereby the
tilt angle of the 3D rotator is neglected, not taking into account that the height of the fluid
changes as the system rotates. Furthermore, this function does not account for shear
stress at different heights in the fluid, since friction of the material and fluid dynamics in­
fluence flow patterns. For the Reynolds number, the fluid height is taken into account;
however, we used the height at a stationary position and not the range of heights of the
rotating system. The mathematical models predicted laminar flow; however, most mea­
surements show a turbulent flow. In functions 4.3 and 4.4 it was assumed that the flow
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
29
==PAGE:35==
channel was rectangular, neglecting the rotation and tilt angle of the system, problematic
for both the 3D rotator and orbital shaker. All approximations could be improved by includ­
ing tilt angle, fluid height, friction, and rotational and tilt angle parameters to provide better
approximations. Comparisons between calculated and measured shear stress could be
made using a Doppler velocimetry probe [39] or temperature and torque sensors [79],
improving the estimation of system parameters.
Due to time limitations, not enough data was obtained to determine the behavior of HU­
VEC under shear stress. Actin staining, flow cytometry, and transcriptomics could have
provided valuable information.
6.4
Conclusion
In this thesis, I explore the use of a platform that uses gravity to induce flow in endothe­
lial and epithelial cells. This device showed promising results in inducing morphological
changes in the cells and could potentially be a high­throughput, user­friendly alternative to
complex micro physiological systems, although challenges remain in flow measurements
and optimal shear induction. I discussed a complex network of shear­induced pathways
in a broad range of cells, uncovered a genetic expression profile in Caco­2 epithelial cells
and transcription factors binding to shear­activated genes. By comparing activated gene
promoter regions and transcription factor binding profiles, I suggested novel pathways
activated by shear stress. These pathways are possible targets for future research into
diseases related to shear stress.
30
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:36==
Bibliography
[1]
M Lindner, A Laporte, S Block, L Elomaa, and M Weinhart. “Physiological Shear
Stress Enhances Differentiation, Mucus­Formation and Structural 3D Organization
of Intestinal Epithelial Cells In Vitro”. In: Cells 10 (8 Aug. 2021), p. 2062. ISSN:
2073­4409. DOI: 10.3390/cells10082062.
[2]
M J Davis, S Earley, Y S Li, and S Chien. “Vascular mechanotransduction”. In:
Physiological Reviews 103 (2 Apr. 2023), pp. 1247–1421. ISSN: 0031­9333. DOI:
10.1152/physrev.00053.2021.
[3]
K S Cunningham and A I Gotlieb. “The role of shear stress in the pathogenesis
of atherosclerosis”. In: Laboratory Investigation 85 (1 Jan. 2005), pp. 9–23. ISSN:
00236837. DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.3700215.
[4]
S W Kim, J Ehrman, M­R Ahn, J Kondo, A A M Lopez, Y S Oh, X H Kim, S W
Crawley, J R Goldenring, M J Tyska, E C Rericha, and K S Lau. “Shear stress
induces noncanonical autophagy in intestinal epithelial monolayers”. In: Molecular
Biology of the Cell 28 (22 Nov. 2017), pp. 3043–3056. ISSN: 1059­1524. DOI:
10.1091/mbc.e17-01-0021.
[5]
C Souilhol, J Serbanovic­Canic, M Fragiadaki, T J Chico, V Ridger, H Roddie,
and P C Evans. “Endothelial responses to shear stress in atherosclerosis: a novel
role for developmental genes”. In: Nature Reviews Cardiology 17 (1 Jan. 2020),
pp. 52–63. ISSN: 1759­5002. DOI: 10.1038/s41569-019-0239-5.
[6]
T P Navarro, A Dardik, D Junqueira, and L Cisneros. Vascular Diseases for the
Non­Specialist. Ed. by Tulio Pinho Navarro, Alan Dardik, Daniela Junqueira, and
Ligia Cisneros. Springer International Publishing, 2017. ISBN: 978­3­319­46057­
4. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-46059-8.
[7]
A Krüger­Genge, A Blocki, R P Franke, and F Jung. “Vascular Endothelial Cell
Biology: An Update”. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences 20 (18 2019),
p. 4411. ISSN: 1422­0067. DOI: 10.3390/ijms20184411.
[8]
P DeSaix, G J Betts, E Johnson, J E Johnson, K Oksana, D H Kruse, and K A
Young. Anatomy & Physiology (OpenStax). 2013.
[9]
B E Sumpio, J T Riley, and A Dardik. “Cells in focus: endothelial cell”. In: The
International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 34 (12 2002), pp. 1508–1512.
ISSN: 13572725. DOI: 10.1016/S1357-2725(02)00075-4.
[10]
D J Medina­Leyte, M Domínguez­Pérez, I Mercado, M T Villarreal­Molina, and L
Jacobo­Albavera. “Use of Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVEC) as a
Model to Study Cardiovascular Disease: A Review”. In: Applied Sciences 10 (3
Jan. 2020), p. 938. ISSN: 2076­3417. DOI: 10.3390/app10030938.
[11]
P de Santa Barbara, G R van den Brink, and D J Roberts. “Development and
differentiation of the intestinal epithelium”. In: Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences
(CMLS) 60 (7 July 2003), pp. 1322–1332. ISSN: 1420­682X. DOI: 10.1007/s00018-
003-2289-3.
[12]
T Lea. The Impact of Food Bioactives on Health. Ed. by Kitty Verhoeckx, Paul
Cotter, Iván López­Expósito, Charlotte Kleiveland, Tor Lea, Alan Mackie, Teresa
Requena, Dominika Swiatecka, and Harry Wichers. Springer International Pub­
lishing, 2015, pp. 103–111. ISBN: 978­3­319­15791­7. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-
16104-4.
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
31
==PAGE:37==
[13]
S Dimmeler, I Fleming, B Fisslthaler, C Hermann, R Busse, and A M Zeiher.
“Activation of nitric oxide synthase in endothelial cells by Akt­dependent phos­
phorylation”. In: Nature 399 (6736 1999), pp. 601–605. ISSN: 0028­0836. DOI:
10.1038/21224.
[14]
T Kong, M Liu, B Ji, B Bai, B Cheng, and C Wang. “Role of the Extracellular Signal­
Regulated Kinase 1/2 Signaling Pathway in Ischemia­Reperfusion Injury”. In: Fron­
tiers in Physiology 10 (2019). ISSN: 1664­042X. DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2019.01038.
[15]
H W Sun, C J Li, H Q Chen, H L Lin, H X Lv, Y Zhang, and M Zhang. “Involvement
of integrins, MAPK, and NF­κB in regulation of the shear stress­induced MMP­9
expression in endothelial cells”. In: Biochemical and Biophysical Research Com­
munications 353 (1 2007), pp. 152–158. ISSN: 0006291X. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.
2006.12.002.
[16]
Z Chen and E Tzima. “PECAM­1 Is Necessary for Flow­Induced Vascular Re­
modeling”. In: Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology 29 (7 2009),
pp. 1067–1073. ISSN: 1079­5642. DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.186692.
[17]
Q Zhao, H Zhou, S Chi, Y Wang, J Wang, J Geng, K Wu, W Liu, T Zhang, M­Q
Dong, J Wang, X Li, and B Xiao. “Structure and mechanogating mechanism of the
Piezo1 channel”. In: Nature 554 (7693 Feb. 2018), pp. 487–492. ISSN: 0028­0836.
DOI: 10.1038/nature25743.
[18]
J A Espina, M H Cordeiro, M Milivojevic, I Pajić­Lijaković, and E H Barriga. “Re­
sponse of cells and tissues to shear stress”. In: Journal of Cell Science 136 (18
Sept. 2023). ISSN: 0021­9533. DOI: 10.1242/jcs.260985.
[19]
E Roux, P Bougaran, P Dufourcq, and T Couffinhal. “Fluid Shear Stress Sensing
by the Endothelial Layer”. In: Frontiers in Physiology 11 (2020). ISSN: 1664­042X.
DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2020.00861.
[20]
B J Ballermann, A Dardik, E Eng, and A Liu. “Shear stress and the endothelium”.
In: Kidney International 54 (1998), S100–S108. ISSN: 00852538. DOI: 10.1046/j.
1523-1755.1998.06720.x.
[21]
C A M Fois, A Schindeler, P Valtchev, and F Dehghani. “Dynamic flow and shear
stress as key parameters for intestinal cells morphology and polarization in an
organ­on­a­chip model”. In: Biomedical Microdevices 23 (4 Dec. 2021), p. 55.
ISSN: 1387­2176. DOI: 10.1007/s10544-021-00591-y.
[22]
A M Malek and S Izumo. “Mechanism of endothelial cell shape change and cy­
toskeletal remodeling in response to fluid shear stress”. In: Journal of Cell Science
109 (4 Apr. 1996), pp. 713–726. ISSN: 0021­9533. DOI: 10.1242/jcs.109.4.713.
[23]
T Kadohama, K Nishimura, Y Hoshino, T Sasajima, and B E Sumpio. “Effects of
different types of fluid shear stress on endothelial cell proliferation and survival”.
In: Journal of Cellular Physiology 212 (1 2007), pp. 244–251. ISSN: 0021­9541.
DOI: 10.1002/jcp.21024.
[24]
D Neumann. “Caco­2 cells show altered gene expression after culture for multiple
passaging cycles under flow”. In: (2023).
[25]
N Baeyens and M A Schwartz. “Biomechanics of vascular mechanosensation and
remodeling”. In: Molecular Biology of the Cell 27 (1 2016), pp. 7–11. ISSN: 1059­
1524. DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E14-11-1522.
[26]
C A Franco, M L Jones, M O Bernabeu, I Geudens, T Mathivet, A Rosa, F M Lopes,
A P Lima, A Ragab, R T Collins, L K Phng, P V Coveney, and H Gerhardt. “Cor­
rection: Dynamic Endothelial Cell Rearrangements Drive Developmental Vessel
Regression”. In: PLOS Biology 13 (5 May 2015), e1002163. ISSN: 1545­7885.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002163.
32
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:38==
[27]
K Herrmann. “Beyond the 3Rs: Expanding the use of human­relevant replace­
ment methods in biomedical research”. In: ALTEX (2019), pp. 343–352. ISSN:
1868596X. DOI: 10.14573/altex.1907031.
[28]
S Pun, L C Haney, and R Barrile. “Modelling Human Physiology on­Chip: Histor­
ical Perspectives and Future Directions”. In: Micromachines 12 (10 Oct. 2021),
p. 1250. ISSN: 2072­666X. DOI: 10.3390/mi12101250.
[29]
C P Whitworth and W J Polacheck. “Vascular organs­on­chip made with patient­
derived endothelial cells: technologies to transform drug discovery and disease
modeling”. In: Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery 19 (3 Mar. 2024), pp. 339–351.
ISSN: 1746­0441. DOI: 10.1080/17460441.2023.2294947.
[30]
C M Leung, P de Haan, K Ronaldson­Bouchard, G­A Kim, J Ko, H S Rho, Z Chen,
P Habibovic, N L Jeon, S Takayama, M L Shuler, G Vunjak­Novakovic, O Frey,
E Verpoorte, and Y­C Toh. “A guide to the organ­on­a­chip”. In: Nature Reviews
Methods Primers 2 (1 May 2022), p. 33. ISSN: 2662­8449. DOI: 10.1038/s43586-
022-00118-6.
[31]
J J Chiu and S Chien. “Effects of Disturbed Flow on Vascular Endothelium: Patho­
physiological Basis and Clinical Perspectives”. In: Physiological Reviews 91 (1
Jan. 2011), pp. 327–387. ISSN: 0031­9333. DOI: 10.1152/physrev.00047.2009.
[32]
G Helmlinger, R V Geiger, S Schreck, and R M Nerem. “Effects of Pulsatile Flow
on Cultured Vascular Endothelial Cell Morphology”. In: Journal of Biomechanical
Engineering 113 (2 May 1991), pp. 123–131. ISSN: 0148­0731. DOI: 10.1115/1.
2891226.
[33]
B R Blackman, K A Barbee, and L E Thibault. “In Vitro Cell Shearing Device to
Investigate the Dynamic Response of Cells in a Controlled Hydrodynamic Envi­
ronment”. In: Annals of Biomedical Engineering 28 (4 Apr. 2000), pp. 363–372.
ISSN: 0090­6964. DOI: 10.1114/1.286.
[34]
Y I Wang, C Oleaga, C J Long, M B Esch, C W McAleer, P G Miller, J J Hickman,
and M L Shuler. “Self­contained, low­cost Body­on­a­Chip systems for drug devel­
opment”. In: Experimental Biology and Medicine 242 (17 Nov. 2017), pp. 1701–
1713. ISSN: 1535­3702. DOI: 10.1177/1535370217694101.
[35]
S B Puneeth, M B Kulkarni, and S Goel. “Microfluidic viscometers for biochemical
and biomedical applications: A review”. In: Engineering Research Express 3 (2
June 2021), p. 022003. ISSN: 2631­8695. DOI: 10.1088/2631-8695/abfd47.
[36]
L Ewart and A Roth. “Opportunities and challenges with microphysiological sys­
tems: a pharma end­user perspective”. In: Nature Reviews Drug Discovery 20 (5
May 2021), pp. 327–328. ISSN: 1474­1776. DOI: 10.1038/d41573-020-00030-2.
[37]
M Dufva. “A quantitative meta­analysis comparing cell models in perfused organ
on a chip with static cell cultures”. In: Scientific Reports 13 (1 May 2023), p. 8233.
ISSN: 2045­2322. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-35043-5.
[38]
G Jin, D Kim, S Mun, and S Bang. “Passive­Flow­Based MPS: Emerging Physio­
logical Flow­Mimetic Platforms for Studying Effects of Flow on Single Tissues and
Inter­tissue Interactions”. In: BioChip Journal (Mar. 2024). ISSN: 1976­0280. DOI:
10.1007/s13206-024-00141-7.
[39]
A Dardik, L Chen, J Frattini, H Asada, F Aziz, F A Kudo, and B E Sumpio. “Dif­
ferential effects of orbital and laminar shear stress on endothelial cells”. In: Jour­
nal of Vascular Surgery 41 (5 May 2005), pp. 869–880. ISSN: 07415214. DOI:
10.1016/j.jvs.2005.01.020.
[40]
L A White, E V Stevenson, J W Yun, R Eshaq, N R Harris, D K Mills, A Minagar,
P­O Couraud, and J S Alexander. “The Assembly and Application of ’Shear Rings’:
A Novel Endothelial Model for Orbital, Unidirectional and Periodic Fluid Flow and
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
33
==PAGE:39==
Shear Stress”. In: Journal of Visualized Experiments (116 Oct. 2016). ISSN: 1940­
087X. DOI: 10.3791/54632.
[41]
N Wettschureck and S Offermanns. “Mammalian G Proteins and Their Cell Type
Specific Functions”. In: Physiological Reviews 85 (4 Oct. 2005), pp. 1159–1204.
ISSN: 0031­9333. DOI: 10.1152/physrev.00003.2005.
[42]
K D Lustig, B R Conklin, P Herzmark, R Taussig, and H R Bourne. “Type II adeny­
lylcyclase integrates coincident signals from Gs, Gi, and Gq”. In: Journal of Bio­
logical Chemistry 268 (19 July 1993), pp. 13900–13905. ISSN: 00219258. DOI:
10.1016/S0021-9258(19)85187-6.
[43]
G Boulay, X Zhu, M Peyton, M Jiang, R Hurst, E Stefani, and L Birnbaumer.
“Cloning and Expression of a Novel Mammalian Homolog ofDrosophila Transient
Receptor Potential (Trp) Involved in Calcium Entry Secondary to Activation of Re­
ceptors Coupled by the Gq Class of G Protein”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry
272 (47 Nov. 1997), pp. 29672–29680. ISSN: 00219258. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.47.
29672.
[44]
T Kozasa, N Hajicek, C R Chow, and N Suzuki. “Signalling mechanisms of RhoGT­
Pase regulation by the heterotrimeric G proteins G12 and G13”. In: Journal of Bio­
chemistry 150 (4 Oct. 2011), pp. 357–369. ISSN: 0021­924X. DOI: 10.1093/jb/
mvr105.
[45]
S Erdogmus, U Storch, L Danner, J Becker, M Winter, N Ziegler, A Wirth, S Of­
fermanns, C Hoffmann, T Gudermann, and M Mederos y Schnitzler. “Helix 8 is
the essential structural motif of mechanosensitive GPCRs”. In: Nature Communi­
cations 10 (1 Dec. 2019), p. 5784. ISSN: 2041­1723. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-
13722-0.
[46]
M Nagahashi, K Takabe, K P Terracina, D Soma, Y Hirose, T Kobayashi, Y Mat­
suda, and T Wakai. “Sphingosine­1­Phosphate Transporters as Targets for Cancer
Therapy”. In: BioMed Research International 2014 (2014), pp. 1–7. ISSN: 2314­
6133. DOI: 10.1155/2014/651727.
[47]
M Otsuka, Y Negishi, and Y Aramaki. “Involvement of phosphatidylinositol￿3￿kinase
and ERK pathways in the production of TGF￿β1 by macrophages treated with li­
posomes composed of phosphatidylserine”. In: FEBS Letters 581 (2 Jan. 2007),
pp. 325–330. ISSN: 0014­5793. DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2006.12.032.
[48]
H Tomura, J­Q Wang, M Komachi, A Damirin, C Mogi, M Tobo, J Kon, N Misawa,
K Sato, and F Okajima. “Prostaglandin I2 Production and cAMP Accumulation
in Response to Acidic Extracellular pH through OGR1 in Human Aortic Smooth
Muscle Cells”. In: Journal of Biological Chemistry 280 (41 Oct. 2005), pp. 34458–
34464. ISSN: 00219258. DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M505287200.
[49]
S Wang, A Iring, B Strilic, J Albarrán Juárez, H Kaur, K Troidl, S Tonack, J C
Burbiel, C E Müller, I Fleming, J O Lundberg, N Wettschureck, and S Offermanns.
“P2Y2 and Gq/G11 control blood pressure by mediating endothelial mechanotrans­
duction”. In: Journal of Clinical Investigation 125 (8 Aug. 2015), pp. 3077–3086.
ISSN: 0021­9738. DOI: 10.1172/JCI81067.
[50]
F Monczor and N Fernandez. “Current Knowledge and Perspectives on Histamine
H <sub>1</sub> and H <sub>2</sub> Receptor Pharmacology: Functional Selec­
tivity, Receptor Crosstalk, and Repositioning of Classic Histaminergic Ligands”. In:
Molecular Pharmacology 90 (5 Nov. 2016), pp. 640–648. ISSN: 0026­895X. DOI:
10.1124/mol.116.105981.
[51]
A P V Dantas, J Igarashi, and T Michel. “Sphingosine 1­phosphate and control of
vascular tone”. In: American Journal of Physiology­Heart and Circulatory Physiol­
34
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:40==
ogy 284 (6 June 2003), H2045–H2052. ISSN: 0363­6135. DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.
01089.2002.
[52]
J B Su. “Role of Bradykinin in the Regulation of Endothelial Nitric Oxide Synthase
Expression by Cardiovascular Drugs”. In: Current Pharmaceutical Design 23 (40
Feb. 2018), pp. 6215–6222. ISSN: 13816128. DOI: 10.2174/1381612823666170622112253.
[53]
A Sabine, Y Agalarov, H Maby­El Hajjami, M Jaquet, R Hägerling, C Pollmann, D
Bebber, A Pfenniger, N Miura, O Dormond, J­M Calmes, R H Adams, T Mäkinen, F
Kiefer, B R Kwak, and T V Petrova. “Mechanotransduction, PROX1, and FOXC2
Cooperate to Control Connexin37 and Calcineurin during Lymphatic­Valve For­
mation”. In: Developmental Cell 22 (2 Feb. 2012), pp. 430–445. ISSN: 15345807.
DOI: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.12.020.
[54]
B R Wamhoff, D K Bowles, O G McDonald, S Sinha, A P Somlyo, A V Somlyo, and
G K Owens. “L­type Voltage­Gated Ca <sup>2+</sup> Channels Modulate Ex­
pression of Smooth Muscle Differentiation Marker Genes via a Rho Kinase/Myocardin/SRF–
Dependent Mechanism”. In: Circulation Research 95 (4 Aug. 2004), pp. 406–414.
ISSN: 0009­7330. DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000138582.36921.9e.
[55]
R Korenaga, K Yamamoto, N Ohura, T Sokabe, A Kamiya, and J Ando. “Sp1­
mediated downregulation of P2X <sub>4</sub> receptor gene transcription in en­
dothelial cells exposed to shear stress”. In: American Journal of Physiology­Heart
and Circulatory Physiology 280 (5 May 2001), H2214–H2221. ISSN: 0363­6135.
DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.2001.280.5.H2214.
[56]
Y Zhang, T S Lee, E M Kolb, K Sun, X Lu, F M Sladek, G S Kassab, T Gar­
land, and J Y J Shyy. “AMP­Activated Protein Kinase Is Involved in Endothelial NO
Synthase Activation in Response to Shear Stress”. In: Arteriosclerosis, Thrombo­
sis, and Vascular Biology 26 (6 2006), pp. 1281–1287. ISSN: 1079­5642. DOI:
10.1161/01.ATV.0000221230.08596.98.
[57]
G Wang, S Kostidis, G L Tiemeier, W M P J Sol, M R de Vries, M Giera, P Carmeliet,
B M van den Berg, and T J Rabelink. “Shear Stress Regulation of Endothelial
Glycocalyx Structure Is Determined by Glucobiosynthesis”. In: Arteriosclerosis,
Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology 40 (2 Feb. 2020), pp. 350–364. ISSN: 1079­
5642. DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.119.313399.
[58]
M U Nollert, S G Eskin, and L V McIntire. “Shear stress increases inositol trispho­
sphate levels in human endothelial cells”. In: Biochemical and Biophysical Re­
search Communications 170 (1 July 1990), pp. 281–287. ISSN: 0006291X. DOI:
10.1016/0006-291X(90)91271-S.
[59]
M Ishii, T Tateya, M Matsuda, and T Hirashima. “Retrograde ERK activation waves
drive base­to­apex multicellular flow in murine cochlear duct morphogenesis”. In:
eLife 10 (2021). ISSN: 2050­084X. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.61092.
[60]
K Düvel, J L Yecies, S Menon, P Raman, A I Lipovsky, A L Souza, E Triantafellow,
Q Ma, R Gorski, S Cleaver, M G Vander Heiden, J P MacKeigan, P M Finan, C B
Clish, L O Murphy, and B D Manning. “Activation of a Metabolic Gene Regulatory
Network Downstream of mTOR Complex 1”. In: Molecular Cell 39 (2 July 2010),
pp. 171–183. ISSN: 10972765. DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.06.022.
[61]
B Hassan, A Akcakanat, A M Holder, and F Meric­Bernstam. “Targeting the PI3­
Kinase/Akt/mTOR Signaling Pathway”. In: Surgical Oncology Clinics of North Amer­
ica 22 (4 Oct. 2013), pp. 641–664. ISSN: 10553207. DOI: 10.1016/j.soc.2013.06.
008.
[62]
S R L Young, R Gerard­O’Riley, M Harrington, and F M Pavalko. “Activation of
NF­κB by fluid shear stress, but not TNF­α, requires focal adhesion kinase in os­
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
35
==PAGE:41==
teoblasts”. In: Bone 47 (1 July 2010), pp. 74–82. ISSN: 87563282. DOI: 10.1016/
j.bone.2010.03.014.
[63]
L Zhu, F Wang, H Yang, J Zhang, and S Chen. “Low shear stress damages en­
dothelial function through STAT1 in endothelial cells (ECs)”. In: Journal of Phys­
iology and Biochemistry 76 (1 Feb. 2020), pp. 147–157. ISSN: 1138­7548. DOI:
10.1007/s13105-020-00729-1.
[64]
S Cuhlmann, K Van der Heiden, D Saliba, J L Tremoleda, M Khalil, M Zakkar, H
Chaudhury, L A Luong, J C Mason, I Udalova, W Gsell, H Jones, D O Haskard, R
Krams, and P C Evans. “Disturbed Blood Flow Induces RelA Expression via c­Jun
N­Terminal Kinase 1”. In: Circulation Research 108 (8 Apr. 2011), pp. 950–959.
ISSN: 0009­7330. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.233841.
[65]
A Hooglugt, M M van der Stoel, R A Boon, and S Huveneers. “Endothelial YAP/TAZ
Signaling in Angiogenesis and Tumor Vasculature”. In: Frontiers in Oncology 10
(Feb. 2021). ISSN: 2234­943X. DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2020.612802.
[66]
B Fisslthaler and I Fleming. “Activation and Signaling by the AMP­Activated Protein
Kinase in Endothelial Cells”. In: Circulation Research 105 (2 July 2009), pp. 114–
127. ISSN: 0009­7330. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.201590.
[67]
B Fisslthaler, I Fleming, B Keserü, K Walsh, and R Busse. “Fluid Shear Stress and
NO Decrease the Activity of the Hydroxy­Methylglutaryl Coenzyme A Reductase in
Endothelial Cells via the AMP­Activated Protein Kinase and FoxO1”. In: Circulation
Research 100 (2 Feb. 2007). ISSN: 0009­7330. DOI: 10.1161/01.RES.0000257747.
74358.1c.
[68]
H Yang, L Zhu, Y Chao, Y Gu, X Kong, M Chen, P Ye, J Luo, and S Chen.
“Hyaluronidase2 (Hyal2) modulates low shear stress￿induced glycocalyx impair­
ment via the LKB1/AMPK/NADPH oxidase￿dependent pathway”. In: Journal of
Cellular Physiology 233 (12 Dec. 2018), pp. 9701–9715. ISSN: 0021­9541. DOI:
10.1002/jcp.26944.
[69]
V Infantino, S Todisco, and P Convertini. “Mitochondrial physiology: An overview”.
In: Elsevier, 2023, pp. 1–27. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-323-88462-4.00001-8.
[70]
A Abuammah, N Maimari, L Towhidi, J Frueh, K Y Chooi, C Warboys, and R
Krams. “New developments in mechanotransduction: Cross talk of the Wnt, TGF­
β and Notch signalling pathways in reaction to shear stress”. In: Current Opin­
ion in Biomedical Engineering 5 (Mar. 2018), pp. 96–104. ISSN: 24684511. DOI:
10.1016/j.cobme.2018.03.003.
[71]
M David, D Petit, and J Bertoglio. “Cell cycle regulation of Rho signaling pathways”.
In: Cell Cycle 11 (16 Aug. 2012), pp. 3003–3010. ISSN: 1538­4101. DOI: 10.4161/
cc.21088.
[72]
S J Kunnen, T B Malas, C M Semeins, A D Bakker, and D J M Peters. “Comprehen­
sive transcriptome analysis of fluid shear stress altered gene expression in renal
epithelial cells”. In: Journal of Cellular Physiology 233 (4 Apr. 2018), pp. 3615–
3628. ISSN: 0021­9541. DOI: 10.1002/jcp.26222.
[73]
L C Delon, Z Guo, A Oszmiana, C­C Chien, R Gibson, C Prestidge, and B Thierry.
“A systematic investigation of the effect of the fluid shear stress on Caco­2 cells
towards the optimization of epithelial organ­on­chip models”. In: Biomaterials 225
(Dec. 2019), p. 119521. ISSN: 01429612. DOI: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2019.119521.
[74]
S Molladavoodi, M Robichaud, D Wulff, and M Gorbet. “Corneal epithelial cells
exposed to shear stress show altered cytoskeleton and migratory behaviour”. In:
PLOS ONE 12 (6 June 2017), e0178981. ISSN: 1932­6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0178981.
36
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:42==
[75]
A Young, W Wu, W Sun, H B Larman, N Wang, Y­S Li, J Y Shyy, S Chien, and
G García­Cardeña. “Flow Activation of AMP­Activated Protein Kinase in Vascu­
lar Endothelium Leads to Krüppel­Like Factor 2 Expression”. In: Arteriosclerosis,
Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology 29 (11 Nov. 2009), pp. 1902–1908. ISSN: 1079­
5642. DOI: 10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.193540.
[76]
A Andueza, S Kumar, J Kim, D­W Kang, H L Mumme, J I Perez, N Villa­Roel, and H
Jo. “Endothelial Reprogramming by Disturbed Flow Revealed by Single­Cell RNA
and Chromatin Accessibility Study”. In: Cell Reports 33 (11 Dec. 2020), p. 108491.
ISSN: 22111247. DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108491.
[77]
J Zhou, K­C Wang, W Wu, S Subramaniam, J Y­J Shyy, J­J Chiu, J Y­S Li, and S
Chien. “MicroRNA­21 targets peroxisome proliferators­activated receptor­α in an
autoregulatory loop to modulate flow­induced endothelial inflammation”. In: Pro­
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108 (25 June 2011), pp. 10355–
10360. ISSN: 0027­8424. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1107052108.
[78]
I Mimura, M Nangaku, Y Kanki, S Tsutsumi, T Inoue, T Kohro, S Yamamoto, T
Fujita, T Shimamura, J Suehiro, A Taguchi, M Kobayashi, K Tanimura, T Inagaki,
T Tanaka, T Hamakubo, J Sakai, H Aburatani, T Kodama, and Y Wada. “Dynamic
Change of Chromatin Conformation in Response to Hypoxia Enhances the Ex­
pression of GLUT3 (SLC2A3) by Cooperative Interaction of Hypoxia­Inducible
Factor 1 and KDM3A”. In: Molecular and Cellular Biology 32 (15 Aug. 2012),
pp. 3018–3032. ISSN: 1098­5549. DOI: 10.1128/MCB.06643-11.
[79]
J M D Thomas, A Chakraborty, R E Berson, M Shakeri, and M K Sharp. “Validation
of a CFD model of an orbiting culture dish with PIV and analytical solutions”. In:
AIChE Journal 63 (9 Sept. 2017), pp. 4233–4242. ISSN: 0001­1541. DOI: 10.1002/
aic.15762.
[80]
N W Ryan and M M Johnson. “Transistion from laminar to turbulent flow in pipes”.
In: AIChE Journal 5 (4 Dec. 1959), pp. 433–435. ISSN: 0001­1541. DOI: 10.1002/
aic.690050407.
[81]
M H Chaudhry. Applied Hydraulic Transients. Springer New York, 2014. ISBN:
978­1­4614­8537­7. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-8538-4.
[82]
B C Heng, P P Bezerra, P R Preiser, SK Alex Law, Y Xia, F Boey, and S S Venka­
traman. “Effect of cell­seeding density on the proliferation and gene expression
profile of human umbilical vein endothelial cells within ex vivo culture”. In: Cytother­
apy 13 (5 May 2011), pp. 606–617. ISSN: 14653249. DOI: 10.3109/14653249.2010.
542455.
[83]
A A Dogan­Gurbuz, M Jonsson, and M Dufva. High throughput shear stress plat­
forms coupling the intestine and blood vessels (unpublished). 2024.
[84]
B Batut, M Freeberg, M Heydarian, A Erxleben, P Videm, C Blank, M Doyle, N
Soranzo, P van Heusden, and L Delisle. Reference­based RNA­Seq data analysis
(Galaxy Training Materials). 2018. URL: https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-
material/topics/transcriptomics/tutorials/ref-based/tutorial.html.
[85]
A Khan, O Fornes, A Stigliani, M Gheorghe, J A Castro­Mondragon, R van der
Lee, A Bessy, J Chèneby, S R Kulkarni, G Tan, D Baranasic, D J Arenillas, A
Sandelin, K Vandepoele, B Lenhard, B Ballester, W W Wasserman, F Parcy, and
A Mathelier. “JASPAR 2018: update of the open­access database of transcription
factor binding profiles and its web framework”. In: Nucleic Acids Research 46 (D1
Jan. 2018), pp. D260–D266. ISSN: 0305­1048. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx1126.
[86]
L J Gearing, H E Cumming, R Chapman, A M Finkel, I B Woodhouse, K Luu, J A
Gould, S C Forster, and P J Hertzog. “CiiiDER: A tool for predicting and analysing
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
37
==PAGE:43==
transcription factor binding sites”. In: PLOS ONE 14 (9 Sept. 2019), e0215495.
ISSN: 1932­6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0215495.
[87]
A Reinitz, J DeStefano, M Ye, A D Wong, and P C Searson. “Human brain mi­
crovascular endothelial cells resist elongation due to shear stress”. In: Microvas­
cular Research 99 (May 2015), pp. 8–18. ISSN: 00262862. DOI: 10.1016/j.mvr.
2015.02.008.
[88]
A Conesa, P Madrigal, S Tarazona, D Gomez­Cabrero, A Cervera, A McPherson,
M W Szcześniak, D J Gaffney, L L Elo, X Zhang, and A Mortazavi. “A survey of
best practices for RNA­seq data analysis”. In: Genome Biology 17 (1 Dec. 2016),
p. 13. ISSN: 1474­760X. DOI: 10.1186/s13059-016-0881-8.
[89]
B Ewing, L Hillier, M C Wendl, and P Green. “Base­Calling of Automated Se­
quencer Traces Using <i>Phred.</i>   I. Accuracy Assessment”. In: Genome Re­
search 8 (3 Mar. 1998), pp. 175–185. ISSN: 1088­9051. DOI: 10.1101/gr.8.3.175.
[90]
T Morita and K Hayashi. “Tumor Progression Is Mediated by Thymosin­β4 through
a TGFβ/MRTF Signaling Axis”. In: Molecular Cancer Research 16 (5 May 2018),
pp. 880–893. ISSN: 1541­7786. DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-17-0715.
[91]
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Bethesda (MD): National
Library of Medicine (US), National Center for Biotechnology Information; [1988].
URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/.
[92]
D Vigil, J Cherfils, K L Rossman, and C J Der. “Ras superfamily GEFs and GAPs:
validated and tractable targets for cancer therapy?” In: Nature Reviews Cancer 10
(12 Dec. 2010), pp. 842–857. ISSN: 1474­175X. DOI: 10.1038/nrc2960.
[93]
L M Iyer. “Wnt­TCF7L2­dependent transcriptional and chromatin dynamics in car­
diac regeneration, homeostasis and disease”. In: (2018). DOI: 10.53846/goediss-
7112.
[94]
A Lin, J Yao, L Zhuang, D Wang, J Han, E W­F Lam, and B Gan. “The FoxO–
BNIP3 axis exerts a unique regulation of mTORC1 and cell survival under energy
stress”. In: Oncogene 33 (24 June 2014), pp. 3183–3194. ISSN: 0950­9232. DOI:
10.1038/onc.2013.273.
[95]
A Sabine, E Bovay, C S Demir, W Kimura, M Jaquet, Y Agalarov, N Zangger, J P
Scallan, W Graber, E Gulpinar, B R Kwak, T Mäkinen, I Martinez­Corral, S Ortega,
M Delorenzi, F Kiefer, M J Davis, V Djonov, N Miura, and T V Petrova. “FOXC2 and
fluid shear stress stabilize postnatal lymphatic vasculature”. In: Journal of Clinical
Investigation 125 (10 Oct. 2015), pp. 3861–3877. ISSN: 0021­9738. DOI: 10.1172/
JCI80454.
[96]
J O Fledderus, J V van Thienen, R A Boon, R J Dekker, J Rohlena, O L Volger,
A­P J J Bijnens, M J A P Daemen, J Kuiper, T J C van Berkel, H Pannekoek,
and A J G Horrevoets. “Prolonged shear stress and KLF2 suppress constitutive
proinflammatory transcription through inhibition of ATF2”. In: Blood 109 (10 May
2007), pp. 4249–4257. ISSN: 0006­4971. DOI: 10.1182/blood-2006-07-036020.
[97]
J Y Lee, J Chung, K H Kim, S H An, M Kim, J Park, and K Kwon. “Fluid shear stress
regulates the expression of Lectin­like oxidized low density lipoprotein receptor­1
via KLF2­AP­1 pathway depending on its intensity and pattern in endothelial cells”.
In: Atherosclerosis 270 (Mar. 2018), pp. 76–88. ISSN: 00219150. DOI: 10.1016/j.
atherosclerosis.2018.01.038.
[98]
M Reclari. “Hydrodynamics of orbital shaken bioreactors”. In: (2013).
[99]
F Ren, W Weng, Q Zhang, C Tan, M Xu, M Zhang, L Wang, W Sheng, S Ni,
and D Huang. “<p>Clinicopathological features and prognosis of AFP­producing
colorectal cancer: a single­center analysis of 20 cases</p>”. In: Cancer Manage­
38
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:44==
ment and Research Volume 11 (May 2019), pp. 4557–4567. ISSN: 1179­1322.
DOI: 10.2147/CMAR.S196919.
[100]
A Cerbone, C Toaldo, R Minelli, E Ciamporcero, S Pizzimenti, P Pettazzoni, G
Roma, M U Dianzani, C Ullio, C Ferretti, C Dianzani, and G Barrera. “Rosiglita­
zone and AS601245 Decrease Cell Adhesion and Migration through Modulation
of Specific Gene Expression in Human Colon Cancer Cells”. In: PLoS ONE 7 (6
June 2012), e40149. ISSN: 1932­6203. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040149.
[101]
C Klijn, S Durinck, E W Stawiski, P M Haverty, Z Jiang, H Liu, J Degenhardt, O
Mayba, F Gnad, J Liu, G Pau, J Reeder, Y Cao, K Mukhyala, S K Selvaraj, M Yu, G
J Zynda, M J Brauer, T D Wu, R C Gentleman, G Manning, R L Yauch, R Bourgon,
D Stokoe, Z Modrusan, R M Neve, F J de Sauvage, J Settleman, S Seshagiri, and
Z Zhang. “A comprehensive transcriptional portrait of human cancer cell lines”.
In: Nature Biotechnology 33 (3 Mar. 2015), pp. 306–312. ISSN: 1087­0156. DOI:
10.1038/nbt.3080.
[102]
KEGG PATHWAY Database. 2024. URL: https://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.
html.
[103]
R Hayeshi, C Hilgendorf, P Artursson, P Augustijns, B Brodin, P Dehertogh, K
Fisher, L Fossati, E Hovenkamp, T Korjamo, C Masungi, N Maubon, R Mols, A
Müllertz, J Mönkkönen, C O’Driscoll, H M Oppers­Tiemissen, E G E Ragnarsson,
M Rooseboom, and A­L Ungell. “Comparison of drug transporter gene expression
and functionality in Caco­2 cells from 10 different laboratories”. In: European Jour­
nal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 35 (5 Dec. 2008), pp. 383–396. ISSN: 09280987.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejps.2008.08.004.
[104]
E E Fekete, A Wang, M Creskey, S E Cummings, J R Lavoie, Z Ning, J Li, D
Figeys, R Chen, and X Zhang. “Multilevel Proteomic Profiling of Colorectal Ade­
nocarcinoma Caco­2 Cell Differentiation to Characterize an Intestinal Epithelial
Model”. In: Journal of Proteome Research (May 2024). ISSN: 1535­3893. DOI:
10.1021/acs.jproteome.4c00276.
[105]
J Elzinga, M Grouls, G J E J Hooiveld, M van der Zande, H Smidt, and H Bouwmeester.
“Systematic comparison of transcriptomes of Caco­2 cells cultured under different
cellular and physiological conditions”. In: Archives of Toxicology 97 (3 Mar. 2023),
pp. 737–753. ISSN: 0340­5761. DOI: 10.1007/s00204-022-03430-y.
[106]
A J Cura and A Carruthers. “Role of Monosaccharide Transport Proteins in Carbo­
hydrate Assimilation, Distribution, Metabolism, and Homeostasis”. In: Wiley, Apr.
2012, pp. 863–914. DOI: 10.1002/cphy.c110024.
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
39
==PAGE:45==
A
Appendix
A.1
Insert design alterations
The design of the insert was originally done by Alexander Jönsson, and was altered for
this thesis; see figure A.1. The total height was increased, and the shape of the wing was
changed from a triangular to a rectagular shape, to avoid the fluid in the device touching
the wings, which could cause a disturbance of the flow. The width of the wings was
increased from 3 mm to 3.27 to account for a larger well radius at the top.
Figure A.1: A. Original insert design, height 10 mm, wing width 3 mm and radius 8.055
mm. B. the insert altered for this thesis, height 17 mm, wing width 3.25 mm and radius
8.055 mm.
A.2
Calculations shear stress and Reynolds number
The shear stress is calculated with
τ = α
√
ηρ(2πf)3,
(A.1)
where α is the orbital radius of the shaker, η is the dynamic viscosity of the growth medium,
ρ is the density of the medium and f is the robital speed in rounds per second.
α = 0.3cm
η = 0.0101g/(cm ∗s)
ρ = 0.9973g/cm3
f = 200rpm = 3.33rps
(A.2)
such that A.1 becomes:
τ = 2.9g/cm2
(A.3)
40
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:46==
The Reynolds number is calculated as follows:
Re = H · α · 2 · π · f · ρ
η
,
(A.4)
with H the height of the medium.
H = 0.33cm
α = 0.3cm
η = 0.0101g/(cm ∗s)
ρ = 0.9973g/cm3
f = 200rpm = 3.33rps
(A.5)
Resulting in the following Reynolds number
Re = 204.7
(A.6)
The threshold between laminar and turbulent flow is suggested as Re = 2100, suggesting
that in this experiment the flow is well below this value and thus laminar. However, this
limit is suggested for a straight pipe.
A.3
HUVEC alignment due to high shear ­ by Reinitz et al.
Reinitz et al. performed a study in which alignment was achieved in HUVECs [87]. After
an application of flow for 36 hours in a microfluidic device using a pump, the morphology
of the cells is shown in figure A.2. The cells exhibit a development from a cobblestone
pattern to spindle­like morphology. Cell growth did not decline after flow activation.
Figure A.2: Morphological changes in HUVECs prior and after the application of 8, 12 or
16 dyne/cm2 for 36 hours [87].
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
41
==PAGE:47==
A.4
Transcriptomics pipeline
The Galaxy EU training written by Batut et al. was used as a guideline for the transcrip­
tomics analysis pipeline [84] as well as the pipeline used by Dana Neumann [24], with
modifications and additions.
1. Create a new history in Galaxy EU
2. Import .fastq files
3. FastQC
Quality control checks on raw sequence data from high­throughput data. Provides
separate quality files per input file.
(a) Raw read data from your current history > Multiple datasets > Enter all .fastq
files
4. MultiQC
Outputs a summary of the FastQC data: sequence counts/quality/length/duplica­
tion/overrepresentation, base/GC/N content, adapter content and status checks. It
outputs numerical files as well as graphs to visualise the data.
(a) Which tool was used generate logs? > FastQC
(b) Type of FastQC output? > Raw data
(c) FastQC output > Select all FastQC files
5. Minimap2
Alignment of reads against large reference databases. Especially fast with longs
reads, which is the case for Oxford Nanopore, it is important to select this feature.
Output is a file containing position data and CIGAR strings for each sequence, that
encodes matches, deletions and insertions as compared to the reference.
(a) Will you select a reference genome from your history or use a built­in index? >
’Use a built­in genome index’
(b) Using reference genome > ’Human Dec. 2013 (GRCh387hg38) (hg38)’
(c) Single or Paired­end reads > ’Single’
(d) Select fastq dataset > Select multiple datasets > Select all .fastq files you want
to map
(e) Select a profile of preset options > ’PacBio/Oxfod Nanopore read to reference
mapping (­Hk19) (map­pb)’
6. Featurecounts
Counts genomic features in sequences and outputs a file containing the number of
reads a gene was found in. Also outputs feature length files that will be used in a GO
analysis later on in this pipeline, and a summary file containing assigned/unassigned
number of reads.
(a) Alignment file > Multiple datasets > Select all minimap2 files
(b) Specify strand information > ’Unstranded’
(c) Gene annotation file > A GFF/GTF file in your history >
Homo_sapiens.GRCH38.87.gtf (hg38)
42
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:48==
(d) GFF feature type filer > ’exon’
(e) GFF gene identifier > ’gene_name’
(f) Output format > ’Gene­ID ”t” read­count (MultiQC/DESeq2/edgeR/limma­voom
compatible)’
(g) Create gene­length file > Yes
(h) Advanced options > Long reads > Yes
7. Make list of counts
(a) Select all ’Counts’ files
(b) Select ’Build dataset list’
(c) Name it ’All Counts’
8. Tag the files according to sample groups.
(a) Upload a tag file containing a line for each .fastq file with the following format:
’fastq_filename group:first_sample_group group:second_sample_group’. E.g:
’3S5 group:3week group:static’. Name the file ’Tag File’.
(b) Use the tag elements tool to tag your file list
i. Input Collection > ’All Counts’
ii. Tag collection elements according to this file > ’Tag File’
iii. How should the tags be updated > ’New tags will be added, existing tags
will be kept’
9. DESeq2
Determines differentially expressed features from count tables by normalisation of
data and statistical analysis. Output it a tabular file containing 7 columns: 1. Gene
ID, 2. Normalised counts, 3. log(FC), 4. Standard error for log(FC), 5. Wald statistic,
6. p­value, 7. p­value adjusted for false discovery rate. DESeq2 also outputs plots
to visualise the data, and can output a normalised counts file, which will be used
later on for plotting in this pipeline.
DESeq2 requires a selection of factors in the data, these are the factors that the sam­
ples have been tagged for previously (’week3’ and ’static’). The first factor is the one
considered to have most effect on the samples. In the case of cells grown under
static or dynamic conditions, for 1 or 3 weeks, the Treatment (static/dynamic) dis­
tinction is considered the primary factor and the Adaptation Time (1week or 3week)
is the secondary factor.
(a) how > Select datasets per level
(b) 1: FactorName > ’Treatment’
(c) 1: FactorLevel > ’Static’
(d) Select groups that correspond to this factor level > Tags:static
(e) 2: FactorLevel > ’Dynamic’
(f) Select groups that correspond to this factor level > Tags:dynamic
(g) Insert Factor
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
43
==PAGE:49==
(h) 2: FactorName > ’Adaptation Time’
(i) 1: FactorLevel > ’1 week’
(j) Select groups that correspond to this factor level > Tags:1week
(k) 2: FactorLevel > ’3 weeks’
(l) Select groups that correspond to this factor level > Tags:3week
(m) Files have header > yes
(n) Choice of Input data > Count data (e.g. from HTSeq­count, featureCounts or
StringTie)
(o) Output options > Select ’Generate plots for visualizing the analysis result’ and
’Output normalised counts’.
10. Filter
This tool can be used to filter the DESeq2 data for statistical significance. This is
done by elimination of lines that don’t meet requirements. We select only data with
a p­value < 0.05 and |log(FC)| > 1
(a) Filer > Select DESeq2 result file
(b) With following condition > ’c7 < 0.05’
11. Rename the filtered DESeq2 file ’DESeq2 file with genes (p<0.05)’
12. Filter
(a) Filer > Select ’DESeq2 file with genes (p<0.05)’
(b) With following condition > ’abs(c3) > 1’
13. Rename the twice filtered file ’DE gene DESeq2 file (p<0.05, log(FC)>1)’
14. Volcano plot
Displays the adjusted p­value against the log(FC), with only the DE genes in color
(downregulated in blue, upregulated in red)
(a) Specify an input file > ’DE gene DESeq2 file (p<0.05, log(FC)>1)’
(b) FDR (adjusted P value) column number > Column: 7
(c) P value (raw) column number > Column: 6
(d) Log Fold Change column number > Column: 3
(e) Labels column number > Column: 1
(f) Significance threshold > 0,05
(g) LogFC threshold to colour > 1,0
(h) Points to label > Input from file > Upload a .txt file with gene names you wish
to label. In the case of this thesis, the top 20 DE genes.
15. Join two Datasets
For the PCA plot, the normalized counts are needed, for the DE genes. This is
done by first joining the normalized counts file with the ’DE gene’ file generated with
DESeq2, and then cutting the DESeq2 data from the joint files.
44
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:50==
(a) Join > Normalized counts file
(b) Using column > 1
(c) With > ’DE gene DESeq2 file (p<0.05, log(FC)>1)’
(d) and column > 1
16. Cut
Cut only the normalized count data from the joint file.
(a) Cut columns > c1­c20
(b) Delimited by > Tab
(c) From > ’Join two Datasets’
17. Rename the output ’Normalized counts for DE genes’
18. PCA plot w ggplot2
Creates a PCA plot with the first two principal components.
(a) Select table > ’Normalized counts for DE genes’
(b) Select input dataset options > Dataset with header and row names
(c) Select column, for row names > Column: 1
19. heatmap2
Generate a heat map from the normalized count data for only the DE genes. Visu­
alizes the expression of genes by clustering similar expressions, in order to make a
clear distinction between samples that have similar expression.
(a) Input > ’Normalized counts for DE genes’
(b) Data transformation > Log2(value+1) transform my data
(c) Labeling columns and rows > Label columns and not rows
(d) Type of colormap to use > Gradien with 2 colors
20. For a Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, two files are needed: the first one contain­
ing gene IDs and their differential expression boolean values (True/False), and the
second one containing gene IDs and their lengths. The first one is made using
Compute, Cut and Change Case. The second one is made with Chance Case.
21. Compute
Change adj p­values below 0.05 into True and other values into False.
(a) Input > DESeq2 results
(b) Expressions > Add expression > bool(float(c7) < 0.05)
22. Cut
Cut the adj p­values from the DESeq2 results file.
(a) Cut columns > c1,c8
(b) From > Compute file
23. Change case
Change all gene names into upper case.
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
45
==PAGE:51==
(a) From > Cut file
(b) Change case of columns > c1
(c) To > Upper case
24. Rename the result ’Gene IDs and DE expression boolean’
25. Change case
Change all gene names into upper case.
(a) From > ’Feature lengths’
(b) Change case of columns > c1
(c) To > Upper case
26. Rename the result ’Gene IDs and their lenghts’
27. goseq
To do a Gene Ontology analysis, in order to highlight biological processes and bio­
logically relevant elements in the expression. Can output plots of Cellular Compo­
nents, Biological Processes and Molecular Function, as well as numerical values of
different caterories.
(a) Differentially expressed genes file > ’Gene IDs and DE expression boolean’
(b) Gene lengths file > ’Gene IDs and their lenghts’
(c) Select a genome to use > Human (hg38)
(d) Select GEne ID format > Gene Symbol
(e) SElect one or more categories > Select GO analysis you wish to perform
(f) Output options > Output Go terms plot > yes AND Extract the DE genes for the
categories (GO/KEGG terms) > yes
28. Pathview To do a KEGG analysis, in order to analyse DE genes present in molecular
pathways. Different pathways that are available at:
https://www.genome.jp/kegg/pathway.html [102].
(a) KEGG pathway > Enter the 5 digit number of a pathway
(b) Species to use > Human
(c) Provide a gene data file? > Yes > ’DE gene DESeq2 file (p<0.05, log(FC)>1)’
(d) Format for gene data > Gene Symbol
46
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:52==
A.5
Phenotying Caco­2 cells
A.5.1
Method
The Caco­2 experiment produced the unexpected expression of the hepatocyte genes
ALB, AFP, FGG, and APOH, alongside the expected expression of unique epithelial genes
SLC2A5 (GLUT5), MUC13 and ALPI [103] [104]. I attempted to perform a phenotyping
analysis of the gene expression to eliminate the option of contamination with hepatocytes.
However, this has been challenging because of significant discrepancies in the data for­
mats of the available data, often based on the Affymetrix microarray. My data set and
available reference data sets differ in gene identifiers, normalization techniques, and file
structures, which complicates direct comparisons. Gene expression data can be normal­
ized in various ways (e.g., TPM, FPKM, RPKM, or raw counts), and reference datasets
might use different gene nomenclature systems. These inconsistencies make it difficult
to align the data I had available with established profiles accurately.
Ultimately, I tried to compare only gene symbols without expression levels of the ex­
pressed genes in this study with reference data. A comprehensive study of human cancer
cell lines using RNA sequencing, performed by Klijn et al. was used as a reference [101].
3 different cell lines were used: Caco­2, the HUH­7 hepatocyte cell line, and the A2780
ovarian carcinoma cell line. The expression of Caco­2 was compared with that of HUH­7
to account for possible contamination with hepatocyte cells in the experiment. The ovarian
cell line was used as a control.
A.5.2
Results and discussion
The 10,456 genes expressed in this Caco­2 study were compared with 1,751 Caco­2,
1,902 HUH­7 and 2,312 reference genes. They had 862, 955 and 1213 genes in com­
mon, respectively. From this, it can not be concluded that the cells used for this thesis
were exclusively Caco­2 cells. However, this analysis does not include a cutoff for gene
expression levels, thus including significantly low expressed genes, while these are not
included in the references. In addition to that, expression levels give important infor­
mation about cell functionality, thus are important to include in a phenotyping analysis.
Furthermore, the heterogeneity of the culture conditions results in a large variability in the
expression profiles of Caco­2 cells; this creates difficulties in phenotyping [105]. More
detailed analysis is needed to exclude the possibility of hepatocyte contamination. In the
future, a direct comparison of Nanopore reads with a reference from the same culturing
conditions would provide the most conclusive results.
A.6
GO analysis
To assess cellular components and molecular function, a Gene Ontology (GO) analysis
was performed. This was done in Galaxy EU using goseq, see A.4. GO analysis shows
that the most prevalent categories are extracellular components and carbohydrate trans­
port (figure A.3). The highlighted carbohydrate transporter activity suggests a large acti­
vation of energy homeostasis [106], the activation of metabolic processes supports this.
The presence of activated extracellular components due to stress can also be explained
by the fact that activation begins with membrane components and ECM rearrangements.
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
47
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.3: The Genetic Ontology (GO) analysis of the cellular components (CC) and
molecular function (MF) of DE genes. The x­axis shows the percentage of the DE per
category, y­axis shows the most relevant categories. The size of the circles indicates
the number of genes involved, and the color the significante, darker blue means a lower
p­value.
A.7
Quality Nanopore .FASTQ files
A quality assessment of the Oxford Nanopore reads was done using FastQC in the Galaxy
EU pipeline. This showed that the sample size was below the advised size of 1 million
(figure A.4. Furthermore, the quality of the reads in each sample was also low, a score of
at least 20 is recommended, corresponding to a base call accuracy of 99 % (figure A.5).
Figure A.4: Number of reads is below 1
million for all samples.
Figure A.5: Phred scores of cDNA sequenc­
ing data performed with Oxford Nanopore
machines. Phred score of 10 corresponds
to a base call accuracy of 90 %, a score of
20 corresponds to 99 %, 30 to 99.9 %.
48
Identification of shear induced gene pathways
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Pl., Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
