==PAGE:1==
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Tomasz Marian Truszkowski
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of statistics and machine
learning.
Tomasz Marian Truszkowski ­ s223219
Signature
Date
ii
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
21.06.2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Mobile applications are an integral part of modern life. With an average daily usage time
spanning several hours, they significantly impact our everyday activities. Understanding
these usage patterns is essential for gaining insights into day­to­day human behaviors.
This study aims to model mobile app usage to address predictive challenges efficiently.
By leveraging state­of­the­art neural network components and a comprehensive dataset
of 170 thousand users, I demonstrate that a BERT­like model implementation [1], en­
hanced with the FAVOR+ attention mechanism [2] and Time2Vec encoding [3], effectively
learns dense representations of mobile apps. This approach improves predictions for daily
screen time and app category usage over the weekend compared to baseline models.
Incorporating learnable time components and handling long­term dependencies between
apps addresses significant gaps in existing research. The developed model provides a
solid foundation for further work on general app representation and tackling unaddressed
challenges in the mobile app usage domain.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Sune Lehman, Professor of Networks and Complexity Science, DTU Compute
I wish to express my sincere thanks to my supervisor, Professor Sune Lehman, for his
overall supervision, encouragement, and empathy. His thoughtful comments, assistance
in conceptualizing the project, and guidance in choosing an interesting direction for its
execution have been greatly appreciated.
Germans Savcisens, Postdoctoral Research Associate, Northeastern University
I am also immensely grateful to my co­supervisor, Dr. Germans Savcisens, for his excep­
tional dedication, weekly meetings, responsiveness, and his efforts to thoroughly explain
everything. His enormous help and patience were crucial to the completion of this re­
search.
Anna Sapienza, Assistant Professor, DiSIT ­ Università del Piemonte Orientale
Additionally, my sincere thanks go to Dr. Anna Sapienza, for her time, for providing and
processing the dataset, and for her ongoing assistance with the data. Her general advice
and expertise were invaluable to this project.
iv
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature review
5
2.1
Next app prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Other challenges in app space
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Dataset
17
3.1
Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.2
Preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.3
Data exploration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4
Methods
29
4.1
Deep Learning basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Transformer architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.3
Pre­training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.4
Fine tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5
Results
41
5.1
Pre­training . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2
Fine­tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Discussion
51
6.1
Findings & interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.2
Limitations & unexpected implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
7
Conclusion
55
Bibliography
57
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Mobile applications have become an integral part of daily human life. Just as the inter­
net started becoming essential at the turn of the last century, mobile apps have trans­
formed our reality since 2007, when Apple released the first iPhone and shortly thereafter
launched its App Store with over 500 apps1. In contrast, by 2023, there were almost 5
million apps available on the Apple and Google app stores combined, generating over
$935 billion in revenue2.
(a) Set of modern mobile applications (au­
thor’s selection). These apps span a wide
range of categories, from Social (Instagram)
to Entertainment (Netflix), Travel (Google
Maps), and Productivity (ChatGPT).
(b) Weekly mobile app usage statistics di­
rectly from the author’s mobile device. For­
tunately, daily usage of 2h 21min is signifi­
cantly below the global average. This can be
explained by full dedication to the Master’s
thesis and limits set on time­consuming apps.
Figure 1.1: A contemporary example of an app library and mobile screen time statistics.
1https://webandcrafts.com/blog/history­of­mobile­apps
2https://techreport.com/statistics/software­web/mobile­app­download­statistics
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
1
==PAGE:10==
Apps have undeniably changed the way we live, to the extent that the average phone
user spends 4.37 hours per day engaging with mobile apps 3 and has around 40 of them
installed4. An example from real life is shown in Figure 1.1a and Figure 1.1b, where se­
lected apps out of 142 installed on the author’s phone and the weekly app usage statistics
are presented.
This trend shows a steady increase and does not appear likely to change in the age of so­
cial media further boosted by the growing integration of AI (e.g., Apple has just introduced
”Apple Intelligence” for future OS versions5). Highly entertaining (and addictive) short
videos recommended by the sophisticated algorithms of TikTok and Instagram contribute
significantly to this persistence6. Naturally, spending so much time on mobile devices im­
pacts various aspects of our lives. WhatsApp, Facebook, Instagram, Tinder, TikTok, Uber,
and Airbnb are just a few well­known examples of applications that are transforming our
reality and having a colossal impact on communication, entertainment, social interactions,
travel, and the comfort of life.
With that in mind, the study of mobile app usage is immensely interesting, and its explo­
ration allows us to better understand the relationship, and dependency of 21st­century
human being on mobile devices. From a business perspective, on the other hand, the
growing reliance on mobile apps requires a deeper understanding of usage patterns to
improve user experience and app performance.
It is believed that a better understanding of user engagement and interaction methods
with mobile apps can optimize advertising and engagement­aware development [4]. Ef­
fective app prediction can enhance battery conservation, improve network efficiency, and
help marketers and developers tailor their offerings more effectively [5]. It can also im­
prove UX by preloading app­related resources, reducing search and loading times [6].
Consequently, software developers, mobile OS operators, and network operators might
be particularly interested in knowing which app you are going to use next [7].
Therefore, it is unsurprising that since the 2010s, there has been a significant rise in
research focused on predicting mobile applications, encompassing not only the app space
but also various sub­fields that emphasize the user experience or the device itself [8].
Statistical methods [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], classical machine learning approaches [15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21], and neural networks [22, 23, 24, 7, 25, 26, 27, 27, 28, 26, 5] have
been employed to predict future app usage. Some studies have examined how our app
usage can help predict when we use them [14, 17, 29], for how long [4], what is our current
location [6, 30, 22], as well as our gender and age [31]. Other research explored different
interesting usage patterns of our apps, which depend, for example, on location [31, 32]
or time of day [33, 34].
Many deep learning solutions are based on the transformer architecture and attention
mechanism [35, 36, 37, 29, 38, 31], which are highly effective in handling sequential data.
Despite their effectiveness in the app usage domain and next app prediction in particular,
many other interesting predictive challenges remain unaddressed. Additionally, I argue
that the way these models handle time and long­term dependencies between applications
is often neglected.
This leads to the development of a general model based on a BERT­like architecture,
3https://backlinko.com/smartphone­usage­statistics
4https://techjury.net/blog/app­usage­statistics
5https://www.apple.com/apple­intelligence/
6https://www.data.ai/en/insights/market­data/state­of­mobile­2024­highlights
2
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:11==
which allows for easy fine­tuning across a wide range of downstream tasks in the mobile
app usage domain. Additionally, two key components are utilized. First, a variant of the
attention mechanism, known as FAVOR+ (Fast Attention Via positive Orthogonal Random
features) [2] that more stably handles long data sequences, enabling the learning of both
short­ and long­term relationships between apps. Second, the Time2Vec encoding [3]
is implemented, which helps to learn embeddings of time by capturing both periodic and
non­periodic time relations.
The culmination of the project is the use of a general, pre­trained model and fine­tuning it
for two predictive tasks. One model attempts to predict screen time for the day based on
the past night and morning. The second model predicts the app categories that the user
will spend the most time on during the weekend, based solely on app usage during the
past week.
The structure of the remainder of this thesis is as follows:
• Chapter 2: Literature review ­ This chapter summarizes research in mobile app
usage, focusing primarily on future app usage prediction. It discusses the related
field of app usage patterns and identifies a research gap.
• Chapter 3: Dataset ­ This chapter provides a detailed description of the dataset
used, including its attributes, preprocessing steps, and exploratory data analysis.
• Chapter 4: Methods ­ This section initially introduces basic deep learning concepts.
Next, it briefly discusses Transformer architecture [39] followed by an explanation
of the methodologies employed in pre­trained and fine­tuned models.
• Chapter 5: Results ­ This chapter presents the results obtained using the trained
models, during the pre­training and fine­tuning phases. It analyses the dense repre­
sentation of the trained app embedding layer, followed by a numerical comparison
with baseline models.
• Chapter 6: Discussion ­ This section extends on Chapter 5 by discussing results
and providing interpretation. It also considers the limitations, unexpected implica­
tions, and potential future work.
• Chapter 7: Conclusion ­ This chapter summarizes the results and highlights the
most significant findings.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
3
==PAGE:12==
4
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:13==
2
Literature review
Given the sequence of mobile apps, what can we say about the future?
Undoubtedly, among the entire research space of mobile app usage, this question, in its
various forms, has been the focus of most scientists. Specifically, predicting future app
usage plays the most significant role. To the best of the author’s knowledge, the majority
of research touches upon this topic, while only selected studies take on the challenge of
predicting other aspects, such as the time spent using the next app, location, gender, or
age of the user.
This chapter summarizes works focusing on prediction in the space of mobile apps, with
an emphasis on the methods used and contextual information. Additionally, for clarity,
I provide a separate table containing information about data availability in the various
studies. Next, studies that attempt to tackle other predictive challenges related to mobile
app usage and human behavior are highlighted. Following this, I briefly discuss a closely
related field — app usage patterns. Finally, I demonstrate and justify the research gap
that can be addressed.
2.1
Next app prediction
Research interest in the prediction of mobile applications has significantly increased since
the 2010s, both in the space of apps and in other sub­fields more centered around the user
or the device itself [8]. Despite the growing volume of publications, most of the studies on
predicting what application users will engage in were conducted in 2012­2013 and then
activity picked up again from around 2017 onward [40].
Throughout the years, the natural progression in the methods used can be seen. The
author identifies three main categories, emphasizing simultaneously that the boundaries
between them often overlap and are not strictly defined. Initially, statistical methods (e.g.,
Naive Bayes [9], Bayesian networks [10, 11, 12], Markov model [13, 14]) and classi­
cal machine learning approaches (e.g., K­Nearest Neighbors (KNN) [15, 16], linear and
logistic regression, and random forest [17, 18]) were mainly studied. As might be ex­
pected, several hybrid solutions have emerged [19, 20, 21], integrating both aforemen­
tioned categories, and further enriching the predictive capabilities within the field. Then,
after 2017, neural approaches have become increasingly popular (e.g., Recurrent Neural
Networks (RNNs) [22, 23, 24, 7], Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [25, 26, 27, 27], Con­
volutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [28, 26], Reinforcement Learning (RL) [41], attention­
or Transformer­based [39] networks [37, 29, 38, 31]) up to point of leveraging advances
in auto­regressive Large Language Models (LLMs) [5].
2.1.1
Statistical methods
In the early 2010s, the primary focus was on statistical learning and probabilistic models
within the realm of improving mobile UI by recommending and predicting the next apps.
Primarily, the research focus was on methods based on Bayes and Markov models.
Although some prior works addressed the problem of app prediction, I believe they are not
fully adequate for today’s smartphone use. For example, one of the first studies within this
field proposed AppNow widget [42] but it only compared the results to basic frequency­
based methods, and the data was collected from just 10 mobile devices. In [43], the
entire dataset was very small, containing only 15 applications. Additionally, one proposed
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
5
==PAGE:14==
interface for Android phones was tested on only 2 participants and was not evaluated in
an actual deployment [44].
Bayes­based
Among the earliest recognized works is a framework based on Naïve Bayes classifiers,
which, based on user, environment, and app­related sensors extracts various features
and calculates the probability of apps being associated with a given context [9]. Also,
building upon Bayes’ method, researchers in [10] proposed a Bayesian network that in­
tegrates the influence of contextual information such as time, location, user profile, and
last­used application. Another work [11] presented Bayesian methods for predicting the
next app by relying solely on the app usage, omitting the location, time, and other con­
textual information that had been considered previously [9, 10]. A later study utilized
Naïve Bayesian networks to predict the next app by combining session features derived
from app usage records with contextual features in a parallelized Tree Augmented Naïve
Bayes framework for 480 users, enhancing prediction accuracy [12]. Other scientists in
[30] used a Bayesian mixture model with location, time, and applications as its compo­
nents, but focused on predicting general categories like entertainment or business rather
than specific apps.
Markov­based
Other studies have utilized Markov­based models to effectively recommend or prefetch
the user’s next app. In [13], the authors proposed the iConRank algorithm, which groups
users based on Markov transition probabilities between apps.
Then, they calculated
Markov models at the cluster level, where each cluster represented a group of users
with similar behavior. This allowed them to predict the probability of transition from one
app to another within that group. Another study [14] proposed an approach, which does
not require any additional sensor context for the prediction. The authors adopted the
Prediction by Partial Match method, which is commonly used in text compression. They
adapted this technique to predict and prefetch the next mobile app using a variable­length
Markov­based predictor.
2.1.2
Machine learning approaches
Some of the early work involved approaches based on basic machine learning algorithms.
These approaches laid the groundwork for more sophisticated predictive models by lever­
aging fundamental supervised and unsupervised learning techniques. The following sec­
tions provide an overview of various supervised algorithms and hybrid solutions, which
combine typical statistical methods with machine learning techniques, that have been
employed in the mobile app usage prediction domain.
Supervised algorithms
In [15], the authors integrated explicit features (e.g., battery level, GSM signal, acceler­
ation) and implicit features like app usage relations to construct a feature space. They
introduced a personalized feature selection algorithm and predicted the next used app
as the class label for KNN classification. Nearest Neighbor classification was also used
in [16], where researchers investigated how social contexts impact prediction by utilizing
similarities in community­level behavior.
Another study [17] investigated the prediction of users’ future locations and app usage
within the next ten minutes, utilizing the rich contextual information available from smart­
phone sensors. The research compared basic models like linear regression, logistic re­
gression, and random forest. The last mentioned algorithm was also utilized in [18] where
researchers analyzed important locations, travel patterns, and mobility indicators to incor­
porate them as features into the random forest model, enabling the prediction of user app
usage behavior. [4] attempted to predict not only the next application but also dwell time,
6
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:15==
although the latter is represented discretely as categories such as light, medium, or inten­
sive, utilizing various ”weak learners” using boosting and stacking algorithms. Last, but
not least in [6] authors argued that Points of Interest (PoI) information, which represents
a location’s attributes, has an important impact on the types of apps people use. They
utilized collaborative filtering to uncover hidden relationships between PoIs and user be­
havior domains and incorporate temporal dynamics for improved accuracy in predicting
app usage patterns.
Hybrid solutions
At the end of the previous decade, several hybrid solutions also emerged, utilizing both
typical statistical methods and machine learning algorithms. In [19], authors enriched se­
mantic information with app descriptions crawled from the App Store platform. They em­
ployed the KNN algorithm to identify similar users, while predictions were made using a
chain­augmented Naive Bayes model. In a separate study [20], researchers utilized KNN
to create an app usage similarity network, which is based on the similarity of users’ behav­
iors in app usage, for modeling future app consumption. In the same year, researchers in
[21] addressed two issues: one involving the decrease in accuracy as more training data
accumulates over time, and another known as the cold­start problem, which refers to pre­
dicting the next applications without having any prior usage history of the given user. They
attempted to tackle these challenges by using incremental KNN and by considering the
dynamic conditional probability of the user similarity and the app periodicity, respectively.
2.1.3
Neural approaches
Many efforts have been made to predict the next mobile application, focusing on deep
neural networks. Much of this work relies on RNNs, which handle sequential data like
human engagement with apps effectively. Some approaches utilize graphs to capture
complex relationships between features such as location, time, and app usage. Most
recent solutions aim to assess various deep learning techniques, often combining them.
However, many of these solutions rely on the Transformers architecture or the attention
mechanism itself to understand the importance and contribution of different apps in pre­
dicting the next one. Additionally, one solution proposes leveraging pretrained LLMs to
process contextual data effectively.
In [35], taking inspiration from Doc2Vec [45], the authors introduce the AppUsage2Vec
framework, comprising three components. These include an attention mechanism to as­
sess the importance of various apps, a dual deep neural network (dual­DNN) for learn­
ing user­personalized characteristics, and the incorporation of temporal context to cap­
ture specific temporal patterns. To the best of the author’s knowledge, it’s also the first
study that employed an attention mechanism in the task of predicting the next mobile
app interaction. Another study [46] also employs a dual­DNN component on three dif­
ferent datasets, although its primary emphasis lies in the embedding of semantic infor­
mation such as task information and search query, and they do not exploit the attention
mechanism. An interesting approach is presented in [41], where the authors introduce
Deep Reinforcement Learning model called DeepAPP. It combines a context­aware state
representation method with personalized and general agents to predict the next mobile
app a user is likely to interact with on their device. More recent work [28] examined the
Time­series Embedding Deep Learning model, which leverages word embeddings and
time­series data encoding to reduce data representation building costs. Additionally, they
utilize a CNN­based deep learning architecture to enhance inference speed.
Recurrent Neural Networks
Much of the research in the field has proposed the use of recurrent networks, in partic­
ular the Long Short­term Memory­based (LSTM) [47] architecture, which addresses the
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
7
==PAGE:16==
problem of vanishing gradient and is better at capturing long­term dependencies. For
example, in [22] the authors present a multi­task RNN­based model integrating time, lo­
cation, and apps in the embedding space. It is capable of predicting the next app used,
visiting locations, and identifying users. In [23] researchers argue that temporal­sequence
dependency of app usage is neglected in the existing approaches and they propose LSTM
to convert temporal and context dependencies into a unified feature representation for the
next app prediction.
In [48], researchers introduced a neural network­based framework for predicting target
apps using search intent and contextual features, culminating in the development of a
universal mobile search system. This comprehensive study led to the release of a dedi­
cated app1 for Mobile Information Retrieval, accompanied by publicly available collections
of search query data2 and annotated app usage dataset3, facilitating further research in
the field. Building upon this foundation, one of the authors, Aliannejadi later presented
NeuSA (Neural Sequential target App recommendation)[24], an LSTM­based model for
personalized time­aware target app recommendations. Another study endeavors to de­
velop a generic model called WhatsNextApp [7] by employing LSTM­based architecture
and Word Embeddings [49]. Word Embeddings use N­dimensional vectors to capture the
semantic meanings and relationships of words. This approach allows words with simi­
lar meanings or that appear in similar contexts to be close in vector space. As a result,
its usage improves generalization and enhances the performance of models across var­
ious Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks. Inspired by that technique, the authors
treat the sequence of app logs in a manner akin to how a sequence of words would be
processed using this method.
Graph­based
Graphs, which effectively capture intricate interrelationships, are another major area that
the research community has focused on over the years. [25] proposes a model called
CAP (Context­aware app) that utilizes a heterogeneous graph embedding approach to
forecast app usage. The authors emphasize the importance of app­location, app­time,
and app­app relationships for accurate prediction and propose an algorithm that learns
node embeddings from sub­graphs of these relationships and maps them into one com­
mon comparable latent space. Another study proposes Sa­GCN (Semantic­Aware rep­
resentation learning model based on Graph Convolutional Network) [26], which utilizes
a Graph CNN to generate node embeddings from graphs created using app, time, and
location data, to predict app usage. A similar approach is demonstrated in [27], where the
study introduces a graph­based network embedding framework that also incorporates
features related to apps, time, and location.
Over the past two years, researchers have explored various approaches. Several works
have been published, verifying the effectiveness of graphs. Additionally, they implement
attention mechanisms or components of the Transformer architecture. Some of them have
directly built upon the foundations laid by others, as exemplified by GinApp framework
[36]. It addresses limitations in aforementioned graph­based solutions such as CAP [25]
and Sa­GCN [26]. Firstly, GinApp employs an attribute­aware heterogeneous directed
graph, capturing the asymmetric nature of transitions between apps. For instance, users
may frequently transition from a shopping app to a finance app for payments but rarely the
other way around. The second enhancement would be an attention mechanism that can
effectively differentiate the contributions of different app usage contexts. A different study
1https://github.com/aliannejadi/uSearch
2https://github.com/aliannejadi/istas
3https://github.com/aliannejadi/LSApp
8
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:17==
on graphs proposed a model [37] that combines sequence modeling and graph modeling
techniques to capture short­term patterns, user­app similarity, and semantic relations in
app usage. To learn the app switch patterns the authors adopt Transformer Encoder [39].
Attention at the core
In short, attention is a mechanism that allows a neural network to track relationships
and learn dependencies between symbols (apps). I describe it in greater detail in Sec­
tion 4.3.2. Although the attention has already appeared in many of the studies discussed,
much more work has been devoted to studying this mechanism and architectures based
on Transformers [39]. One research [29] proposed an ATTP (App Temporal Point Pro­
cess) model that adopts RNN to implement marked temporal point process (MTPP) mod­
eling for the prediction of both the next app and its open time. ATTP incorporates var­
ious techniques, including a soft attention mechanism to better handle drop­in app us­
age. Another study [38] focused on spatial information by incorporating node2vec’s [50]
embeddings that outperformed other dimensionality reduction methods like one­hot en­
coding or PCA [51]. Their proposed deep learning framework for predicting application
usage comprises a gated recurrent unit (GRU) [52], attention layer, and softmax layer. In
[31] the authors propose a network that employs a fine­tuning strategy to optimize per­
formance across various downstream tasks such as age prediction, gender prediction,
and app recommendation. Additionally, they introduce a time­difference module to ad­
dress issues related to low­frequency app usage behavior over time. A key component
of the proposed solution is the Transformer Encoder, which is responsible for fusing and
compressing different types of information
Finally, it was recently proposed to leverage Large Language Models for mobile app pre­
diction [5]. In this approach, the authors utilize LLMs to analyze contextual data, capturing
intricate patterns and relationships. For example, they employ prompts such as “The user
is currently at [LOCATION]” or “The app [APP] is used recently”. Additionally, they intro­
duce a two­stage LLM training module, wherein the predicted category precedes the ac­
tual app prediction, facilitated by specialized target prompts. The authors argue that their
method substantially reduces computational requirements and training time, enhancing
efficiency and scalability through the utilization of pretrained embeddings.
As a summary, I present a table 2.1 that provides an overview of the methods used and the
contextual information. Additionally, it includes details about the data availability, specifi­
cally the number of users and the number of applications used in each study.
As observed, the sizes of datasets used in various studies over the years are highly di­
verse. The number of users ranges from a few dozen to several million, with a median
of 870. Similarly, the total number of unique applications (or the average per user) varies
widely, with a median of 4600. This diversity likely stems from the fact that data is collected
in different ways (mainly through app monitoring or network operators) and over varying
periods (from days to years) [8]. In comparison, the dataset available for this study, af­
ter initial preprocessing, contains over 125,000 users and 4379 unique apps, making it
relatively representative. The dataset is described in detail in Chapter 3.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
9
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.1: Summary of studies on mobile app usage prediction
Ref.
# Users
# Apps
Features
Methods
Time
Location
Other
[9]
23
~74 per user
✓
✓
Battery, network
Naïve Bayes
[10]
17062
9583
✓
✓
User profile, last­used app
Bayesian Network
[11]
80
~59 per user
×
×
×
Bayesian Network
[12]
480
7000
✓
×
Audio input, charging state
Bayesian Network
[30]
1700000
3500
✓
✓
×
Bayesian Mixture Model
[13]
17062
9583
✓
×
Screen state
Markov Model
[14]
34
­
✓
✓
×
Variable­length Markov
[15]
50
300
×
×
Battery, GSM signal, acceleration
KNN
[16]
16000
4606
✓
✓
Social contexts, network mode, app category, screen state
KNN
[17]
71
~7 per user
✓
✓
Battery level, networks mode
Linear and Logistic Regression, Random Forest
[18]
1000
­
✓
✓
Travel and mobility patterns
Random Forest
[4]
12000
9000
×
×
User characteristics (e.g., age, gender, device type)
Boosting and stacking algorithms
[6]
6000000+
10000+
×
✓
Points of Interests
Collaborative filtering
[19]
1083
588
✓
×
App descriptions
KNN, Naïve Bayes
[20]
25378
1003
✓
×
App usage similarity
KNN
[21]
30000
­
✓
✓
App similarity, battery, network and sensors data
Incremental KNN
[35]
2000
9373
✓
×
×
Dual­DNN
[41]
443
36039
✓
✓
×
Deep Reinforcement Learning
[28]
34
~140 per user
✓
×
×
CNN
[22]
1785
10000
✓
✓
×
LSTM
[23]
31
~27 per user
✓
✓
Orientation and movement of the phone
LSTM
[48, 24]
255
192
✓
✓
Gyroscope, WiFi signal, battery and screen state
NN, LSTM
[7]
975
19485
✓
×
×
LSTM
[25]
2000
1788
✓
✓
App category
GNN
[26]
2000
11170
✓
✓
App category
Graph CNN
[27]
24
­
✓
✓
App category
GNN
[36]
168 / 100
2663 / 1228
✓
✓
App category, personalised location features
GNN + Attention
[37]
748 / 64
1518 / 574
✓
✓
Semantic relations between apps
GNN + Transformer
[29]
443
­
✓
✓
Status of smartphone usage
RNN + Attention
[38]
1000
2000
✓
✓
×
GRU + Attention
[31]
100000
15751
✓
×
Installation timestamp
CNN + Transformer
[5]
870 / 292
2000 / 87
✓
✓
App category
LLMs
2.2
Other challenges in app space
While many studies focus on predicting the next application, I lean towards the opinion
that predicting other aspects related to general phone or mobile app usage is just as
interesting, if not more so. First, in this chapter, I will examine what other aspects, besides
applications, have been attempted to predict in the existing literature.
Furthermore, many fascinating cases in the realm of app usage that rely on prediction
have their roots in a neighboring field — app usage pattern discovery. Pattern discovery
in the mobile app space is not only equally intriguing but also lays the groundwork for
context­aware app prediction and recommendation [8]. Accordingly, the second part of
this chapter will provide a brief summary of that field.
To conclude the entire literature review, the research gap that this project aims to address
will be discussed in the final part of the section.
2.2.1
Not the prediction of next application
In the previously presented literature, several works explore prediction topics beyond
merely identifying the next app a user will interact with. These are discussed below.
Arguably, the first work attempting to answer the question of when an app will be used
is [14]. The authors try to determine the probability that an app will be used within a time
interval Δt from the current time. From a practical standpoint, when it comes to resource
saving, app preloading, etc., timing is crucial, making this topic important and interesting.
Shortly thereafter, in [17] the authors again examine whether a user will launch a given
app within the next 10 minutes. Additionally, based on app usage sequences, they also
attempt to predict the next location to which the user will go. Similarly, in [29] researchers
predict whether an app will be used within the next hour.
In [6] researchers show how strongly the presence of POIs (such as restaurants, stores,
parks, etc.) affects the choice of mobile applications that people use when they are near
these locations. [30] demonstrates a clear correlation between the distribution of POIs
10
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:19==
and the categories of apps being used. The model proposed by the authors can accu­
rately predict users’ future locations. While [22] also predicts locations visited by users,
they additionally design a user identification task combined with app usage prediction to
capture user preferences.
In [4] the authors try to answer the question: How does the time of day impact users’ dwell
time? They also investigate how long a user will engage with the current app. In contrast,
[31] proposes two downstream tasks to predict the age and gender of the user.
In summary, while predicting the next app plays the most significant role, the literature
shows a strong interest in exploring other aspects of mobile app usage, such as time,
location, and user demographics.
2.2.2
App usage patterns
From the perspective of human behavior, app usage pattern discovery is also a very
intriguing field. Unlike predicting the next app, which focuses on immediate user actions,
pattern discovery provides deeper insights into long­term user habits and preferences,
paving the way for context­aware app forecasting and recommendations [8]. Since this
field usually requires fine­grained usage behaviors such as launching and switching apps,
along with precise timestamps, whereas the data collection used in this project does not
have one, it is not my primary focus. However, due to its significance and close relevance,
I consider it reasonable to mention several related research works.
A significant part of the field focuses on contextual pattern discovery. Contextual patterns
are strongly related to predicting the next applications, as they examine the usage context,
such as applications used before and after the current one. Additionally, they explore the
correlation between sensor data and mobile applications, including factors like location,
time, battery levels, user movement status, and connectivity via WiFi or cellular networks.
Furthermore, some studies focus on the social context [53], investigating how the pres­
ence of other people influences app usage. Second area is temporal patterns, which on
the other hand, focus on dynamic aspects. They address topics such as diurnal patterns
of app usage, which many studies have discovered and investigate how interruptions,
such as phone calls, affect the completion of ongoing tasks [8].
Among the interesting works is [54], which shows that people’s attentiveness to new no­
tifications depends more on their location than their activity. For example, students tend
to pay more attention to notifications when they are at school. Who would expect it?
The study [32] highlights the significant impact of location on the apps and their categories
that users are likely to use. People who spent more time at a friend’s home also used
voice calls more frequently, possibly indicating the need to call family or a significant other.
During travel, users are more likely to use web and multimedia apps, and... clock.
[33] reveals that, unsurprisingly, news and calendar apps are most popular in the morning.
In contrast, before falling asleep, people tend to play games and read. In other words,
Kindle and Angry Birds are popular choices at this time of day.
Moreover, as shown in [34] app usage follows a typical diurnal pattern, that has been
illustrated in fig. 2.1. App usage sharply declines after 21:00, with very limited activity
during the usual inactivity period from 00:00 to 05:00. This is expected, as people typically
begin to rest and sleep during these hours.
Interestingly, in the case of the dataset used in this study, the pattern is similar but not
identical. There is significantly reduced activity from 21:00 to 05:00, and a small peak can
be observed between 12:00 and 13:00, which is labeled as the ”Noon break.” It appears,
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
11
==PAGE:20==
however, that users gradually use their phones more throughout the day, with a small
exception between 13:00 and 14:00. What is more, in contrast to 2.1, the drop in usage
between 9:00 and 11:00 is not noticeable in the data from the used dataset.
12
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:21==
Figure 2.1: Min­max normalized number of app usage records during one day. Each
’window’ refers to an app usage block composed of app usage records during a specific
time period. It shows a typical pattern followed by mobile app users throughout the day
[34].
Figure 2.2: Similarly, the figure presents a diurnal pattern of mobile app usage using the
project’s dataset ­ min­max normalized number of used apps during one day. The plot
resembles and facilitates comparison with the fig. 2.1. Four time windows with annota­
tions can be observed, highlighting characteristic times of day from the perspective of
phone usage. ”Sleep time”, ”Morning rush hour”, ”Noon break” and ”Evening rush hour”
respectively.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
13
==PAGE:22==
At first glance, two possible explanations emerge. First, the data used in [34] were col­
lected in 2016 in China, whereas the data used in this project were collected between
2016 and 2018 in Europe. Cultural differences and the natural evolution of usage pat­
terns with technological development and dynamics can influence how phones are used
throughout the day. The second reason for the observed differences might be the varying
granularity of the data. While the researchers used precise timestamps, I have access to
timestamps with a 1­hour time resolution.
Both of these figures prompted an intriguing question: Is it possible to determine, based
on the apps used in the morning, how much time will be spent on the phone for the
rest of the day? This forms the first research question that this study aims to investigate.
Understanding the issues and formulating the research question is crucial but not suffi­
cient. To ensure the continued advancement of knowledge, it is also essential to identify
technical research gaps, as these highlight areas that require further exploration. This is
what I aim to address in the following section.
2.2.3
Filling the research gap
Over the past decade and in recent years, numerous solutions have undoubtedly emerged
attempting to address the problem of predicting the next application by appropriately mod­
eling the applications and their relationships. The author argues, however, that none of
them fully and comprehensively address the complexity of this issue.
Starting with works based on Bayesian models [9]–[12], [30], the features used are typi­
cally assumed to be independent of each other for the prediction task. However, the way
applications are used is strongly related to context, particularly time.
On the other hand, Markov models [13, 14] learn the correlation among sequentially used
apps but assume that the next app is only related to the most recently used app, ignoring
the multiple apps used in previous time steps.
Such solutions therefore do not even address the early­recognized fact that the correlation
between sequentially used apps significantly contributes to the accuracy of app prediction
[10].
Many studies [15, 16, 18, 17, 4, 6] explore in depth the contextual features that can be
used by employing machine learning algorithms, sometimes combining them with clas­
sical probabilistic approaches [19]–[21]. However, to build a feature space of complex
app relationships and handle the sequential nature of data, it is believed that a different
technology stack is more appropriate.
In the era of rapid development of language models, it seems reasonable to state that the
technology that undoubtedly excels in modeling long sequences and, more importantly,
the relationships between symbols are deep learning models based on the Transformer
architecture. While many studies [35, 36, 37, 29, 38, 31] incorporate this technology
or independent attention component into the field of app usage and next app prediction
tasks, the author argues that two fundamentally related aspects are neglected.
Firstly, despite the widespread use of time context in modeling applications, there is a
lack of solutions that allow learning the periodic nature of time. Many applications are
strongly associated with specific times of the day. For example, in the morning, people
often read the news on their phones and check their calendars, while in the evening, they
play games [33]. Additionally, it seems that many applications are cyclically dependent on
the tasks being performed. For instance, sports, nutrition, or shopping apps may be used
several times a week, while a banking app might be used to pay bills once a month. Given
14
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:23==
the periodicity and the impact of long­term dependencies on app usage, the author aims
for the model to learn long­term app relationships and generalize different usage
patterns. Therefore, the author implements a learnable time component and a modified
version of the attention mechanism, to effectively capture time dependencies and model
app relationships over extended periods.
Having discussed the existing research and identified the gaps, it seems reasonable to
explore the dataset in detail to validate the proposed approach, which I address in the
next chapter.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
15
==PAGE:24==
16
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:25==
3
Dataset
The following chapter presents a detailed characterization of the dataset utilized to train
the deep learning model in this project. It begins by outlining the dataset’s attributes and
associated nuances, followed by a description of the preprocessing steps undertaken.
Subsequently, I explore the data and provide visualizations as an overview of the dataset’s
statistics.
3.1
Overview
The dataset represents 171032 anonymized users from European countries only. The
data was collected over three years, from the beginning of 2016 to the end of 2018.
The collection comprises 4393 unique applications that are most popular among users.
The remaining, less frequently used ones are represented by one of 30 categories re­
trieved from the Google Play Store [55]. The example categories include ”Productivity”,
”Communication”, and ”Game” but they are further explored in section section 3.3.
In consideration of some features examined in similar studies, including travel patterns
[18], battery level [17], screen state [16], [13], network connectivity [17], and many others,
it can be concluded that this dataset offers very standard characteristics regarding apps
usage with additional information on users age and gender.
The dataset consists of 7 attributes: user_id, apps, hour_label, durations, checks,
age_group and gender. An explanation of each is provided in the table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Description of dataset attributes.
Name
Description
Type
user_id
Unique user identifier.
String
apps
Names of applications used sequentially.
List[String]
hour_label
It corresponds to the apps list. It denotes the specific time at
which the user utilized each application.
Integer
durations
It corresponds to the apps list. It indicates the duration in sec­
onds of interaction between the user and each respective ap­
plication.
List[Integer]
checks
It corresponds to the apps list. It represents the frequency of
opening each application within the given durations time.
List[Integer]
age_group
Age group to which the user belongs. Four ranges are avail­
able: 20­39, 40­54, 55­74 and 75+.
Integer
gender
User’s gender.
String
While user_id, gender, and age_group are self­explanatory, it’s beneficial to provide ex­
amples of other attributes directly associated with application usage, as demonstrated in
section 3.1.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
17
==PAGE:26==
Table 3.2: Example of several records from a dataset showing attributes directly associ­
ated with apps usage.
hour_label
apps
durations
checks
0
[”WhatsApp”, ”eBay”, ”Instagram”]
[78, 18, 40]
[4, 1, 3]
1
[”Tinder”, ”YouTube”, ”Game”]
[12, 10, 20]
[1, 1, 1]
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
264
[”Facebook”, ”Tinder”, ... ”Chrome”]
[20, 287, ... 48]
[1, 8, ... 2]
265
[”Spotify”]
[35]
[2]
As seen in the above table, the number of applications in each row corresponds to the
number of durations and checks. In the case of the first record with hour_label = 0,
”WhatsApp”1 application was used for 78 seconds, and the user launched it 4 times within
that time. In the second row, the third application is ”Game” ­ as mentioned, less popular
applications have been replaced with the names of the categories to which they belong.
The time (hour_label) represents values between 0 and 26279, which is a 3­year span.
Each number encodes hour time window on the exact date. 0 denotes the hour between
midnight and 1 AM on Friday, 1st of January 2016. This means that 24 will denote the
same hour on Saturday, 2nd of January, while 264 will encode Tuesday the week after, at
4 PM.
3.2
Preprocessing
The initial dataset used for the project had already undergone cleaning and filtering based
on time and location. Originally, it was part of a much larger dataset collected by a global
electronics company, encompassing nearly 5 million users. This larger dataset is de­
scribed in more detail and utilized in the study [56].
However, further preprocessing was required to adapt the data for the model architec­
ture and training process. This involved a series of preprocessing steps, detailed in the
following section.
1. As an initial step, the hours are aggregated to form a list, corresponding to vectors
representing applications, time spent, and the number of interactions. For instance,
the first two rows of the table referenced as section 3.1 would now appear as follows:
hour_label
apps
…
[0, 0, 0]
[”WhatsApp”, ”eBay”, ”Instagram”]
…
[1, 1, 1]
[”Tinder”, ”YouTube”, ”Game”]
…
...
2. Next, the rows corresponding to individual users were aggregated based on the
user_id field. In other words, instead of treating the sequence of applications sepa­
rately for each hour, each user will have one sequence of all concatenated applica­
1More precisely, the application name in the original data is the unique identifier of the applica­
tion on the Google Play Store [55].
For example ”WhatsApp” is ”com.whatsapp” and ”Facebook” is
”com.facebook.katana”.
18
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:27==
tions along with their corresponding time vector. The same happens with durations
and checks. Below is the simplified form after the aggregation and concatenation
operation.
hour_label
apps
…
[0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1]
[”WhatsApp”, ”eBay”, ”Instagram”, ”Tinder”, ”YouTube”, ”Game”]
…
...
3. The final step was to limit the dataset to users whose total sequence length is 2500
or greater. This ensures greater consistency during the training process and avoids
the padding operation, which can involve adding hundreds or even thousands of
zeros for users with very short application usage sequences. The downside of this
approach is that I potentially lose the representation of users who very rarely use
their phones. This could reduce diversity and introduce some bias.
After pre­processing for the model training needs, 126093 unique users and 4379 apps
remained. Together with the 30 categories, which represent all the less frequently used
applications, the size of the vocabulary was 4409.
The data processed in this way is ready for the pretraining. However, for the purposes of
the downstream tasks, additional steps were necessary:
a) Aggregating the dataset by day, meaning each record represents the apps used
by a single user on a given day, between 00:00 and 23:59. Next, I consider the
applications used from 00:00 to 12:00 to predict the time spent on the phone for the
rest of the day until midnight.
hour_label
apps
target
[0, 0, ..., 10, 11 ]
[”WhatsApp”, ”eBay” ... ”Facebook”, ”Messenger”]
175 min
b) Aggregating the dataset by week, meaning each record represents the apps used
by a single user over the course of a full week, from Monday to Sunday. Following
that, I take into account the applications used from Monday to Friday to predict the
app categories used over the weekend.
hour_label
apps
target
[0, ..., 118, 119 ]
[”WhatsApp”, ... ”Pokemon GO”, ”Spotify”]
[”Music”, ”Game”, ...]
Such a transformation facilitates the fine­tuning steps, described in more detail in sec­
tion 4.4.
3.3
Data exploration
The final part of the chapter involves a statistical exploration of the dataset. This section
examines the distributions of gender and age and their impact on time spent engaging
with mobile applications.
Next, a closer look at available categories, their popularity, and the most popular apps
among users will be presented. Finally, the daily usage pattern will be revisited, this time
broken down by gender, and phone usage throughout the week will be analyzed.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
19
==PAGE:28==
3.3.1
Users
The users are divided into four age groups: 20­39, 40­54, 55­74, and 75+. Naturally, the
fewest users are in the oldest group, with only 250 individuals, making this class very
imbalanced. Age information is available for just over one­third of all users.
Gender information is complete, while the entire dataset contains significantly fewer women
than men. Specifically, there are 45756 women and 80337 men, resulting in approxi­
mately 1.75 men for every woman. Such a diverse proportion can introduce bias and
even affect fairness for certain downstream tasks that rely on the model trained on this
data. It might also impact the insights derived from the data, reducing the model’s ability
to generalize.
An overview of the users in the dataset is presented in fig. 3.1a. It shows the gender ratio
across each age group. Due to only 249 individuals in the 75+ category, this group was
omitted from the chart because the height of the bar was close to zero and not visible.
The ratio of men to women in this age category was 7 to 3. Additionally, gender proportion
can be seen on fig. 3.1b, while the distribution of those whose age is known is shown in
fig. 3.1c.
20
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:29==
(a) Chart shows the distribution of users in each age group together with the gender ratio, shown
on each of the bars. Due to the insignificant number of users, the category ’75+’, was omitted.
(b) Gender Distribution in the dataset. Women
make up roughly one­third of the dataset (blue),
while men account for the remaining two­thirds
(orange).
(c) Age Distribution in the dataset. The older
the age group, the fewer the users. More than
half are young people up to 39 years old, one­
third are between 40 and 54 years old, and the
remaining portion consists of individuals older
than 55 years.
Figure 3.1: Figure presents a demographic analysis of the dataset, highlighting the distri­
bution of users by age and gender.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
21
==PAGE:30==
While exploring age and gender, it seems interesting to examine the statistics on time
spent on mobile devices based on these characteristics. That has been presented in
fig. 3.2
Figure 3.2: The figure shows the average time a user spends engaging with an app,
broken down by gender and age group. Overall, women and younger people tend to
spend more time on their screens. As we age, the average time spent using mobile apps
decreases.
As expected, younger people use apps for longer periods. Specifically, women aged
20­39 spend an average of 230 seconds using apps, while men in the same age group
spend just under 10 seconds less. The trend of women using apps for longer durations
persists across all age groups. The shortest engagement with mobile apps is observed
among older individuals, although it still exceeds 3 minutes. Surprisingly, women in both
the youngest age group and the 40­54 group spend the same average amount of time on
a single app, whereas men show a decrease of over 10 seconds in the older group.
The average time spent on the app alone does not provide much insight. Usually, it is spe­
cific app categories or particular apps that consume most of our time, and I will examine
these in the next subsection.
22
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:31==
3.3.2
Apps and categories
In the first step, the author verifies the total time an average woman and man from our
dataset spend on different app categories. Figures fig. 3.3a and fig. 3.3b show the 10
categories, on which users spend the most of time. This distribution is very interesting
and reveals some differences between genders.
(a) App categories on which females spend
the most time.
The category that women
spend the most time on is “Social,” with an
average total number of over 250 hours.
Considering the average number of weeks
(i.e., 87) that the dataset represents for each
user, this translates to almost 3 hours of so­
cial media per week.
(b) App categories on which males spend
the most time. Unlike women, men spend
the most time on apps designed for com­
munication. The number of hours that men
spend on apps like WhatsApp corresponds
to almost 2½ hours per week.
Figure 3.3: Categories with total highest time spent among both genders. App categories
on which women and men spend the most time. The calculated average represents the
total time spent on a given category by a specific gender, divided by the number of users
of that gender.
Although the top three categories — “Social,” “Communication,” and “Game” — are the
same for both genders, we can already see an interesting difference. While women spend
the most time in the “Social” category, which includes apps like Facebook, Instagram, and
TikTok, men spend the most time in the “Communication” category, which includes apps
like WhatsApp, Facebook Messanger, or WeChat.
Further differences are observed in the last four positions. Women spend more time using
apps in the “Camera/Album” category, while men prefer the “Travel & Local” category.
Photo­related apps do not make it into the top 10 for men.
The categories to which we devote the most time like ”Communication” and ”Social” sug­
gest that mobile apps are predominantly used to stay in touch with others, highlighting the
importance of social connections in our daily lives. ”Games”, ”Browsing” and ”Movies/TV”
that follow them show that a significant portion of time is also dedicated to entertainment
and reflects a tendency to use mobile devices for leisure activities.
The next aspect of interest was the app categories with the longest average single en­
gagement duration. In other words, this analysis focuses not on the categories with the
highest overall usage time, but on those that maintain user engagement on the phone
screen for the longest uninterrupted duration. Turns out, it’s exactly what is expected ­
the longest sessions are typically associated with movies, games, and books. Those app
categories naturally consume more time. 8­minute sessions seem short, but when one
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
23
==PAGE:32==
considers that every minor interruption ­ even receiving a message, resets the time, then
even less than 10 minutes in an age of endless information coming at us seems like a lot.
Figure 3.4: App categories with the longest average one­time use. As expected, the top
categories are those that involve using the app for an extended time. Examples of apps in
the top three categories are respectively: Netflix for ”Movie/TV”, Pokemon GO for ”Game”
and Amazon Kindle for ”Book”.
The final aspect is the applications present in the dataset. As previously mentioned, the
dataset contains 4,393 apps, but their distribution is highly skewed as shown in Figure 3.5.
A small percentage of apps account for the majority of time spent on the phone. While
the presented distribution shows the number of app occurrences (one occurrence being
one app launch), I also compare this with the 15 apps that users spend the most time on.
These apps are shown in fig. 3.7.
24
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:33==
Figure 3.5: The distribution of app occurrences in the dataset divided into 30 intervals
(bins). Most apps appear very rarely, as seen in the leftmost bin, while the rightmost bins
represent only a few apps that are used most frequently.
Furthermore, Figure 3.6 shows the log­log scale data distribution with a fitted Zipfian
model. Zipf’s law, states that the frequency of an item is inversely proportional to its rank.
This again highlights the uneven distribution and confirms that app popularity distribution
deviates from commonly observed Zipf­like models [57].
Figure 3.6: The distribution of app occurrences in the dataset. The red line represents the
fitted Zipfian model. The rank of each app was determined based on its frequency. The
ranks and corresponding app occurrences are shown on the log­log scale to highlight the
relationship between them.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
25
==PAGE:34==
Both Figure 3.5 and Figure 3.6 strongly emphasize how a small number of applications
stand out in terms of popularity, while the vast majority are used moderately or infrequently.
Figure 3.7: The top 15 most time­consuming apps in the dataset. The summed total time
spent on each app category was scaled with min­max normalization. Most of the apps that
consume the most time overlap with those we use most frequently. Specifically, Face­
book, WhatsApp, and Google Chrome are the apps with significantly higher usage times
compared to others. The popularity of Google Chrome may stem from its ability to serve
multiple functions simultaneously, acting as an application across various categories.
The apps that are not only opened most frequently but also used the most are primarily
well­known commercial apps or system apps such as Conversations, Album, or Phone­
book by Sony Ericsson. The 15 apps that consume the most user time also correspond
to the categories on which we spend the most time as shown in fig. 3.3a and fig. 3.3b.
3.3.3
Time dependency
The final aspect that piqued the author’s curiosity is the daily and weekly usage patterns,
as well as the differences in popular apps used during various times of the day and across
the week.
First, the author revisits the diurnal pattern, this time broken down by gender. Figure
fig. 3.8 presents an hourly representation of mobile app usage by women and men. In
general, this characteristic has already been described in section 2.2.2 and fig. 2.2. When
observing both genders separately, an interesting pattern emerges: men use their phones
more in the night and early morning, while women spend more time on their phones in
the evening when compared to men.
Secondly, the average time on the phone throughout the week was verified. The results
are somewhat surprising and they are presented in fig. 3.9. It was expected that usage
would increase as the weekend approached, but the figure shows the opposite. From
Monday to Thursday, phone usage decreases. There is an increase on Fridays, which
might suggest planning weekend activities or relaxing after work, for example, by playing
games or watching videos. While people tend to put their phones down and use them the
26
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.8: Min­max normalized, averaged time spent on mobile apps throughout the
day. The peak of usage can be seen between 21­22, while after 23 (after index 22 on the
plot because it represents time spent on the phone between 22­23), usage significantly
decreases.
least on Saturday, they make up for it the next day, making Sunday the day with the most
time spent on phones on average.
Initially, I analyzed categories instead of specific apps. However, across each day of
the week and at different times of the day (morning, afternoon, evening), the top seven
categories that users spend the most time on, remained the same. The top two posi­
tions alternated between “Social” and “Communication,” followed by “Game,” “Browsing,”
“Movie/TV,” and the last two spots interchangeably occupied by “Travel & Local,” “Tools,”
and “Other.”
These categories seem to be too general, so the focus shifted to specific apps at different
times of the day and on various days of the week. Since, again, most of the apps repeat
over different times of the day, weekdays, and weekends there are also few exceptions.
The apps that frequently appear are those listed in fig. 3.7. Facebook, for example, reigns
supreme at all times of the day and on every day of the week, without exception. However,
a few notable differences can be observed. First, the morning is the only time of the day
at which users spend more time browsing with Google Chrome rather than texting on
WhatsApp. It is also in the morning that we use the dedicated Google search engine app
the most. While users spend a lot of time watching movies on YouTube in the morning
and evening, afternoons are dominated by phone conversations, and generally, people
spend more time on messaging apps. The days of the week were also analyzed, but it
turns out that on weekends, we spend most of our time using the same apps as during
the week.
However, when analyzing the categories of apps we use the most throughout different
days of the week and during the weekend, I began to consider the impact of the previous
week on our phone usage patterns. Noticing that many of the top categories consistently
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 3.9: The average number of hours spent on the phone throughout the week by
both genders.
appear in terms of highest usage, I became intrigued by whether we can effectively predict
the exact order of categories that will consume the most time over the weekend based on
our phone app usage history. This led me to the second research question: Is it possible
to determine, based on the apps used during the week, which app categories user
will spend the most time on during the weekend? I will attempt to answer both of these
questions in the following sections.
28
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:37==
4
Methods
The following chapter outlines the methods used, architectural choices, and implemen­
tation details of the model trained for this project. The first section presents basic deep
learning concepts and an explanation of how classical training of deep neural networks
works. Next, there is a brief introduction to Transformer­based models, followed by a
progressive explanation of the structure of the implemented model and technical details.
4.1
Deep Learning basics
4.1.1
Basic concepts
In the second half of the 20th century, Frank Rosenblatt, inspired by earlier work de­
scribing a mathematical model of a human neuron [58], proposed the perceptron, a basic
mathematical model of an artificial neuron. The perceptron is a type of linear classifier
that determines which of two classes a given input vector belongs to. With the help of
weights and bias, it generates a single binary output. Such a model can be represented
mathematically with the following simple expression:
y =
! 1,
if w · x > b
0,
if w · x ≤b,
(4.1)
where:
• y ­ binary output;
• w ­ weights vector;
• x ­ input vector;
• b ­ bias.
This representation helps to explain the meaning of weights and bias, later called param­
eters. Assuming that a single neuron aims to make a decision 0 or 1, then respectively:
• inputs can represent factors on which the decision depends;
• weights describe inputs significance, in other words, the greater the influence of the
factor on the decision, the greater the weight;
• bias is a constant term that adjusts the position of the decision boundary.
Activation function
The perceptron, in its basic form, can make a single decision. By changing the parame­
ters, we influence the outcome of the perceptron. Repeating this process, in order to get
a better result, can be called learning. Unfortunately, in practice, during small, incremen­
tal changes in the parameters of the perceptron, we can significantly affect its result and
completely reverse the intended effect, making the network, instead of learning, worsen
its results. To avoid such a situation and introduce nonlinearity, activation functions are
used, according to which the outputs of the perceptron is calculated [59].
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
29
==PAGE:38==
In this case, the expression describing output of a single artificial neuron can be written
in the form:
y = f(w · x + b),
(4.2)
where f is the chosen activation function.
The choice of activation function is important and depends on the problem to be solved
by the neural network. In the following, the activation functions that were used in the
implementation of the model for the purpose of this work are briefly characterized.
Softmax in Eq. 4.3 is an activation function used to convert model outputs into probabil­
ities. In Transformer networks, it is a crucial component in the attention mechanism that
helps obtain the weights on the values. It is also used to convert the decoder output to
predicted next­token probabilities [39].
f(xi) =
exi
"n
j=1 exj ,
(4.3)
Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) in Eq. 4.4 is one of the most popular activation functions in
neural networks. It returns an input value if it is greater than zero, and otherwise returns
zero. It is used in each of the fully connected feed­forward networks proposed in the
original Transformer architecture and feed­forward heads for fine tuning the implemented
model for downstream tasks.
f(x) = max(0, x) =
! xi,
if xi ≥0
0,
if xi < 0.
(4.4)
Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU) [60] function shown in Eq. 4.5 smoothly approximates
the ReLU function while introducing non­zero values for negative inputs. GELU applies
a scaled version of the input value multiplied by Φ(x), the cumulative distribution function
(CDF) of the standard normal distribution. In the ultimate version of the model implemen­
tation, it replaces ReLU from the fully connected feed­forward layers.
f(x) = x · Φ(x)
(4.5)
Hyperbolic Tangent in Eq. 4.6 maps inputs to a range between ­1 and 1. In the context of
this work, it is used in a module that represents the Masked Language Modelling (MLM)
task, which is further defined in section 4.3.3. Tanh provides a non­linear transformation
while keeping outputs in a controlled range, which can enhance stability in training.
f(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x ,
(4.6)
Structure and architecture
Non­linearity is great, but neither a single neuron alone with an activation function nor
a large linear network is capable of solving complex problems. Real potential emerges
when we combine the use of activation functions and multiple perceptrons into a layered
network.
As we increase the number of artificial neurons, we can begin to construct what is known
as an artificial neural network. On the other hand, when dealing with a neural network
with several layers, it is usually divided into an input layer, hidden layers, and an output
30
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:39==
layer. This type of architecture is known as a multilayer perception (MLP) and is illustrated
in the Figure 4.1. An MLP is a mathematical function that maps a set of input values to a
set of output values. It consists of numerous simpler functions, which form the essence
of deep learning [61].
Figure 4.1: Structure of multilayer perceptron. It is worth noting, that outputs of each
layer are the inputs of the following layers. Such a network is called a feedforward neural
network. That means that there are no loops or feedback connections in the network
and the information is always propagated forward to the next layers [59]. Feedforward
networks are crucial for machine learning practitioners as they form the basis of many
important commercial applications.
Architectures that allow backward propagation of information are called recurrent neural
networks. They use a hidden state that is updated each time a new input vector is passed.
Once updated, the internal hidden state is fed back into the network. Thanks to the recur­
rence, some of the information from the past is preserved in subsequent iterations. One
might say that the final hidden state “summarizes” the entire sequence of inputs. This is
what makes this architecture applicable to NLP, where we often face long sequences of
words.
Another well­known architecture, a specialized kind of feedforward network, is a convolu­
tional neural network [62]. CNNs are widely used in Computer Vision and excel at tasks
like image recognition and object detection. Its name comes from a mathematical linear
operation between vectors, called convolution. CNN allows the reduction of the number
of parameters of an artificial neural network, by reusing features from previous layers and
sharing parameters [63]. Another important aspect of these networks is obtaining abstract
features when propagating an input vector through the neural network. Convolutional net­
works, allow ”observation” of local parts of the input data, instead of the whole at once.
They detect and recognize features regardless of their place in the input vector. In other
words ­ hidden layers receive an input vector corresponding only to a part of the previous
hidden layer, which allows to limit the number of fully connected layers.
The other architecture also often used in computer vision, is a Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN). GANs is an interesting concept for estimating generative models, pro­
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
31
==PAGE:40==
posed by Ian Goodfellow in 2014 [64], and assumes that two models are trained at the
same time, competing by minimizing and maximizing a cost function. The first model is
the Generator, which learns to generate data that conforms to the probability density dis­
tribution of the training data. The second model is called the Discriminator and evaluates
the probability that the data comes from the original input set, rather than being falsified
by the Generator. In GANs, we usually encounter two multilayer networks.
An architecture that is of particular interest from the perspective of processing long se­
quences, such as the sequence of applications used by users of mobile devices is called a
Transformer and it was first presented in the “Attention Is All You Need” paper [39]. Unlike
traditional neural networks, it relies heavily on the title attention mechanism, eliminating
the need for recurrence or convolutions. Given that it is the foundation of the application
underlying this thesis, a separate section 4.2 is devoted to it.
4.1.2
Training mechanism
Cost function
As already mentioned, the learning of a neural network comes down to the selection of
appropriate parameters. For this purpose, a cost function is used, the result of which is a
measure that helps to estimate the effectiveness of the training.
For a more complete explanation, a simple example is given. The classic cost func­
tion used for training neural networks in regression problems is the Mean Squared Error
(MSE), represented by the expression 4.7.
MSE = 1
N
N
#
i=1
$
yi −ˆyi)2,
(4.7)
where:
• N ­ total number of training inputs;
• yi ­ expected value;
• ˆyi ­ output from the network.
In this case, the smaller the difference between the expected value yi and the network
output ˆyi the better estimation of a single data point. Thus, our goal will be to minimize
the cost function.
Optimization
Optimization refers to the task of either minimizing or maximizing cost function f(x) by
altering x. Derivatives play a crucial role in this process, providing information about how
changes in x affect the function’s output. In deep learning, the gradient represents the
derivatives of a loss function with respect to the model’s parameters. For example, if
f(x −ϵ · sign(f′(x))) is less than f(x) for sufficiently small ϵ, then the value of f(x) can
be reduced by moving x in small steps in the opposite direction of the derivative. This
technique, known as gradient descent, is central to most optimization algorithms in deep
learning.
However, as the training set size grows to billions of examples, the time to take a single
gradient step can become prohibitively long. To address this, Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) is a widely used algorithm that estimates the gradient using a minibatch of samples,
making it faster and more efficient. This approach balances computational efficiency with
the need for accurate gradient estimates [61].
32
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:41==
Back­propagation
While gradient descent performs learning, it is a back­propagation algorithm that is at
the core of deep learning libraries. Back­propagation effectively evaluates the gradient of
loss function with respect to the weights of the neural network. Essentially, it computes
the chain rule, with a specific order of operations that is highly efficient.
To compute the gradient of an output value z with respect to one of its ancestor nodes x,
we have to find the gradient with respect to each of z’s parent nodes in the graph. Starting
by calculating the gradient with respect to z itself ( dz
dz = 1) we then multiply the current
gradient by the Jacobian, which represents the derivative of the operation that produced
z. We continue this process, multiplying by Jacobians while moving backward through
the graph, until we reach x.
If there’s a node that can be reached through multiple paths from z, we add the gradients
arriving from those different paths at that node to get the final gradient. That helps to avoid
recalculating subexpressions (e.g. partial derivatives) over and over, which prevents an
exponential increase in computation. This backward traversal through the graph, multiply­
ing by Jacobians and summing gradients as needed, allows us to calculate how changes
in x affect z [61].
4.2
Transformer architecture
The following section helps the reader become familiar with the transformer architecture,
which is the backbone of the model implemented in this work. First, the general historical
context, applications, and structure are presented.
The subsequent sections explain and refer to the specific architectural decisions and
methods used in the model implementation. First, for the pretraining stage which focuses
on learning the general representation of mobile apps through the MLM task. Then, for
the fine­tuning step, which adapts the model for downstream prediction tasks.
4.2.1
History context
Until 2017, most sequence modeling tasks such as machine translation or text summa­
rization relied primarily on recurrent networks like LSTM [47] or GRUs [65]. However,
these networks were significantly limited by their sequential nature, making parallel train­
ing impossible and critically restricting memory, especially with long sequences. That has
changed significantly with the introduction of the Transformer architecture, which heavily
relies on the attention mechanism [39].
This revolution resulted from numerous studies conducted over the years. It began with
the learning of distributed representations for words to predict subsequent words in the
early 2000s, marked by the introduction of the neural probabilistic language model [66].
Significant advancements followed, such as the large LSTM encoder that improved trans­
lation [67], and the introduction of the attention mechanism, which eliminated the need for
fixed vectors or rigid segmentation. Instead, it employs a flexible method to determine
the most relevant parts of a source sentence for predicting a target word, without explic­
itly defining distinct segments [68].
Undoubtedly attention is the most important component. The reason, however, why this
architecture remains largely unchanged is due to many elements being combined in a
unique and thoughtful way. It is now the cornerstone of language modeling tasks, par­
ticularly evident in the era of large language models like GPT­4 [69]. As it turns out, this
architecture, with minor modifications, can be replicated and used in different fields.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
33
==PAGE:42==
Transformer has been used, among other things, for image recognition [70], speech
recognition [71, 72], reinforcement learning [73] and even for prediction of protein struc­
ture in AlphaFold [74] or human early mortality in life2vec [75].
4.2.2
Overall structure
Transformer architecture follows an encoder­decoder structure. The encoder maps an
input sequence of words1 representations (a0, ..., an) to a sequence of continuous rep­
resentation z (z0, ..., zn), effectively embedding the representations of the apps into a
higher­dimensional space. Based on z, the decoder then generates an output sequence
(y0, ..., yn) of apps one element at a time. The model is auto­regressive [76], which means
it uses the previously generated symbols as additional input when producing the next one
[39].
In this work, the before­mentioned encoder­decoder approach is slightly modified and
draws more from BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) archi­
tecture [1], which helps to train deep bidirectional representations of, in this case, mobile
applications from user app usage sequences. This training phase is called pre­training.
Pre­trained BERT­like model can be easily adjusted to a wide range of tasks and fine
tuned using just one additional output layer.
Regardless, transformer­based architectures typically rely on the components listed be­
low.
• input embeddings ­ mulit­dimensional vectors that represent input tokens;
• positional encoding ­ added to input embeddings; model lacks recursion and con­
volution, so to keep track of apps order, we encode their positions;
• residual connections [77] ­ helps the model to converge faster by creating short­
cuts for gradients, reducing the impact of vanishing gradients in deep networks,
which helps the model learn more effectively, especially in the early stages of train­
ing;
• self­attention ­ encodes the relationship among the apps;
• layer normalization [78] ­ method that improves training speed, that directly esti­
mates the normalization statistics from the summed inputs to the neurons within a
hidden layer;
• feed­forward networks ­ applies non­linear transformation (ReLU 4.4) to the atten­
tion output allowing the model to capture more complex relationships and features
in the data.
The most important components and their ultimate versions, with possible modifications
used in the pre­training and fine­tuning phases of model training are described in more
detail in the following sections.
4.3
Pre­training
Word embeddings have been a cornerstone in NLP, with notable methods like Word2Vec
[79] and Glove [80] shaping the way models understand language.
However, unlike language, mobile app ecosystems would not benefit as much from out­
of­the­box embeddings due to their rapidly evolving nature. The English language has a
1Technically speaking, we are also dealing with words, but in the context of this work, it seems more
appropriate to use ”apps” or ”applications” instead of ”words” when referring to the sequence of symbols.
34
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:43==
finite vocabulary, with new words appearing relatively steadily, whereas the app market
is dynamic, with new applications continuously being introduced. As detailed in Chapter
2, the app space includes various datasets with significant differences in the number and
types of applications, the periods they were collected, and even the operating systems
they target. Moreover, the usage of mobile apps has been rapidly evolving. Over the past
decade, the global number of smartphone users has more than quadrupled2, and some
sources even report that by 2023, the average daily time spent in apps exceeded five
hours — a 6% increase over the previous year3.
Large language models like BERT have introduced pre­trained embeddings, reducing the
need for heavily customized, task­tailored architectures [1]. Specifically, one of the tasks
that BERT uses to create contextual embeddings by learning from hidden parts of text
sequences is MLM. These embeddings are general­purpose representations, created by
training on extensive text datasets.
Given the app ecosystem’s current state, a BERT­like pre­training approach seems ap­
propriate to address the challenges posed by its constant change and diversity.
4.3.1
Embedding layer
This section describes the embedding layer, a core component of the model implemen­
tation. It plays a fundamental role in transforming discrete tokens into continuous repre­
sentations. The embedding layer is designed to convert long input sequences into high­
dimensional embeddings by combining app, position, and time embeddings, a simplifica­
tion of which was presented in figure 4.2. This approach improves the model’s capacity to
capture sequence­based relationships and semantic information, enabling more effective
processing in subsequent layers.
Apps
App (or token) embeddings are considered the most important of the three embedding
components. Each token is assigned a unique vector representation of embed_dim size,
which helps the model to get an ”understanding” of the input sequence. In this case
embed_dim takes the value 256, which is a compromise between dataset qualities and
size and computational resources available.
It’s implemented, like all deep learning components of this project, with the help of Py­
Torch library [81]. The app embedding layer uses standard nn.Embedding module, which
is learnable matrix but at the same time serves as a lookup table where each row corre­
sponds to the embedding vector for a specific input token.
Position
Instead of positional encoding used in [39] model learns its own positional information
during training through position_embedding module. This module generates positional
embeddings that match the dimensionality of token embeddings. However, it also sets
a limit on the maximum context length that the model can process, which in our case is
2048.
Time
Undoubtedly, as mentioned in previous chapters the time we use phones and apps mat­
ters a lot.
Given the importance of temporal patterns, it was recognized that utilizing learnable rep­
resentation could enhance the pre­training phase. Consequently, instead of using static
2https://www.statista.com/forecasts/1143723/smartphone­users­in­the­world
3https://www.data.ai/en/ insights/market­data/state­of­mobile­2024­highlights/
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
35
==PAGE:44==
representation like classical positional encoding, where each position is fixed and pre­
computed, the author uses a dynamic approach known as Time2Vec [82]. The mathe­
matical representation of the method, for the given scalar notion of time τ is described by
the expression 4.8.
t2v(τ)[i] =
%
ωiτ + φi,
if i = 0
F(ωiτ + φi),
if 1 ≤i ≤k
(4.8)
where φ and ω are learnable vectors. The first term is linear and represents the progres­
sion of time. The second term uses a periodic activation function. They can respectively
be used for capturing non­periodic and periodic patterns in the time­dependent input. Fol­
lowing Time2Vec experiments, the chosen periodic function in the implemented model is
sine.
Figure 4.2: Input representation of the model. Input embeddings are the sum of app,
position, and time embeddings. Trained app embeddings are expected to capture the
relationships and similarities among apps, such as those related to category or usage
patterns. Position embeddings aim to represent the positional context of each token in a
sequence, while time embeddings assist the model in learning the relative time of day, day
of the week, or even month and year associated with app usage. The names of the apps
are not further tokenized, so what would commonly be referred to as ”token embeddings”,
is in that case ”app embeddings”.
4.3.2
Encoder layer and attention
To a large extent, the implementation of the model follow the original architecture and
principles presented in the [39]. The encoder is composed of a stack of N identical layers,
each comprising two sub­layers. The first is a multi­head self­attention module, and the
second is a simple, position­wise fully connected feed­forward network.
Nevertheless, since the Transformer architecture was proposed, many solutions have
been developed that allow faster convergence, and therefore both encoder and attention
mechanism have been adopted for the project needs.
Firstly, instead of dot­product attention, which has quadratic space and time complexity,
the model uses FAVOR+ approach [2]. Secondly, instead of the standard residual con­
nections that were employed around each of the two Transformer sub­layers, followed by
layer normalization, the model uses the ReZero approach [83]. Both are further explained
later in this section.
36
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:45==
The only change to the feed­forward networks was the replacement of the activation func­
tion. In this regard, I follow the approach proposed in BERT architecture [1]. In other
words, instead of ReLU, I use GELU, which improves performance across NLP tasks
[60].
Attenion mechanism
Attention, generally speaking, is a mechanism that helps to keep track of the relationship
between symbols, which in this case represents mobile apps.
More formally, it is a function that maps a query and a set of key­value pairs to an output.
Queries and keys are of dimension dk, values are of dimension dv. The function computes
the dot product of the query with all keys, scales the result by
1
√dk , and then applies
softmax to obtain weights on values [39].
In practice, the attention function is computed on sets of queries, keys, and values simul­
taneously, packed into matrices Q, K, and V, respectively. It is also known as ”Scaled
Dot­Product Attention” and can be described by the formula 4.9.
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
&QKT
√dk
'
V
(4.9)
Multi­head attention
Multi­head attention expands upon the single­attention mechanism.
The input queries, keys, and values are first transformed h times, using learned linear pro­
jections. Then, the attention function is applied independently to each set of transformed
queries, keys, and values, resulting in dv­dimensional output values for each set. These
outputs are called attention heads. Ith attention head can be expressed as:
headi = Attention(QW Q
i , KW K
i , V W V
i )
(4.10)
where linear projections are parameter matrices W Q
i
∈Rdmodel×dk, W K
i
∈Rdmodel×dk, and
W V
i
∈Rdmodel×dv.
Heads are then concatenated to obtain the final output, which is mathematically presented
in the below formula:
MultiHead(Q, K, V ) = Concat(head1, head2, ..., headh)W O
(4.11)
where W O ∈Rhdv × dmodel is the final linear projection matrix.
That multi­head mechanism allows the model to attend to information from different rep­
resentation subspaces at different positions and thus capture diverse aspects of the rela­
tionships between apps.
Performer Attention
The space and time complexity of the traditional attention mechanism in Transformers
increases quadratically with the size of the input sequence L.
Given that the author intends to also capture long­term dependencies, so the input se­
quences on which the model is trained in the pre­training process have a length of L =
2048, an enhanced version of the Transformer called Performer was employed [2]. Per­
former reduces space and time complexity to linear.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
37
==PAGE:46==
Instead of directly calculating attention scores between all pairs of elements in a se­
quence, Performer uses Fast Attention Via positive Orthogonal Random features (FA­
VOR+). This mechanism approximates the softmax attention with random feature maps,
enabling efficient computation. The key idea is to use kernel functions decomposable into
dot products of randomized feature maps. This transformation allows attention computa­
tion to be expressed in a way that significantly reduces its complexity.
Formally, Performer’s attention can be approximated using the following steps:
1. Random Feature Mapping: The queries Q and keys K are transformed using a
random feature map φ(·):
φ(Q), φ(K) ∈RL×r
where r is the dimension of the random feature space, significantly smaller than L.
2. Approximate Attention: The softmax attention is approximated using these ran­
dom features:
Attention(Q, K, V ) ≈φ(Q)
$
φ(K)T V
(
This allows the attention computation to be decomposed into a series of matrix multipli­
cations.
By simplifying the computation of attention scores, Performer attention enables faster pro­
cessing while maintaining the essential relationships between elements in the sequence,
which makes it particularly effective in NLP tasks. While the model with implemented Per­
former attention efficiently handles long sequences, it is crucial not to overlook short­term
dependencies. Therefore, softmax attention heads are still used but with a limited range
of 32 neighboring apps.
ReZero normalization
In standard deep learning architectures, residual connections [77] are often used to fa­
cilitate the flow of information through deep layers. However, in the original formulation
of residual connections defined in 4.12, the input and output of each layer are added
together, which can introduce scaling issues and complicate training.
xi+1 = xi + F(xi)
(4.12)
where:
• xi+1 ­ output representation;
• xi ­ input representation;
• F ­ function representing multi­head attention module or fully connected feed­forward
network.
Many modern architectures use normalization [78] together with residual connections to
mitigate the issues mentioned. For example, Transformer [39] uses post­normalization:
xi+1 = Norm(xi + F(xi))
(4.13)
and BERT [1] uses pre­normalization:
xi+1 = (xi) + F(Norm(xi))
(4.14)
38
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:47==
The implemented model uses a different approach ­ ReZero [83]:
xi+1 = (xi) + αiF(xi)
(4.15)
ReZero is a simple idea, where the learnable parameter α modulates the non­trivial trans­
formation of a layer F(xi). ReZero applies to each feed­forward network and multi­head
attention module. From a programming point of view, it’s a function that wraps each of
these blocks by adding a learnable parameter that is initialized with a tiny number.
4.3.3
Masked Language Modeling
The last module plays the role of the decoder and its objective makes the model learn the
relationship between applications. The MLM task is about inferring masked tokens. More
specifically, 30% of the original input tokens are randomly chosen [84]. Of these, 80% are
substituted with special [MASK] token, 10% are replaced with random tokens, and the
other 10% remain unchanged.
The objective of MLM, its loss function, is cross­entropy loss.
CE(y, x) = −
#
yi log(f(xi))
(4.16)
where:
• yi ­ true targets;
• f(xi) ­ inferred tokens;
The architecture of the module follows the exact structure of the MLM task proposed in
life2vec [75]. The decoder has two fully connected layers f1 and f2. First, it is trans­
formed using tanh function, then l2­normalization (x/∥x∥) is applied and followed by the
dropout layer. The resulting output goes through f2 function that is scaled by α parameter.
For clarity, each step is presented separately in the formula 4.17. It is worth mentioning
that the weights of the second network f2 are tight with the app embedding matrix, which
is further normalized emphasizing the relative directions of app embeddings while disre­
garding their absolute magnitudes [85].
1)
˜x = f1(x)
2)
˜x = tanh(˜x)
3)
˜x = l2_norm(˜x)
4)
˜x = dropout(˜x)
5)
logits = α × f2(˜x)
(4.17)
Logits, the output of the MLM, represent the probability distribution across the entire vo­
cabulary. In this case, the probability is determined by the scaled cosine distance be­
tween the contextualized representation of an app and the original representations in the
app embedding matrix.
4.4
Fine tuning
When the model is successfully pre­trained, fine tuning it for a downstream task becomes
relatively simple. Essentially, the architecture remains the same as in the pre­training
process, but the final module, in this case, the MLM decoder, is modified. Instead, a
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
39
==PAGE:48==
component suitable for the selected task is used. This provides the perfect conditions to
use these tasks to verify the proposed research questions.
4.4.1
App usage dwell time prediction
Is it possible to determine, based on the apps used in the morning, how much time
will be spent on the phone for the rest of the day?
The first downstream task undertaken is the prediction of app usage dwell time throughout
the day based on how the user engaged with applications during the night and morning,
up until 12 o’clock. In other words, based on the applications used up to 12 PM on the
same day, the author aims to predict one out of five time intervals that correspond to the
time spent by the user on mobile app usage. The ranges were selected based on the
distribution of the time users spend after 12 PM such that the number of data in each
interval is equal. The ranges are as follows: 0­55, 55­90, 90­130, 130­190, and over 190
minutes.
To address this task, I undertook the following steps:
1. Copy all the trained parameters from the pre­trained model.
2. ”Freeze” the entire embedding layer, meaning the tensor’s gradients are not com­
puted during the backward pass.
3. Replace the MLM decoder with a relevant module and objective function.
For this task, the author implements a ”classification head”, which consists of two simple
feed­forward networks with a ReLU function in between. This module predicts the user’s
mobile app dwell time for the rest of the day. Again, I choose the Cross­Entropy Loss
criterion to evaluate the model.
4.4.2
Top app categories for the upcoming weekend
Is it possible to determine, based on the apps used during the week, which app
categories user will spend the most time on during the weekend?
The second task can better leverage learned long­term relationships, as it involves pre­
dicting the 10 categories of apps a user will engage with over the upcoming weekend
based on their app usage during the week.
The steps taken to address this problem are the same as those used in the dwell time
prediction described in section 4.4.1. The architecture of the classification head remains
unchanged, except for the number of output classes, which is now 30, representing the
total number of available categories. Although the model returns a probability for each
class, we aim to predict only 10. I made this decision because, over the weekend, users
typically do not use apps across all categories, so I don’t see the point in predicting them.
To make the task more difficult, the goal is not only to choose the top 10 categories but also
to rank them accordingly. Since I want to focus on the ranked top 10 predictions, a previ­
ously used loss function like cross­entropy is not entirely suitable. Instead, I use Ranking
Loss, which encourages the model to accurately rank predicted categories by computing
the loss based on the difference in positions between true and predicted rankings.
40
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:49==
5
Results
This chapter summarizes the results obtained during the model pre­training and fine­
tuning stages. First, I discuss the evaluation of MLM task, followed by the review of
trained representation of app embeddings, which allows for easily narrowing down the
model’s goal. For example, it can predict the time a user will spend on their phone from
noon to midnight or identify the categories they will most frequently use during weekend
leisure based solely on their phone usage during the day and the week, respectively.
These downstream tasks are possible because I have trained robust embedding and at­
tention layers, which help the machine understand the relationships and dependencies
between applications and their usage patterns. These tasks are discussed in the second
part of this chapter in Section 5.2.
5.1
Pre­training
The effectiveness of pre­training is evaluated on masked language modeling task using
two metrics ­ the top­k accuracy score, and the F1­score. Moreover, we compare the re­
sults with three baseline models to provide perspective. The first and simplest baseline,
used in numerous works, e.g. [4, 27], always predicts the app used most frequently in
the dataset and is also known as MFU. The second is based on a Markov model which
leverages the probabilities of transitioning from one app to another to determine masked
tokens. The third is a recurrent neural network, initially trained with the same setup, but
eventually reduced in size. It was trained for the same number of iterations as the imple­
mented model1.
App embeddings are also visually represented in a 2­dimensional space using the dimen­
sionality reduction technique UMAP (Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for
Dimension Reduction) [86] to understand better how the model learns abstract represen­
tations of mobile applications.
5.1.1
Comparison with baseline models
First, when evaluating the training, I focus on the numerical results and concentrate on
two metrics: accuracy and F1­score. Predicting a specific app, especially when there are
several thousand possibilities, is a very challenging task. Therefore, one can usually see
calculation of top­n accuracy, to assess the model’s accuracy for n predictions e.g., [14, 9,
12, 18, 25, 26, 27]. In this case, I evaluate top­1 and top­5 accuracy. Accuracy provides
an intuitive view of how well the model guesses masked symbols.
On the other hand, the F1 score measures the balance between precision and recall,
providing a single metric that considers both false positives and false negatives. This gives
us a broader perspective as it accounts for the imbalance of classes. More specifically, I
focused on the macro­weighted F1 score, which treats each class equally, regardless of
its size. This helps build an understanding of how the model handles apps that appear
much less frequently. For the trained model, we achieve a top­1 accuracy of 41% and a
top­5 accuracy of 75%. The RNN, which differs in that it uses an LSTM network instead
of an Encoder block, was trained for the same number of iterations. When I used the
same model setup, which resulted in a similar number of parameters (around 6 million),
1Ultimately, the number of parameters with which the pre­training model was trained amounted to
5,928,465.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
41
==PAGE:50==
the training was very unstable. By reducing the model size to 64 hidden layers, resulting
in a final parameter count of 683905, the training significantly improved, achieving an
Acc@5 of 59%. In comparison, the baseline Markov model achieves a top­1 accuracy
of 10% and a top­5 accuracy of 33%. Interestingly, by selecting the most frequent token,
i.e., WhatsApp, the model achieves an accuracy of 9.8% and 37% respectively for 1 and
5 most frequent apps.
Noting that we can predict almost 10% of applications by always choosing the most fre­
quently occurring one, it’s important to consider the macro F1­score. Although the F1
scores for both the Markov model and MFU are very low, the Markov model still achieves
a score ten times higher. This emphasizes that even simple probabilistic models outper­
form heuristics like MFU. Furthermore, the macro F1­score for the RNN model is 0.01,
which, while incomparable to the BERT­like model’s score, still significantly outperforms
the Markov model and MFU.
Considering this, the 0.16 achieved by the trained model is regarded as a relatively good
result. This also shows that there is a colossal difference between trivial guessing or
simple transition probabilities and a properly trained deep model.
Model
Acc.@1
Acc.@5
Macro F1­score
BERT­like
0.41
0.75
0.16
RNN
0.25
0.59
0.01
Markov model
0.10
0.33
6 × 10−4
Most Frequent Used
0.09
0.37
5.24 × 10−5
Table 5.1: Comparison of the pre­trained and the baseline models results on MLM task
based on Accuracy and Macro F1 scores.
5.1.2
Visualization of App Embeddings
Trained embeddings of mobile applications not only enable their use in downstream tasks
but also open up possibilities for in­depth analysis of how the model ”understands” the
applications. In this section, I examine the representation of applications reduced from
256 to 2 dimensions using the UMAP algorithm [86]. I used cosine similarity between
data points to compute distances as it measures the orientation between vectors, rather
than their magnitude. Theoretically, two applications occurring in a similar context should
point in a similar direction, and consequently, have a close cosine similarity value.
Firstly, in Figure 5.1, the trained app embeddings are shown divided into 30 app cate­
gories.
At first glance, a large cluster of red points catches the eye, representing the game cate­
gory. Undoubtedly, this suggests that the context in which we use mobile games is distinct
from other categories. Examining the chart, more points of the same color can be seen
clustered around similar areas. For example, on the right side, where the UMAP values for
the first and second dimensions are around 4, we can see a vertically stretching cluster of
light blue points representing the ”Camera/Album” category. While more clusters can be
identified, this task becomes easier with a smaller number of categories. Therefore, the
clusters of applications are described below in greater detail when discussing Figure 5.1.
Due to the number of applications, it is not feasible to display annotations with app names
on this chart for the reader. Therefore, in Figure 5.1, I also marked four areas using dashed
squares, highlighting interesting application clusters. In separate figures (Figure 5.2a,
42
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.1: Embeddings of mobile applications, extracted from the trained model and
projected into 2 dimensions using the UMAP algorithm [86]. The colors represent different
app categories, for instance, red represents the game category, which is most prominently
visible in the upper part of the image. Four squares marked with dashed lines highlight
selected clusters of applications, which are described in detail later in the chapter.
Figure 5.2b, Figure 5.2c and Figure 5.2d) I present close­up views of these areas, with
selected data points annotated.
The first, marked as blue Figure 5.2a, shows a section densely populated with various
types of games. The second, Figure 5.2b, highlighted in red, can confirm that some
applications cluster based on context, and consequently, according to how users interact
with them. It depicts a cluster of Polish applications2, which belong to diverse categories.
The key point is that these applications are used by a very specific group of users, likely
explaining their close positioning on the chart. Third, Figure 5.2c, shows different sport
and health­related apps, mostly from the ”Health & Fitness” category. Interestingly, many
applications from the ”Music” category, marked in bright pink, can also be observed, which
likely may be used during sports activities. The last cluster, shown in Figure 5.2d, includes
not only applications from the ”Productivity” and ”Tools” categories but primarily apps from
the Google and Microsoft families. In this cluster, I identified at least 25 applications from
these companies. This suggests that regardless of which corporation’s applications a
user prefers, they are used in a similar manner.
2Polish applications are identified by the unique identifier where the first two letters, in this case, ”pl”,
represent the country of origin.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
43
==PAGE:52==
(a) A dense cluster of game app embeddings.
There are notable games such as ”Need for
Speed,” ”Star Wars,” and ”Scrabble”. However,
looking at the titles, it appears that the game’s
theme is of secondary importance, as ”AdVen­
ture Capitalist” and ”Peppa Pig Paintbox” are
located right next to each other.
(b) A small cluster, somewhat distant from
the main ”body” of all data points.
It rep­
resents a collection of Polish applications
from various categories.
There are apps
for car trading (pl.otomoto),
banking apps
(pl.bzwbk.bzwbk24),
and even a draughts
game (pl.lukok.draughts).
(c) A cluster of health­related applications.
Most of the points are beige, representing the
”Health & Fitness” category.
There are also
scattered music applications (bright pink) that
may be used during sports activities or them­
selves fit into the health theme (e.g., ”Medita­
tion Sounds”).
(d) A collection of well­known applications,
where most belong to the ”Productivity” and
”Tools” categories.
These applications serve
various purposes (e.g., translator, authentica­
tor, cloud storage), yet they are located close
to each other.
Applications such as ”Word,”
”Excel,” ”PowerPoint,” and ”OneNote” from Mi­
crosoft are clustered almost at a single point,
strongly suggesting that they are used in very
similar contexts, such as professional settings.
Figure 5.2: Figures show four clusters of app embeddings selected by the author. These
can be understood as four distinct ”paths” in which app embeddings positioned them­
selves in multi­dimensional space. In other words, applications seem to be grouped not
only based on categories but also due to other factors such as their country of origin, more
general themes, and usage patterns.
44
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:53==
Overall, many categories are mixed, but upon examining specific close­up clusters, a
rationale can be found. Some, like in the case of games, are indeed overwhelmingly from
one category. Others may represent applications used by users in a specific country.
Apps may also be grouped based on their thematic nature (e.g., health or productivity).
Figure 5.3: App embeddings divided into 9 general categories. Overall, the colors are visi­
ble in groups. The most clustered categories appear to be ”Games” and ”Camera/Album.”
In the center of the area marked with green square beige and pink colors mix together, cor­
responding to ”Communication” and ”Music,” respectively. Clusters primarily combining
the ”Others” category with ”Entertainment” are marked with yellow dashed boxes. The
red square highlights a very dense cluster of applications from various categories. An
attempt to explain why this is the case is made later in this chapter.
Some categories occur relatively infrequently, so in Figure 5.3, I present the embeddings
again, this time showcasing higher­level, more general categories. This better illustrates
the separation of applications. For example, once again, we see red and blue points,
corresponding to games or camera/album­related applications. Playing games or taking
photos seem to be specific activities, which likely causes these categories to be the most
strongly clustered. In other words, the context in which we play games (e.g., in the evening
to relax) or take photos (e.g., during a vacation trip) is quite concrete. In contrast, the
pink (”Music”) and beige (”Communication”) colors appear to be scattered mainly in the
middle of the main body of embeddings marked by the dashed green line. Music, for
example, can be used during transport, for relaxation, for focus, or during sports, as seen
in Figure 5.2c. Similarly, communication apps are often essential regardless of what we
are doing and at what time of day. The only category that significantly deviates from this
pattern is ”Others,” which seems reasonable. ”Others” represents a very broad range of
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
45
==PAGE:54==
applications used for various purposes.
With a yellow dashed line, I marked three smaller clusters, which consist largely of the
”Entertainment” and ”Others” categories. These may represent various interesting groups
of applications, revealing patterns or ways in which people entertain themselves with mo­
bile apps. However, I do not analyze them in greater detail; I merely highlight them for the
reader’s attention. The area marked with a red dotted line remains somewhat unclear,
where categories intermingle. As discussed in the Section 3.3, classes, or applications,
are not well­balanced. This is well illustrated in Table 5.2, which presents basic statistics
regarding app occurrences:
Median
Mean
Std
Min
Max
10428
3.98 × 105
5.05 × 106
1
1.73 × 108
Table 5.2: Summary Statistics of the app occurrences in the training dataset.
The colossal difference between the mean and median shows that the data is right­
skewed, with a few apps having a very large number of occurrences (e.g., WhatsApp
with 173 million occurrences) pulling the mean upwards. The very high standard devia­
tion also indicates significant variability in the dataset. There are also applications that
appear only a few times, or even just once. Given that, I assume that a significant portion
of applications whose representations are not easily distinguishable are those that appear
relatively few times. To illustrate this, I divided the applications into 10 equal ranges based
on the number of occurrences, as shown in Figure 5.4.
The small number of occurrences for many applications (below 513) may cause the model
to struggle to build their representations. This could explain the dense cluster, which
largely consists of these rarely occurring applications. Previously, in Figure 5.3, it can
also be observed that many applications in this cluster belong to the ”Others” category,
which may further complicate the creation of their unique representations.
46
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.4: App embeddings divided into 10 categories based on the total number of
occurrences in the training set. The two bright colors represent the applications that occur
the least frequently. These rarely occurring applications are concentrated on the outskirts,
forming small individual clusters, and in the largest cluster located in the bottom right
corner.
5.2
Fine­tuning
Due to the specificity of both downstream tasks, there is a lack of comparable solutions in
the literature. During training, I use the same metrics as in the pre­training phase, namely
accuracy and F1­score. Additionally, due to the relatively small number of classes (5 and
30), I examine Cohen’s kappa coefficient, which accounts for the similarity between the
classifier’s predictions and the actual labels that might happen by chance.
Three simple baselines were implemented: dummy classifier, which chose the most fre­
quent class (MFC); KNN; and Random Forest. Furthermore, to understand the impact
of trained embedding and attention layers for the downstream tasks I also evaluate the
neural network, which I referred to in Section 4.4.1 and Section 4.4.2 as classification
head.
Due to limited computational resources (6 CPU cores and 2 Quadro RTX 5000 GPUs)
relative to the available amount of data, the training of each model was conducted on
1,000,000 examples (each example represents 1 day of app usage) for dwell time predic­
tion and 500,000 examples (each example represents mobile app usage throughout the
week) for predicting the most used categories over the weekend. The training of neural
networks lasts for 10 epochs, with a batch size of 64 for the dwell time prediction task and
a batch size of 32 for the category prediction task, resulting in a total of 156,250 iterations.
20% of the examples constitute the test set, on which the models are evaluated.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
47
==PAGE:56==
5.2.1
Dwell time prediction
The task involves predicting the amount of time a user will spend on their phone from
12:00 PM to 12:00 AM, based on the applications used during the night and morning, up
until 12:00 PM. Specifically, I predict one of five time ranges: very short (up to 56 minutes),
short (up to one and a half hours), moderate (not exceeding 130 minutes), long (up to 190
minutes), and very long (above 190 minutes).
Model
Accuracy
Kappa
F1­score
Fine­tuned model
0.32
0.14
0.28
NN (Classification head)
0.21
0.00
0.07
KNN
0.22
0.03
0.22
Random Forest
0.26
0.07
0.25
Most Frequent Class
0.20
0.00
0.07
Table 5.3: Comparison of the fine­tuned and the baseline models results on dwell time
prediction task based on Accuracy, Kappa coefficient, and F1 score.
As expected, the dummy classifier correctly predicts 1 in 5 times with a Kappa score of
0, indicating no agreement beyond chance. The other two models show a slight improve­
ment in accuracy—0.22 and 0.26 for KNN and Random Forest, respectively. However,
since the classification is not limited to a single class as in the case of MFC, the macro­
weighted F1­score is higher for these models.
The neural network trained for 10 epochs only surpasses the dummy classifier in effec­
tiveness. It is possible that a model trained for a longer period would achieve better
results. However, as mentioned, the number of training epochs had to be limited due to
constrained time and resources. On the other hand, the implemented model that uses
weights from the pre­trained model (with the embedding layer kept frozen) and is also
trained for 10 epochs achieves significantly better results. The accuracy is at a level of
0.32, with a kappa coefficient and F1 score of 0.14 and 0.28, respectively.
5.2.2
Top categories prediction
The task involves predicting the 10 app categories in which a user will spend the most time
on Saturday and Sunday based on their app usage history from the previous week, from
Monday to Friday. As discussed in Section 3.3, a significant majority of time is spent on
specific categories, and this pattern continues over the weekend. Therefore, the model’s
task is not only to classify the 10 categories but also to rank them in the correct order
based on the time spent, i.e., to chronologically arrange them according to the predicted
usage time.
Model
Accuracy
Kappa
F1­score
Fine­tuned model
0.26
0.15
0.13
NN (Classification head)
0.13
0.00
0.01
KNN
0.14
−0.00
0.03
Random Forest
0.20
0.03
0.03
Most Frequent Class
0.13
0.00
0.01
Table 5.4: Comparison of the fine­tuned and the baseline models results on top­10 week­
end app categories prediction task based on Accuracy, Kappa coefficient, and F1 score.
None of the three later baseline models is effective in predicting the ranking of most popu­
48
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:57==
lar categories. In fact, KNN and Random Forest barely outperform MFC, which achieves
an accuracy of 0.13 by always choosing the 10 most popular classes. In each case, the
Kappa coefficient is close to zero, but Random Forest shows slightly better agreement
than random chance. The results of the neural network trained for 10 epochs are not
markedly different. However, when the same neural network utilizes pre­trained embed­
ding and attention layers, while also allowing fine­tuning of the latter, the results improve
substantially. In over a quarter of the cases, the model correctly ranks the categories.
More importantly, it performs much better with classes that rarely appear as the most
popular over the weekend, as indicated by the considerably higher F1­score.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
49
==PAGE:58==
50
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:59==
6
Discussion
This chapter discusses and interprets the results presented in the previous sections. Addi­
tionally, it addresses the limitations and encountered problems, concluding with potential
future directions for work continuation.
6.1
Findings & interpretation
By utilizing the Performer attention mechanism [2] suitable for long contexts and the learn­
able representation of time, Time2Vec [3], I trained a generalized representation of appli­
cations that improves the results of different downstream tasks. Consequently, offering
a promising perspective for affirmatively answering the posed research questions in the
future.
While sequential modeling with RNN remains a robust approach, embeddings combined
with the attention mechanism prove to be the most effective among the models tested.
The BERT­like model’s ability to capture complex relationships within the data enhances
prediction accuracy and F1 scores, illustrating the value of SOTA pre­training techniques.
It highlights the critical role of model architecture in effectively handling diverse and im­
balanced datasets, paving the way for more advanced and accurate mobile application
usage predictions.
Numerically, the implemented model achieves 0.75 accuracy for top­5 tokens in the masked
language modeling task. This surpasses the results obtained by all baseline models, in­
cluding the RNN using the same architecture and parameter set. Overall, based on the
2­dimensional representation of applications, it can be assumed that the model has ac­
quired a very general ”understanding” of the applications and their relationships with each
other. The complex dependencies between applications learned during pre­training are
illustrated and explained in the figures presented in Chapter 5.
The model learns to distinguish different categories of applications, such as games or
camera/gallery apps. Additionally, it differentiates applications according to broader themes,
such as health or productivity, grouping them based on the context in which they are used.
However, some applications do not have unique representations, which may be primarily
due to the unbalanced dataset and the very infrequent occurrences of certain applica­
tions. When an application appears in the dataset only a few or several dozen times, it
can be difficult to model it in a way that distinguishes it from other very similar applications
that also appear infrequently.
As expected, when we use a model that has acquired a certain understanding of appli­
cations through the parameters of the embedding and attention layers to predict app us­
age, we achieve better results compared to baseline models. For both tasks—predicting
dwell time and forecasting the most popular weekend categories—the fine­tuned model
outperforms the other baselines. What sets the fine­tuned model apart the most is its
substantially higher effectiveness for less balanced classes, as indicated by the F1 score.
Certainly, in both cases, a model fine­tuned on the full dataset for a longer period, with opti­
mized hyperparameters, has the potential to achieve significantly better results. However,
the key point is that even with very short training times, we see substantial differences.
This suggests that the trained embeddings and attention layer strongly contribute to faster
model convergence and potentially higher performance with a complete training regimen.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
51
==PAGE:60==
In summary, the model performs relatively well considering that the dataset is not well­
balanced. We successfully obtained a representation of mobile applications that serves
as a good starting point for more specific tasks. This is confirmed by the two examples of
predictive tasks to which this model was applied. Furthermore, the representation itself
can be deeply analyzed, leading to interesting insights regarding the model’s understand­
ing of mobile applications.
6.2
Limitations & unexpected implications
The biggest limitations are time and computational resources. It is well known that a mas­
ter’s project has a limited time frame. It is also known, that a model with nearly 6 million
parameters and a dataset encompassing almost 130,000 users with extremely long se­
quences, makes the training process lengthy. In other words, a full training session using
both available GPUs takes approximately three days. Among the recorded model training
sessions (without removed or locally ran sessions), the total compute time amounts to 45
days. To track experiments, I used the Weights & Biases library [87].
As mentioned earlier, another limiting factor is the unbalanced dataset. A more balanced
dataset could positively impact the model’s pre­training. If the dataset remains the same,
I would take a different approach during its preprocessing. Applications that rarely ap­
pear in the dataset would be replaced by their categories. This approach addresses the
problem of applications whose representations are difficult to learn, but it also limits the
dataset’s diversity and results in the loss of some information. On the other hand, strong
representations of the categories themselves can help when encountering entirely new
applications outside the model’s vocabulary. In other words, an unknown application to
the model would be treated as its category, which would provide it with a generalized
representation.
I approached the complexity of the model incrementally. The initial implementation was
a classic transformer with a self­attention mechanism [39], processing only sequences of
applications without considering time. Based on this foundation, I expanded the archi­
tecture and increased the dataset used for training the model. Week by week, various
small or significant parts of the architecture evolved. Additionally, minor bugs naturally
appeared in the code, which in some cases invalidated the results from previously trained
models. This often led me to select the set of parameters based on choices in studies
[39, 1] or [75], rather than methodically, such as through grid search.
For example, a significant amount of time was spent on an error encountered very late
in the training process. Well after 100 iterations, the stability of the model training would
collapse, as seen in fig. 6.1. The likely cause was a combination of gradient accumulation,
improper scaling, and an excessively high learning rate, leading to gradient explosion.
6.3
Future work
The topic of modeling mobile applications is very broad, and I believe there are many
opportunities for further exploration and research. Before diving into those, I would focus
on improving the model.
Firstly, I am convinced that there are numerous techniques or tricks that could enhance the
overall architecture of the model. I have in mind techniques like weight tying [85] or ReZero
normalization [83], which I used in the implementation. Additionally, it would be worthwhile
to test other cost functions and optimizers for comparison. Another important step would
certainly be the methodical tuning of the model’s parameters, even using simple methods
like grid search. This would involve analyzing the impact of the number of hidden layers,
52
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:61==
Figure 6.1: The collapse in training stability of five independent models, each differing in
architectural nuances (nuances that attempted to address the illustrated problem). Steps
have been shifted and they indicate the start of training continuation (after 100 steps),
not the very beginning.
the number of performer blocks, the length of the input sequence, and the rest of the
model’s hyperparameters.
In terms of fine­tuning models, I would train them for longer, until the models converge. I
would also utilize the “durations” feature from the dataset. Knowing how long a user has
engaged with an application could have a significant and positive impact on the results,
both for predicting dwell time for the rest of the day and for ranking the categories that will
consume the most time over the weekend. Particularly in the first case, not only the titles
of the applications and their order influence our further phone usage, but the time spent
on each application also appears to have an impact.
Further work would undoubtedly include a more in­depth analysis of the embedding layer
of the pre­trained network. I would examine not only the applications but also the trained
embeddings of time. The same applies to the encoder blocks, or more specifically, the
attention weights. These should be investigated and visualized to better understand the
dependencies and mutual influences among applications.
This, however, would be the scope of my personal further work. In general, the model, in
its current state, allows for the pursuit of other directions. The first is fine­tuning the model
to predict the next application that the user will engage with. This is the most obvious use
case but at the same time, there are many studies against which such a model can be
compared, especially the recent ones [28, 37, 29, 38, 31, 5]. Other possibilities include
predicting gender or age, churn prediction (identifying which apps the user will likely stop
using), or different variations of user engagement.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
53
==PAGE:62==
54
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:63==
7
Conclusion
In this work, I have demonstrated that combining state­of­the­art components within the
implementation of a neural network based on the BERT architecture [1] effectively aids in
training a model that learns dense representations of thousands of mobile apps. This cre­
ated a solid foundation for fine­tuning models for various downstream tasks, as evidenced
by the two fine­tuned classification models I implemented.
The literature review highlighted two key aspects of mobile app usage that in my opinion,
have been overlooked: the significant impact of time on how we use apps [33] and the
cyclical nature of app usage based on the activities they support. While most studies take
time into account (e.g., [16]­[23]), none train a learnable time component. Additionally,
most research focuses on short context windows (e.g., 1­30 minutes [41], 8.35 records
on average [35], 30­190 records [23]). Even when they do consider long sequences, it
is typically in the specific context of predicting the next application [7]. Considering other
predictive challenges, this seems to be a limiting factor.
To address these gaps, I incorporated the Time2Vec [3] component in the pre­trained
model to effectively learn the periodic nature of time. Additionally, I used FAVOR+ [2], a
variant of the attention mechanism, suitable for long sequences, which helps in learning
long­term app relationships and generalizing different usage patterns. This resulted
in a model that effectively learns app representations. These app representations are
intriguing because the learned vectors explicitly encode various app usage patterns [35]
and could be extended to other application scenarios.
I, in contrast, focus on other predictive tasks, aiming to answer two research questions.
The first model outperformed four baseline models in predicting the time spent on the
phone for the rest of the day, based only on apps used at night and in the morning. The
second model also surpasses the other four models in effectiveness, ranking the app
categories that the user will use most intensively over the weekend. It is worth noting,
however, that the models were fine­tuned on only a small portion of the data (around one­
twentieth for the prediction of dwell time and one­fifth for the prediction of app categories)
for a limited number of iterations. Despite the performance better than baseline models,
I do not believe the results allow me to conclude that the model effectively predicts all the
mentioned aspects of mobile app usage. Nevertheless, these results indicate the model’s
potential for further work that may yield fruitful results.
In summary, the model presented in this work effectively learns dense app representa­
tions, enhancing effectiveness in predictive downstream tasks. Moreover, it opens up
new perspectives for further investigation and practical applications in the field of mobile
app usage analysis
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
55
==PAGE:64==
56
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1]
Jacob Devlin et al. “Bert: Pre­training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018).
[2]
Krzysztof Choromanski et al. “Rethinking attention with performers”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:2009.14794 (2020).
[3]
Seyed Mehran Kazemi et al. “Time2Vec: Learning a Vector Representation of Time”.
In: CoRR abs/1907.05321 (2019). arXiv: 1907.05321. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/
1907.05321.
[4]
Yuan Tian, Ke Zhou, and Dan Pelleg. “What and how long: Prediction of mobile app
engagement”. In: ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 40.1 (2021),
pp. 1–38.
[5]
Yonchanok Khaokaew, Hao Xue, and Flora D Salim. “MAPLE: Mobile App Predic­
tion Leveraging Large Language model Embeddings”. In: Proceedings of the ACM
on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 8.1 (2024), pp. 1–25.
[6]
Donghan Yu et al. “Smartphone app usage prediction using points of interest”. In:
Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technolo­
gies 1.4 (2018), pp. 1–21.
[7]
Katerina Katsarou, Geunhye Yu, and Felix Beierle. “WhatsNextApp: LSTM­based
next­app prediction with app usage sequences”. In: IEEE Access 10 (2022), pp. 18233–
18247.
[8]
Tong Li et al. “Smartphone App Usage Analysis: Datasets, Methods, and Applica­
tions”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials 24.2 (2022), pp. 937–966. DOI:
10.1109/COMST.2022.3163176.
[9]
Choonsung Shin, Jin­Hyuk Hong, and Anind K Dey. “Understanding and prediction
of mobile application usage for smart phones”. In: proceedings of the 2012 ACM
conference on ubiquitous computing. 2012, pp. 173–182.
[10]
Ke Huang et al. “Predicting mobile application usage using contextual informa­
tion”. In: proceedings of the 2012 ACM conference on ubiquitous computing. 2012,
pp. 1059–1065.
[11]
Xun Zou et al. “Prophet: What app you wish to use next”. In: Proceedings of the
2013 ACM conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing adjunct publication.
2013, pp. 167–170.
[12]
Ricardo Baeza­Yates et al. “Predicting the next app that you are going to use”. In:
Proceedings of the eighth ACM international conference on web search and data
mining. 2015, pp. 285–294.
[13]
Nagarajan Natarajan, Donghyuk Shin, and Inderjit S Dhillon. “Which app will you
use next? Collaborative filtering with interactional context”. In: Proceedings of the
7th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems. 2013, pp. 201–208.
[14]
Abhinav Parate et al. “Practical prediction and prefetch for faster access to appli­
cations on mobile phones”. In: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint
conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing. 2013, pp. 275–284.
[15]
Zhung­Xun Liao et al. “On the feature discovery for app usage prediction in smart­
phones”. In: 2013 IEEE 13th International Conference on Data Mining. IEEE. 2013,
pp. 1127–1132.
[16]
Ye Xu et al. “Preference, context and communities: a multi­faceted approach to pre­
dicting smartphone app usage patterns”. In: Proceedings of the 2013 International
Symposium on Wearable Computers. 2013, pp. 69–76.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
57
==PAGE:66==
[17]
Trinh Minh Tri Do and Daniel Gatica­Perez. “Where and what: Using smartphones
to predict next locations and applications in daily life”. In: Pervasive and Mobile
Computing 12 (2014), pp. 79–91.
[18]
Xiaoxing Zhao et al. “Prediction of user app usage behavior from geo­spatial data”.
In: Proceedings of the Third International ACM SIGMOD Workshop on Managing
and Mining Enriched Geo­Spatial Data. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[19]
Changjian Fang et al. “Next­app prediction by fusing semantic information with se­
quential behavior”. In: IEEE Access 6 (2018), pp. 73489–73498.
[20]
Yubo Jiang, Xin Du, and Tao Jin. “Using combined network information to predict
mobile application usage”. In: Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications
515 (2019), pp. 430–439.
[21]
Di Han et al. “An app usage recommender system: improving prediction accuracy
for both warm and cold start users”. In: Multimedia Systems 25 (2019), pp. 603–
616.
[22]
Tong Xia et al. “DeepApp: Predicting personalized smartphone app usage via context­
aware multi­task learning”. In: ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Tech­
nology (TIST) 11.6 (2020), pp. 1–12.
[23]
Shijian Xu et al. “Predicting and recommending the next smartphone apps based
on recurrent neural network”. In: CCF Transactions on Pervasive Computing and
Interaction 2.4 (2020), pp. 314–328.
[24]
Mohammad Aliannejadi et al. “Context­aware target apps selection and recommen­
dation for enhancing personal mobile assistants”. In: ACM Transactions on Informa­
tion Systems (TOIS) 39.3 (2021), pp. 1–30.
[25]
Xinlei Chen et al. “CAP: Context­aware app usage prediction with heterogeneous
graph embedding”. In: Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable
and Ubiquitous Technologies 3.1 (2019), pp. 1–25.
[26]
Yue Yu et al. “Semantic­aware spatio­temporal app usage representation via graph
convolutional network”. In: Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wear­
able and Ubiquitous Technologies 4.3 (2020), pp. 1–24.
[27]
Yifei Zhou, Shaoyong Li, and Yaping Liu. “Graph­based method for app usage pre­
diction with attributed heterogeneous network embedding”. In: Future Internet 12.3
(2020), p. 58.
[28]
Taieui Song and Gahgene Gweon. “Predicting Next Application Most Likely Used
with Word Embedding and Time­Series Data Encoding”. In: 2023 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data and Smart Computing (BigComp). IEEE. 2023, pp. 277–
284.
[29]
Kang Yang et al. “Atpp: A mobile app prediction system based on deep marked
temporal point processes”. In: ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks 19.3 (2023),
pp. 1–24.
[30]
Huandong Wang et al. “Modeling spatio­temporal app usage for a large user popu­
lation”. In: Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous
Technologies 3.1 (2019), pp. 1–23.
[31]
Fanrui Zeng et al. “DDHCN: Dual decoder Hyperformer convolutional network for
Downstream­Adaptable user representation learning on app usage”. In: Expert Sys­
tems with Applications 237 (2024), p. 121564.
[32]
Trinh Minh Tri Do, Jan Blom, and Daniel Gatica­Perez. “Smartphone usage in the
wild: a large­scale analysis of applications and context”. In: Proceedings of the 13th
international conference on multimodal interfaces. 2011, pp. 353–360.
[33]
Matthias Böhmer et al. “Falling asleep with angry birds, facebook and kindle: a large
scale study on mobile application usage”. In: Proceedings of the 13th international
58
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:67==
conference on Human computer interaction with mobile devices and services. 2011,
pp. 47–56.
[34]
Tong Li et al. “To what extent we repeat ourselves? Discovering daily activity pat­
terns across mobile app usage”. In: IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 21.4
(2020), pp. 1492–1507.
[35]
Sha Zhao et al. “AppUsage2Vec: Modeling smartphone app usage for prediction”.
In: 2019 IEEE 35th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE). IEEE.
2019, pp. 1322–1333.
[36]
Zhihao Shen, Xi Zhao, and Jianhua Zou. “GinApp: An Inductive Graph Learning
based Framework for Mobile Application Usage Prediction”. In: IEEE INFOCOM
2023­IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE. 2023, pp. 1–10.
[37]
Yizhuo Wang et al. “Sequence­Graph Fusion Neural Network for User Mobile App
Behavior Prediction”. In: Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowl­
edge Discovery in Databases. Springer. 2023, pp. 105–121.
[38]
Adir Solomon, Bracha Shapira, and Lior Rokach. “Predicting application usage based
on latent contextual information”. In: Computer Communications 192 (2022), pp. 197–
209.
[39]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. 2023. arXiv: 1706.03762 [cs.CL].
[40]
Hong Cao and Miao Lin. “Mining smartphone data for app usage prediction and
recommendations: A survey”. In: Pervasive and Mobile Computing 37 (2017), pp. 1–
22.
[41]
Zhihao Shen et al. “Deepapp: a deep reinforcement learning framework for mobile
application usage prediction”. In: Proceedings of the 17th Conference on Embedded
Networked Sensor Systems. 2019, pp. 153–165.
[42]
Zhung­Xun Liao et al. “Appnow: predicting usages of mobile applications on smart
phones”. In: 2012 Conference on Technologies and Applications of Artificial Intelli­
gence. IEEE. 2012, pp. 300–303.
[43]
Daisuke Kamisaka et al. “Operation prediction for context­aware user interfaces of
mobile phones”. In: 2009 Ninth Annual International Symposium on Applications
and the Internet. IEEE. 2009, pp. 16–22.
[44]
Hosub Lee, Young Sang Choi, and Yeo­Jin Kim. “An adaptive user interface based
on spatiotemporal structure learning”. In: IEEE Communications Magazine 49.6
(2011), pp. 118–124.
[45]
Quoc Le and Tomas Mikolov. “Distributed representations of sentences and docu­
ments”. In: International conference on machine learning. PMLR. 2014, pp. 1188–
1196.
[46]
Yonchanok Khaokaew et al. “Cosem: Contextual and semantic embedding for app
usage prediction”. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on
Information & Knowledge Management. 2021, pp. 3137–3141.
[47]
Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. “Long short­term memory”. In: Neural
computation 9.8 (1997), pp. 1735–1780.
[48]
Mohammad Aliannejadi et al. “In situ and context­aware target apps selection for
unified mobile search”. In: Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference
on Information and Knowledge Management. 2018, pp. 1383–1392.
[49]
Tomas Mikolov et al. “Distributed representations of words and phrases and their
compositionality”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 26 (2013).
[50]
Aditya Grover and Jure Leskovec. “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for net­
works”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining. 2016, pp. 855–864.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
59
==PAGE:68==
[51]
Rasmus Bro and Age K Smilde. “Principal component analysis”. In: Analytical meth­
ods 6.9 (2014), pp. 2812–2831.
[52]
Kyunghyun Cho et al. “Learning phrase representations using RNN encoder­decoder
for statistical machine translation”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1406.1078 (2014).
[53]
Alain Shema and Daniel E Acuna. “Show me your APP usage and I will tell who
your close friends are: predicting user’s context from simple cellphone activity”. In:
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. 2017, pp. 2929–2935.
[54]
Abhinav Mehrotra et al. “Understanding the role of places and activities on mobile
phone interaction and usage patterns”. In: Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive,
Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 1.3 (2017), pp. 1–22.
[55]
Google Play Store. Retrieved May 16, 2024, from https://play.google.com/store/
apps. 2024.
[56]
Anna Sapienza et al. “Exposure to urban and rural contexts shapes smartphone
usage behavior”. In: PNAS nexus 2.11 (2023), pgad357.
[57]
Thanasis Petsas et al. “Rise of the planet of the apps: A systematic study of the
mobile app ecosystem”. In: Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Internet mea­
surement conference. 2013, pp. 277–290.
[58]
Warren S McCulloch and Walter Pitts. “A logical calculus of the ideas immanent in
nervous activity”. In: The bulletin of mathematical biophysics 5 (1943), pp. 115–133.
[59]
Michael A Nielsen. Neural networks and deep learning. Vol. 25. Determination press
San Francisco, CA, USA, 2015.
[60]
Dan Hendrycks and Kevin Gimpel. “Gaussian error linear units (gelus)”. In: arXiv
preprint arXiv:1606.08415 (2016).
[61]
Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org. MIT Press, 2016.
[62]
Yann LeCun et al. “Backpropagation applied to handwritten zip code recognition”.
In: Neural computation 1.4 (1989), pp. 541–551.
[63]
Yann LeCun et al. “Gradient­based learning applied to document recognition”. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE 86.11 (1998), pp. 2278–2324.
[64]
Ian Goodfellow et al. “Generative adversarial networks”. In: Communications of the
ACM 63.11 (2020), pp. 139–144.
[65]
Junyoung Chung et al. “Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on
sequence modeling”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555 (2014).
[66]
Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, and Pascal Vincent. “A neural probabilistic lan­
guage model”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 13 (2000).
[67]
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V Le. “Sequence to sequence learning with
neural networks”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 27 (2014).
[68]
Dzmitry Bahdanau, Kyunghyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. “Neural machine trans­
lation by jointly learning to align and translate”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473
(2014).
[69]
Josh Achiam et al. “Gpt­4 technical report”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774
(2023).
[70]
Alexey Dosovitskiy et al. “An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image
recognition at scale”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 (2020).
[71]
Anmol Gulati et al. “Conformer: Convolution­augmented transformer for speech
recognition”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.08100 (2020).
[72]
Alec Radford et al. “Robust speech recognition via large­scale weak supervision”.
In: International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR. 2023, pp. 28492–28518.
60
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
==PAGE:69==
[73]
Lili Chen et al. “Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence model­
ing”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 34 (2021), pp. 15084–
15097.
[74]
John Jumper et al. “Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold”. In:
Nature 596.7873 (2021), pp. 583–589.
[75]
Germans Savcisens et al. “Using sequences of life­events to predict human lives”.
In: Nature Computational Science 4.1 (2024), pp. 43–56.
[76]
Alex Graves. “Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks”. In: arXiv preprint
arXiv:1308.0850 (2013).
[77]
Kaiming He et al. “Deep residual learning for image recognition”. In: Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016, pp. 770–
778.
[78]
Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. “Layer normalization”. In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.06450 (2016).
[79]
Tomas Mikolov et al. “Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 (2013).
[80]
Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. “Glove: Global
vectors for word representation”. In: Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empir­
ical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP). 2014, pp. 1532–1543.
[81]
Adam Paszke et al. “Pytorch: An imperative style, high­performance deep learning
library”. In: Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019).
[82]
Seyed Mehran Kazemi et al. “Time2vec: Learning a vector representation of time”.
In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05321 (2019).
[83]
Thomas Bachlechner et al. “Rezero is all you need: Fast convergence at large
depth”. In: Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. PMLR. 2021, pp. 1352–1361.
[84]
Alexander Wettig et al. “Should you mask 15% in masked language modeling?” In:
arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.08005 (2022).
[85]
Nikolaos Pappas, Lesly Miculicich Werlen, and James Henderson. “Beyond Weight
Tying: Learning Joint Input­Output Embeddings for Neural Machine Translation”. In:
CoRR abs/1808.10681 (2018). arXiv: 1808.10681. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1808.
10681.
[86]
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. “Umap: Uniform manifold approx­
imation and projection for dimension reduction”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.03426
(2018).
[87]
Lukas Biewald. Experiment Tracking with Weights and Biases. Software available
from wandb.com. 2020. URL: https://www.wandb.com/.
Predictive modelling of mobile app usage
61
==PAGE:70==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
