==PAGE:1==
Development of a Methodology for Data
Collection
and
LCA
of
Refurbishment
Projects from the Contractor’s Perspective
Master Thesis
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies - s183510
DTU Architectural Engineering
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
Development of a Methodology for Data Collection and LCA of Refurbishment
Projects from the Contractor’s Perspective
Report prepared by:
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
DTU supervisors:
Rune Andersen, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Lisbeth M. Ottosen, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
External supervisor:
Grith Bech-Nielsen, Group Sustainability Manager, Per Aarsleff A/S
Project period:
01.02.2024 - 30.06.2024
ECTS:
30
Education:
Master
Studyline:
Architectural Engineering
Remarks:
This report was prepared in collaboration with Hansson & Knudsen
A/S, as part of the Master’s program at the Technical University of
Denmark.
Note:
Image for the title page was generated using Microsoft Designer - Copilot
from the prompt "A refurbished multistory residential building".
Rights:
© Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, 2024
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
The Danish construction sector significantly impacts Denmark’s CO2 emissions,
being responsible for approximately 23% of the total emissions in Denmark [1]. This
necessitates sustainable initiatives to minimize the carbon footprint not only for the
sector but for Denmark as a whole. In collaboration with the construction company
Hansson & Knudsen A/S, this project addresses some of the challenges in the industry
through a focus on Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) for refurbishment projects, as the
existing building mass continues to form a substantial part of the building stock.
This report includes systematic methodology development, case study management,
and evaluation of environmental impacts for refurbishment projects. The research of
the study consists of three main objectives:
1. Identification of processes related to contractors’ implementation of LCA in re-
furbishment projects.
2. Development of a methodology for collecting building-specific data concerning
larger refurbishment projects.
3. Evaluation of environmental impacts in refurbishment projects based on the de-
veloped methodology.
The data was provided by Hansson & Knudsen, through project material for five
selected case studies on the refurbishment of residential multistory buildings in Den-
mark. All five cases provided data for the methodology development, while only two
cases were assessed for their environmental impacts.
Key findings of the study indicate that the involvement of the contractor in LCA
processes can improve the accuracy and effectiveness of LCAs on refurbishment projects.
The study highlights the challenges in data and quantity collection from project mate-
rials due to varying file structures in project material and detail levels in Revit models.
The evaluation of the environmental impact for the two case studies showed that oper-
ational energy use, especially the energy used for heating, significantly contributes to
the CO2 emissions for refurbishment projects over a 50-year reference study period.
Future recommendations include developing a roadmap for LCA implementation in
refurbishment projects, creating templates to standardize detail levels in Revit models,
and exploring alternative scenarios to identify opportunities for further reducing envi-
ronmental impacts in refurbishment projects. These initiatives aim to improve LCA
practices, ensuring knowledge-based decision-making - leading to more sustainable re-
furbishment processes in the construction sector.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Project Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Litterature Study
4
2.1
Planetary Boundaries and CO2 Emissions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Planetary Boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
CO2 Emissions in the Construction Sector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Embodied Emissions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
LCA in Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Legislation and Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Standards and System Boundaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
LCA Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
Challenges with Refurbishment Projects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Methodology
13
3.1
Information Search . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
Case Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Life Cycle Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Goal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4.1
Reasons for Carrying Out the LCA Study and Intended Applications
14
3.4.2
Method Assumptions and Impact Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4.3
Target Audience
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.5
Scope
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.6
Function and Functional Unit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.7
System Boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.7.1
Representativeness of LCI Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.7.2
Basis for Impact Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.8
Life Cycle Inventory Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.8.1
Data for "Building and Operation" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.8.1.1
Calculation of Operational Energy Use . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.8.2
Data for "Building Model" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.8.2.1
Sorting of of Building Data and Quantities in Revit . . . . .
20
3.8.2.2
Grasshopper Code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.9
The Five Case Studies and Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.9.1
Case Study 1 - Methodology and LCA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.9.1.1
Data Overview for Case 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.9.1.2
Quantity Extraction for Case 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.9.2
Case Study 2 - Methodology and LCA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.9.2.1
Data Overview for Case 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.9.2.2
Quantity Extraction for Case 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.9.3
Case Study 3, 4, and 5 - Data Collection for Methodology
. . . . . .
32
==PAGE:5==
4
Results & Discussion
37
4.1
Identification of Processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.1
Diagram for the Identified Processes
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.1.2
Discussion of the Identified Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.2
Development of Methodology for Data Collection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.1
Diagram for Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.2.2
Flow Diagram for Extracting Quantities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.2.3
Discussion of Data Collection and Quantity Extraction from Revit . .
46
4.3
Evaluation of Environmental Impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.1
Environmental Impacts for Case 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.3.2
Environmental Impacts for Case 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.3.3
Comparison and Discussion of Results for Case 1 and Case 2 . . . . .
56
4.3.4
Discussion of Uncertainties and Limitations to the Evaluated Impacts
62
4.3.4.1
Limitation to the Chosen Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4.3.4.2
Limitation to the Studied Environmental Impacts . . . . . .
65
4.3.4.3
Limitation to the chosen unit for benchmarks
. . . . . . . .
67
4.3.4.4
Uncertainties of LCA Databases and Quantity Extractions .
68
5
Conclusion
69
5.1
Methodology for Data and Quantity Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
5.2
Evaluation of Environmental Impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
5.2.1
Uncertainties and Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.3
Future Recommendations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
References
73
Appendices
76
A Grasshopper Code
76
A.1 Example on Quantity Extraction from Revit model for Case 2 . . . . . . . .
81
B Life Cycle Inventory
82
B.1 The Five Case Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
B.1.1
Case 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
B.1.1.1
LCI on Quantities for Case 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
B.1.2
Case 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
B.1.2.1
LCI on Quantities for Case 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
114
C Guides Related to "Flow Chart for Extracting Quantities"
143
C.1 Revit Guide, Phases
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143
C.2 Grasshopper Guide, Scenario 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
144
C.3 Grasshopper Guide, Scenario 2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
147
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
BIM
Building Information Modeling
DGNB
Deutsche Gesellshcaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen/German Sustain-
able Building Council
EoL
End of Life
EPD
Environmental Product Declaration
ESG
Environment, Social, and Governance
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GWP
Global Warming Potential
IFC
International Foundation Class
LCA
Life Cycle Assessment
LCI
Life Cycle Inventory
LCIA
Life Cycle Inventory Assessment
LEED
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
PCB
Poly-Chlorinated Biphenyls
PM
Project Manager
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
1.1
Background
While the construction sector is an important part of Denmark’s economy, it is, unfortu-
nately, a sector with a significant environmental impact. The construction sector is respon-
sible for approximately 23% of the Danish CO2 emissions [1] and approximately 42% of the
collected waste in Denmark in 2021 [2]. With an intensified focus on sustainability, the EU
and Denmark aim to increase sustainability and decrease environmental impacts nationally.
Due to the high environmental impacts connected with the construction sector, the sector
plays a crucial role in bringing down the environmental impacts for Denmark on a national
level.
From the Danish construction sector emissions, it is estimated that 87% of the emissions are
related to buildings, from where 53% is from the energy used for building operation [1]. The
high percentage of emissions from energy use in building operations points to the critical
importance of enhancing energy performance in both old and new buildings. The Renovation
Wave furthermore estimates that 85-95% of the building stock in Europe today will still be
standing in the year 2050, which makes energy renovation of the existing building stock
an important tool for bringing down the CO2 emissions related to the construction sector
[3].
In 2021, more than 5 million tons of waste was collected (excluding soil), which means that
the amount of waste produced by the construction sector shows an increase in produced
waste from 2009. The growth in construction waste could indicate both a high material
consumption in the construction sector as well as a growing challenge in handling resources
effectively on the construction site, resulting in a large waste. The amount of waste from
the construction sector mentioned in the waste statistic [2] includes both waste from new
construction and demolition, indicating a potential for lowering the waste production by
improving existing building mass rather than demolishing. This will also further the circular
economy and resource optimization through selective demolition and conserving building
materials already in use, as this will also support sustainable building practices and help
preserve architectural and cultural value within the existing building mass [1].
In Denmark, the added focus on renovation and refurbishment has been incorporated into
national and municipality regulations through guidelines and standards [4]. Over time it is
expected to become less permitted to demolish existing buildings. Construction companies
like Hansson & Knudsen A/S are expected to have an advantage with future requirements due
to their prior knowledge and expertise in refurbishment and transforming existing building
mass. This report can help companies focusing on refurbishment projects in order to prepare
for future limit values for LCA.
1.2
Project Description
The project will consist of LCA on several refurbishment projects for multistory residential
buildings. It is being carried out in collaboration with the construction company Hansson &
==PAGE:8==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Knudsen A/S. Data will be provided by Hansson & Knudsen in the form of project materials
and 3D models for five selected refurbishment projects.
These data will, among other things, be used to identify the contractor’s role in the transition
to LCA in refurbishment projects and for the development of a methodology for collecting
data for LCA on refurbishment projects.
Since different architects and engineers design
the refurbishment projects, various issues may arise in data collection, which must be ad-
dressed in the methodology. Finally, two of the five case studies will be evaluated for their
environmental impacts, with a particular focus on CO2, which can help identify potential
improvement opportunities for environmental impacts for refurbishment projects.
The two main branches of this project are illustrated in Figure 1 and will be described further
in the problem statement below.
Figure 1: The two main branches and themes for the study.
1.3
Problem Statement
The current focus within LCA in the construction industry is on new buildings, but there
is an expected increase in focus on LCA for refurbishment projects. One of the challenges
with refurbishment projects compared to new constructions is the complexity of the projects.
Since the projects are based on existing buildings, there are often many unknown factors and,
thus, uncertainties associated with these projects in both the design and execution phases.
Data-driven decision-making regarding refurbishment projects’ environmental impacts will
become a larger focus within the coming years. This requires relevant and reliable data on
materials and quantities from specific projects, which is why this project will consist of three
parts:
1. Identification of processes related to contractors’ implementation of LCA in refurbish-
ment projects.
Page 2 of 149
==PAGE:9==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
2. Development of a methodology for collecting building-specific data concerning larger
refurbishment projects.
3. Evaluation of environmental impacts in refurbishment projects based on the developed
methodology.
As previously mentioned, five case studies will be used to address the problem statement. All
five cases will contribute to the development of a methodology for data collection. However,
the final evaluation of environmental impacts will be performed only for two of the cases.
An overview of the five cases and their contributions to the problem statement can be seen
in Table 1.
Table 1: Overview of the contribution from the five case studies to the problem statement.
Case
2. Methodology for data collection
3. Evaluation of environmental impacts
1
x
x
2
x
x
3
x
4
x
5
x
It should be noted that the project will be based solely on the available data from the project
materials and will not include input from architects and consulting engineers regarding
potential blind spots in the models or project materials.
Page 3 of 149
==PAGE:10==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
2
Litterature Study
As presented in the introduction, the construction sector is responsible for significant emis-
sions and resource consumption. This highlights some of the sector’s significant environmen-
tal impacts and the urgent need for action and more sustainable practices. This literature
study will examine existing research and strategies for mitigating climate change through
themes such as planetary boundaries, sustainable practices using LCA as a tool within the
construction sector, and legislation and political targets.
2.1
Planetary Boundaries and CO2 Emissions
When discussing sustainability in the industry, the focus is often on CO2 and greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions. There are, however, several categories of environmental impacts to
consider, and some of these have been used to assess nine categories in the planetary bound-
aries.
2.1.1
Planetary Boundaries
The planetary boundaries are a framework that identifies and quantifies nine critical pro-
cesses for a stable and resilient Earth system. The nine processes are heavily affected by
human activities. They are assessed based on the global environments and life-support sys-
tems to be similar to the ones experienced over the past 10.000 years [5]. This is used to
assess, human activities’ effects on the Earth as an automated system, also considering the
interaction between the different processes. The nine processes are climate change, biosphere
integrity, land-system change, freshwater change, biogeochemical flows, ocean acidification,
atmospheric aerosol loading, stratospheric ozone depletion, and novel entities, which have
been reinvestigated and assessed in 2023. As shown in Figure 2, six of the nine processes
have been transgressed and are outside the safe operating space.
Page 4 of 149
==PAGE:11==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 2: The nine processes of the Planetary boundaries framework and the safe operating
spaces [6].
Despite several planetary boundaries being transgressed, the political focus of decreasing
environmental impacts has mainly been reducing CO2 emissions. However, other environ-
mental impacts, especially biodiversity, are gaining more attention and will have more focus
in the future. The next section will examine the CO2 emissions related to the construction
sector.
When mentioning the planetary boundaries, it is also relevant to mention absolute sustain-
ability. Currently, most sustainability assessments focus on relative sustainability. Relative
sustainability involves comparing the sustainability of products or actions to other products
or actions with the same functional unit. While relative sustainability provides insights into
how sustainable something is compared to something else, it does not indicate whether the
activity remains within the planetary boundaries or nature’s tolerance limits.
Absolute sustainability assesses whether an activity is within the planetary boundaries or the
tolerance limits of nature. Only a certain portion of the emissions in the safe operating space
can be allocated to specific products or activities [7]. Therefore it builds on the premise of
how much a specific product or activity is permitted to emit. This approach can, however,
be challenging to define, due to the high level of complexity and the numerous functions that
must be considered when assessing certain products and activities.
Page 5 of 149
==PAGE:12==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
2.1.2
CO2 Emissions in the Construction Sector
The construction industry alone is responsible for 40% of the consumed energy [8] and 42% of
the produced waste in Denmark. At the same time, it is accountable for 50% of the material
consumption in Europe [9]. Based on these numbers, it is fair to say that the construction
industry has a large potential for sustainable development.
Numbers from the Sustainability Task Force for the Construction Sector (Byggeriets Han-
dletank for bæredygtighed) show that 53% of the building sector’s territorial emissions in
2021 came from energy for building operations as shown in Figure 3. 17% and 14% came
from the energy and process emissions for the production of building materials, respectively,
while only 11% and 5% came from construction-related transport and energy consumption
during construction.
Figure 3: Territorial carbon footprint for the building sector in 2021 [1, p. 34].
Looking at the average of 18 refurbishment cases from SWECOs LCA database, the Global
Warming Potential (GWP) related to operational energy poses 61% of the total, with
materials making up the remaining 39% on a building level [10]. Up until the past few
years, building refurbishment’s main focus has been energy optimization. Since energy use
for operation is still responsible for 53% of the consumed energy in the sector, this will still
be a crucial focus point when lowering the emissions from the construction sector.
When looking at the energy used for building operations in the construction sector, it is also
important to be aware of the considered lifetime from an LCA perspective. When doing
an LCA for buildings, the considered lifetime is usually 50 years [11, Bygningsreglementets
vejledning om bygningers klimapåvirkning (§ 250 - § 298)]. This is relevant, as the longer a
lifetime that is considered, the larger a part of the impacts, the energy use during the use
phase will have in the total emissions.
A study from Rambøll shows that even with extensive energy renovation and optimization
of an existing building, the yearly energy use will still be higher for renovated buildings
compared to new buildings [12, p. 14]. The study assesses different types of buildings, such
Page 6 of 149
==PAGE:13==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
as offices, single-family, multi-story, and public buildings. These cases are analyzed across
three refurbishment scenarios and one new build scenario.
The refurbishment scenarios
vary in scope; from refurbishing just the roof to refurbishing the roof and exterior walls,
and finally to refurbishing the roof and exterior walls and upgrading the installations. For
all building types, the common finding is that the operational energy use is higher in all
refurbishment scenarios compared to the equivalent new build. However, the total average
kg CO2-eq./m2/year over 50 years for two of the three refurbishment scenarios is lower than
that of the new build for all types of buildings except single-family houses. This indicates
that with sufficient focus on energy savings during refurbishment, the total CO2 emissions
can be reduced compared to building new.
2.1.3
Embodied Emissions
Human activities affecting the planetary boundaries are significantly influenced by the linear
economy, widely practised worldwide. This includes how design choices, manufacturing, and
materials and waste disposal supply chains are managed [13]. The numbers in Figure 3 show
that approximately 31% of the carbon emissions related to the construction sector come
from the production of building materials. This indicates a significant potential for reducing
emissions through material and resource efficiency. According to the European Commission,
emissions connected to material consumption can be reduced by up to 80% with better
material efficiency [9].
These figures are for the total construction industry, where the refurbishment of existing
buildings can become an important tool in reducing emissions related to material consump-
tion. By refurbishing existing buildings instead of demolishing and building new ones, many
of the typically carbon-heavy and often structural materials, such as concrete and steel, re-
main in place. Since the CO2 emitted from the existing building has already been released
and does not affect the potential new building, these emissions will not count toward the new
refurbished building. This leaves embodied emissions from the uninstalled and new building
components. A 2015 case study, which included data on materials out and materials in,
showed that the disposal of uninstalled building components for a project accounted for only
3% of the total environmental impacts. In contrast, producing new materials to be installed
in the project accounted for 65% of the environmental impacts [14, p. 28]. This study shows
that even for refurbished buildings, it is crucial to consider the emissions related to producing
new materials.
For refurbished buildings, the new building components with the highest impacts are usually
windows and glazing systems, exterior walls, roofs, or slabs toward the ground. The average
kg CO2-eq./m2/year divided into the categories for 18 refurbishment projects can be seen in
Figure 4. Interestingly, these are all building components that directly affect the operational
energy use of a building, as also pointed out in another study [15, p. 5].
Page 7 of 149
==PAGE:14==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 4: Average kg CO2-eq./m2/year for 18 refurbishment cases from SWECO’s LCA
database [10].
Similar findings were observed in a similar study, which found that the main contribut-
ing materials are metals, glass, insulation, and cement-based materials, consistent with the
highlighted building components [14, p. 29 & 33].
2.2
LCA in Construction
LCA is a crucial tool in the construction industry for assessing the environmental impacts
of building projects.
It evaluates the entire life cycle of a building, from raw material
extraction and production to construction, operation, and End of Life (EoL) disposal. By
analyzing energy consumption, material use, and emissions at each stage, LCA provides a
comprehensive picture of a building’s environmental footprint. This approach helps identify
opportunities for reducing resource use and emissions, promoting more sustainable building
practices.
Until recently, LCAs for buildings were primarily used in projects aiming for certifications
like Deutsche Gesellshcaft für Nachhaltiges Bauen/German Sustainable Building Coun-
cil (DGNB) or Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED). However, LCA
requirements have now been incorporated into Danish legislation, and the use of LCA is
expected to become more standardized and mandatory across the industry. The next part
will focus on current construction practices, standards, and benchmarks for LCA.
Page 8 of 149
==PAGE:15==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
2.2.1
Legislation and Benchmarks
As mentioned, the EU and the Danish government have set specific sustainability targets.
Some of these targets focus on Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions. The EU aims to cut total
emissions by 40% from 1990 levels by 2030, which includes a target of reducing emissions
from the construction sector by at least 30% from 2005 levels by 2030. On the other hand,
Denmark has set the ambitious goal of a 70% reduction.
To achieve the goals of the Climate Act, various legislations have been implemented across
different sectors.
For the construction sector, this means LCA requirements on all new
buildings starting from January 1st, 2023, explicitly targeting GHG emissions. These re-
quirements have been incorporated into the building code, mandating an LCA for all new
buildings and including a limit of 12 kg CO2-eq./m2/year for new buildings over 1000 m2 [11,
Energiforbrug og klimapåvirkning (§ 250 - § 298)]. This limit is accompanied by a voluntary
low-emission class limit of 8 kg CO2-eq./m2/year. Both limits will be continuously reeval-
uated and updated in 2025, 2027, and 2029 to reflect the latest knowledge and data. The
new limit for 2025 will also apply to new buildings under 1000 m2 [16].
Currently, no legislation requires LCA on refurbishment projects. However, several reports
have analysed system boundaries and benchmarks for future requirements. Most of these
follow the LCA standard DS/EN 15978 and use the same unit (kg CO2-eq./m2/year) for
new constructions. A study from 2023 addresses challenges in benchmarking refurbishment
projects and suggests three potential approaches for benchmarking [15, p. 9]. The proposed
approaches are:
1. A single benchmark for the whole refurbishment project
2. A benchmark for building constructions
3. A benchmark for the relationship between embodied emissions and operational energy
savings
The first approach would be similar to the one for new construction, with a kg CO2-
eq./m2/year for the entire building. While this approach considers the entire project, it
does not adequately highlight the complexity and variations often seen in refurbishment
projects.
The second approach allows for evaluating specific building constructions, comparing their
functions against each type of construction’s environmental impact. This could give refur-
bishment projects, focusing on the building envelope, a higher benchmark than projects
focusing on additions like balconies or other architectural updates. While this approach
addresses some complexity in refurbishment projects, it does not consider the project’s en-
vironmental impacts.
Finally, the third approach considers the energy saved and compares these savings to the
embodied emissions from the refurbishments. This can potentially ensure that future refur-
bishments focus on materials that support energy efficiency. However, it should be noted
that refurbishment projects often aim not only at energy efficiency but also at adding new
functions to a project. Additionally, this approach would require significant documentation,
Page 9 of 149
==PAGE:16==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
making it more challenging to implement in practice.
2.2.2
Standards and System Boundaries
Defining goal and scope is an important part of any LCA. The scope is well-defined for new
buildings, especially if the Building Code is followed. The included life cycle stages within
the system boundary can be seen below in Figure 5 [17, p. 22].
Figure 5: System boundary showing the included life cycle stages [11, Bygningsreglementets
vejledning om bygningers klimapåvirkning (§ 250 - § 298)].
For refurbishments, some variation in the system boundaries of the LCA should be consid-
ered. These variations depend on the assessment’s goal and the data available for projects.
It is important to note that the system boundary for refurbishment, compared to new con-
struction, includes handling impacts from the existing building mass. Here, the burden-free
approach can be used, meaning that existing building constructions retained for the refur-
bished building and with a lifetime of over 50 years are calculated without impact [15]. This
means that only new materials or replacing old materials will be implemented in the LCA
calculations. The Danish Industry Guide to LCA in Refurbishment defines three levels for
LCA on refurbishment projects, depending on the goal and scope of the LCA [18, p. 8]. The
three levels are:
1. Level 1, LCA with large scope: Used for comparative LCA or assessing reduction
in environmental impacts based on the retained building constructions.
This level
requires knowledge of dismantled, retained, and new building constructions for the
project, which makes the level of detail high compared to the other two levels.
2. Level 2, LCA with medium scope: Used for LCA in combination with building
certifications or similar requirements for documentation of impact, e.g., the Building
Code. This level requires data on dismantled and new building constructions.
3. Level 3, LCA with small scope: Used in the design phase or for assessing building
components. This level only requires data on new materials used for the refurbishment
Page 10 of 149
==PAGE:17==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
project.
Within the three levels, there are further scenarios depending on the goal of the LCA,
defining which life cycle stages should be considered. The considered life cycle stages also
differ depending on the different types of building constructions (retained, dismantled, or
new). It should be noted that required data for levels 1 and 2 will often be difficult and
costly to obtain.
Common to all three levels are the phases included for the different types of building con-
structions (retained, dismantled, and new) when considering the scenarios of the building as
a whole. Stages A1-A3, B4, B6, C3, and C4 should be included for the newly added build-
ing components and materials. The included stages are only C3 and C4 for the dismantled
building components and materials, while the retained building components and materials
are only calculated for stages A1-A3.
2.2.3
LCA Tools
Various LCA tools have been developed to quantify and calculate the environmental impacts
of products, processes, or systems. Some of the most widely used LCA tools include SimaPro,
OpenLCA, Real-Time LCA, and LCAbyg [19]. These tools differ in databases and layout
depending on the intended application. For instance, SimaPro is commonly used for product-
specific LCAs and generating Environmental Product Declaration (EPD)s, while LCAbyg
has been specifically developed for LCAs on buildings [20].
In this project, LCAbyg will be used to quantify environmental impacts. LCAbyg was devel-
oped by BUILD at Aalborg University and is a widely used tool in Denmark for calculating
the environmental impacts of buildings. It is furthermore designed to comply with Danish
building regulations and certification requirements [21]. LCAbyg analyzes various building
components and materials to calculate environmental impacts, and has therefore been chosen
for this project.
2.2.4
Challenges with Refurbishment Projects
An essential part of the building LCA process is considering the many stakeholders and the
potential uncertainties connected to the construction activities. LCAs are often iterative
processes and can be used in the design stage to support specific design decisions to improve
environmental performance. However, it is also essential to understand that there often are
differences between the designed building and how it is constructed in practice. Some of these
differences can occur due to material shortages or inconsistencies in the Building Information
Modeling (BIM) models, as there are often different models for different disciplines, such as
architectural, structural, or plumbing and ventilation. This means that what has been the
initial design is not always possible to construct. Due to this, several guides and standards
on LCA require an LCA on the designed building and the actual constructed building.
This is a well-known challenge for new builds but even more significant when refurbishing.
Many buildings that undergo refurbishment today are at least 50 years old, meaning the
existing drawings are not up to modern BIM standards. It is, therefore, often not possible
Page 11 of 149
==PAGE:18==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
to have complete knowledge of the building constructions and build-in materials. These
challenges are usually mitigated through thoroughly investigating the existing drawings and
descriptions of the existing building and environmental studies or mapping. The environmen-
tal studies consist of selected samples of the building, tested e.g. asbestos, Poly-Chlorinated
Biphenyls (PCB) or heavy metals. The risk for these environmentally hazardous substances
is largest in buildings built between 1950 and 1977, making many refurbishment projects
today a high risk [22]. Because of this, there are expected to be significant risks related
to refurbishment projects, meaning that changes at the construction site are often needed
compared to what was initially designed.
Page 12 of 149
==PAGE:19==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
3
Methodology
This section describes the methodologies used to address the research objectives, including
identifying processes for implementing LCA in refurbishment projects, developing a data
collection methodology, and evaluating environmental impacts.
This includes delimiting
the goal and scope, describing data collection, and presenting the quantities of building
components and materials for the Life Cycle Inventory (LCI), as well as assumptions used
for the LCA in each case study.
3.1
Information Search
Part of the information search involved conversations and interviews with relevant special-
ists in sustainability and energy. The specialists consulted include Katja Frankvard from AI
Arkitekter & Ingeniører, Kasper Brokær from Sustain, Emma Murel Vilstrup, energy con-
sultant, and Grith Bech-Nielsen from Per Aarsleff A/S. Each of these experts has specialized
knowledge in areas pertinent to this project. The interviews aimed to gather practical in-
dustry knowledge and understand the possibilities and limitations of sustainability and LCA
in construction.
In addition to interviews, relevant reports and articles were reviewed for the literature study
in previous sections. Official documents, standards, and guidelines from the EU Commission
and the Danish Government were also utilized to gain insights into the topic and explore
potential solutions.
3.2
Case Studies
The study employs five case studies of refurbishment projects provided by the construction
company Hansson & Knudsen A/S. These case studies include project materials for data
collection by extracting material quantities for the subsequent LCA.
The project and tender materials for each case study include project descriptions, building
permits, drawings, and 3D models in the form of Revit files. These resources were used
to extract material quantities, as detailed in the following sections. Additional information
regarding the chosen cases was found through public records, such as BBR or boligejer.
dk.
3.3
Life Cycle Assessment
The actual LCA calculations were performed using LCAbyg, described in Section 2.2.3. The
necessary input for LCAbyg was obtained for each case study, following the industry guide
[18]. To ensure accurate data, it is first necessary to define the goal and scope of the study,
which will be done in the next sections.
Page 13 of 149
==PAGE:20==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
3.4
Goal
The goal of an LCA is important to establish, to determine the expected output, and form
the basis for the final impact assessment. The goal definition loosely follows the guide and
template from the book "Life Cycle Assessment - Theory and Practice" [23, Ch. 7].
3.4.1
Reasons for Carrying Out the LCA Study and Intended Applications
The study aims to gain knowledge and experience in conducting LCA on refurbishment
projects for multi-story residential buildings. This focus has been chosen from the growing
emphasis on reducing CO2 emissions in the construction sector and using LCA to quantify
and analyze the environmental impacts of construction activities.
The study’s intended
applications involve identifying hotspots through LCA, considering GWP at both building
constructions and material levels.
The experience and hotspots identified in this study are expected to help the contractor
execute future LCAs on refurbishment projects. Additionally, the LCA results are expected
to support future design decisions in similar refurbishment projects, ensuring decisions are
based on environmental performance.
3.4.2
Method Assumptions and Impact Limitations
As previously mentioned, the LCA tool LCAbyg has been chosen for this study because it is
widely used in the Danish construction sector. LCAbyg includes a library of pre-generated
building constructions and materials that can be used to model the environmental impacts
of buildings [24].
In LCAbyg, components can be filtered based on their sources, such as GenDK, EPDDan-
mark, or EPDNorge. For this project, generic data have been chosen, making GenDK the
primary source, as this is also LCAbyg’s predefined database. Since the predefined building
components do not always align with the project’s needs, some components will be dupli-
cated and adjusted based on relevant building knowledge. Due to the complexity and scope
of some of the chosen case studies, the modelled LCA will not be a precise representation of
the actual building. Necessary assumptions will be highlighted, including certain uncertain-
ties.
The results generated with LCAbyg quantifies the environmental impacts on 9 indicators.
However, the main focus of this study’s results will be on the environmental impact of GWP,
as this is currently the primary focus of political and company-wide initiatives.
3.4.3
Target Audience
The results of the study are intended for construction companies, such as Hansson & Knud-
sen.
The target audience is expected to have some degree of knowledge regarding LCA
and construction practices, although not necessarily specialized. This consideration will be
reflected in the preparation of the report.
Page 14 of 149
==PAGE:21==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
3.5
Scope
Similarly to the goal definition, the definition of scope is a crucial part of an LCA. The
definition of the scope should include methodological choices, such as the functional unit
and system boundaries amongst others. The scope definition loosely follows the guide and
template from the book "Life Cycle Assessment - Theory and Practice" [23, Ch. 8].
3.6
Function and Functional Unit
Function: The primary function of the studied refurbishment projects is to enhance the
usability, energy efficiency, and indoor climate of existing multi-story residential buildings.
This study focuses on optimizing operational energy consumption and reducing environmen-
tal impact, specifically CO2, for the three case studies. It is important to note that even
though the chosen case studies vary in square footage, the overall scope and functions of
the multi-story residential buildings are similar. Therefore, it has been assessed that the
functions and scope for each studied project are aligned.
Functional Unit: The chosen refurbishment case studies are modeled and evaluated based on
the functional unit: 1 m2 area of a multi-story residential building in Denmark, maintaining
the structural and functional integrity following Danish building regulations, with a considered
lifetime of 50 years.
It should be noted, that this functional unit can also be applied to LCAs on new buildings,
making it possible to potentially compare the results from the refurbishment case studies to
LCAs on new buildings.
3.7
System Boundary
Based on the provided materials for each case study, it has been chosen to follow level 3 of the
industry guide for refurbishment in construction, which has been explained in Section 2.2.2
[18]. Level 3 considers the environmental impacts of building operation and newly added
materials, including those used in refurbishment and replacing existing building parts with
a remaining lifetime of under 50 years. For the processes in the system boundary, the stages
according to Figure 5 in Section 2.2.2 are included. Figure 6 illustrates the included life cycle
stages and system boundary for the remaining existing construction and new constructions
respectively.
Page 15 of 149
==PAGE:22==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 6: System boundary for the remaining existing constructions and new constructions.
In other words, this study considers the existing building mass that is not replaced during
the 50 year study reference period with zero-impact. For the existing building constructions
that remain in the refurbished building, the constructions with a remaining lifetime of under
45 years will be modeled as shown in the upper half of Figure 6. 45 years was chosen as the
cutoff, as the reference study period is 50 years, but it is not expected, that any replacements
or refurbishments will be performed within the last 5 years. New constructions added to
the building during the refurbishment, will be modeled as depicted in the bottom half of
Figure 6. Note that integrated garages and additional areas defined by LCAbyg has not been
included in the scope of this project, as the provided models constituted a limitation.
Since the environmental impacts of the existing building, as well as the dismantling and
demolition of existing parts, are not included in the scope, it is important to note that the
results will not assess the overall environmental profitability at the building level but focus
on the design choices of the refurbishment.
3.7.1
Representativeness of LCI Data
As previously mentioned, the inventory data is based on the generic GenDK library from
LCAbyg. This is assessed to align with the projects, as the chosen case studies are all re-
furbishment projects located in Denmark and are assumed to use standard/generic building
components and materials.
This is also expected to be relevant for technological repre-
sentativeness, as the generic data is anticipated to represent common building methods in
Denmark.
Page 16 of 149
==PAGE:23==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
The three case studies are current projects ranging in refurbishment years from 2020 to
2026.
Due to this, it is likewise assumed that the time-related representativeness is up
to date. With current projects, the building methods are expected to align with modern
methods. As the LCA considers a timeframe of 50 years, some changes in the energy grid
are expected. This has been accounted for in LCAbyg through the possibility of choosing
projection scenarios for the operational energy use of the building.
These scenarios are
based on the assumption that the environmental impacts of heat and electricity generation
technologies will be reduced in the future, as described in the LCAbyg guide [24].
3.7.2
Basis for Impact Assessment
In accordance with the goal definition in Section 3.4.1, this project will only consider the
environmental impacts for GWP. This focus has been chosen because the primary emphasis
of political and corporate initiatives is on reducing CO2 emissions.
An example of this
political agenda is the incorporation of a limit value in the Danish Building Regulations,
evaluated in kg CO2-eq./m2/year.
3.8
Life Cycle Inventory Analysis
To use the LCA software LCAbyg, it is necessary to have basic data on the building and the
quantity of all materials used. To understand the requirements for LCI data for this project,
the LCAbyg guide will be used, as that is the chosen software [24]. The necessary inputs
in LCAbyg are divided into "Building and operation" and "Building model." The following
sections will describe the necessary data and explain how the data was retrieved. This will
be followed by introducing the five cases and how the data was obtained for each.
The data was provided by Hansson & Knudsen through the project material for all five
projects. The material was then screened for relevant documents and drawings to get an
overview of each project. Here it should be noted, as described in Section 1.3, that all five
case studies were used for developing the methodology on data collection, while only Case 1
and Case 2 were used for performing final LCAs and evaluating the environmental impacts.
Some of the documents deemed relevant are building case description, floorplans, section
drawings, and 3D models of the buildings.
3.8.1
Data for "Building and Operation"
The purpose of the following section is to clarify the data and information required for input
in LCAbyg under "Building and operation".
The tab in LCAbyg, called "Building and operation," consists of inputs with the headings
"Project," "Building," "Calculation prerequisites," and "Energy consumption and supply."
Only the inputs under "Calculation prerequisites" and "Energy consumption and supply" are
required to calculate environmental impacts. This information calculates the environmental
impacts for operational energy use and environmental impacts per m2. The additional topics
under "Building and operation" are largely voluntary and should be used to add relevant
context to the building. Based on this, the necessary information to be filled out under
Page 17 of 149
==PAGE:24==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
"Building and operation" is listed in Table 2. How the information was collected for the case
studies can be seen under the presentation of each case in Section 3.9.
Table 2: Table stating the necessary data inputs for LCAbyg.
Calculation prerequisites
Energy consumption and supply
– Calculation type
Electricity
– Building type
– Operational electricity use
– Commissioning year
– Exported electricity
– Reference study period
– Electricity supply
– Heated floor area
– Electricity supplement
– Gross floor area
– Integrated garages
Heat
– Additional area
– Operational heat use
– Heat supplement
– Heat supply
Information regarding building type, commissioning year, and areas can often be found
in the tender and project material. Public websites such as BBR.dk or boligejer.dk can
sometimes be used for this. However, it should be noted that for refurbishment projects, this
information will often pertain to the existing building and may not reflect the final building.
It is important to verify whether the information has been updated if the refurbishment
activities have ended, and if not, the information should be obtained from the official project
material. The input for operational energy use exemplifies this issue, as this information is
often not officially released until after project handover, and the actual numbers are not
available in the project material. The section below will describe how to find the input for
operational energy use.
3.8.1.1
Calculation of Operational Energy Use
As mentioned above, operational energy use is necessary to determine the environmental
impacts of energy use during the use phase of the building. This can be found through Energy
Labels (Danish: Energimærke), which are required for all new buildings or in case a building
is sold or rented [25]. The label should likewise be updated in case of significant energy
renovations. An Energy Label is valid for 10 years after inspection by an energy consultant,
which is why the label will not be available until post-construction. If an Energy Label is
unavailable, software such as BE18 or Energy10 can perform the necessary calculations.
If the Energy Label is used as the source for the operational energy input in LCAbyg, the
method is straightforward. The Energy Label can be found through boligejer.dk, noting
that there might be several Energy Labels available for residential blocks, as there should be
one for each block. In the Energy Label, an overview of each building will be included. Under
"Building description," it is possible to find information on relevant areas for the building
such as heated floor and basement areas as well as the heating source, which are relevant
information for LCAbyg. In the Energy Label under "Buildings calculated energy demand,"
Page 18 of 149
==PAGE:25==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
the expected operational use for heating and electricity can be found. For electricity, only
the number under "Building and operation" should be considered. These numbers are stated
in kWh and should be divided by the heated floor area to get the unit kWh/m2 year, which
is the unit used in LCAbyg [24].
If the updated Energy Label is not available, the operational energy can also be calculated
through BE18 or Energy10. For this project it was chosen to use Energy10, as this calculation
tool is often used for calculating Energy Labels and energy optimizations [26]. The tool also
has access to existing information used for the old Energy Labels on the existing buildings.
This information can then be changed accordingly, based on the project material for the
cases. Some of the categories in Energy10, that should be updated accordingly, are general
building information, building envelope, heat source, and cooling and ventilation. There are
other categories that might be relevant in some cases, but for this project and the intended
use of the results, these categories have been deemed sufficient.
It should be noted that the calculated energy use from Energy10 is not the official energy use
and should be updated towards the end of the refurbishment process to match the Energy
Label. However, it can be an important tool throughout the project, as it can shed light on
the effect on energy use from specific design choices and give an estimate of the operational
energy use of the refurbished building.
3.8.2
Data for "Building Model"
The second part of the LCA to be filled out is the "Building model".
This consists of
information and quantities related to building constructions and materials. The "Building
model" is divided into four levels: "Elements", "Constructions", "Products", and "Stages".
An example of this can be seen in Figure 7.
Figure 7: Example of the four levels under "Building model" for the construction "bk.væg31".
All four levels should be completed. Depending on the building constructions, some parts
may be filled out automatically using generic constructions, or products from the database,
as it can be seen in the example.
To accurately complete the building model in LCAbyg, it is necessary to collect quantities
of building constructions and materials from Revit files. This requires gathering, analyz-
ing, and sorting all relevant Revit files for the architectural, structural, and installation
Page 19 of 149
==PAGE:26==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
disciplines.
3.8.2.1
Sorting of of Building Data and Quantities in Revit
The detail level and modeling of the Revit models vary significantly from model to model.
Some building constructions are divided into the correct phases, while others only distinguish
between phases in the construction names, by starting with "E -" or "bk." This variation
makes it impossible to use the exact same code for data collection for each project. Below
are examples from two cases that demonstrate these differences in the Revit models.
The first example, shown in Figure 8, is from the architectural model of Case 1. This Revit
model sorts the building constructions into existing and new construction in the properties
under "Phasing" as well as in the naming key.
(a) Existing wall.
(b) New construction wall.
Figure 8: Example from Case 1 showing that the existing vs. new constructions can be
sorted through phases or naming key.
The second example, shown in Figure 9, is from the architectural model of Case 2. In this
model, the existing building parts are not sorted into a phase, as the "Phasing" category
does not appear under properties. However, the new constructions are sorted into the phase
"New construction." Because of this, it is not possible to extract quantities from the model
through phasing.
Instead, it is possible to sort the building constructions based on the
naming key: Existing constructions start with "E -" while new construction constructions
start with "bk.".
Page 20 of 149
==PAGE:27==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
(a) Existing wall.
(b) New construction wall.
Figure 9: Example from Case 2 showing that the existing vs. new constructions can only be
sorted through naming key.
It is also necessary to cross-reference the structure of the building constructions with the final
and detailed drawings in the tender material. This is because some building constructions
in the Revit models are not correctly modeled, meaning the materials entered into the
structure do not match the actual materials. Most projects have a legend description for
building constructions, presenting the precise layers in the constructions. This data has been
used for cross-referencing, to ensure correct material quantities.
A typical challenge is layers of insulation modeled as air or just the wood or steel frame of
a wall in the Revit models. In Case 3, more significant inconsistencies were observed. An
example is shown in Figure 10, where the total width of the wall is consistent, but the layers
do not match.
Page 21 of 149
==PAGE:28==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
(a) Description of wall 224.05 from the official leg-
end and description of constructions.
(b) Properties and layers of wall 224.05 ac-
cording to the Revit model.
Figure 10: Comparison of layers in wall 224.05 according to the official description and the
Revit model from Case 3.
As seen in the figure, the finishes on both sides of the wall consist of two layers of plasterboard
and 95mm c-profiles with insulation, according to the official description. However, in the
Revit model, the plasterboard layers are only one layer, and the material is not appropriately
defined. The middle layer in the Revit model describes only the mineral wool and does not
include the structural C-profiles.
Because of this, it was decided to extract quantities in terms of square meters of wall (m2)
rather than the volume of each material in the wall. This approach helps reduce some of
the uncertainty. This method of quantity extraction is also useful for modeling the cases in
LCAbyg, as the buildings are modeled at the building construction level, with the relevant
constructions and projects as subcategories.
3.8.2.2
Grasshopper Code
Based on the above presented challenges and because the chosen cases are relatively large
refurbishment projects (19,800-53,031m2), consisting of several blocks and layouts, as well
as having approximately 100 different building construction types per project, it has been
chosen to develop a code in Grasshopper. Grasshopper is a visual coder for CAD drawings
that can be applied to Revit models via Rhino.Inside for Autodesk Revit. Grasshopper can
be used to generate geometry in 3D models as well as extract data from models, as it has
been used for in this project. The plugin LunchBox to Grasshopper is also required to be
downloaded, in order to run the code correctly. It is recommended to have some knowledge
regarding Revit and Grasshopper, for easier use of the explained code.
The code has been developed for data collection for this specific project and is therefore also
a part of the results. It will however be presented under method, as it has been used to
understand the Revit models as well as collecting quantities for the LCI. The Grasshopper
code will also function as a tool to streamline information and data from several different
Page 22 of 149
==PAGE:29==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Revit files and projects. The grasshopper code will, however, be substituted by and cross-
checked with the Revit models, as well as schedules taken the "traditional" way from the
models.
Since the data is being pulled from different projects with different teams of architects and
engineers, there are differences in the models regarding construction naming and detail level.
Due to this, it is necessary that the code can easily be programmed to sort in specific data to
get the desired data more efficiently. The code in Grasshopper has been iterated in several
steps to accommodate the different detail levels and necessities for each project.
The code has been divided into four steps for easier navigation, where only steps 1 and 4
require modification by the user, depending on the investigated model. It will therefore only
be those steps that will be presented in the main part here, whereas the entire explanation
of the Grasshopper code can be found in Appendix A. Before opening Grasshopper it is
important to have opened the relevant view. This way, the Grasshopper code can call on the
view and extract the necessary data. Different actions should be taken in this step depending
on whether the constructions are sorted based on phasing or naming. If the constructions
are sorted based on phasing, the relevant phasing such as "Existing" or "New construction"
should first be activated in the Revit model. When this is done, the code can be opened,
and one should start with Step 1.
Step 1 of the code involves selecting the relevant view and determining how the building
constructions from the model should be sorted.
This can be used for different building
models, as long as the sorting is individualized to the specific Revit model. The visual code
for Step 1 is depicted in Figure 11 below.
Figure 11: Step 1 of the Grasshopper Code, where the relevant view and how the construc-
tions are sorted are chosen.
In the first box called "View," the relevant view should be chosen by right-clicking on the
box.
The view from which quantities are to be extracted must also be open in Revit.
Once this step is completed, the following two boxes run automatically, sorting the building
constructions from the model. If there is a need to focus on specific building constructions,
such as walls or sorting by naming, this is done in the "Py3" box, which is further explained
in Section C.3. If sorting based on the naming of constructions is not necessary, the "Py3"
box should simply be disconnected from the other boxes.
Finally, the constructions are
sorted and combined into one list in the "cull" box automatically.
Step 4 is where the final parameters are connected, and the final Excel sheet is set up. Here,
Page 23 of 149
==PAGE:30==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
the user can choose a path and name for the file and export the data. The visual code for
Step 4 can be seen in Figure 12.
Figure 12: Step 4 of the Grasshopper Code, where the relevant parameters are named and
the data exported to Excel.
The main box in Step 4 is the "ExcelWrite," which exports the chosen inputs to Excel.
These inputs include previously chosen parameters and headings, as well as the chosen file
and sheet location of the data. Of the two "Toggle" boxes, the top one is used to export
the data. The toggle is changed to true by double-clicking on the box, and when the yellow
box to the far right says "Data written to Excel worksheet!", the toggle is changed back to
false.
Once these steps are completed, the quantities of building constructions from a Revit file
should have been successfully extracted and exported to Excel. An example of this based on
Case 2 can be found in Appendix A.1. It should be noted that the Grasshopper code cannot
stand alone. Some manual sorting of the Grasshopper output is still necessary, and the user
should remain critical of the output. Additionally, it is not possible to extract data from
multiple models at once, which is why the view needs to be updated accordingly for each
model. The file path and name should also be updated, as the existing file will otherwise be
overwritten.
It is important to note that the chosen output parameters are amount [count] and area [m²],
not volume [m3] or mass [kg]. This decision was made based on the previously presented
challenges, where it was described that the current detail levels of the Revit models are not
sufficient for this. The chosen output parameters were also chosen, as these are easier to use
in LCAbyg. However, these parameters can potentially be changed in the Grasshopper code
if desired.
3.9
The Five Case Studies and Data Collection
For this part, it is essential to note that the study has been divided into two main sections,
as presented in the introduction. The first one focuses on identifying the contractor’s role as
Page 24 of 149
==PAGE:31==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
well as developing a methodology for data collection, while the other focuses on execution
of the actual LCA and evaluation of the environmental impacts. Hansson & Knudsen have
provided project material for five refurbishment projects. All five case studies will be used
to develop the data and quantity collection methodology for this project. Since this part or
branch of the study is quite extensive, the final LCA and evaluation of environmental impacts
will only be conducted on two out of the five case studies. This limitation has been chosen
to ensure an in-depth understanding of the challenges and uncertainties of the selected case
studies. Case 1 and 2 will be the cases where the final LCA will also be analyzed. These
are refurbishment projects with a gross floor area of 53,031 m2 and 19,800 m2, making them
considerable for in-depth analysis and evaluation, which will be presented in Section 4.3.
Case 3, 4, and 5, on the other hand, will only be used for assessing the methodology for data
collection.
The main overview of data and information from each of the three cases, as well as the
sources, will be presented in the following sections. This will be followed by a description of
challenges connected to the quantity extraction from the Revit models.
3.9.1
Case Study 1 - Methodology and LCA
Case 1 is a social housing located on Funen in Denmark, consisting of 504 apartments
divided into 8 blocks, as shown in Figure 13. The refurbishment project includes updates
to the building envelope, installations, construction, improvements of floor plans, as well as
architectural appearance. Kitchens and baths are also updated in the refurbishment projects,
but the interior designs such as cabinets and other components are not included in the scope
of the LCA and have therefore not been considered. All tables and figures in both the main
part and in appendices will be blue for easier overview.
Figure 13: Aerial view of Case 1, from skraafoto.dataforsyningen.dk.
The necessary input data for "Building and operation" in LCAbyg for Case 1 can be seen
in Table 3. The data has been primarily obtained from the building case description in the
Page 25 of 149
==PAGE:32==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
tender material, as well as from the basic information used for Energy Label calculations.
For an overview of the specific sources for each input presented in the next three tables, refer
to Section B.1.1.
Table 3: LCI for "Building and operation" for Case 1.
"Building and operation"
Input
Calculation prerequisites
Type
Multi-story residential buildings
Commissioning year
2024
Heated floor area [m²]
42518
Gross floor area [m²]
53031
Integrated garages [m²]
0
Additional area [m²]
0
Energy consumption and supply
Operational electricity use [kWh/m²/year]
3.4
Exported electricity [kWh/m²/year]
0
Electricity supply
Electricity - Progression
Electricity supplement [kWh/m²/year]
0
Operational heat use [kWh/m²/year]
57.6
Heat supplement [kWh/m²/year]
0
Heat supply
District heating - Progression
Since the commissioning year for the refurbished buildings is 2024, and they have already
been commissioned, the official Energy Label for the blocks is already available at boli
gejer.dk. The data on areas, electricity, and heat has therefore been extracted from the
Energy Label. This has been chosen over own Energy10 calculations, as the Energy Label
is a verified and official document and therefore considered more complete. If Energy10
calculations were desired earlier in the process, the project material included an official note
on the calculated U-values for the new project. These values could be used as input for the
Energy10 calculations.
3.9.1.1
Data Overview for Case 1
To extract the quantities from the Revit models, it was first necessary to get an overview of
the available models in the project material. The overview of available data can be seen in
Table 4.
Table 4: Available Revit models and information used for quantity extraction for Case 1.
Building models and information
Available files
Revit models for architectural discipline
6
Revit model for structural discipline
1
Revit models for installation discipline
1
Legend description/building part description
1
Page 26 of 149
==PAGE:33==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
In total, there are eight Revit models that have been analyzed for this case. Six of these
models are architectural models, as there are only one or two blocks per model.
It has
therefore been necessary to run the Grasshopper Code 8 times, with relevant sorting for each
model. A legend description/building part description for the entire project was available
for this case, which was used to cross-reference with the extracted building constructions
from Revit.
Finally, Table 5 shows additional information for Case 1. This additional information is not
necessary as input to LCAbyg; however, it does bring necessary context and understanding
to the case.
Table 5: Additional information on Case 1.
Additional information
Data
Year of construction
1969
Year of major refurbishment
-
Building blocks
8
Floors above ground
4
Basement floors
1
Scope of refurbishment included in LCA
– Building envelope
– Installations/ventilation
– Structure/construction
– Improvements of floor plans
– Architectural appearance
For Case 1, it is relevant to note that there is no description in the tender or project material
describing any major refurbishments since the year of construction. Had there been a major
refurbishment, this might have been relevant for the lifetime of the remaining existing build-
ing constructions. Since this information was not available, the remaining building parts will
be assumed to be mainly from the year 1969, even though there might have been continuous
minor renovations on the blocks and apartments.
3.9.1.2
Quantity Extraction for Case 1
The quantity extraction for this case was done by following the method described in Sec-
tion 3.8.2 for the structural and architectural models. The structural model distinguished
between the existing and new construction building constructions through the phasing prop-
erty in Revit. This way, the desired view could be turned on before running the Grasshopper
code, making it possible to get the relevant building constructions separately as described
in Section C.1. However, the naming in the structural model did not give any indication of
which phase the building constructions belonged to, and thus, this could not be used.
For the architectural model, it was possible to sort both by phasing and through the naming
of the building constructions. However, it was chosen to use phasing for sorting, as there
were inconsistencies when only sorting by naming. An example of this is that names for
existing walls start with "E - ", whereas existing windows start with "E-". Even though the
Page 27 of 149
==PAGE:34==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
difference between these two lies only in the spacing between letters and symbol, the code
would not sort the constructions correctly based on these differences. While this could have
been mitigated by running the Grasshopper code twice with the necessary changes, it was
not chosen for this case.
An overview of the LCI on quantities of building constructions can be seen in Table 6. The
table only shows the total quantity for each construction group, as well as the amount of
different construction types registered for the case. For a detailed LCI for quantities, refer
to Section B.1.1.1.
Table 6: Overview of the extracted quantities on building constructions for Case 1.
Construction Group
Construction Types
Total Quantity
Unit
Decks
12
2127.4
m²
Floors
17
34737.2
m²
Interior Walls
18
26813.8
m²
Exterior Walls
14
40754.9
m²
Ceilings
6
8488.3
m²
Roofs
9
11592.0
m²
Columns and Beams
13
485.6
m
Doors
6
-
-
Windows
3
5867.1
m²
Installations
4
-
-
As seen in Table 6 and in Section B.1.1.1, the complexity of the project was rather high. In
this context, a construction group is the main group like floors or ceilings, where construction
types refer to individual constructions within the group. Each construction type will consist
of different layers and materials, and is therefore modeled separately in LCAbyg.
Each
construction group had up to 18 different building constructions, which could then consist
of several different products and materials, making it time-consuming to model in LCAbyg.
It was chosen to model several different types of windows and doors under one construction
type, as several of them consisted of the same materials only varying in size. The reason
for not including a quantity for doors, was that the doors have been modeled in LCAbyg
through standard constructions, where some are quantified in square meters m² whereas
others are quantified in amount. Therefore, it has not been possible to measure the total
quantity in one unit for this construction type.
It should be noted that the total quantities presented in the table cannot be used for the
LCI but are provided to give an idea of the extent of the project. They can also serve as a
rough control by comparing, for example, the total area for roofs with the actual roof area
of the buildings. If the number in the table exceeds the actual roofs, something has gone
wrong in the process of quantity extraction.
Page 28 of 149
==PAGE:35==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
3.9.2
Case Study 2 - Methodology and LCA
Case 2 is similar to Case 1, a social housing located on Funen in Denmark. Case 2 consists
of 225 apartments divided into 4 blocks, as shown in Figure 14. The refurbishment project
includes updates to the building envelope, installations, construction, improvements of floor
plans, as well as architectural appearance.
Kitchens and baths are also updated in the
refurbishment projects, but the interior designs such as cabinets and other components are
not included in the scope of the LCA and have therefore not been considered. Here it should
also be noted, that 160 bathrooms were renovated in 2003, which are therefore not included
in the current refurbishment. All tables and figures in both the main part and in appendices
will be purple for easier overview.
Figure 14: Aerial view of Case 2, from skraafoto.dataforsyningen.dk.
The necessary input data for "Building and operation" in LCAbyg for Case 2 can be seen
in Table 7. The data has been primarily obtained from the building case description in the
tender material, as well as from the basic information used for Energy Label calculations.
For an overview of the specific sources for each input presented in the next three tables, refer
to Section B.1.2.
Page 29 of 149
==PAGE:36==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 7: LCI for "Building and operation" for Case 2.
Building and operation
Input
Calculation prerequisites
Type
Multi-story residential buildings
Commissioning year
2024
Heated floor area [m²]
17600
Gross floor area [m²]
19800
Integrated garages [m²]
0
Additional area [m²]
0
Energy consumption and supply
Operational electricity use [kWh/m²/year]
3.6
Exported electricity [kWh/m²/year]
0
Electricity supply
Electricity - Progression
Electricity supplement [kWh/m²/year]
0
Operational heat use [kWh/m²/year]
42.4
Heat supplement [kWh/m²/year]
0
Heat supply
District heating - Progression
Since the commissioning year for the refurbished buildings is 2024, and the buildings have
already been commissioned, the official Energy Label for the blocks is already available at
boligejer.dk. The data on areas, electricity, and heat has therefore been extracted from
the Energy Label. This has been chosen over own Energy10 calculations, as the Energy
Label is a verified and official document and therefore considered more complete.
The
newly calculated U-values were not included in the project material for Case 2. If Energy10
calculations were desired earlier in the process, it would therefore have been necessary to
contact the consulting engineers, to obtain these values. The values could be used as input
for the Energy10 calculations.
3.9.2.1
Data Overview for Case 2
To extract the quantities from the Revit models, it was first necessary to get an overview of
the available models in the project material. The overview of available data can be seen in
Table 8.
Table 8: Available Revit models and information used for quantity extraction for Case 2.
Building models and information
Available files
Revit models for architectural discipline
1
Revit model for structural discipline
1
Revit models for installations
1
Legend description/building part description
1
In total, three Revit models have been analyzed for this case. The architectural model only
included a model for one of the four blocks. The four blocks are similar regarding the archi-
tectural discipline, and it was therefore assumed that the buildings would undergo the same
Page 30 of 149
==PAGE:37==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
refurbishments. The extracted quantities from this model have therefore been multiplied by
four to obtain the total quantities for the case. For the construction and ventilation disci-
plines, all four blocks were modeled. For Case 2, there was no general overview for legend
descriptions or building part descriptions available in the project material. It has there-
fore been necessary to gather data on the different building constructions through selected
drawings and their individual building part descriptions.
Finally, Table 9 shows additional information for Case 2. This additional information is not
necessary as input to LCAbyg; however, it does bring relevant context and understanding
to the case.
Table 9: Additional information on Case 2.
Additional information
Data
Year of construction
1950’s
Year of major refurbishments
2000-2008
Building blocks
4
Floors above ground
8
Basement floors
1
Scope of refurbishment included in LCA
– Building envelope
– Installations/ventilation
– Structure/construction
– Improvements of floor plans
– Architectural appearance
For Case 2, it is relevant to note that there have been several refurbishments and refurbish-
ment since the construction in the 1950’s. This has been relevant for the lifetime analysis
of the remaining existing building constructions. The remaining constructions will therefore
have different years for installation, which are modeled with a delayed start.
3.9.2.2
Quantity Extraction for Case 2
The quantity extraction for Case 2 was done similarly to Case 1. The structural model
distinguished between the existing and new construction building constructions through the
phasing property in Revit. This way, the desired view could be turned on before running the
Grasshopper Code, making it possible to get the relevant building constructions separately.
The naming of the construction types also distinguished between existing and new construc-
tion. For existing constructions the types started with "E - " whereas new constructions
started with an ID-number. Because of this was it chosen to sort on phasing, as it would
require filtering out the existing constructions if using the Grasshopper code.
For the architectural model, it was only possible to sort through the naming of the building
constructions. Even the existing constructions in this model were sorted under phasing as
new constructions in Revit, with only few exceptions, not making it possible to sort through
phasing. The naming of existing constructions started with "E -", and the new constructions
started with "bk." similar to Case 1.
Page 31 of 149
==PAGE:38==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
An overview of the LCI on quantities of building constructions can be seen in Table 10. The
table only shows the total quantity for each construction group, as well as the amount of
different construction types registered for the case. For a detailed LCI for quantities, refer
to Section B.1.2.1.
Table 10: Overview of the extracted quantities on building constructions for Case 2.
construction Group
construction Types
Total Quantity
Unit
Decks
8
3659.4
m²
Floors
7
15181.0
m²
Interior Walls
24
13173.1
m²
Exterior Walls
12
22509.4
m²
Ceilings
3
11059.3
m²
Roofs
1
2246.3
m²
Columns and Beams
12
219.2
m
Doors
10
2674.5
m²
Windows
2
8443.2
m²
Installations
4
-
-
As seen in Table 10 and in Section B.1.2.1, the complexity of the project was high. Each
construction group had up to 24 different constructions, making it an extensive task to
model the building in LCAbyg. For this case it was chosen to model the same window type
as different construction types. This could however have been modeled as one construction
type with one big area, as it was done for Case 1.
3.9.3
Case Study 3, 4, and 5 - Data Collection for Methodology
As previously mentioned, Cases 3, 4, and 5 will be used only for collecting data and insights
for the methodology developed for this project. Therefore, a final LCA will not be performed
for these three cases. Table 11 shows where the necessary data for "Building and operation"
can be found in the project materials for each of the three cases.
Page 32 of 149
==PAGE:39==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 11: LCI for "Building and operation" for Case 3, 4, and 5.
Building and operation
Sources from Case 3
Sources from Case 4
Sources from Case 5
Type
Not available, potentially in
the tender material
Tender material:
"Building
case description"
Not available, potentially in
the tender material
Commissioning year
Project material: Construc-
tion schedule
Project material: Construc-
tion schedule
Project material: Construc-
tion schedule
Heated floor area
[m²]
Energy10
Energy10
Energy10
Gross floor area
[m²]
Energy10
Energy10
Energy10
Integrated garages
[m²]
Site plan and Revit models
Site plan and Revit models
Site plan and Revit models
Additional area
[m²]
Site plan and Revit models
Site plan and Revit models
Site plan and Revit models
Operational electricity use
[kWh/m²/year]
Energy10
Energy10
Energy10
Exported electricity
[kWh/m²/year]
Energy10
Energy10
Energy10
Electricity supply
Energy10
Energy10
Energy10
Electricity supplement
[kWh/m²/year]
Energy10
Energy10
Energy10
Operational heat use
[kWh/m²/year]
Energy10
Energy10
Energy10
Heat supplement
[kWh/m²/year]
Energy10
Energy10
Energy10
Heat supply
Energy10
Energy10
Energy10
Here it can be seen that for both Case 3 and Case 5, access was only granted for the project material. This means that the tender
material was not obtainable for those two cases. Usually, the project case description contains relevant background information
and a description of the case. Some of the necessary information therefore needs to be obtained through the Project Manager
(PM) or someone else familiar with the cases. Furthermore, the expected and final areas and operational energy use are not
obtainable through the Energy Labels, as these are not acquired before the finalization of the refurbishment. These values can,
Page 33 of 149
==PAGE:40==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
however, be found through Energy10 calculations or the energy engineer for the cases.
Table 12 shows the available Revit models for the quantity extraction for each of the three cases.
Table 12: vailable Revit models and information used for quantity extraction for Case 3, 4, and 5.
Building models and in-
formation
Sources from Case 3
Sources from Case 4
Sources from Case 5
Revit models for architec-
tural discipline
Project material:
Architect
drawings
Project material: Geometry
Project material: Geometry
Revit model for structural
discipline
Project material: Structural
engineer drawings
Not available - only drawings
available
Project material: Geometry
Revit models for installa-
tions
Project material: VVS and
ventilation
engineer
draw-
ings
Project material: Geometry
Project material: Geometry
Legend description/descrip-
tion of constructions
Project material:
Individ-
ual
drawings
and
"Leg-
end/building
descriptions
for constructions"
Project material:
Individ-
ual
drawings
and
"Leg-
end/building
descriptions
for constructions"
Project material:
Individ-
ual
drawings
and
"Leg-
end/building
descriptions
for constructions"
Here it becomes evident that not all cases follow the same folder structure. Because of this, it may be necessary to find the
relevant information in different folder locations depending on the case. For Case 4 and Case 5, the models were found under
the folder "Geometry", whereas Case 3 had folders for each discipline where the relevant models could be found. The structural
Revit model for Case 4 was not included in the project material for this case. It might have been deemed sufficient for the
contractor in this case to only have access to the official drawings, why it has not been included. If an LCA were to be performed
on Case 4, the structural model should be requested in order to apply the chosen method for data extraction for this project.
Finally, it can be seen that there is no overall legend description/description of building constructions for any of the three
cases. Here, the layers and materials used for the individual constructions must be found manually through the construction
descriptions in the relevant drawings.
The additional information on the three cases can be seen in Table 13.
Page 34 of 149
==PAGE:41==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 13: Additional information on Case 3, 4, and 5.
Additional information
Sources from Case 3
Sources from Case 4
Sources from Case 5
Year of construction
Available through
kort.bbr.dk
Tender material:
"Building
case description"
Available through
kort.bbr.dk
Year
of
major
refurbish-
ments
Not available, potentially in
the tender material
Tender material:
"Building
case description"
Not available, potentially in
the tender material
Building blocks
Project material:
Working
environment - Plan for safety
and health
Potentially in the tender ma-
terial
Project matertial: Drawings
and Revit models
Project matertial: Drawings
and Revit models
Floors above ground
Project matertial: Drawings
and Revit models
Project matertial: Drawings
and Revit models
Project matertial: Drawings
and Revit models
Basement floors
Project matertial: Drawings
and Revit models
Project matertial: Drawings
and Revit models
Project matertial: Drawings
and Revit models
Scope of refurbishment in-
cluded in LCA
– Project material: Working
environment - Plan for safety
and health
– Potentially in the tender
material
Tender material:
"Building
case description"
Not available, potentially in
the tender material
It is evident that the tender material was not available for Case 3 and Case 5. Although this information does not serve as direct
input to LCAbyg, it is essential for a comprehensive understanding of the refurbishment project. Much of this information can
be acquired through an in-depth introduction to the cases.
Based on the data presented above, the Revit models for Case 3, 4, and 5 were investigated to establish the premises for the
Grasshopper Code. The architectural and structural models for each case were reviewed to assess their sorting possibilities.
The ventilation model was not examined since the transition from natural to mechanical ventilation in all cases involves entirely
new ventilation ducts. The sorting possibilities for each case, based on phasing and naming, are detailed in Table 14.
Page 35 of 149
==PAGE:42==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 14: Possible sorting of constructions for Revit models for Case 3, 4, and 5.
Revit model
Sorting
Case 3
Case 4
Case 5
Architectural
Phasing
Not differentiated
"Existing" vs.
"New con-
struction"
"Existing" vs.
"New con-
struction"
Naming
"Eksist." vs. ID no.
".E_" vs. ".N"
Not differentiated
Structural
Phasing
Only new constructions
are
included
in
the
model.
Model not available
"Existing" vs.
"New con-
struction"
Naming
Model not available
Not differentiated
The investigation of the models revealed that for Case 3, the architectural model can only be sorted based on naming, as
the phasing properties have not been properly defined. The structural model included only new constructions, making sort-
ing redundant. It is assumed that all relevant existing structural constructions have been modeled within the architectural
model.
For Case 4, it was possible to sort based on both phasing and naming within the architectural model. As the structural model
was not available, it was not investigated.
Interestingly, Case 5 was the only one among the five cases where sorting by naming was not possible at all. However, this
model was the most advanced in terms of phasing properties for both the architectural and structural models. It was even
possible to choose a phasing for "Temporarily." The "Phase Filter" in Revit also allowed for several different combinations of
phases, which has not been seen in any of the other cases.
The investigation of the three additional case studies demonstrated that the level of detail and sorting possibilities highly depend
on the designing architects or engineers. This underlines that it is crucial to familiarize oneself with the project and the models
to navigate the models, quantities, and construction details properly.
Page 36 of 149
==PAGE:43==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
4
Results & Discussion
This section presents the results based on the goal and scope of the study.
The result
and discussion sections are combined for clarity and structure. The studied problems are
divided into three main parts, and the results for each part will be presented and discussed
individually. The study, as introduced, is divided into the following three parts:
1. Identification of processes related to contractors’ implementation of LCA in refurbish-
ment projects.
2. Development of a methodology for collecting building-specific data concerning larger
refurbishment projects.
3. Evaluation of environmental impacts in refurbishment projects based on the developed
methodology.
4.1
Identification of Processes
This part will investigate the processes related to contractors’ implementation of LCA in
refurbishment projects. This focus is essential as LCAs are often a task associated with
consulting engineers but can be expected to require more involvement from all actors in the
future.
4.1.1
Diagram for the Identified Processes
A critical part of the LCA process for buildings is considering the many stakeholders, actors,
and uncertainties connected to construction activities. LCAs are often iterative processes
used during the design stage to support specific design decisions to improve environmen-
tal performance. However, it is also crucial to understand that there are often differences
between the initially designed building and how it is constructed in practice, as described
in Section 2.2.4. Due to this, there should be an LCA on both the designed building and
the actual constructed building. An LCA, that has been updated with "as-built" data, are
beneficial as the steps in LCA are often not linear and require an ongoing flow of information
through all phases of designing and constructing a building. Some of these information flows
are between the three main actors ("project owner and consultants", "consulting engineers
and architects", and "contractor") are shown in Figure 15 below. The figure presents the
different main phases, a short description of the phases, and a description of the related LCA
activities expected in each phase.
Page 37 of 149
==PAGE:44==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 15: Identification of processes related to the LCA process in refurbishment projects.
In the Pre-Design phase, the main objectives and requirements of the upcoming projects are discussed and defined. This
includes determining the scope of the LCA and the goal and potential benchmarks. The project owner, consultant engineers,
and architects are primarily involved in this phase.
The Design phase builds on the previous phase, where the actual building/project is designed based on the defined requirements
and objectives. In this phase, the first LCA is carried out, and potential changes are made based on the chosen scope and
benchmarks. The leading information flows are still between the project owner, consultant engineers and architects. However,
contractors are sometimes consulted at this stage.
Page 38 of 149
==PAGE:45==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
In the Procurement phase, the contractor becomes more involved in the project. In this
phase, the services and materials are planned and coordinated, ensuring that the designed
building can be constructed.
This process is also important for the final environmental
impacts, as there might be changes to material choices. The used materials become more
specific, possibly even at the product level, meaning that the LCA might get more detailed
and needs to be updated. This is shown as flows between the contractor and consulting
engineers and architects, with a flow reporting back to the building owner and their consul-
tants.
This leads to the main phase for the contractor, the Construction phase. In this phase,
the designed building is constructed. As previously mentioned, it is not always possible to
construct a building exactly as designed or procured, especially in a refurbishment project.
Therefore, the contractor is often forced to make changes on-site, which need to be updated
in the drawings, Revit models, and the LCA model. Due to the contractor’s crucial role in
this phase, it is relevant that the contractor makes informed decisions based on knowledge of
LCA and environmental impacts. Consequently, the expected information flow is primarily
between contractors and consulting engineers and architects to ensure that the initial design
choices and objectives are respected and the LCA models are updated accordingly. Similarly
to the procurement phase, this also has a flow reporting back to the building owner and
consultants.
Finally, the Post-Construction phase consists of the final reviews and handover of the
building. At this stage, it is necessary to ensure that the LCA model, drawings, and other
documentation are completely updated according to the executed changes compared to the
originally designed building. This phase generally requires a lot of work by the contractors
but also requires collaboration between all three main actors, as all relevant documentation
needs to be collected and handed over to both the project owner and authorities.
4.1.2
Discussion of the Identified Processes
As presented in Figure 15, the scope and initial LCA are often carried out by the consulting
engineering team in the Pre-Design and Design phases. The LCA processes for buildings
today often depend on the consultant engineers and architects being primarily responsible
for the LCA. This means that the contractor is mainly responsible for passing on relevant
information and updates to the building models to ensure the LCA models are updated
accordingly. However, it can be argued that the contractor ought to play a more involved
role in the future, as suggested by the presented diagram.
Increased involvement from the contractor and closer collaboration with consulting engineers
and architects throughout a project would support the iterative LCA process. In this case
the design and LCA would be evaluated and updated continuously throughout a project.
Compared to the current process, where the consultants update the LCA model at the
building and documentation hand-over, increased involvement from the contractor would
make it possible to use LCA as a decision-making tool even during the construction phase.
Although there are no requirements for LCA or benchmarks for refurbishment projects in
the building regulations, this can be expected in the future. The stricter the limit values and
Page 39 of 149
==PAGE:46==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
benchmarks on buildings, the more crucial the impact from last-minute changes can have on
the total impacts of a building. This makes it further beneficial for the LCA process to have
the contractor update the LCA continuously through the construction phases, as last-minute
changes during construction might risk the limit value not being adhered to.
For LCA to be used as a tool by the contractor, the contractor must be able to perform
an LCA as well. This would require the collection of material quantities from updated 3D
models and an update of the LCA model. This would increase the contractor’s understanding
of material and design choices and their environmental impacts, which is beneficial as they
are often the ones tasked with finding solutions to challenges on the construction site. The
involvement and in-depth understanding for the contractor of the LCA process can also be
argued to be a valuable factor from a competitive point of view. The involvement would
arguably mean an increased cost for the contractor, as the task of LCA will not be the
sole responsibility of the consultants. However, involvement and understanding from the
contractor might be a point-scoring factor that would help win more projects with a focus on
sustainability. To involve the contractor to a greater extent, the limitations and challenges
of 3D models in relation to LCA must be understood and mitigated by the contractor.
Getting the contractor to be more involved in the LCA processes, might require financial
involvement by the project owner. Here it might be necessary to ensure means in the budget
for the contractor’s extra work, as LCA otherwise risks being underprioritized.
Considering the challenges previously discussed regarding the contractor’s increased involve-
ment in LCA for refurbishment projects, it would be beneficial to establish a strategic
roadmap. This roadmap should not only focus on the involvement of the contractor but
focus on incorporating LCA into every phase of refurbishment projects. It is essential to in-
clude incentives for increased involvement from all actors while highlighting the contractor’s
active participation to ensure that LCA is effectively utilized as a decision-making tool.
4.2
Development of Methodology for Data Collection
In this part, it is examined how the contractor can work with the LCA process in practice,
based on the identified processes in the previous section. To perform an LCA on a project,
it is necessary to have data and material quantities related to the specific project, which can
be extracted from project materiale and 3D models. The methodology for data collection
presented in this section is divided into two parts. The first part provides an overview of
the necessary data for LCA, while the second part focuses on the extraction of material
quantities from 3D models, specifically Revit models.
4.2.1
Diagram for Data Collection
The following diagram and flow chart in Figure 16 and Figure 17 were prepared by collecting
data for LCA on the five refurbishment case studies and performing the entire LCA on two
of the five prepared cases. The flow chart examines the LCA process from the contractor’s
perspective. This means that the data collection and implementation of necessary changes
in design choices based on the LCA results are the responsibility of the contractor but can
be assisted by consulting engineers or architects if required. The diagram divides the LCA
Page 40 of 149
==PAGE:47==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
process into three main parts or steps, with corresponding distribution of roles as presented
in Figure 16.
Figure 16: Steps related to the LCA process in refurbishment projects.
Step 1 is the collection of basic building data. This includes crucial information identified
Page 41 of 149
==PAGE:48==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
during the method development, such as construction year, floor area, and operational energy
use. Additionally, this step requires the collection of Revit models for quantity collection in
Step 2. The required data/information will mostly be available in the project and tender
materials. However, it is often scattered across different documents, as experienced during
the data collection of the five cases. Therefore, this task has been assigned to the PM, as
they are expected to have an overview of the project materials and can piece the necessary
information together. Based on experience from the data collection for the examined five
case studies, the sources for the required information are:
• Project and tender material:
– Building case description
– Geometry/Revit models
– Drawings
– Legend description/description of constructions
• Energy10 and Energy Label1
Some data may need to be found on external websites, depending on the available information
in the project materials and whether the construction is still ongoing or has finished. This
is particularly relevant when considering whether the Energy Labels have been updated,
or if the calculations need to be done manually through programs like Energy10. The final
quantity extractions and LCA should likewise not be performed before all Revit models have
been updated.
Step 2 is the material quantity collection phase. Before proceeding to quantity collection,
a basic understanding of the case is necessary, as defined in Step 1. This part focuses on
collecting material quantities based on the Revit models from the project materials. Due to
the complexity of this step, it has been separated into an individual flow chart. The results
and flow chart for quantity collection can be found in Section 4.2.
The responsibility for Step 2 lies with several actors within the construction company, as
extracting quantities with this method requires someone knowledgeable and experienced
with Revit and Grasshopper, while also understanding the specific project. Additionally, the
complexity may necessitate involving consultant engineers and architects to address some of
the inconsistencies and uncertainties that can be expected in the Revit models.
Step 3 is the assessment of the results from the LCA itself. This part primarily falls on the
LCA specialist, who interprets and assesses the environmental impacts for the specific case.
Here, it is important to reflect back on the intended goal. LCAs can serve various purposes,
such as documentation for building regulations or Environment, Social, and Governance
(ESG) reporting.
This can potentially include benchmarks, limit values, and predefined
scopes for the project, which are all relevant to the assessment. If the LCA is used as a tool
for decision-making and reducing environmental impacts, the different iterations and LCA
scenarios should also be considered to highlight the purpose of the LCA.
1boligejer.dk
Page 42 of 149
==PAGE:49==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
4.2.2
Flow Diagram for Extracting Quantities
In this part, Step 2 from the previous flow diagram (Figure 16) is being presented. This step
involves focusing on the Revit models and extracting quantities from them, assuming that
the overall understanding and overview of the building have already been established.
This step is especially important in the LCA process, as the LCI (in this case, extracted
quantities and data on building constructions) forms the foundation and inputs for LCAbyg.
The flow diagram illustrates the necessary steps and complexity for quantity collection,
highlights the necessary decisions, and provides guidance through the different layers of
Revit models and the Grasshopper Code.
Unlike new construction, the complexity of refurbishment projects requires the LCA to
distinguish between the remaining existing and new building parts and materials. Therefore,
the main division in the data collection process will focus on these categories, though the
steps for both will be similar for most of the way. The different questions, steps, and actions
for navigating through quantity collection are illustrated in Figure 17.
Page 43 of 149
==PAGE:50==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 17: Flow diagram showing the necessary steps for collecting quantities from Revit
building model.
Page 44 of 149
==PAGE:51==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
As described in the method and discovered through working with the five refurbishment
cases, it is necessary to be familiar with the Revit models for each case. This includes un-
derstanding how the building constructions are sorted, named, and defined in the model. The
understanding of the model is crucial, as the modeled LCA should consider which building
constructions are related to the existing building mass and are kept in the new building, and
which building constructions are new constructions. This adds a layer to quantity collection
for refurbishment compared to new builds, which is important to understand and navigate
properly.
Following the paths of the flowchart, it is possible to see which method of sorting to apply to
get the right input data for the LCA model. There are different scenarios to consider, which
is why the flow diagram as a tool provides a useful overview and guidance for the user.
The first step is to check if the building constructions are sorted into phases. This can be
determined by checking the properties of different building constructions, as described in the
method. If the constructions are sorted into the phases "Existing" or "New construction," the
relevant phase can be activated, and the quantity extraction will be based on the activated
phase.
This should be followed by the use of "Revit Guide, Phases" and "Grasshopper
Guide, Scenario 1".
If the constructions are not properly sorted into phases, it is necessary to examine the
naming of the building constructions. In this case, check if the names indicate whether it is
an existing building part or new construction. If neither the phases nor the naming indicates
the category to which the construction belongs, the ICT manager should be contacted, as the
Revit model will not be detailed enough to extract material quantities from. If the names do
however indicate, to which phase the constructions belong, "Grasshopper Guide, Scenario
2" should be followed. The two Grasshopper guides, as well as the "Revit Guide, Phases,"
can be found in Section C.
Following the Grasshopper Guides will result in an Excel sheet with quantities of building
constructions. Note that some manual sorting will be necessary, as the output may include
building objects such as beds or kitchen cabinets, depending on how the data is sorted. An
example showing a cutout of an unfiltered Excel file exported through the described method
for Case 2 can be seen in Appendix A.1. The output includes only the construction name
as defined by the architect and engineer, so the individual materials in the constructions
must be entered manually by comparing them to the key provided in the project material.
For building constructions of the new construction phase, the relevant constructions and
materials should be entered into the LCA model once the guide has been followed.
For existing building parts, however, an important step is required before entering building
constructions and materials.
Based on the scope defined in the method in Section 3.7,
existing building parts should only be entered if the remaining lifetime is under 45 years.
The lifetime of each building construction should therefore be evaluated, and only relevant
building constructions and materials should be entered into the LCA model.
Page 45 of 149
==PAGE:52==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
4.2.3
Discussion of Data Collection and Quantity Extraction from Revit
Scope and Available Data
Starting with the identified necessary information presented in Figure 16, Step 1 focuses
on the overview and necessary data for conducting an LCA. As mentioned, much of the
necessary data is scattered throughout the project material, making it a tedious process to
collect. It has even been deemed necessary to include a part for possible sources in the
diagram, as not all information is expected to be found in the project material. Information
not available in the project material for these cases might, however, be obtainable through
the consulting architects and engineers but was found through external sources for this
project. As the project considers refurbishment projects, some of the information found
through external sources might not be completely up-to-date. A good example of this is
the operational heat and electricity use for the cases. For Case 1 and 2, the official Energy
Labels have been updated, as the projects have already been handed over. For Case Study
3, 4, and 5, however, the energy would have to be estimated through the Energy10 software,
if the cases were to be modeled at this stage. While these calculations could be sufficient for
the different iterations, the official Energy Label can only be provided by a certified energy
consultant when the case is finished, which might lead to inconsistencies in the different
iterations. This underlines the importance of an updated LCA at building material and
model handover, as some official information might not be available until the building is
finished.
Looking closer at Step 2 and the flow diagram presented in Figure 17, the uncertainties
connected to the scope of the study are important to discuss. The entire definition of the
scope and functional unit of an LCA is a well-known uncertainty. The defined scope and
cut-off regarding considered information and data can greatly affect the results. This study
was based on the recommendation of the industry guidelines for LCA on refurbishment
projects. It has, however, also been chosen to use one out of three suggested scenarios with
the "lowest" detail level from the guideline [18]. The chosen scenario only considers existing
building materials that are replaced within 50 years and new building materials, completely
cutting off the remaining and dismantled materials of the existing building. This was partly
a deliberate choice, focusing on the actual refurbishment activities and not the existing
building nor the embodied emissions from the existing building, on which the contractor
has no influence. It was also partly out of necessity, as it quickly became clear that the
detail level of the project material could not comply with other scopes. This would require
additional and extensive investigations of the existing building, as well as a level of detail
regarding dismantling and waste handling of the demolished parts, that are not yet an
industry standard.
A redefined scope based on more details and the inclusion of the existing building parts
can be argued to show a more precise picture of the actual environmental impacts of refur-
bishment activities. It can, however, be argued that the, for this study, chosen scope can
be easier to compare to the activities of new build, considering the political agenda, as the
included life cycle stages and functional unit are aligned. This also underlines how limit
values and benchmarks set by, e.g., building regulations, affect initiatives within the sector
Page 46 of 149
==PAGE:53==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
and individual companies, by increasing focus on certain life cycle stages or environmental
impacts. It is, therefore, important to note that the presented flow chart for quantity collec-
tion is based on current practices in the industry but will need to be updated and potentially
redefined to comply with future standards and regulations in the area.
When considering the lifetime of the remaining materials, it was chosen to look at the
individual materials in the building constructions. Because of this, it has not been considered
in detail how building constructions are assembled and potentially should be disassembled
at EoL. This means that in the LCA model, it has been assumed that the replacement
of one material will not affect the lifetime of another material in the same construction.
In reality, the replacement of one material can, however, be expected to damage nearby
materials due to construction methods, leading to the replacement of more materials than
modeled in LCAbyg. This has not been distinguished in this project, as it would increase
the complexity to an even higher level, which is not possible within the scope and available
data for this study.
Level of Detail in Revit Models
Another crucial uncertainty to Step 2 of the diagram is concerning the detail level of the
Revit models.
Based on the provided project material, it was clear that the official 2D
drawings were the most detailed compared to the Revit models. It is therefore assumed that
the Revit models are often used to get an overview of the designed building, but when the
actual construction activities start, the most detailed drawings are taken to the construction
site. It is also not always required that all discipline models are uploaded to the project
material, whereas all discipline drawings have been uploaded. Due to this, inconsistencies and
shortcomings in the Revit models were observed. Even though some of these inconsistencies
were mitigated through the Grasshopper Code and different ways of sorting, as well as by
cross-referencing the 2D drawings and descriptions of the building constructions, not all
inconsistencies could be explained and assumptions had to be made. An inconsistency could
be a construction in the Revit model, which was not described in the official description
of building constructions. For these cases was it possible to find an official construction
with similar layers, and the two areas would be combined, counting the construction as one
type. Furthermore, it is important to verify the information and extracted data for the final
LCA, to ensure that potential changes during the construction phase have been included
and modeled in the LCA model.
Also, due to the observed detail level in Revit models, it was necessary to consider the
materials based on the official description of constructions. The quantity extraction from
Revit has the potential for extracting quantities as volume or mass distributed among the
different materials. However, many constructions in the current Revit models are fillers, to
ensure the correct dimensions of certain constructions. Examples of these are decks consisting
of soil according to the Revit model or walls with several layers of air, which are actually
insulation. Because of this, it is necessary to look at an individual building construction
level, even though this process is more detailed and time-consuming. If it is desired to have
the quantities solely on a material level in volume or mass, an even higher detail level of
the Revit model would be required. The detailing would consist of ensuring that all layers
in constructions are modeled with the correct thickness and materials, while differentiating
Page 47 of 149
==PAGE:54==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
between, e.g., different types of plasterboard or strength in concrete or steel. This would
be necessary to ensure that the correct products are chosen in LCAbyg. An advantage to
the chosen method of looking at a building construction level is, however, the evaluation
of the environmental impacts from the LCA. This makes it possible to compare building
constructions or different design choices, as the variations are more clearly stated compared to
one combined mass of, e.g., concrete, and thereby more transparent and detailed. This option
would be lost, if extracting quantities on an overall material level in volume or mass.
Improving the overall detail level of Revit models for refurbishment projects will therefore be
necessary to mitigate these challenges and uncertainties. Most projects in Denmark include
an ICT agreement, in which expectations for detail levels in Revit models can be specified.
A Danish knowledge center for the construction industry, Molio, has published a guide for
ICT requirements related to LCA. This guide includes specifications for interfaces between
stakeholders and the delivery of LCI data [27]. Such a guide or standard could be utilized
in future projects to ensure alignment of all models and LCA-relevant project information,
thereby preventing inconsistencies and misunderstandings across interfaces.
Besides the uncertainties connected to the detail level of the Revit models, the quantity
extraction also relies heavily on the models’ area definitions being correct. The extracted
areas have, for some of the building constructions, been cross-referenced to manual quantity
extraction from the models as well as estimation calculations on, e.g., the total roof or ground
floor area of the cases. It is, however, not possible with the designed Grasshopper Code to
detect potential errors in the model. A possible mistake in a model that could lead to false
quantities, could be defining the same floor twice right above each other. This would be
difficult to detect when doing quality control of the models and could lead to the relevant
area of the building construction being counted twice. Another mistake could be in the form
of not defining an area or the length of a building construction correctly. This can, e.g.,
be the case when building constructions overlap and the overlap is not defined correctly.
Some of these risks of using a plugin such as Grasshopper for BIM models can be mitigated
by diving deeper into the Grasshopper Code and making adaptations that can potentially
highlight any potential risks and mistakes in the 3D models. This could, however, be an
entire study itself and is outside the scope of this study.
Another limitation of the chosen collection of quantities with the Grasshopper Code is that
it is based on the models being available as Revit models. This was chosen as all five cases
had the 3D models as Revit files, and it is known that this is the most common format for
3D models in Denmark in general. This does, however, not mean that it is the only format,
which is why it would make sense to also consider other formats such as Rhino or the more
general International Foundation Class (IFC). IFC is a standardized data model that can
be viewed through, e.g., Revit. This means that instead of making a code, as has been done
in this case, that can extract data from Revit files, it might be beneficial to develop af tool
for data extraction from IFC files, as the Revit models can be exported to IFC. This could
at least be considered if the code for data and quantity extraction is further developed.
Page 48 of 149
==PAGE:55==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
4.3
Evaluation of Environmental Impacts
As mentioned in the method, the evaluation of environmental impacts will be based on Case
1 and Case 2. Here, the main environmental impacts will be presented, and potential hot-
spots will be identified and discussed. Finally, the two cases will be compared and discussed
to identify potential similarities and differences. It should also be noted that the evaluation
of environmental impacts will focus solely on GWP, disregarding other potentially relevant
environmental impacts.
4.3.1
Environmental Impacts for Case 1
Firstly, the results for Case 1 will be presented and analyzed. Selected overviews and main
results will be highlighted in this section.
The total GWP for Case 1 was found to be 5.75 kg CO2-eq./m²/year. Of the total result,
26% is related to the building materials, while the remaining 74% comes from building
operations, as shown in Figure 18.
Figure 18: Circle diagram showing the GWP distribution from building materials and build-
ing operations for Case 1.
From the emissions associated with building operations, only 4% comes from electricity, while
the remaining 96% comes from heating through district heating. It should be noted that
the input electricity use in the LCA model includes only electricity for building operations
and therefore does not include electricity for consumption. All emissions related to building
operations are emitted in stage B6, which is the stage for operational energy use.
For the building materials, the emissions can be distributed into several categories.
In
Figure 19, the distribution of building constructions into nine groups has been chosen for
analysis. The presented results do not include emissions related to life cycle stage D.
Page 49 of 149
==PAGE:56==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 19: GWP from building constructions distributed on construction groups for Case 1.
Here it can be seen that the construction groups with the largest GWP contributions for the
share from building materials are "windows, doors, and glazing systems" with 33%; "roofs
and ceilings" as well as "interior walls" with 16% each; followed by "exterior walls" with
14%.
When considering the environmental impacts of building constructions, it is also interesting
to consider which life cycle stages the emissions are coming from. This has been shown in
Figure 20, where the percentage distribution for each life cycle stage can be seen for each
construction group.
Page 50 of 149
==PAGE:57==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 20: GWP from construction groups distributed on life cycle stages for Case 1.
Common for most of the construction groups is that the product stages A1-3 are significant
contributors. The emissions in this stage are related to raw material supply, transport, and
manufacturing. This is, however, not the case for the "floor decks", where the stage for
waste processing (C3) is the main contributor. This is due to many of the interior floors
having wooden flooring, for which the emission contribution for waste processing is rather
high. Some of the modeled floors are also modeled as existing floors, meaning they have been
modeled with a delayed start. This delayed start is registered as replacements in LCAbyg.
Because wood is modeled with a negative impact in the production stages, this negative
impact is allocated to the replacement stage (B4) for the existing floors.
For "interior walls", "roofs and ceilings", "ventilation and cooling", "windows, doors, glazing
systems", as well as "exterior walls", the replacement stage B4 contribute with a positive
impact. For the groups "drainage", "columns and beams", and "water systems", the stage
Page 51 of 149
==PAGE:58==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
B4 does not play a significant role, as replacements over a 50-year reference period are not
expected.
The life cycle stage D, which covers potential for reuse, recycling, and recovery, is not
included in the other figures but has been included in the described figure. This was chosen,
as it can be seen that depending on the construction group, the EoL potential might have a
significant share of the total emissions and even have a negative value. The inclusion of this
negative value can have a crucial effect on the total performance of each construction group
or even the overall building. This can especially be seen in the construction groups drainage,
water systems, and ventilation and cooling, as many of these installations are produced with
different types of metal, which all have a high potential for recycling.
To better understand the impacts of the building constructions, it has also been chosen to
look into the distribution of GWP on a material level. Figure 21 shows the GWP for seven
material groups.
Figure 21: GWP from building constructions distributed on material groups for Case 1.
Here it can be seen that the main contribution comes from "components for windows and
curtain walls". This also corresponds to the main contributor on a construction level, as
the biggest contributor was the "windows, doors, and glazing systems". This shows how
glass as a material has a high environmental impact when considering CO2. A large part of
these contributions comes from the replacement of the materials, as the window glazing has
an expected lifetime of 25 years, meaning that it has to be replaced once entirely over the
50-year reference period.
This is followed by the contribution of "mineral building products", such as concrete. Con-
crete is used in several constructions for both interior and exterior walls as well as floor
Page 52 of 149
==PAGE:59==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
decks. An important ingredient in concrete is cement, which is made by firing limestone,
clay, and other materials in a kiln [28]. This process releases significant amounts of CO2 into
the atmosphere, explaining the high contribution for stage A1-3 for the mentioned building
constructions.
The same goes for "insulation materials", which are the third highest contributor. The most
common insulation material used for this project is mineral wool, which is made from stone
melted in furnaces [29]. The material group for metals shows the fourth largest impact on
a material level for this case, due to the energy-intensive manufacturing processes. Note
that the presented results in the figure above do not include stage D, which describes the
potentials for reuse, recovery, or recycling of the materials.
4.3.2
Environmental Impacts for Case 2
The results for Case 2 will follow the same structure as Case 1.
The total GWP for Case 2 was found to be 5.51 kg CO2-eq./m2/year.
From the total
result, 42% is related to the building materials and the remaining 58% comes from building
operations, as seen in Figure 22.
Figure 22: Circle diagram showing the GWP distribution from building materials and build-
ing operations for Case 2.
From the emissions associated with building operations, only 6% comes from electricity,
while the remaining 94% comes from heating of the building. The main heating source for
Case 2 is district heating. Compared to the Energy Label on the same buildings from 2015,
this is a reduction of 47% in operational heating for the building, because of the changes
made in the refurbishment.
For Case 2, the emissions related to building materials can be divided into 10 main construc-
tion groups. Figure 23 shows the distribution of GWP on building constructions.
Page 53 of 149
==PAGE:60==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 23: GWP from building constructions distributed on construction groups for Case 2.
For this case, the construction groups with the largest GWP contributions are "windows,
doors, glazing systems" with 45%, "floor decks" with 16%, followed by "columns and beams",
"interior" as well as "exterior walls", all three with 11%. Most of the doors leading out to-
wards the balconies were replaced. These doors typically feature an aluminium frame and
three-pane glazing, both materials associated with high GWP. Combined with the replace-
ment of most of the remaining windows in the building with three-pane glazing, this explains
why the group for "windows, doors, glazing systems" constitutes almost half of the emissions
related to building materials.
For a better understanding of the emissions related to the construction groups, Figure 24
shows the percentage distribution for each life cycle stage.
Page 54 of 149
==PAGE:61==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 24: GWP from construction groups distributed on life cycle stages for Case 2.
The production stages A1-3 are significant for most of the construction groups. For the
"floor decks", the main contributing stage is waste processing in C3, accounting for over
60%. This is because most of the interior flooring was replaced during the refurbishment,
mainly with wooden materials, which have a high GWP for waste processing. For "interior
walls", "ventilation and cooling", as well as "windows, doors, and glazing systems", stage B4,
which is the replacement stage, also contributes significantly. This is due to the expected
lifetime of some materials compared to the studied reference period.
This is especially
noteworthy for the contribution from "windows, doors, glazing systems", as even though the
contribution for stage B4 is not the largest compared to other constructions emissions in
A1-3, the total for the construction group is high, making it a significant contribution at the
building construction level.
The construction groups presented in Figure 23 consist of different materials, which is why
it is relevant to also examine the results on a material level. Figure 25 shows the GWP for
seven material groups for Case 2.
Page 55 of 149
==PAGE:62==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 25: GWP from building constructions distributed on material groups for Case 2.
Here it can be seen that the two largest material groups combined account for 78% of
the total emissions from materials in the building. The largest contributor among material
groups is "mineral building products", such as concrete, cement, or plaster, constituting 47%
of the total GWP for building materials. These materials are found in some of the building
constructions observed as the largest contributors in Figure 23, such as "floor decks", "roofs
and ceilings", "interior walls" as well as "exterior walls". The second largest material group
consists of "components for windows and curtain walls", such as glass, contributing 31%.
This aligns with the large number of window replacements for the case, as described for the
construction group "windows, doors, glazing systems" in the previous figures. The third
largest contribution comes from metals, contributing 9%. While this is significantly smaller
compared to the two largest, it is still relevant to highlight. These materials are significant
for this case, as several steel beams and columns were added in the refurbishment, along
with replaced balcony doors consisting of an aluminum frame.
4.3.3
Comparison and Discussion of Results for Case 1 and Case 2
The total GWP for Case 1 and 2 are rather close to each other, with Case 1 having total
emissions of 5.8 kg CO2-eq./m²/year and Case 2 5.5 kg CO2-eq./m²/year. What is interesting
to look into are the differences in the distribution for the two cases. An overview of the two
cases can be seen below in Figure 26.
The figure also includes the average GWP from
refurbishment projects analyzed by SWECO, which was also presented in Section 2.1.3. The
average from SWECO’s LCA database has been based on 18 refurbishment cases and is 6.4
kg CO2-eq./m²/year [10].
Page 56 of 149
==PAGE:63==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 26: GWP distribution from building materials and building operations for Case 1
and 2.
In the overview, it can be seen that even though the two cases have a similar total GWP,
the building operations alone constitute 74% of the total emissions for Case 1, whereas this
is only 58% for Case 2. The average from the LCA database is 61%, which makes the results
for Case 1 and 2 relatively close to the average; however, the distribution from Case 1 can
be considered relatively higher.
Since most of the operational energy use comes from heating of the buildings, focusing on
energy renovations is crucial to bring down the total emissions for buildings. This can be
argued to already have had a large focus, as the operational heating has been reduced by
40% and 47% through the refurbishment for Case 1 and Case 2 respectively, compared to
the available Energy Labels from 2015.
What is interesting to consider when comparing the impacts from Case 1 and Case 2 respec-
tively is that even though they are both multi-story residential buildings from approximately
the same time, they vary in dimensions and gross floor areas. These can be used to determine
a compactness ratio for the two cases, as more compact buildings are often expected to have
a lower consumption of energy for heating. The compactness ratio for the two cases can be
seen in Table 15.
Table 15: Calculation of compactness ratio for Case 1 and Case 2.
Gross floor area [m2]
Building envelope area [m2]
Compactness ratio
Case 1
53031
27376
0.52
Case 2
19800
4272
0.22
As can be seen, the compactness ratio is lower for Case 2, meaning there is less building
envelope area per gross floor area. This is consistent with the lower GWP related to building
Page 57 of 149
==PAGE:64==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
operations, as the building is more compact, and thereby has less relative surface area for
heat loss. It also shows that not all energy-saving building methods can be applied to a
refurbishment project, as some are constrained by the existing building and its dimensions,
such as the compactness ratio.
Figure 27 compares the results from Case 1 and 2 on an construction level.
The fig-
ure shows 10 different construction groups for both cases and their respective kg CO2-
eq./m²/year.
Figure 27: GWP from building constructions distributed on construction groups for Case 1
and 2.
Here it can be seen that the two cases follow the same tendencies, with the five largest
construction groups being "windows, doors, glazing systems", "floor decks", "roofs and ceil-
ings", "interior walls" as well as "exterior walls". These are similar to the largest construction
groups observed in the LCA database from SWECO. Interestingly, it is seen that the GWP
for Case 2 is higher in all construction groups, even though the total emissions related to the
project are lower. This is due to the percentage of the total GWP attributed to the materials
being higher, and thereby the contributions for the materials from Case 2 are higher than
for Case 1.
Figure 28 shows the distribution of relevant material groups for both cases. This should be
seen in connection with the material distribution of the two cases.
Page 58 of 149
==PAGE:65==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 28: GWP from building constructions distributed on material groups for Case 1 and
2.
The two largest material groups for both cases are "components for windows and curtain
walls" and "mineral building products". For Case 1, the largest contribution is from "com-
ponents for windows and curtain walls", whereas it is "mineral building products" for Case 2.
These differences are expected due to the dimensions of the existing buildings. Since Case 2
consists of seven floors for each block, structural building constructions are expected to play
a more important role than in Case 1. This can explain why mineral building products such
as concrete constructions or beams and columns are the dominating materials for Case 2, as
concrete constructions are often used for structural constructions. It could be beneficial for
the impact from materials to consider only having load-bearing structural constructions of
high carbon-intensive materials such as concrete or metals. If non-load-bearing constructions
consisted of, for example, wood, this could help bring down the GWP from the materials.
However, this could risk other environmental impacts being affected negatively, which will
be discussed further in Section 4.3.4.
Because Case 1 might not require as many structural constructions to be replaced or added,
glass will then be the main contributing material. This is further supported by the windows
in Case 1 being replaced with 2-layer panes, while the windows in Case 2 are replaced with
3-layer panes. Common for the "windows, doors, glazing systems" building constructions for
all cases is that the primary material is glass, consistent with this being one of the largest
contributions on a material level. Some of these emissions are connected to the melting
processes at the production stages of glass, but the replacement stage also plays a significant
role in the GWP for the materials. Firstly, most windows and glazing systems are modeled
to have a lifetime of 25 years in LCAbyg, meaning they have to be replaced at least once
during the 50 year reference period. Furthermore, it is common practice to change windows
in refurbishment projects to minimize heat loss through the windows. This means that often
most windows are replaced, making it one of the more comprehensive changes to the building
Page 59 of 149
==PAGE:66==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
and thereby also contributing significantly to the environmental impacts. Based on this, it
can be beneficial to create different scenarios in the future when considering changing the
windows in a facade. Such scenarios could consist of comparing the environmental impacts
over a 50-year reference period, comparing the savings in operational heat emissions and the
emissions from glass as a material, as this might show that replacing all windows might not
have the desired effect from an environmental perspective.
Finally, insulation is interesting to examine, as it has the third largest contribution to GWP
for Case 1. Re-insulation is a common method for reducing energy use in a building. It is
noteworthy that the larger contribution from insulation materials comes from Case 1, even
though Case 1 only has a 40% reduction in heat consumption, whereas Case 2 has a 47%
reduction compared to 2015. Based on the Energy Labels for both cases from 2015, the
existing building for Case 1 was better insulated in the building envelope compared to Case
2 to begin with. Despite this, it was chosen to increase the insulation in Case 1 more.
What is interesting to consider here is, that the insulation layers have been increased signifi-
cantly more for Case 1 than Case 2, while the saved emissions from energy savings are similar.
The embodied emissions related to added insulation for Case 1 is 0.22 kg CO2-eq./m²/year,
whereas it is 0.07 kg CO2-eq./m²/year for Case 2. The saved emissions from the decrease
in heating demand are 2.67 kg CO2-eq./m²/year in both cases. This shows, that a thicker
layer of insulation does not necessarily mean a bigger reduction in heating demand or an
improved overall heating demand of a building. Improvement of the building envelope, and
thereby a lower heating demand, is dependent on several factors, such as insulation layers,
windows, or thermal bridges.
Here it is chosen to highlight specifically thermal bridges, as many existing buildings, in-
cluding those in these cases, have issues with thermal bridges. An example of this can be
seen in the apartment drawings from Case 1, as shown in Figure 29.
Page 60 of 149
==PAGE:67==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 29: Cutout from drawings of apartment Type A2 from Case 1 showing the re-
insulation of a thermal bridge.
The overview of the apartment is derived from the drawings of the existing building from
2011, while the cutout shows the new drawings of the apartment, where the thermal bridge
(continuous concrete wall from inside to outside) has been re-insulated. It is evident that
by adding extra layers to the facade and the construction extending from the balcony to the
interior of the apartment, a crucial thermal bridge will be significantly reduced. Although
the actual layer of insulation around the previous thermal bridge is relatively thin compared
to other re-insulations in the exterior walls, it is expected to have a significant impact on
the heat consumption in the buildings. This suggests that while re-insulating the building
envelope remains important for reducing emissions related to energy consumption, it may
be more effective to ensure proper insulation in specific locations rather than just increasing
insulation thickness.
As mentioned in the presentation of the results for Case 1 and Case 2, the life cycle stage D
is only included in the results when looking at the stage distribution on an construction and
material level. This decision was made because stage D is usually not included in the scope
of LCAs on construction. However, it is especially relevant when assessing the circularity
of a building construction or project, as it describes the potential for reuse, recycling, or
recovery. Both cases showed that the percentage of emissions related to stage D is largest
Page 61 of 149
==PAGE:68==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
for construction groups with a high share of metals, as the recyclability of these materials is
considered high. The GWP can be reduced by 58% if steel scrap is used in the production
processes, significantly lowering the total emissions from steel if the potential for recycling
is included [30].
The potential for reuse, recycling, and recovery is lower for mineral building product-heavy
constructions, such as floor decks and walls. Concrete and other mineral products are more
difficult to recycle than metals. This is partly because they are more difficult to separate if
different types are mixed and the waste has not been separated correctly at the demolishing
site, making the properties of the crushed concrete uncertain. With crushed concrete the
aggregates can be reused in the production of new concrete. However, current standards
prevent recycled concrete from being used in applications that require freeze-thaw resistance,
limiting the use of the new product [31]. This process is also known as downcycling and is
relevant for stage D.
Therefore, when considering stage D it is relevant to consider designing and building with a
focus on circularity. This can be achieved by examining the recyclability of certain products
to ensure that when the building is demolished or constructions replaced, the materials can
be properly recycled. It is also important to assess if different materials can be used for
building constructions.
For example, concrete in columns and beams might be replaced
with steel, as the potential in stage D is higher for metals. However, this change should be
thoroughly investigated, as steel might have higher emissions in the product stages, might
not be suitable due to structural properties, or might exceed the project budget. Some of
these challenges can be explored through different scenarios and iterations of LCA on the
specific building constructions and projects.
4.3.4
Discussion of Uncertainties and Limitations to the Evaluated Impacts
In this section, the various uncertainties and limitations that can potentially affect the pre-
vious section presented results, will be discussed. Some of the uncertainties and limitations
for LCA studies are inherent to the data collection and chosen methods, such as the scope
of the study, the chosen environmental impacts, the benchmarks and the chosen database.
The project’s constraints will be addressed, to asses and evaluate the environmental impacts
presented.
4.3.4.1
Limitation to the Chosen Scope
A significant limitation of all LCAs is the chosen scope. For this project, it was decided to use
the scope from the industry guide as described in Section 3.5. This includes the delimitation
of included life cycle stages, system boundaries, and reference study period.
Starting with the considered life cycle stages, it has already been discussed in Section 4.3.3
what difference it can make to include the life cycle stage D, which describes the potential
for reuse, recycling, and recovery. This stage often has negative values and thereby lowers
the total emissions related to a building. This is a life cycle stage that is possible to model in
a program such as LCAbyg, as the data is available. This can however be tricky to include
in the final results, as most of these negative emissions will first appear at the EoL of the
Page 62 of 149
==PAGE:69==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
building. It can therefore be misleading to include them, as the handling of the materials
at EoL are difficult to predict 50 years in the future. It can be argued, that this makes
more sense to include in the projects, where the reused or recycled materials are used in the
future.
It is not possible to gain insight into the emissions related to stages A4, A5, B1-3, B5, B7,
C1, and C2 with the current level of available data in LCAbyg. Here it should be noted that
B5 describes the emissions related to refurbishments, which can be difficult to predict and
are covered in, for example, this project. Some of these stages describe the processes on the
construction site, such as A4, A5, and C1, for which there is currently a lack of data. This
is, however, an upcoming focus in the construction industry, and stage A4-5 will be included
in future regulations as shown in Figure 30.
Figure 30: System boundary showing the included and future included life cycle stages
included in the building regulations for new build [32].
Because the above mentioned life cycle stages are not included in the scope, the evaluated
environmental impacts in this project are expected to be lower than the actual impacts in
reality.
Another one of the main limitations of this scope is the system boundary and definition of
which materials are included in the LCI. This has similarly to the above, been based on
one of the scenarios presented in the industry guideline for refurbishment projects. This
means that all new building constructions and materials are being accounted for, while only
later replacement of the existing building constructions and products are included in the
LCI. The existing building materials are therefore assumed with a zero-impact. While this
might be beneficial for the political agenda, where there is an added focus to highlight the
environmental benefits by refurbishing existing building mass instead of building new, this
does not show the complete picture of the impacts. Here it can however be argued, that
since the existing building has already been constructed, the emissions related to the original
Page 63 of 149
==PAGE:70==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
construction and materials will have been emitted regardless of whether the chosen scenario
today is refurbishment or demolition and new build.
Finally, there is the, for the construction industry, the standard used reference study period
of 50 years. It is important to have a standard reference period for LCA on construction, to
be able to compare results for different LCAs properly by having the same functional unit.
While this is the case, 50 years might not be an accurate lifetime for buildings. It is known
that 85% of the EU’s building stock was built before 2001, while 85-95% is estimated to
still be standing in 2050 [3]. While a lot of these buildings will be refurbished during their
lifetime, they are expected to have a lifetime exceeding the 50-year reference period. Some
studies have analyzed and evaluated scenarios for different reference study periods. And like
most decisions in LCA, there are limitations and uncertainties connected to all delimiting
decisions.
A study showed that if considering a reference study period of 80-120 years, new uncertainties
regarding modeled lifetimes of products became a significant uncertainty. This is partly
due to it being difficult to predict future processes and tendencies in the industry that far
ahead. The energy mix used for production, or the amount of recycled potential in "new"
materials might look completely different in the future, making the predictions uncertain and
insufficient [33]. For the 50-year study period, the study showed significant differences in
light vs. heavy construction, due to the modeled lifetimes of the constructions and materials.
For light constructions, such as wood, the expected lifetime is around 50 years. For heavy
constructions, where e.g. concrete is the dominant material, the expected lifetime is up to
120 years.
If the overall reference study period for the building is only 50 years, the LCA will not
account for the light structures to be replaced at least once during the actual lifetime of
the building. This also includes the energy mix used for operational energy use in LCAbyg.
While LCAbyg models with electricity and heat progressions, where the future energy mix
has been tried predicted, this is only an estimation. These predictions heavily depend on
assumptions, explaining why different progression models can have significantly different
outcomes, making them uncertain as well.
Another important factor when considering different reference study periods, is the rela-
tionship between emissions related to building materials and emissions related to building
operation. Assuming that there will only be limited replacements of materials, it is expected
that building operations will be the main contributor over the reference period. For the con-
sidered cases in this project, where a 50-year reference period was used, building operations
constituted between 58-74% of the total emissions. This is due to the building operations
being continuous emissions, while emissions related to materials are most significant in the
beginning stages. The embodied emissions from materials will only increase in case of re-
placement of materials. The accumulated emissions from materials and operations for Case
1 and Case 2 can be seen in Figure 31.
Page 64 of 149
==PAGE:71==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 31: Accumulated GWP distributed on materials and operation for Case 1 and Case
2 over a 50 year reference study period.
The figure shows that even though the embodied emissions related to the materials are
highest at the beginning, the emissions related to the yearly operation of the building surpass
the embodied emissions after 7-16 years in these cases. This means that after this crossover
point has been surpassed, the main contribution for GWP in the building will be from
building operations. Furthermore, refurbishments are often carried out to improve energy
use in buildings. The operational energy use for refurbished buildings will often be higher
compared to new buildings. A refurbished building will therefore potentially have higher
emissions over a long reference study period compared to new buildings.
Furthermore, there will also be different actual lifetimes of buildings, depending on whether
it is a new build or a refurbishment. A study on durability-based estimations of buildings’
lifespans showed that new buildings can be expected to have a lifetime up to six times longer
than refurbished buildings [34]. This shows that regardless of the chosen reference study
period, there will be limitations and uncertainties connected to the LCA. What is, however,
important for the use of LCA as a tool is that the functional unit is the same when comparing
projects.
Due to some of the presented limitations and uncertainties discussed here, it should also
be noted that the scope was chosen based on the industry guideline. This means that the
data collection and performed LCA are according to current standards but will need to be
updated accordingly if there are changes to current standards or practices.
4.3.4.2
Limitation to the Studied Environmental Impacts
The evaluation of the environmental impacts for the two cases has been chosen to only assess
CO2. The reason for this is the current focus of the Danish building regulation and political
focus.
According to the standard "Sustainability of construction works - Assessment of
Page 65 of 149
==PAGE:72==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
environmental performance of buildings - Calculation method" DS/EN 16978, the Life Cycle
Inventory Assessment (LCIA) should, however, be assessed based on seven environmental
indicators [35]. The seven indicators are presented in Table 16 below.
Table 16: The seven environmental impacts according to DS/EN 15978.
Category
Abbr.
Unit
Description
Global Warming Potential
GWP
kg CO2-eq.
Describes the amount of greenhouse
gasses in the atmosphere, which can
result in a heated climate.
Ozone Depletion Potential
ODP
kg CFC11-eq.
Depletion of the stratospheric ozone
layer, risking flora and fauna to be
exposed to harmful UV-rays.
Photochemical
Ozone
Cre-
ation Potential
POCP
kg Ethene-eq.
Relates to ground-level ozone forma-
tion, risking the development of sum-
mer smog with respiratory risks.
Acidification Potential
AP
kg SO2-eq.
Risk of acid rain if it reacts with wa-
ter, which affects the root system and
nutrients for plants.
Eutrophication Potential
EP
kg (PO4)3--eq.
Measures affect on ecosystems based
on nutrient release into water bodies.
Abiotic Depletion Potential -
constructions
ADPE
kg Sb-eq.
Quantifies consumption of abiotic re-
sources like metals or minerals.
Abiotic Depletion Potential -
Fossil fuels
ADPF
MJ
Quantifies consumption of abiotic re-
sources like coal and oil.
Some of the mentioned environmental impacts from the table might be outdated or not
relevant to the construction sector. Here ODP can be mentioned, as most ozone-depleting
substances have been phased out since the Montreal Protocol in 1987. This means that
today most of these substances and products are phased out, with especially ambitious and
effective EU regulations [36]. This can also be seen in the planetary boundaries, where the
stratospheric ozone depletion is within the safe operating space. Environmental impacts such
as EP, which quantifies an excess supply of nutrients, are more relevant for the agricultural
sector.
This is often caused by over-fertilization and is therefore often not relevant for
the construction sector [37]. Because of this, it can be expected that the impact of these
indicators for the construction sector is relatively small compared to other sectors. If these
environmental impact categories are included in the comparison between buildings, a building
with a relatively low ODP or EP might be preferred over another building, even if the GWP
might be higher for the other project.
Because of this, it is important to consider the
relevance of each impact category and potentially include weighting of the impact categories
if all are to be included in the final assessment.
Some of these indicators for environmental impacts can be put into perspective to the plan-
Page 66 of 149
==PAGE:73==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
etary boundaries. As presented in Section 2.1.1, CO2 only constitutes a small part of the
planetary boundaries. It is therefore not possible to assess the sustainability of a build-
ing based on just the indicator for GWP. Even if more of the environmental impacts had
been considered in this study, the absolute sustainability would still be difficult to assess
for the cases. Absolute sustainability also requires a benchmark, where a certain limit for
an indicator has to be complied with. Currently, there is no widely used standard within
the construction sector regarding absolute sustainability. Here it should also be noted that
benchmarks for absolute sustainability are likewise exposed to limitations. To assess for
absolute sustainability, it has to be established how large a piece from the "emission cake"
can be allocated to the construction sector or even specific building types. It is therefore
possible to compare the sustainability of the two cases to each other or other cases, but it is
not possible to assess the absolute sustainability in this project.
Considering the seven indicators presented in Table 16, interestingly enough, there is no
indicator for biodiversity. This is even though the "biosphere integrity" in the planetary
boundaries presented in Section 2.1.1 is one of the six out of nine processes that have exceeded
the planetary boundaries. As this is an environmental impact that has gained significant
focus over the past couple of years, it can be expected that this will be included in future
LCAs. This can potentially help in gaining a more holistic assessment of buildings. Currently,
the main focus is on GWP, where biomaterials such as wood have negative values in the
production stages, as the trees absorb CO2 before being cut down. If assessing just based on
CO2, this can lead to a distorted picture. If including biodiversity, the use of biomaterials
might not look as environmentally friendly as many think today. This shows the importance
of considering several environmental impacts when assessing the sustainability of a product
or a building.
4.3.4.3
Limitation to the chosen unit for benchmarks
As mentioned in Section 2.2.1, the main focus of benchmarks in the construction sector
is on GWP. Currently, there are only requirements for LCA and benchmarks within new
construction. The unit for these are kg CO2-eq./m2/year. This is also the unit used to
evaluate the case studies for this project, where the refurbishment projects are evaluated
on a building level. It is, however, also possible to assess refurbishment projects on a level
for building constructions or the relationship between embodied (materials) and operational
energy savings. The different types of benchmarks each have their own benefits. The chosen
benchmark has its benefits, as it can be more easily compared to the activities for new
buildings.
Considering a benchmark on a building construction level can make it possible to assign
value to certain design choices in a project. By doing this, it can be possible to set higher
limit values for the building envelope, as this can help reduce the operational energy use,
which is a significant factor in the overall emissions. The other way around, lower limit
values can be set for aesthetic design choices if this is chosen, from a political view.
The same goes for considering the relationship between the design choices and the operational
heat savings. This directly links the embodied emissions from design choices to heat savings,
Page 67 of 149
==PAGE:74==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
underlining the importance of designing for energy savings when refurbishing buildings, as
it is the goal in the European Renovation Wave.
While the latter two can have a political benefit, these also require a higher level of detail in
the LCA modeling. As it has been seen throughout this project, the current level of detail
can be difficult to obtain. This is therefore something that can be highly relevant in the
future but might not be something the construction industry is mature enough for at this
point.
4.3.4.4
Uncertainties of LCA Databases and Quantity Extractions
Finally, there are the uncertainties connected to the modeled buildings through LCA databases
and standard products. For this project, standard building constructions and products from
the GenDK database have been used. While these might be sufficient for the level of this
project, there is little room for detailing in the design choices. For example, windows in
this project are modeled on standard data, but considering the variables in different window
products, this can have a significant effect on the final calculated emissions.
Here it could have been beneficial to look into specific products with EPDs, to ensure a high
level of detail. This, however, requires a high level of detail in the cases and their additional
products and materials. This is partly implemented in some LCAs, where product-specific
EPDs are included in the LCA modeling to individualize constructions. Not all products
have EPDs, and product specification often happens later in the phases of a case, meaning
this can only be modeled in the final LCA.
This also speaks to some of the uncertainties discovered in the quantity extractions from
the Revit models. The data in Revit models are often generic if even modeled with a high
enough detail level. It will therefore be necessary all around to increase the detail level in
3D models to ensure proper quantity and material/product extractions. This would add
another level of complexity to the already quite complex projects. This added complexity
can, however, be relevant, as it makes it possible to choose manufacturers and products
based on their sustainability initiatives. A demand for more sustainable products due to the
detail level of LCAs, can potentially incentivize manufacturers in the sustainable agenda.
This might not just improve the sustainability level of the specific projects, but might even
increase the sustainable innovations in the sector altogether.
——————————
Page 68 of 149
==PAGE:75==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
5
Conclusion
The construction sector’s significant contribution to CO2 emissions and energy use, un-
derlines the importance of sustainable initiatives and systematic approaches to minimize
environmental impacts for the sector. As sustainability becomes a more significant factor
in construction, with an increased focus on environmental impacts and expected upcoming
legislation and benchmarks, the involvement of contractors in LCA processes might be a
necessity in the future. By collaborating with the construction company Hansson & Knud-
sen A/S, this project provides an identification of the processes related to the contractor’s
implementation of LCA, a methodology for data and quantity collection for LCA on refur-
bishment projects based on five case studies, and an evaluation of the environmental impacts
related to two of the case studies.
It is recommended that LCA will not only be performed at the initial and final phases of
construction activities, but will also be used as a tool throughout all construction phases.
Utilizing LCA as a tool can optimize environmental impacts for specific design choices, given
the complexity and uncertainties observed in refurbishment projects, that makes changes to
the constructions, during the construction phase, necessary. While this does not require
contractors to perform complete LCAs from start to finish, understanding and addressing
uncertainties related to quantity collection and LCA are essential.
By addressing LCA processes and advocating active contractor involvement, the study pro-
vided a framework for integrating LCA into refurbishment projects. This approach not only
enhances the accuracy of LCA outcomes but also supports the broader goal of reducing
environmental impacts in the construction sector. Increased contractor involvement in LCA
processes is expected to improve the detail level of LCA models during the construction
phase, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of LCA as a tool for mitigating environmental
impacts in construction.
5.1
Methodology for Data and Quantity Collection
A comprehensive methodology for data and quantity collection was developed to ensure
alignment and comprehension of the necessary input for an LCA for refurbishment projects.
This includes necessary input for "Building and operation," which focuses on the overall areas
and operational energy use of the building. For the input in "Building model", a method-
ology and accompanying Grasshopper Code (for this project developed tool) for extracting
quantities on constructions and materials were developed. Some of the main challenges and
limitations to the developed methodology were data scattering and availability, detail level
in Revit models, and complexity of the individual cases.
To obtain the necessary documentation, it was observed that, depending on the individual
case and the folder structure in the respective project materials, the documents and files
could be placed in different folders. The necessary information was also often scattered over
several documents and files, making it a part of the process to become familiarized with the
project material and search for the relevant information.
Page 69 of 149
==PAGE:76==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
The methodology developed in this project also addressed challenges posed by the detail
level of different Revit models for several projects, and how to sort for necessary data for the
LCI, based on the properties of the models and the related constructions. The uncertainties
related to quantity extractions based on Revit models highlighted a need for improved stan-
dardization regarding the detail level of and streamlining for the naming of existing and new
constructions in models for refurbishment projects. While a high detail level is possible to
achieve in Revit, the detail levels of the five case studies showed significant inconsistencies
and thereby uncertainties. Due to this, it would be beneficial if requirements for detail level
in Revit models were incorporated in future ICT agreements by the project owner.
In connection to the addressed challenges regarding the detail level, the complexity of the
refurbishment projects was also an uncertainty factor. One of the layers of uncertainty was
distinguishing between existing and new constructions. Additionally, because refurbishment
projects are based on existing buildings, there are often no one-size-fits-all solutions, resulting
in a high variety of different construction types. This means that some inconsistencies and
shortcuts were observed in the Revit models, which were correctly drawn in the official 2D
drawings for the projects.
The developed methodology and guide considered most of these challenges and uncertainties
by individualizing the sorting possibilities in the Grasshopper Code. This was designed to fit
the different detail levels and properties of the Revit models. With the addition of manual
sorting of the extracted data, the developed methodology was deemed aligned with the goal
and scope of the study.
5.2
Evaluation of Environmental Impacts
The environmental impacts for CO2 were calculated and assessed for two of the five case
studies. The data for the LCA, as well as construction and material quantities, were ex-
tracted using the developed methodology and Grasshopper Code. The calculated results
provided valuable insights into the GWP associated with refurbishment projects, highlight-
ing potential areas for improvement that can support future decision-making and reduce
CO2 emissions.
The total GWP for Case 1 and Case 2 are relatively close, with Case 1 having total emissions
of 5.8 kg CO2-eq./m2/year and Case 2 having 5.5 kg CO2-eq./m2/year. Although the two
cases have similar total GWPs, the distribution of emissions related to operational energy use
and embodied emissions from materials varies significantly between the two cases. Energy
use for building operations constitutes 74% of the total emissions for Case 1, while it is 61%
for Case 2. It was found that within the operational energy use, emissions related to district
heating played the most significant role. Due to the high emissions from building operations
compared to embodied emissions, it was concluded that energy savings should be a main
focus in refurbishment projects if the goal is to reduce emissions.
Furthermore, the distribution of emissions by construction and material types was also in-
vestigated. This showed that the main contributing construction types were related to the
building envelope, such as windows, exterior walls, and roofs. For materials, the main con-
tributing material groups were glazing and mineral building products. These materials are
Page 70 of 149
==PAGE:77==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
some of the main components in windows, exterior walls, and roofs. It could therefore be
concluded that while it is important to reduce operational energy use, the emissions from
materials originate from the building envelope, which is key to a lower heating demand. This
comprehensive approach is critical for enhancing the overall sustainability and environmental
performance of refurbishment projects.
5.2.1
Uncertainties and Limitations
For uncertainties and limitations, the main categories for the evaluated results were the scope,
considered environmental impacts, benchmarks, and LCA databases, which are inherent to
most LCA projects.
For the scope, it is important to mention that based on the available data provided by
Hansson & Knudsen, it was chosen to consider the existing building mass with zero impact,
except for the replacement stage B4. The considered environmental impacts also constituted
a significant limitation, as the evaluated results only included emissions for certain life cycle
stages over a 50-year reference study period. While this followed the recommended stages
and reference study period from the industry guide on LCA for refurbishment projects and
the building regulations, the emissions related to building processes (A4-5) among others
were omitted. The evaluated results can therefore be considered lower than the actual CO2
emissions for the case studies.
The chosen unit for evaluating the environmental impacts was kg CO2-eq./m2/year, and was
selected to compare to emissions from new builds. Other benchmarks, such as considering
emissions on a construction level (e.g., interior/exterior walls, roofs, or floor decks) or con-
sidering embodied emissions relative to saved emissions from energy savings, can potentially
highlight significant changes in emissions for specific design choices. This can be used to
shape the design choices towards a certain goal, such as reduction of operational energy use
instead of refurbishing with a focus on aesthetics. Furthermore, the evaluation of results was
limited to GWP, so other potentially significant environmental impacts were not considered
in this project.
Finally, there are uncertainties connected to the database. The LCA was modeled with
constructions and products found in the GenDK database. This means, that no product-
specific data was used for modeling. This could potentially reduce or increase the calculated
GWP, by increasing the detail level of the LCA models.
5.3
Future Recommendations
While this report has examined key aspects of LCA for refurbishment projects, it serves as a
starting point for future studies to improve the use of LCA in refurbishment projects. Some
suggestions for the next steps to improve the processes and methodology could be:
• Roadmap for implementation of LCA in refurbishment
• Template and guide for improving the detail levels of Revit models
• Exploration of alternative scenarios
Page 71 of 149
==PAGE:78==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
The roadmap for implementation of LCA in refurbishment should be developed with
the aim of integrating LCA into all phases of refurbishment projects. The roadmap should
emphasize the increased involvement of the contractor to ensure the use of LCA as a tool
for decision-making.
Template and guide for improving the detail levels of Revit models should outline
the necessary detail level in Revit models to ensure accurate quantity extraction for LCAs.
This would provide clear standards for contractors and designers to follow when updating
BIM models and drawings.
An enhanced detail level in Revit models will improve the
accuracy and reliability of the LCI.
For Exploration of alternative scenarios, alternative scenarios of the evaluated cases
should be conducted to explore and identify specific opportunities and design choices to
further reduce the environmental impacts of the case studies. The scenarios could include
changes to material or product choices as well as the refurbishment scope. This can po-
tentially highlight crucial trade-offs and opportunities for improving sustainability in the
construction sector.
These future recommendations aim to ease the implementation of LCA in refurbishment
projects and increase the understanding of the prerequisites for LCA as well as the potentials
when using LCA as a tool for decision-making.
Page 72 of 149
==PAGE:79==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
References
[1]
Byggeriets Handletank for Bæredygtighed. Byggeriets Handletank for Bæredygtighed
- Bygge- og Anlægssektorens Handleplan på Vej Mod Bæredygtighed i Byggeriet. 2024.
url: https://www.frinet.dk/media/r0dd14kn/byggeriets-handletank-rapport
-20112023-dobbeltsidet.pdf (visited on 03/01/2024).
[2]
Miljøstyrelsen. “Affaldsstatistik 2021, Revideret Udgave”. In: Affaldsstatistik 2021 2247
(2023). url: https://mst.dk/publikationer/2023/oktober/affaldsstatistik-
2021.
[3]
European Commission. A Renovation Wave for Europe - Greening Our Buildings, Cre-
ating Jobs, Improving Lives. Communication from the Commission to the European
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Com-
mittee of the Regions COM(2020) 662 final. Brussels: European Commission, 2020.
[4]
Dagens Byggeri. Ny Standard: Bevar i Stedet for at Rive Ned. 2024. url: https:
//www.dagensbyggeri.dk/artikel/121992-ny-standard-bevar-i-stedet-for-
at-rive-ned (visited on 04/20/2024).
[5]
Katherine Richardson et al. “Earth beyond six of nine planetary boundaries”. In:
Science Advances 9.37 (2023), eadh2458. doi: 10 . 1126 / sciadv . adh2458. eprint:
https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.adh2458. url: https:
//www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/sciadv.adh2458.
[6]
Stockholm Resilience Centre. Planetary Boundaries. url: https://www.stockholmr
esilience.org/research/planetary-boundaries.html (visited on 03/03/2024).
[7]
DTU. Questions about absolute sustainability. url: https://www.dtu.dk/english/
newsarchive/2022/06/questions-about-absolute-sustainability (visited on
06/15/2024).
[8]
Regeringens Klimapartnerskaber Bygge- og Anlægssektoren. “Anbefalinger til Regerin-
gen fra Klimapartnerskabet for Bygge- og Anlægssektoren”. In: (2020).
[9]
European Commission. Buildings and Construction. url: https://single-market-
economy.ec.europa.eu/industry/sustainability/buildings-and-constructi
on_en?fbclid=IwZXh0bgNhZW0CMTAAAR2YmUYissSHgFUfJJ_u3nfcv9KDnBYzAos9Ir_
_0Lcj_mfZ- c7xm9sv1SY_aem_AXXWkS13WodncPwRZu15OKGMZsdDKW1A2Kt7ci- pnn-
ogKwPjxJA_HgexDkImsGPPw-tyjFRvPc5A2haiG2Hw7TA (visited on 04/22/2024).
[10]
SWECO. LCA-database. url: https://www.sweco.dk/baeredygtighed/lca-datab
ase/ (visited on 04/29/2024).
[11]
Bygge- og Boligstyrelsen Trafik-. Bygningsreglement 2018. Accessed: 2024-05-20. 2018.
url: https://bygningsreglementet.dk/.
[12]
Lise Hvid Horup Sørensen and Mathilde Mattson. “Analyse af CO2-udledning og To-
taløkonomi i Renovering og Nybyg”. Version 3.0. In: (2020).
[13]
Emma Elobeid. How the Circular Economy Can Help Us Stay within Planetary Bound-
aries. 2022. url: https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/articles/how-
the-circular-economy-can-help-us-stay-within-planetary-boundaries (vis-
ited on 03/06/2024).
Page 73 of 149
==PAGE:80==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
[14]
Freja Nygaard Rasmussen and Harpa Birgisdottir. Livscyklusvurdering af større bygn-
ingsrenoveringer: Miljømæssige konsekvenser belyst via casestudier. Dansk. SBI. SBI
Forlag, 2015.
[15]
Regitze Kjær Zimmermann, Freja Nygaard Rasmussen, and Harpa Birgisdóttir. “Chal-
lenges in Benchmarking Whole-Life GHG Emissions from Renovation Cases: Evidence
from 23 Real-Life Cases”. In: Energy and Buildings 301 (2023), p. 113639. issn: 0378-
7788. doi: 10.1016/j.enbuild.2023.113639. url: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0378778823008691.
[16]
Boligstyrelsen. Klimakrav (LCA) i Bygningsreglement. url: https : / / www . sbst .
dk/byggeri/baeredygtigt- byggeri/national- strategi- for- baeredygtigt-
byggeri/klimakrav-lca-i-bygningsreglementet (visited on 04/03/2024).
[17]
Alberte Mai Lund et al. “Klimapåvirkning fra Renovering - Muligheder for Udformning
af Grænseværdier til LCA for Renovering”. In: BUILD Rapport 2022:33 (2022), p. 688.
issn: 2597-3118.
[18]
Amdi Schødt Worm et al. “Branchevejledning i LCA ved Renovering”. Dansk. In:
Branchevejledning i LCA ved Renovering. 2017.
[19]
Videncenter om Bygningers Klimapåvirkninger. LCA-værktøjer. url: https://bygge
riogklima.dk/viden/lca-vaerktoejer/ (visited on 06/20/2024).
[20]
PRé Sustainability. SIMAPRO - LCA software for informed changemakers. url: https
://pre-sustainability.com/solutions/tools/simapro/ (visited on 06/20/2024).
[21]
LCAbyg. Om LCAbyg. url: https://www.lcabyg.dk/da/ (visited on 06/20/2024).
[22]
Dansk Miljøanalyse. Miljøscreening af bygninger og privathuse. url: https://dma.
nu/raadgivning/miljoescreening/ (visited on 04/20/2024).
[23]
Michael Z. Hauschild, Ralph K. Rosenbaum, and Stig Irving Olsen. Life Cycle Assess-
ment - Theory and Practice. English. Springer Nature, 2018. isbn: 978-3-319-56474-6.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-56475-3.
[24]
Emilie Brisson Stapel et al. “Brugervejledning til LCAbyg 2023 v. 5.3.1.0”. Dansk.
In: Beregning af Bygningers Miljøprofil. BUILD - Institut for Byggeri, By og Miljø,
Aalborg Universitet, 2023.
[25]
Energistyrelsen. Energimærkning af bygninger. url: https://ens.dk/ansvarsomraa
der/energimaerkning-af-bygninger/hvornaar-skal-bygninger-energimaerkes
(visited on 06/08/2024).
[26]
Energy10. Energy10 – Intelligent beregning af byggeri og energi! url: https://www.
energy10.dk/ (visited on 06/08/2024).
[27]
MOLIO. A323 klæder bygherre på til at definere formål og stille krav om LCA i udbud.
url: https://molio.dk/nyheder-og-viden/nyheder/seneste-nyt/lca-kravstil
lelse (visited on 06/20/2024).
[28]
Princeton Student Climate Initiative. CEMENT AND CONCRETE: THE ENVIRON-
MENTAL IMPACT. url: https://psci.princeton.edu/tips/2020/11/3/cement-
and-concrete-the-environmental-impact (visited on 06/10/2024).
[29]
G.A. Perry. “Mineral Wool Insulation is Not Green, Sustainable or Environmentally
Friendly”. In: (2019). White Paper. url: https://miscimages-2.s3.amazonaws.
com/3353/Gavin+Perry+Mineral+Wool+Insulation+is+Not+Green+Sustainable+
or+Environmentally+Friendly+2019-06-09.pdf.
Page 74 of 149
==PAGE:81==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
[30]
Stena Recycling. The value of recycling materials. url: https://www.stenarecyclin
g.com/news-insights/insights-inspiration/guides-articles/the-value-of-
recycling-metals/ (visited on 06/15/2024).
[31]
Sika Group. CAN CONCRETE BE RECYCLED? url: https://www.sika.com/en/
knowledge-hub/can-concrete-be-recycled.html (visited on 06/15/2024).
[32]
Bolig- og Ældreministeriet Social-. Ny aftale stiller ambitiøse klimakrav til nyt byggeri.
url: https://www.sm.dk/nyheder/nyhedsarkiv/2024/maj/ny-aftale-stiller-
ambitioese-klimakrav-til-nyt-byggeri (visited on 06/20/2024).
[33]
F N Rasmussen et al. “The choice of reference study period in building LCA – case-
based analysis and arguments”. In: IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental
Science 588.3 (2020), p. 032029. doi: 10.1088/1755- 1315/588/3/032029. url:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/588/3/032029.
[34]
Beatriz Palacios-Munoz et al. “Sustainability assessment of refurbishment vs. new
constructions by means of LCA and durability-based estimations of buildings lifes-
pans: A new approach”. In: Building and Environment 160 (2019), p. 106203. doi:
10.1016/j.buildenv.2019.106203. url: https://hal.science/hal-02173841.
[35]
DS Dansk Standard. “Sustainability of construction works - Assessment of environ-
mental performance of buildings - Calculation method”. In: DS/EN 15978:2012. 2012.
[36]
European Environment Agency. Consumption of ozone-depleting substances. url: ht
tps://www.eea.europa.eu/en/analysis/indicators/consumption-of-ozone-
depleting-substances (visited on 06/15/2024).
[37]
space4water Portal. Eutrophication Potential. url: https://www.space4water.org/
water/eutrophication-potential (visited on 06/15/2024).
Page 75 of 149
==PAGE:82==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Appendices
A
Grasshopper Code
The following section will present the Grasshopper code used for the methodology and data collection. To use the code, the
following software (in addition to Revit) must be installed on the computer:
• Rhino.Inside.Revit - https://www.rhino3d.com/features/rhino-inside-revit/
• Grasshopper - https://www.grasshopper3d.com/page/download-1
• Lunchbox - https://www.food4rhino.com/en/app/lunchbox
The following figure provides an overview of the steps in the Grasshopper code. This is followed by screenshots and descriptions
for each step of the code.
Figure 32: Overview of the Grasshopper Code, showing the connection between each step.
Page 76 of 149
==PAGE:83==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 33: Step 1 and description of the Grasshopper Code.
Page 77 of 149
==PAGE:84==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 34: Step 2 and description of the Grasshopper Code.
Page 78 of 149
==PAGE:85==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 35: Step 3 and description of the Grasshopper Code.
Page 79 of 149
==PAGE:86==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 36: Step 4 and description of the Grasshopper Code.
Page 80 of 149
==PAGE:87==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
A.1
Example on Quantity Extraction from Revit model for Case 2
Table 17: Example from Case 2 of an unfiltered output from the Grasshopper Code including furniture, which is not considered
in the scope.
Name/element
Count
Area
Revit Ceiling : bk.lof02 - 25G/25S/45S : id 7683230
63
129.7215
Revit Ceiling : bk.lof04 - 95IS : id 9659532
2
13.23
Revit Component : bi.møb7 - Enkeltseng : id 11783117
2
4.92
Revit Component : bi.møb8 - Dobbeltseng : id 11834720
2
8.88
Revit Component : bi.ska43 - Garderobeskab 60 40 dyb : id 6859576
31
396.8806
Revit Component : bi.ska44 - Højskab 40 30 dyb - EL : id 7488620
12
103.3896
Revit Floor : bk.alg01 - 180BE : id 9530370
40
284.0113
Revit Floor : bk.dæk01 - 100BI/bundopbygning : id 7071181
2
7.580785
Revit Floor : bk.dæk02 - 100BI : id 7881364
28
26.07
Revit Floor : bk.dæk05 - 20T/80BI : id 10472358
4
6.0888
Revit Floor : bk.gul02 - 2LD/5BF/70BF/15F : id 6294081
16
95.1
Revit Floor : bk.gul10 - 22T/195RL : id 8253107
2
65.78639
Revit Floor : bk.væg50 - 25G/15G : id 9888591
5
2.82488
Revit Roof : bk.tak01 - 5TP/25TB/125ST : id 6367748
2
411.1862
Revit Roof : bk.tak02 - 13SK/38TL/125ST : id 6386152
1
101.599
Revit Wall : bk.væg10 - 10P/150LB : id 10308866
2
0.6235
Revit Wall : bk.væg11 - 10P : id 10044044
2
1.512
Revit Wall : bk.væg12 - 10P/200I : id 9613647
8
24.9495
Page 81 of 149
==PAGE:88==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
B
Life Cycle Inventory
B.1
The Five Case Studies
B.1.1
Case 1
Table 18: LCI and sources for "Building and operation" for Case 1.
Building and operation
Input
Source
Type
Multi-story residential buildings
Tender material: "Building case description"
Commissioning year
2024
Heated floor area [m2]
42518
Energy Label
Gross floor area [m2]
53031
Energy Label
Integrated garages [m2]
0
Additional area [m2]
0
Operational electricity use [kWh/m2 year]
3.4
Energy10/Energy Label
Exported electricity [kWh/m2 year]
0
Energy10/Energy Label
Electricity supply
Electricity - Progression
Energy10/Energy Label
Electricity supplement [kWh/m2 year]
0
Energy10/Energy Label
Operational heat use [kWh/m2 year]
57.6
Energy10/Energy Label
Heat supplement [kWh/m2 year]
0
Energy10/Energy Label
Heat supply
District heating - Progression
Energy10/Energy Label
Page 82 of 149
==PAGE:89==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 19: Available Revit models, information, and sources used for quantity extraction for Case 1.
Building models and information
Available files
Source
Revit models for architectural discipline
6
Project material: Geometry
Revit model for structural discipline
1
Project material: Geometry
Revit models for ventilation
1
Project material: Geometry
Legend description/building part description
1
Project material: Individual drawings
Table 20: Additional information and sources for Case 1.
Additional information
Data
Source
Year of construction
1969
Tender material: "Building case description"
Year of major renovation
-
N/A
Building blocks
8
Tender material: "Building case description"
Floors above ground
4
Tender material: "Building case description"
Basement floors
1
Tender material: "Building case description"
Scope of refurbishment included in LCA
– Building envelope
– Installations/ventilation
– Structure/construction
– Improvements of floor plans
– Architectural appearance
– Project material: Drawings and Revit models
– Tender material: "Building case description"
Page 83 of 149
==PAGE:90==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
B.1.1.1
LCI on Quantities for Case 1
Table 21: LCI quantities for the construction group "Decks" and "Floors" for Case 1.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Decks
bk.dæk01
Floor
deck,
concrete
ele-
ment, prestressed hollow deck
0.18/7.0 m
57.3
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
7.2
kg/m²
412.56
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete
C45/55 - CEM I
305.6234
kg/m²
7.856537
m³
bk.dæk02
Floor
deck,
in-situ
cast
0.15/5.0 m
84.9
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
20.5
kg/m²
1740.45
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.15
m³/m²
12.735
m³
bk.dæk03
Floor
deck,
concrete
ele-
ment, prestressed hollow deck
0.22/7.0 m
473.9
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
8.8
kg/m²
4170.32
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete
C45/55 - CEM I
315.8109
kg/m²
67.14347
m³
bk.dæk04
Floor
deck,
concrete
ele-
ment, prestressed hollow deck
0.22/7.0 m
68.7
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
8.8
kg/m²
604.56
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete
C45/55 - CEM I
315.8109
kg/m²
9.733606
m³
Flooring, terrazzo
68.7
m²
Terrazzo, 10mm
75
kg/m²
5152.5
kg
bk.dæk10
Floor deck, in-situ cast 0.1
168.5
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
13
kg/m²
2190.5
kg
Continued on next page
Page 84 of 149
==PAGE:91==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 21 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.1
m³/m²
16.85
m³
Insulation EPS 400 mm
168.5
m²
EPS insulation for walls
and roofs W / D 035
0.4
m³/m²
67.4
m³
bk.dæk11
Floor
deck,
in-situ
cast
0.08/5.0 m
28.8
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
10
kg/m²
288
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.08
m³/m²
2.304
m³
Insulation EPS 400 mm
28.8
m²
EPS insulation for walls
and roofs W / D 035
0.4
m³/m²
11.52
m³
VM_CONC
_IN-
SUL_INSUL
_500
Floor deck, in-situ cast 0.1
199.2
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
13
kg/m²
2589.6
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.1
m³/m²
19.92
m³
Insulation EPS 400 mm
199.2
m²
EPS insulation for walls
and roofs W / D 035
0.4
m³/m²
79.68
m³
VM_Massivt
_CONC
Floor
deck,
concrete
ele-
ment, prestressed hollow deck
0.22/7.0 m
19.6
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
8.8
kg/m²
172.48
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete
C45/55 - CEM I
315.8109
kg/m²
2.776982
m³
Continued on next page
Page 85 of 149
==PAGE:92==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 21 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
VM_CONC
_IN-
SUL_INSUL
_300
Floor deck, in-situ cast 0.1
11.6
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
13
kg/m²
150.8
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.1
m³/m²
1.16
m³
Insulation EPS 200 mm
11.6
m²
EPS insulation for walls
and roofs W / D 035
0.2
m³/m²
2.32
m³
VM_Precast
_CONC
Floor
deck,
concrete
ele-
ment, prestressed hollow deck
0.22/7.0 m
411.1
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
8.8
kg/m²
3617.68
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete
C45/55 - CEM I
315.8109
kg/m²
58.24579
m³
VM_CONC
Floor deck, in-situ cast 0.6
86.5
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
78
kg/m²
6747
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.6
m³/m²
51.9
m³
VM_Insitu
_CONC
Floor deck, in-situ cast 0.1
32
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
13
kg/m²
416
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.1
m³/m²
3.2
m³
Floor
deck,
in-situ
cast
0.15/5.0 m
8.5
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
20.5
kg/m²
174.25
kg
Continued on next page
Page 86 of 149
==PAGE:93==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 21 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.15
m³/m²
1.275
m³
Floors
bk.gul02
Floor deck, concrete 47mm
918.9
m²
Ready mixed concrete
C35/45 SCC
0.047
m³/m²
43.1883
m³
Flooring, ceramic tiles, 10 mm
918.9
m²
Cement screed
96
kg/m²
88214.4
kg
Stoneware tiles glazed
(thickness 0.01 m)
1
m²/m²
918.9
m²
Tile adhesive
3.1
kg/m²
2848.59
kg
Floor heating pipes, PEX, 100
mm distance
918.9
m²
Underfloor
heating
system with insulation,
PEX (100 mm distance)
1
m²/m²
918.9
m²
bk.gul26
Insulation,
mineral
wool
40mm
287.7
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.04
m³/m²
11.508
m³
Middle layer, concrete element
100mm
287.7
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
7
kg/m²
2013.9
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.1
m³/m²
28.77
m³
bk.gul07
Floor deck, concrete 30mm
860.3
m²
Ready mixed concrete
C35/45 SCC
0.03
m³/m²
25.809
m³
Flooring, ceramic tiles, 10 mm
860.3
m²
Cement screed
96
kg/m²
82588.8
kg
Stoneware tiles glazed
(thickness 0.01 m)
1
m²/m²
860.3
m²
Tile adhesive
3.1
kg/m²
2666.93
kg
Continued on next page
Page 87 of 149
==PAGE:94==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 21 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Floor heating pipes, PEX, 100
mm distance
860.3
m²
Underfloor
heating
system with insulation,
PEX (100 mm distance)
1
m²/m²
860.3
m²
E - kl/bet/luf
(badplade)
Flooring, ceramic tiles, 10 mm
1042.2
m²
Cement screed
96
kg/m²
100051.2
kg
Stoneware tiles glazed
(thickness 0.01 m)
1
m²/m²
1042.2
m²
Tile adhesive
3.1
kg/m²
3230.82
kg
bk.gul13
Floor deck, concrete 40mm
66.1
m²
Ready mixed concrete
C35/45 SCC
0.04
m³/m²
2.644
m³
Flooring, ceramic tiles, 10 mm
66.1
m²
Cement screed
96
kg/m²
6345.6
kg
Stoneware tiles glazed
(thickness 0.01 m)
1
m²/m²
66.1
m²
Tile adhesive
3.1
kg/m²
204.91
kg
bk.gul17
Flooring, ceramic tiles, 10 mm
28.9
m²
Cement screed
96
kg/m²
2774.4
kg
Stoneware tiles glazed
(thickness 0.01 m)
1
m²/m²
28.9
m²
Tile adhesive
3.1
kg/m²
89.59
kg
bk.gul01
Flooring, timber flooring (20
mm) on floor plasterboard
9919.8
m²
Dry floor screed (gyp-
sum cardboard) (thick-
ness 0.018 m)
19.8
kg/m²
9786.35
m²
Lava granulate
12.1
kg/m²
120029.6
kg
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
0.02
m³/m²
198.396
m³
bk.gul12
Floor deck, concrete 60mm
33.8
m²
Ready mixed concrete
C35/45 SCC
0.06
m³/m²
2.028
m³
Continued on next page
Page 88 of 149
==PAGE:95==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 21 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Flooring, ceramic tiles, 10 mm
33.8
m²
Cement screed
96
kg/m²
3244.8
kg
Stoneware tiles glazed
(thickness 0.01 m)
1
m²/m²
33.8
m²
Tile adhesive
3.1
kg/m²
104.78
kg
bk.gul16
Floor deck, concrete 80mm
41.5
m²
Ready mixed concrete
C35/45 SCC
0.08
m³/m²
3.32
m³
Flooring, ceramic tiles, 10 mm
41.5
m²
Cement screed
96
kg/m²
3984
kg
Stoneware tiles glazed
(thickness 0.01 m)
1
m²/m²
41.5
m²
Tile adhesive
3.1
kg/m²
128.65
kg
Insulation EPS 40mm
41.5
m²
EPS insulation for ceil-
ings/floors as edge insu-
lation B / P-040
0.04
m³/m²
1.66
m³
bk.gul03+25
Flooring, timber flooring on
joists without insulation
710.3
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0039
m³/m²
2.77017
m³
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
0.022
m³/m²
15.6266
m³
bk.gul09
Floor deck, concrete 55mm
28.9
m²
Ready mixed concrete
C35/45 SCC
0.055
m³/m²
1.5895
m³
Flooring,
cement
screed
15mm
28.9
m²
Cement screed
36
kg/m²
1040.4
kg
bk.gul04
Substrate,
insulation
foam
glass
(100mm)
and
stable
gravel
24.1
m²
Cellular glass insulation
115 kg/m³
11.5
kg/m²
277.15
kg
Continued on next page
Page 89 of 149
==PAGE:96==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 21 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Damp
insulation
PE
(thickness 0.0002 m)
0.2
kg/m²
24.1
m²
Gravel 2/32 dried
277.5
kg/m²
6687.75
kg
E - Parket m.
strøer u. isoler-
ing
Flooring, timber flooring on
joists without insulation
11647.9
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0039
m³/m²
45.42681
m³
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
0.022
m³/m²
256.2538
m³
E - Parket m.
strøer
Flooring, timber flooring on
joists
4507.1
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0039
m³/m²
17.57769
m³
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
0.022
m³/m²
99.1562
m³
bk.gul15+20
Flooring,
vinyl,
cements
screed
(80mm)
and
EPS
insulation (40mm)
408.1
m²
Cement screed
192
kg/m²
78355.2
kg
EPS insulation for ceil-
ings/floors as edge insu-
lation B / P-040
0.04
m³/m²
16.324
m³
Transparent board PVC
0.002
m³/m²
0.8162
m³
bk.gul14
Flooring, vinyl, cement screed
(48mm)
128.7
m²
Cement screed
115.2
kg/m²
14826.24
kg
Transparent board PVC
0.002
m³/m²
0.2574
m³
Continued on next page
Page 90 of 149
==PAGE:97==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 21 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
bk.gul05
Flooring, joists
12.5
m²
EPS insulation for ceil-
ings/floors as edge insu-
lation B / P-035
0.073
m³/m²
0.9125
m³
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0039
m³/m²
0.04875
m³
Flooring, vinyl, cement screed
(48mm)
12.5
m²
Cement screed
115.2
kg/m²
1440
kg
Transparent board PVC
0.002
m³/m²
0.025
m³
Page 91 of 149
==PAGE:98==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 22: LCI quantities for the construction group "Interior Walls" and "Exterior Walls" for Case 1.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Interior Walls
bk.væg62
Middle layer, concrete element
250mm
172
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
15
kg/m²
2580
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.25
m³/m²
43
m³
bk.væg63
Middle layer, concrete element
200 mm
529.8
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
12
kg/m²
6357.6
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.2
m³/m²
105.96
m³
bk.væg100
Insulation,
mineral
wool
230mm
205.5
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.23
m³/m²
47.265
m³
Wall surface, plasterboard 1
layer, 12,5 mm
205.5
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
1
m²/m²
205.5
m²
E - Bræddevæg
Timber partition wall 50 mm
3242.4
m²
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
26
kg/m²
153.6122
m³
bk.væg40
Insulation,
mineral
wool
230mm
78.2
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.23
m³/m²
17.986
m³
Middle layer, concrete, aer-
ated concrete 100 mm
78.2
m²
Aerated concrete P2 04
non-reinforced
0.1
m³/m²
7.82
m³
bk.væg31
Middle layer, concrete, aer-
ated concrete 75 mm
1056.2
m²
Aerated concrete P2 04
non-reinforced
0.075
m³/m²
79.215
m³
bk.væg32
Middle layer, concrete, aer-
ated concrete 100 mm
4524.9
m²
Aerated concrete P2 04
non-reinforced
0.1
m³/m²
452.49
m³
Continued on next page
Page 92 of 149
==PAGE:99==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 22 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
bk.væg34
Middle layer, concrete, aer-
ated concrete 150mm
251.1
m²
Aerated concrete P2 04
non-reinforced
0.15
m³/m²
37.665
m³
bk.væg37
Exterior wall surface,
lime-
stone sandstone,
front wall
150mm
1700.6
m²
Sand-lime brick
0.15
m³/m²
255.09
m³
Tile adhesive
77.1
kg/m²
131116.3
kg
bk.væg44
Middle layer, steel skeleton, 95
mm
1045.4
m²
Mineral wool (facade in-
sulation)
0.095
m³/m²
99.313
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
3.6
kg/m²
3763.44
kg
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
1045.4
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
2090.8
m²
bk.væg64
Middle layer, concrete element
250mm
49.4
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
15
kg/m²
741
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.25
m³/m²
12.35
m³
bk.væg43
Middle layer, steel skeleton, 70
mm
3436.8
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.07
m³/m²
240.576
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
3.1
kg/m²
10654.08
kg
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
3436.8
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
6873.6
m²
bk.væg36
Exterior wall surface,
lime-
stone sandstone,
front wall
100mm
233.6
m²
Sand-lime brick
0.1
m³/m²
23.36
m³
Continued on next page
Page 93 of 149
==PAGE:100==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 22 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Tile adhesive
51.4
kg/m²
12007.04
kg
bk.væg47
Middle layer, steel skeleton, 70
mm
153.8
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.07
m³/m²
10.766
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
3.1
kg/m²
476.78
kg
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
153.8
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
307.6
m²
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
153.8
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
307.6
m²
bk.væg03
Insulation,
mineral
wool
230mm
36.1
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.23
m³/m²
8.303
m³
Wall surface, plaster of lime
10mm
36.1
m²
Lime
gypsum
interior
plaster
0.01
m³/m²
0.361
m³
Exterior wall surface,
lime-
stone sandstone,
front wall
100mm
36.1
m²
Sand-lime brick
0.1
m³/m²
3.61
m³
Tile adhesive
51.4
kg/m²
1855.54
kg
bk.væg49
Middle layer, steel skeleton, 95
mm
121.7
m²
Mineral wool (facade in-
sulation)
0.095
m³/m²
11.5615
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
3.6
kg/m²
438.12
kg
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
121.7
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
243.4
m²
Continued on next page
Page 94 of 149
==PAGE:101==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 22 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
121.7
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
243.4
m²
bk.væg60
Steel grid wall
148.1
m²
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates (Clone)
21
kg/m²
3110.1
kg
bk.væg90
Flooring, ceramic tiles, 10 mm
4439.1
m²
Cement screed
96
kg/m²
426153.6
kg
Stoneware tiles glazed
(thickness 0.01 m)
1
m²/m²
4439.1
m²
Tile adhesive
3.1
kg/m²
13761.21
kg
External Walls
bk.væg07+08
Ex.
Masonry 110 mm (1/2
brick)
1076.7
m²
Lime-cement plaster
32
kg/m²
19.14133
m³
Lime plaster
12
kg/m²
7.178
m³
Lime
gypsum
interior
plaster
0.02
m³/m²
21.534
m³
Facing brick
182.7
kg/m²
109.2851
m³
bk.væg10
Middle layer, steel skeleton,
mineral wool, 145 mm
5102.1
m²
Damp
insulation
PE
(thickness 0.0002 m)
0.2
m²/m²
1020.42
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.145
m³/m²
739.8045
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
9.1
kg/m²
46429.11
kg
Middle layer, steel skeleton, 45
mm
5102.1
m²
Mineral wool (facade in-
sulation)
0.045
m³/m²
229.5945
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
2.1
kg/m²
10714.41
kg
Continued on next page
Page 95 of 149
==PAGE:102==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 22 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Facade panel, aluminium and
fibre cement
5102.1
m²
Aluminium sheet
2.376
kg/m²
12122.59
kg
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1
m²/m²
5102.1
m²
bk.væg02
Middle
layer,
concrete,
lightweight
clinker
concrete
100mm, insulated 170mm
500.3
m²
EPS insulation for walls
and roofs W / D 035
0.17
m³/m²
85.051
m³
Lightweight
concrete
block
0.1
m³/m²
50.03
m³
Tile adhesive
4.8
kg/m²
2401.44
kg
bk.væg09
Ex.
Masonry 110 mm (1/2
brick)
229
m²
Lime-cement plaster
32
kg/m²
4.071111
m³
Lime plaster
12
kg/m²
1.526667
m³
Lime
gypsum
interior
plaster
0.02
m³/m²
4.58
m³
Facing brick
182.7
kg/m²
23.2435
m³
Middle layer, mineral wool,
240mm
229
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.24
m³/m²
54.96
m³
bk.væg15
Middle layer, steel skeleton,
mineral wool, 145 mm
1091
m²
Damp
insulation
PE
(thickness 0.0002 m)
0.2
m²/m²
218.2
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.145
m³/m²
158.195
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
9.1
kg/m²
9928.1
kg
Middle layer, steel skeleton, 45
mm
1091
m²
Mineral wool (facade in-
sulation)
0.045
m³/m²
49.095
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
2.1
kg/m²
2291.1
kg
Continued on next page
Page 96 of 149
==PAGE:103==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 22 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Facade panel, aluminium and
fibre cement
1091
m²
Aluminium sheet
2.376
kg/m²
2592.216
kg
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1
m²/m²
1091
m²
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
1091
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
2182
m²
bk.væg18
Middle layer, steel skeleton,
mineral wool, 245mm
278.3
m²
Damp
insulation
PE
(thickness 0.0002 m)
0.2
m²/m²
55.66
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.245
m³/m²
68.1835
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
7.5
kg/m²
2087.25
kg
Middle layer, mineral wool,
50mm
278.3
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.05
m³/m²
13.915
m³
Facade panel, aluminium and
fibre cement
278.3
m²
Aluminium sheet
2.376
kg/m²
661.2408
kg
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1
m²/m²
278.3
m²
bk.væg01
Middle
layer,
concrete,
lightweight
clinker
concrete
100mm, insulated 50mm
203.5
m²
EPS insulation for walls
and roofs W / D 035
0.05
m³/m²
10.175
m³
Lightweight
concrete
block
0.1
m³/m²
20.35
m³
Tile adhesive
4.8
kg/m²
976.8
kg
bk.væg13
Middle layer, steel skeleton,
25mm
80.9
m²
Mineral wool (facade in-
sulation)
0.025
m³/m²
2.0225
m³
Continued on next page
Page 97 of 149
==PAGE:104==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 22 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
0.65
kg/m²
52.585
kg
bk.væg17
Ex.
Masonry 110 mm (1/2
brick)
54.1
m²
Lime-cement plaster
32
kg/m²
0.961778
m³
Lime plaster
12
kg/m²
0.360667
m³
Lime
gypsum
interior
plaster
0.02
m³/m²
1.082
m³
Facing brick
182.7
kg/m²
5.49115
m³
Middle layer, mineral wool,
75mm
54.1
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.075
m³/m²
4.0575
m³
bk.væg05+06+25+26
Ex.
Masonry 110 mm (1/2
brick)
6806.3
m²
Lime-cement plaster
32
kg/m²
121.0009
m³
Lime plaster
12
kg/m²
45.37533
m³
Lime
gypsum
interior
plaster
0.02
m³/m²
136.126
m³
Facing brick
182.7
kg/m²
690.8395
m³
Middle layer, mineral wool,
190mm
6806.3
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.19
m³/m²
1293.197
m³
bk.væg14
Ceiling, fibre cement board
779.2
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1
m²/m²
779.2
m²
Middle layer, steel skeleton,
195 mm
779.2
m²
Mineral wool (facade in-
sulation)
0.195
m³/m²
151.944
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
5.5
kg/m²
4285.6
kg
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
779.2
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
1558.4
m²
Continued on next page
Page 98 of 149
==PAGE:105==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 22 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
bk.væg11
Middle layer, mineral wool,
190mm
76.1
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.19
m³/m²
14.459
m³
bk.væg22
Ceiling, fibre cement board
567.9
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1
m²/m²
567.9
m²
Middle layer, wood frame wall
45/95 mm
567.9
m²
Damp
insulation
PE
(thickness 0.0002 m)
1
m²/m²
567.9
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0095
m³/m²
5.39505
m³
bk.væg29
Middle layer, mineral wool,
200 mm
660
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.2
m³/m²
132
m³
Page 99 of 149
==PAGE:106==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 23: LCI quantities for the construction group "Ceilings" and "Roofs" for Case 1.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Ceilings
bk.lof02
Ceiling, plasterboard 25 mm
on steel profiles with 95mm
hard insulation
604.1
m²
EPS insulation for walls
and roofs W / D 035
0.095
m³/m²
57.3895
m³
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
1208.2
m²
bk.lof06+7+8
Ceiling, fibre cement boards
on steel profiles with 45mm in-
sulation
903.9
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1
m²/m²
903.9
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation), 45mm
0.045
m³/m²
40.6755
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates, 45 mm
1.5
kg/m²
1355.85
kg
bk.lof09
Ceiling,
hygiene
20mm
on
steel profiles with 25+45mm
insulation
2595.1
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation), 45mm
0.045
m³/m²
116.7795
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation), 25mm
0.025
m³/m²
64.8775
m³
Particle
board,
melamine coated
0.02
m³/m²
51.902
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates, 25 mm
0.85
kg/m²
2205.835
kg
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates, 45 mm
1.5
kg/m²
3892.65
kg
Continued on next page
Page 100 of 149
==PAGE:107==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 23 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
bk.lof01
Ceiling,
plasterboard
25
mm
on
steel
profiles
with
25+45+75mm insulation
1324.8
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
2649.6
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation), 45mm
0.045
m³/m²
59.616
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation), 75mm
0.075
m³/m²
99.36
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation), 25mm
0.025
m³/m²
33.12
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates, 25 mm
0.85
kg/m²
1126.08
kg
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates, 45 mm
1.5
kg/m²
1987.2
kg
bk.lof03
Ceiling,
plasterboard
25
mm
on
steel
profiles
with
25+45mmm insulation
2595.1
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
5190.2
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation), 45mm
0.045
m³/m²
116.7795
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation), 25mm
0.025
m³/m²
64.8775
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates, 25 mm
0.85
kg/m²
2205.835
kg
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates, 45 mm
1.5
kg/m²
3892.65
kg
E - Nedhængt
loft
ved
in-
dgang
Ceiling, gypsum plasterboard
on wooden battens, no insula-
tion
465.3
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
930.6
m²
Continued on next page
Page 101 of 149
==PAGE:108==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 23 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0241
m³/m²
11.21373
m³
Lime
gypsum
interior
plaster
8
kg/m²
4.136
m³
Roofs
bk.tak10
Insulation EPS 400 mm
5223.1
m²
EPS insulation for walls
and roofs W / D 035
0.4
m³/m²
2089.24
m³
bk.tak07
Insulation,
mineral
wool
150+200+50mm
348.5
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.4
m³/m²
139.4
m³
Roofing, roofing felt
348.5
m²
Bitumen
sheets
PYE-
PV 200 S5 ns (slated)
(thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
348.5
m²
Bitumen sheets G 200
S4 (thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
348.5
m²
bk.tak02
Roof, wooden battens 25mm
398.4
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.009
m³/m²
3.5856
m³
Roofing,
roofing
felt
and
board roof
398.4
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL), 25 mm
0.025
m³/m²
9.96
m³
Bitumen
sheets
PYE-
PV 200 S5 ns (slated)
(thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
398.4
m²
Continued on next page
Page 102 of 149
==PAGE:109==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 23 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Bitumen sheets G 200
S4 (thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
398.4
m²
Facade panel, aluminium and
fibre cement
398.4
m²
Aluminium sheet
2.376
kg/m²
946.5984
kg
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1
m²/m²
398.4
m²
bk.tak04
Middle
layer,
steel
deck
300mm C-profiles
556.6
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.3
m³/m²
166.98
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
19.04
kg/m²
10597.66
kg
Middle
layer,
steel
deck
100mm C-profiles
556.6
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.1
m³/m²
55.66
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
3.65
kg/m²
2031.59
kg
Roofing, roofing felt, board
roof and plasterboard (inside)
556.6
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
1
m²/m²
556.6
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL), 25 mm
0.025
m³/m²
13.915
m³
Bitumen
sheets
PYE-
PV 200 S5 ns (slated)
(thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
556.6
m²
Bitumen sheets G 200
S4 (thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
556.6
m²
bk.tak03
Roofing, roofing felt
847
m²
Bitumen
sheets
PYE-
PV 200 S5 ns (slated)
(thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
847
m²
Continued on next page
Page 103 of 149
==PAGE:110==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 23 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Bitumen sheets G 200
S4 (thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
847
m²
Insulation EPS 400 mm
847
m²
EPS insulation for walls
and roofs W / D 035
0.4
m³/m²
338.8
m³
bk.tak01
Insulation,
mineral
wool
400mm
329.6
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.4
m³/m²
131.84
m³
Roofing,
roofing
felt
and
board roof
329.6
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL), 25 mm
0.025
m³/m²
8.24
m³
Bitumen
sheets
PYE-
PV 200 S5 ns (slated)
(thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
329.6
m²
Bitumen sheets G 200
S4 (thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
329.6
m²
bk.tak06
Insulation,
mineral
wool
150+200+50mm
14.6
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.4
m³/m²
5.84
m³
Roofing, roofing felt
14.6
m²
Bitumen
sheets
PYE-
PV 200 S5 ns (slated)
(thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
14.6
m²
Bitumen sheets G 200
S4 (thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
14.6
m²
bk.tak09
Roof, wooden battens 25mm
76.4
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.009
m³/m²
0.6876
m³
Continued on next page
Page 104 of 149
==PAGE:111==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 23 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Roofing,
roofing
felt
and
board roof
76.4
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL), 25 mm
0.025
m³/m²
1.91
m³
Bitumen
sheets
PYE-
PV 200 S5 ns (slated)
(thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
76.4
m²
Bitumen sheets G 200
S4 (thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
76.4
m²
Facade panel, aluminium and
fibre cement
76.4
m²
Aluminium sheet
2.376
kg/m²
181.5264
kg
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1
m²/m²
76.4
m²
bk.tak08
Roofing,
steel,
trapezoidal
plates 205
195.3
m²
Hot dip galvanized steel
4.6
kg/m²
157.0594
m²
Page 105 of 149
==PAGE:112==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 24: LCI quantities for the construction group "Columns and Beams" for Case 1.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Columns and Beams
Concrete
_Rectangu-
lar
_Pre-
cast_Column
Columns, concrete frame col-
umn 400/200
3.5
m
Reinforcement
steel
wire
12
kg/m
42
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete
C45/55 - CEM I
0.08
m³/m
0.28
m³
Steel_RHS
Rectangu-
lar_Column
Columns,
steel
rectangular
tube SHS 200x10/8
13.1
m
Steel section
24.04
kg/m
314.924
kg
Columns,
steel
rectangular
tube RHS 90/50/4
5.2
m
Steel section
10.04
kg/m
52.208
kg
Steel_Square
tube_Column
Columns, steel square tube
SHS 100/10
7.2
m
Steel section
28.3
kg/m
203.76
kg
Columns, steel square tube
SHS 60/5
85.2
m
Steel section
8.554
kg/m
728.8008
kg
Columns, steel square tube
SHS 60/4
144.6
m
Steel section
6.9
kg/m
997.74
kg
Columns, steel square tube
SHS 70/5
138.5
m
Steel section
10.04
kg/m
1390.54
kg
Steel_HEB
_Column
Beams/columns,
steel
HEB
100
2.3
m
Steel section
20.28
kg/m
46.644
kg
Beams/columns,
steel
HEB
140
10
m
Steel section
33.54
kg/m
335.4
kg
Beams/columns,
steel
HEB
160
14.7
m
Steel section
42.354
kg/m
622.6038
kg
Continued on next page
Page 106 of 149
==PAGE:113==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 24 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Beams/columns,
steel
HEB
180
20.9
m
Steel section
50.934
kg/m
1064.521
kg
Beams/columns,
steel
HEB
200
19.5
m
Steel section
60.918
kg/m
1187.901
kg
Beams/columns,
steel
HEB
220
20.9
m
Steel section
70.98
kg/m
1483.482
kg
Page 107 of 149
==PAGE:114==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 25: LCI quantities for the construction group "Doors" and "Windows" for Case 1.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Doors
bk.dør20
Door, interior wood
471
stk.
Chipboard (average)
33
kg/stk.
22.2
m³
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
10
kg/stk.
8.6
m³
bk.dør21
Door, interior wood
392
stk.
Chipboard (average)
33
kg/stk.
18.5
m³
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
10
kg/stk.
7.1
m³
bk.dør22
Door, front door
823.4
m²
Door, alu, front door
1
m²/m²
823.4
m²
bk.dør01
Door, front door
169
m²
Door, alu, front door
1
m²/m²
169.0
m²
bk.dør02
Door, outer aluminium and
glass door
969.1
m²
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
290.7
kg
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
290.7
kg
Aluminium sheet
1.6
kg/m²
1550.6
kg
Steel window fittings
0.7
kg/m²
257.9
stk.
Plastic profile silicone
0.2
kg/m²
193.8
kg
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
21.2
kg/m²
684.8
m²
Window frame PVC-U
9.1
kg/m²
3149.6
m
Aluminium frame pro-
file, powder coated
1.9
kg/m²
1805.2
m
Continued on next page
Page 108 of 149
==PAGE:115==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 25 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
bk.dør04
Door, outer aluminium and
glass door
10.3
m²
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
3.1
kg
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
3.1
kg
Aluminium sheet
1.6
kg/m²
16.5
kg
Steel window fittings
0.7
kg/m²
2.7
stk.
Plastic profile silicone
0.2
kg/m²
2.1
kg
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
21.2
kg/m²
7.3
m²
Window frame PVC-U
9.1
kg/m²
33.5
m
Aluminium frame pro-
file, powder coated
1.9
kg/m²
19.2
m
Windows
bk.vin90+91
Skylight dome window, plastic
(complete skylight)
69
m²
Skylight dome, plastic
1
m²/m²
69.0
m²
bk.vin01+02
+04+05+06+08+11
window,
timber/aluminum
frame with 3-layer pane
5771.1
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
33328.1
m
Insulated glazing, dou-
ble pane
0.8
m²/m²
4616.9
m²
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
2959.5
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
4778.5
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
16563.1
m
Continued on next page
Page 109 of 149
==PAGE:116==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 25 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
4968.9
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
15928.2
m
bk.vin93
Frame, windows, timber/alu-
minum
13.5
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
78.0
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
6.9
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
11.2
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
38.7
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
11.6
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
37.3
m
Window pane, 2-layer energy
pane
13.5
m²
Insulated glazing, dou-
ble pane
0.8
m²/m²
13.5
m²
Page 110 of 149
==PAGE:117==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 26: LCI quantities for the construction group "Installations" for Case 1.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Installations
Drainage
Drainpipe
1389
m
Zink, patinated
0.677
kg/m
940.353
kg
Gutter
1920
m
Zink, patinated
2.304
kg/m
4423.68
kg
Plumbing
Plumbing, water, Multifamily
residence (Default value)
42518
m²
Plumbing, water, Mul-
tifamily residence (De-
fault value)
1
m²/m²
42518
m²
Ventilation unit
Ventilation unit 20,000 m3/h,
offices,
schools and institu-
tions, and central plant for
multi-storey dwellings
8
stk.
Ventilation
centralized
with heat recovery per
10000 m3/h
1376
kg/pcs.
15.6377
pcs.
Ventilation ducts
Ventilation
ducts
Ø200,
single-family house and multi-
storey dwellings
13157.7
m
Air
ventilation
duct
(zinc coated steel plate)
(Clone)
2.43
kg/m
31973.21
kg
Page 111 of 149
==PAGE:118==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
B.1.2
Case 2
Table 27: LCI and sources for "Building and operation" for Case 2.
Building and operation
Input
Source
Type
Multi-story residential buildings
Tender material: "Building case description"
Commissioning year
2024
Heated floor area [m2]
17600
Energy Label
Gross floor area [m2]
19800
Energy Label
Integrated garages [m2]
0
Additional area [m2]
0
Operational electricity use [kWh/m2 year]
3.6
Energy10/Energy Label
Exported electricity [kWh/m2 year]
0
Energy10/Energy Label
Electricity supply
Electricity - Progression
Energy10/Energy Label
Electricity supplement [kWh/m2 year]
0
Energy10/Energy Label
Operational heat use [kWh/m2 year]
42.4
Energy10/Energy Label
Heat supplement [kWh/m2 year]
0
Energy10/Energy Label
Heat supply
District heating - Progression
Energy10/Energy Label
Page 112 of 149
==PAGE:119==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 28: Available Revit models, information, and sources used for quantity extraction for Case 2.
Building models and information
Available files
Source
Revit models for architectural discipline
1
Project material: Geometry
Revit model for structural discipline
1
Project material: Geometry
Revit models for ventilation
1
Project material: Geometry
Legend description/building part description
1
Project material: Individual drawings and "Leg-
end/building descriptions for elements"
Table 29: Additional information and sources for Case 2.
Additional information
Data
Source
Year of construction
1950’s
Tender material: "Building case description"
Year of major renovations
2000-2008
Tender material: "Building case description"
Building blocks
4
Tender material: "Building case description"
Floors above ground
8
Tender material: "Building case description"
Basement floors
1
Tender material: "Building case description"
Scope of refurbishment included in LCA
– Building envelope
– Installations/ventilation
– Structure/construction
– Improvements of floor plans
– Architectural appearance
– Project material: Drawings and Revit models
– Tender material: "Building case description"
Page 113 of 149
==PAGE:120==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
B.1.2.1
LCI on Quantities for Case 2
Table 30: LCI quantities for the construction group "Decks" and "Floors" for Case 2.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Decks
Daek_Beton
_InSitu_100
Floor deck, in-situ cast 0.1
91.2
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
13
kg/m²
1185.6
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.1
m³/m²
9.12
m³
Huldaekelement
_Beton_180
Floor
deck,
concrete
ele-
ment, prestressed hollow deck
0.18/7.0 m
1043.1
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
7.2
kg/m²
7510.32
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete
C45/55 - CEM I
305.6234
kg/m²
143.0219
m³
bk.alg01
Floor
deck,
concrete
ele-
ment, prestressed hollow deck
0.18/7.0 m
2112.8
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
7.2
kg/m²
15212.16
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete
C45/55 - CEM I
305.6234
kg/m²
289.6909
m³
bk.dæk04
Floor
deck,
in-situ
cast
0.15/5.0 m
17.5
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
20.5
kg/m²
358.75
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.15
m³/m²
2.625
m³
Insulation EPS 300 mm
17.5
m²
EPS insulation for walls
and roofs W / D 035
0.3
m³/m²
5.25
m³
Continued on next page
Page 114 of 149
==PAGE:121==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 30 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
bk.dæk01
Floor deck, in-situ cast 0.1/5.0
m, gravel
41.1
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
13
kg/m²
534.3
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.1
m³/m²
4.11
m³
Gravel (Grain size 2/32)
20mm
34.4
kg/m²
1413.84
kg
bk.dæk02
Floor deck, in-situ cast 0.1/5.0
m
211.9
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
13
kg/m²
2754.7
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.1
m³/m²
21.19
m³
Gravel (Grain size 2/32)
20mm
34.4
kg/m²
7289.36
kg
bk.dæk03
Floor
deck,
in-situ
cast
0.16/5.0 m, gravel
17.5
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
21
kg/m²
367.5
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.16
m³/m²
2.8
m³
Gravel (Grain size 2/32)
20mm
34.4
kg/m²
602
kg
bk.dæk05
Floor
deck,
in-situ
cast
0.08/5.0 m
53.4
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
10
kg/m²
534
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete,
C25/30
(exposure
classes X0, XC1)
0.08
m³/m²
4.272
m³
Flooring, terrazzo
53.4
m²
Terrazzo, 10mm
25
kg/m²
1335
kg
Continued on next page
Page 115 of 149
==PAGE:122==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 30 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Floors
E
-
Terrazzo
floor
Flooring, terrazzo
316.8
m²
Terrazzo, 10mm
25.0
kg/m²
7920.0
kg
bk.gul09
Insulation, mineral wool 180
mm
1794.9
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.2
m³/m²
323.1
m³
bk.gul02
Floor deck, concrete
760.7
m²
Ready mixed concrete
C35/45 SCC
0.0
m³/m²
3.8
m³
Flooring, ceramic tiles, with
sound
insulation
and
wear
layer
760.7
m²
Cement screed
168.0
kg/m²
127797.6
kg
EPS insulation for ceil-
ings / floors as edge in-
sulation B / P-040
0.0
m³/m²
1.5
m³
Stoneware tiles glazed
(thickness 0.015 m)
2.0
m²/m²
1521.4
m²
Tile adhesive
3.1
kg/m²
2358.2
kg
bk.gul10
Flooring, timber flooring (22
mm) on joists (195 mm)
482.4
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0
m³/m²
9.4
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.1
m³/m²
31.4
m³
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
0.0
m³/m²
10.6
m³
Continued on next page
Page 116 of 149
==PAGE:123==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 30 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
bk.gul05
Flooring, timber flooring (22
mm) on joists
10890.8
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0
m³/m²
42.5
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.1
m³/m²
707.9
m³
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
0.0
m³/m²
239.6
m³
E - Wood floor
Flooring,
timber
flooring
(25mm) on joists (65mm)
174.7
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0
m³/m²
0.7
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.1
m³/m²
11.4
m³
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
0.0
m³/m²
4.4
m³
Page 117 of 149
==PAGE:124==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 31: LCI quantities for the construction group "Interior Walls" and "Exterior Walls" for Case 2.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Interior Walls
121002_Linie
_Funda-
ment
_Be-
ton_InSitu_600
Strip foundation, 400/600 mm
(h/w)
14.4
m
Reinforcement
steel
wire
6
kg/m
86.4
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C35/45 SCC
0.24
m³/m
3.456
m³
121002_Linie
_Funda-
ment
_Be-
ton_InSitu_400
Strip foundation, 400/400 mm
(h/w)
10
m
Reinforcement
steel
wire
4
kg/m
40
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C35/45 SCC
0.16
m³/m
1.6
m³
bk.væg52
Middle layer, concrete element
200 mm
416
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
12
kg/m²
4992
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.2
m³/m²
83.2
m³
bk.væg51
Middle layer, concrete element
400 mm
20.4
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
24
kg/m²
489.6
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.4
m³/m²
8.16
m³
bk.væg59
Middle layer, concrete element
200 mm
62.8
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
12
kg/m²
753.6
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.2
m³/m²
12.56
m³
Continued on next page
Page 118 of 149
==PAGE:125==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 31 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Wall
Light
Width
Wall
50mm
Middle layer, timber skeleton,
non-bearing,
mineral
wool
50mm
139.3
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.00705
m³/m²
0.982065
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.05
m³/m²
6.965
m³
bk.væg11
Wall surface, plaster of clay,
10mm
6
m²
Clay plaster
0.01
m³/m²
0.06
m³
bk.væg16
Middle layer, EPS insulation,
100 mm
22.3
m²
EPS insulation for walls
and roofs W / D 040
0.1
m³/m²
2.23
m³
Middle
layer,
concrete
ele-
ment,
lightweight
concrete,
100 mm
22.3
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
9
kg/m²
200.7
kg
Precast
lightweight
concrete wall element,
thickness
=
100
mm
(10% holllow)
1
m²/m²
22.3
m²
Wall surface, plaster of clay,
10mm
22.3
m²
Clay plaster
0.01
m³/m²
0.223
m³
bk.væg10
Middle
layer,
concrete
ele-
ment, lightweight concrete 150
mm (DEN RIGTIGE)
3.1
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
9
kg/m²
27.9
kg
Precast
lightweight
concrete wall element,
thickness
=
100
mm
(10% holllow)
1.5
m²/m²
4.65
m²
Continued on next page
Page 119 of 149
==PAGE:126==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 31 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Wall surface, plaster of clay,
10mm
3.1
m²
Clay plaster
0.01
m³/m²
0.031
m³
bk.væg15
Middle
layer,
concrete
ele-
ment,
lightweight
concrete,
100 mm
27.2
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
9
kg/m²
244.8
kg
Precast
lightweight
concrete wall element,
thickness
=
100
mm
(10% holllow)
1
m²/m²
27.2
m²
Wall surface, plaster of clay,
10mm
27.2
m²
Clay plaster
0.01
m³/m²
0.272
m³
bk.væg13
Interior wall surface, interior
post-insulation, mineral wool,
250mm
35.7
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.25
m³/m²
8.925
m³
Wall surface, plaster of clay,
10mm
35.7
m²
Clay plaster
0.01
m³/m²
0.357
m³
bk.væg12
Interior wall surface, interior
post-insulation, mineral wool,
200mm
167.8
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.2
m³/m²
33.56
m³
Wall surface, plaster of clay,
10mm
167.8
m²
Clay plaster
0.01
m³/m²
1.678
m³
bk.væg39
Middle layer, concrete, aer-
ated concrete 200 mm
622.9
m²
Aerated concrete P2 04
non-reinforced
0.2
m³/m²
124.58
m³
bk.væg31
Middle layer, concrete, aer-
ated concrete 75 mm
152.9
m²
Aerated concrete P2 04
non-reinforced
0.075
m³/m²
11.4675
m³
Continued on next page
Page 120 of 149
==PAGE:127==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 31 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
bk.væg32
Middle layer, concrete, aer-
ated concrete 100 mm
4000.1
m²
Aerated concrete P2 04
non-reinforced
0.1
m³/m²
400.01
m³
bk.væg34
Middle layer, concrete, aer-
ated concrete 200 mm
441.7
m²
Aerated concrete P2 04
non-reinforced
0.2
m³/m²
88.34
m³
bk.væg37
Middle layer, concrete element
130 mm
18.9
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
7.2
kg/m²
136.08
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.13
m³/m²
2.457
m³
bk.væg38
Middle layer, concrete element
150 mm
622.9
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
7.2
kg/m²
4484.88
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.15
m³/m²
93.435
m³
bk.væg45
Middle layer, steel skeleton, 95
mm
135.4
m²
Mineral wool (facade in-
sulation)
0.095
m³/m²
12.863
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
4.12
kg/m²
557.848
kg
Wall surface, plasterboard 1
layer, 12,5 mm
135.4
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
1
m²/m²
135.4
m²
bk.væg41
Middle layer, steel skeleton, 70
mm
531.4
m²
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
4.12
kg/m²
2189.368
kg
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
531.4
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
1062.8
m²
bk.væg42
Middle layer, steel skeleton, 45
mm
1062.8
m²
Mineral wool (facade in-
sulation)
0.045
m³/m²
47.826
m³
Continued on next page
Page 121 of 149
==PAGE:128==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 31 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
2.23
kg/m²
2370.044
kg
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
1062.8
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
2125.6
m²
bk.væg61
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
179.4
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
358.8
m²
Wall surface, plasterboard 1
layer, 15 mm
179.4
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
1.2
m²/m²
215.28
m²
bk.væg60
Steel grid wall
1012.5
m²
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates (Clone)
21
kg/m²
21262.5
kg
bk.væg90
Ceramic tiles, 10 mm
1304.2
m²
Cement screed
96
kg/m²
125203.2
kg
Stoneware tiles glazed
(thickness 0.01 m)
1
m²/m²
1304.2
m²
Tile adhesive
3.1
kg/m²
4043.02
kg
Exterior Walls
212004_Vaeg
_Udv_Beton
_InSitu_200
Middle layer, concrete element
200 mm
34.4
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
12
kg/m²
412.8
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.2
m³/m²
6.88
m³
222003_Vaeg
_Be-
ton_InSitu_180
Middle layer, concrete element
180 mm
1.5
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
10.8
kg/m²
16.2
kg
Continued on next page
Page 122 of 149
==PAGE:129==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 31 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.18
m³/m²
0.27
m³
223104_Vaeg
_Porebe-
ton_200
Middle layer, concrete, aer-
ated concrete 200 mm
202.2
m²
Aerated concrete P2 04
non-reinforced
0.2
m³/m²
40.44
m³
Indstøbnings-
blokke190
Middle layer, concrete element
190 mm
37.2
m²
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.19
m³/m²
7.068
m³
bk.væg22
Middle layer, wood frame wall
45/195 mm, 195 mm mineral
wool
2015.9
m²
Damp
insulation
PE
(thickness 0.0002 m)
1
m²/m²
2015.9
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.019
m³/m²
38.3021
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.195
m³/m²
393.1005
m³
Middle layer, wood frame wall
45/45 mm, 45 mm mineral
wool
2015.9
m²
Damp
insulation
PE
(thickness 0.0002 m)
1
m²/m²
2015.9
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0045
m³/m²
9.07155
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.045
m³/m²
90.7155
m³
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
2015.9
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
4031.8
m²
Continued on next page
Page 123 of 149
==PAGE:130==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 31 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Facade panel, 10 mm
2015.9
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1.25
m²/m²
2519.875
m²
bk.væg25
Middle layer, wood frame wall
45/95 mm
522.6
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(impregnated, moisture
resistant)
(thickness
0.0125 m)
0.154
m²/m²
80.4804
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.007
m³/m²
3.6582
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.095
m³/m²
49.647
m³
bk.væg21
Middle layer, wood construc-
tion, mineral wool, 95mm
26.5
m²
Damp
insulation
PE
(thickness 0.0002 m)
0.2
kg/m²
26.5
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.029935
m³/m²
0.793278
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.095
m³/m²
2.5175
m³
Mineral wool (blowable)
0.07
m³/m²
1.855
m³
Middle layer, wood frame wall
45/95 mm
26.5
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(impregnated, moisture
resistant)
(thickness
0.0125 m)
0.154
m²/m²
4.081
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.007
m³/m²
0.1855
m³
Continued on next page
Page 124 of 149
==PAGE:131==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 31 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.095
m³/m²
2.5175
m³
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
26.5
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
53
m²
Facade panel, 10 mm
26.5
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1.25
m²/m²
33.125
m²
bk.væg24
Middle layer, wood frame wall
45/95 mm
522.6
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(impregnated, moisture
resistant)
(thickness
0.0125 m)
0.154
m²/m²
80.4804
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.007
m³/m²
3.6582
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.095
m³/m²
49.647
m³
Facade panel, 10 mm
522.6
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1.25
m²/m²
653.25
m²
Facade panel, 10 mm
522.6
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1.25
m²/m²
653.25
m²
bk.væg23
Middle layer, steel skeleton,
mineral wool, 145 mm
50
m²
Damp
insulation
PE
(thickness 0.0002 m)
0.2
kg/m²
50
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.145
m³/m²
7.25
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
6.23
kg/m²
311.5
kg
Middle layer, mineral wool, 50
mm
50
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.05
m³/m²
2.5
m³
Continued on next page
Page 125 of 149
==PAGE:132==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 31 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Wall surface, plasterboard 2
layers, 25 mm
50
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
100
m²
Facade panel, 10 mm
50
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1.25
m²/m²
62.5
m²
211002_facade-
element_150
_beton_200
_isolering
Middle layer, concrete element
150 mm
258.5
m²
Reinforcement
steel
wire
9
kg/m²
2326.5
kg
Ready mixed concrete
C30/37
0.15
m³/m²
38.775
m³
Middle layer, mineral wool,
200 mm
258.5
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.2
m³/m²
51.7
m³
Facade panel, 25 mm
258.5
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel 25 mm
3.125
m²/m²
807.8125
m²
bk.væg26
Middle layer, mineral wool, 50
mm
3285.6
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.05
m³/m²
164.28
m³
Middle layer, wood frame wall
45/145 mm, 145 mm mineral
wool
3285.6
m²
Damp
insulation
PE
(thickness 0.0002 m)
1
m²/m²
3285.6
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0145
m³/m²
47.6412
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.145
m³/m²
476.412
m³
Facade panel, 25 mm
3285.6
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel 25 mm
3.125
m²/m²
10267.5
m²
Continued on next page
Page 126 of 149
==PAGE:133==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 31 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
bk.væg28
Middle layer, mineral wool, 50
mm
380.6
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.05
m³/m²
19.03
m³
Middle layer, wood frame wall
45/145 mm, 145 mm mineral
wool
380.6
m²
Damp
insulation
PE
(thickness 0.0002 m)
1
m²/m²
380.6
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.0145
m³/m²
5.5187
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation)
0.145
m³/m²
55.187
m³
Facade panel, 25 mm
380.6
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel 25 mm
3.125
m²/m²
1189.375
m²
Page 127 of 149
==PAGE:134==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 32: LCI quantities for the construction group "Ceilings" and "Roofs" for Case 2.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Ceilings
bk.lof04
Ceiling, fibre cement boards
105.8
m²
Fibre
cement
facade
panel
1
m²/m²
105.8
m²
Ceiling, on wooden battens
105.8
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL), 25 mm
0.015
m³/m²
1.587
m³
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL), 95 mm
0.05
m³/m²
5.29
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation), 40 mm
0.045
m³/m²
4.761
m³
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation), 95 mm
0.045
m³/m²
4.761
m³
bk.lof01
Ceiling, plasterboard 25 mm
on steel profiles with insula-
tion
655.7
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
1311.4
m²
Mineral wool (partition
walls insulation), 95 mm
0.095
m³/m²
62.2915
m³
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates, 25 mm
2
kg/m²
1311.4
kg
bk.lof02
Ceiling, plasterboard 25 mm
on steel profiles
10192
m²
Gypsum plaster board
(perforated board) (12.5
mm)
2
m²/m²
20384
m²
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates, 45 mm
3.4
kg/m²
34652.8
kg
Continued on next page
Page 128 of 149
==PAGE:135==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 32 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates, 25 mm
2
kg/m²
20384
kg
Roofs
bk.tak01
Roofing,
roofing
felt
and
board roof
2246.3
m²
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL), 25 mm
0.025
m³/m²
56.1575
m³
Bitumen
sheets
PYE-
PV 200 S5 ns (slated)
(thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
2246.3
m²
Bitumen sheets G 200
S4 (thickness 0.004 m)
1
m²/m²
2246.3
m²
Page 129 of 149
==PAGE:136==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 33: LCI quantities for the construction group "Columns and Beams" for Case 2.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Columns and Beams
Bjaelkespaer
_Trae_50x100
Beams,
construction timber
50x100
18.9
m
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.005
m³/m
0.0945
m³
Bjaelke_Beton
_In-
Situ_200x180
Concrete beam, 200x180
6.8
m
Reinforcement
steel
wire
3.96
kg/m
26.928
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete
C45/55 - CEM I
0.036
m³/m
0.2448
m³
Staalbjaelker
Beams, steel IPE 270
13.2
m
Steel section
35.802
kg/m
472.5864
kg
Beams/columns,
steel
HEB
100
5.2
m
Steel section
20.28
kg/m
105.456
kg
Beams/columns,
steel
HEB
120
4.1
m
Steel section
26.52
kg/m
108.732
kg
Beams/columns,
steel
HEB
200
4.1
m
Steel section
60.918
kg/m
249.7638
kg
Soejle_Beton
_In-
Situ_200x200
Concrete beam, 200x200
10.2
m
Reinforcement
steel
wire
4.02
kg/m
41.004
kg
Ready-mixed
concrete
C45/55 - CEM I
0.04
m³/m
0.408
m³
Soejle_Beton
_In-
Situ_200x180
Concrete beam, 200x180
10.2
m
Reinforcement
steel
wire
3.96
kg/m
40.392
kg
Continued on next page
Page 130 of 149
==PAGE:137==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 33 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Ready-mixed
concrete
C45/55 - CEM I
0.036
m³/m
0.3672
m³
Staalsoejle
_Kvadratisk
_Roer_100x50x5
Columns,
steel
rectangular
tube RHS 100/50/5
10
m
Steel section
10.686
kg/m
106.86
kg
Staalsoejle
_Kvadratisk
_Roer_100x100x8
Columns, steel square tube
SHS 100/8
9.2
m
Steel section
22.85
kg/m
210.22
kg
Staalsoejle
_Kvadratisk
_Roer_60x60x5
Columns, steel square tube
SHS 60/5
9
m
Steel section
8.554
kg/m
76.986
kg
Structural Col-
umn, Wood
Columns,
construction tim-
ber, planed 100/100
118.3
m
Construction
wood,
pine and spruce,
wet
and sawn (Incineration
EoL)
0.01
m³/m
1.183
m³
Page 131 of 149
==PAGE:138==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 34: LCI quantities for the construction group "Doors" and "Windows" for Case 2.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Doors
bk.dør03
Door, outer steel door
36
m²
Aluminium sheet
0.62
kg/m²
22.32
kg
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
3.3
kg/m²
660
m
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates
16.44
kg/m²
591.84
kg
Extruded
polystyrene
(XPS)
0.046
m³/m²
1.656
m³
bk.dør01
Door, outer steel and glass
door
101.64
m²
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
30.492
kg
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
30.492
kg
Aluminium sheet
1.6
kg/m²
162.624
kg
Steel window profile
5.3
kg/m²
204.8259
stk.
Steel window fittings
0.7
kg/m²
27.05247
stk.
Plastic profile silicone
0.2
kg/m²
20.328
kg
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
21.2
kg/m²
71.8256
m²
Window frame PVC-U
9.1
kg/m²
330.33
m
bk.dør26
Door, internal steel door
16.8
m²
Door,
multifunction
door
1
m²/m²
16.8
m²
bk.dør02
Door, outer aluminium and
glass door
218.4
m²
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
65.52
kg
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
65.52
kg
Continued on next page
Page 132 of 149
==PAGE:139==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 34 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Aluminium sheet
1.6
kg/m²
349.44
kg
Steel window fittings
0.7
kg/m²
58.12928
stk.
Plastic profile silicone
0.2
kg/m²
43.68
kg
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
21.2
kg/m²
154.336
m²
Window frame PVC-U
9.1
kg/m²
709.8
m
Aluminium frame pro-
file, powder coated
1.9
kg/m²
406.8235
m
bk.dør06
Door,
outer
wood/alu
and
glass door
499.2
m²
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
149.76
kg
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
149.76
kg
Aluminium sheet
1.6
kg/m²
798.72
kg
Steel window fittings
0.7
kg/m²
132.8669
stk.
Plastic profile silicone
0.2
kg/m²
99.84
kg
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
21.2
kg/m²
352.768
m²
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
16
kg/m²
14.55394
m³
Window frame PVC-U
9.1
kg/m²
1622.4
m
bk.dør07
Door,
outer
wood/alu
and
glass door
309.76
m²
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
92.928
kg
Aluminium
die-cast
parts
0.3
kg/m²
92.928
kg
Aluminium sheet
1.6
kg/m²
495.616
kg
Steel window fittings
0.7
kg/m²
82.44563
stk.
Continued on next page
Page 133 of 149
==PAGE:140==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 34 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Plastic profile silicone
0.2
kg/m²
61.952
kg
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
21.2
kg/m²
218.8971
m²
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
16
kg/m²
9.030904
m³
Window frame PVC-U
9.1
kg/m²
1006.72
m
bk.dør11
Door, interior wood
456.96
m²
Chipboard (average)
33
kg/m²
21.5424
m³
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
10
kg/m²
8.326531
m³
bk.dør10
Door, interior wood
423.4
m²
Chipboard (average)
33
kg/m²
19.96029
m³
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
10
kg/m²
7.715015
m³
bk.dør15
Door, interior wood
241.92
m²
Chipboard (average)
33
kg/m²
11.4048
m³
Timber pine (12% mois-
ture / 10.7% H2O con-
tent)
10
kg/m²
4.408163
m³
bk.dør25
Steel grid wall
370.44
m²
Structural Steel:
Sec-
tions and Plates (Clone)
21
kg/m²
7779.24
kg
Windows
bk.vin06
Frame, windows, aluminum
45.79
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
264.4373
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
23.48205
stk.
Continued on next page
Page 134 of 149
==PAGE:141==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 34 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
2.87
m/m²
131.4173
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
2.76
m/m²
126.3804
m
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
45.79
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
45.79
m²
bk.vin25
Frame, windows, timber/alu-
minum
141.2
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
815.43
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
72.41026
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
116.9136
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
405.244
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
121.5732
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
389.712
m
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
141.2
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
141.2
m²
bk.vin02
Frame, windows, aluminum
88.15
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
509.0663
m
Continued on next page
Page 135 of 149
==PAGE:142==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 34 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
45.20513
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
2.87
m/m²
252.9905
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
2.76
m/m²
243.294
m
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
88.15
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
88.15
m²
bk.vin01
Frame, windows, timber/alu-
minum
54.64
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
315.546
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
28.02051
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
45.24192
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
156.8168
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
47.04504
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
150.8064
m
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
54.64
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
54.64
m²
Continued on next page
Page 136 of 149
==PAGE:143==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 34 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
bk.vin05
Frame, windows, timber/alu-
minum
305.48
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
1764.147
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
156.6564
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
252.9374
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
876.7276
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
263.0183
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
843.1248
m
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
305.48
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
305.48
m²
bk.vin07
Frame, windows, timber/alu-
minum
375.48
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
2168.397
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
192.5538
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
310.8974
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
1077.628
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
323.2883
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
1036.325
m
Continued on next page
Page 137 of 149
==PAGE:144==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 34 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
375.48
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
375.48
m²
bk.vin08
Frame, windows, timber/alu-
minum
138.37
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
799.0868
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
70.95897
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
114.5704
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
397.1219
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
119.1366
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
381.9012
m
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
138.37
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
138.37
m²
bk.vin20
Frame, windows, timber/alu-
minum
1658.16
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
9575.874
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
850.3385
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
1372.956
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
4758.919
m
Continued on next page
Page 138 of 149
==PAGE:145==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 34 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
1427.676
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
4576.522
m
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
1658.16
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
1658.16
m²
bk.vin21
Frame, windows, timber/alu-
minum
485.97
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
2806.477
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
249.2154
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
402.3832
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
1394.734
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
418.4202
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
1341.277
m
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
485.97
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
485.97
m²
bk.vin22
Frame, windows, timber/alu-
minum
414.89
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
2395.99
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
212.7641
stk.
Continued on next page
Page 139 of 149
==PAGE:146==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 34 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
343.5289
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
1190.734
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
357.2203
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
1145.096
m
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
414.89
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
414.89
m²
bk.vin23
Frame, windows, timber/alu-
minum
234.61
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
1354.873
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
120.3128
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
194.2571
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
673.3307
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
201.9992
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
647.5236
m
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
234.61
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
234.61
m²
Continued on next page
Page 140 of 149
==PAGE:147==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 34 – continued from previous page
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
bk.vin24
Frame, windows, timber/alu-
minum
278.88
m²
EPDM sealing for alu-
minium section
5.775
m/m²
1610.532
m
Window fitting for dou-
ble sash window
0.52
kg/m²
143.0154
stk.
Aluminium frame sec-
tion,
thermally
sepa-
rated, powder coated
0.828
m/m²
230.9126
m
Window frame (spruce)
2.87
m/m²
800.3856
m
Aluminium
case-
ment
frame
section,
thermally
separated,
powder coated
0.861
m/m²
240.1157
m
Window sash (spruce)
2.76
m/m²
769.7088
m
Window pane, 3-layer energy
pane
278.88
m²
Insulated glazing, triple
pane (thickness:
0.036
m)
1
m²/m²
278.88
m²
Page 141 of 149
==PAGE:148==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Table 35: LCI quantities for the construction group "Installations" for Case 2.
Element
Construction
Input
Unit
Products
Input
Unit
Amount
Unit
Installations
Drainage
Drainpipe
1200
m
Zink, patinated
0.677
kg/m
812.4
kg
Gutter
2000
m
Zink, patinated
2.304
kg/m
4608
kg
Plumbing
Plumbing, water, Multifamily
residence (Default value)
17600
m²
Plumbing, water, Mul-
tifamily residence (De-
fault value)
1
m²/m²
17600
m²
Ventilation unit
Ventilation unit 20,000 m3/h,
offices,
schools and institu-
tions and central plant for
multi-storey dwellings (Clone)
4
stk.
Ventilation
centralized
with heat recovery per
10000 m³/h
1376
kg/stk.
7.818848
stk.
Ventilation ducts
Ventilation
ducts
Ø200,
single-family house and multi-
storey dwellings
4881.8
m
Air
ventilation
duct
(zinc coated steel plate)
(Clone)
2.43
kg/m
11862.77
kg
Page 142 of 149
==PAGE:149==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
C
Guides Related to "Flow Chart for Extracting Quan-
tities"
C.1
Revit Guide, Phases
To sort the constructions based on the phasing property in Revit, this step-by-step guide
should be followed, to activate the relevant layer in the view.
Firstly, open the desired view. From here, go to the properties panel on the right side, as
marked in red in Figure 37.
Figure 37: Screenshot showing where to find the properties for a chosen view.
In the properties panel, there are two subcategories under the "Phasing" category. Starting
with "Phase Filter," set this to "Complete" as seen one the left in Figure 38. The naming
can vary from project to project, but it is important to ensure that only the constructions for
the completed project are activated in the view. The phase filter must always be correctly
defined.
For "Phase," activate the desired phase. In this case, you can choose between "Existing"
and "New Construction", as seen on the right in Figure 38.
Page 143 of 149
==PAGE:150==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
(a) Activation of relevant "Phase Filter".
(b) Activation of relevant "Phase".
Figure 38: Navigating "Phasing" under properties, and activating the relevant phases in
Revit.
Once the correct and relevant "Phasing" and "Phase filter" to be examined are activated,
the Grasshopper code can be run.
C.2
Grasshopper Guide, Scenario 1
When using the Grasshopper Code for phase sorting, the actual sorting of constructions
happens in the selected view, as described in Section C.1. Actions in the Grasshopper Code
are only relevant for Step 1 and Step 4, while the remaining steps should remain untouched
(see Appendix A for all Grasshopper Steps).
Before opening Grasshopper it is necessary to have opened the view, from which the quan-
tities should be extracted. This should be a view, where all construction are visible, such as
the 3D view. After this, the Grasshopper plugin and code can be opened.
Step 1: Select the open view to be examined. This is done by right-clicking the box called
“View”. When doing so, the following options will appear.
Page 144 of 149
==PAGE:151==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 39: Screenshot showing how to choose or change the view for which the Grasshopper
Code should run.
Choose the opened view in the Grasshopper Code by double-clicking it. In this case, it is
the view called “3D View : 3D”. After this, disconnect the “Pyt3” box from the other boxes.
The “Pyt3” box will then turn red, as illustrated in the picture below.
Page 145 of 149
==PAGE:152==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 40: Screenshot showing that the "Py3" box has been disconnected.
Step 4: In this step, choose a path and folder where the extracted quantities should be
exported. This is done by double-clicking the yellow boxes with the path and inserting the
desired path.
Figure 41: Screenshot showing the yellow box, where the file path can be changed.
Finally, export the quantities by changing the first “Toggle” box to true by double-clicking
it. When this is done, the yellow box to the far right should display “Data written to Excel
worksheet!” as illustrated below.
Figure 42: Screenshot showing that the data has been exported to Excel successfully.
The quantities from the Revit model have now been exported and are ready for use.
Page 146 of 149
==PAGE:153==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
C.3
Grasshopper Guide, Scenario 2
When using the Grasshopper Code for sorting based on names, the actual sorting of con-
structions happens in the “Py3” box. Actions in the Grasshopper Code are only relevant for
Step 1 and Step 4, while the remaining steps should remain untouched (see Appendix A for
all Grasshopper Steps).
Step 1: Select the open view to be examined. This is done by right-clicking the box called
“View”. When doing so, the following options will appear.
Figure 43: Screenshot showing how to choose or change the view for which the Grasshopper
Code should run.
Choose the opened view in the Grasshopper Code by double-clicking it. In this case, it is
the view called “3D View : 3D”.
The next step is to program the Python code to sort for the desired names. This is done by
Page 147 of 149
==PAGE:154==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
double-clicking the "Py3" box, and the box showed in Figure 44 will appear.
Figure 44: Screenshot showing the Python code inside Grasshopper, used for sorting based
on naming of constructions.
If you want to sort for something other than “bk.”, as used in the example, the red “bk.”
can be changed accordingly. Be sure to use the correct spacing between symbols to avoid
incorrect sorting.
Step 4: In this step, choose a path and folder where the extracted quantities should be
exported. This is done by double-clicking the yellow boxes with the path and inserting the
desired path.
Page 148 of 149
==PAGE:155==
DTU
Master Thesis
Architectural Engineering
Frederikke Guldbæk Spies, s183510
Figure 45: Screenshot showing the yellow box, where the file path can be changed.
Finally, export the quantities by changing the first “Toggle” box to true by double-clicking
it. When this is done, the yellow box to the far right should display “Data written to Excel
worksheet!” as illustrated below.
Figure 46: Screenshot showing that the data has been exported to Excel successfully.
The quantities from the Revit model have now been exported and are ready for use.
Page 149 of 149
