==PAGE:1==
Impact
of
dysfunctional
ubiquitination
in
response to cancer immunotherapy
Master Thesis
DTU Health Tech
Department of Health Technology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Eric Bautista Farrerons
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cusВӯ
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Health Technology, Гҳrsteds Plads, Building 345C,
2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
Supervised by:
Associate Professor Dr. Lars RГёnn Olsen (DTU Health Tech)
Postdoc Dr. Aimilia Schina (DTU Health Tech)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared from January 2024 to June 2024 at the Single Cell Omics
group of the Department of Health Technology, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng. BioinВӯ
formatics and Systems Biology. It is the result of a 30 ECTS masterвҖҷs project under the
supervision of Lars RГёnn Olsen and Aimilia Schina.
Eric Bautista Farrerons Вӯ s212514
Signature
Date
ii
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
22-06-2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
EarlyВӯonset cancers have experienced a rise in their incidence and mortality rates in reВӯ
cent years, particularly melanoma. Although Adoptive Cell Therapy (ACT) has improved
melanoma prognosis, around 50% of patients still do not show clinical benefit from it.
Therefore, the investigation of predictive biomarkers to optimize patient treatment must
be prioritized. In this project, the dysfunction in the UbiquitinВӯProteasome System (UPS) is
evaluated as a potential feature to predict clinical outcome of ACT protocols in melanoma
patients. To do so, somatic mutation and transcriptomic analyses were performed to preВӯ
treatment samples from 22 patients from a clinical phase I/II trial of ACT with stage IV
melanoma. Results of the OverВӯRepresentation Analysis (ORA) suggest a potential asВӯ
sociation between loss of function mutations in the ubiquitin pathway and clinical benefit
from ACT. Despite finding the expected correlations between immune cell signatures and
tumor purity, the latter was not associated with loss of function mutations in the ubiquitin
pathway. Analysis of cancerВӯimmunity cycle biomarkers did not reveal distinct patterns to
distinguish between patients with and without clinical benefits from ACT. These findings
highlight the complexity of cancer, and the need for benchmarking studies on biomarkers
to validate their ability to predict ACT outcome in melanoma patients.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abbreviations
Abbreviation
Meaning
ACT
Adoptive Cell Therapy
APC
Antigen Presenting Cell
APM
Antigen Presenting Machinery
BH
BenjaminiВӯHochberg
CNV
Copy Number Variation
CR
Complete Responder
CRS
Cytokine Release Syndrome
CSD
Cronically SunВӯDamaged
CTLAВӯ4
Cytotoxic T LymphocyteВӯAssociated protein 4
DNP
Double Nucleotide Polymorphism
DUB
Deubiquitinase
ER
Endoplasmic Reticulum
FDR
False Discovery Rate
GEP
Gene Expression Profile
ICB
Immune Checkpoint Blockade
LoF
Loss of Function
MFP
Molecular Functional Portraits
MIAS
MHCВӯI Association immunoScore
NES
Normalized Enrichment Score
NK
Natural Killer
ORA
OverВӯRepresentation Analysis
OS
Overall Survival
PD
Progressive Disease
PDВӯ1
Programmed cell Death protein 1
PFS
ProgressionВӯFree Survival
PR
Partial Responder
RPK
Reads Per Kilobase
RECIST
Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors
SD
Stable Disease
SNV
Single Nucleotide Variant
SNP
Single Nucleotide Polymorphism
ssGSEA
Single Sample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis
TAP
Transporter associated with Antigen Processing
TCR
TВӯCell Receptor
TIDE
Tumor Immune Dysfunction and Exclusion
TIL
Tumor Infiltrating Lymphocytes
TIP
Tracking Tumor Immunophenotype
TME
Tumor MicroEnvironment
TPM
Transcripts Per Million
UPS
UbiquitinВӯProteasome System
USP
Ubiquitin Specific Proteases
WES
Whole Exome Sequencing
iv
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to the entire Single Cell Omics group at DTU Health Tech for welcoming me
into their community and for their valuable feedback. Special thanks to my supervisor,
Aimilia Schina, for her continuous guidance and support throughout the project. I would
also like to extend my appreciation to Lars RГёnn Olsen for supervising this thesis and
providing insights at key stages of the project.
Aimilia Schina, Postdoc, DTU Health Tech
Supervision, support, discussions, feedback and guidance.
Lars RГёnn Olsen, Groupleader & Associate Professor, DTU Health Tech
Supervision, support and feedback.
Dimitrios S. Kanakoglou, PhD Student, DTU Health Tech
Discussions and support.
Laura S. Machado, MSc Graduate, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability
Feedback and support.
Mar Bautista Farrerons, BSc Student, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona
Feedback and support.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
2
Theoretical Background
2
2.1
Cancer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.2
Melanoma . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Immune system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
The cancerВӯimmunity cycle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Immunotherapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
UbiquitinВӯProteasome System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3
Methods
13
3.1
Patient cohort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Response group definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Data preВӯprocessing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Somatic mutation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.5
Transcriptomic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.6
Statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.7
Data availability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4
Results
19
4.1
Patient cohort and characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Somatic mutation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
4.3
Transcriptomic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
Discussion
33
5.1
Somatic mutation analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.2
Transcriptomic analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6
Conclusion
37
7
Outlook
38
Bibliography
39
A Appx: Ubiquitin GO parent terms
45
B Appx: Somatic mutations per patient
46
C Appx: Somatic mutations per patient in ubiquitin pathway
47
D Appx: Top 30 ubiquitin pathway genes with LoF mutations
48
vi
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Cancer remains a formidable global health challenge, as underscored by recent statistics
that emphasize both its prevalence and lethality. The latest Global Cancer Observatory
report states that there were approximately 20 million new cancer cases and almost 10
million deaths in 2022 [1].
EarlyВӯonset cancers, which are those that occur in adults under the age of 50, have exВӯ
perienced a rise in their incidence and mortality rates. Aided by an increase in the global
population, the number of deaths from these cancers has risen by almost 28% between
1990 and 2019 worldwide [2]. Among this group of cancers, melanoma is particularly
concerning, as the number of diagnosed cases is increasing faster than any other cancer
[3].
Even though the prognosis of melanoma patients has improved in recent years, particuВӯ
larly due to the advent of Adoptive Cell Therapies (ACT), around 50% of patients still do
not benefit from this medical practice [4]. ACT is costly for healthcare systems and intenВӯ
sive for patients, potentially having unwanted side effects [5]. Therefore, it is of utmost
importance to investigate predictive biomarkers in order to guide medical decision and
optimize patient treatment.
One of the biomarkers that has been shown to predict clinical benefit on melanoma treatВӯ
ment with ACT is the tumor mutational load [4, 6]. However, this is not true for all patient
cohorts [7, 8], so only relying on tumor mutational load is not appropriate. Another poВӯ
tential biomarker could be the immunoproteasome expression, but so far the correlation
with clinical benefit has only been proven for Immune Checkpoint Blockade (ICB) therapy
[9, 10]. Consequently, novel molecular features that link tumor characteristics with ACT
response are needed.
In this project, the dysfunction in the UbiquitinВӯProteasome System (UPS) is evaluated as
a potential feature to predict clinical outcome of ACT protocols in melanoma patients. The
hypothesis is that mutations in the ubiquitin pathway improve immunotherapy response by
favoring protein degradation by the immunoproteasome over the constitutive proteasome,
thereby enhancing antigen presentation via the MHCВӯI pathway. In order to investigate
this, somatic mutation and transcriptomic analyses were performed.
The following questions were addressed: What are the current challenges in using ACT
therapy for melanoma patients? Is there a differential pattern of UPS mutations between
patients who do and do not respond to this therapy? Are immunoproteasome components
differentially expressed in patients who benefit from immunotherapy? Is there a correlation
between mutations in the UPS, immunoproteasome expression and antigen presentation?
In addition to improving patient selection, the identification of molecules associated with
resistance to ACT therapy could suggest combinatorial approaches to improve clinical
outcomes of melanoma patients. And, if confirmed by other studies, they could potentially
be applied to other solid tumors where ACT is currently in an early stage of development.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
1
==PAGE:10==
2
Theoretical Background
2.1
Cancer
Cancer is a complex group of diseases that can start in almost any organ or tissue of the
body and is characterized by uncontrolled cell growth, with the potential to invade other
parts of the body [11]. The transition from normal cells to abnormal cells with uncontrolled
division is driven by genetic alterations, which allow cells to escape their intrinsic biological
division control that would otherwise stop their growth. These alterations appear as a
result of the interaction between genetic factors (such as replication or recombination)
and three main categories of external agents: (1) physical carcinogens, such as radiationНҫ
(2) chemical carcinogens, such as tobacco and alcoholНҫ and (3) biological carcinogens,
such as viral, bacterial or parasitical infections.
2.1.1
Mutational load and tumor mutational burden
The number of genetic alterations in a tumor is known as mutational load in cancer reВӯ
search [12].
A related term is Tumor mutational burden (TMB), which is defined as
the number of somatic mutations per megabase of genomic sequence. TMB has been
demonstrated to have predictive power for the identification of cancer patients most likely
to respond to immunotherapy [13].
2.1.2
Tumor microenvironment (TME)
Although mutations in the DNA are necessary for cancer to appear, it is now understood
that they are not sufficient to determine cancer initiation and progression [14]. The molecВӯ
ular interactions between the complex ecosystem of cells plays a major role, which is
known as the tumor microenvironment (TME). In addition to cancer cells, this ecosystem
is composed of a wide range of nonВӯmalignant cell types, such as immune cells, endotheВӯ
lial cells, cancerВӯassociated fibroblasts, and others depending on the tissue. All of these
cells are surrounded by a vascularized extracellular matrix, which provides them a strucВӯ
tural and biochemical support (see Fig. 2.1 for a visual reference).
Figure 2.1: Microenvironmental regulation of primary tumor progression and metastasis.
Extracted from: Visser et al. (2023) [14]
2
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:11==
2.1.3
Tumor purity
Therefore, it is not surprising that the balance between cancerous and nonВӯcancerous
cells inside the TME is one of the metrics with prognostic potential on immunotherapy
outcome, which is known as tumor purity [15]. Thus, having a high tumor purity indicates
less presence of immune cells, which correlates with a poorer prognosis.
2.1.4
Dysfunction and exhaustion
Another factor influencing immunotherapy efficacy is immune dysfunction[16]. DysfuncВӯ
tion can be caused by tolerance to selfВӯantigens or triggered by pathology [17], which
in cancer is known as TВӯcell exhaustion. Immune cells can enter this state of exhaustion
due to persistent antigen exposure [18]. When that happens, these immune cells express
inhibitory receptors and have a dissimilar transcriptional state from functional memory or
effector TВӯcells [16], with alterations in TCR and cytokine signaling pathways [17] that imВӯ
pair their usual function. Hence, having a higher TВӯcell exhaustion in a cancer sample
indicates poorer immunotherapy prognosis.
2.1.5
Exclusion
Immune exclusion can be described as the inability of T cells to infiltrate the tumor [19].
This phenomenon can occur when lymphocytes are recruited to the periphery of the tumor
by antigenic stimuli that promote their persistence, but there are physical or molecular barВӯ
riers preventing their infiltration. Thus, higher exclusion correlates with a poorer prognosis
of immunotherapy.
2.2
Melanoma
Melanoma is a malignancy arising from melanocytes. Melanocytes are cells that produce
the melanin pigment and are found mostly in the skin, but also in the eyes, ears, lepВӯ
tomeninges, gastrointestinal tract, and oral, genital, and sinonasal mucous membranes
[20]. Melanoma is characterized by having a higher mutational load compared to other
cancers and its ability to metastasize at early stages of tumor development [21]. HistorВӯ
ically, the classification of melanoma into subtypes has been based on the tissue where
the primary tumor appears, which are: (1) cutaneous melanoma, (2) mucosal melanoma,
(3) acral melanoma, and (4) uveal melanoma.
2.2.1
Cutaneous melanoma
Cutaneous melanoma is a malignancy arising from melanocytes of the skin, being the
most common melanoma subtype (>90% of diagnoses) [20] and the deadliest form of skin
cancer [22]. Its incidence varies between countries, but overall it has had an increase in
incidence rates, particularly in White populations [20]. The last report from the Global
Cancer Observatory states that there were almost 332 thousand new cases and around
58 thousand deaths worldwide attributed to cutaneous melanoma in 2022 [1].
Diagnosis
Unlike other solid tumors, melanoma affects mostly young and middleВӯaged individuals
(median age at diagnosis, 57 years) [23]. The diagnosis of cutaneous melanoma is based
on a combination of histopathological and clinical findings [20]. A good reference of the
staging system to determine severity of the disease is the one established by the American
Joint Committee on Cancer, which published the 8th edition of their manual in 2018 [24].
See Figure 2.2 for a visual representation of the stages.
Treatment
In early stages, this melanoma is treated with excision or surgery alone and survival rates
are high, but after metastasis the chance of survival drops significantly [22]. Therefore,
early and correct diagnosis is key for ensuring patients have the best possible prognosis.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
3
==PAGE:12==
Further treatment includes radiotherapy and/or immunotherapy [20]. Immunotherapy, in
particular immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) and adoptive TВӯcell therapy (ACT), have
demonstrated very high response rates and longВӯlasting complete tumor regression in
25% of patients participating in clinical trials [4].
Molecular features
The mutational landscape of cutaneous melanoma consists primarily on C>T transitions,
which are a characteristic of mutations caused by UV light exposure [21]. Additionally,
about half of these cancers are BRAFВӯmutant, and less commonly RAS and NF1Вӯmutant
[21].
Figure 2.2: Cutaneous melanoma T categories. Tis=melanoma in situ. *Thinner than 0.8
mm without ulceration. вҖ Thinner than 0.8 mm with ulceration or 0.8вҖ“1.0 mm thick with or
without ulceration. Extracted from: Long et al. (2023) [20]
2.2.2
Mucosal melanoma
Mucosal melanomas are rare and have a particularly aggressive clinical course. They
are characterized by a higher amount of chromosomal structural aberrations and a lower
mutational load than cutaneous melanoma [21].
2.2.3
Acral melanoma
Acral melanoma is a rarer than the previous types. It arises on the palms, soles and
nail beds. Similar to mucosal melanoma, they have lower mutational burden and display
higher somatic structural aberrations, especially copy number changes [21].
2.2.4
Uveal melanoma
Uveal melanoma has one of the lowest observed mutational loads across all tumors [21].
It is also very rare, only accounting for less than 5% of melanoma diagnosis [20].
2.3
Immune system
The immune system is a complex network of cells, humoral factors and cytokines that proВӯ
tect the host from pathological invasion and disease [25], playing a crucial role in overall
health maintenance. It can be divided into two, depending on the reaction speed: (1)
innate immunity and (2) adaptive immunity.
2.3.1
Innate immune system
In addition to immune system elements, the innate immune system also includes physical,
chemical and microbiological barriers that act as a first line of defense. The main charВӯ
acteristic of this response is that it is fast, but also unspecific and poorly targeted [25].
Certainly, the innate response plays a crucial role in limiting cancer progression through
various mechanisms, for example cytotoxicity of natural killer (NK) cells and phagocytosis
4
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:13==
of macrophages, among others [26]. Moreover, antigenВӯpresenting cells (APCs) can exert
crossВӯpresentation of tumor antigens, thereby priming CD8+ TВӯlymphocytes and creating
an interaction between the innate and adaptive responses [26].
2.3.2
Adaptive immune system
Opposite to the innate response, adaptive immunity is initially slower but more specific
(both to self and foreign antigens). Additionally, a major characteristic of the adaptive
response is that it confers immunologic memory, which happens because a fraction of
effector T cells survive even after the pathogen is repelled [17]. This means that when
there are subsequent encounters with an antigen already known, the adaptive response is
activated and offers a quicker and robust response. In fact, this principle is what allowed
the creation of vaccines.
The adaptive immune system is basically composed of B lymphocytes, which mature in
the bone marrow, and T lymphocytes, coming from the thymus [27]. These cells recogВӯ
nize antigens, which are presented to them by APCs, leading to cell priming, activation
and differentiation (see Fig. 2.3). Then, the effector response occurs, either by the cytoВӯ
toxic activity of TВӯcells or by the release of antibodies from BВӯcells [25]. In the following
subsection, the antigen presentation process is explained in more detail.
Figure 2.3: The role of T and B lymphocytes in specific immunity. Extracted from: Parkin
et al. (2001) [25]
2.3.3
Antigen presentation
As mentioned above, antigen presentation is a complex system, and it involves the capВӯ
turing, processing and presentation of antigens on the APCs surface to T lymphocytes.
There are two ways in which this presentation can occur. The first one requires that the
antigen is produced endogenously within the cell, which will then be attached to an MHC
class I molecule after intracellular processing (Fig. 2.4) [25, 28]. The second one inВӯ
volves exogenous antigens, which will then be coupled with MHC class II molecules (Fig.
2.5) [28]. The individual steps that comprise antigen presentation are explained below,
distinguishing between the two pathways.
1. Capture of antigens
вҖў MHCВӯI: No need to capture, since they are produced endogenously in MHCВӯIВӯ
positive cells (all nucleated cells).
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
5
==PAGE:14==
вҖў MHCВӯII: Antigens are captured by APCs through phagocytosis and endocytosis.
2. Tagging antigens for proteolysis
вҖў MHCВӯI: Ubiquitin is used to tag misfolded proteins, which are degraded by the
ubiquitinВӯproteasome system (UPS). This is explained in detail later in point 2.6.
вҖў MHCВӯII: The combination of a reducing environment and a low pH aid in protein
unfolding, which are then processed by endolysosomal proteases.
3. Delivery and binding to MHC molecules
вҖў MHCВӯI: The transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) brings the peptide
to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), where it will bind to the MHCВӯI molecule aided
by auxiliary proteins.
вҖў MHCВӯII: The MHCВӯII molecule is associated with a membrane protein, the invariant
chain (Ii). This allows it to reach the endolysosomal compartment where the antigen
is and load it, aided by other proteins.
4. Display to the cell surface and recognition
вҖў MHCВӯI: The complex goes through the Golgi apparatus and reaches the cell memВӯ
brane in a vesicle. The antigen can then be recognized by the TВӯcell receptor (TCR)
of a CD8+ (cytotoxic) lymphocyte.
вҖў MHCВӯII: A transport vesicle brings the complex to the cell membrane. At this point,
the antigen can be recognized by the TCR of a CD4+ (helper) lymphocyte.
Figure 2.4: Trafficking pathways for MHC class I molecules. Extracted from: Pishesha et
al. (2022) [28]
6
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:15==
Figure 2.5: Trafficking pathways for MHC class II molecules. Extracted from: Pishesha
et al. (2022) [28]
2.4
The cancerВӯimmunity cycle
A framework that is very useful to understand the interconnection between the immune
system and cancer is the cancerВӯimmunity cycle. It consists of seven steps that the imВӯ
mune system needs to succeed and iterate on in order to control tumor growth (Fig. 2.6)
[29]. Any of these checkpoints can become rateВӯlimiting, so they are equally important
to confront the tumor progression. The individual steps are described in the following
subsections.
2.4.1
Release of cancer cell antigens
The first step is when APCs capture and process the neoantigens that are released from
tumor cells, which depends on proinflammatory cytokines and other immunogenic signals
being present.
2.4.2
Cancer antigen presentation
As explained above, the antigens need to be presented coupled with MHC molecules in
the APCs to be recognized by T cells.
2.4.3
Priming and activation
When a TCR recognizes a neoantigen, it results in the priming and activation of that T
cell. This activation results in the proliferation and differentiation of neoantigenВӯspecific T
cells that can target the cancer. It is also worth mentioning that the ratio between effector
and regulatory T cells is also important.
2.4.4
Trafficking of T cells to tumors
Activated T cells travel from the lymphoid tissue to the tumor site. This migration is guided
by chemokines and other signaling molecules that guide the T cells from the bloodstream
into the tumor tissue.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
7
==PAGE:16==
2.4.5
Infiltration of T cells into tumors
Once T cells arrive, they must infiltrate into the TME in order to attack tumor cells. This
process is influenced by diverse factors, which include physical barriers and expression
of adhesion molecules.
2.4.6
Recognition of cancer cells by T cells
Now, the TCR must interact with the neoantigen bound to MHCВӯI molecules it was deВӯ
signed to detect.
2.4.7
Killing of cancer cells
Finally, effector T cells release cytotoxic molecules (such as perforin and granzymes) to
destroy the cancer cells. Upon killing of the tumor cell, more tumorВӯassociated antigens
are released, leading to step 1 again and repeating the cycle.
Figure 2.6: The cancerВӯimmunity cycle. Extracted from: Mellman et al. (2023) [30]
2.5
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy has been a major breakthrough in treating diseases, particularly cancer
[31]. In the case of patients with advanced stage IV melanoma, median survival has
improved from around 6 months to approximately 6 years since the introduction of this
clinical practice [32].
Immunotherapy consists in boosting the antitumor capabilities of the immune system to
control disease progression and increase both overall survival and quality of life for paВӯ
tients. There exist different approaches of immunotherapy: immune checkpoint blockade
(ICB), adoptive TВӯcell therapy (ACT), cancer vaccines, monoclonal antibodies and more
[32]. Since the cohort used for this project received ICB followed by ACT using tumor
8
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:17==
infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) [4], these will be explained in further detail.
2.5.1
Immune checkpoint blockade (ICB)
The immune system is regulated by immune checkpoint molecules in physiological conВӯ
ditions, which prevent TВӯcells from uncontrolled amplification upon antigen recognition
[33]. However, such inhibition might be undesired when facing cancer, since tumor cells
can express these molecules and use this mechanism in their favor. Hence, strategies to
block these inhibitors have been developed to counteract this immunosuppressive phenoВӯ
type. The main molecules targeted by ICB are Cytotoxic T lymphocyteВӯassociated protein
4 (CTLAВӯ4) and programmed cell death protein 1 (PDВӯ1).
2.5.2
Adoptive TВӯcell therapy (ACT)
ACT is a form of immunotherapy that uses the immune cells from the patient to target and
eliminate cancer cells [34]. Some forms of ACT involve the genetic engineering of TCRs
to improve cancer recognition (such as CARВӯT) [35], while others consist in expanding
the existing immune cells without modifying them (such as TILs). Usually, TIL therapy
involves the selection of lymphocytes that already succeeded in infiltrating the tumor and
augmenting them (see Fig. 2.7), although some protocols directly expand the cells without
prior selection [32].
Figure 2.7: Adoptive cell transfer (ACT) with tumorВӯinfiltrating lymphocytes (TILs). ExВӯ
tracted from: Stoltenborg et al. (2022) [5]
Despite the promising results of immunotherapy in the clinic, negative side effects need
to be carefully considered. Normally, toxicity associated with TIL administration is less
common than other kinds of immunotherapy [5], although some patients develop cytokine
release syndrome (CRS) which can be lifeВӯthreatening. Major complications can occur in
melanoma treatment due to autoimmune melanocyte destruction, such as vitiligo or uveitis
[5].
In order to improve medical treatment, it is critical to understand resistance mechanisms
that might hinder the administration of immunotherapy. Resistance to TILs may appear
from the start of the treatment (innate resistance) or after some time (acquired resistance).
Innate resistance to TILs
The lack of tumor recognition cells is the most common mechanism of innate resistance
[5]. This can happen due to a low number of tumorВӯspecific TВӯcells or the lack of imВӯ
munogenic tumor antigens being presented. Other sources of innate resistance are the
presence of immunosuppressive cells in the tumor, TВӯcell dysfunction and exhaustion,
and the impairment of cell migration to the tumor.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
9
==PAGE:18==
Acquired resistance to TILs
Cancers can become resistant to immunotherapy by immunoediting, which is the process
of favoring the selection of tumor resistant clones [5]. Most frequently in TIL therapy,
this is due to defects in the APM. Other sources of acquired resistance are loss of target
antigens and participation of immune checkpoint inhibitors.
2.5.3
RECIST
Response Evaluation Criteria In Solid Tumors (RECIST) is a set of standardized guideВӯ
lines applied in clinical trials to measure the tumor size shrinkage and disease progression
in response to cancer treatment [36]. There are four categorical labels depending on these
parameters:
вҖў Complete Response (CR): When all target lesions disappear, and any pathological
lymph nodes must reduce to less than 10 mm.
вҖў Partial Response (PR):
When at least there is a 30% decrease in the sum of
diameters of target lesions.
вҖў Progressive Disease (PD): When at least there is a 20% relative increase in the
sum of diameters of target lesions, and an absolute increase of 5 mm.
вҖў Stable Disease (SD): When there is neither sufficient shrinkage to qualify as PR
nor sufficient increase to qualify as PD.
2.6
UbiquitinВӯProteasome System
The ubiquitinВӯproteasome system (UPS) has a vital role in the degradation of intracellular
proteins, and it is involved in many different cellular processes, such as cell cycle, apopВӯ
tosis, DNA repair, immune response, and more (see Fig. 2.8C) [37]. It is estimated that
the UPS is responsible for degrading more than 80% of eukaryotic proteins within a cell
[38]. The signal that leads proteins to degradation is ubiquitin, a 76 amino acid molecule
that is covalently attached by a cascade of enzymes: ubiquitin activating enzymes (E1),
ubiquitin conjugating enzymes (E2), and ubiquitin ligases (E3) [39]. See Figure 2.8A for
a schematic representation.
2.6.1
Ubiquitination and deubiquitination
Ubiquitination starts when E1 enzymes activate and transfer ubiquitin to E2 enzymes at
the expense of ATP. Then, E2 enzymes deliver the molecule either directly to a lysine
residue in a substrate (mediated by a RING/UВӯbox E3 enzyme) or to a HECT/RBR E3
enzyme and later to the substrate [40].
Deubiquitination is the opposite process, where ubiquitins are removed from proteins and
it is performed by deubiquitinases (DUBs). This process helps with ubiquitin balance
maintenance and also prevents pathway hyperactivation [39].
2.6.2
The ubiquitin code
Ubiquitination can be performed one time (monoubiquitination) or several times (polyuВӯ
biquitination), which gives rise to a broad range of combinations known as the ubiquitin
code (see Fig. 2.8B). Since ubiquitin has different lysine residues susceptible to be coВӯ
valently linked (Lys6, Lys11, Lys27, Lys29, Lys33, Lys48, and Lys63), different homotypic
and heterotypic chains can be formed, which is determined by participation of different E2
and E3 enzymes [41]. Such diversity confers the UPS with spacial and temporal precision
to act in numerous molecular processes.
10
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:19==
Figure 2.8: Ubiquitin signalling in cell biology and disease. A: Schematic of the ubiquitiВӯ
nation and deubiquitination reactions. B: Schematic representation and examples of the
вҖҳubiquitin codeвҖҷ. C: Examples of cellular functions that are regulated by ubiquitination. D:
Dysfunction of ubiquitination is associated with development of pathologies. Extracted
from: Damgaard et al. (2021) [40]
2.6.3
Proteasome
The proteasome is a protein complex where proteins tagged with ubiquitin are degraded,
and it is located in the nucleus and cytoplasm of all eukaryotic cells [38]. Its constitutive
form is composed by a 20S core particle and two 19S regulatory particles. The core
particle is composed of 4 rings: 2 outer ОұВӯrings that have a scaffoldВӯlike function and 2
inner ОІВӯrings that have enzymatic activity [38].
2.6.4
Immunoproteasome
When inflammation signals appear (such as IFNВӯОі, IFNОұ/ОІ, TNFОұ, and others), the exВӯ
pression of another form of the proteasome is upregulated: the immunoproteasome. This
complex assembles four times faster than the standard proteasome, ensuring a quick imВӯ
mune response [42]. Notably, immunoproteasomes are already constitutively expressed
in APCs and T lymphocytes, and both proteasome forms can create immunogenic pepВӯ
tides [38].
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
11
==PAGE:20==
The main difference between the two forms is in three ОІ subunits of the ОІ ring (see Fig.
2.9). These changes of subunits favor the production of peptides with a hydrophobic CВӯ
terminus, which is what makes the immunoproteasome more efficient in processing and
presenting antigens with MHCВӯI molecules [43].
2.6.5
UPS in cancer
Given the complexity and the participation of the UPS in many different pathways, it is not
surprising that dysregulation can result in multiple diseases, one of them being cancer
[44]. A possible mechanism that can contribute to tumor initiation and development is the
imbalance in cell cycle protein levels related to alterations in E3 enzymes [45, 46]. FurВӯ
thermore, tumor cells heavily rely on the UPS for their survival, since they have increased
protein turnover rates [37].
In the case of melanoma, overexpression of immunoproteasome subunits has been proven
to be associated with better immunotherapy prognosis [9]. Additionally, recent studies
demonstrated that high expression of these subunits correlates with a high abundance of
TILs and better survival [38].
Figure 2.9: Structure of immunoproteasome. Extracted from: Chen et al. (2023) [43]
12
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:21==
3
Methods
3.1
Patient cohort
All 27 cancer patients of this study were enrolled in the phase I/II clinical trial NCT009376256
[47, 48, 4], where the efficacy of ACT followed by attenuated doses of interleukinВӯ2 was inВӯ
vestigated. The dataset consists of preВӯtreatment samples from these 27 patients, which
all had stage IV melanoma, had been previously exposed to other immunotherapies, and
progressed.
The clinical data used in this work consists of sample timepoint, type of lesion, OS, PFS,
type of primary melanoma and RECIST classification [36].
3.2
Response group definition
In order to evaluate differences in immunotherapy response, patients were divided into
two groups: responders, meaning they have a clinical benefit from applying the therapy,
and nonВӯresponders, meaning they do not benefit from the therapy. All patients with tumor
response according to RECIST, so Complete Responders (CR) and Partial Responders
(PR), were considered responders. All patients with Progressive Disease (PD) according
to RECIST were considered nonВӯresponders. For patients that had a Stable Disease (SD)
according to RECIST, the OS was used to determine the groups. Since the median OS
was 22.8 months, a 2 years cutoff was selected. Therefore, patients with SD and OS of
less than 24 months were categorized as nonВӯresponders, and the rest were considered
responders.
3.3
Data preВӯprocessing
RStudio Version 2023.12.0, build 369 was used throughout the entire project. Manual
preВӯprocessing of HGNC symbols was needed, since some of them were in dateВӯlike
format and could not be recognized when attempting the mapping to Ensembl Gene IDs.
Further processing included converting the gene alias names to the official gene symbols
using the HGNChelper [49] and limma [50] packages. The package used to map HGNC
symbols to Ensembl Gene IDs was EnsDb.Hsapiens.v75 [51].
3.4
Somatic mutation analysis
The data to carry out somatic mutation analysis consisted of somatic mutations found
in tumor samples after WES, where germline mutations were already filtered out as deВӯ
scribed previously [4]. Reads were mapped to the human reference genome using the
hg19 assembly.
3.4.1
Tumor Mutational Burden
The Tumor Mutational Burden (TMB) was calculated for each sample as follows:
TMB =
M
CDSlen
Where M is the number of nonsynonymous mutations [52] and CDSlen is the total human
CDS length in Megabases, which is 25.84 Mb [53]. A high TMB was considered to be more
than 10 mutations per Mb, as it is the stateВӯofВӯtheВӯart measure for melanoma [54].
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
13
==PAGE:22==
3.4.2
Variant Effect Predictor
In order to analyze and interpret the biological significance of genetic variants, the web
interface of Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor (VEP) was used (URL) [55]. The input data
were the genomic regions and alleles for all nonsynonymous mutations in the form:
chromosome start_position end_position allele strand ID
The most relevant fields of the VEP output for subsequent analysis are explained below
(see the documentation [URL] for more details):
вҖў Gene: Stable Ensembl gene ID of the affected gene.
вҖў ENSP: The Ensembl protein ID of the affected protein.
вҖў Consequence: Type of biological consequence of this variant. VEP calculates the
consequences as follows: for each variant that is mapped to the reference genome,
it identifies all overlapping Ensembl transcripts. Then it uses a ruleВӯbased approach
to predict the effects that each allele of the variant may have on each transcript and
gives a result. See the documentation [URL] for a complete list of possible values.
вҖў SIFT: Sorting Intolerant From Tolerant consequence prediction. SIFT predicts wheВӯ
ther an amino acid substitution affects protein function based on sequence homolВӯ
ogy and the properties of amino acids. It uses a database of protein families to
identify conserved regions, under the assumption that important amino acids will be
conserved in these regions. The score ranges from 0 to 1. A score of less or equal
to 0.05 is considered to predict a deleterious effect, while variants with scores above
0.05 are predicted to be tolerated [56].
вҖў PolyPhen: Polymorphism Phenotyping consequence prediction. PolyPhenВӯ2 preВӯ
dicts the possible impact of an amino acid substitution on the structure, stability
and function of a protein using a NaГҜve Bayes classifier trained using supervised
machine learning. The score ranges from 0 to 1. A score between 0 and 0.446 preВӯ
dicts a benign effect. A score between 0.446 and 0.908 predicts possibly damaging.
A score between 0.906 and 1 predicts a probably damaging effect [57].
To determine loss of function (LoF) variants in this project, both SIFT and PolyPhen scores
were considered. If SIFT was lower or equal to 0.05Нҫ or if PolyPhen was higher than 0.446,
the variant was considered deleterious.
3.4.3
GO annotation
In order to construct customized gene sets based on GO terms related to the ubiquitin
pathway, a database was built. The end goal was to have each ubiquitinВӯrelated GO child
term of each gene grouped into shared GO parent terms, which would then be grouped
in four broader customВӯdefined categories. The list of categories can be found below:
вҖў ubiquitination: related in any way in favor of protein ubiquitination.
вҖў deubiquitination: related in any way in favor of protein deubiquitination.
вҖў ubiquitin_neutral: only ubiquitinВӯprotein transferase activity (GO:0004842). It is conВӯ
sidered neutral since ubiquitination and deubiquitination happen at the same time.
вҖў ubiquitin_other: other functions performed by ubiquitins.
To construct the database, first a selection of GO parent terms was made, and each
child GO term was assigned to these parent terms using the GO.db [58], mygene [59]
14
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:23==
and biomaRt [60] packages. Since some genes could not be assigned, more GO parent
terms were fetched. This process was repeated until no genes were left out, ending
up with 40 different GO parent terms (see Appendix A). In this process, some genes
had inconsistencies due to inaccurate annotation, meaning they were annotated to both
ubiquitination and deubiquitination categories. Those genes were manually curated to
remove the inconsistency.
3.4.4
Over Representation Analysis
Over Representation Analysis (ORA) is used to determine which preВӯdefined sets of genes
are more frequently present in a specific list of genes than what would be expected by
chance [61]. To accomplish that, a hypergeometric distribution is used to determine this
probability given the ratio of those genes in the background distribution, and it is calculated
as follows:
P(X вүҘx) = 1 вҲ’
xвҲ’1
!
i=0
"M
i
#"NвҲ’M
nвҲ’i
#
"N
n
#
Where N is the number of genes in the background setНҫ M is the number of genes in the
predefined category (also contained in the background)Нҫ n is the number of genes in the
list of interestНҫ and x is the number of genes from the predefined category that are also in
the list of interest.
For this study, the background used were all Homo sapiens genes. The preВӯdefined gene
sets were 5 enzyme classes related to the ubiquitin pathway provided by Rune Busk
DamgaardвҖҷs group at DTU: Ubiquitin Signalling and Inflammation. The enzyme classes
were these: UbiquitinВӯactivating enzymes, UbiquitinВӯconjugating enzymes, UbiquitinВӯprotein
ligase family, Peptidase family C19 and Deubiquitinases. Finally, the list of genes used
as query for the analysis were genes which were predicted to have at least one loss of
function mutation, and the analysis was done for each sample separately. The package
fgsea [62] was used to perform the ORA.
3.4.5
Cellular component analysis
To determine the subcellular location of proteins, the webserver DeepLocВӯ2.0 was used
(URL). DeepLocВӯ2.0 uses a three stage deep learning approach for sequence classificaВӯ
tion. First, a feature representation for each amino acid in the sequence is generated
using a preВӯtrained protein transformer language model. Then an attentionВӯbased poolВӯ
ing stage produces a single representation for the whole sequence. Finally, the prediction
stage uses a classifier to output the subcellular labels [63].
The input used to run the software was a multifasta containing all the protein sequences
belonging to ubiquitin pathway genes which were predicted to have at least one loss of
function mutation.
3.4.6
PFAM analysis
The functional analysis of proteins and classification into families was performed using
the InterPro webserver (URL) using the search by sequence feature. InterPro uses preВӯ
dictive models provided by several different databases to classify proteins into families
and determine their domains [64].
The input used to run the software was a multifasta containing all the protein sequences
belonging to ubiquitin pathway genes which were predicted to have at least one loss of
function mutation.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
15
==PAGE:24==
3.5
Transcriptomic analysis
The data for this analysis consisted of bulk RNAВӯSeq expression profiles that were alВӯ
ready TPM normalized by the authors [4]. TPM normalizes both for sequencing depth
and transcript length, and it is calculated as follows for each transcript and sample [65]:
1. Dividing the read counts mapped to a transcript by the length of the transcript in
kilobases gives Reads Per Kilobase (RPK).
RPK =
Read counts
Transcript length (kb)
2. Summing all RPK values in a sample and dividing by 1 million gives the scaling
factor for each sample.
Scaling factor =
$ RPK
1, 000, 000
3. Dividing each RPK value by the scaling factor gives Transcripts Per Million (TPM).
TPM =
RPK
Scaling factor
With the objective of scaling all values to be in the range between 0 and 1, a minВӯmax
normalization was applied to all genes, calculated as follows:
Normalized value =
x вҲ’min(x)
max(x) вҲ’min(x)
Where x is the value to be normalized, min(x) is the minimum expression value for that
gene, and max(x) is the maximum expression value for that gene.
In order to evaluate all steps of the cancer immunity cycle and the TME, different tools
were used to calculate several biomarkers. The minВӯmax normalization technique was
also applied to levels of biomarkers.
3.5.1
Tools for calculating transcriptomic biomarkers
Tracking Tumor Immunophenotype (TIP)
TIP can be used to determine tumor immunophenotype at the 7 different steps of the
cancerВӯimmunity cycle (see Theoretical Background). To characterize the different steps,
the authors manually collected 178 signature genes from published studies and grouped
them in 23 gene sets. Then, the levels of activity were calculated for each gene set using
singleВӯsample Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (ssGSEA) [66].
Molecular Functional Portraits (MFP)
MFP can be used to classify tumor samples into TME subtypes. The MFP authors gathВӯ
ered 29 genes and use their expression levels ssGSEA scores to classify a tumor sample
into one of the TME subtypes they defined [67]. The possible subtypes are: ImmuneВӯ
Enriched, Fibrotic (IE/F)Нҫ Fibrotic (F)Нҫ ImmuneВӯEnriched, nonВӯfibrotic (IE)Нҫ and Immune
desert (D).
16
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:25==
EcoTyper
EcoTyper is a machine learning framework to identify coВӯoccurrence of cellВӯtype specific
transcriptional states in tumor samples from bulk and singleВӯcell (scRNAВӯseq) expression
data. In order to do so, the authors employed a hierarchical strategy in which two signature
matrices were sequentially applied, each previously validated in solid tumors. The first
matrix was TR4 to deconvolute major cellular compartments in epithelial tumors, and the
second was LM22 to deconvolute leukocyte phenotypes [68].
Tumor Immune Dysfunction and Exclusion (TIDE)
TIDE is a computational framework developed to evaluate the potential of tumor immune
escape from the gene expression profiles of cancer samples. To do so, it estimates cell
dysfunction and exclusion by assessing how closely the gene expression profile of the
tumor sample matches the corresponding signature [69].
ConsensusTME
ConsensusTME is a tool that calculates cancer specific signatures for 18 different cell
types of the TME using a consensus approach. To achieve that, it defines gene sets that
are then used within a ssGSEA framework to provide normalized enrichment scores for
each of the cell types [70].
Estimation of STromal and Immune cells in MAlignant Tumours using Expression
data (ESTIMATE)
ESTIMATE is a computational framework for predicting tumor purity and presence of infilВӯ
trating stromal/immune cells in tumor samples using gene expression data. The algorithm
is based on ssGSEA, which generates three scores [71]:
1. Stromal score: captures the presence of stroma in the tumor tissue.
2. Immune score: represents the infiltration of immune cells in the tumor tissue.
3. Estimate score: infers tumor purity.
3.5.2
Additional biomarkers
Other biomarkers evaluated in this project include the following:
вҖў APM_Senb score: normalized enrichment score (NES) of antigen presentation maВӯ
chinery (APM) computed with ssGSEA based on seven genes: HLAВӯA, HLAВӯB, HLAВӯ
C, B2M, TAP1, TAP2 and TAPBP [72].
вҖў IP_Wu score: immunoproteasome signature created by taking the average expresВӯ
sion of its three specific subunit genes: PSMB8, PSMB9 and PSMB10 [10].
вҖў MIAS score: ssGSEA NES of 100 MHCВӯI related genes [73] to assess antigen
presentation.
вҖў IMPRES: IMmunoВӯPREdictive Score to evaluate cancer cells recognition from TВӯ
cells.
It is based on 15 pairwise transcriptomics relationships between immune
checkpoint genes [74, 75].
вҖў ImmuneCyt_Davoli score: Immune cytolytic score to evaluate killing of cancer
cells.
The calculation is done by normalizing counts of gene sets representing
molecular markers of cytotoxic CD8+ TВӯcells and NK cells [76].
вҖў Tinflam_Ayers score: measure of tumor inflammation to assess killing of cancer
cells. It is based on a weighted sum of 18 genes expressed in response to IFNВӯОі
[77].
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
17
==PAGE:26==
3.6
Statistical analysis
3.6.1
Box plots
For all boxplots, center lines indicate medians (value on top), box edges represent the inВӯ
terquartile range, whiskers extend to the most extreme data points not considered outliers,
and the outliers are plotted using dots. Points are defined as outliers if they are greater
than q3 + w Г— (q3вҖ“q1) or less than q1вҖ“w Г— (q3вҖ“q1), where w is the maximum whisker
length, and q1 and q3 are the 25th and 75th percentiles of the sample data, respectively.
The pВӯvalue was calculated using unpaired MannВӯWhitney test with an alpha of 0.05.
3.6.2
Bar plots
For bar plots, the center is defined by the mean of the distribution, and error bars represent
the standard deviation of the distribution.
3.6.3
Over Representation Analysis
The significance in Over Representation Analysis is evaluated using a hypergeometric
distribution to determine if the number of query genes that fall into a particular gene set is
greater than expected by chance. Since multiple gene sets are tested, the pВӯvalues are
adjusted using the BenjaminiВӯHochberg (BH) method [78] to control for False Discovery
Rate (FDR) with a threshold of p вҲ’value < Оұ.
3.7
Data availability
All the data and code used in this work to perform the somatic mutation analysis, together
with the results obtained, can be found on this GitHub repository: https://github.com/EricbfВӯ
10/MScВӯthesisВӯEric.
18
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:27==
4
Results
4.1
Patient cohort and characteristics
The dataset used for this project consists of preВӯtreatment samples from 27 cancer paВӯ
tients that later received adoptive TВӯcell therapy (ACT) using tumor infiltrating lymphocytes
(TILs) as part of a clinical phase I/II trial. All patients had stage IV melanoma, and had
been previously exposed to other immunotherapies. The majority of the samples had cuВӯ
taneous as primary melanoma, two (samples 31 and 34) had mucosal melanoma and 6
(samples 01, 03, 14, 43, 45, 47) had an unknown one (Fig. 4.1). According to the REВӯ
CIST criteria, there were five CR, seven PR, ten with SD and five with PD. The mutational
landscape of the 27 melanoma tumor samples was investigated using WES. Three of the
samples (01, 29 and 45) failed exome sequencing, so they were excluded from the analВӯ
ysis. Another two out of the remaining 24 samples (20 and 24) had no RNAВӯSeq data
available, so they were excluded from the analysis as well.
The clinical benefit was determined as explained in the Methods section. After filtering out
the samples mentioned earlier, there were a total of 10 responder and 12 nonВӯresponder
patients. The tumor mutational load among the samples was quite disperse, ranging from
23 to 2,200 mutations (Fig. 4.1).
Figure 4.1: Mutational load and clinical features of the patient cohort. Tumor samples
are ordered according to mutational load from lowest to highest. Abbreviations: CR =
Complete ResponseНҫ PD = Progressive DiseaseНҫ PR = Partial ResponseНҫ SD = Stable
DiseaseНҫ OS = Overall Survival.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
19
==PAGE:28==
4.2
Somatic mutation analysis
4.2.1
Tumor mutational burden
Having a higher TMB is known to correlate with a better prognosis of cancer immunotherВӯ
apy. As expected, it was found that responders had a higher TMB (median = 12.29) than
nonВӯresponders (median = 4.02) (pВӯvalue = 0.012, Fig. 4.2), indicating that a higher TMB
is associated with a better clinical outcome from ACT. However, there were some noВӯ
ticeable outliers in both groups. Regarding the nonВӯresponders group, samples 43 (TMB
= 15.17) and 03 (TMB = 49.81) had much higher values than the group median. In the
responders group, samples 26 (TMB = 35.02) and 22 (TMB = 53.79) had again higher
values than their group median (Fig. 4.2).
Figure 4.2: Tumor Mutational Burden (TMB) by response groups. PВӯvalue from MannвҖ“
Whitney test.
4.2.2
Variant characteristics
Next, the variant characteristics were analyzed using the MAFTools package [79]. The
majority of the mutations found in the data were missense, accounting for a total of 6,345.
There were also 381 nonsense mutations, 285 splice site mutations and 4 nonstop muВӯ
tations (Fig. 4.3A). Noticeably, most of the variants were SNPs (10,489), but there were
also some DNP (304) (Fig. 4.3B). As expected for melanoma, the vast majority of SNPs
were C>T transitions (8,830) (Fig. 4.3C).
4.2.3
Number of LoF mutations
To further assess differences between the patients who had a clinical benefit from ACT
and the ones who did not, a variant effect predictor was used to predict functional conВӯ
sequences of nonsynonymous mutations. A diagram showing unique and shared genes
with one or more LoF mutation between the two patient response groups is shown in FigВӯ
ure 4.4. The responders group had 1,810 unique genes, whereas the nonВӯresponders
group had 984. Both groups shared 409 genes with at least one LoF mutation.
20
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:29==
Figure 4.3: Characteristics of mutations in all samples. A: Number of mutations grouped
by nonsynonymous classes. B: Number of mutations grouped by variant type. C: Number
of mutations classified by SNV class. Abbreviations: SNP = Single Nucleotide PolymorВӯ
phismНҫ DNP = Double Nucleotide PolymorphismНҫ SNV = Single Nucleotide Variant.
Figure 4.4: Venn Diagram of genes with at least one loss of function mutation by response
group.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
21
==PAGE:30==
Next, the difference in number of LoF mutations between the two groups was evaluated
(a summary of mutations per patient can be found in Appendix B). The number of LoF
mutations in the responders group (median = 198.5) was significantly higher (pВӯvalue =
0.021) than the nonВӯresponders group (median = 71, Fig. 4.5). This was expected since
the TMB was also higher in responders compared to nonВӯresponders. Again, there are
some outliers in both groups. Regarding the nonВӯresponders group, sample 43 had 263
LoF mutations and 03 had 840, both of which differ greatly from their group median. In
the responders group, sample 26 had 595 LoF mutations and 22 had 893, which are also
higher than their group median.
Figure 4.5: Number of LoF mutations by response groups. PВӯvalue from MannвҖ“Whitney
test.
4.2.4
Top genes with LoF mutations
An exploration of the top 50 genes with one or more LoF mutations was performed.
The gene that is mutated in most samples is BRAF (59%), followed by MIR548N (50%)
and MUC16 (45%, Fig. 4.6). Interestingly, MUC16 was only found mutated in two nonВӯ
responder patients, whereas it was mutated in eight responders. Furthermore, there are
several genes that are mutated only in one sample of the nonВӯresponder group, but in
several samples of the responder group. This is the case for (from top to bottom): MYH8,
COL5A3, LRP1B, NLRP8, PKHD1, PTPRT, C10orf71, CACNA1C, COL1A1, DNAH6,
EPHA6, FLNB, FREM1, KALRN, LAMA1, MYLK, NEB, OR51B5, RYR2, and SCYL1.
Also, CLCN1 and TMEM132C are not mutated in any nonВӯresponder sample, but are
mutated in four samples of the responders group.
22
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:31==
Figure 4.6: Top 50 most mutated genes with at least one LoF mutation. The heat map
indicates the variant classification for LoF mutations per gene and sample. The right
panel is a bar plot indicating the number of samples with mutations in that gene. The
percentages indicate the number of samples that had one or more mutations for that
gene with respect to the total number of samples. Note: Variants annotated as Multi_Hit
indicate that distinct mutations were observed in the same gene for a single sample.
4.2.5
UbiquitinВӯrelated genes with LoF mutations
To evaluate LoF mutations in genes of the ubiquitin pathway, mutations were filtered
to only include ubiquitinВӯrelated genes (summary of mutations in Appendix C). The toВӯ
tal amount of loss of function mutations after filtering was 87 in responders and 43 in
nonВӯresponders. A diagram showing unique and shared genes between the two patient
response groups is shown in Figure 4.7. The responders group had 63 unique genes,
whereas the nonВӯresponders group had 29 (LoF mutated genes in Appendix D). Both
groups shared only 9 genes with at least one LoF mutation: RNF17, MYCBP2, NEDD4L,
HECW2, MARCHF1, CBLB, FBXW7, VPS8, CDC20B and USP34. All of them are E3
ubiquitin transferases except for USP34, which is a deubiquitinase.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 4.7: Venn Diagram of ubiquitin pathway genes with at least one loss of function
mutation.
4.2.6
OverВӯrepresentation analysis of the ubiquitin pathway
In order to evaluate if the ubiquitin pathway was overВӯrepresented among the loss of
function mutations of the samples, an ORA was performed. Both groups showed overВӯ
representation in the ubiquitinВӯprotein ligase family, but there were six samples in responВӯ
ders and three in nonВӯresponders (Fig. 4.8).
Figure 4.8: OverВӯRepresentation Analysis of the ubiquitin pathway. A: ORA for the reВӯ
sponders group. B: ORA for the nonВӯresponders group.
24
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:33==
Remarkably, the responder samples 22 and 42 had overВӯrepresentation in the deubiqВӯ
uitinases class (Fig.
4.8A), while there was no overВӯrepresentation on that gene set
in the nonВӯresponders group (Fig. 4.8B). Overall, more samples from the responders
group showed significantly (pВӯadjusted < 0.05) overВӯrepresented ubiquitinВӯrelated gene
sets compared to the nonВӯresponders group.
4.2.7
Protein function analysis
To further explore differences between response groups associated to ubiquitin pathway
genes with LoF mutations, the aim now was to analyze protein functions, locations and
families to further explore differences between response groups. Firstly, the GO terms
related to the ubiquitin pathway were annotated to genes that had at least one loss of
function mutation as described in Methods. All GO terms except one showed a nonВӯ
significant difference among the two response groups (pВӯvalue > 0.05, Fig. 4.9). Only
regulation of DNAВӯtemplated transcription showed a statistically significant difference (pВӯ
value = 0.025), being higher in responders than in nonВӯresponders.
Figure 4.9: GO terms related to genes of the ubiquitin pathway with LoF mutations. PВӯ
value from MannвҖ“Whitney test if significant, otherwise not shown.
4.2.8
Subcellular location analysis
Next, the subcellular location of predicted proteins by VEP was investigated, focusing only
on those belonging to the ubiquitin pathway with LoF mutations. Cell membrane, endoВӯ
plasmic reticulum and lysosome/vacuole subcellular compartments did not show statistiВӯ
cally significant differences among response groups (Fig. 4.10). Cytoplasm and Nucleus
were significantly higher in responders compared to nonВӯresponders (pВӯvalue = 0.027 and
0.016, respectively).
4.2.9
Protein family analysis
Moving forward, the PFAM families for the same proteins were explored as described
in Methods. All except one of the families showed a nonВӯsignificant difference among
the response groups (pВӯvalue > 0.05, Fig. 4.11). Only Peptidase_C19 has significantly
higher in responders (pВӯvalue = 0.036). The most represented family in both groups was
UbВӯprot_ligase_E3. Notably, the Cullin family (IPR045093) and the ZnF_C2H2Вӯtype_TF
family (IPR050888) were only present in responders.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 4.10: Subcellular location of predicted proteins from genes of the ubiquitin pathway
with LoF mutations. PВӯvalue from MannвҖ“Whitney test if significant, otherwise not shown.
Figure 4.11: PFAM family of predicted proteins from genes of the ubiquitin pathway with
LoF mutations. PВӯvalue from MannвҖ“Whitney test if significant, otherwise not shown.
26
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:35==
4.3
Transcriptomic analysis
In order to observe how somatic mutations on the ubiquitin pathway genes impacted gene
expression, a transcriptomics analysis was performed. The goal was to explore differВӯ
ences between the two response groups by looking at the expression profiles of proteaВӯ
some subunits, ubiquitinВӯrelated genes and cancerВӯimmunity cycle biomarkers.
4.3.1
Expression of proteasome subunits
Since the immunoproteasome plays a key role within the ubiquitin pathway, the expression
of proteasome subunits was investigated for both response groups. Although responders
have a higher median for all immunoproteasomeВӯspecific subunits (PSMB8, PSMB9 and
PSMB10) compared to nonВӯresponders, results are nonВӯsignificant (pВӯvalue > 0.05, Fig.
4.12). Regarding the expression of the regular proteasome subunits (PSMB5, PSMB6
and PSMB7), differences were also nonВӯsignificant (pВӯvalue > 0.05).
Figure 4.12: Normalized gene expression of proteasome subunits by response groups.
PВӯvalue from MannвҖ“Whitney test.
4.3.2
Expression and LoF mutations of ubiquitin pathway genes
Next, the expression profiles of ubiquitin pathway genes with at least one LoF mutation
were evaluated. When ordering by median expression of all genes (high to low from left
to right), there was no clear separation between responders and nonВӯresponders (Fig.
4.13). Surprisingly, some genes with LoF mutations had very high expression values,
especially in sample 22 and 31. However, the majority of genes with LoF had very low
expression values.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.13: Ubiquitin pathway gene expression and LoF mutation presence. Expression
levels were normalized as indicated in Methods. Samples were ordered from left to right
by highest median expression of all genes. Pink dots indicate presence of at least one
LoF mutation.
28
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:37==
4.3.3
Relationship between tumor purity and LoF mutations
Tumor purity is an indicator of the cancerous and nonВӯcancerous cell ratio. Evaluating the
relationship between tumor purity and the number of LoF mutations in ubiquitin pathway
genes could potentially indicate a tumor escape mechanism. Although there is an upward
trend for both response groups, the pВӯvalue (0.133) indicates that the relationship between
tumor purity and the number of LoF mutations is not statistically significant (Fig. 4.14).
Figure 4.14: Linear regression of tumor purity and number of LoF mutations in ubiquitin
pathway genes. The black dashed line represents the linear regression trend line, and
the shaded area around the trend line represents the confidence interval. PВӯvalue from
tВӯtest.
4.3.4
Correlation of cancerВӯimmunity cycle biomarkers
Since resistance to immunotherapy can occur at different stages of the cancerВӯimmunity
cycle, several biomarkers were used to gain insights on each step. By examining the
relationships between biomarkers from different steps, it is possible to identify whether
changes in one step affect other steps. Thus, pairwise correlation between the biomarkers
was performed.
The results demonstrate a strong positive correlation among all cellular biomarkers from
consensusTME (immune cell signatures) in both responders and nonВӯresponders, as ilВӯ
lustrated in Figure 4.15. Additionally, several key immune parameters, including the trafВӯ
ficking of immune cells into tumors (from TIP), immune dysfunction, immune cytolytic
score, MIAS, tumor inflammation score and antigen presentation machinery score, exВӯ
hibit similarly positive intercorrelations on both groups. Conversely, exclusion and tumor
purity display a strong negative correlation with the biomarkers mentioned above for both
groups. Surprisingly, responders have a strong negative correlation between immunoВӯ
proteasome signature and recognition of cancer cells by immune cells (Fig. 4.15A). This
group also shows a strong negative correlation between IMPRES and immune cell excluВӯ
sion. Regarding the nonВӯresponders, there is a strong negative correlation between killing
of cancer cells and two other biomarkers: APM score and recognition of cancer cells (Fig.
4.15B). Other correlations were not pronounced.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
29
==PAGE:38==
4.3.5
Profile of biomarkers and LoF mutations
To finish the analysis, the profile of biomarkers related to the tumor immunity cycle was
assessed for each sample. Overall, the levels of biomarkers are similar between the two
response groups, as it can be seen in Figure 4.16. As expected by the results of the
pairwise correlation between biomarkers, samples that had a high tumor purity showed a
decreased level of biomarkers related to immune infiltration. Remarkably, samples with
a desert TME are clustered together in both response groups, and they had lower levels
values overall compared to samples with other TME types.
30
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.15: Cancer immunity cycle biomarkers correlation by response group. A: ReВӯ
sponders. B: NonВӯresponders.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.16: BiomarkerвҖҷs scores profiles, ubiquitin pathway LoF mutations and patient
characteristics. Score levels were normalized as indicated in Methods. Ubiquitin_LoF
indicates presence or absence of any LoF mutation in either E1, E2 or E3 enzymes.
Deubiquitin_LoF indicates presence or absence of any LoF mutation in deubiquitinases.
A: Responder group panel. B: NonВӯresponder group panel. Abbreviations: D = DesertНҫ F
= FibroticНҫ IE = ImmuneВӯEnriched, nonВӯfibroticНҫ IE/F: ImmuneВӯEnriched, Fibrotic.
32
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:41==
5
Discussion
The aim of this project was to evaluate if differences in the mutational landscape and exВӯ
pression profiles of ubiquitin pathway genes could explain the dissimilar response to ACT
in melanoma patients. For the somatic mutation analysis, it was expected that more loss of
function mutations were found in samples of patients that had a clinical benefit from ACT.
The hypothesis was that within the mutated genes, ubiquitinВӯrelated gene sets would be
more overВӯrepresented in the responders group compared to the nonВӯresponders. The hyВӯ
pothesis for the transcriptomic analysis was that samples belonging to responders would
show higher expression of immunoproteasomeВӯspecific subunits and cancerВӯimmunity cyВӯ
cle related biomarkers.
5.1
Somatic mutation analysis
Regarding the somatic mutation data, it was startling that authors did not include insertions
nor deletions. This is problematic, since it may lead to an incomplete understanding of
the mutational landscape, as it prevents the analysis of frameshift mutations.
5.1.1
TMB as a clinical outcome predictor
The evidence of responders having a higher TMB than nonВӯresponders validates previous
findings [4, 6], and demonstrates that having high mutational load is associated with a
better clinical outcome from ACT in this patient cohort. However, it was surprising that
samples 03 and 43 had a high mutational load despite being nonВӯresponders. These
findings combined with evidence that TMB is not associated with clinical benefit in other
cohorts [7, 8] points out that mutational load alone cannot be used as a therapy outcome
predictor. Therefore, investigating other predictive biomarkers is of high importance.
5.1.2
Functional impact prediction
Most of the nonsynonymous mutations were missense, and most of them were SNPs of
the type C>T transitions. This was expected since the majority of the samples (16/22)
had a primary cutaneous melanoma, and it is likely that most mutations were UVВӯinduced
arising from a chronically sunВӯdamaged (CSD) site [21]. This is also consistent with having
a higher mutational load, since TMB is higher in melanomas originated from CSD sites
than in those arising from nonВӯCSD sites [80].
The functional impact of the nonsynonymous mutations was predicted using Ensembl
VEP. As mentioned in Methods, SIFT and PolyPhen scores were used to determine when
a mutation was considered to be deleterious. However, both scores did not necessarily
have to agree to classify a mutation as loss of function. A stricter approach could have
been taken by only considering LoF those mutations where both scores agreed (see OutВӯ
look for further discussion). Using the current approach, evidence demonstrates that
responders had a higher median number of LoF mutations compared to nonВӯresponders,
which was expected since they started with more mutations overall.
As expected for melanoma samples, the most commonly mutated gene was BRAF [21].
This gene encodes a protein called BВӯRaf, which is a kinase involved in the transduction
of mitogenic signals from the cell membrane to the nucleus through the RAFВӯMEKВӯERK
pathway. Dysregulation of this pathway has been linked to enhancing tumor survival,
proliferation, invasion and metastasis [81]. Therefore, it was expected that more nonВӯ
responders had BRAF LoF mutations compared to responders, but the differences were
not substantial in this study (8 and 5 samples, respectively).
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
33
==PAGE:42==
Other highly mutated genes were MIR548N and MUC16, which encode for a micro RNA
[82] and a protein that helps in the formation of a protective mucous barrier [83], respecВӯ
tively. Those do not seem to have a relationship with cancer progression. Genes CLCN1
and TMEM132C were found mutated only in the responders group. CLCN1 encodes for a
voltageВӯdependent chloride channel, which regulates the electric excitability of the skeleВӯ
tal muscle membrane [84]. TMEM132C encodes for a transmembrane protein that is an
integral component of the cell membrane [85]. However, 6 of 10 patients who had clinical
benefit did not have these mutations, so further analysis would be needed to examine if
a relationship between these mutations and immunotherapy sensitivity exists.
5.1.3
Ubiquitin pathway ORA and further exploration
In order to investigate if the ubiquitin pathway was overВӯrepresented among the loss of
function mutations in the samples, an ORA was performed. The results indicate that
responders have more overВӯrepresentation of the ubiquitinВӯprotein ligase family and deuВӯ
biquitinases gene sets compared to nonВӯresponders. Considering the number of samples
of each group, 6/10 patients with clinical benefit showed overВӯrepresentation compared to
3/12 patients with no clinical benefit. This implies that LoF in the ubiquitin pathway could
be associated to clinical outcome from ACT, although more studies with larger sample
sizes are needed to corroborate these findings.
To further explore and identify patterns distinguishing responders from nonВӯresponders,
three biological characteristics of ubiquitin pathway genes with LoF mutations were anaВӯ
lyzed: protein function, subcellular location and protein family. Regarding protein function,
regulation of DNAВӯtemplated transcription was significantly higher in responders than nonВӯ
responders. It is not clear why that is the case, so further investigation should be done.
The protein family analysis results were surprising, since UbВӯprot_ligase_E3 was exВӯ
pected to be significantly higher in responders according to the ORA results. A possiВӯ
ble explanation could be attributed to different grouping, since the ORA had only one
group with all E3 enzymes and the PFAM analysis used more subgroups. If proteins of all
subgroups belonging to the E3 enzyme superfamily were summed, perhaps the results
would be significant. Peptidase_C19, a family of deubiquitinases, was significantly higher
in responders, which is in accordance with the ORA findings. Despite some significant
results, the high variability in the data together with the limited sample size demand for
further verification by independent studies.
The analysis of subcellular locations primarily aimed to determine whether nonВӯresponders
had proteins with LoF mutations localized predominantly outside the nucleus and cytoВӯ
plasm, which could potentially elucidate differences in response. The most represented
compartments for both response groups were the nucleus and cytoplasm. Although reВӯ
sponders had significantly more proteins than nonВӯresponders in these two subcellular
locations, this is likely due to the fact that responders had more loss of function mutaВӯ
tions overall. Hence, this result is not surprising, and a larger sample size is needed to
corroborate the validity of these findings.
5.2
Transcriptomic analysis
The transcriptomic analysis was conducted using the TPMВӯnormalized data, since the auВӯ
thors did not provide the raw data [4]. Thus, it was not possible to do differential expresВӯ
sion analysis, nor it was possible to prove that authors did TPM normalization correctly.
Nevertheless, this was not an issue for the biomarker analysis, as the majority of the tools
preferred TPM as input over raw data.
34
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:43==
5.2.1
Expression of UPS genes
There is evidence that a high expression of the immunoproteasome subunits is associВӯ
ated with better survival of melanoma patients [38, 9]. In this cohort, the results indicate
no association of immunoproteasomeВӯspecific subunits and clinical benefit from ACT. ExВӯ
cluding patients classified with SD according to the RECIST criteria from both response
groups might reveal a stronger association. However, due to the limited sample size, such
comparison was not feasible in this study.
Expression profiles of ubiquitin pathway genes with at least one LoF mutation were investiВӯ
gated next. As expected by the ORA results, samples 22 and 42 had more LoF mutations
in ubiquitinВӯspecific proteases (deubiquitinases) compared to the rest. Regarding tranВӯ
script levels, some mutated genes were found to be highly expressed. This phenomenon
could be explained by the genotype being heterozygote, meaning that the second chroВӯ
mosome copy compensates for the mutation[86]. Another explanation could be attributed
to copy number variation (CNV) due to replication or recombination events, which created
a nonВӯmutated gene that can be normally expressed [87].
5.2.2
Evaluation of TME biomarkers
Tumor purity is an indicator of the proportion of tumor cells with respect to nonВӯcancerous
cells inside the sample [15]. Evaluating the relationship between tumor purity and the
number of LoF mutations in ubiquitin pathway genes could potentially indicate a tumor
escape mechanism. Here, results were not statistically significant to demonstrate an asВӯ
sociation between these two variables in any response group.
Regarding other TMEВӯrelated biomarkers, it was confirmed a positive correlation between
immune cell signatures among themselves, and negative correlation of these with tumor
purity and immune exclusion. These results are coherent with established literature [15].
5.2.3
Evaluation of cancerВӯimmune cycle biomarkers
Evaluating the levels of cancer immunityВӯcycle biomarkers is critical to get a comprehenВӯ
sive understanding of what could be causing the clinical outcome. It may happen that
the antigen presentation pathway is fully functional, but impediments on a downstream
process are the cause of immunotherapy resistance [29].
Results validated a positive correlation of immune cells with trafficking and immune cyВӯ
tolytic score in both response groups. This was expected, since trafficking is the ability
of immune cells to travel to the tumor site. Additionally, the positive correlation of MHCВӯI
associated score with antigen presenting machinery score indicates that these metrics
are complementary to assess APM function.
It was not expected to see in responders that higher immunoproteasome expression was
associated with lower recognition of cancer cells, as indicated by the strong negative
correlation. More investigation would be needed to explain this finding. It was also logical
to see a negative correlation in this group between IMPRES (which measures cancer cell
recognition by TВӯcells) and exclusion.
Regarding nonВӯresponders, the negative correlation between recognition and killing of
cancer cells could contribute to explain a resistance mechanism to immunotherapy. AnВӯ
other possible resistance mechanism could be explained by investigating the negative
correlation between APM score and killing of cancer cells.
When the biomarkers were evaluated per sample, the levels were very similar between
responders and nonВӯresponders. It was expected that antigen presentation machinery
scores were significantly higher in responders than in nonВӯresponders [4], but that was not
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
35
==PAGE:44==
the case. This finding is also consistent with the nonВӯsignificant differences in expression
of immunoproteasome subunits between both groups.
The TME type is a good indicator of overall scores of biomarkers, since it is expected
that samples with desert TME have lower levels in general due to a high malignant cell
percentage [67], and samples with immuneВӯenriched TME have higher scores of cancerВӯ
immune cycle biomarkers. Although the results confirmed this, TME type is not sufficient
to determine clinical benefit, since both TME types appear in both response groups.
The case of sample 22 is intriguing, as it displays pronounced low scores of most biomarkВӯ
ers, including immune cell signatures, and it still belongs to the clinical benefit group. It
also exhibits a high exclusion and tumor purity, but it has high activation of TВӯcells, recogВӯ
nition, and killing of tumor cells. Therefore, implementing TIL therapy could potentially
enhance the ability of the patient to combat the cancer, since more active immune cells
are introduced.
36
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:45==
6
Conclusion
The objective of this project was to determine whether variations in the mutational landВӯ
scape and expression patterns of ubiquitin pathway genes could account for the differing
responses to ACT observed in melanoma patients. The results on TMB characterization
suggest that mutational load alone cannot be used as a predictor of clinical outcome, deВӯ
spite showing a significant difference between the response groups. Additionally, confirmВӯ
ing the prevalence of C>T transitions and BRAF mutations is consistent with established
molecular characteristics of melanoma.
The overВӯrepresentation analysis findings suggest a potential association between loss
of function mutations in the ubiquitin pathway genes and improved response to ACT in
melanoma patients. However, when investigating the underlying functions, subcellular loВӯ
cations and protein families among the two response groups, little differences were found.
This may be due to the limited sample size and high variability on the data, and require
further investigation with larger datasets.
The transcriptomic analysis revealed that expression of the immunoproteasome subunits
was not linked to clinical outcome from ACT in melanoma patients. However, this finding
contradicts established scientific literature for ICB, so further validation with larger sample
sizes is required to validate these results. Furthermore, analysis of ubiquitin pathway
genes revealed that despite the presence of loss of function mutations, some mutated
genes were highly expressed. This could be due to alternative splicing that bypasses the
mutated exon, heterozygous mutations allowing expression of a normal allele, or CNV
and gene redundancy maintaining normal gene function.
No significant association between tumor purity and loss of function mutations in the ubiqВӯ
uitin pathway was found, suggesting that these mutations do not directly correlate with
the cellular composition of tumors. The expected correlations between immune cell sigВӯ
natures and tumor purity were observed for both response groups, supporting the theory
that higher tumor purity correlates with reduced immune presence in the TME. UnexpectВӯ
edly, higher immunoproteasome expression in responders negatively correlated with canВӯ
cer cell recognition, indicating complex molecular interactions that require further study.
When analyzing scores of cancerВӯimmunity cycle biomarkers by sample, no distinct patВӯ
terns emerged to differentiate responders from nonВӯresponders. This underlines the comВӯ
plexity of cancer, and the importance of conducting benchmarking studies on biomarkers
to ensure their reliability in predicting ACT prognosis for melanoma patients.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
37
==PAGE:46==
7
Outlook
The results of this project exhibit the complexity of finding predictive biomarkers to better
guide ACT therapy application in melanoma patients. As discussed previously, this is of
high importance, since a better informed medical decision could potentially increase the
chances of patients to survive. Although the results of the overВӯrepresentation analysis
were promising, they warrant further investigation. It is possible that independent studies
with larger cohort sizes could find more robust relationships between the UPS mutational
landscape and clinical benefit of ACT therapy. Moreover, analyzing gain of function muВӯ
tations could also help in better understanding the molecular mechanisms behind the
difference in UPS overВӯrepresentation among response groups.
Additional insights could be gained by dividing the response groups differently. If the coВӯ
hort was larger, patients could be divided into three groups: responders (CR and PR),
nonВӯresponders (PD) and an additional group of patients in between these categories
(SD). By doing so, it is plausible that differences between responders and nonВӯresponders
would be more accentuated, potentially unraveling molecular features significantly differВӯ
ent among these groups. Still, this approach does not solve the major challenge, which
is reliably predicting the clinical outcome for patients with stable disease. Hence, further
research is needed to discover biomarkers that allow for a better characterization of these
patients instead of classifying them based on overall survival only.
The chosen criteria to define loss of function mutations is another methodology that could
be reconsidered. In this work, LoF mutations were defined based on the scores of SIFT
and PolyPhen, even if both predictions did not agree. Changing this approach to conВӯ
sider LoF only those mutations where both scores matched could have potentially led to
different conclusions. Thus, more robust metrics to predict functional impact of somatic
mutations need to be developed to cope with such inconsistencies.
During the transcriptomics analysis, the expression profiles of nonВӯmutated genes belongВӯ
ing to the ubiquitin pathway could have been explored. By doing so, basal differences in
the UPS expression between the two response groups could have been evaluated, poВӯ
tentially providing insights on immunotherapy resistance or susceptibility phenotypes.
Further analyses to complement this research which could be considered are predictions
of ubiquitination sites in mutated proteins. Correlating the genomic location of LoF mutaВӯ
tions with the results of such analysis could give insights on proteins that can no longer
be ubiquitinated, and therefore not being degraded by the proteasome. Then, the conseВӯ
quences could potentially indicate mechanisms of resistance to immunotherapy.
In summary, the exploration of biomarkers to predict clinical outcome from ACT therapy
is a complex task. However, refining our understanding of genetic variations and molecВӯ
ular interactions within the UPS brings potential for further development. Continuing with
the integration of genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic data will be critical to overcome
current limitations and achieving major breakthroughs in personalized cancer treatment.
38
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
Hyuna Sung et al. вҖңGlobal cancer statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN estimates of inciВӯ
dence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countriesвҖқ. In: CA: A Cancer
Journal for Clinicians 71 (2021), pp. 209вҖ“249. DOI: 10.3322/caac.21660.
[2]
Heidi Ledford. Why are so many young people getting cancer? What the data say.
Accessed: 2024Вӯ05Вӯ31. Mar. 2024. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-
024-00720-6.
[3]
Ali R. Jazirehi. вҖңMolecular Analysis of Elements of Melanoma Insensitivity to TCRВӯ
Engineered Adoptive Cell TherapyвҖқ. In: International Journal of Molecular Sciences
22.21 (2021), p. 11726. DOI: 10.3390/IJMS222111726.
[4]
Martin Lauss et al. вҖңMutational and putative neoantigen load predict clinical benefit
of adoptive T cell therapy in melanomaвҖқ. In: Nature Communications 8.1 (2017),
pp. 1вҖ“11. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-017-01460-0.
[5]
Joachim Stoltenborg GranhГёj et al. вҖңTumorВӯinfiltrating lymphocytes for adoptive cell
therapy: recent advances, challenges, and future directionsвҖқ. In: Expert Opinion on
Biological Therapy 22.5 (2022), pp. 627вҖ“641. DOI: 10.1080/14712598.2022.2064711.
[6]
Shoshana T. Levi et al. вҖңNeoantigen Identification and Response to Adoptive Cell
Transfer in anti PDВӯ1 NaГҜve and Experienced Patients with Metastatic MelanomaвҖқ.
In: Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the American Association for CanВӯ
cer Research 28.14 (2022), p. 3042. DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-21-4499.
[7]
Troels Holz Borch et al. вҖңOriginal research: Clinical efficacy of TВӯcell therapy afВӯ
ter shortВӯterm BRAFВӯinhibitor priming in patients with checkpoint inhibitorВӯresistant
metastatic melanomaвҖқ. In: Journal for Immunotherapy of Cancer 9.7 (2021), p. 2703.
DOI: 10.1136/JITC-2021-002703.
[8]
Marie Andree Forget et al. вҖңProspective analysis of adoptive TIL therapy in patients
with metastatic melanoma: response, impact of antiВӯCTLA4, and biomarkers to preВӯ
dict clinical outcomeвҖқ. In: Clinical cancer research : an official journal of the AmerВӯ
ican Association for Cancer Research 24.18 (2018), p. 4416. DOI: 10.1158/1078-
0432.CCR-17-3649.
[9]
Shelly Kalaora et al. вҖңImmunoproteasome expression is associated with better progВӯ
nosis and response to checkpoint therapies in melanomaвҖқ. In: Nature CommunicaВӯ
tions 11 (2020). DOI: 10.1038/S41467-020-14639-9.
[10]
Rahul Kumar et al. вҖңPrognostic association of immunoproteasome expression in
solid tumours is governed by the immediate immune environmentвҖқ. In: Molecular
Oncology 17.6 (2023), p. 1041. ISSN: 18780261. DOI: 10.1002/1878-0261.13443.
[11]
World Health Organization. Cancer. Accessed: 2024Вӯ05Вӯ31. 2024. URL: https://
www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/cancer.
[12]
Kristen Starbuck, Paul Mayor, and Emese Zsiros. вҖңGynecologic MalignanciesвҖқ. In:
Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors in Cancer (2019), pp. 135вҖ“155. DOI: 10.1016/B978-
0-323-54948-6.00007-X.
[13]
Zachary R. Chalmers et al. вҖңAnalysis of 100,000 human cancer genomes reveals
the landscape of tumor mutational burdenвҖқ. In: Genome Medicine 9.1 (2017), pp. 1вҖ“
14. DOI: 10.1186/S13073-017-0424-2/FIGURES/5.
[14]
Karin E. de Visser and Johanna A. Joyce. вҖңThe evolving tumor microenvironment:
From cancer initiation to metastatic outgrowthвҖқ. In: Cancer Cell 41.3 (2023), pp. 374вҖ“
403. DOI: 10.1016/J.CCELL.2023.02.016.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
39
==PAGE:48==
[15]
Yali Deng et al. вҖңTumor purity as a prognosis and immunotherapy relevant feature in
cervical cancerвҖқ. In: Aging 13.22 (2021), pp. 24768вҖ“24785. DOI: 10.18632/AGING.
203714.
[16]
Zhen Zhang et al. вҖңT Cell Dysfunction and Exhaustion in CancerвҖқ. In: Frontiers in
Cell and Developmental Biology 8 (2020), p. 17. DOI: 10.3389/FCELL.2020.00017.
[17]
Andrea Schietinger and Philip D. Greenberg. вҖңTolerance and Exhaustion: Defining
Mechanisms of T cell DysfunctionвҖқ. In: Trends in immunology 35.2 (2014), p. 51.
ISSN: 14714906. DOI: 10.1016/J.IT.2013.10.001.
[18]
Anliang Xia et al. вҖңT Cell Dysfunction in Cancer Immunity and ImmunotherapyвҖқ. In:
Frontiers in Immunology 10 (2019), p. 1719. DOI: 10.3389/FIMMU.2019.01719.
[19]
Sofia Bruni et al. вҖңCancer immune exclusion: breaking the barricade for a successful
immunotherapyвҖқ. In: Frontiers in Oncology 13 (2023). DOI: 10.3389/FONC.2023.
1135456.
[20]
Georgina V. Long et al. вҖңCutaneous melanomaвҖқ. In: Lancet (London, England) 402.10400
(2023), pp. 485вҖ“502. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)00821-8.
[21]
Roy Rabbie et al. вҖңMelanoma subtypes: genomic profiles, prognostic molecular
markers and therapeutic possibilitiesвҖқ. In: The Journal of Pathology 247.5 (2019),
p. 539. DOI: 10.1002/PATH.5213.
[22]
Lauren E. Davis, Sara C. Shalin, and Alan J. Tackett. вҖңCurrent state of melanoma
diagnosis and treatmentвҖқ. In: Cancer Biology and Therapy 20.11 (2019), p. 1366.
DOI: 10.1080/15384047.2019.1640032.
[23]
Giulia C. Leonardi et al. вҖңCutaneous melanoma: From pathogenesis to therapy (ReВӯ
view)вҖқ. In: International Journal of Oncology 52.4 (2018), p. 1071. DOI: 10.3892/
IJO.2018.4287.
[24]
Emily Z. Keung and Jeffrey E. Gershenwald. вҖңThe eighth edition American Joint
Committee on Cancer (AJCC) melanoma staging system: implications for melanoma
treatment and careвҖқ. In: Expert review of anticancer therapy 18.8 (2018), p. 775.
DOI: 10.1080/14737140.2018.1489246.
[25]
Jacqueline Parkin and Bryony Cohen. вҖңAn overview of the immune systemвҖқ. In: The
Lancet 357.9270 (2001), pp. 1777вҖ“1789. DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(00)04904-7.
[26]
Yuxia Zhang et al. вҖңInnate Immunity in Cancer Biology and TherapyвҖқ. In: InternaВӯ
tional Journal of Molecular Sciences 24.14 (2023). DOI: 10.3390/IJMS241411233.
[27]
Francisco A. Bonilla and Hans C. Oettgen. вҖңAdaptive immunityвҖқ. In: Journal of AlВӯ
lergy and Clinical Immunology 125.2 (2010), S33вҖ“S40. DOI: 10.1016/J.JACI.2009.
09.017.
[28]
Novalia Pishesha, Thibault J. Harmand, and Hidde L. Ploegh. вҖңA guide to antigen
processing and presentationвҖқ. In: Nature Reviews Immunology 2022 22:12 22.12
(2022), pp. 751вҖ“764. DOI: 10.1038/s41577-022-00707-2.
[29]
Daniel S. Chen and Ira Mellman. вҖңOncology Meets Immunology: The CancerВӯImmunity
CycleвҖқ. In: Immunity 39.1 (2013), pp. 1вҖ“10. DOI: 10.1016/J.IMMUNI.2013.07.012.
[30]
Ira Mellman et al. вҖңThe cancerВӯimmunity cycle: Indication, genotype, and immunoВӯ
typeвҖқ. In: Immunity 56.10 (2023), pp. 2188вҖ“2205. DOI: 10.1016/J.IMMUNI.2023.09.
011.
[31]
Subhamay Adhikary et al. вҖңCurrent Technologies and Future Perspectives in ImВӯ
munotherapy towards a Clinical Oncology ApproachвҖқ. In: Biomedicines 12.1 (2024).
DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12010217.
[32]
Andrew Knight, Lilit Karapetyan, and John M. Kirkwood. вҖңImmunotherapy in Melanoma:
Recent Advances and Future DirectionsвҖқ. In: Cancers 15.4 (2023). DOI: 10.3390/
CANCERS15041106.
40
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:49==
[33]
Golnaz Morad et al. вҖңHallmarks of response, resistance, and toxicity to immune
checkpoint blockadeвҖқ. In: Cell 184.21 (2021), p. 5309. DOI: 10.1016/J.CELL.2021.
09.020.
[34]
National Cancer Institute. Adoptive Cell Therapy. Accessed: 2024Вӯ06Вӯ18. URL: https:
//www.cancer.gov/publications/dictionaries/cancer-terms/def/adoptive-cell-therapy.
[35]
Zhidong Wang and Yu J. Cao. вҖңAdoptive Cell Therapy Targeting Neoantigens: A
Frontier for Cancer ResearchвҖқ. In: Frontiers in Immunology 11 (2020), p. 176. DOI:
10.3389/FIMMU.2020.00176.
[36]
E. A. Eisenhauer et al. вҖңNew response evaluation criteria in solid tumours: ReВӯ
vised RECIST guideline (version 1.1)вҖқ. In: European Journal of Cancer 45.2 (2009),
pp. 228вҖ“247. DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2008.10.026.
[37]
Gabriel Laplante and Wei Zhang. вҖңTargeting the UbiquitinВӯProteasome System for
Cancer Therapeutics by SmallВӯMolecule InhibitorsвҖқ. In: Cancers 2021, Vol. 13, Page
3079 13.12 (2021), p. 3079. DOI: 10.3390/CANCERS13123079.
[38]
Hanna Leister et al. вҖңThe Role of Immunoproteasomes in TumorВӯImmune Cell InterВӯ
actions in Melanoma and Colon CancerвҖқ. In: Archivum Immunologiae et Therapiae
Experimentalis 70.1 (2022), p. 5. DOI: 10.1007/S00005-022-00644-X.
[39]
Peter E. Cockram et al. вҖңUbiquitination in the regulation of inflammatory cell death
and cancerвҖқ. In: Cell Death and Differentiation 28.2 (2021), pp. 591вҖ“605. DOI: 10.
1038/s41418-020-00708-5.
[40]
Rune Busk Damgaard. вҖңThe ubiquitin system: from cell signalling to disease biology
and new therapeutic opportunitiesвҖқ. In: Cell Death and Differentiation 2021 28:2 28.2
(2021), pp. 423вҖ“426. DOI: 10.1038/s41418-020-00703-w.
[41]
David Komander and Michael Rape. вҖңThe ubiquitin codeвҖқ. In: Annual Review of
Biochemistry 81 (2012), pp. 203вҖ“229. DOI: 10.1146/ANNUREV-BIOCHEM-060310-
170328/CITE/REFWORKS.
[42]
Deborah A. Ferrington and Dale S. Gregerson. вҖңImmunoproteasomes: Structure,
Function, and Antigen PresentationвҖқ. In: Progress in molecular biology and translaВӯ
tional science 109 (2012), p. 75. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-397863-9.00003-1.
[43]
Boya Chen et al. вҖңThe dichotomous role of immunoproteasome in cancer: Friend or
foe?вҖқ In: Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica. B 13.5 (2023), p. 1976. DOI: 10.1016/J.APSB.
2022.11.005.
[44]
Quan Yang et al. вҖңE3 ubiquitin ligases: styles, structures and functionsвҖқ. In: MolecВӯ
ular Biomedicine 2.1 (2021). DOI: 10.1186/S43556-021-00043-2.
[45]
вҖңDrug Development Targeting the UbiquitinвҖ“Proteasome System (UPS) for the TreatВӯ
ment of Human CancersвҖқ. In: Cancers 12.4 (2020), p. 902. DOI: 10.3390/CANCERS12040902.
[46]
Fabin Dang, Li Nie, and Wenyi Wei. вҖңUbiquitin signaling in cell cycle control and
tumorigenesisвҖқ. In: Cell Death and Differentiation 2020 28:2 28.2 (2020), pp. 427вҖ“
438. DOI: 10.1038/s41418-020-00648-0.
[47]
Eva Ellebaek et al. вҖңAdoptive cell therapy with autologous tumor infiltrating lymphoВӯ
cytes and lowВӯdose InterleukinВӯ2 in metastatic melanoma patientsвҖқ. In: Journal of
Translational Medicine 10.1 (2012), p. 169. DOI: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-169.
[48]
Rikke Andersen et al. вҖңLongВӯLasting complete responses in patients with metastatic
melanoma after adoptive cell therapy with tumorВӯinfiltrating lymphocytes and an
attenuated il2 regimenвҖқ. In: Clinical Cancer Research 22.15 (2016), pp. 3734вҖ“3745.
DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-1879/128511/AM/LONG-LASTING-COMPLETE-
RESPONSES-IN-PATIENTS-WITH.
[49]
Sehyun Oh et al. вҖңHGNChelper: identification and correction of invalid gene symbols
for human and mouseвҖқ. In: F1000Research 9 (2020). DOI: 10.12688/F1000RESEARCH.
28033.2.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
41
==PAGE:50==
[50]
Matthew E. Ritchie et al. вҖңlimma powers differential expression analyses for RNAВӯ
sequencing and microarray studiesвҖқ. In: Nucleic Acids Research 43.7 (Apr. 2015),
e47вҖ“e47. ISSN: 0305Вӯ1048. DOI: 10.1093/NAR/GKV007. URL: https://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/nar/gkv007.
[51]
Johannes Rainer. EnsDb.Hsapiens.v75: Ensembl based annotation package. R
package version 2.99.0. 2017.
[52]
BГЎrbara MelГ©ndez et al. вҖңMethods of measurement for tumor mutational burden
in tumor tissueвҖқ. In: Translational Lung Cancer Research 7.6 (2018), p. 661. DOI:
10.21037/TLCR.2018.08.02.
[53]
Allison Piovesan et al. вҖңHuman proteinВӯcoding genes and gene feature statistics in
2019вҖқ. In: BMC Research Notes 12.1 (2019), pp. 1вҖ“5. DOI: 10.1186/S13104-019-
4343-8/TABLES/2.
[54]
Miles C. Andrews et al. вҖңPredictive Impact of Tumor Mutational Burden on RealВӯ
World Outcomes of FirstВӯLine Immune Checkpoint Inhibition in Metastatic MelanomaвҖқ.
In: https://doi.org/10.1200/PO.23.00640 8 (2024). DOI: 10.1200/PO.23.00640.
[55]
William McLaren et al. вҖңThe Ensembl Variant Effect PredictorвҖқ. In: Genome Biology
17.1 (2016), pp. 1вҖ“14. DOI: 10.1186/S13059-016-0974-4/TABLES/8.
[56]
Pauline C. Ng and Steven Henikoff. вҖңPredicting Deleterious Amino Acid SubstituВӯ
tionsвҖқ. In: Genome Research 11.5 (2001), p. 863. DOI: 10.1101/GR.176601.
[57]
Ivan A. Adzhubei et al. вҖңA method and server for predicting damaging missense
mutationsвҖқ. In: Nature Methods 2010 7:4 7.4 (2010), pp. 248вҖ“249. DOI: 10.1038/
nmeth0410-248.
[58]
Marc Carlson. GO.db: A set of annotation maps describing the entire Gene OntolВӯ
ogy. R package version 3.18.0. 2023.
[59]
Adam Mark et al. mygene. R package version 1.38.0. 2023. DOI: 10.18129/B9.bioc.
mygene.
[60]
Steffen Durinck et al. вҖңMapping identifiers for the integration of genomic datasets
with the R/Bioconductor package biomaRtвҖқ. In: Nature protocols 4.8 (2009), pp. 1184вҖ“
1191. DOI: 10.1038/NPROT.2009.97.
[61]
Da Wei Huang, Brad T. Sherman, and Richard A. Lempicki. вҖңBioinformatics enrichВӯ
ment tools: paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis of large gene listsвҖқ.
In: Nucleic Acids Research 37.1 (2009), p. 1. DOI: 10.1093/NAR/GKN923.
[62]
Gennady Korotkevich et al. вҖңFast gene set enrichment analysisвҖқ. In: bioRxiv (2021),
p. 060012. DOI: 10.1101/060012.
[63]
Vineet Thumuluri et al. вҖңDeepLoc 2.0: multiВӯlabel subcellular localization prediction
using protein language modelsвҖқ. In: Nucleic Acids Research 50.W1 (2022), W228вҖ“
W234. DOI: 10.1093/NAR/GKAC278.
[64]
Typhaine PaysanВӯLafosse et al. вҖңInterPro in 2022вҖқ. In: Nucleic Acids Research 51.D1
(2023), pp. D418вҖ“D427. DOI: 10.1093/NAR/GKAC993.
[65]
Shanrong Zhao, Zhan Ye, and Robert Stanton. вҖңMisuse of RPKM or TPM normalВӯ
ization when comparing across samples and sequencing protocolsвҖқ. In: RNA 26.8
(2020), p. 903. DOI: 10.1261/RNA.074922.120.
[66]
Liwen Xu et al. вҖңTIP: A Web Server for Resolving Tumor Immunophenotype ProВӯ
filing.вҖқ In: Cancer Research 78.23 (2018), pp. 6575вҖ“6580. DOI: 10 . 1158 / 0008 -
5472.CAN-18-0689.
[67]
Alexander Bagaev et al. вҖңConserved panВӯcancer microenvironment subtypes preВӯ
dict response to immunotherapyвҖқ. In: Cancer Cell 39.6 (2021), 845вҖ“865.e7. DOI:
10.1016/J.CCELL.2021.04.014/ATTACHMENT/E157B4BF- E4C7- 4AB5- 83EA-
0A6650FF555F/MMC6.XLSX.
42
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:51==
[68]
Bogdan A. Luca et al. вҖңAtlas of clinically distinct cell states and ecosystems across
human solid tumorsвҖқ. In: Cell 184.21 (2021), 5482вҖ“5496.e28. DOI: 10.1016/J.CELL.
2021.09.014.
[69]
Peng Jiang et al. вҖңSignatures of T cell dysfunction and exclusion predict cancer
immunotherapy responseвҖқ. In: Nature Medicine 2018 24:10 24.10 (2018), pp. 1550вҖ“
1558. DOI: 10.1038/s41591-018-0136-1.
[70]
Alejandro JimenezВӯSanchez, Oliver Cast, and Martin L. Miller. вҖңComprehensive
benchmarking and integration of tumor microenvironment cell estimation methodsвҖқ.
In: Cancer Research 79.24 (2019), pp. 6238вҖ“6246. DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-
18-3560/653647/AM/COMPREHENSIVE-BENCHMARKING-AND-INTEGRATION-
OF.
[71]
Kosuke Yoshihara et al. вҖңInferring tumour purity and stromal and immune cell adВӯ
mixture from expression dataвҖқ. In: Nature Communications 2013 4:1 4.1 (2013),
pp. 1вҖ“11. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms3612.
[72]
Yasin ЕһenbabaoДҹlu et al. вҖңTumor immune microenvironment characterization in
clear cell renal cell carcinoma identifies prognostic and immunotherapeutically releВӯ
vant messenger RNA signaturesвҖқ. In: Genome Biology 17.1 (2016), pp. 1вҖ“25. DOI:
10.1186/S13059-016-1092-Z/FIGURES/8.
[73]
Chia Chin Wu et al. вҖңPrediction of biomarkers and therapeutic combinations for
antiВӯPDВӯ1 immunotherapy using the global gene network associationвҖқ. In: Nature
Communications 2022 13:1 13.1 (2022), pp. 1вҖ“14. DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-27651-
4.
[74]
Г“scar LapuenteВӯSantana et al. вҖңInterpretable systems biomarkers predict response
to immuneВӯcheckpoint inhibitorsвҖқ. In: Patterns 2.8 (2021), p. 100293. DOI: 10.1016/
J.PATTER.2021.100293.
[75]
Noam Auslander et al. вҖңRobust prediction of response to immune checkpoint blockВӯ
ade therapy in metastatic melanomaвҖқ. In: Nature medicine 24.10 (2018), p. 1545.
DOI: 10.1038/S41591-018-0157-9.
[76]
Teresa Davoli et al. вҖңTumor aneuploidy correlates with markers of immune evaВӯ
sion and with reduced response to immunotherapyвҖқ. In: Science (New York, N.Y.)
355.6322 (2017). DOI: 10.1126/SCIENCE.AAF8399.
[77]
Mark Ayers et al. вҖңIFNВӯОівҖ“related mRNA profile predicts clinical response to PDВӯ
1 blockadeвҖқ. In: The Journal of Clinical Investigation 127.8 (2017), p. 2930. DOI:
10.1172/JCI91190.
[78]
W. Haynes. вҖңBenjaminiвҖ“Hochberg MethodвҖқ. In: Encyclopedia of Systems Biology.
Ed. by W. Dubitzky et al. New York, NY: Springer, 2013. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4419-
9863-7_1215.
[79]
Anand Mayakonda et al. вҖңMaftools: efficient and comprehensive analysis of somatic
variants in cancerвҖқ. In: Genome Research 28.11 (2018), pp. 1747вҖ“1756. DOI: 10.
1101/GR.239244.118.
[80]
A. Hunter Shain and Boris C. Bastian. вҖңFrom melanocytes to melanomasвҖқ. In: Nature
reviews. Cancer 16.6 (2016), pp. 345вҖ“358. DOI: 10.1038/NRC.2016.37.
[81]
Rahim Ullah et al. вҖңRAFВӯMEKВӯERK pathway in cancer evolution and treatmentвҖқ. In:
Seminars in Cancer Biology 85 (2022), pp. 123вҖ“154. DOI: 10.1016/J.SEMCANCER.
2021.05.010.
[82]
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Homo sapiens gene MIR548N
(ID 100302152), NCBI Gene. Accessed: 2024Вӯ06Вӯ17. 2024.
[83]
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Homo sapiens gene MUC16
(ID 94025), NCBI Gene. Accessed: 2024Вӯ06Вӯ17. 2024.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
43
==PAGE:52==
[84]
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Homo sapiens gene CLCN1
(ID 1180), NCBI Gene. Accessed: 2024Вӯ06Вӯ17. 2024.
[85]
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Homo sapiens gene TMEM132C
(ID 92293), NCBI Gene. Accessed: 2024Вӯ06Вӯ17. 2024.
[86]
T. A. Brown. вҖңGenomesвҖқ. In: 2nd. Oxford: WileyВӯLiss, 2002. Chap. 14, Mutation,
Repair and Recombination.
[87]
Feng Zhang et al. вҖңCopy Number Variation in Human Health, Disease, and EvoluВӯ
tionвҖқ. In: Annual review of genomics and human genetics 10 (2009), p. 451. DOI:
10.1146/ANNUREV.GENOM.9.081307.164217.
44
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:53==
A
Appx: Ubiquitin GO parent terms
NВә
Category
GO Parent Term
Description
1
ubiquitination
GO:0016567
protein ubiquitination
2
deubiquitination
GO:0016579
protein deubiquitination
3
ubiquitination
GO:0006511
ubiquitinВӯdependent protein catabolic
process
4
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0010499
proteasomal
ubiquitinВӯindependent
protein catabolic process
5
ubiquitination
GO:0010992
ubiquitin recycling
6
ubiquitination
GO:0070086
ubiquitinВӯdependent endocytosis
7
ubiquitination
GO:0120323
lipid ubiquitination
8
deubiquitination
GO:0031397
negative regulation of protein ubiquitiВӯ
nation
9
ubiquitination
GO:0031398
positive regulation of protein ubiquitiВӯ
nation
10
deubiquitination
GO:2000059
negative
regulation
of
ubiquitinВӯ
dependent protein catabolic process
11
ubiquitination
GO:2000060
positive
regulation
of
ubiquitinВӯ
dependent protein catabolic process
12
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0046872
metal ion binding (MF)
13
ubiquitin_neutral
GO:0004842
ubiquitinВӯprotein transferase activity
(MF)
14
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0006355
regulation
of
DNAВӯtemplated
tranВӯ
scription
15
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0006508
proteolysis
16
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0032446
protein modification by small protein
conjugation
17
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0051726
regulation of cell cycle
18
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0006325
chromatin organization
19
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0006468
protein phosphorylation
20
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0006396
RNA processing
21
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0007399
nervous system development
22
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0006623
protein targeting to vacuole
23
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0007283
spermatogenesis
24
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0006906
vesicle fusion
25
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0009267
cellular response to starvation
26
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0032007
negative regulation of TOR signaling
27
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0000226
microtubule cytoskeleton organization
28
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0006414
translational elongation
29
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0007507
heart development
30
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0007160
cellВӯmatrix adhesion
31
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0043086
negative regulation of catalytic activity
32
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0007605
sensory perception of sound
33
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0097049
motor neuron apoptotic process
34
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0099536
synaptic signaling
35
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0030154
cell differentiation
36
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0030163
protein catabolic process
37
ubiquitin_independent
GO:0031331
positive regulation of cellular catabolic
process
38
ubiquitination
GO:0051865
protein autoubiquitination
39
ubiquitination
GO:0000209
protein polyubiquitination
40
ubiquitination
GO:0006513
protein monoubiquitination
Table A.1: Table of GO parent terms used to construct the Ubiquitin Database.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
45
==PAGE:54==
B
Appx: Somatic mutations per patient
Figure B.1: Number of all, nonsynonymous and loss of function (LoF) mutations per paВӯ
tient by response groups. A: Responders. B: NonВӯresponders.
46
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:55==
C
Appx: Somatic mutations per patient in
ubiquitin pathway
Figure C.1: Number of all, nonsynonymous and loss of function (LoF) mutations in the
ubiquitin pathway per patient by response groups. A: Responders. B: NonВӯresponders.
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
47
==PAGE:56==
D
Appx: Top 30 ubiquitin pathway genes
with LoF mutations
Figure D.1: Top 30 most mutated ubiqutin pathway genes with at least one LoF mutaВӯ
tion. The heat map indicates the variant classification for LoF mutations per gene and
sample. The right panel is a bar plot indicating the number of samples with mutations in
that gene. The percentages indicate the number of samples that had one or more muВӯ
tations for that gene with respect to the total number of samples. Samples 14, 36 and
47 were excluded from the plot as no LoF mutation was found. Note: Variants annotated
as Multi_Hit indicate that distinct mutations were observed in the same gene for a single
sample.
48
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
==PAGE:57==
Impact of dysfunctional ubiquitination in response to cancer immunotherapy
49
==PAGE:58==
вҖңIf you want to keep a secret, you must also hide it from yourself.вҖқ
вҖ“ George Orwell, 1984
Technical
University of
Denmark
Гҳrsteds Plads, Building 345C
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.healthtech.dtu.dk
