==PAGE:1==
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
Creating and controlling magnetic defects for
spintronic devices
Master Thesis
DTU Physics
Department of Physics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
Creating and controlling magnetic defects for spintronic devices
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Alan Ernesto Anaya Morales
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Alan Anaya, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Physics, Brovej, Building 118, 2800 Kgs.
Lyn­
gby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months at the Section of 2D Materials Engineering
and Physics (2DPHYS), Department of Physics, at the Technical University of Denmark,
DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Physics and Nanotechnology.
Alan Ernesto Anaya Morales ­ s222435
Signature
Date
ii
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
Graphene based materials have a great potential for developing spintronic devices due
their small Spin­Orbit coupling, interaction responsible of spin relaxation and decoher­
ence. Among these materials, bottom­up Nanoporous Graphene (NPG) offers the poten­
tial of controlling the spatial electron propagation through its unique electronic structure.
In this project, we explore the use of hydrogen adatoms and single carbon vacancies as
means of controlling the spin transport in these nanomaterials. Our ab­initio calculations,
together with large­scale simulations, prompt that hydrogen defects in nitrogen­doped hy­
brid Nanoporous Graphene (h­NPG) allows to spin­filter the electron transport and confine
the bonds transmission to single graphene nanoribbons along tens of nanometers.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Alan Ernesto Anaya Morales, MSc Physics and Nanotechnology, DTU
I want to express my profound gratitude to my family (my mom, my dad and my sister),
who I deeply love and who are the reason I am here. To all my physics friends (Sarah.
Kostas, Emma, Nick, Philip, Lorenzo, Jakob) who have made this learning process more
exciting and who’s friendship I found invaluable. To my dancing friends (Sadri, Juan,
Monica, Valerie, Maja, Ruben, Joanna, Milene, Iliana) who had put the music in my life and
who I have share so many happy moments. To Andrea, Laurita, Karolina, Federico and
Max, who have become a second family during this last year and who I cannot express
how grateful I am to meet them. To all my friends in Monterrey (Sergio, Iñaki, Harold,
Ruben, Daniel) who I miss every day.
I want to thank my supervisor, professor Mads Brandbyge, who I admire and who has
always shared his curiosity, passion and excitement about physics. To Sofia and Viktor,
who’s discussions have been priceless during this project. To all the people of Nanomade
(now 2Dphys) who had received me with open arms.
iv
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
2
1.1
Overview of carbon nano­materials.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.2
Nanoporous Graphene . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.3
Project description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Theoretical minimum
11
2.1
Tight­binding and graphene electronic structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Introduction to Density Functional Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3
Quantum Transport in the context of nano­electronics
. . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3
Electronic structure of pristine NPG and h­NPG
23
3.1
Band structure of pristine NPG and h­NPG
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2
Electrostatic Gating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
4
Defects in NPG and h­NPG
32
4.1
Localized states caused by defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.2
Electrostatic control of single magnetic defects. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.3
Multiple defects and their indirect exchange mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5
Electron transport
43
5.1
Anisotropic transport in pristine NPG and h­NPG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.2
Longitudinal transport along single­defects and spin­filtering . . . . . . . . . 45
5.3
Controlling longitudinal transport along defect in hybrid Nanoporous Graphene
(h­NPG) with electrostatic­gating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
5.4
Out of equilibrium: I vs V calculations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
6
Large Scale Transport Calculations
54
6.1
Large­Scale TB simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6.2
Transport in h­NPG: Does it matters in which GNR do we inject electrons? . 56
7
Conclusion
62
Bibliography
64
A Benzene
71
B Carbon vacancies and Hydrogen adatom in h­NPG structures
72
C Magnetic Defects
76
C.1 DOS of single magnetic Defects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
C.2 MF­Hubbard
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
C.3 Multiple Hydrogen Defects defects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
v
==PAGE:8==
D Quantum Transport
80
D.1 Transmission Eigenchannels
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
E
Large­Scale Transport
81
E.1 h­NPG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
E.2 h­NPGH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
vi
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:9==
Acronyms
𝐸𝐹Fermi energy
Ha Hydrogen adatom
BOA Born­Oppenheimer Approximation
CB Conduction Band
DFT Density Functional Theory
DOS Density of States
FBZ First Brillouin Zone
FET Field Effect Transistor
GNR Graphene Nanoribbon
GNRs Graphene Nanoribbons
GS Ground­State
h­NPG hybrid Nanoporous Graphene
HF Hartree­Fock
LCAO Linear Combination Of Atomic Orbitals
MF Mean­Field
NEGF Non­Equilibrium Green’s Function
NPG Nanoporous Graphene
OSS on­surface synthesis
RKKY Ruderman­Kittel­Kasuya­Yosida
SOC Spin­Orbit Coupling
SV Single carbon vacancy
TB tight­binding
VB Valence Band
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Introduction
Down­scaling of electronic devices, based on silicon technologies, has allowed a drastic
improvement on the efficiency and portability of current electronic components, bringing
a technological revolution never seen before [1]. However, this process of miniaturization
cannot be continued indefinitely, as physical laws change when going deep into the nano­
scale. For instance, chips are getting hotter on a rate that heat cannot be removed through
traditional means. Moreover, the emergence of quantum phenomena, such as quantum
tunneling, leads to energy dissipation and reduces the efficiency of electronic devices.
Therefore, electronics must be revisited from an atomic perspective.
Ideally, single molecules would be natural to consider for continuing this shrinking pro­
cess [2, 3]. It was in 1974 when theoretical work from Aviram and Ratner, considered the
possibility of sandwiching molecules to metallic contacts as a way of making electronic de­
vices, such as molecular rectifiers [4]. The first measurements on single­molecule trans­
port came two decades afterwards from Mark Reed and James Tour group [5]. Despite
the progress made in this field, molecular electronics present different challenges that
make practical implementation unfeasible in the short­term. For instance, thermal stabil­
ity of organic molecules together with a robust realization of molecule­contacts represent
a barrier for its commercialization [6, 7, 8].
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.1: Nanotechnology proposals for down­scaling electronics. (a) Molecular
electronic device in which a difference in the bias between electrodes can generate a
chemical reaction that allows a current to flow along the molecular junction. Figure taken
from [9]. (b) Proximity effect in graphene can allow to develop spintronic devices such as
spin­filters. Figure adapted from [10].
Nevertheless, the emergence of 2D materials, and graphene in particular, has shown
to be more robust [11, 12]. Graphene itself exhibits extraordinary electronic and struc­
tural properties [13]. The advances in micro and nanofabrication have make this material
available with high qualities.
In this project, we aim to asses the potential of a family of Nanoporous Graphene (NPG)
materials as spintronic devices by creating local magnetic defects on the Graphene Nanorib­
2
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:11==
bons (GNRs) of these material. These materials are of great interest as they allow to spa­
tially address the propagation of electrons due to their anisotropic conductive properties
[14, 15].
In the next sections, we provide a brief overview of the relevant fields that have moti­
vated the research behind this work. We start by introducing graphene, discussing how
its remarkable properties have been of great interest for developing nano­scale electronic
devices. Afterwards, we introduce magnetism on graphene and different strategies to in­
duce magnetism, focusing on local­magnetic defects. Next, we introduce NPG, a bottom­
up self­assembled material exhibiting anisotropic electron transport. Finally, we conclude
the chapter by revisiting the main goals of the current project.
1.1
Overview of carbon nano­materials.
Carbon is the building block of all organic chemistry. It possesses 4 electrons in its va­
lence orbitals (2𝑠22𝑝2), which can mix through hybridization. This unique electronic struc­
ture provides to carbon the structural flexibility to adopt different geometries, forming a
vast universe of structures. These structures can vary in dimension, ranging from ”0D”
molecules and carbon dots, to 3D bulk materials like graphite or diamond. The observed
properties of these materials are vast, and to large extent, depend on the dimensionality
of the material in question.
Figure 1.2: Carbon can form a variety of allotropes, ranging from 3D bulk materials like
diamond or graphite, to quasi 0D nano­structures like fullerenes. Figure from: Buckmin­
sterfullerine, diamond and graphite illustrate ”the very rich chemistry of carbon”.
During the last decade, Graphene research has experienced a drastic boom due to its
unique electronic and structural properties. Graphene is a 2D material of carbon atoms
arranged in a honeycomb structure. When ”rolled”, it forms carbon nanotubes, quasi­1D
structures with high thermal and electrical conductivity. Naturally, when multiple graphene
sheets are stacked in layers, van der Waals interactions keep them together, giving rise
to graphite, the most stable carbon allotrope found in nature.
Theoretical arguments
by Landau and Peierls showed that 2D materials were thermodynamically unstable and
therefore, could not exist [16]. It was not until 2004, when Andre Geim and Konstantin
Novoselov, using the ”scotch tape” method (mechanical exfoliation), isolated and ob­
served graphene flakes for the first time, opening the research of 2­D­materials [17].
Nowadays, more advanced methods have been developed to synthesize graphene. Among
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
3
==PAGE:12==
these, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) can allow the fabrication of graphene mono­
layers with high structural quality and large areas up to square metres [18].
Figure 1.3: 𝑠𝑝2 config­
uration of a graphene.
Figure adapted from
[19].
Graphene can be regarded as an infinitely large aromatic
molecule and as a single layer of graphite. One of its most re­
markable features is its mechanical properties, having a tensile
strength of 125 GPa and an elastic modulus of 1.1 TPa, (for
comparison, the elastic modulus of common steel is around 200
GPa). Graphene breaking strength is 42 N/m; thus, graphene
has 100 times better mechanical strength than steel. This struc­
tural flexibility arises from its electronic structure. In graphene,
the 𝑠orbital ”hybridizes” with two 𝑝orbitals (𝑝𝑥and 𝑝𝑦), giving
rise to three 𝑠𝑝2 orbitals, forming a trigonal planar structure. This
allows carbon to bond with up to three atoms forming a 2D array.
Moreover, the ”softness” of graphene arises from out­of plane phonons that cannot be
found in 3­D solids.
Figure 1.4: Graphene
exhibits
ambipoloar
effect in which gate
voltages 𝑉𝑔can shift
continuously
the
Fermi
energy
(𝐸𝐹).
Figure adapted from
[20].
While the 𝑠𝑝2 orbitals, by forming 𝜎bonds, are responsible of
the mechanical properties of graphene, the remaining half occu­
pied 𝑝𝑧orbitals mix in delocalised 𝜋states, forming a Valence
Band (VB) and a Conduction Band (CB) responsible of the elec­
tronic properties of graphene. These bands touch at some high
symmetry points, and thus, graphene can be defined as gap­less
semi­metal. Moreover, in the vicinity of these points, the VB and
VB exhibit unusual linear dispersion, forming Dirac cones. These
low energy excitations are described by the Dirac equation of rel­
ativistic chiral fermions with zero mass and constant velocity 𝑣𝐹
[21]. This opened the opportunity to study relativistic effects in
solid state devices. For instance, the emergence of fractional
Quantum Hall. Moreover, graphene can be continuously 𝑛(𝑝)­
doped via electric field effect up to charge densities of 1013 cm2
and the charge carrier mobility’s 𝜇exceed 15000 cm2V−1s−1 at
room temperature. This weak dependence of 𝜇with tempera­
ture shows that the scattering is mainly dominated by impurities,
and thus, charge carriers in graphene move ballistic across 𝜇m
distances [20].
Meso and nano­graphene structures, can also have significant differences in their prop­
erties depending on their boundaries. For example, while zigzag graphene nanoribbons
(ZGNR) exhibit surface states, while armchair graphene nanoribbons (AGNR) have width­
dependent band gaps [22, 23]. On the other hand, Coulomb interactions can be enhanced
in small graphene based nanostructures giving rise to Coulomb blockade [24] and Kondo
Physics [25, 26].
4
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:13==
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.5: Band­gap dependence of GNRs. (a) Variation of band gaps of AGNRs as a
function of width 𝑤𝑎according to first­principles calculations. (b) Contour graph for spin
charge difference 𝛿𝜌𝜎of a 12 ZGNR and the band­gap dependence on the width 𝑤𝑧.
Figures adapted from [23].
1.1.1
Magnetism in graphene
Magnetic materials have been key to a wide range of technologies, functioning as elec­
trical components or being the working principle behind medical imaging devices. Nowa­
days, employing electron spin in solid state systems as an additional degree of freedom for
data storage and information transfer is the final goal of spintronic research. This would
provide faster and more efficient data transfer. Graphene is intrinsically non­magnetic,
and therefore, it is non­trivial to induce magnetism in such material [27, 28]. Besides,
graphene and other carbon­based 𝜋systems present weak Spin­Orbit Coupling (SOC)
and hyper­fine splitting, which are two of the main mechanisms that drive spin relaxation
and decoherence. Therefore, carbon nano­materials present a platform for technological
development of robust spintronic devices. Furthermore, with the advance of on­surface
synthesis (OSS), synthesis and characterizion of unique carbon nano­structures with in­
trinsic magnetic moments [29] has became possible. As graphene­based materials offer
a great potential towards developing spintronic devices with long spin relaxation times,
then the following question arises:
How can we create and engineer magnetism in graphene?
Fortunately, this has been experimentally explored and theoretically explained to some
degree [30]. In graphene, the atoms form a bipartite system, with two sublattice atoms
𝐴and 𝐵found inside a unit cell. Each carbon atom contribute with 𝑝𝑧states, forming
𝜋bonds with neighboring atoms (belonging to a different sublattices). Therefore, if two
sublattices have different number of atoms 𝑁𝐴≠𝑁𝐵, electrons will be unable to pair, and
radicals will form, giving rise to a net spin of ⟨𝑆⟩≠0. This is formalized in Lieb’s theorem,
which states that for repulsive interactions 𝑈> 0, the magnetic moment of a bipartite
lattice is proportional to the sublattice imbalance
𝜇= 𝜇𝐵|𝑁𝐴−𝑁𝐵|
One way of achieving this sublattice imbalance is via adatoms. The effect of these for­
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
5
==PAGE:14==
eign adatoms on graphene is highly dependent on the bonding strength, which can range
from covalent to weak van der Waals. Hydrogen has been widely used as a benchmark
for studying magnetic moments in graphene [31]. Hydrogen chemisorbs to graphene by
forming strong covalent bonds with the carbon atom beneath it. Hydrogen adatom (Ha)
effectively removes a 𝑝𝑧orbital from the 𝜋systems (shifting the bonding state several
electronvolt down from the 𝐸𝐹and therefore, generating a theoretical magnetic moment
of 1 𝜇𝐵.
Magnetic moments can also be achieved by Single carbon vacancy (SV) obtained by the
removal of a carbon atom. Due to Jahn­Teller distortion [32], two of the three dangling
bonds saturates, leaving a remaining pair of electrons that give rise to a net magnetic
moment. In the absence of coupling with the 𝜎bands, the removal of an atom will give a
magnetic moment of 1 𝜇𝐵, however due to hybridization with the the 𝜎states, the observed
magnetic moment of a SV in graphene is of ≈1.7 𝜇𝐵. Lattice imbalance can also be
achieved at the edges of ZGNR, which leads to strong magnetic states at the edges [23].
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.6: (a) Atomic force microscopy image of triangulene, a non­Kekulé structure
with intrinsic magnetism. (b) Spin Polarization around H adatom and C vacancy. Figure
adapted from [33].
6
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:15==
1.2
Nanoporous Graphene
Recently, a bottom­up method for synthesizing NPG has been developed [14]. This ma­
terial consists of an ordered array of pores separated by longitudinal GNRs. These pores
change the semi­metallic nature of graphene in to a semiconductor. This engineered
material presents a highly anisotropic electronic structure, which provides a versatile plat­
form for nano­electronics. Particularly, in the region of |𝐸–𝐸𝐹| < 1.2 eV, the transport is
mainly longitudinal. Moreover, NPG presents a variety of localized electronic states, with
potential applications in transport, chemical sensing and particle separation.
Figure 1.7: Band­structure comparison between a 1D Graphene Nanoribbon (GNR) and
Nanoporous Graphene (NPG). NPG exhibits longitudinal states (L) with anisotropic dis­
persion. At high eVs above the 𝐸𝐹, transverse (T) and pore (P) states can be observed
as well. Figure adapted from [14].
Recently, atomistic calculations on NPG predicted that the inter­ribbon coupling disrupted
the electron confinment, leading to interference Talbot­effect in the electron propagation
[34]. This opens the question of how to engineer this material by means of defects, or pore
functionalization, in order to control the current flow. Among some of the proposals, with
a modification of the chemical precursor, different bridge configurations can be obtained
(para­para, meta­meta and para­meta) [35]. The application of quantum­interference of
the 𝜋conjugation between atoms at the bridges allows to disrupt the ”cross­talk” between
GNRs, suppressing the dispersion of propagating electrons. In the same direction, mod­
ification of the OSS method allowed the synthesis of self­assembled 2D lateral hetero­
junctions of of nitrogen­doped h­NPG [GNRC −GNRN]𝑛, where pyrimidine groups at the
bridges of GNRN result in chemical heterogeneity at the pores [15]. The presence of ni­
trogen atoms produces a band offset between electronic bands associated to each of the
GNRs, and thus, decoupling the GNRs. On the same line, computational studies showed
that introducing quinone groups at the bridges can allow the electrochemical control of
the spatial flow of electrons along the GNRs, allowing spin­filtering along the longitudinal
axis [36].
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
7
==PAGE:16==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1.8: a) Bond currents exhibit Talbot interference due to interibbon coupling. (b)
Control of Bond Currents trough quantum interference engineering of NPG bridges. (c)
DOS and band structure of h­NPG projected to the different graphene nanoribbon. The
electronic bands associated to GNRC and GNRN are shifted in energy relative to one
another. Figures adapted from [37, 35, 15].
1.3
Project description
Although there have been studies on how to control the spatial current distribution on
NPG structures, these have focused on controlling the transport through modification of
the bridges. Few work has been made for revealing the role of defects on the Graphene
Nanoribbon (GNR) itself [38]. Graphene­based materials can become magnetic by means
of hydrogen adsorption or vacancy formation. Therefore, it would be interesting to use
such defects as a mean of controlling the electron propagation. Besides, both adatoms
and carbon vacancies can be locally produced by means of scanning tunneling micro­
scope (STM).
In this work, we study the role of both Ha and SV on GNRs of both NPG and h­NPG for
controlling the spin transport. For this, we rely on ab­initio calculations employing Density
Functional Theory (DFT) and Non­Equilibrium Green’s Function (NEGF) methods. We
are particularly interested on h­NPG due to the energy offset observed in the VB and CB,
which we hypothesize can allow the spatial confinement of electron current along effective
quasi­1D channels. We speculate that, due to this confinement, magnetic defects will
allow us to spin­filter the spin currents. The main questions to answer in this research
project are:
• Can we create local magnetic states in NPG materials by means of defects (Ha and
8
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:17==
SV)?
• How different is the behaviour of these magnetic defects to defects in pristine graphene?
• Can we control the magnetism by means of doping via electrostatic gating?
• How does single magnetic defects affect the (spin­dependent) electron transport in
NPG materials? Can we achieve spin­filtering?
In our studies, we will consider the effect of doping via electrostatic gating as way to
control the local­magnetic defects. Finally, as a proof of concept, we will implement a
large­scale transport methodology to calculate the spin transport along a device with a
magnetic defect.
Due to the small SOC in carbon, we envision the potential application of these devices for
spintronics and even quantum computing, where injected electrons act as ”flying” qubits.
These will interact locally with a magnetic defect embedded on the GNR, acting as a
”stationary” qubits. Therefore, the injected electron will carry information about the defect
state, allowing to produce quantum entanglement.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1.9: a) Control of spin currents in h­NPG through a hydrogen defect. I. An elec­
tron with a particular spin enters the device region from the bottom electrode (red). II.
As it propagates, the incoming electron experiences the potential from the spin­polarized
defect, changing its initial state. III. The electron propagates out into the top electrode
region. (b) The effect of the local spin on the traveling electron can be though as uni­
tary transformation. (c) For strong interactions, these can led to correlations an quantum
entanglement. These last two properties are essential for realizing universal quantum
computers.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
9
==PAGE:18==
The structure of this master’s thesis is as follows:
• On Chapter 2, we present an overview of theoretical concepts that might be useful
for the general reader. We include a discussion about tight­binding (TB) models
in graphene. Afterwards, general aspects of DFT are reviewed. Finally, quantum
transport and Green’s function formalism is presented.
• On Chapter 3, we present the results from ab­initio calculations on pristine NPG
and h­NPG, and investigate the effect of electrostatic gating do on these materials.
• On Chapter 4, we present the results related to the electronic (DFT) and magnetic
(NEGF­DFT) properties of hydrogen adatoms and carbon vacancies.
• On Chapter 5, we present the results from quantum transport calculations, starting
with pristine NPG and h­NPG. Then, we include magnetic defects and explore the
role of defects on the electron transport along these materials. We discuss the
emergence of Fano­resonances in the electron transmission when hydrogen defects
are found and its potential for spin­filter devices.
• On Chapter 6, we present results from large­scale transport calculations as proof
of concept and employ the bond transmissions for visualizing the spatial features of
the electron transport.
We conclude this thesis with some final remarks, along with some reflection on the scope
and limitations of current project and future work to be done.
10
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:19==
2
Theoretical minimum
In this chapter, we facilitate a theoretical minimum required to understand the foundations
of this work. We start by providing an introduction of the electronic structure of graphene
using tight binding (TB) models and discuss the key elements predicted using this simple
approach.Our discussion will be mainly based on [21]. Afterwards, we proceed to intro­
duce Density Functional Theory (DFT), an ab­initio method used for solving electronic
structure problems. We discuss some important aspects of its implementation in Siesta
[39]. Finally we conclude the chapter by introducing the formalism of Non­Equilibrium
Green’s Functions (NEGF) in the context of Quantum Transport in nano and mesoscopic
systems, and discussing its implementation in TransSiesta [40].
2.1
Tight­binding and graphene electronic structure
Graphene is a 2D material that adopts a honeycomb structure. Two sublattices (𝐴and 𝐵)
can be identified, with the atoms being related by a reflection symmetry, as can be seen
in figure 2.1. We can define graphene unit cell by the following lattice vectors:
𝐚1,2 = 𝑎
2(3, ±
√
3)
with 𝑎being the carbon­carbon bond length which has experimentally been determined to
be 𝑎≈1.42 Å. The reciprocal lattice vectors 𝐛1,2 are defined by the relation 𝐚𝑖⋅𝐛𝑗= 2𝜋𝛿𝑖𝑗
and correspond to:
𝐛1,2 = 2𝜋
3𝑎(3, ±
√
3).
Each sublattice atom is surrounded by three different atoms from the other sublattice. It
is convenient to define a set of vectors that connect nearest neighbours carbon atoms as:
𝜹1 = 𝑎
2(1,
√
3)
𝜹2 = 𝑎
2(1, −
√
3)
𝜹3 = −𝑎(1, 0)
The First Brillouin Zone (FBZ), defined by the planes bisecting the vectors nearest recip­
rocal lattice points, corresponds to the same honeycomb lattice rotated by 𝜋/2. We can
identify the high symmetry points 𝐊=
2𝜋
3
√
3𝑎(
√
3, 1) and 𝐊′ =
2𝜋
3
√
3𝑎(
√
3, −1) at the corners
of the FBZ.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 2.1: Honeycomb lattice of graphene, the sublattices 𝐴and 𝐵are shown in blue
and yellow. Reciprocal lattice vectors and the high symmetry points in the FBZ . Figure
adapted from [21].
Most of graphene electronic properties can be described with a simple TB model of near­
est neighbour hopping between the 𝑝𝑧orbitals. In second quantization formalism, this
Hamiltonian takes the form:
𝐻= −𝑡∑
𝑖
∑
𝑗=𝑛𝑛𝑖
(𝑎†
𝑖𝑏𝑗+ ℎ.𝑐.)
(2.1)
Where the sum over 𝑗runs over the nearest neighbours of sublattice 𝐴in the 𝑖­th unit cell.
The operator 𝑎†
𝑖(𝑎𝑖) create(destroy) an electron in the sublattice 𝐴inside the 𝑖­th unit cell.
Similarly, we can define the operators 𝑏† (𝑏𝑖) for the 𝐵sublattice atoms. The Hamiltonian
describes the kinetic energy term of electrons jumping around different atomic sites. We
can write the electron operators in the site representation as the Fourier decomposition
from the 𝑘­space operators
𝑎𝑖=
1
√
𝑁
∑
𝐤∈𝐵𝑍
𝑎𝐤𝑒𝑖𝐤⋅𝐑𝑎
𝑖
(2.2)
𝑏𝑖=
1
√
𝑁
∑
𝐤∈𝐵𝑍
𝑏𝐤𝑒𝑖𝐤⋅𝐑𝑏
𝑖
(2.3)
where 𝐑𝑎
𝑖is position of atom 𝐴in the 𝑖­th unit cell and 𝐑𝑏
𝑖= 𝐑𝑎
𝑖+ 𝜹is the position
on sublattice 𝐵. Substituting this into the electronic Hamiltonian and using the relation
1
𝑁∑𝑖𝑒𝑖𝐑𝑎
𝑖⋅(𝐪−𝐤) = 𝛿𝐤,𝐪, We find that the only terms that will contribute are those that
conserve momentum 𝐤= 𝐪. Then, 𝐻can be expressed as:
𝐻= −𝑡∑
𝐤
3
∑
𝑗=1
(𝑎†
𝐤𝑏𝐤𝑒𝑖𝐤⋅𝜹𝑗+ ℎ.𝑐.)
(2.4)
We can group the termss and define Δ(𝐤) = ∑
3
𝑗=1 𝑒𝑖𝑘𝛿𝑗. Expanding over nearest neigh­
bours
Δ(𝐤) = −𝑡𝑒−𝑖𝑘𝑥𝑎(1 + 2𝑒𝑖3𝑘𝑥𝑎/3 cos (
√
3𝑘𝑦𝑎/2))
(2.5)
With this, the Hamiltonian can be written in the simple off­diagonal form:
𝐻(𝐤) = [
0
Δ(𝐤)
Δ∗(𝐤)
0
]
(2.6)
12
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:21==
Which has eigenvalues 𝐸𝑘= ±|Δ(𝑘)|. One remarkable aspect is that the energy bands
are symmetric around 𝐸𝑘= 0. Thus, for half­filling of the band, the Density of States
(DOS) at the 𝐸𝐹is exactly 0. Taking spin degree into account, it turns out that graphene
bands are exactly half filled, and therefore, graphene is a semi­metal.
(a)
Γ
M
K
Γ
-5
0
5
Γ
M
K
Γ
k-points
E (eV)
(b)
Figure 2.2: Electronic Structure of Graphene. (a) Valence and Conduction Bands of
Graphene using TB Hamiltonian in the FBZ. (b) Band­Structure of graphene along the
path Γ →𝑀→𝐾→Γ defining the Irreducible Brouillin zone.
We can expand the dispersion relation for for low energy excitations around the K­point,
i.e. around 𝐪= 𝐊−𝐤≈0. Up to first order:
Δ𝐪≈2𝑡𝑒−𝑖𝐾𝑥𝑎∇𝑘(𝑒𝑖3𝑘𝑥𝑎/3 cos (
√
3𝑘𝑦𝑎/2))
𝐤=𝐊= −3𝑡𝑎
2 𝑒−𝑖𝐾𝑥𝑎(𝑖𝑞𝑥−𝑞𝑦)
(2.7)
Dropping out the constant factor −𝑖𝑒−𝑖𝐾𝑥𝑎and defining the Fermi velocity as 𝑣𝐹= 3𝑡𝑎
2ℏ
Δ𝑞= ℏ𝑣𝐹(𝑞𝑥+ 𝑖𝑞𝑦)
(2.8)
Near 𝐊, the Hamiltonian is given in terms of the Pauli matrices
𝐻𝑞= ℏ𝑣𝐹𝝈⋅𝐪
(2.9)
The low energy excitations described by the above Hamiltonian then corresponds to a
relativistic mass­less spin 1/2 particle with velocity 𝑣𝐹≈300 smaller than the speed of
light. While the density of states vanishes at the Dirac point, it is non­zero around it.
DOS(𝐸) = 𝑑𝑛𝐾(𝐸)
𝑑𝐸
=
1
ℏ𝑣𝐹
𝑑𝑛𝐾
𝑑𝑞
=
1
𝜋(ℏ𝑣𝐹)2 𝐸
(2.10)
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
13
==PAGE:22==
2.2
Introduction to Density Functional Theory
For crystal materials (solid­state) and molecules (chemistry), the relevant problem under
consideration can be reduced to a system of electrons distributed around some nuclei [41].
Due to the difference in sizes between the ions and the electrons, the Born­Oppenheimer
Approximation (BOA) allows to decouple the nuclear and electronic degrees of freedom.
Within this approximation, electrons will respond adiabatically to any change in the atomic
configuration. Thus, the problem reduces to solve the electronic Hamiltonian.
𝐻= 1
2 ∑∇2
𝑖−∑
𝑖𝑗
𝑍𝑖
|𝑟𝑗−𝑅𝑖| + ∑
1
|𝑟𝑖−𝑟𝑗|
(2.11)
In this equation, the first term corresponds to the kinetic energy of the electrons. The
second term describes the electron nuclei Coulomb interaction (or external potential),
while the last one takes the electron­electron interactions.
One of the first approaches to solve the electronic structure problem was the variational
method known as Hartree­Fock (HF), where non­interacting electrons are placed in Mean­
Field (MF) potential consisting of a classical coulomb term and a quantum mechanical
non­local exchange potential. The best variational wave­function corresponds to a Slater
determinant. In order to find the Ground­State (GS) energy, a set of equations (known
as HF equations) have to be solved self­consistently. One of the main problems of this
method is that it neglects most of electron correlations. However this method can be ex­
tended by considering excitations of the Slater determinant (multi­configurational wave­
function methods). However, these latter suffer from requiring to calculate a many­body
wave­function with 3𝑁degrees of freedom, making it computationally expensive. Then,
the question arises:
Is it possible to calculate the ground state properties without computing the 3𝑁
dimensional wave­function?
Fortunately, the answer is yes. In fact we only require the electron density 𝜌(𝑟), which has
only three spatial degrees of freedom, to compute the ground­state properties. DFT as
we know nowadays is strongly rooted on a series of theorems developed by Hohenberg­
Kohn Theorems in 1964 [42]. We will shortly present them below:
Theorem 1
The ground­state electron density determines the external potential of a given system
(up to an additive constant). Such that
𝐶∶𝑉→Ψ
(2.12)
𝐷∶Ψ →𝜌
(2.13)
Where 𝐶and 𝐷are bijective (one to one correspondence).
From this it follows that the electron density determines the Hamiltonian 𝜌→𝐻and thus,
the ground state properties can be calculated from 𝜌. The second theorem establishes
a variational principle that lower bounds the energy expectation value of a trial density
̃𝜌:
Theorem 2
For any trial density
̃𝜌satisfying the relation ∫̃𝜌𝑑r = 𝑁then it must follow that 𝐸̃𝜌=
𝐻[ ̃𝜌] ≥𝐸0 = 𝐻[𝜌]
14
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:23==
This is simply a consequence of the first theorem where we can write the wave­function as
a functional of the electron density 𝜓(𝑟) = 𝜓[𝜌(r)]. and exploiting Ritz Variational Principle.
Then, combining these theorems, we find that the key equation of DFT is simply:
𝛿(𝐸[𝜌] −𝜇(∫𝜌𝑑r −𝑁)) = 0
(2.14)
That is to say, the GS energy and GS density are such that they minimizes the functional
𝐸[𝜌], subjected to the constraint of a fixed number of 𝑁electrons in the system. The
Lagrangian multiplier happens to be the chemical potential of the system 𝜇(𝑁) = 𝜕𝐸
𝜕𝑁for
a fixed number of particles. Moreover, Hohenberg Kohn theorems show that there exist
a universal functional independent of the external potential 𝐹[𝜌] = 𝑇[𝜌] + 𝑈𝜌].
The energy functional can be written as 𝐸[𝜌] = 𝑇[𝜌] + 𝑉𝑒𝑥𝑡[𝜌] + 𝑉𝑒𝑒[𝜌], with each term
representing the kinetic, external and electron­electron interaction terms. While it is trivial
to write down the external potential:
𝑉𝑒𝑥𝑡= ∫𝑑r𝑣𝑒𝑥𝑡[𝜌(r)]
(2.15)
the kinetic and electron­electron functionals are unknown.
Walter Kohn and Lu Sham introduced a system of 𝑁­non­interacting electrons described
by a single Slater determinant of 𝑁orbitals 𝜙𝑖[43], such that the electron density can be
expressed as:
𝜌(r) =
𝑁
∑
𝑖
|𝜙𝑖(r)|2
For this system then the Kinetic energy is simply:
𝑇𝑠[𝜌] = −1
2
𝑁
∑
𝑖
𝜙∗
𝑖∇2𝜙𝑖
(2.16)
and the classical Coulomb interaction corresponds to the Hartree potential:
𝑉𝐻((r)) = −1
2 ∫𝜌(r)𝜌(r′)
|(r) −(r′)|𝑑r′
(2.17)
Then the energy functional becomes
𝐸[𝜌] = 𝑇𝑠[𝜌] + 𝑉𝐻[𝜌] + 𝑉𝑒𝑥𝑡[𝜌] + 𝐸𝑥𝑐[𝜌]
(2.18)
where 𝐸𝑥𝑐is known as the exchange­correlation functional that takes into account the
fact that we are approximating the unknown kinetic and electron­electron functionals to
the known non­interacting ones. Applying the variational principle, we find that the orbitals
that minimise the energy satisfy the single particle Kohn­Sham equations:
[−1
2
𝑁
∑
𝑖
∇2 + 𝜈𝑒𝑥𝑡(r) + 𝜈𝐻+ 𝜈𝑥𝑐(r)]𝜙𝑖(r) = 𝜖𝑖𝜙𝑖(r)
(2.19)
𝜈𝐻= ∫
𝜌(r′)
|(r) −(r′)|𝑑r′
(2.20)
𝛿𝐸𝑥𝑐
𝛿𝜌
= 𝜈𝑥𝑐
(2.21)
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
15
==PAGE:24==
This set of non­linear equations describes a non­interaction system of electrons in an
effective local potential. This has a similar structure to the HF equations just that the
non­local exchange potential is replaced by the local exchange correlation potential. DFT
is an exact theory, in the sense that for a exact exchange correlation, the Kohn­Sham
orbitals yield the exact electron density and therefore, the exact ground­state energy of
the many­body interacting system. In practice, DFT relies in approximating as good as
possible the exchange­correlation.
2.2.1
Electronic properties, periodic systems and Kohn­Sham Orbitals
While Kohn­Sham wave­function are just an auxiliary tool for building up the charge den­
sity, in many cases these states and their energies happen to be reasonable approxima­
tions to the many body excitations and and thus, can describe the optical and electrical
properties of materials.
Particularly for crystalline solids we can make use of Bloch theorem [44, 45, 46], the
single­particle wave­functions in a crystal can be expressed as the product of periodic
function (inside the unit cell) times a plane wave
𝜙𝑖(r) →𝜙𝑖k(r) = 𝑒𝑖k⋅r𝑢𝑖k(r)
(2.22)
where
𝑢𝑖k(r + R)) = 𝑢𝑖k(r)
(2.23)
with R = 𝑛1a1 + 𝑛2a2 + 𝑛3a3, (𝑛𝑖) being integers and 𝑎𝑖being the lattice vectors of the
crystal. Inserting this on the Kohn­Sham equations modifies the Hamiltonian to:
𝐻k𝑢𝑖k = 𝜖𝑖k𝑢𝑖k
(2.24)
𝐻k = −1
2(∇+ 𝑖k)2 + 𝑉
(2.25)
Thus, in order to study electrons in an infinite crystal, we just need to solve Schrodinger
equation inside the unit cell inside and apply the corresponding periodic boundary condi­
tions.
In general, band­structures calculated from Konn­Sham DFT are found to be underesti­
mated by around 40%. This is know as the band gap problem and is an active area of
research. although, on naive words, its due to the fact of calculating excited state energies
𝑁±1 electrons with the GS density [47, 48, 49]
2.2.2
Implementation in Siesta
Siesta is an open source DFT code, density­functional theory with linear scaling DFT­
code [39]. It bases on atomic­like orbitals as basis sets, also called Linear Combination
Of Atomic Orbitals (LCAO). This kind of basis set are often use in the context of quantum
chemistry. Siesta implements pseudo­potentials for core electrons. As other DFT codes
it solves self­consistently the Kohn­Sham equations.
16
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.3: Self­Consistent field iteration for solving the Kohn­Sham equations as imple­
mented in Siesta [39].
While the efficiency of LCAO methods overcast plane­wave basis sets, the convergence
of this methods is more laborious and has to be carried out in a more systematic matter.
Among one of the key features of TranSiesta, its expansion of ballistic transport calcula­
tions (TranSiesta).
2.3
Quantum Transport in the context of nano­electronics
2.3.1
Landauer­Buttiker formalism
As the size of electronic­devices shrinks with the advances of micro and nano­fabrication,
the question about the mechanisms behind electron transport along single molecules and
nano­scale systems became more important not only from a fundamental research but
also with a technological relevance. It is clear that, for small systems, particularly for
those in which the mean free path 𝜆is much larger than the dimensions of the system 𝐿,
𝜆≫𝐿, Ohms’ law will not apply [50]:
𝑉= 𝐼𝑅
(2.26)
𝐿
𝜆
𝐿
𝜆
Figure 2.4: Comparison between diffusive transport, where 𝐿≫𝜆, and ballistic transport,
where 𝜆.
This is because the resistance 𝑅in Ohm’s law is derived assuming scattering process
occurring as electrons propagate through a material. For nano­electronic devices, the
transport occurs at the ballistic­regime, where electrons travel along the material without
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
17
==PAGE:26==
any scattering event, meaning energy and momentum conservation along the channel
[51]. Early experiments showed that under this regime, the conductance is quantized
in channels [52], with the quantum of conductance being the smallest possible non­zero
value for perfect ballistic conductors. Moreover, for such systems, the energy dissipation
occurs at the contacts, as electrons thermalize as they enter to the electrodes. In the
presence of impurities or defects, the conductance gets diminished.
Landauer theoretical formulated electron transport in mesoscopic systems as a scattering
problem [53], where the current along a device can be calculated using Landauer formula
that depends on the transmission function 𝑇
𝐼= 𝐺0 ∑
𝑛
∫
∞
∞
𝑇𝑛(𝐸, 𝑉)[𝑛𝑠(𝐸−𝜇𝑠) −𝑛𝑑(𝐸−𝜇𝑑)]𝑑𝐸
(2.27)
where 𝐺0 is the quantum of conductance 𝐺0 =
𝑒2
ℎ, 𝑛𝑠,𝑑(𝐸−𝜇𝑠,𝑑) is the Fermi­Dirac
distribution of the source and the drain electrodes at a given chemical potential 𝜇𝑠,𝑑. This
describes the occupation of the electronic bands at a given temperature. For small bias
𝑉between the source and the drain, Landauer formula can be Taylor expanded, together
with the approximation that 𝑇(𝐸, 𝑉) is constant along the energy window of relevance
(around 𝐸𝐹), then the current at small bias and at 0 K is given by
𝐼= 𝐺𝑉= (𝐺0 ∑
𝑛
𝑇𝑛(𝐸𝐹))𝑉
(2.28)
Where we have recovered Ohm’s Law with the conductance being the inverse of the
resistance. Then, the problem of transport lies on:
How to calculate the transmission function 𝑇?
In the next section, we introduce the formalism of Greens Functions as a method to com­
pute 𝑇, even in non­equilibrium conditions.
2.3.2
Green’s function on the basis of nano­electronics
Green’s functions are often used in Quantum Mechanics on problems where we want to
study perturbations[54]. For simplicity, as well as to narrow to the case of interest for the
current project, everything discussed in this section will be related to the single particle
Greens­Function. With, this in mind, let’s consider the time independent Schrodinger
equation:
(𝐻0(r) + 𝑉(r))Ψ(r) = 𝐸Ψ(r)
(2.29)
Where 𝐻0 is the unperturbed known Hamiltonian that we assume we can solve and know
its spectra. Meanwhile, 𝑉corresponds to a external perturbation to the system. To solve
this, we use the bare Green’s function 𝐺0, which defined by the differential equation:
(𝐸−𝐻0(r))𝐺0(r, r′, 𝐸) = 𝛿(r −r′)
(2.30)
Therefore, the wave­function takes the form
Ψ(r) = Ψ0(r) + ∫𝑑r′𝐺0(r, r′, 𝐸)𝑉(r′)Ψ(r′)
(2.31)
We can iteratively insert Ψ(r) to get a perturbative solution in orders of 𝑉. For the scat­
tering problem in which the energy forms a continuum, such process is known as Born
expansion. For the time dependent Schrodinger equation we can show that the solution
Ψ(r, 𝑡) takes the form
Ψ(r, 𝑡) = ∫𝑑𝑟′𝐺(r𝑡, r′𝑡′)Ψ(r′, 𝑡′)
(2.32)
18
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:27==
where we see that 𝐺(𝑟𝑡, 𝑟′𝑡′) is an operator that acts on a state on position 𝑟′ at a time 𝑡′
and propagates it to a position 𝑟at a time 𝑡. This propagator 𝐺can be expressed in terms
of the bare Green’s function 𝐺0 as
𝐺= 𝐺0 + 𝐺0𝑉𝐺
(2.33)
#M
=
F
+
Fc#M
𝑉
which can be solved as:
𝐺=
𝐼
(𝐺0)−1 −𝑉
(2.34)
#M
=
𝐼
(
F
)
−1 −c
𝑉
This equation is know as Dyson Equation, which allows to express diagrammatically the
physical process due to the scattering events occurring due to 𝑉.
For the particular case of transport in nano­scale devices, the system corresponds to a
”Device” region connected to different Leads/Electrodes that act as electron reservoirs.
We are particularly interested on the device central region, while its coupling to the elec­
trodes can be taken as a external perturbation.
𝐻𝐿,Σ𝐿
𝐻𝑅,Σ𝑅
𝐻𝐶
Figure 2.5: Example of a nano­scale device in quantum transport. The central region
is connected two pristine h­NPG, acting as electrodes (red). The electrodes are semi­
infinite, described by a self­energy Σ). The central region is connected to the left and
right electrodes. This central region, contains a hydrogen defect that perturbs the pristine
material. This region is described by the Hamiltonian 𝐻𝐶. The transport direction is em­
phasized by the arrow. Periodic boundary conditions can be imposed transverse to the
transport direction.
A general feature of external perturbations is that the solution of a system under these
perturbations only requires the self energy of the perturbation. For the system of interest
this can be shown as follows. We start with the full Schrodinger equation.
𝐻Ψ = ⎡⎢
⎣
𝐻𝐿
𝑉𝐿
0
𝑉†
𝐿
𝐻𝐶
𝑉†
𝑅
0
𝑉𝑅
𝐻𝑅
⎤⎥
⎦
⎡⎢
⎣
Ψ𝐿
Ψ𝐶
Ψ𝑅
⎤⎥
⎦
= 𝐸⎡⎢
⎣
Ψ𝐿
Ψ𝐶
Ψ𝑅
⎤⎥
⎦
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
19
==PAGE:28==
We can employ Green’s function formalism, which will allow us to calculate the transport
properties of the device. The governing equation is
(𝐸−𝐻)𝐺= 𝐼
(2.35)
which in matrix form looks as
⎡⎢
⎣
𝐻𝐿
𝑉𝐿
0
𝑉†
𝐿
𝐻𝐶
𝑉†
𝑅
0
𝑉𝑅
𝐻𝑅
⎤⎥
⎦
⎡⎢
⎣
𝐺𝐿
𝐺𝐿𝐷
𝐺𝐿𝑅
𝐺𝐷𝐿
𝐺𝐶
𝐺𝐶𝑅
𝐺𝑅𝐿
𝐺𝑅𝐶
𝐺𝑅
⎤⎥
⎦
= ⎡⎢
⎣
𝐼
0
0
0
𝐼
0
0
0
𝐼
⎤⎥
⎦
Solving for 𝐺𝐶we find that 𝐺𝐿𝐶,𝑅𝐶= 𝑔𝐿,𝑅𝑉𝐿,𝑅𝐺𝐶, where 𝑔𝐿,𝑅= (𝐸−𝐻𝐿,𝑅) are the
bare Green’s functions of the left and right electrodes. Thus, the Green’s function of the
device region due to the coupling with the electrodes is
𝐺𝐶= (𝐸−𝐻𝐶−∑Σ𝛼)−1
(2.36)
where Σ𝛼= 𝑉†
𝛼𝑔𝛼𝑉𝛼is the self energy contribution of the 𝛼electrode to the device. There­
fore, the self energies have information about the electronic structure of the electrodes
and renormalize the Hamiltonian in the device region.
To observe the effect of the electrodes into the device region, we can make use of the the
spectral function 𝐴(𝐸), which is deeply related to the DOS. For the unperturbed device,
The bare greens function 𝐺0(𝐸) can be written in terms of the eigenstates of 𝐻0 ( which
can be found using ab­initio methods).
𝐺0(𝐸) = ∑
𝑛
|𝜓𝑛⟩⟨𝜓𝑛|
𝐸+ 𝑖𝜂−𝜖𝑛
in the limit of 𝜂→0 it follows that
𝐴(𝐸) = −2ℑ[𝐺0(𝐸)] = −∑
𝑛
|𝜓𝑛⟩⟨𝜓𝑛| 𝛿(𝐸−𝜖𝑛)
(2.37)
𝐷𝑂𝑆(𝐸) = −1
𝜋𝑇𝑟(ℑ[𝐺0]) = 1
2𝜋𝑇𝑟(𝐴(𝐸))
(2.38)
When the device is coupled to the electrodes, the states in the device are no longer
eigenstates of the full Hamiltonian, and thus, will have a finite life­time. This will give
rise to a broadening 𝜂in 𝐴(𝐸) which in the simplest model takes the form of a Lorentzian
peak
𝐿(𝐸) =
𝜂
(𝐸−𝜖𝑖𝑘)2 + 𝜂2
(2.39)
The imaginary part of the self energy in fact is related to the life­time in the device while
the real part acts as a shift in the spectrum.
In the Landauer­Buttiker formalism, the current over a mesoscopic device connected to
two electron reservoirs at a given bias 𝑉= 𝑒(𝜇𝐿−𝜇𝑅) on a linear regime corresponds to
to:
𝐼(𝑉) = −2𝑒2
ℎ∫𝑇𝑟(t†(𝐸)t(𝐸))𝑑𝑛𝐹
𝑑𝐸𝑉𝑑𝐸
(2.40)
where t†(𝐸)t(𝐸) is the transmission matrix, which can be calculated from the Green’s
function 𝐺𝐶(𝐸) and the coupling matrices Γ𝐿(𝐸) and Γ𝑅(𝐸) (which are related to Σ𝐿and
Σ𝑅by Γ𝑥(𝐸) = 𝑖[Σ𝑥−Σ†
𝑥])
𝑇(𝐸) = 𝑇𝑟[𝐺𝐶(𝐸)Γ𝑅(𝐸)Γ𝐿(𝐸)𝐺𝐶(𝐸)]
(2.41)
20
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:29==
Often, the transverse direction to the transport can be represented by periodic boundary
conditions. Thus, we will have a continuum of channels corresponding to different angles
of waves impinging on the device region. The theory can be extended by making the
Hamiltonian 𝐻0 and the coupling 𝑉depend on 𝑘⟂. Now the transport properties like the
transmission or the DOS will be k averaged for a given energy.
2.3.3
Implementation in TranSiesta
Weakly interacting systems allow to adopt an effective single particle picture. This regime
implies small bias voltage, such that the energy transfer between charge carriers is neg­
ligible. With this in mind, NEGF­DFT methods for quantum transport calculations, like
TranSiesta are of great use to calculate the steady state transport properties. These
methods rely on a partitioning scheme as presented before, consisting of some leads
weakly coupled to a device region. The precise partitioning of the device is often set for
convenience. However it is required for the coupling between bulk electrode with the de­
vice, that the coupling region behave as an electrode itself. We can consider the system
as defect on the electrodes. This defect will have a screening length. We are required that
the effect of the defect is completely screened in the coupling region. This is illustrated on
figure 2.6b. In general, bad screening requires to include a large amount of electrodes to
accommodate the perturbation, resulting in larger more expensive calculations. This has
to be systematically tested in order to observe convergence of transport results.
𝐻0
𝐻0
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.6: Screening of a defect in the device region. (a) Illustration of the spin po­
larization around a Ha adatom in h­NPG and its spreading along multiple unit cells. (b)
Effect of an hypothetical defect on the Hamiltonian of each cell. The effect of a defect is
illustrated by the colors of the atoms. The perturbation caused by the defect extends up
to three unit cells. For this particular case then our device region needs to include at least
five uni cells, centered from the defect. Figure adapted from TransSiesta school lecture
notes.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
21
==PAGE:30==
As previously mentioned, the coupling of the device to semi­infinite electrodes broadens
the DOS by some 𝜂, which corresponds to some half­width maximum. TranSiesta relies
on the numerical integration of the Greens function over some energy range, this re­
quires to define a 𝛿𝐸to perform the numerical calculations. It is required to have 𝛿𝐸≪𝜂
to resolve the features of the DOS. On the other hand. while the self energies take into
account the semi­infinite nature of the electrodes, which then define the transport direc­
tion, periodic boundary conditions can be established in the perpendicular directions, and
therefore, 𝑘­point sampling must be carried out as well (Brillouin zone integration). Pre­
vious understanding of the electronic structure of the system is required. For numerical
practicalities the k­point sampling 𝛿𝑘must be such that 𝐸𝑘−𝐸𝑘+𝛿𝑘≈𝜂. Thus, we can
see that Transport calculations in TranSiesta are computationally more expensive that
standard DFT calculations as they require 2­D sampling (E,k).
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.7: Technical aspects of implementing transport calculations in TransSi­
esta. (a) Lorenizan­Broadening of the DOS. (b)Transverse periodic bondary conditions
in transport calculations.
A standard TranSiesta calculation is carried out as follows.
1. Siesta Calculation of the Electrodes to compute 𝐻,𝜌and Σ
2. Siesta Calculation on the device to build 𝐻𝐶, 𝜌
3. solve open system using Greens Functions to calculate new 𝜌.
The second and third steps are solved self­consistently until some convergence is reached.
TBTrans is then used as a post­processing tool to compute the physical observable, such
as 𝑇or 𝐼. While in TranSiesta, the self­energies are only for semi­infinite leads, TBTrans
allows to customize additional self­energies to describe local defects as well as absorbing
potentials.
22
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:31==
3
Electronic structure of pristine NPG and
h­NPG
NPG and h­NPG have been previously studied [14, 15]. In this section, we perform ab­
initio calculations on pristine structure of NPG and h­NPG to test our computational meth­
ods. We start by discussing the electronic structure of these materials. We conclude this
chapter by studying doping via electrostatic gating by considering a Field Effect Transistor
(FET) setup as implemented in [55]. We analyse the response of electrostatic­doping by
analyzing it’s effect the band structure and the spatial electron redistribution.
(a)
GNRN
GNRC
GNRC
(b)
Figure 3.1: Atomic structure of (a) NPG and (b) h­NPG. The structures where relaxed
using DFT by constraining the unit cell.
3.1
Band structure of pristine NPG and h­NPG
3.1.1
DFT methods
We calculated the electronic structure of NPG and h­NPG by employing DFT as imple­
mented in Siesta [39]. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) of the exchange­
correlation functional in the PBE was employed in all calculations. A DZP basis­set was
used, as it was found out it was required for describing the dispersion along Γ →𝑍.
Pseudo­potentials were used for describing the core electrons. A super­cell of 3 × 3 × 1
was used and 5 × 12 × 1 𝑘­points were sampled with a Monkhorst­Pack grid. Conver­
gence of the physical properties was assured by comparison of the electronic bands and
convergence of the total energy. For the structural optimization, forces were relaxed up
to 0.01 eV/Å.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
23
==PAGE:32==
3.1.2
Symmetries and their consequences in the electronic bands
NPG is a bottom­up material that posses a mirror symmetry in its unit cell, which is shown
in figure 3.2(a) . Therefore, it follows that the external potential 𝑉(𝑥) created by the ions
satisfy 𝑉(−𝑥) = 𝑉(𝑥) along the mirror plane. This constraints the wave­functions parity
to be either symmetric or anti­symmetric with respect to reflection [56, 57].
for: 𝑉(−𝑥) = 𝑉(𝑥) ⇒
𝜓(−𝑥) = 𝜓(𝑥) (even) or
𝜓(−𝑥) = −𝜓(𝑥) (odd)
Besides, GNRs in NPG are equivalent up to a 𝐶2 rotation followed by a some translation
along 𝑥and 𝑧, as shown in figure 3.2 (b). This translates into a degeneracy of the states
at 𝑋.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: Symmetry features of NPG. (a) NPG posses a symmetry plane along the
longitudinal direction constraining the wave­functions to have even or odd parity.
(b)
Graphene nanoribbons in NPG are equivalent and can be transformed through a 𝐶2 ro­
tation followed by a translation, resulting in degenerate bands at 𝑋.
NPG presents a direct band gap at the Γ point that has experimentally determined to be 1
eV by measuring the 𝑑𝐼/𝑑𝑉spectra [14]. From our first­principles calculations, we found
a band gap of 0.619 eV. As mentioned in the theoretical minimum, DFT methods tend to
underestimate the band gaps of materials.
One of the main features of this material is its highly anisotropic dispersion, with the VB
and CB corresponding to longitudinal states, as observed in figure 3.3 (a). We plot the
wave­functions at the Γ­point for these bands in figure 3.3 (b) and (c). Both VB and CB
states have even parity. For the VB, the 𝜓corresponds to states with ”bonding” configu­
ration between nearest neighbour atoms along the 𝑧direction. These would correspond
to a in­phase linear combination of one of the degenerate 𝑒1𝑔benzene ring states (see
Appendix). Meanwhile, for the the CB 𝜓, the nearest neighbour atoms along 𝑧direction
are found to be in anti­bonding configuration, similar to the other 𝑒1𝑔state of benzene.
The VB state exhibits 4 nodal planes along 𝑥inside a GNR while the CB state exhibits 3
nodal planes along 𝑥and 2 nodal planes along 𝑧. For the VB, the wave­function exhibits
a change of phase change as we move across the bridge, moving from one GNR to the
next. Meanwhile, there is no change of phase between GNRs for the wave­function in the
CB.
24
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:33==
At high energies, NPG presents Transverse (T) and confined­pore (P) states, making
the NPG a versatile semiconductor for cleaving and sensing of molecular species. The
T­state moves in zigzag following the bridge path connecting the GNRs. This state is anti­
symmetric and those the wave­function exhibits a phase change between nanoribbons.
The P­state arise from the anti­bonding 𝜎∗states of carbon and hydrogen atoms, and its
spatially distributed inside the pore region.
Using a simple TB Hamiltonian, by only considering 𝑝𝑧orbitals, we can describe the elec­
tronic structure of NPG for energies close to the 𝐸𝐹. In figure 3.3 (a), we plotted the TB
band structure using up to next next­nearest neighbours hopping between carbon atoms
as it was observed that 𝑡2 and 𝑡3 where needed to describe the the bands­structure dis­
persion as calculated with DFT. We employ the TB parameters 𝑡1 = 2.7 eV, 𝑡2 = 0.2 eV,
and 𝑡3 = 0.18 eV, as in [58].
VB
CB
(a)
(b) VB 𝜓Γ
(c) CB 𝜓Γ
(d) T 𝜓Γ
(e) P 𝜓Γ
Figure 3.3: Electronic structure of NPG. (a) Band structure comparison for NPG cal­
culated with DFT and TB. The valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) exhibit
anisotropic dispersion. (b) and (c) correspond to the VB and CB wave­functions at the
Γ­point. The color represents the sign of the wave­function. Isosurfaces are plotted for
an isovalue of 0.05 Å
−3.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
25
==PAGE:34==
Modification of the chemical synthesis can allow to produce hetero­junctions of nitrogen­
doped hybrid nanoporous graphene, or h­NPG for short [15]. This nitrogen substitution
breaks the GNR equivalence, and therefore, the degeneracy in 𝑋, opening a gap be­
tween these bands, as can be observed in figure 3.4. A direct band gap of ≈0.421 eV
was found at 𝑋. Electron­hole symmetry is not longer present, which is more evident at
bands around 1 eV away from the 𝐸𝐹. The presence of the nitrogen introduces dipole
moments in the bridges, as nitrogen is more electronegative than carbon, and therefore
will have a larger charge distribution around it. Theoretical values of pyrimidine rings
predict dipole moments of ≈2.1𝐷. This effectively decouples the GNR, materializing in
downshift of the energy bands of the GNRN with respect to the GNRC. To illustrate this,
we show the fat­bands projected onto GNRC and GNRN in figure 3.4 (a). In these plots,
the colors correspond to the DOS projected to the atoms belonging to the different GNRs,
with magenta corresponding to GNRN and cyan for the GNRC.
CB+1
CB
VB
VB­1
(a)
GNRN
GNRC
GNRC
(b)
Figure 3.4: Decoupling of electronic bands in h­NPG. (a) Band structure with fat­bands
(Left panel) and projected density of states on the GNR show the bands decouple in to
the different GNRs, opening a energy gap at 𝑋. (b) h­NPG structure with the color of the
GNR corresponding to GNRC in cyan and GNR N in magenta.
26
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:35==
We observe that the VB and CB correspond to states with contributions of mainly of one
type of GNR, with the VB spreading along GNRC and the CB along GNRN. We can
think of the VB­CB+1 and VB−1­VB pairs as forming decoupled subsystems, with each
presenting similar band gaps of around 0.75 eV. Although this is a good approximation
at low 𝑘, we observe, particularly for the CB+1 band, that the GNRs hybridize along the
Γ →𝑍direction. The flat­band at −1 eV corresponds to the non­bonding electron state
(formed by 𝑝𝑥and 𝑝𝑦) from the nitrogen in the pyrimidine structure of the bridges. The
polarization of the different GNR can be incorporated into the TB model by considering
a rigid on­site shift to the GNRN . We found that a relative splitting of 0.25 eV allows to
describe the dispersion of the electronic bands around the 𝐸𝐹. We employ an onsite
energy for nitrogen of 𝜖𝑁= −1.4 eV.
(a)
(b) 𝑉𝐵−1 𝜓Γ
(c) 𝑉𝐵𝜓Γ
(d) 𝐶𝐵𝜓Γ
(e) 𝐶𝐵+1 𝜓Γ
(f) N 𝜓Γ
Figure 3.5: Electronic structure of h­NPG. (a) Band structure comparison of h­NPG as
calculated with DFT (left panel) and TB (right panel). (c)­(e) Wave functions at Γ for the
VB−1 to CB+1. Isosurfaces are plotted for an isovalue of 0.05 Å
−3.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
27
==PAGE:36==
Since the nitrogen in the bridges doesn’t disrupt the mirror plane symmetry, the wave­
functions are still restricted by symmetry. In figure 3.4 (b)­(e), we plot the wave­functions
for the previously discussed bands. We observe that the VB corresponds to a state lo­
calized on the GNRC, this is essentially the VB wave­function from NPG but with a small
contribution of GNRN. The same argument applies for the CB state by interchanging the
roles of the GNRs. The wave­function for the non bonding state is mainly localized around
pyrimidine ring and doesn’t delocalized around GNRs. The states have 𝜎symmetry (no
nodal planes in 𝑥𝑧) and have contribution of the nitrogen atoms, pointing towards the pore
region.
Although it is scope of this current work, it would be interesting to study the response of
this localized state to the presence of foreign chemical species; particularly, small polar
molecules like water or ammonia. We believe that these molecules, through non­covalent
interactions, can alter the inter­ribbon coupling allowing to change locally the electronic
properties of the material.
3.2
Electrostatic Gating
3.2.1
A model for electrostatic gating on ab­initio calculations
In order to realize graphene based devices, it is of great importance it circuit integration.
Particularly, electrostatic control via gate voltages is vital on modern integrated circuits.
For this, we consider a FET set­up shown in figure 3.6. The system consist of a gate plane
and the system of interest separated by a distance 𝑑. In between, there’s a dielectric layer,
which for our case consist of vacuum.
Figure 3.6: Field effect setup as a capacitor for modelling electrostatic gating with ab­
initio calculations as implemented in Siesta. Here the charge density in a gate plane is
fixed to be 𝑔× 1013 e/cm². By constraining the hole region to be charge neutral then the
system gets additional charge of −𝑔. Figure adapted from [55].
From a computational perspective, this configuration can be model as a capacitor, where a
gate voltage is applied between the gate and the system, driving an electrostatic potential.
The charge at the gate plane is set to be 𝑔, and −𝑔at the system. Thus, for 𝑔< 0 the
system will be 𝑝­doped while for 𝑔< 0 the system will be 𝑛­doped. The additional charges
28
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:37==
in the system will redistribute to create a polarization along the electric field direction. How
this additional charge 𝛿𝜌
𝛿𝜌= 𝜌(𝑔) −𝜌(0)
(3.1)
will spatially redistribute will depend on the electronic structure of the material.
This electrostatic problem in DFT is often solved by solving Poisson equation for the
Hartree potential.
∇2𝑉𝐻(r) = −4𝜋𝜌(r)
(3.2)
From our FET system, we can write down the governing equations the following plate
capacitor model
E = 𝑉𝐺
𝑑=
𝑔
𝜖𝑟𝜖0
(3.3)
Thus the only adjustment to DFT is to replace the Hartree potential with:
𝑉𝐻((r) →𝑉𝐻((r) + 𝑉𝐺((r)
(3.4)
Since solving Poisson equation requires periodic boundary conditions, a slab­dipole cor­
rection is often required to correct possible un­physical interactions between the image
cells. This model for FET can be implemented in Siesta [55, 59].
3.2.2
Role of nitrogen in the charge redistribution under electrostatic
gating of NPG
Below we proceed to study NPG and h­NPG under a gate­plane located at 5 Å below.
The calculations were performed using the same DFT procedure from previous sections.
In figure 3.7, we present the band structure of those calculations. Gating on NPG corre­
sponds to a elastic shift of the 𝐸𝐹, that is, no change is observed in the electronic structure
other than the occupation of the bands. Carbon­carbon bonds are strongly non­polar, and
thus NPG responds homogeneously to the additional charge.
On the other hand, electrostatic gating of h­NPG leads to significant changes of the elec­
tronic bands. Particularly, as we start to populate/depopulate the CB/VB, we observe that
the energy gaps between the VBs and CBs shrink, and the electronic bands resembles
more to the one observed in NPG, with the inter­ribbon coupling Δ𝑘also decreasing.
Moreover, we see that the flat band corresponding to the nitrogen lone pairs are shifted
drastically relative to the rest of the bands, indicating the response of this state is stronger
to external fields.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
29
==PAGE:38==
Δ𝑘
(a)
Δ𝑘
(b)
Figure 3.7: Doping by electrostatic gating of NPG and h­NPG. (a) Band structure of
NPG and (b) h­NPG as a function of electrostatic gating. the number of electrons cor­
responds to 𝑔× 1013 e/cm².The filling corresponds to the occupation of the states, while
the color is used to denote when the system is 𝑝­doped (red), charge neutral (gray), or
𝑛­doped (blue).
A simple explanation for this difference between NPG and h­NPG is the presence of the
pyrimidine ring at the GNR bridges. Hetero cyclic compounds exhibit dipole moments due
30
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:39==
to an uneven distribution of the electron density. This can be observed using Mulliken
charge analysis1[60]. We observe that N has a larger charge compared to its neighbour­
ing carbon atoms. As we start 𝑝­doping the carbons that exhibit larger changes in their
charges 𝛿𝑞are the ones in the GNRC closer to the pore. On the other side, 𝑛­doping
results in a change of 𝛿𝑞in atoms close to the pores inside the GNRN.
Figure 3.8: Mulliken Charges on the different atoms of h­NPG.
We can gain similar information from the electron energy redistribution 𝛿𝜌. This is plotted
for NPG and h­NPG at the particular values of 𝑔= ±0.5. Positive values correspond to
blue while negative values are plotted in red. NPG exhibits an isotropic 𝛿𝜌with respect
to the GNR . On the other hand. h­NPG main redistribution occurs at the GNR that are
being filled or emptied. One interesting aspect is to observe relation of the wave­functions
and the 𝛿𝜌, as this resembles the spatial shape of the states. One key feature that we
can observe in 𝛿𝜌of h­NPG is the presence of a charge separation along the C­C bond
in the bridge, that doesn’t occur in NPG. Particularly, when theh­NPG is 𝑛­doped, the
carbon inside the pyrimidine ring gets replenished of electrons, depleting the bond region,
meanwhile, the carbon belonging to GNRC is deplenished by bringing charge to the bond
region. The same behaviour occurs for 𝑝­doping.
(a) g=­0.5
(b) g=+0.5
(c) g=­0.5
(d) g=+0.5
Figure 3.9: Electron density redistribution Δ𝜌between gated and ungated systems. The
isovalues are taken as 0.0015 Å
−3. Blue and red colors indicate electron accumulation and
depletion respectively. (a) and (b) correspond to gated NPG while (c) and (d) to h­NPG.
Charge doping corresponds to 𝑔× 1013 e/cm².
1Allows the estimation of partial atomic charges from ab­initio calculations, particularly those based on the
linear combination of atomic orbitals molecular orbital methods (LCAO’s)
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
31
==PAGE:40==
4
Defects in NPG and h­NPG
We devote this chapter to studying the role of defects in NPG and h­NPG. Particularly,
hydrogen adatoms (Ha) and single carbon vacancies (SV) are considered. We discuss
the effect of these defects and the emergence of localized states close to the 𝐸𝐹. These
studies are done by employing the same DFT methods as in the previous chapter. We
continue our investigation by removing the periodicity constriction of standard DFT calcu­
lations by employing NEGF­DFT method [61]. At this step, we include spin polarization
in our calculations to take into account magnetism. Naturally, we will explore the possi­
bility of using the FET set­up as a way of controlling the magnetism around the defects.
Finally, we consider the interaction between magnetic defects placed in same GNR and
their indirect exchange is the coupling 𝐽as a function of their relative distance 𝑑.
4.1
Localized states caused by defects
4.1.1
Geometry optimization of the defects
We start by placing Ha and SV defects on one of the GNR in NPG and h­NPG. These
defects are placed at the atoms in the center of one of the GNR in order to be as gen­
eral as possible. We show the optimized geometries considered in figure 4.1. These
have been optimized by relaxing the structures using DFT while constraining the unit cell.
Geometry optimizations were carried out using the Broyden’s method, as it has been
previously reported that provides faster convergence compared to other optimization al­
gorithms available in Siesta. For both NPG and h­NPG, the H­C bond distance was found
to be 1.13 Å and rearrangement into a trigonal pyramidal configuration was observed. For
the carbon vacancies, it was found that in NPG, one of the C­C distances got shorten to
a value of 2.31 Å, while the other two C­C pairs showed a same separation of 2.63 Å. In
h­NPG three different distances were observed, these being 2.43, 2.62 and 2.67 Å.
(a) NPGH
(b) NPGvac
(c) h­NPGH
(d) h­NPGvac
Figure 4.1: DFT optimized structures using DZP basis sets for (a) NPGH, (b) NPGvac, (c)
h­NPGH and (d) h­NPGvac.
32
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:41==
4.1.2
Emergence of flat­bands due to defects at graphene nanoribbons
We start our discussion by considering the electronic­structure of NPGH. In figure 4.2
(a) we present the band structure with the bands projected onto the different GNRs, with
cyan being the GNR without defect and magenta being the GNR with Ha. The presence
of Ha introduces a flat­band around the 𝐸𝐹. We observe that the flat­band corresponds
to a state localized at the GNR with the defect. In order to observe the contribution of
the Ha, we projected the DOS of the hydrogen into the bands in (4.2 (b). Indeed, the flat­
band has important contribution from the Ha and increases along the Γ →𝑍. The bands
around ±1 eV have also some contribution from the Ha along Γ −𝑋region. The VB and
CB are bands localized at the GNRs that doesn’t have defect (cyan). At energies above
(and below) 1.5 eV, we see that the bands hybridize again. Therefore, the defect is only
relevant in terms of decoupling the GNRs at low energies few eVs around the 𝐸𝐹.
(a)
(b) Ha 𝜓Γ
Figure 4.2: Electronic structure and localized state of a H adatom inside NPG. (a)
On the left, the band structure of NPGH. The fat­bands are projected to the atoms in
the GNR, with magenta being the GNR where the adatom is adsorbed, while cyan corre­
spond to the neighbouring ribbons. On the right, the bands are projected to the hydrogen
atom, indicated in red. (b) Wave­function at Γ corresponding to the flat­band at the 𝐸𝐹.
Isosurfaces are plotted for an isovalue of 0.05 Å
−3.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
33
==PAGE:42==
We plotted the wave­function of the localized state at Γ. The wave­function exhibits con­
tribution from the 𝑠orbitals of Ha, while the carbon beneath H doesn’t contribute significant
to the state. Two of the nearest neighbours of that carbon atom bring hybridized 𝑠orbitals
to form an anti­bonding state with H. The wave­function extends the other GNR by fol­
lowing the atoms along the edges of the pores . It would be of interest to further explore
the effect of local changes in the chemical environment on the pores (like polar molecules
such as water or ammonia) and the effect on the defect state, however, this is out of the
scope for this current project.
Using a modified TB model, that includes the contribution of the 𝑠orbital coming from
the Hydrogen atom 𝜖𝐻, a carbon­hydrogen hopping 𝑡𝐻= −6.5, as well as an onsite
correction to the carbon’s on­site energy 𝜖𝐶′, we find that the TB is able to reproduce the
band structure, capturing the dispersion of the flat band. The parameters employed for
such TB were 𝑡𝐻= −6.5 eV, 𝜖𝐻= 1.75 eV, and 𝜖𝐶′ = −4.75 eV. We used second and
third nearest neighbour hopping with same values as ones used in the pristine NPG. We
found out that the features of the electronic bands were strongly dependent of the sign of
𝜖𝐻, and only flat­bands were observed for 𝜖𝐻> 0, indicating the anti­bonding nature of
the Ha.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.3: A TB model for H adatoms (a) Scheme of a hydrogen adatom on top of a
𝑠𝑝2 carbon atom and its TB model. The Hydrogen adatom is modeled by including an
onsite energy 𝜖𝐻and a hopping with the bottom carbon 𝑡𝐻. The presence of H introduces
an energy shift in the bottom carbon and therefore, its onsite energy becomes 𝜖𝐶′. The
rest of the TB parameters remain the same, although extension can consider next near­
est neighbour hopping between the adatom and surrounding atoms. (b) Band structure
comparison of the DFT calculation and the TB model proposed.
We continue our discussion by considering NPGvac. We present the band structure in
figure 4.4 (a) and some wave­functions in (4.4) (b)­(d) that will be discussed below. Over­
all, similar features in the electronic bands arise when comparing the band structure of
NPGvac with that of NPGH, such as the decoupling of the GNR for the VB and CB and
the emergence of localized states around the 𝐸𝐹. The main difference is that instead of
one, two flat bands are observed near the 𝐸𝐹and an extra flat­band is observed at higher
energies. This arise due to the absence of a carbon atom, then the remaining three car­
bons around the vacancy are forced to rearrange in order to stabilize the dangling bonds.
34
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:43==
Another difference is that the dispersion exhibits negative slope along Γ →𝑍.
𝜋1
𝜎1
𝜎2
(a)
(b) 𝜎1 𝜓Γ
(c) 𝜋𝜓Γ
(d) 𝜎2 𝜓Γ
Figure 4.4: Electronic dtructure of and localized states of a carbon vacancy inside
NPG. (a) In the left we show the band structure with the bands projected into the GNR,
with magenta being the GNR with the vacancy and cyan the GNR without defect. On the
right, we project the bands onto the orbitals 𝑠(red), 𝑝𝑥+ 𝑝𝑦(blue) and 𝑝𝑧(green). (c)­(d)
Wave­functions at the Γ­point for the 𝜎1, 𝜋and 𝜎2 vacancy states. Isosurfaces are plotted
for an isovalue of 0.05 Å
−3.
The fat­bands projected onto the orbitals together with the wave­functions, show that
indeed these bands arise from the dangling bond states of these carbon atoms. One
of the flat­bands near the 𝐸𝐹(𝜎1) is originated from the 𝑝𝑥and 𝑝𝑦orbitals mixing with the
𝑠orbitals (𝑠𝑝2 hybridization), forming a 𝜎bond that stabilize the carbon vacancy (shown in
red and blue). The other flat­band (𝜋) arises from the dangling 𝑝𝑧state (shown in green).
The second 𝜎flat­band (𝜎2) is formed at energies around 0.9 eV above the Fermi Energy.
We can visually appreciate the nature of the 𝜎and 𝜋bonding from the wave­functions. The
state in figure 4.4 (b) corresponds to the 𝜎1 state and is symmetric along reflection. We
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
35
==PAGE:44==
observe how the dangling 𝑝states hybridize such that two of the 3 carbons in the vacancy
maximize their overlap, this state lie completely on the 𝑥𝑧­plane exhibiting 𝜎symmetry.
In figure 4.4 (c) we plot the 𝜋state. We observe that the only one of the dangling states
is contributing to the wave­function. The behaviour of this defect wave­function is similar
to that of the Hydrogen, exhibiting some tails in the neighbouring ribbons by extending
through the edge atoms at the pores. In figure 4.4 (d) We plotted the wave­function for
high energy 𝜎2 state. This state is anti­symmetric with respect to reflections and has no
contribution from one of the carbon atoms. The remaining two atoms form an anti­bonding
𝜎∗state along the bond direction.
Due to symmetry, the 𝜎states do not couple to the 𝜋system and therefore, we can con­
sider only the subspace spanned by the orbitals with the same symmetry as the 𝑝𝑧orbitals.
With this, using the same TB parameters as before, by just removing the on­site energy
and the C­C hopping of that vacant carbon, we are able to describe the features the elec­
tronic bands of DFT.
Figure 4.5: Band structure comparison of the DFT calculations (DZP/PBE), shown to the
left, with the TB model proposed, shown in the right panel.
Similar results are observed for h­NPGH and h­NPGvac and therefore, will not be dis­
cussed, however, we show the results in the Appendix. The dispersion of SV defect is
different to the one found for the Ha, such that the Ha exhibits a slightly positive group ve­
locity, while a larger and negative group velocity is found for carbon vacancies. Therefore,
by using two different TB models, we have shown that the nature of defects in graphene
and cannot be treated as equal, even on a crude TB model, something that has commonly
adopted in the literature.
36
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:45==
4.2
Electrostatic control of single magnetic defects.
One of the ultimate goals of spintronics is the electrostatic control of magnetic states [62,
63]. Thus, it is of relevance for this project to describe the magnetic states arising from
Ha and SV under electrostatic gating.
Although, a big misconception tends to treat both as similar, different ab­initio calculations
have shown that it is not the case. Particularly, previous results have shown that, while
the magnetism of Ha in graphene can be turned on­off by the addition (removal) of 1
electron under electrostatic doping, SV remain magnetic [63]. This is due to the fact that
magnetism in SV originates from both the 𝜋states as well as localized 𝜎dangling states.
Therefore, 𝑛­doping with 1 electron leads to a double occupation of the 𝜋states leaving
a single unpaired 𝜎state. Removing 1 electron decreases the occupancy of the 𝜋states,
yet the asymmetry of the spin splitting in these states yields a non­zero occupancy.
Since the nitrogen in h­NPG decouples the electronic states into the isolated nanoribbons,
it provides a platform to address this question and therefore, we will focus on this material
for the rest of the discussion, studying h­NPGH and h­NPGvac. Our results, employing
NEGF­DFT methods, are shown in figures 4.6 and 4.7 showing the spin polarization
Δ𝜌𝜎= 𝜌↑−𝜌↓
(4.1)
(a) g=+1.0
(b) g=+0.5
(c) g=+0.1
(d) g=0.0
(e) g=­0.1
(f) g=­0.5
(g) g=­1.0
Figure 4.6: Doping can turn­off the magnetic moment around a Ha adsorbed to h­
NPG. Spin polarization Δ𝜌𝜎of Ha in h­NPG as a function of electrostatic doping. Isosur­
faces are plotted for an isovalue of 0.003 Å
−3.Blue and red colors indicate the sign of the
spin polarization Charge doping corresponds to 𝑔× 1013 e/cm².
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
37
==PAGE:46==
Our calculations present similar trends as the ones reported in previous literature [63].
For Ha, both 𝑛and 𝑝­doping allow to turn­off the magnetism for 𝑔= ±1. Small doping
of 𝑔≈±0.1 allows to fill in the VB/conduction bands, as can be observe from the DOS
(see appendix). For this small doping, the system keeps its spin polarization. This can
be of interest for devices under some out­equilibrium conditions, like when applying a
small bias between the source and the drain. This will lead to a difference in the chemical
potentials, driving a current between electrodes. We observe that the spin polarization
under electrostatic control is not completely symmetric. This is due to the electron­hole
symmetry breaking caused by the nitrogen atoms at the bridges. For the SV defect, 𝑝­
doping the system up to 𝑔= +1 is not enough to completely turn­off the spin polarization.
Meanwhile, for its 𝑛­doped counterpart, the spin polarization completely vanish.
(a) g=+1.0
(b) g=+0.5
(c) g=+0.1
(d) g=0.0
(e) g=­0.1
(f) g=­0.5
(g) g=­1.0
Figure 4.7: Doping of a C vacancy in h­NPG exhibits asymmetric behaviour in its
spin polarization. Spin polarization Δ𝜌𝜎of SV in h­NPG as a function of electrostatic
gating. Isosurfaces are plotted for an isovalue of 0.05 Å
−3. Blue and red colors indicate
the sign of the spin polarization. Charge doping corresponds to 𝑔× 1013 e/cm².
We plot the calculated ⟨𝑆⟩for the defects previously discussed in figure 4.8 as a way to
summarize our results. The regions corresponding to 𝑛­dope and 𝑝­dope are colored in
blue and red for convenience of the reader. From here, it is easy to observe the asymmetry
of the behaviour of the SV under electrostatic gating compared to the more symmetric
case of Ha which can be completely turned off for both ranges of electron/hole doping. The
larger asymmetry under doping in SV comes from both 𝜎and 𝜋magnetism. When charge
38
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:47==
neutral, both defects are close to the theoretical values predicted from Lieb’s theorem,
corresponding to ⟨𝑆⟩= 1ℏfor the Ha and ⟨𝑆⟩= 2ℏfor the SV.
Figure 4.8: Control of magnetism in Ha and SV in h­NPG with electrostatic gating. Charge
doping corresponds to 𝑔× 1013 e/cm².
4.3
Multiple defects and their indirect exchange mechanism
In nano­scale and mesoscopic systems, when two magnetic moments are embedded at
a host material, separated by a distance 𝑑large enough such that the overlap of their
respective wave­functions is negligible, an indirect exchange interaction can be mediated
by the conduction electrons of this host medium. This gives rise to a energy difference
between possible alignments of the localized magnetic moments. Within the Ruderman­
Kittel­Kasuya­Yosida (RKKY) approximation, the coupling is treated as a consequence
of the spin polarisation of the conduction electrons in the host material [64]. The RKKY
effective Hamiltonian can be derived from the Kondo Hamiltonian of localized spins 𝑆𝑖
corresponding to the embedded magnetic impurities, which interact with lattice states with
spin 𝑠𝑖[65]. Then, the interaction between the magnetic impurity 𝑆and the conduction
electrons of the lattice 𝑠is given by
𝐻𝑖𝑛𝑡= −𝜆∑
𝑖
𝑆𝑖⋅𝑠𝑖
(4.2)
where
𝑠𝑖= ℏ
2 ∑
𝜇,𝜈
𝑐†
𝑖𝜇𝜎𝜇𝜈𝑐𝑖𝜈
(4.3)
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
39
==PAGE:48==
Using perturbation theory, and assuming non­interacting electrons, this allows to use
Wick’s theorem to write an effective Hamiltonian as:
𝐻𝑅𝐾𝐾𝑌= −𝐽21𝑆2 ⋅𝑆1
(4.4)
which describes an effective direct interaction between two magnetic impurities 1 and
2. Here the coupling strength 𝐽21 depends on the static magnetic susceptibility, which
describes response of the host magnetization to a static magnetic field
𝐽21 = −𝜆2ℏ2
4
𝜒0
21
(4.5)
with 𝜒0
21 expressed in terms of the Matsubara Green’s functions.
𝜒0
21 = −1
𝛽∫𝑑𝜏𝒢0(2, 1, 𝜏)𝒢0(1, 2, 𝜏)
(4.6)
𝑘
𝑘−𝑝
From a technological perspective, it is interesting to understand and control magnetic or­
dering in graphene in order to develop spintronic devices. Magnetic coupling between
defects can exhibit Friedel oscillations with an oscillation depending on the Fermi wave­
vector 𝑘𝐹and a decay rate proportional to 𝑅−𝛼where 𝛼is strongly dependent on the di­
mensionality of the the system. It has previously been observed that the indirect exchange
interaction in magnetic impurities on graphene behave different compared to other 2d ma­
terials [66, 67]. For instance, most 2D metals present a 𝐽∝𝑅−2 dependence. However,
graphene the 𝐽dependence in 𝑅falls off as 𝑅−3 [68], and exhibits the common 𝑅−2 de­
cay when doped [69]. Furthermore, due to particle­hole symmetry, only ferromagnetic
or antiferromagnetic coupling are observed when the impurities are placed at same or
different sublattices.
Here, we are interested in characterizing magnetic interactions between hydrogen defects
when embedded on h­NPG, particularly due to its ribbon decoupling. We consider placing
a second Ha on the middle of the same GNRN separated by some distance 𝑑. This second
adatom can be adsorbed on top of four different carbon sites. In general, adsorption of
an adatom on an 𝑠𝑝2 carbon keeps the 𝐶3𝑉symmetry resulting in a spatial distribution of
the spin polarization with triangular shape. However, in the GNR here studied, there is a
symmetry breaking of the three­fold rotational symmetry, nevertheless, spin polarization
around the defects still exhibit triangular shape due to mirror symmetry.
For our previously studied Ha defect, the spins polarization spreads into the electrode
region. By keeping our first defect in place, placing a second defect will give rise to two
possible configurations of the spin distributions, as shown in figure 4.9. In the first con­
figuration, the two defects will spread out of each other (pink and yellow). This occurs for
different sublattices (𝐴−𝐵pairing). Meanwhile, for the other possible type of configura­
tion, the spin polarization originated from the second defect will spread into the first­one
(pink­yellow). This occurs when the two adatoms adsorb to same sublattices (𝐴−𝐴
pairing)
40
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.9: Schematic of defects configuration. A first hydrogen adatom 𝐻𝐴is placed
at a fixed at a certain position. The triangle represents how the spin polarization around
the defect will spread. We then proceed to place a second H adatom 𝐻𝐵at a distance 𝑑.
For this, we consider 4 possible sites, which can spread into the first defect (in pink) or
out of it (yellow). This defects where optimized separately. We can add pristine unit cells
in between defects to study to study the distance dependence of the RKKY interaction.
We proceeded to perform a NEGF calculations as implemented in TranSiesta and com­
puted the energy difference between the ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic states. This
is done by providing an initial spin polarization on the atoms that favours the convergence
towards one of the two solutions. As convergence criteria, we consider the change of spin
in the device region as a function of number of electrodes, with the threshold by Δ𝑆≤0.1.
We computed the ferromagnetic­antiferromagnetic splitting as follows
𝐽= 𝐸𝐴𝐹−𝐸𝐹
(4.7)
with 𝐽< 0 having preferred antiferromagnetic coupling and 𝐽> 0 having ferromagnetic
coupling.
We observe, as expected, that sites placed at same sublattice (𝐴−𝐴) exhibit ferromag­
netic ordering, while placing them onto different sublattices (𝐴−𝐵) an antiferromagnetic
configuration was energetically favoured. The coupling decreases as a function of the
separation distance, as expected from RKKY theory, where the non­interacting suscepti­
bility 𝜒0
𝐵𝐴decays over the distance 𝑑between the embedded defects.
As an important remark, 𝐽showed to be highly dependent on the position in which the sec­
ond magnetic defect is placed. For this particular set­up, the configurations that are fer­
romagnetic, are those that have maximum overlap in the spin polarization region. Mean­
while, in antiferromagnetic favoured configurations, both defects spread out of each other,
and therefore, the their overlap is small. This is relevant since is the itinerant electrons
surrounding the defects, and thus, the electron density, that gives rise to this indirect in­
teraction, thus, resulting in the observed smaller 𝐽. To proof this, it would be interesting
to test how much the spin polarization around the two defects Δ𝜌21
𝜎change is compared
to the average contribution of the single defects
Δ𝜌21
𝜎−1
2(Δ𝜌2
𝜎+ Δ𝜌1
𝜎)
(4.8)
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
41
==PAGE:50==
This will provide some information about the electron redistribution in between the defects.
However, due to lack of time, we leave it as an open question to further explorer.
Thus, we must emphasize that the magnitude of the coupling is not unique to our system
but a matter of how we defined the configuration. For instance, we could have chosen
the first Ha to be in a 𝐵sublattice such that the spin polarization spread into the second
defect. For such cases, we would expect that antiferromagnetic couplings to be enhanced
while the ferromagnetic couplings to be significantly reduced. As an example, calculations
carried out by Schaffer et al. [70] presented calculations in which the antiferromagnetic
coupling was 3 times larges that ferromagnetic, further proving the point previously dis­
cussed. It is clear that more studies must be carry out to completely characterize the
interaction between magnetic defects. Nevertheless this results are a first step for cal­
culating 𝐽employing NEGF­DFT, allowing to remove some of the periodic boundaries
imposed by standard DFT methodologies.
Figure 4.10: 𝐽of two Hydrogen adatoms in h­NPG. Pink region corresponds to preferred
ferromagnetic (FM) ordering while yellow corresponds to antiferromagnetic (AFM). Insets
of the spin polarization are shown to exemplify the difference between preferred FM and
AFM order as well as the 𝑑dependence. Isosurfaces where calculated at an isovalue of
0.005 Å−3.
42
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:51==
5
Electron transport
This chapter is devoted to studying the quantum transport in NPG and h­NPG . We start
by presenting the transport in the pristine materials, where the electronic bands can be
regarded as transmission channels for the electrons to propagate. Afterwards we con­
tinue to study the longitudinal spin­transport across SV and Ha and consider the effect
of electrostatic doping. As proof of concept, we use one of the devices and apply a bias
voltage between electrodes and show the spin­dependent currents.
5.1
Anisotropic transport in pristine NPG and h­NPG
5.1.1
NEGF­DFT method
In this section we investigate the anisotropic electron transport of NPG and h­NPG along
𝑥(transverse) and 𝑧(longitudinal) directions. The calculations were performed using
NEGF­DFT formalism as implemented in TransSiesta. Transmission along transverse
(longitudinal) direction is obtained by repeating the unit cell three times along the trans­
port direction see figure and using 100 𝑘­points sampling in the transverse direction for
getting the transmission in TBTrans.
5.1.2
Nanoribbon decoupling and Anisotropic Transport
In figure 5.1, we plot the transmission of pristine NPG along the transverse and longitudinal
directions and compare the DFT result with the parameterized TB model.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.1: Transport in NPG. (a) Transverse and (b) longitudinal transmission in pristine
NPG according to DFT and TB NEGF calculations. Device geometries are shown in (c)
and (d). The arrow represents the transport direction, while the red color indicates the
electrode region inside the device.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
43
==PAGE:52==
Both transport directions exhibit a gap in the transmission, corresponding to the band gap
between the VB and CB. We observe that the transport is mainly longitudinal however,
transverse transmission increase to almost unity as we move around 1.7 eV above/ below
the 𝐸𝐹. The TB model describe the main features of the transmission around the energy
range of ±1 eV. Particularly, the band gap is well approximated. The transmission cor­
responding to the bands above(below) the CB(VB) present a small shift of approximately
0.2 eV .
The transport of h­NPG haven’t been published so far. In figure 5.2 we present the trans­
verse and longitudinal transmission for pristine h­NPG . We observe that the transverse
transmission is around an order of magnitude smaller in the energy range of ± 1 eV com­
pared to NPG. This prompts that nitrogen in h­NPG leads to decrease in the electron
transport along x by reducing the inter­ribbon coupling. Meanwhile, longitudinal transport
exhibits the step­wise behaviour or the transmission corresponding to the different bands
acting as transmission channels. The TB model describes the longitudinal transport in h­
NPG in the energy window of 1 eV, which is where the VBs and CBs of the two decouple
GNRs lie. However, for energies apart from the 𝐸𝐹of −2 eV and −1.5 eV, there are some
wide anti­resonances that are not present in the DFT transmission.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.2: Transport in h­NPG. (a) Transverse and (b) longitudinal transmission in pris­
tine h­NPG according to DFT and TB NEGF calculations. The device geometries are
shown in (c) and (d). The arrow represents the transport direction, while the red color
indicates the electrode region inside the device.
44
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:53==
5.2
Longitudinal transport along single­defects and
spin­filtering
We continue by studying the role of defects in the electron transport along the longitudi­
nal direction of NPG and h­NPG, as we have previously observed the transport is mainly
along this direction. Same methods as for pristine transport calculations we considered,
however this time, spin polarization was taken into account to observe the role of the
magnetic defects in the transmission for the different spins. In order to do this, a a larger
system was considered to accommodate the spin polarization around the defects (Ha and
SV). Due to the particular geometry of our defects, three unit cells were considered in the
bottom region (before the defect) and three more in the top region (after the defect). Thus,
the whole system consists of seven unit cells. This was performed by ensuring conver­
gence of the physical properties (Spin polarization and Transmission). For TransSIESTA
calculations. initializing the system with a good guess of the initial spin polarization en­
sures faster convergence. For this, we employed the mean field Hubbard python package
combined with our TB model to provide initial spin polarization [71]
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.3: Longitudinal transport along H defect. (a) Device structure for NPGH and
(b) h­NPGH with their respective transmission functions plotted in (c) and (d). Pristine
transmission is shown in gray.
In figure 5.3 we compare the longitudinal spin transmission of NPG and h­NPG (𝑇↑and
𝑇↓), when a Ha is placed in the center of the device region. For NPG , as both GNR
can be taken as equivalent, we decided to place the Ha in the center for convenience.
However in h­NPG , we have two non­degenerate GNRs. For this, we decided to start
placing the Ha in GNRN which is lowered in energy relative to the GNRC. We observe
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
45
==PAGE:54==
that NPG doesn’t exhibit significant spin polarization in the transmission, and particularly
both VB and CB are transmissive. On the other hand, h­NPG exhibits a resonance peak
around the CB region, which, according to the fat­band analysis from previous chapters,
corresponds to a band with precisely contribution of the GNRN. We hypothesize that, even
though transport in NPG is mainly transverse, the small inter­ribbon dispersion hinders the
influence of the local defect on the spin transport. Meanwhile, the decoupling of the GNRs
in h­NPG confines the electrons to the GNR and therefore, feel a stronger effect of the
Ha.
The features of the transmission for the spin­down components exhibit some of the fea­
tures of a Fano resonance, where a high transmission peak is followed by an abrupt fall
of the transmission. In molecular electronics, this effects usually arise when additional
localised states, which do not couple to the leads, interacts with a continuum, allowing
electron to go into these isolated orbitals for long times [72, 73, 74, 75]. We find two par­
ticular energies of interest, in which the system could act as a spin filter. At 𝐸= 0.275, 𝑇↓
is ≈30 times larger than 𝑇↑. Meanwhile at 𝐸= 0.45, 𝑇↓vanishes.
(a)
(b) Eigen­channel
𝐸= 0.275 𝜎=↑
(c) Eigen­channel
𝐸= 0.275 𝜎=↓
(d) Eigen­channel
𝐸= 0.45 𝜎=↑
(e) Eigen­channel
𝐸= 0.45 𝜎=↓
Figure 5.4: Fano resonance due to H 𝑠orbital. (a) Zoom­in of the transmission along the
resonance peak for the longitudinal transmission in h­NPG with a hydrogen defect. Pris­
tine transmission is shown in gray. (b)­(e) Spin­transmission eigen­channels for energies
𝐸= 0.275 and 𝐸= 0.45. Isosurfaces are plotted for an isovalue of 0.05 Å
−3.
46
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:55==
Transmission eigen­channels provide an intuitive picture of the electron transport [76], and
have been previously employ to elucidate Fano resonances for spin­dependent transport
in GNR [31] and carbon nanotubes [77]. Transmission eigenvalues correspond to the
eigenvectors of the diagonalization of the transmission matrix.
𝑇= t†t = U†
𝐿t†tU𝐿= diag(𝑇1, 𝑇2, … )
(5.1)
Where 𝑈𝐿are unitary operators that transform the scattering states |𝜓𝑙⟩into the trans­
mission eigen­channels |𝜙𝛼⟩. These eigen­channels are non­mixing in the sense that
for a given energy, the total transmission is the sum of their corresponding transmission
eigenvalues 𝑇(𝐸) = ∑𝑇𝑖(𝐸).
In figure 5.4 (b)­(e), we plot the real part of some transmission eigen­channels of interest.
We consider the energies of 𝐸= 0.275 eV and 𝐸= 0.45 eV,which are were we have
the peak in the transmission , and no transmission for the spin­down component. For
this energies we observe that the transport is dominated by single channels, exhibiting
at least an order of magnitude larger transmission relative to the rest. This matches with
band structure picture, where there’s only a single electronic band available for those
energies and therefore, only single channels.
At 𝐸= 0.275 eV, the spin­up eigen­channel has small transmission 𝑇↑≈0.01 and there­
fore, it weakly couples to the Top electrode. Meanwhile, the spin­down state exhibits
coupling with the electrodes. We observe that the hydrogen 𝑠orbital contributes to the
eigen­channel and that after encountering the Ha, the eigen­channel exhibits a tail, formed
by in­phase 𝑝𝑧C orbitals extending into the electrodes. For 𝐸= 0.45 eV, the spin­up has
a eigen­channel has a transmission of 𝑇↑≈0.12. We see that the wave­function spreads
after scattering with the Ha, but couples to the top electrode region. The eigen­channel
with spin­down is completely reflected a few atoms after encountering the defect. In the
appendix, we show the imaginary part of the transmission eigen­channels. In general, for
these to drive a current density, they must satisfy ℑ[𝜙†
𝛼∇𝜙𝛼] ≠0. Overall, we can see this
will be the case for 𝜙𝛼(𝑥) being complex in space, we see particularly that low transmis­
sion eigen­channel is indeed mainly real, showing it will not contribute to transport.
In figure 5.5, we consider the electron transport along carbon vacancies. W observe that
similarly to the longitudinal transmission in NPGH, NPGvac doesn’t exhibits differences
between the transmissions for the spin­components. Besides, the transmission of the
vacancy defect exhibits less scattering, resulting in higher transmission, when compared
to the hydrogen defect. Unlike, NPGvac, h­NPGvac does exhibits spin­polarized trans­
missions mainly at energies lying at the VBs and CBs. We observe that for the VB, the
transmission of the spin­down channel 𝑇↑is constant along the the range of −1 eV to
−0.25 eV. This feature is also present in the NPG device as well, a small Fano resonance
is observed at the VB for the 𝑇↑lying at −0.3 eV. In the CBs we observe a step­wise
behaviour with the 𝑇↓being slightly larger approximately by 0.1 than the 𝑇↑.
We observe that both devices of h­NPG exhibits interesting spin­dependent transmis­
sions, however, due to simple Fano­resonance, the Ha provides of a simple platform for
developing spin­filters, as the transmission. Moreover, creating hydrogen defects its sim­
pler experimentally compared to carbon vacancies, which is more prone to damage the
samples.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
47
==PAGE:56==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.5: Longitudinal transport along SV defect. (a) Device structure for NPGvac and
(b) h­NPGvac with their respective transmission functions plotted in (c) and (d). These are
plotted for the different spin components, for 𝑇↑in red and 𝑇↑in blue. Pristine transmission
is shown in gray.
5.2.1
Does it matter in which ribbon we place the H adatom?
Our previous calculations on h­NPG were done by placing a Ha on the GNRN of h­NPG.
We have the hypothesis that by placing the defect on such Ha, which is lowered in energy
relative to their neighbouring ribbons, the propagating electron will be forced to transmit
along that GNR. Then is natural to ask:
What is the transport behaviour if we place the Ha on GNR instead?
Our calculations show that no spin­polarization in the transmission is observed. Inter­
esting, no resonances where observed in the VB, but instead almost no transmission for
both spins. This might indicate that the hydrogen defect inside GNRN is more reflective to
impinging electron waves coming form the electrodes. In addition, the CB exhibits almost
unit transmission, showing that the GNRN do no feel the presence of the Ha when placed
at GNRC. Why this is the case is something that must be further studied. For instance, it
could be that the resonance is site dependent to which atom it adsorbs. For instance, in
GNRC, the adatom is closer to the pore region, while in GNRN, it is to the bridges. Thus,
the local environment might play a role that has to be determined. Another explanation
is the degree of the magnetic screening of the different GNRs in h­NPG and thus, the
spreading of the spin polarization around the defect. From our calculations, it seems that
the GNRC screens poorly the defect and therefore, the incoming scattering states feel
48
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:57==
a stronger perturbation that prohibits the transmission. We plotted the spin polarization
around both different defects in figure 5.7 to illustrate this.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.6: Longitudinal transport along H defect on different GNR in h­NPG. a)
Device structure for defect inside GNRC and (b) GNRN with their respective transmission
functions plotted in (c) and (d). Pristine transmission is shown in gray.
(a) GNRC­H
(b) GNRN­H
Figure 5.7: Spin­Polarization around Ha adsorbed on GNRC and GNRN. Isosurfaces are
plotted for an isovalue of 0.05 Å
−3. Blue and red colors indicate the sign of the spin
polarization.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
49
==PAGE:58==
Overall, a systematic exploration of the position of the Ha in both nanoribbons has to be
done in order to elucidate the main factors that give rise to Fano resonances.
5.2.2
Mean­Field TB­Hubbard for Ha
In previous sections, we showed how we could employ a simple TB­model to describe
the flat­bands arising from defects inside the unit cell. Here, we explore the role of the
hydrogen orbital in the resonant electron transmission previously discussed by employing
a self­consistent­mean field Hubbard method develop by [71].
This method solves the TB Hamiltonian
𝐻= −∑𝑡𝑖𝑗𝜎𝑐†
𝑖𝜎𝑐𝑗𝜎+ ∑𝑈𝑖𝑛𝑖↑𝑛𝑖↓+ 1
2 ∑𝑈𝑖𝑗𝑛𝑖𝜎𝑛𝑗𝜎′
(5.2)
by doing a mean­field approximation
𝐻𝑀𝐹= −∑𝑡𝑖𝑗𝜎𝑐†
𝑖𝜎𝑐𝑗𝜎+ ∑𝑈𝑖⟨𝑛𝑖↑⟩𝑛𝑖𝜎′ + ∑(𝑈𝑖𝑗+ 𝑈𝑗𝑖)(⟨𝑛𝑖↑⟩+ ⟨𝑛𝑖↓⟩)𝑛𝑗𝜎
(5.3)
and solving self­consistently the energy through some initial spin­density ansatz.
Among some of its main capabilities, is that it allows to solve open­quantum systems
using Green’s functions. We employ this method to for our studying h­NPG with a Ha at
the center of the geometry. We employed the pristine NPG Hamiltonian for the top and
bottom electrodes, and the modified TB as our device, with 𝑡𝐻= −3.25, Δ𝜖𝑎= 1.75,
Δ𝜖𝑐= −2.5. We use the same Coulomb repulsion parameter 𝑈for carbon and nitrogen
𝑈= 3.5 and 𝑈𝐻= 4.5 for hydrogen.
From the NEGF­MF Hubbard calculation we obtain | ⟨𝑆⟩| = 0.96ℏwith the spin polariza­
tion spread around the hydrogen defect. This is close to the expected theoretical value
and agrees with the observed features 𝛿𝜌𝜎from DFT calculations. We employed this final
self­consistent MF­Hubbard Hamiltonian to calculate the longitudinal transmission. We
acknowledge that this model is prone to improvements, particularly, to finding the optimal
Coulomb repulsion. Nevertheless, the model exhibited the observed Fano resonance
peak in the CB. We were not able to obtain such feature by modeling the Ha by a vacancy
𝑝𝑧orbital, further showing the relevance of this orbital in the transport.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8: Longitudinal transport along H defect. (a) Spin­Polarization around Ha
calculated with NEGF­MF Hubbard. (b) Spin­dependent longitudinal transmission for ac­
cording to TB model. Pristine transmission is shown in gray.
50
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:59==
5.3
Controlling longitudinal transport along defect in h­NPG
with electrostatic­gating
So far, we have been studied the transport of defects without electrostatic gating. Both
NPG andh­NPG are semiconducting and thus, require doping for carry out experimental
transport measurements. Therefore, the question arise, does the spin­filter effect remains
for the h­NPG device when the system is doped by electrostatic gating. We have already,
seen that calculations that the spin polarization vanishes for large gating in h­NPG and
thus, the transmission should reflect this.
In figure 5.9,we plot the longitudinal transmission of h­NPG when a H­defect is placed on
GNRN. We observe that, for 𝑝­doping the transmission exhibits almost no spin­polarization,
and the resonant state vanishes. For small values of 𝑛­doping, 𝑔≈−0.1, we can increase
the resonance transmission in the spin­down component, while decrease the transmis­
sion for the spin­up. However, as we start, occupying the other bands, the spin­filter effect
fades away as can be seen for 𝑔= −1.
This shows that, by means of simple gates, we can switch on­off the the spin­filtering in the
transmission. Moreover, since this transmission have spatial dependence of the GNRs,
we could use this as a mean of controlling the spatial propagation of electrons through
the device.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.9: Spin dependent longitudinal transmission along h­NPGH for different elec­
trostatic doping. Charge doping corresponds to 𝑔× 1013 e/cm². Pristine transmission is
shown in gray.
In experiments, conductance of the system is one of the key properties to characterize,
as it provides information about how electrically conductive is a material. Below, in figure
5.10, we present the conductance results of our ab­initio calculations under electrostatic
doping. This were calculated by assuming a small bias between the top and bottom
electrode 𝑉≈0.1 V . This allow to expand the 𝐸𝐹around 𝑉= 0, giving an energy window
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
51
==PAGE:60==
of around 1 eV where the product of the transmission 𝑇(𝐸) and the derivative of the Fermi­
Dirac distribution 𝜕𝑓
𝜕𝐸≠0 . Then, in this regime, the integrand of the Landauer formula
corresponds to the Conductance. For convenience, we normalize the results in terms of
𝑒2/ℎwhich are the units of the quantum of Conductance. We observe that for 𝑛­doping,
the difference in conductance is larger than for 𝑝­doping. We attribute this due to the
resonance peak. At doping of 𝑔±1, the conductance are the same as magnetism around
the defect vanish. Within this approximation, the current will be simply the product of the
small bias voltage times the conductance. Then, we see that a spin­polarized current will
be established along the device for 𝑛­doping.
Figure 5.10: Conductance of h­NPGH as a function of electrostatic doping 𝑔. Charge
doping corresponds to 𝑔× 1013 e/cm².
5.4
Out of equilibrium: I vs V calculations
To further explore this idea, we study transport calculations under non­equilibrium calcu­
lations by applying small bias between electrodes on a 𝑛­doped system 𝑔= −0.075. For
this doping, the system is slightly 𝑛­doped such that the electrodes behave as metallic.
We consider the system as before(h­NPG with Ha). We perform open­system calculations
at particular bias and then proceed to use interpolation schemes implemented in TBTrans
to get the current through the rearrange from −0.25 to 0.25 V.
Our 𝐼−𝑉plots are shown in figure 5.11. We observe that the currents for the two spin
components exhibit different magnitudes along the bias. We quantify this difference be­
52
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:61==
tween the 𝐼↑and 𝐼↓by the 𝑆𝑃that we define as follows:
𝑆𝑃= |𝐼↑−𝐼↓
𝐼↑+ 𝐼↓
|
(5.4)
Moreover, the 𝐼𝑉curves exhibit a small rectification behaviour, particularly for the spin­
down current, that could be potentially used as a diode. Interestingly, at large bias, we ob­
serve the spin­down current exhibits negative differential resistance (NDR) below −0.225
V and above 0.125 V. NDR is a non­linear effect that has found a variety of applications,
including storage memory and threshold logic devices. In many nano­scale devices, this
arises due to tunnelling effect. The nature of this NDR should be further investigated in
future work.
As a final remark, we showed that the presence of defects can allow to control the spin
dependent currents achieving 𝑆𝑃close to unity for small bias.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.11: Spin­Polarized currents in h­NPGH. (a) Spin dependent currents at an
electrostatic 𝑛doping of 𝑔= −0.075. (b) SP as a function of bias voltage. Charge doping
corresponds to 𝑔× 1013 e/cm².
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
53
==PAGE:62==
6
Large Scale Transport Calculations
We end this work by considering the transport along these nano structures on a large­
scale device. We employ the methodology developed by Xie et al [78], and previously
used in [37] to study the emergent Talbot­interference pattern in NPG.
6.1
Large­Scale TB simulations
6.1.1
Methods
To address simulation of quantum transport on real graphene devices, it is required to
describe the electronic structure of in a computationally efficient manner. Thus, TB models
have been adopted for this goal. Combined with NEGF, TB­NEGF can allow to calculate
the conductance of multi­terminal nano­scale large­scale devices. On this line, TBTrans
allows to customize the Green’s function by adding energy/𝑘dependent perturbations
𝛿𝐻(𝐸, 𝑘) :
𝐺(𝐸, 𝑘) = [𝑆0(𝑘, 𝐸) −𝐻0(𝐸, 𝑘) −∑
𝑖
Σ(𝐸𝑖, 𝑘) −𝛿𝐻(𝐸, 𝑘)]−1
(6.1)
This is particularly useful in order to approximate an infinite environment in a infinite sys­
tem, This is done by employing a complex absorption potential (CAP). CAP reduces the
reflection of the wave­function at the defined boundaries by completely absorbing the
wave­function without disrupting the current conservation.
𝜕𝜌
𝜕𝑡−∇⋅𝐽= 0
(6.2)
Therefore, the Hamiltonian matrix for a two­terminal system, with transport in z­direction,
CAP can be used at the boundaries of the device region, such that the Hamiltonian can
be written as the sum of the standard Hamiltonian matrix plus a purely imaginary 𝛿𝐻𝐶𝐴𝑃
term added to the diagonal matrix elements of the device
⎡⎢
⎣
𝐻𝐵
𝑉𝐵
0
𝑉†
𝐵
𝐻𝐶−𝑖𝑊𝐶(𝑟) ⋅𝛿𝑖,𝑗
𝑉†
𝑇
0
𝑉𝑇
𝐻𝑇
⎤⎥
⎦
The analytical expression for 𝑊in the CAP perturbation can be derived using the semi­
classical approximation by minimizing the reflection coefficient of a 1D quantum system
and is given by
𝑊𝐶= ℏ2
2𝑚( 2𝜋
Δ𝑟)2𝑓(𝑟)
(6.3)
𝑓(𝑟) = 4
𝑐2 [(
Δ𝑟
𝑟𝑓−2𝑟𝑖+ 𝑟)2 + ( Δ𝑟
𝑟𝑓−𝑟)2 −2]
(6.4)
This method has been previously employed by Calogero for describing ballistic transport
in graphene devices exhibiting lensing behaviour [37]. Similarly, this has been previously
employed on NPG exhibiting Talbot interference [37].
54
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:63==
6.1.2
Talbot­Interference in NPG
We consider first the bond transmission of pristine NPG. A geometry of 16 repeated unit
cells in 𝑥and 90 in 𝑧, with dimensions of 524.6 × 781.1 Å² was built as device region.
The width of the absorbing walls was set to 50 Å². The entire system consists of 115200
atoms. To describing them, we prune the Hamiltonian by leaving the 𝑝𝑧orbitals only (see
Appendix). We consider placing the injection point at the middle of the device, as shown
in figure 6.2
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.1: Multi­scale transport calculation methodology. (a) Electronic bands com­
parison between parameter­free TB Hamiltonian and DFT Hamiltonian. A parameter free
TB Hamiltonian is constructed by pruning the Hamiltonian calculated from first­principles.
(b) Set­up overview. The injection point is indicated by the red circle. CAP regions are in­
dicated with a color­scale indicating their value. Top and bottom electrodes are indicated
in black
Below we present the orbital transmission for an injection energy of 0.8 eV. These are
calculated as
𝑇𝑖𝑗(𝐸) = 𝑖[(𝐻𝑗𝑖−𝐸𝑆𝑗𝑖)𝐴𝑖𝑗(𝐸) −(𝐻𝑖𝑗−𝐸𝑆𝑖𝑗)𝐴𝑗𝑖(𝐸)]
(6.5)
and correspond to the transmission from orbital𝑗to 𝑖. Summing over all orbitals for a
given atom results in the bond transmission. For our parameter­free TB model these
are equivalent. We were able to reproduce the Talbot interference observed in previous
literature [37]. The transmission from the injection point was found to be 𝑇= 0.0121.
These results were found to consistent at different injection points, thus the interference
is an emergent property intrinsic of NPG due to its unique anisotropic electronic structure.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
55
==PAGE:64==
Figure 6.2: Talbot­Interference effect arises in the bond transmissions of NPG as we
inject an electron inside a GNR.
6.2
Transport in h­NPG: Does it matters in which GNR do we
inject electrons?
Here, we investigate the large­scale transport in h­NPG and consider how does the bond
currents spread depending on which nano­ribbon we inject the electron. For this, we fol­
lowed the same procedure of pruning the Hamiltonian letting only 𝑝𝑧orbitals. We consider
two injection positions, marked in red on figures 6.4 and 6.5, such that we inject on the
center of either GNRC or GNRN. The injection energies were set to be ±0.6 and ±0.4 eV,
such that we lie on energies at the VBs and CBs.
When injecting inside the GNRC at 0.6 eV, we observe that electrons propagate mainly the
inside that GNR, although, some transmission currents leaks out into the closest GNRC,
with the GNRN acting as a bridge. When injecting inside GNRN though, the bond trans­
mission is less prone to leak out of the injected nanoribbon, with some periodic regions
where the bond currents leaks out of the GNR where the electron was injected. This hap­
pens because at that energy, we have two allowed bands, one for each type of GNR, and
thus, we have similar transmissions.
56
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:65==
←GNRC
←GNRN
GNRN →
GNRC →
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.3: Electronic bands of h­NPG. (a) Electronic bands of pristine h­NPG. The
colors correspond to the fat­bands projected to the GNRs. The injection energies are
indicated by the arrows and the labels reference the dominating GNR. (b)­(c) Injection
sites indicated in red when inside GNRC and GNRN.
Now, when we inject inside GNRC, at energies of 0.4 eV, there’s only one band allowed,
with contribution from GNRN atoms and thus, resulting in a low transmission. We ob­
serve that the few bond current quickly leaks towards the nearest GNRN and spreads
only along those ribbons. Meanwhile, injecting inside the GNRN results in bond current
almost completely confined inside one GNRN . Same arguments apply if we inject at en­
ergies of −0.4 eV, by just changing the roles of the GNRs. When injecting at −0.6 eV on
GNRC, the transmission is mainly on that nanoribbon, with some oscillatory patterns on
the neighbour GNRN. Similarly, injecting on GNRN the transmission is mainly along that
ribbon but with larger spread­out and no periodic oscillations.
Transmission from injection point to top electrode
0.6 eV
0.4 eV
−0.4 eV
−0.6 eV
GNRC
0.0173
0.0004
0.0181
0.0169
GNRN
0.0104
0.0125
0.0002
0.0222
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
57
==PAGE:66==
Overall, we see that the band structure studies carried on the first section provide of great
insight for understanding the spatial features of the transport through atom transmissions.
As a general remark. we observe that the bond transmission in h­NPG are more confined
than NPG, resulting in a higher anisotropy in the transport.
(a)
(b) 𝐸= 0.8 eV
(c) 𝐸= 0.6 eV
(d) 𝐸= 0.4 eV
(e) 𝐸= −0.4 eV
(f) 𝐸= −0.6 eV
(g) 𝐸= −0.8 eV
Figure 6.4: The allowed electronic bands determine the transmission in h­NPG when
injecting on GNRC. (a) Injection site inside GNRC. (b)­(g) Bond transmissions at different
energies. When injection on a forbidden band (d), the transmission gets significantly
diminished. Meanwhile, when injecting on an allowed band (e),transport is dominated by
a single ribbon.
58
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:67==
(a)
(b) 𝐸= 0.8 eV
(c) 𝐸= 0.6 eV
(d) 𝐸= 0.4 eV
(e) 𝐸= −0.4 eV
(f) 𝐸= −0.6 eV
(g) 𝐸= −0.8 eV
Figure 6.5: The allowed electronic bands determine the transmission in h­NPG when
injecting on GNRN. (a) Injection site inside GNRN. (b)­(g) Bond transmission at different
energies. When injection on a forbidden band (e), the transmission gets significantly
diminished. Meanwhile, when injecting on an allowed band (d), transport is dominated by
a single ribbon.
6.2.1
Transport in h­NPG: Spin Filter due to Ha
In this final section, we consider the role of a Ha, adsorbed on GNRN, at the center of the
entire device. The geometry consists of 17 × 90 cells,where the single hydrogen adatom
adsorbed on the GNRN, consisting of 1 × 7 unit cells was added to pristine h­NPG. Same
procedure was for pruning the Hamiltonian was followed, now considering spin polarized
calculations instead. We use the ungated NEGF­DFT Hamiltonian was used by keeping
the 𝑠orbitals of the Ha and the 𝑝𝑧of C and N. A shift to the 𝐸𝐹was introduced to match
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
59
==PAGE:68==
that of the 𝐸𝐹from TB electrodes.
Naturally, we consider as injection point, an atom inside the GNRN where the hydrogen
defect is located, approximately 13.8 nanometers below. We consider the same energies
as discussed before to directly compare with the pristine results and observe the effect
on the different electronic bands. We present these results in figure 6.6, together with the
total transmission from the injection point to the top electrode in the following table.
Transmission from injection point to top electrode
0.6 eV
0.4 eV
−0.4 eV
−0.6 eV
𝜎= ↑
0.0008
0.0002
0.0005
0.0125
𝜎= ↓
0.0297
0.0081
0.0005
0.0510
(a) 𝐸= 0.6 eV
(b) 𝐸= 0.4 eV
(c) 𝐸= −0.4 eV
(d) 𝐸= −0.6 eV
(e) 𝐸= 0.6 eV
𝜎=↑
(f) 𝐸= 0.4 eV
𝜎=↑
(g) 𝐸= −0.4 eV
𝜎=↑
(h) 𝐸= −0.6 eV
𝜎=↑
(i) 𝐸= 0.6 eV
𝜎=↓
(j) 𝐸= 0.4 eV
𝜎=↓
(k) −𝐸= −0.4 eV
𝜎=↓
(l) 𝐸= −0.6 eV
𝜎=↓
Figure 6.6: Spin filter effect of spin dependent bond transmissions through hydro­
gen adatom on h­NPG. (a)­(d) Bond transmissions for pristine h­NPG when injecting on
GNRN. (e)­(h) Spin­up bond transmissions for pristine h­NPGH when injecting on GNRN.
(i)­(l) Spin­down bond transmission for pristine h­NPGH when injecting on GNRN.
.
We observe that when injecting at the energies above the 𝐸𝐹, the Ha acts a spin fil­
60
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:69==
ter, allowing only transmission from spin­down component. Moreover, we observe that
for 𝐸= 0.6 eV, the defect is able to focus the bond transmission, acting as a focusing
lenses. The spin­transmission is 3 orders of magnitude larger for the spin­down compo­
nent. Injection at −0.4 eV doesn’t have any effect as the electron is not able to feel the
presence of the defect as it quickly leaks out of the GNRN. Injecting at −0.6 eV allows
both spins to transmit, with the spin­down being slightly larger and thus, doesn’t exhibit
significant spin filter effect. We attribute this out­standing behaviour to the presence of the
resonance­peak, and therefore, further research has to be guided towards understanding
and engineering these resonances.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
61
==PAGE:70==
7
Conclusion
In this master thesis, I presented a systematic study of electron­transport properties of
NPG and h­NPG by employing first­principle calculations. I explore the presence of mag­
netic defects as a way of designing new spintronic devices and consider the role of elec­
trostatic gating as a way of controlling the local magnetism around these defects. Among
some of our results, I find out that
• Transport of h­NPG presents higher anisotropic electron transport compared to pris­
tine NPG, resulting in confined bond transmissions along tenths of nanometers.
• Both Ha and SV defects present spin­polarized transmissions at energies corre­
sponding to those of the VB and CB, which are the relevant bands for transport.
Devices with such defects can potentially be used as spintronic devices.
• TB models and MF­Hubbard showed that the transport of Ha is strongly dependent
of the hydrogen 𝑠orbital and should not be treated as equal as a carbon vacancy.
• Doping through electrostatic gating can be used to control magnetism of Ha and SV.
• Ha in NPG present RKKY interactions that exhibit ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic
coupling depending on the sublattices they are placed.
Figure 7.1: Hydrogen adatoms in h­NPG allow spin­filtering. These could be potentially
exploited to develop spintronic devices.
Particularly, I observed that the presence of hydrogen adatom inside the GNRN of h­NPG
exhibited an interesting Fano­resonance in the transmission.
62
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:71==
7.0.1
Limitations and future work
Along some of the questions that remain open in this project are
• Why does a H defect in GNRC doesn’t exhibit similar transport behaviour?
. In this project, I did not explore the dependence of the transmission on the defect po­
sition. Particularly, closeness to the pore or bridges might alter the transport properties.
Particularly, the presence of N atoms close to the defect might be playing an important role
that we need to further investigate to get a final explanation for the transport behaviour.
• Full characterization of RKKY interaction.
Further efforts have to be carried out in order to completely characterized the RKKY
in these NPG materials by employing NEGF­DFT calculations, which remove periodic
boundary conditions of standard DFT calculations. However, I did not explore the whole
set of possible configurations to estimate the decay rate 𝑅−𝛼. More importantly, RKKY
interaction is highly dependent on the DOS at the 𝐸𝐹, something we have shown we can
control with doping using electrostatic gating. Thus is vital to further employ this interac­
tion under such conditions. Furthermore, it would be interesting to employ the NEGF­MF
Hubbard method for such purpose. For these it would be necessary to further parameter­
ize the coulomb repulsion 𝑈of the species involved.
• How is the electron transport when multiple magnetic deffects are placed on a GNR
in h­NPG?
I didn’t explore the effect of multiple defects, aligned along the longitudinal direction of the
GNR. I speculate that two defects, exhibiting ferromagnetic coupling, can act as Fabry­
Perot cavities, exhibiting distance­dependent transmission resonances.
• Does the geometry of the bridges can play a role in the spin transport when magnetic
defects are created?
In this project, we explore NPG materials with anti parallel bridges. However, it exist the
possibility of having parallel (’//’) bridges connecting the GNRs that has not been explored
in this project so far. Most papers show the properties of NPG materials as equal for
both kinds of bridges. I speculate that this might not be the case by just considering the
symmetries of the different structures.
• Single molecules at the pores
Another interesting direction would be to include polar molecules at the pores of h­NPG.
We believe we can employ these molecules to locally change the electronic properties of
the material.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
63
==PAGE:72==
Bibliography
[1]
Shubo Zhang. “Review of Modern Field Effect Transistor Technologies for Scaling”.
In: Journal of Physics: Conference Series 1617.1 (Aug. 2020), p. 012054. DOI:
10.1088/1742- 6596/1617/1/012054. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-
6596/1617/1/012054.
[2]
Ritu Gupta et al. Current state and perspectives of nanoscale molecular rectifiers.
Tech. rep.
[3]
Paven Thomas Mathew and Fengzhou Fang. “Advances in Molecular Electronics:
A Brief Review”. In: Engineering 4.6 (2018), pp. 760–771. ISSN: 2095­8099. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2018.11.001. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2095809918306453.
[4]
Arieh Aviram and Mark A. Ratner. “Molecular Rectifiers”. In: Chemical Physics Let­
ters 29.2 (1974), pp. 277–183.
[5]
M A Reed et al. Conductance of a Molecular Junction. Tech. rep. URL: https://
www.science.org.
[6]
R. Lloyd Carroll and Christopher B. Gorman. “The Genesis of Molecular Electron­
ics”. In: Angewandte Chemie International Edition 41.23 (2002), pp. 4378–4400.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/1521-3773(20021202)41:23<4378::AID-ANIE4378>
3.0.CO;2-A. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/1521-3773%
2820021202%2941%3A23%3C4378%3A%3AAID-ANIE4378%3E3.0.CO%3B2-A. URL:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/1521-3773%2820021202%2941%
3A23%3C4378%3A%3AAID-ANIE4378%3E3.0.CO%3B2-A.
[7]
Dong Xiang et al. “Molecular­Scale Electronics: From Concept to Function”. In:
Chemical Reviews 116.7 (2016). PMID: 26979510, pp. 4318–4440. DOI: 10.1021/
acs.chemrev.5b00680. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00680. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.5b00680.
[8]
Tianming Li, Vineeth Kumar Bandari, and Oliver G. Schmidt. “Molecular Electronics:
Creating and Bridging Molecular Junctions and Promoting Its Commercialization”.
In: Advanced Materials 35.22 (2023), p. 2209088. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.202209088. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/adma.
202209088. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adma.202209088.
[9]
Na Xin et al. “Concepts in the design and engineering of single­molecule electronic
devices”. In: Nature Reviews Physics 1.3 (Mar. 2019), pp. 211–230.
[10]
Ethan C. Ahn. 2D materials for spintronic devices. Dec. 2020. DOI: 10.1038/s41699-
020-0152-0.
[11]
Akinwande D, Petrone N, Hone J. “Two­dimensional flexible nanoelectronics ”. In:
Nature Communications 5 (2014). DOI: {https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms6678}.
[12]
Sheneve Z. Butler et al. “Progress, Challenges, and Opportunities in Two­Dimensional
Materials Beyond Graphene”. In: ACS Nano 7.4 (2013). PMID: 23464873, pp. 2898–
2926. DOI: 10.1021/nn400280c. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/nn400280c. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1021/nn400280c.
[13]
K. S. Novoselov et al. A roadmap for graphene. Oct. 2012. DOI: 10.1038/nature11458.
[14]
César Moreno et al. Bottom­up synthesis of multifunctional nanoporous graphene.
Tech. rep. URL: https://www.science.org.
[15]
Maria Tenorio et al. “Atomically Sharp Lateral Superlattice Heterojunctions Built­In
Nitrogen­Doped Nanoporous Graphene”. In: Advanced Materials 34.20 (May 2022).
ISSN: 15214095. DOI: 10.1002/adma.202110099.
64
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:73==
[16]
D. Ter Haar. “29 ­ ON THE THEORY OF PHASE TRANSITIONS”. In: Collected
Papers of L. D. Landau. Vol. 1. 1965, pp. 193–216. ISBN: 9780080105864. DOI:
10.1016/B978-0-08-010586-4.50034-1.
[17]
K S Novoselov et al. Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films. Tech. rep.
2000, p. 3824. URL: www.arXiv.org/quant-ph/.
[18]
Bae, Sukang and Kim, Hyeongkeun and Lee, Youngbin and Xu, Xiangfan and Park,
Jae Sung and Zheng, Yi and Balakrishnan, Jayakumar and Lei, Tian and Ri Kim,
Hye and Song, Young Il and Kim, Young Jin and Kim, Kwang S. and Özyilmaz, Bar­
baros and Ahn, Jong Hyun and Hong, Byung Hee and Iijima, Sumio. “Roll­to­roll
production of 30­inch graphene films for transparent electrodes”. In: Nature Nan­
otechnology 5.8 (Aug. 2010), pp. 574–578. ISSN: 17483387. DOI: 10.1038/nnano.
2010.132.
[19]
“The sp2 Nanocarbons: Prototypes for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology”. In: Ra­
man Spectroscopy in Graphene Related Systems. John Wiley Sons, Ltd, 2011.
Chap. 1, pp. 1–15. ISBN: 9783527632695. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527632695.
ch1. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/9783527632695.ch1.
URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/9783527632695.ch1.
[20]
A K Geim and K S Novoselov. The rise of graphene. Tech. rep. URL: www.nature.
com/naturematerials.
[21]
A. H. Castro Neto et al. “The electronic properties of graphene”. In: Reviews of
Modern Physics 81.1 (Jan. 2009), pp. 109–162. ISSN: 00346861. DOI: 10.1103/
RevModPhys.81.109.
[22]
Toshiaki Enoki, Shintaro Fujii, and Kazuyuki Takai. “Zigzag and armchair edges
in graphene”. In: Carbon 50.9 (2012). Festschrift dedicated to Peter A. Thrower,
Editor­in­Chief, 1972 ­ 2012, pp. 3141–3145. ISSN: 0008­6223. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.carbon.2011.10.004. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0008622311008232.
[23]
Young­Woo Son, Marvin L. Cohen, and Steven G. Louie. “Energy Gaps in Graphene
Nanoribbons”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 97 (21 Nov. 2006), p. 216803. DOI: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.97.216803. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.97.
216803.
[24]
C. Stampfer et al. “Tunable Coulomb blockade in nanostructured graphene”. In:
Applied Physics Letters 92.1 (Jan. 2008), p. 012102. ISSN: 0003­6951. DOI: 10.
1063/1.2827188. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/apl/article- pdf/doi/10.1063/
1.2827188/14388993/012102\_1\_online.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.
2827188.
[25]
Yuqing Xing et al. “Reversible switching of Kondo resonance in a single­molecule
junction”. In: Nano Research 15.2 (Feb. 2022), pp. 1466–1471.
[26]
Lars Fritz and Matthias Vojta. “The physics of Kondo impurities in graphene”. In:
Reports on Progress in Physics 76.3 (Feb. 2013), p. 032501. DOI: 10.1088/0034-
4885/76/3/032501. URL: https://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0034-4885/76/3/032501.
[27]
Mahesh Datt Bhatt, Heeju Kim, and Gunn Kim. Various defects in graphene: a re­
view. Aug. 2022. DOI: 10.1039/d2ra01436j.
[28]
Shantanu Mishra et al. Topological frustration induces unconventional magnetism
in a nanographene. Jan. 2020. DOI: 10.1038/s41565-019-0577-9.
[29]
Pavliček, Niko and Mistry, Anish and Majzik, Zsolt and Moll, Nikolaj and Meyer, Ger­
hard and Fox, David J. and Gross, Leo. “Synthesis and characterization of triangu­
lene”. In: Nature Nanotechnology 12.4 (May 2017), pp. 308–311. ISSN: 17483395.
DOI: 10.1038/nnano.2016.305.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
65
==PAGE:74==
[30]
Héctor González­Herrero et al. “Atomic­scale control of graphene magnetism by
using hydrogen atoms”. In: Science 352.6284 (2016), pp. 437–441.
[31]
Joachim A. Fürst et al. “Ab initio study of spin­dependent transport in carbon nan­
otubes with iron and vanadium adatoms”. In: Physical Review B ­ Condensed Matter
and Materials Physics 78.19 (Nov. 2008). ISSN: 10980121. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.
78.195405.
[32]
B R K Nanda et al. “Electronic structure of the substitutional vacancy in graphene:
density­functional and Green’s function studies”. In: New Journal of Physics 14.8
(Aug. 2012), p. 083004. DOI: 10.1088/1367-2630/14/8/083004. URL: https://dx.
doi.org/10.1088/1367-2630/14/8/083004.
[33]
Jinhua Hong et al. “Atomic Defects in Two­Dimensional Materials: From Single­
Atom Spectroscopy to Functionalities in Opto­/Electronics, Nanomagnetism, and
Catalysis”. In: Advanced Materials 29.14 (2017), p. 1606434. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1002/adma.201606434. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/
adma.201606434. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/adma.
201606434.
[34]
Gaetano Calogero et al. “Electron Transport in Nanoporous Graphene: Probing the
Talbot Effect”. In: Nano Letters 19.1 (Jan. 2019), pp. 576–581. ISSN: 15306992.
DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.8b04616.
[35]
Gaetano Calogero et al. “Quantum Interference Engineering of Nanoporous Graphene
for Carbon Nanocircuitry”. In: Journal of the American Chemical Society 141.33
(Aug. 2019), pp. 13081–13088. ISSN: 15205126. DOI: 10.1021/jacs.9b04649.
[36]
Isaac Alcón et al. “Electrochemical Control of Charge Current Flow in Nanoporous
Graphene”. In: Advanced Functional Materials 31.40 (Oct. 2021). ISSN: 16163028.
DOI: 10.1002/adfm.202104031.
[37]
Gaetano Calogero et al. “Large­scale tight­binding simulations of quantum transport
in ballistic graphene”. In: Journal of Physics Condensed Matter 30.36 (Aug. 2018).
ISSN: 1361648X. DOI: 10.1088/1361-648X/aad6f1.
[38]
Isaac Alcón, Aron W. Cummings, and Stephan Roche. “Tailoring giant quantum
transport anisotropy in nanoporous graphenes under electrostatic disorder”. In: Nanoscale
Horiz. 9 (3 2024), pp. 407–415. DOI: 10.1039/D3NH00416C. URL: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1039/D3NH00416C.
[39]
Alberto García et al. “Siesta: Recent developments and applications”. In: The Jour­
nal of Chemical Physics 152.20 (May 2020), p. 204108. ISSN: 0021­9606. DOI:
10.1063/5.0005077. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp/article-pdf/doi/10.1063/
5.0005077/16745439/204108\_1\_online.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.
0005077.
[40]
Nick Papior et al. “Improvements on non­equilibrium and transport Green function
techniques: The next­generation transiesta”. In: Computer Physics Communica­
tions 212 (Mar. 2017), pp. 8–24. ISSN: 0010­4655. DOI: 10.1016/j.cpc.2016.09.022.
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2016.09.022.
[41]
Feliciano Giustino. Materials modelling using density functional theory : properties
and predictions. 1st ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014, xiv, 286 pages :
illustrations (some color), 25 cm.
[42]
P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn. “Inhomogeneous Electron Gas”. In: Phys. Rev. 136 (3B
Nov. 1964), B864–B871. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRev.136.B864. URL: https://link.aps.
org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.136.B864.
[43]
W. Kohn and L. J. Sham. “Self­Consistent Equations Including Exchange and Cor­
relation Effects”. In: Phys. Rev. 140 (4A Nov. 1965), A1133–A1138. DOI: 10.1103/
PhysRev.140.A1133. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.140.A1133.
66
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:75==
[44]
Felix Bloch. “Über die Quantenmechanik der Elektronen in Kristallgittern”. In: Zeitschrift
für Physik 52 (1929), pp. 555–600. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
120668259.
[45]
Charles Kittel. Introduction to Solid State Physics. 8th ed. Wiley, 2004. ISBN: 9780471415268.
URL: http : / / www . amazon . com / Introduction - Solid - Physics - Charles - Kittel / dp /
047141526X/ref=dp_ob_title_bk.
[46]
N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin. Solid State Physics. Holt­Saunders, 1976.
[47]
John P. Perdew and Mel Levy. “Physical Content of the Exact Kohn­Sham Orbital
Energies: Band Gaps and Derivative Discontinuities”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (20
Nov. 1983), pp. 1884–1887. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.51.1884. URL: https://link.
aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.51.1884.
[48]
L. J. Sham and M. Schlüter. “Density­Functional Theory of the Energy Gap”. In:
Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (20 Nov. 1983), pp. 1888–1891. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.51.
1888. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.51.1888.
[49]
Diola Bagayoko. “Understanding density functional theory (DFT) and completing it
in practice”. In: AIP Advances 4.12 (Dec. 2014), p. 127104. ISSN: 2158­3226. DOI:
10.1063/1.4903408. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/adv/article-pdf/doi/10.1063/
1.4903408/12936758/127104\_1\_online.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.1063/1.
4903408.
[50]
Supriyo Datta. Quantum Transport Atom to Transistor. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 2005.
[51]
Juan Carlos Cuevas and Elke Scheer. “Molecular Electronics: An Introduction to
Theory and Experiment”. In: 2010. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
61104339.
[52]
B. J. van Wees et al. “Quantized conductance of point contacts in a two­dimensional
electron gas”. In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 60 (9 Feb. 1988), pp. 848–850. DOI: 10.1103/
PhysRevLett.60.848. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevLett.60.848.
[53]
R. Landauer. “Spatial Variation of Currents and Fields Due to Localized Scatterers
in Metallic Conduction”. In: IBM Journal of Research and Development 1.3 (1957),
pp. 223–231. DOI: 10.1147/rd.13.0223.
[54]
Henrik Bruus and Karsten Flensberg. “Many­body quantum theory in condensed
matter physics ­ an introduction”. In: 2004. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:117788036.
[55]
Nick Papior et al. “Manipulating the voltage drop in graphene nanojunctions using
a gate potential”. In: Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 18 (2 2016), pp. 1025–1031. DOI:
10.1039/C5CP04613K. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C5CP04613K.
[56]
David Griffiths. Introduction of Quantum Mechanics. Prentice Hall, Inc., 1995.
[57]
J. Mur­Petit, A. Polls, and F. Mazzanti. “The variational principle and simple proper­
ties of the ground­state wave function”. In: American Journal of Physics 70.8 (Aug.
2002), pp. 808–810. ISSN: 0002­9505. DOI: 10 . 1119 / 1 . 1479742. eprint: https :
//pubs.aip.org/aapt/ajp/article- pdf/70/8/808/7530218/808\_1\_online.pdf.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1119/1.1479742.
[58]
Y. Hancock et al. “Generalized tight­binding transport model for graphene nanoribbon­
based systems”. In: Physical Review B ­ Condensed Matter and Materials Physics
81.24 (June 2010). ISSN: 10980121. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.81.245402.
[59]
Daniele Stradi et al. “Field Effect in Graphene­Based van der Waals Heterostruc­
tures: Stacking Sequence Matters”. In: Nano Letters 17.4 (2017). PMID: 28263606,
pp. 2660–2666. DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b00473. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.nanolett.7b00473. URL: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.7b00473.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
67
==PAGE:76==
[60]
R. S. Mulliken. “Electronic Population Analysis on LCAO–MO Molecular Wave Func­
tions. I”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 23.10 (Oct. 1955), pp. 1833–1840.
ISSN: 0021­9606. DOI: 10.1063/1.1740588. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp/
article-pdf/23/10/1833/18807925/1833\_1\_online.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1063/1.1740588.
[61]
Mads Brandbyge et al. “Density­functional method for nonequilibrium electron trans­
port”. In: Phys. Rev. B 65 (16 Mar. 2002), p. 165401. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.65.
165401. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.65.165401.
[62]
Jakob Kjærulff Svaneborg et al. “Manipulation of magnetization and spin transport in
hydrogenated graphene with THz pulses”. In: Frontiers in Physics 11 (2023). ISSN:
2296424X. DOI: 10.3389/fphy.2023.1237383.
[63]
Fei Gao et al. “Control of the local magnetic states in graphene with voltage and
gating”. In: Physical Review B 103.24 (June 2021). ISSN: 24699969. DOI: 10.1103/
PhysRevB.103.L241402.
[64]
D. N. Aristov. “Indirect RKKY interaction in any dimensionality”. In: Phys. Rev. B
55 (13 Apr. 1997), pp. 8064–8066. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.55.8064. URL: https:
//link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.55.8064.
[65]
E. Kogan. “RKKY interaction in graphene”. In: Physical Review B 84.11 (Sept. 2011).
ISSN: 1550­235X. DOI: 10.1103/physrevb.84.115119. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1103/PhysRevB.84.115119.
[66]
Stephen R. Power and Mauro S. Ferreira. “Indirect Exchange and Ruderman–Kittel–
Kasuya–Yosida (RKKY) Interactions in Magnetically­Doped Graphene”. In: Crystals
3.1 (2013), pp. 49–78. ISSN: 2073­4352. DOI: 10.3390/cryst3010049. URL: https:
//www.mdpi.com/2073-4352/3/1/49.
[67]
M. Sherafati and S. Satpathy. “RKKY interaction in graphene from the lattice Green’s
function”. In: Phys. Rev. B 83 (16 Apr. 2011), p. 165425. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.
83.165425. URL: https://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevB.83.165425.
[68]
S. R. Power et al. “Dynamic RKKY interaction in graphene”. In: Physical Review
B 85.19 (May 2012). ISSN: 1550­235X. DOI: 10.1103/physrevb.85.195411. URL:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.85.195411.
[69]
P. D. Gorman et al. “RKKY interaction between adsorbed magnetic impurities in
graphene: Symmetry and strain effects”. In: Phys. Rev. B 88 (8 Aug. 2013), p. 085405.
DOI: 10 . 1103 / PhysRevB . 88 . 085405. URL: https : / / link . aps . org / doi / 10 . 1103 /
PhysRevB.88.085405.
[70]
Annica M. Black­Schaffer. “RKKY coupling in graphene”. In: (Jan. 2010). DOI: 10.
1103/PhysRevB.81.205416. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1001.4024%20http://dx.doi.
org/10.1103/PhysRevB.81.205416.
[71]
Sofia Sanz Wuhl et al. hubbard: v<fill­version>. 2023. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.4748765.
URL: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4748765.
[72]
Ali K Ismael, Iain Grace, and Colin J Lambert. Connectivity dependence of Fano
resonances in single molecules. Tech. rep.
[73]
A. Kormányos, I. Grace, and C. J. Lambert. “Andreev reflection through Fano reso­
nances in molecular wires”. In: Physical Review B ­ Condensed Matter and Materials
Physics 79.7 (Feb. 2009). ISSN: 10980121. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.79.075119.
[74]
Yan Zheng et al. “Fano Resonance in Single­Molecule Junctions”. In: Angewandte
Chemie ­ International Edition 61.40 (Oct. 2022). ISSN: 15213773. DOI: 10.1002/
anie.202210097.
[75]
Daijiro Nozaki et al. “Control of quantum interference in molecular junctions: Un­
derstanding the origin of Fano and anti­ resonances”. In: (Mar. 2012). DOI: 10 .
68
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:77==
1088/1742-6596/427/1/012013. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1203.5269%20http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/427/1/012013.
[76]
Magnus Paulsson and Mads Brandbyge. “Transmission eigenchannels from nonequi­
librium Green’s functions”. In: Physical Review B ­ Condensed Matter and Materials
Physics 76.11 (Sept. 2007). ISSN: 10980121. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevB.76.115117.
[77]
Kwangwoo Hong and Woo Youn Kim. “Fano­resonance­driven spin­valve effect us­
ing single­molecule magnets”. In: Angewandte Chemie ­ International Edition 52.12
(Mar. 2013), pp. 3389–3393. ISSN: 14337851. DOI: 10.1002/anie.201208816.
[78]
Hang Xie et al. “Complex absorbing potential based Lorentzian fitting scheme and
time dependent quantum transport”. In: Journal of Chemical Physics 141.16 (Oct.
2014). ISSN: 10897690. DOI: 10.1063/1.4898729.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
69
==PAGE:78==
70
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:79==
A
Benzene
Figure A.1: Occupied molecular orbitals of benzene.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
71
==PAGE:80==
B
Carbon vacancies and Hydrogen
adatom in h­NPG structures
Figure B.1: Localized state in h­NPGH, On the left, the Band structure of NPGh. The
fat­bands are projected to the atoms in the GNR. On the right, the PDOS for the GNR is
shown. (b)GNRs of h­NPG are shown. A hydrogen atom is adsorbed on top of a carbon
inside GNR𝑁.
72
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:81==
The following TB parameters were employed 𝑡1 = −2.7, 𝑡2 = 0.2, 𝑡3 = 0.18, Δribbon =
0.25,𝜖𝑁= −1.4, 𝑡𝐻= −3.75 ,𝜖𝐻= 3.15, 𝜖C’ = −5.75 eV.
Figure B.2: Comparison of electronic bands of h­NPGH calculated with DFT (right) and
TB model for describing the emergent localized state.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
73
==PAGE:82==
Figure B.3: Localized state in h­NPGvac. The fat­bands are projected to the atoms in the
different GNR. On the right, the PDOS onto the GNR is showed. (b) GNRs of h­NPG. A
carbon vacancy is generated at the center or GNRN.
The following TB parameters were employed: 𝑡1 = −2.7, 𝑡2 = 0.2, 𝑡3 = 0.18, Δribbon =
0.25,𝜖𝑁= −1.4 eV.
74
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:83==
Figure B.4: Comparison of electronic bands of h­NPGvac calculated with DFT (right) and
TB model for describing the emergent localized state.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
75
==PAGE:84==
C
Magnetic Defects
C.1
DOS of single magnetic Defects
The density can be calculated from the spectral function as the sum of the spectral function
from the different electrodes
𝜌A = ∑
𝑖
𝜌𝐴𝑖
(C.1)
where the spectral function corresponds to the scattering states injected from the 𝑖­th
electrode.
𝜌𝐴𝑖= 𝐺(𝐸)Γ𝑖𝐺†(𝐸)
(C.2)
However, Schrodinger’s equation accounts also for solution with bound­states, which can
be calculated from the total Green’s function
𝜌bound−states = 𝜌G −∑
𝑖
𝜌𝐴𝑖
(C.3)
Figure C.1: DOS as a function of electrostatic doping in h­NPGH. Red color correspond
to spin up, blue for spin down and gray for bulk.
76
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:85==
(a)
Figure C.2: DOS as a function of electrostatic doping in h­NPGvac. Red color correspond
to spin up, blue for spin down and gray for bulk.
C.2
MF­Hubbard
Figure C.3: Final on­site energies of MF­Hubbard­NEGF calculation of a Ha in h­NPG
device. The colors correspond to the on­site energies while the lines connecting the atoms
represent the hopping terms 𝑡up to third nearest neighbours.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
77
==PAGE:86==
C.3
Multiple Hydrogen Defects defects
C.3.1
Longitudinal transport along two defects
We consider the longitudinal transport along two Ha placed in the same carbon atoms
of different cells, separated by 𝑛= 1, 2, 3 unit cells. This defects adopt a ferromagnetic
coupling and exhibit the appearance of resonance peaks. We observe that these peaks
are shifted in energy depending on the distance between defects. By comparing the
different transmissions, 𝑇↑and 𝑇↓, we can see that the distance between defects can
exploited to create spin­filter behaviour.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure C.4: (a) Spin­up and spin­down (b) transmission for devices with two hydrogen
atoms separated by 𝑛= 1, 2, 3, 4 unit cells. (c)­(d) Comparison of spin transmission for
the different devices. Pristine transmission is shown in gray.
78
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:87==
C.3.2
Electrostatic control of two defects
We consider as a case study for testing electrostatic control of multiple defects by consid­
ering a system in which a second hydrogen atom is placed at a the same position, two unit
cells apart, with a separation distance 𝑑= 17.38 Å. This system exhibits ferromagnetic
coupling. We observe that similarly to one Ha, we can control the magnetism around two
defects through doping.
Figure C.5: Control spin of two defects in ferromagnetic configuration with electrostatic
gating. Charge doping corresponds to 𝑔× 1013 e/cm².
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
79
==PAGE:88==
D
Quantum Transport
D.1
Transmission Eigenchannels
(a) Im Eigen­channel
𝐸= 0.275 𝜎=↑
(b) Im Eigen­channel
𝐸= 0.275 𝜎=↓
(c) Im Eigen­channel
𝐸= 0.45 𝜎=↑
(d) Im Eigen­channel
𝐸= 0.45 𝜎=↓
Figure D.1: (a)­(d) Imaginary part of spin transmission eigen­channels for energies 𝐸=
0.275 eV and 𝐸= 0.45 eV. Isosurfaces are plotted for an isovalue of 0.05 Å
−3
80
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:89==
E
Large­Scale Transport
E.1
h­NPG
Figure E.1: Electronic bands comparison between parameter­free TB Hamiltonian and
DZP Hamiltonian for large­scale transport calculations.
Figure E.2: Set up overview of the large scale transport geometry of NPG. The red dot
indicates the injection point. The colour region corresponds to the CAP value. Top and
bottom electrodes are indicated in black. (a) GNRC (b) GNRN
E.2
h­NPGH
The device has dimensions of 557.37 Å in 𝑥and 0.68 Å, 789.77 Å. The number of atoms
in total is 123761 with one orbital each.
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure E.3: Set up overview of the large scale transport geometry of h­NPG with Hydrogen
adatom. The red dot indicates the injection point. The colour region corresponds to the
CAP value. Top and Bottom electrodes are indicated in blue
(a)
(b)
Figure E.4: Parameter­free TB band structure for h­NPGH region. (a) Spin­up and (b)
spin­down components.
82
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
==PAGE:91==
Electron transport in Nanoporous Graphene
83
==PAGE:92==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 118
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
