==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
DTU National Food Institute
22nd of June 2024
Integrating Livestock Movement Data in a Dynamic
Model for Spread and Surveillance of Newly
Infectious Agents in the Danish Pig Production
Master Thesis by
Anna Sophie Bjerremand Jensen, s174349
MSc in Quantitative Biology and Disease Modelling
Supervisor:
Per Håkan Vigre, Associate Professor,
Research Group for Genetic Epidemiology
==PAGE:2==
2
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
1
Preface
Use of AI tools
Throughout this thesis, some AI tools has been utilized to improve the content. ChatGPT-
3.5 was used to correct grammar, translate wordings, and assist in reformulating and
improve sentences which were challenging in construction. Overall, I consider AI to be
a valuable tool during the writing process. However, it is essential to maintain a clear
vision of the specific areas where assistance is needed, as it occasionally introduces filler
words and may alter sentences more than intended.
Additionally, ChatGPT was instrumental in resolving minor issues in the code during the
modeling process. I found it faster to ask it for the names of functions or packages, or how
to use them, rather than searching for this information online. In the process of developing
the interface for the model, ChatGPT has been incredibly valuable, especially given my
limited experience with Shiny. Here it has assisted in producing key portions of code,
which helped me understand the structure and allowed me to expand and incorporate
my desired inputs to the interface.
2
Acknowledgment
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Per Håkan Vigre for continuously
making time and meetings filled with valuable feedback and idea development. It has
been very beneficial that he took the time to have two weekly meetings, consistently
guiding and pushing the project in the right direction through our collaboration.
i
==PAGE:3==
CONTENTS
Contents
1
Preface
i
2
Acknowledgment
i
3
Abstract
1
4
Introduction
2
5
Materials and Methods
4
5.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
5.1.1
Data Management
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5.2
Model Construction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.2.1
Overall Model Composition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
5.2.2
Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
5.2.3
Module 1 - Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
5.2.3.1
Within Herd Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2.3.2
Between Herd Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2.4
Module 2a - Test at slaughter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.2.5
Module 2b - Visual inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.3
Application of model - Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.4
Sensitivity Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
6
Results
23
6.1
Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.2
Contact patterns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
6.3
Cases - Application of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.4
Sensitivity test of methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
Discussion
34
8
Conclusion
39
References
40
ii
==PAGE:4==
LIST OF FIGURES
Appendices
43
A Data Structure
43
B Packages and defined functions
44
C GitHub Link
46
D User Interface
47
E Utilizing the logistic growth model
48
F Movement Patterns
53
G Sensitivity Analysis
56
H Effect of assumptions and model choices on transmission
60
List of Figures
1
Flowchart of Data Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Overall flowchart of model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Flowchart for Module 1 - Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Flowchart of Module 2a - Test at slaughter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
Flowchart of Module 2b - Visual inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
6
Appearance of herds within 2020-2022
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
7
Sendings and Receivings exceeding max capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
8
Distribution of sendings and receiving between farm types
. . . . . . . .
26
9
Unique monthly contacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
10
Number of sending per Herd-pair
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
11
Contact Pattern for herd 2336659471 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
12
Impact of Movement Frequency on detection of Infectious Agent . . . . .
30
13
Impact of surveillance/test strategy on detection of of Virus
. . . . . . .
32
14
Supplementary - Data Structure; raw data snapshot . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
15
Supplementary - Screenshot of interface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
16
Supplementary - SIR flowchart . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
iii
==PAGE:5==
LIST OF TABLES
17
Supplementary - logistic curve; slow and fast beta . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
18
Supplementary - Difference in SI and logistic growt model
. . . . . . . .
52
19
Supplementary - Total Number of movements be Production type . . . .
53
20
Supplementary - Weekly & Monthly moved pigs . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
21
Supplementary - Netto flow of pigs based on production type . . . . . . .
54
22
Supplementary - Population flow of random herds . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
23
Supplementary - Sensitivity barchart; Total propagation during 2020-2022
56
24
Supplementary - Maximal difference for each herd across the different seeds
and introduction dates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
25
Supplementary - Bar chart spread for each index herd . . . . . . . . . . .
58
List of Tables
1
Variables in data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Model run times . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Observation sensitivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4
Distribution of Farm Types
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Supplementary - Sensitivity Summary Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
6
Effect of choises and assumptions made in the modelling process on the
transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
iv
==PAGE:6==
3
ABSTRACT
3
Abstract
This study presents a dynamic model designed to simulate the spread of newly introduced
infectious agents in the Danish Commercial pig production and the effect of surveillance.
The model specifically evaluates two main aspects: the total number of infected herds at
detection and the time from introduction to detection under various surveillance strate-
gies, and movement frequencies. With the model focusing highly on influence of move-
ments the model offers a rapid assessment grounded in the livestock network’s realities.
Searching the literature many models focus on specific viruses or bacteria when studying
disease prevention in the livestock production. The model presented in this thesis is flexi-
ble for various infectious agents and include all possible index herds. The model operates
through the following key features; i) Framework Design: Only infected farms appear in
the network, allowing the number of herds in the model to grow as the infection spreads.
ii) Modular Structure: The model is divided into modules each representing part of the
spread and surveillance. The first module simulates the full transmission over three years
for all possible index herds independent of surveillance strategies. Subsequent testing
modules are based on this transmission output. iii) Transmission Processes: Within-herd
infection runs in continuous day-day time via a logistic growth model, while livestock
data is integrated as scheduled events. Between-herd spread runs with a binomial model
using herd-prevalence at day of movement, reflecting real-world randomness.
Key findings highlight the significant impact of the index herd on the spread of infectious
agents. Herds with extensive networks significantly contribute to the spread directly link-
ing the extent of transmission to movement patterns, while herds with limited networks
show minimal spread and may naturally restrict the infection. The results demonstrate
the chaotic nature of transmission through the trade network, underscoring the benefit
of incorporating movement data for accurate spread prediction.
Overall, the model’s
general output, indicates that the final number of infected herds is more influenced by
the sampling intensity of the surveillance program than by transmission rates. However,
detection time is affected by the transmission rates with a fast transmission leading to
generally faster detection.
1
==PAGE:7==
4
INTRODUCTION
4
Introduction
The spread of infectious diseases in humans and animals, along with effective methods
to prevent such spread, have been topics of ongoing discussion throughout history. This
remains a significant point of concern in the modern Danish commercial pig production
today. While it is widely acknowledged that completely preventing introduction of infec-
tious agents into livestock is impossible, there is an increased focused on i) minimizing
the likelihood of introduction of foreign viruses and bacteria into the country, ii) Enhanc-
ing the robustness of production systems against uncontrolled spread upon introduction,
iii) Developing monitoring programs that can effectively detect the agents after their in-
troduction and iv) Management and restrictions upon detection. The work presented
in this thesis will be focused on surveillance and preventive measures before detection.
The model developed in this study is based on the scenario where and infectious agent
is introduced to an index herd within the Danish commercial pig production. It predicts
the transmission through the production network, estimating the spread and the time
until detection.
The Danish Food and Veterinary Authorities, in collaboration with the livestock indus-
try, play a crucial role in implementing regulations to minimize the impact of emerging
viruses and bacteria in livestock. Key components of this strategy include regulating in-
dustry structure and establishing sensitive monitoring systems to detect emerging agents
before they become widespread.
However, not all infectious agents cause immediate
symptoms, making their detection reliant on routine tests. Asymptomatic bacteria can
evade detection and persist in the system, potentially developing antimicrobial resistance
(AMR) over time, which can render antibiotics ineffective. Although these bacteria may
not harm animals directly, their AMR traits can transfer to more aggressive pathogens,
posing significant risks [1, 2].
Evidence suggests that symptomatic agents can be more readily detected through ob-
servation, allowing for faster responses. Symptomatic infections, like those of some viral
pathogens, can be identified due to visible signs of illness, prompting timely interventions.
In contrast, asymptomatic infections, such as many bacterial pathogens, depend on reg-
ular surveillance programs. These asymptomatic infections might go unnoticed without
2
==PAGE:8==
4
INTRODUCTION
frequent testing, leading to delays in detection. This delay underscores the importance
of robust surveillance systems that can monitor both symptomatic and asymptomatic
infections, thereby ensuring faster detection and response to outbreaks, which is critical
for maintaining the resilience of Danish pig production [3, 4]
Infectious agents spreads through livestock herds via various pathways. Most virus and
bacteria are transmitted from animal to animal by direct contact, or over short distances
by aerosols or feces. Indirect transmission through shared staff or equipment also plays
a role, with airborne transmission particularly important for initial introductions. After
introduction, animal movement between farms is often the most significant transmission
route. Thus, regulations focusing on animal movements are critical for improving the
robustness of primary production in Denmark in case of an emerging infection is intro-
duced [5, 6]. Managing of all livestock needs a structure which makes the population and
network able to withstand uncontrolled spread of an infection before it is detected and
can be effectively managed. This has led to the following questions of interest:
1. How does the underlying trade network of livestock play a role in disease spread
after introduction with a virus or bacteria?
2. What can be changed in the danish pig production to make it more robust against
foreign pathogens/agents ?
To answer these questions, There is a need to understand how surveillance and test
strategies are implemented in Denmark, as well as the movement patterns across all
danish herds.
Over time, multiple advancements have transformed the landscape of Danish pig move-
ments, fostering a more systematic approach in farm construction and inter-farm systems.
This systematic approach has led to the deliberate allocation of specific types of pigs to
different farms. This facilitates an established trade network between designated farms,
while reducing inter-farm contacts among multiple herds. All movement across herds
in Denmark is collected by the swine movement database (SMD), which is part of the
Central Husbandry Register (CHR) owned by The Danish Veterinary and Food Adminis-
tration. [7] [8] The trade register enable tracking of contacts between them. Additionally,
samples are routinely collected from slaughterhouses and analyzed for infection.
3
==PAGE:9==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Movements between herds and to slaughterhouses create a solid foundation for qualitative
analysis of the effects of these movements and testing strategies on disease dynamics.
However, many disease transmission models rely on numerous assumptions for practical
application, which can compromise their accuracy and validity in representing real-world
dynamics. Therefore, innovative approaches are needed that focus on incorporating only
the most essential information at each iteration. This ensures the model evolves with the
most relevant data, improving its accuracy and utility over time.
5
Materials and Methods
5.1
Data
EU regulations mandated the registration of herds of various livestock, including pigs.
A herd is defined as a geographical place where animals are temporarily gathered, such
as farms where pigs are reared and slaughterhouses. Upon registration, all farms are
assigned a CHR number(a specific herd ID) and the geographical location of the property.
Additionally, they are required to register the type of livestock they hold, the type of
production, and the number of animals they can accommodate under normal operating
conditions. The last mentioned was used as the mamimum herd capacity during this
study.
In Denmark, this data was stored in the Central Husbandry Register (CHR)
database, which updated daily given any changes [8]. Additionally, pig producers had to
report all movements of pigs, whether domestic or international, into the Swine Movement
Database (SMD), a subpart of the CHR database. The responsibility for registering pig
movements within Denmark lay with the recipient of the pigs [7]. The databases served
as crucial resources as they provided the project with real-time movement patterns across
all pig production in Denmark.
For this study, a dataset combining information from both CHR and SMD, encompassing
the period from 1st January 2020 to 31st December 2022, was provided by supervisor
Håkan Vigre. The data from SMD contained a record for each movement of pigs between
herds and from herds to slaughterhouses in Denmark. Each record specified the farm ID
from where the pigs were moved, the farm ID to where the pigs were moved, the date of
the movement, and the number of pigs that were moved. The data from CHR used in this
4
==PAGE:10==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
study was a monthly record for each farm about the type of production and the number
of pigs on the farm for the current month. Data from CHR were merged onto the SMD by
farm ID, so the capacity in the sending and receiving farms was known at each movement.
The structure of the dataset used for simulations is illustrated in Supplementary Figure
14 presented in appendix A. Before receiving data, all ID numbers had been masked due
to GDPR circumstances, so that no specific herd could be identified. It is therefore the
masked ID numbers that are presented throughout this thesis. All the variables found in
the data along with a description can be seen in Table 1 below.
Table 1: Variables in the combined data from CHR and SMD.
The table contains: Variable-names as they appear in the received raw data, a short description
of the information in each variable, an example of this information and the format when loaded
and used in R.
Variable
Description
Example
Format
DATE_MOVEMENT
The date of the given movement
01.01.2022
Date
farmID_SENDER
An 8 digit ID unique to the sending herd
2336578985
Num
farmID_RECEIVER
An 8 digit ID unique to the receiving herd
2336986346
Num
SENDER_FARMTYPE
production type of the sending herd + 4 digit ID unique to the type
15 11 Svineproduktion
Chr
RECEIVER_FARMTYPE
production type of the receiving herd + 4 digit ID unique to the type
15 68 Svineslagteri
Chr
SENDER_N_PIGS
Capacity of the sending herd
1050
Num
RECEIVER_N_PIGS
Capacity of the receiving herd
15000
Num
N_MOVED_PIGS
Total number of pigs moved between sending and receiving herd
506
Num
The raw data consisted of 793,988 records, each representing a movement of pigs between
2020 and 2022. Of these movements, more than half (477,979) were destined for slaugh-
ter, while the rest were distributed among the remaining five farm types: Production,
Breeding and Multiplication, Piglet, Organic, and Free-range herds. A total of 6,005
herds were registered to be involved in pig production in Denmark within the specified
period.
5.1.1
Data Management
Several adjustments were performed on the raw data prior to its utilization in the model.
Consequently, this resulted in the usage of a reduced number of herds in the model
compared to what was initially registered, hence a reduction in the number of records.
The process of managing the data has been outlined in the flow diagram shown in Figure
1.
5
==PAGE:11==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A total of 18 herds (excluding slaughterhouses) had not disclosed their capacity at any
point during the 3-year period of this study. These herds had NA or zero capacity, which
was considered equivalent to not existing and were therefore excluded from the data.
Figure 1: Flowchart of Data restriction, based on 3 criteria: i) Exclude herds that have not
disclosed their capacity. ii) Excluding movements involving small herds. Small herds is defined
as herds with a capacity of less than 100 pigs. iii) Limit slaughterhouses to those managed by
Danish Crown or Tican in Denmark. (Defined as 10 largest by total number pigs received).
Herds with few pigs were categorized as hobby herds as well as petting pigs in private
households and generally not part of the commercial pig production in Denmark. There-
fore, a cutoff value was set to 100 pigs, where all herds with fewer were categorized as
small herds. Additionally, only movement of pigs to slaughterhouses managed by Danish
Crown and Tican in Denmark were included, whereas movement to small private slaugh-
terhouses were excluded. The private slaughterhouses encompass, for instance, local or
6
==PAGE:12==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
small private slaughters. Consequently, a total of 10 out of 72 slaughterhouses were in-
cluded in the model. [9] These were identified based on the total number of pigs sent to
slaughter at each unique slaughterhouse within the entire period. Slaughterhouses were
the final link in the infection chain, and removal of the small ones would not impact the
transmission pattern. However, as illustrated in Figure 1, this decision also led to the
exclusion of 21 herds of various types which did not supply to any of the major slaugh-
terhouses at any point during the 3-year period. Upon the filtering process, the dataset
comprised 5427 unique herds, distributed across all 6 farm types (seen in Table 4 section
6.1) and included 703,740 movements over 3 years.
In addition to the described data restriction, a data frame was created to store essential
information for each herd, including farm ID, farm type, and capacity. This approach
was decided upon as the information was initially stored in the raw data in an imprac-
tical manner, necessitating repetitive extraction and filtering. The construction of this
data frame was based on variables from the raw data, divided into sender and receiver
categories (see Table 1). To ensure inclusion of all unique herds, information from both
sender and receiver variables was combined. This process involved: i) Filtering based
on sender variables (farmID_SENDER, SENDER_FARMTYPE, and SENDER_N_PIGS), removing
duplicates, and keeping one unique record per herd. ii) Repeating the filtering for re-
ceiver variables. iii) Combining the information from both steps and removing duplicates
of herds involved in both sending and receiving. The resulting information was stored
in a new data frame under the variables Farmid, Farm_type, and N_pigs. Since the
data spans several years, some farm types and capacities changed, resulting in multiple
records for these herds. To address this, the year of information extraction (based on
DATE_MOVEMENT) was added under the variable Year. It was decided to keep the farm
type and capacity constant over the three-year period. These values were determined
based on the earliest registration, utilizing the added Year variable. Consequently, the
majority of the herds’ capacities and farm types reflect the situation in the first year of
the study, 2020.
7
==PAGE:13==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
5.2
Model Construction
The model developed for this study aimed to simulate: i) The spread of a disease-causing
agent or a resistant non-disease-causing agent. These were demonstrated with a virus
and an antimicrobial-resistant bacteria. ii) The time, in days, until detection of the agent
after its introduction into an index herd. iii) The total number of herds infected at the
point of detection. The model was built using data from the primary pig production
in Denmark, involving the movement of pigs across herds when simulating. The model
includes flexibility such that it can operate with different populations of livestock pro-
duction in a country, where the animals are distributed in herds and connected by the
movement of animals. However, for the sake of readability, the model will exclusively be
described for pigs going forward.
The model was built using R 4.2.3 and RStudio Version 2024.04.1+748. Primarily, func-
tions and packages available in base R and common packages like the tidyverse library
were utilized in the model work. However, a few specific packages are worth mentioning
as they were particularly useful for specific goals of the model: shiny and shinyjs for
developing the user interface, and minpack.lm for optimization tasks. Additionally, the
packages magick, network, statnet, scales, and av were used to create dynamic GIFs
that illustrate the network of a herd developing over time. A complete list of all packages
used in the development of this model can be found in Appendix B. The code repository
containing the full model and additional scripts used to produce all outputs for this thesis
is public accessible on GitHub. (the URL link is provided in Appendix C)
5.2.1
Overall Model Composition
The model is built of three main simulation modules and a module for visualization of the
final results. An overview of the flow through the different compartments of the model
is illustrated in Figure 2.
The model is designed to simulate the transmission of a disease-causing agent or antimicrobial-
resistant bacteria within pig herds. It is controlled through an interface where the neces-
sary parameters are registered, and based on these choices, the modules are executed.
8
==PAGE:14==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Figure 2: Flowchart showing overall model structure.
The flowchart illustrates the model structure for simulating disease transmission in pig herds. The shapes
represent different operations and choices: light blue squares for preparation scripts, dark blue squares
for model modules, a gray square for the user interface, green diamonds for decision points, and cream-
colored shapes for data storage. The arrows indicate the possible routes through the entire model, all
controlled by parameters set in the interface.
The flowchart outlines the overall structure and key decision points of the model: i)
Preload Data: Due to GDPR restrictions, the raw data is not published with the model.
Instead, the model runs with stored data from pre-executed simulations representing
different scenarios.
This allows the model to operate without raw data, covering six
transmission scenarios with two transmission rates (β = 0.05 and β = 0.2) and three
movement frequencies (100%, 50%, and 33%). ii) Movement Frequency (Movefreq): If
raw data is accessible, this choice runs a script that prepares the data by consolidating
multiple moves into one before running the transmission module. The reduction affects
the frequency of movements but not the number of pigs moved; all pigs from the consol-
idated movements are sent in the first of these movements. Movements to slaughter are
9
==PAGE:15==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
kept constant and are not subject to frequency reduction. The extent of the reduction in
movement frequency is based on the user’s settings and can range from 1% to 100% of the
original movement pattern. iii) Symptoms: This decision point determines whether both
test modules should be executed. If the infection does not produce clinical symptoms, the
visual inspection module is skipped, as observing asymptomatic animals is unnecessary.
The main modules in the model included: Transmission (Module 1): Ran a full trans-
mission simulation where each iteration was a new possible index herd, predicting their
transmission pattern over the three-year period. The index herds included all herds reg-
istered at the time of introduction of the infectious agent, set to February 1st, 2020 and
sums up to 5311 herds. Upon completion, the outcome data was stored for use in subse-
quent test modules. Test at Slaughter (Module 2a): Simulated the process of sampling
at abattoirs, testing at laboratories, and returning test results. It generated a data frame
with results for each index herd, used in Module 3 to produce visual results. Visual
Inspection (Module 2b): Simulated unstructured testing through natural observations of
pigs in each herd. This module operated based on the type of agent infecting the herd.
If the agent was disease-causing, symptoms triggered this module’s operation. For exam-
ple the case of a resistant bacteria, which spread without causing symptoms, bypassed
this module. Visualization Module 3: This module compiles information from the other
modules and creates visual outputs for the user.
Splitting the model into multiple modules provided flexibility, enabling users to run mul-
tiple simulations with different initial parameters in the test modules without repeating
the transmission simulation in module 1. This modular design also allowed the model to
be executed without the raw data. Additionally, it was possible to use completely default
parameters, allowing users to obtain results directly.
5.2.2
Interface
When executing the shiny script for the interface, it opened a window from which all
flexible parameters could be controlled. Users could set the desired parameters and click
the "Run Model" button to initialize and run all scripts, saving outputs to a result folder.
An illustration of the interface is presented in Supplementary Figure 15 in Appendix D.
The implementation of an interface allowed users to input parameters without needing
10
==PAGE:16==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
to understand the underlying structure of the model. Due to GDPR regulations, the
raw data has not been published with the model and is therefore not included when
downloading the model repository from GitHub. If the user did not have access to the
raw data, the interface limited options to default parameters corresponding to previously
run simulations described in section 5.3, while parameters in test modules (module 2a
and 2b) remained flexible. However, if users had access to properly stored raw data,
the interface provided more options.
The data had to be in a folder named "Raw"
within the project’s Data folder and follow the structure shown in appendix A. Additional
parameter options included selecting a movement frequency between 1-100%, where 100%
used all movements in the data. Users could also choose a different transmission rate by
either inputting the specific rate directly or opting to estimate it.
For estimation of
β, a nonlinear model estimator was implemented directly in the interface. It took two
vectors as input; one containing time data and another containing corresponding counts
of infected cases. The estimation was performed using nonlinear least squares regression
(nlsLM function in R) to fit a logistic growth model to the provided data. The logistic
growth model assumed that the rate of change of infected cases followed a sigmoidal
curve over time. The model was parameterized by the carrying capacity (N) and the
growth rate (β). The formula used for the logistic model was the one used for within-
herd transmission which will be presented in section 5.2.3.1 equation 1. The estimation
process attempted to find the values of N and β that best fit the provided data. The
initial guess for N was set to the maximum value in the inputted infected vector, and
the initial guess for β was set to 0.1. The accuracy of the beta estimation might vary,
especially for high transmission rates, and the accuracy generally improved with more
input data. If the input vectors contained fewer than two elements each or if their lengths
did not match, an error message was returned. This implementation provided a basic
estimation of the transmission rate parameter, which could be a useful feature in certain
applications, although it might not always provide highly accurate results, especially in
complex scenarios.
Furthermore, users could choose whether the infection caused clinical symptoms. This
parameter determined whether module 2b (visual inspection) should be run. The last
flexible parameters were used in module 2a and were adjustable with or without raw
data. These parameters involved the total number of daily tests taken at slaughter and
11
==PAGE:17==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
the sensitivity of the test. Several default values were included, allowing the model to
run without performing any simulation, resulting in an output within seconds. The time
frame for running the complete model depended on the number of default parameters
used. A summary of approximate times for model execution can be seen in table 2.
Table 2: Model run times
Movement Frequency
Beta, Transmission rate
# Samples
Time
(Approx)
Default
(100%, 50%, 33%)
Default
(0.05, 0.2)
Default
(5, 50)
6 -10 sec
Customized
30-50 min
Customized
Customized
3.5 - 5 hour
Customized
Customized
Customized
4 - 5.5 hour
The table illustrates that initiating custom parameters early in the modeling process ne-
cessitated running more modules. This is because each part of the model builds on results
obtained in preceding steps. (Note that the two test modules, 2a and 2b, ran simulta-
neously and were independent.) Consequently, customizing a parameter like movement
frequency required running all model components, regardless of whether default values
were selected for other parameters.
5.2.3
Module 1 - Transmission
This part of the model simulated the full transmission pattern, initializing each index
herd with an agent and following the chain of infection. By running this module, the
complete disease pattern for each Danish herd registered in 2020 across all herds within
the period 2020-2022 was obtained.
The goal during the model’s construction was to achieve a short simulation time frame.
To achieve this, it was decided to build a model that dynamically expanded the number of
included herds as the disease spread from the index herd throughout its network. Initially,
only the index herd was included, progressively adding herds as they became infected by
receiving infected pigs from other infected herds. The index herd was initialized with just
one infected pig, from where the infection spread both within and across herds. When
12
==PAGE:18==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
the infection was transmitted to other herds, they were initialized with the number of
infected pigs received and became registered as an infected herd.
For each iteration,
records corresponding to movements from all infected herds were extracted from the
data, ensuring the entire transmission pattern was captured. The flow within this model
is illustrated in figure 3.
Figure 3: Flowchart for Module 1 - Transmission.
The flowchart shows the transmission from indroduction of an agent in an index herd and through its
network from 2020 to 2022. The diagram include distinct shapes and colors to represent operations and
choices within the module. Blue rectangles represent a process or an operation, grey square represent
manual input (interface), parallelograms represent data and the diamond represent a decision. The green
diamonds represent if-statements where as the gold colored diamonds represent a loop.
The arrows
indicate the direction of the flow, which in all cases end in the Grey hexagon collecting data produced
in this module to use for the final output.
The implementation of this module was based on three key assumptions. i) Initial disease
introduction occurred in only one herd in Denmark during the entire period of the study.
Hence, all transmission originated from this herd (the index herd). ii) Infection could
solely be transmitted by direct contact between infected and susceptible pigs belonging to
13
==PAGE:19==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
a registered herd in Denmark hence transmitted via movement of infected pigs between
herds. iii) The time between an animal becoming infected and being able to transmit the
infection is 1 day. These assumptions were guided by expert advice from Håkan Vigre,
who emphasized that movement of animals significantly outweighs other transmission
routes in contributing to the overall spread, which is also indicated in the literature. [5].
The first while loop simulated each index herd individually, filling 2 data frames for each
iteration. One data frame stored information capturing the infection chain over time,
whereas the other kept number of infected pigs sent to slaughter over time. The data
frames were added to a large list stored under the name of the farmID of the index herd,
before resetting for the next iteration. The second while loop, incorporated an event-
based structure, where each iteration corresponded to a date where a relevant movement
occured. Relevant movements were defined as the next movement from any infected herd
to a non-infected herd or a slaughterhouse after the current date. This structure led to
varying time frames for each index herd, with differences in the number of iterations and
the size of the time steps. Both of these variations depended on when and if the next
relevant movement occurred. Each iteration(event) starts by updating the prevalence in
all the infected herds (Within herd transmission described in section 5.2.3.1), by running
a logistic growth model with the amount of days since last event. Then the movement
at the event-date was extracted from the data. Sometimes multiple relevant movements
happened on this date, which was handled in the last loop. This loop iteratively went
through all extracted relevant moves and checked weather any infected pigs were in-
cluded.(Between Herd transmission described in section5.2.3.2). If any infected pigs were
included the destination of the movement was checked. If the destination was slaughter
the number of infected pigs and the event date was registered in the corresponding data
frame. Otherwise the receiving herd would by registered as infected and the farmID,
date of infection and initial number of infected were registered in the other data frame,
before proceeding to the next relevant move. Once this process was complete, the out-
put list contained information for all 5311 index herds, marking the completion of the
transmission simulation.
14
==PAGE:20==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
5.2.3.1
Within Herd Transmission
Modeling transmission within each infected herd was necessary since the prevalence was
used in determining the parallel running between herd transmission. The simple SI model
was initially chosen for this purpose. However, the SI model was rewritten to mimic the
logistic growth model, which offered some advantages given the event-based structure, as
it could calculate the number of infected at any given time instead of going through time
iteratively. (See Appendix E for a more detailed mathematical explanation of going from
SI to logistic growth model, as well as transformation to a function of time.)
The model used to estimate the number of infected pigs within each infected farm over
time is given as:
I(t) = NCeβt
1 + Ceβt,
C =
I0
N −I0
(1)
Here, N represents the capacity of each herd limiting the total number of infected, and β
is the specific transmission rate corresponding to the analyzed infection. The time t was
inputted as days since introduction and I0 as the number of initially infected pigs in the
herd. By recording the introduction date of the agent and the number of initially infected
animals for each herd, this model efficiently computed within-herd transmission. This
provided the prevalence for any infected farm at any given time point, thereby eliminating
the need for iterative daily computations.
when simulating the spread using the logistic growth model the following assumptions
were established: i) The population within each herd were held constant. Hence in- and
outflow of pigs due to birth, deaths and movements were neglected.
The size of the
population was set to always be at maximum capacity. ii) The infection was uniformly
distributed among all pigs in a herd, meaning that each pig has an equal probability of
being infected. iii) the transmission rate (β) was constant across all herds in Denmark,
ignoring type of production, different contact between pigs, etc.
vi) Only the initial
movement of infected pigs into a non-infected herd was registered, while all subsequent
movement of infected pigs into the herd was ignored. This meant that only the first
receiving of infected pigs affected the within-herd-transmission in a given herd. Conse-
quently, movements of pigs in the model consisted solely of using the initial number of
infected pigs to establish the herd in the logistic growth model, while the capacities of
15
==PAGE:21==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
the two involved herds remained unchanged
5.2.3.2
Between Herd Transmission
The spread between herds was dependent on the prevalence in each infected herd and,
unlike within-herd transmission, involved stochasticity. To model the outcome of each
movement between infected and uninfected herds, the binomial distribution was used.
This probability distribution described the number of successes in a fixed number of
independent Bernoulli trials, where each trial had two possible outcomes: fail or success.
The Binomial distribution is given as:
X ∼(n, ps)
(2)
X represent the number of success (number of infected pigs in the movement) and follows
a binomial distribution with n trials (total number of pigs in the movement) each with a
probability ps of success (probability of being infected for each pig in the movement). By
using the binomial distribution it introduced some stochasticity to the model representing
the natural randomness and variability observed in disease transmission. The effect of
this stochasticity is explored later in section 6.4. Three assumptions were made under
implementation. i) As the infection was assumed uniformly distributed in the within-herd
transmission, the chance of including an infected pig in a movement was likewise uniformly
distributed (ps = Prev). ii) Upon introduction, the infection can not be removed from
the herd. iii) Only movements to non-infected herds and slaughter were included based
on the assumption that subsequent receptions of infected pigs would not be included in
within-herd transmission.
5.2.4
Module 2a - Test at slaughter
This module represented the surveillance program conducted at slaughterhouses.
It
used output data from the simulation executed in the previously described Transmis-
sion module, which generated two data frames for each index herd. This data, along with
surveillance parameters set by the user in the interface, were used for initialization. The
surveillance parameters included the number of daily samples taken across the 10 largest
slaughterhouses (n_test) and the combined sensitivity of the test (test_sensitivity).
This combined sensitivity accounted for both the sensitivity of the laboratory test used
16
==PAGE:22==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
to analyze the samples and the reduced concentration resulting from pooling samples to-
gether. Additionally, the initialization of this module involved calculating the total daily
number of pigs sent to any of the largest slaughterhouses. This total was used during the
simulation to determine the combined prevalence at slaughter, which was essential for
the sampling and testing process. The last step of initialization included removing move-
ments to slaughter on Fridays, Saturdays, and Sundays, as it was assumed no sampling
was conducted during the weekends including Fridays. The Dynamics of the simulation
in this module can be followed in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Flowchart for Module 2a - Test at Slaughterhouses.
The flowchart shows the process of the surveillance program at slaughterhouses. Blue rectangles repre-
sent operations, grey squares indicate manual inputs, parallelograms denote data, and diamond shapes
represent decisions. green diamond is if statements while the gold diamond are loops. Arrows indicate
the direction of the flow based on these decisions.
The flow chart shows a for-loop which iterated through all farmIDs (index Herds) to
achieve a detection date and the number of infected herds at detection for each. The
while loop ran based on a detection flag, which was turned on when any test result came
17
==PAGE:23==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
back positive. If no test was positive during the 3-year period, the loop also broke due to
lack of movements, and the detection date was set to the first date of the next year, with
the number of infected herds being the maximum number of herds in this transmission
chain. Samples were taken every day during the week (Monday - Thursday). However,
results from the laboratory were assumed to only come back on Mondays. This meant
a sample taken on a Monday-Thursday in one week, if tested positive in the lab, would
first be registered as positive the following Monday. Therefore, the first step in the while
loop was to check the latest test results. If any result came back positive, the current
date and number of infected herds were recorded, and the detection flag was turned on.
This broke the loop and started an iteration for the next farm ID.
Like in Module 1 (Transmission), this module also ran on an event-based time frame. The
while loop processed all days/events where infected pigs were sent for slaughter, meaning
the number and size of iterations varied from index herd to index herd. This structure
was based on the assumption of no false positives, ensuring a specificity of 100%. It
was assumed that supporting tests would be conducted in case of a positive outcome to
eliminate any doubt. This assumption eliminated the need to sample on days when no
infected pigs were sent to slaughter. On relevant days, n samples were taken and sent for
analysis, where n was a flexible number set by the user in the interface, with a default
of 5 samples per day. The test function ran based on a binomial distribution which has
been described under between-herd transmission, section 5.2.3.2. However, as the specific
number of successes (positive outcomes) were not of interest in this section, the question
in the binomial was modified to test if one or more test results were positive, which was
given by:
P(X ≥1) = 1 −P(X = 0)
Where P(X = 0) was the probability of getting no successes (no positive test results).
P(X = 0) =

n
0

· p0 · (1 −p)n = (1 −p)n
Here n represented the number of trials (daily samples) and p the probability of success
corresponded to the combined daily prevalence across the 10 largest abattoirs. Therefore
18
==PAGE:24==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
the probability of at least one positive test was given by:
P(positive) = 1 −(1 −p)n
Practically this probability was used in the binomial function. X ∼(n, 1, P(positive))
which gave either 1 or 0 corresponding to a positive or negative test result respectively.
After completing the test process for all index herds the data frame contained detection
date and number of infected farms at detection was saved in the Data folder for usage in
the visualization module where the final model outputs were created.
5.2.5
Module 2b - Visual inspection
This Module was designed to represent the daily visual assessment of animals within a
herd. Naturally if a large proportion of animals in a herd was showing clinical symptoms of
a disease it would be caught by the personnel at some point. Therefore this compartment
was included as a part of the disease detection. However some agents does not necessarily
cause any visual symptoms and therefore, if the model was used on one of these infectious
agents (pathogen set to true in interface), this part was skipped. A flowchart of the
dynamics in the module is visualized in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Flowchart for Module 2b - Visual inspection in herds.
The flowchart shows the process of natural observation of the pigs on any herd. Blue rectangles represent
operations, Grey square indicate manual input, parallelograms denote data, and Gold diamond shapes
represent decisions via a loop. Arrows indicate the direction of the flow based on the decisions.
19
==PAGE:25==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
This module also used data obtained from the transmission module in the initialization.
This structure was based on just one loop, which iterated through all index herds. The
first step was to assign a prevalence to all infected herds in each transmission chain
reflecting the extend of spread when the agent would be detected by the personnel. This
was done with a function that used a binomial distribution to simulate at which sensitivity
the symptoms in the herd was noticed.
X ∼(N, 1, S)
Where N represented the number of possible sensitivities, 1 meaning the outcome would
be 1 or 0 and S was a vector containing all the sensitivities. The sensitivities was therefore
used as the probability of success. The outcome was a vector of N successes. The lowest
sensitivity that gave a positive result was then chosen and the corresponding prevalence
was assigned to the given herd. Next step was to find at which time the given herd
reached this specific prevalence and what the propagation was at this timepoint. This
was achieved by modifying the previously described logistic growth model, such that it
took a target amount of infected (calculated by the prevalence) and outputted at which
time this was achieved. The modified growth model is given by:
t(Itarget) =
log

(N−I0)·Itarget
I0·(N−Itarget

β
Where Itarget is the number of infected pigs equivalent to a specific prevalence in the herd,
I0 is the number of initially infected pigs in the herd, N is the capacity of the herd, and
β is the transmission rate. The result is the date t at which the herd reaches the specific
prevalence. This date is then used to find the the number of infected farms at detection
time.
A record for each farmID was stored containing; farmID of the index herd, the farmID of
the herd where the disease was first detected, the prevalence at detection, the detection
date and the propagation.
20
==PAGE:26==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
5.3
Application of model - Cases
The model was initialized with an index herd and a specific date as the initial introduc-
tion point. The introduction date, set to February 1st, 2020, accounted for potential
delays in movement registrations around holidays and the new year. By pushing back
the introduction date by a month, a possible over-representation of movements within
the initial period of the model was avoided. With the disease introduced on a specific
date, some herds were excluded from being initialized as the index herd. Only herds
registered in 2020 were utilized for initialization, while 10 of these represented the larger
slaughterhouses and were therefore excluded. This resulted in simulating the model with
a total of 5311 herds as the index herd.
To illustrate the capabilities of this model, two distinct scenarios were selected: one
representing a disease-causing agent and the other a non-disease-causing agent. The first
scenario involved a fast transmission rate (β = 0.2), representing a viral outbreak, while
the second scenario featured a slow transmission rate (β = 0.05), mimicking an outbreak
of non disease causing antimicrobial-resistant bacteria.
In the first scenario, the bacterial transmission rate was used to assess the effect of dif-
ferent movement frequencies on the spread and time of detection. Movement frequencies
were tested at 100%, 50%, and 33% of all movements between herds, while maintaining a
constant test intensity of five daily tests at slaughterhouses with an 85% sensitivity. The
movement frequency to slaughter remained constant, and this scenario did not involve
visual inspections.
In the second scenario, the viral transmission rate was utilized to evaluate the effect of
different test intensities at slaughter versus visual inspections by personnel in each herd
again evaluated on the total spread and time of detection. The movement frequency was
kept constant at 100%, while the number of tests and their sensitivity varied. Sensitiv-
ity changes resulted from sample pooling when the number of tests increased, leading
to lower sensitivity. Test intensities included five daily tests with 85% sensitivity and
fifty daily tests with 70% sensitivity. This variation was compared against the effect of
visual inspections, which was based on the sensitivity of observing the infection given the
prevalence in the herd. The specific parameters are given in Table 3 and are not flexible
21
==PAGE:27==
5
MATERIALS AND METHODS
parameters in the current model.
Table 3: Table of herd prevalence and the corresponding sensitivity of observing the infection
at the given prevalence
Prevalence
0.05
0.07
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
0.90
1.00
Sensitivity
5%
7%
10%
20%
40%
50%
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
99%
100%
5.4
Sensitivity Analysis
A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the impact of certain model choices on
the final model output. Two analyses were undertaken: one to examine the influence
of stochasticity in transmission and another to evaluate the effect of the introduction
date. These choices were pivotal in the initial module of the model (Transmission), with
the resulting transmission chain utilized in subsequent simulations. The objective was to
assess the extent of their influence, hence the sensitivity analyses were exclusively focused
on this module. Throughout all simulations, movements remained constant. It’s worth
noting that the logistic growth model results do not include stochasticity; they yield
consistent outcomes when identical parameters are applied. Therefore, by maintaining
a constant introduction date, the only variation in the infection chain within Module
1 arises from the randomness incorporated in the between-herd transmission, simulated
using a binomial function. Consequently, the sensitivity analysis involved running the
model across 10 different seeds, with infection consistently introduced on January 1,
2020. The variability in infection across these 10 seeds directly reflects the impact of
the binomial distribution function, allowing for an assessment of its resultant effect. The
seeds used were: 4700, 8353, 4291, 8332, 6503, 7709, 3503, 1847, 5637, and 3982.
The second sensitivity analysis involved varying the start date and assessing resulting
differences in infection patterns. The introduction date of the infection was tested across
five different starting points within the first quarter of 2020, specifically: January 1, 2020;
January 15, 2020; February 1, 2020; March 2, 2020; and March 31, 2020.
22
==PAGE:28==
6
RESULTS
6
Results
In this section results from a data analysis as well as results of applying the cases described
in section 5.3 to the model, will be presented.
6.1
Data
The data used in this study spans 3 years, during which the composition of herds changes
slightly, with some herds being added, removed, or changed. The Venn-diagram in Figure
6 illustrate the appearance of herds over this period.
Figure 6: This Venn diagram represents the appearance of herd composition over the years 2020, 2021,
and 2022. Each circle corresponds to one year, displaying;
(Total) - the total number of herds in a given year, (\) - herds unique to that year, (∩) - herds present
in both/all respective years (∪) - total herds combining the respective years.
Looking at year 2020, there are 5321 herds in total, with 105 unique to that year. The
intersection with both other years is 4959 herds and the union is 5432. That means of
all the herds used in the model 5321 herds will be registered in 2020 and therefore used
as index herd (excluding the slaughterhouses), 79 will be registered some time in 2021
and 32 are not registered until 2022 summing up to a total of 5432 herds (the union of
23
==PAGE:29==
6
RESULTS
all years). The distribution of these 5432 herds within the 6 possible farm types can be
seen in table 4
Table 4: Table presenting the distribution of the farm types across all herds in 2020-2022.
Included variables: Type ID - A unique identifier for each type of herd, Type Name - name of the farm
time (in both English and the original name from CHR in Danish), Herds(raw data) and Herds(used)
the number of unique herds in raw data versus those used in the study
Type ID
Type Name (danish)
Herds (raw data)
Herds (used)
Pigs, production herds
15 11
(Svin, produktionsbesætning)
5133
4905
Organic pig herd
15 13
(Økologisk svinebesætning)
175
113
Free-range herd
15 17
(Frilandssvinebesætning)
259
45
Pigs, breeding and multiplication herd
15 41
(Svin, avls- og opformeringsbesætning)
189
182
Piglet herd
15 46
(Smågriseopdrætsbesætning)
177
177
Slaughterhouse
15 68
(Svineslagteri)
72
10
Total
6005
5432
The data is clearly dominated by "Pigs, production herds" (Type ID 15 11) both in
the raw data and in the used data, reflecting their prevalence/relevans in the industry.
The "Organic pig herd" (Type ID 15 13) and "Free-range herd" (Type ID 15 17) have
significantly fewer herds compared to production herds. This reflect these types belonging
to a segment within the primary pig production where more strict rules are imposed.
"Pigs, breeding and multiplication herd" (Type ID 15 41) and "Piglet herd" (Type ID 15
46) have a similar number of herds in the raw and used data, indicating minimal reduction
during the data processing phase, hence no missing or small capacities registered. The
"Slaughterhouse" category (Type ID 15 68) shows a significant reduction from 72 herds
in the raw data to 10 in used data directly corresponding to the choice of only including
slaughterhouses managed by Danish crown or Tican in Denmark.
During model simulations unforeseen entries revealed several movements(data entries)
which exceeded the capacities of either the sending herd or receiving herd and sometimes
both. These movements have been extracted and visualized in figure 7.
24
==PAGE:30==
6
RESULTS
Figure 7: Bar chart illustrating the number of movements with pigs exceeding capacities from 2020
to 2022. The y-axes indicate the number of movements exceeding the maximum capacity. Each bar is
color-coded to represent one of the three years within the period, as indicated in the legend.
Sendings: The x-axis shows the percentage of pigs moved beyond the sending herd’s capacity.
Receivings: The x-axis shows the percentage of pigs moved beyond the receiving herd’s capacity.
The figure illustrates several movements that significantly exceed the capacities of sending
or receiving herds. This indicates that some herds are sending far more pigs than they
have, or receiving far more than they can accommodate. Most of these overestimated
movements range within 1% to 100% above capacity. However, a small fraction exceeds
100%, with a few exceeding 500%, and one instance reaching up to 1500% above the
allowed capacity.
6.2
Contact patterns
The model is based on and heavily influenced by animal movements.
Therefore this
section will explore the movements and contact patterns in the the danish pig production
from 2020 to 2022. Figure 8 illustrates the distribution of movements of pigs between
different types of herds within the Danish pig production.
25
==PAGE:31==
6
RESULTS
Figure 8:
Bar chart showing distribution of sendings and receiving of pigs between farm types in
Denmark 2020-2022. Each plot represent a sending herd type while each bar color indicates the receiving
herd as seen in the legend. The y-axis indicate total number of pigs sent in a logarithmic scale. The
exact number of pigs is given on top of each bar
The movements between herd types are clearly dominated by the production herds (15
11). The logarithmic scale reveals significant differences in movement scales, with pro-
duction and piglet herds moving pigs in the millions, while other herd types show con-
siderably smaller magnitudesof thousands. Movements from piglet and breeding herds to
other types, including slaughter, are substantial, underscoring their significant role in the
overall pig production lifecycle. Furthermore, a significant portion of pigs from all herd
types are sent to slaughter. However, interactions between some herd types are limited or
nonexistent. For example, free-range herds do not send pigs to either piglet or breeding
and multiplication herds at all during the three-year period. Generally, free-range and
organic herds send fewer pigs compared to other production herds and mostly exchange
pigs between themselves. For more insight in the weekly and monthly movements between
herds and herd production see supplementary figures in appendix F
Figue 9 presents the number of unique contacts each herd has on a monthly basis, high-
lighting the significant variation in herd activity levels. Most herds maintain a few con-
26
==PAGE:32==
6
RESULTS
tacts each month, typically ranging from 1 to 12 unique contacts. However, occasionally,
a herd with a broad network emerges, having between 1 to 80 contacts depending on
the month. This herds can potentially become a superspreader which significantly con-
tributes to the transmission chain. This variability indicates the complexity and chaos in
the network.
Figure 9: The depicts the number of unique contacts each herd has over time. The y-axis
represents the number of unique contacts in a given month, while the x-axis shows the months
from 2020 to 2022. Each line represents a unique herd, differentiated by color. Monthly unique
contacts refer to the number of different herds a given herd has moved pigs to and from within
the same month
The graph focuses on the number of different herds which each herd interacts with,
rather than the frequency of those interactions. In comparison, Figure 10 examines pair
installations, providing insight into the movements between them. It counts how many
times a unique pair of herds contacts each other through pig movements from 2020 to
2022.
27
==PAGE:33==
6
RESULTS
Figure 10: The bar chart illustrates the number of movements between all pair constellations in Den-
mark from 2020 to 2022. A pair is defined as any set of two unique herds that had contact during
this period, meaning a single herd can be part of multiple pairs. The x-axis represents the number of
movements, while the y-axis shows the number of pairs that had this frequency of contact. Each bar is
divided into two colors, indicating whether the pairs consist of herds within the same production type
or across different production types
This figure 10, illustrate the frequency of movements between pairs of herds. A substantial
portion of pairs has only one contact during the entire period. Another significant fraction
of pairs had between 2 and 100 contacts. A smaller but notable group has between 100
and 200 contacts, indicating higher internal activity and a thereby a higher probability of
infection spread between them. The final fraction represents pairs with over 200 contacts
during the three years, equating to more than one movement per week.
The three presented figures 8, 9 and 10 each offer insights into the patterns and fre-
quencies of movements between herds within the Danish pig production from 2020 to
2022. They collectively illustrate the complexity and chaotic nature of these networks,
highlighting how unpredictably an infection chain can develop depending on which herd
is introduced into the network. One of these networks are illustrated in Figure 11 to see
how it develops over time. This plot illustrates the evolving contact pattern of a breeding
and multiplication herd (15 41, ID: 2336659471) over a three-year period from 2020 to
2022. The network graphs, which represent snapshots taken on the last day of each year,
28
==PAGE:34==
6
RESULTS
provide several insights. The network of contacts grows noticeably each year, indicating
the herd’s expanding network and the potential for wider infection spread.
Figure 11: Network-plot showing the contact pattern for a breeding and multiplication herd (15 41,
ID: 2336659471) evolving over time. Each network-graph is a snapshot taken on the last day of each
year from 2020 to 2022.
Nodes: Each node represent an unique herd. The yellow node marks the origin herd (ID: 2336659471)
which is followed since 1. Feb. 2020.
Edges: The edges in the network display exclusively the first contact to a new unique herd. The colors
of the nodes indicate their farm type, as shown in the legend.
Layout: The placement of nodes does not represent their geographical locations but is based on the
Fruchterman-Reingold layout algorithm in R: network::gplot.layout.fruchtermanreingold.
The network includes various herd types, as indicated by the different colors, however
as expected dominated by production herds (15 11).
This diversity suggests interac-
tions across different segments of pig production, which can complicate infection man-
agement efforts. The origin herd (yellow node) maintains a central position throughout
the period, with many new chains starting from this point. The dynamical development
of this network over time can be seen in this gif file: https://imgur.com/gallery/
contact-network-ltSZ0tl. It is notable to mention, that even in this analysis where
every contact for the given herd is included (corresponding to a transmission of 100%)
the largest network did not reach more than around 650 herds. This sums only to around
29
==PAGE:35==
6
RESULTS
1/8 of total amount of herds in Denmark during this period. This is directly caused by
the limit of transmission route meaning only direct contact between pigs from two herds
can cause infection.
6.3
Cases - Application of model
This section explores the results from running the model with different cases described
in section 5.3. The effect of decreasing the movement frequency on both the propagation
and time at detection is illustrated in figure 12.
Figure 12: Violin/Box-plot showing the results of simulations assessing the impact of reducing move-
ment frequency on the detection of antimicrobial resistant bacteria in the Danish pig production. Detec-
tion was based on 5 daily random samples at slaughterhouse. Test-sensitivity = 0.85. Each simulation
includes 5432 iterations equivalent to each herd being the index herd.
(A) Number of Infected Farms at Detection: The y-axis shows the number of farms infected at
the time of detection. Herds where infection went undetected are represented in yellow.
(B) Time to Detection: The y-axis shows the time to detection in days since the bacteria was intro-
duced to the index herd. The box plot excludes results for herds where infection remained undetected.
Each graph present the result of 3 movement scenarios between herds: current movement frequency
(100%), half frequency (50%), and one third frequency (33%). Movements to slaughter remained con-
stant across all scenarios.
30
==PAGE:36==
6
RESULTS
Here the transmission rate used for simulation is mimicking an non-disease-causing bacte-
ria. Figure 12 demonstrates how reducing the movement frequency directly influence the
number of infected herds at detection, which decreases as the frequency also decrease.
The real effect is found in herds with very high propagation. The number of infected
herds at detection seems to fall for these with the decrease of the movement frequency.
However the majority of the index herds has a generally steady pattern with most of
the transmission chains including under 25 infected herds. The yellow dots in the graph
represent the transmission chains which are not detected after the three year period. The
result of these seems to be relatively constant across the thee movement frequencies. This
consistency suggests that severe transmission patterns involving active index herds are
more likely to be detected quickly due to the high movement rate and subsequent higher
detection probability. Conversely, the time of detection does not notably vary across the
three different movement frequencies.
Figure 13 show the effect on propagation and detection time when varying the surveillance
measures. This simulation involved a transmission rate mimicking a virus. The results
from this scenario demonstrate how each surveillance strategy influences the detection
time and the extent of infection spread. The amount of infected herds at detection varies
hugely across the different test intensities and especially the observation of symptoms
at herd-level. at the same time, a significant decrease in time of detection is also seen.
Again the the yellow dots represent undetected cases. The low intensity (5 daily samples)
give very similar picture as seen in figure 13. The number of undetected agents are fewer
at the high intensity testing (50 daily sample) as the increased testing will detect more
infections. The number of undetected cases is completely eliminated when looking at the
last testing type of observing the symptoms in the animals.
31
==PAGE:37==
6
RESULTS
Figure 13:
Violin/Box-plot showing the results of simulations assessing the impact of surveillance
strategies on detection time and extend of herds infected. Transmission simulated a virus with a trans-
mission rate (β) of 0.2 in a population with 100% movement frequency. Each simulation includes 5432
iterations, equivalent to each herd being the index herd.
(A) Number of Infected Farms at Detection: The y-axis shows the number of farms infected at
the time of detection. Herds where infection went undetected are represented in yellow
(B) Time to Detection: The y-axis shows the time to detection in days since the virus was introduced
to the index herd. The box plot excludes results for herds where infection remained undetected
Each graph present the result of three surveillance strategies. Detection at slaughterhouses was per-
formed using two sampling methods: (i) 5 random samples with a test sensitivity of 0.85, and (ii) 50
pooled samples, reducing the sensitivity to 0.7. Additionally, visual inspection was performed by observ-
ing all herds for clinical symptoms, with sensitivities adjusted based on disease prevalence in the given
herd.
The low intensity test scenario (5 samples) from figure 13 and the 100% movement fre-
quency from Figure 12 (the light blue boxplot/violin in both figures) share identical
parameters except for the transmission rate. Comparing the two scenarios reveals several
insights. Both scenarios exhibit similar results, with the low transmission rate scenario
showing a few more extreme transmission patterns. The average number of infected herds
32
==PAGE:38==
6
RESULTS
at detection is nearly identical between the two scenarios, suggesting that the transmission
rate does not significantly influence the number of infected herds at detection. However,
the time to detection varies notably between the two scenarios. The higher transmission
rate scenario results in a generally lower and more spread out detection time throughout
the year compared to the lower transmission rate scenario. This indicates that while the
transmission rate may not affect the total number of infected herds at detection, it does
play a significant role in the timing of detection.
6.4
Sensitivity test of methods
The effect of two model choices has been evaluated through two setups: one assessing
the effect of stochasticity in between-herd transmission, and the other examining the
significance of the infection introduction date. The visual outputs of these analyses are
presented in Appendix G.
Overall, both analyses demonstrates a limited impact on the overall infection pattern.
(see Supplementary Figure 23) The maximum transmission chain for all index herds across
all seeds and introduction dates ranged from 571 to 638 infected herds. (see Statistics
across seeds and dates in Sublementary Table 5) The maximum difference in spread
within the same index herd across all seeds was generally very low. Approximately 80%
of all index herds showed no difference in the number of infected farms across the 10
seeds, and 75% showed no difference across the different introduction dates. For the vast
majority of index herds, the maximum difference in propagation across all 10 seeds and
5 dates was 25 infected herds or fewer during the period from 2020 to 2022. However, a
few herds exhibited a maximum difference in propagation of several hundred herds. (See
Sublementary Figure 24 for the full distrubution)
This significant difference likely resulted from the infection reaching one or two highly ac-
tive herds ("superspreaders"), which led to a substantial increase in the infection spread.
While the variation within these implementations potentially have an effect influencing
a few herds, leading to large differences in final spread, it was found not to significantly
alter the overall infection pattern. This small variability is considered to be natural and
reflects the randomness and uncertainty observed in real-world scenarios.
33
==PAGE:39==
7
DISCUSSION
7
Discussion
The model developed in this study was specifically directed to answer three key questions;
i) How many herds will be infected at detection after introduction to a single index herd?
ii) How long will it take to detect? iii) How does different surveillance and prevention
measures help making the Danish Commercial Pig Production more resilient against
introduction and spread of new infectious agents?
Given the model’s reliance on pig movements between herds, the handling of movement
has an important role for the output.
During the data management process a total
of 573 herds (approximately 10% of the total number of registered herds within the
three year period) were excluded from the model due to various reasons. One of these
due to being categorized as small herds with fewer than 100 pigs — a cutoff based on a
guess. However this cutoff might need adjustment to more accurately reflect the industry.
Generally exclusion of any herds could potentially disrupt the infection chain if they
act as intermediaries between other herds. Examination of the contact patterns of some
excluded herds revealed that many has limited contacts and primarily interact with other
small herds, thus minimizing interference with other transmission chains. Nevertheless,
this exclusion could result in a generally lower propagation for some index herds.
Another choice that could effect the transmission chain was the handling of movements
exceeding the registered herd capacities. This discrepancy happened both ways, with
herds either sending or receiving more pigs than their capacity allows.
This caused
some problems in the transmission simulation. For instance, if a herd with a capacity of
1000 pigs and a 50% prevalence moves 5000 pigs, it implies that 2500 infected pigs are
sent from a farm that can only hold 1000 pigs, which is unrealistic and does not reflect
the prevalence.
This was handled by capping the number of moved infected pigs at
the receiving herd’s maximum capacity, resulting in an instant prevalence of 100% in the
receiving herd. While this approach may not be very realistic, it was chosen because these
overestimated movements constitute a small fraction of the total number of movements.
Additionally, many of these movements might be destined for already infected farms, thus
minimizing their impact as these movements are neglected.
Generally the choices and assumptions made in the model all influence the final output.
34
==PAGE:40==
7
DISCUSSION
Supplementary Table 6 in Appendix H presents those affecting transmission and evaluates
their overall effect.
While some assumptions increase transmission speed and others
decrease it, their individual effects tend to balance each other out.
One central assumption in the model is the presence of only one index herd. This is
realistic for infectious agents causing diseases such as African swine fever (ASF) and foot-
and-mouth disease (FMD), which are under strict control in Danish livestock production.
The last outbreak of FMD in Denmark was in 1983, and ASF has never been reported.
[10], [11]. Therefore, the likelihood of two separate herds becoming infected within the
model’s timeframe is minimal.
The module simulating the in-herd spread of infectious agents between animals was based
on the assumption of constant transmission rate (β) across all herds. This assumption
overlooks significant variations that can occur both within and between herds. Within
the same herd, transmission rates can vary due to differences in pig contact based on
their location in pens, sections and houses. Environmental and structural factors can
influence the beta values for each specific herd. The type of production also matters; the
extent to which pigs are outdoors, their density, and their level of contact with other pigs
can significantly affect transmission rates. The agent’s route of transmission also plays a
role in these variations. Incorporating variable beta values both within and across herds
could potentially enhance model accuracy but would also mean increasing the individ-
uality of the animals within a herd, including the location of each herd to account for
spatial influences, and considering other transmission routes that may not align with the
logistic growth model. Each of these additions would introduce more complexity to the
model, but could be an important consideration for future work. Another important
consideration is the route of transmission. The model assumes that transmission occurs
only directly through the movement through animal-animal infection. This may limit
the transmission network which for some infectious agents is not valid, due to significant
probability of airborne transmission or environmental transmission. In reality, environ-
mental factors can also contribute to the spread.
For example, indirect transmission
through contaminated equipment or personnel moving between farms could play a role.
By introduction of other transmission routes, the geographical location of herds could
also be important, as herds situated near other infected herds may face higher exposure
35
==PAGE:41==
7
DISCUSSION
risks due to transmission through wildlife or airborne transmission [12].
The final model is the result of multiple optimizations of the initial model developed.
This process involved using R-tools like profvis, identifying new opportunities, and
reconstruction of existing compartments. The decision to include only infected herds,
starting with one and increasing as the infection spread, proved beneficial. This approach,
based on the assumption that transmission occurred solely through the movement of
infected pigs to non-infected herds, minimized unnecessary iterations and data extraction
where no transmission was possible. Given the daily frequency of movements, this decision
significantly saved time during simulations (a reduction from aprox 50 - 5 hours was
achived during the optimization process).
Another strength of the final model is its
division into the three main modules, each responsible for a crucial part of the simulations.
This structure allows for the separation of transmission simulations and and detection
prediction. The two testing modules operate independently of each other but both depend
on the results from a transmission simulation (A full transmission pattern for all index
herds). Once a transmission simulation is completed with the desired transmission rate,
it does not need to be repeated and can be used to test as many testing strategies
and sampling schedules as desired. This separation between the transmission pattern
and testing procedures enables the model to isolate the consequences of each change in
testing strategy. Since the transmission remains constant, any variation in outcomes is a
direct result of changes in the testing strategy. Running a surveillance scenarios multiple
times with the same parameters can provide insights into the sensitivity of the testing
methods, highlighting the effects of randomness and inherent variation.
Another significant choice in the model structure that optimizes its effectiveness for this
specific scope is the use of a logistic growth model compared to the initially chosen
SI(R) model. The logistic growth model notably decreases the simulation time for the
transmission module, allowing for simulations with varying iteration sizes instead of daily
updates. This choice is effective for assessing overall transmission and propagation at
the detection point. However, the logistic growth model comes with trade-offs. While it
simplifies within-herd dynamics, making it suitable for large-scale simulations of between-
herd transmission, it conversely excludes implementation of additional interventions such
as vaccination or latency periods.
36
==PAGE:42==
7
DISCUSSION
Using real movement data in the model is a key strength, as it accurately represents
the network of the Danish pig industry. It captures the full range of contact patterns,
including extreme cases with huge networks, which is crucial for understanding industry
dynamics. While the majority of Danish farms have fairly similar and limited daily net-
works, there are herds with extensive connections that can significantly influence disease
spread. By incorporating real data, the model includes these extremes, providing a com-
prehensive picture of the network. Additionally, using actual movement data allows the
model to simulate realistic scenarios, offering insights that might not be possible with
synthetic distributions. This approach helps identify these herds with a significant im-
pact on transmission patterns, which is essential for targeted interventions. Without real
data, the model would likely miss these critical dynamics, leading to less accurate and
potentially misleading results.
Moreover, the model is flexible to data input and allows for easy updates with new data,
ensuring its relevance over time. Due to the structure of dynamics within herds, the model
can also be adapted to other livestock industries, making it versatile but at the same time
also quite generic. However extra complexity does not necessarily ensure a more accurate
model output. Hartmut et al. e.g uses three different network complexities and finds that
even the simplest network captures many relevant aspects and provides solid outcomes.
This indicates that useful results can be achieved without excessive complexity. They
also found that including the exact quantities of animals traded (trade volume) does not
significantly alter the overall network structure or the results of the intervention strategy.
[6] This is beneficial for our model since the specific number of moved pigs are sometimes
registered late in CHR and can be inaccurate. This was also seen in this study with the
sendings exceeding capacity, which according to Hartmut et al might not influence the
overall conclusions. They did however find that the accurate temporal data (the timing
of trades) is crucial for understanding disease dynamics and calculating the maximum
outbreak size. Although the model in this study does not use a fixed network accounting
for the geographical location of the herds but rather tracks movements over time, it does
represent temporal resolution, which enhances prediction accuracy.
The model demonstrates a relationship between the transmission rate (beta) and the
time to detection. Faster-spreading infectious agents are detected faster, yet they of-
37
==PAGE:43==
7
DISCUSSION
ten result in a similar number of infected herds at the point of detection compared to
slower-spreading infectious agents. This suggests that a high transmission rate does not
necessarily lead to a more extensive outbreak but rather influences the timing of detection.
Additionally, the model’s ability to identify herds with extensive networks — those with a
large number of contacts — provides a strategic advantage. These herds can be targeted
for heightened surveillance and early intervention measures to prevent widespread trans-
mission. Identifying and monitoring these critical nodes within the movement network
can significantly enhance the effectiveness of disease management efforts [13]. Research
on the French swine industry has also demonstrated the structural vulnerability of trade
networks to infectious diseases. This study emphasized the need for targeted surveillance
and control measures within the network. By analyzing trade volume and network ac-
tivity, it provided a detailed characterization of the trade network, offering insights into
how trade patterns contribute to disease spread and the effectiveness of interventions such
as trade restrictions and vaccination [14]. Similarly, a study on the German pig trade
network highlighted the importance of monitoring and potentially regulating trade activ-
ities. They mapped livestock movements over several years, underscoring the importance
of understanding herd contact patterns to predict outbreaks and plan control measures.
[6]
In summary, the model outputs reveal the complex interplay between transmission dy-
namics, detection timing, and herd contact patterns.
In relation to the objective of
the model to address the identified questions, a number of opportunities for model im-
provement or expansion has been identified. Particularly, implementation of diffuse en-
vironmental transmission or a flexible beta value across herds could provide interesting
comparisons with the current model results. However, it is crucial not to compromise
the use of real data, as it is essential for capturing the full spectrum of potential out-
comes. This finding is supported by Acklan et al., who also highlights the importance
of utilizing movement data for modeling and controlling disease spread within Danish
pig production. The study emphasizes the need for high-resolution movement data to
improve disease modeling and surveillance accuracy. It is advocating for enhanced data
collection and integration across different sectors of the pig industry [15].
Generally looking through the literature, several studies highlight many of the same
38
==PAGE:44==
8
CONCLUSION
outcome and conclusions as in this thesis which underscores the importance of move-
ment/contact patterns for each herd. However a significant strength of this model is its
ability to simulate disease transmission starting from all possible index herds registered
at the time of introduction and compare the result. By initializing with all potential
index herds, the model captures the full impact of infection from any possible starting
point, providing a more detailed and accurate representation of the spread of disease.
Many models in animal disease transmission tend to simplify the analysis by focusing on
a single index case, which can overlook the variability and potential underestimations of
disease impact. The importance of considering multiple initial sources in disease trans-
mission models is highlighted in various studies. Evaluating multiple index cases helps
in capturing the full spectrum of transmission pathways, thereby enhancing the model’s
predictive power and relevance to regulations [16, 17].
8
Conclusion
In this study, I developed a dynamic disease spread model using real movement data from
the Danish pig industry to describe the spread of an infectious agent after its introduction
to an index herd. The model evaluates the total number of infected herds at detection and
the time from introduction to detection under various surveillance strategies. Addition-
ally, it assesses the impact of different movement frequencies on spread of the infectious
agent. By simulating for all possible index herds (5311 herds), the model reveals every
possible transmission pattern outcome from the agent’s introduction time. Incorporating
real movement data ensures the model’s flexibility and applicability beyond the specific
period studied, maintaining its relevance.
The model reveals that the speed and extent of spread depend significantly on the in-
dex herd. Key findings highlight critical herds with extensive networks, directly linking
transmission extent to movement patterns. Conversely, herds with limited networks show
very limited spread and may naturally restrict the infection.
The results demonstrate the chaotic nature of transmission through the trade network,
indicating the benefit of incorporating movement data for accurate spread prediction.
A general output from the model is that the number of infected herds at time of detec-
39
==PAGE:45==
REFERENCES
tion is more influenced by the sampling intensity of the surveillance program than by
transmission rates, while detection time is highly dependent on transmission rates.
References
[1]
S. A. McEwen and P. J. Collignon. “Antimicrobial Resistance: a One Health Per-
spective”. In: Microbiology Spectrum 6.2 (2018). doi: 10.1128/microbiolspec.
ARBA-0009-2017.
[2]
Patricia M. C. Huijbers et al. “Role of the Environment in the Transmission of An-
timicrobial Resistance to Humans: A Review”. In: Environmental Science & Tech-
nology 49.20 (2015), pp. 11993–12004. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.5b02566.
[3]
Author(s) Name(s). “Title of the Article”. In: Journal Name (2021). url: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0167587721002312.
[4]
Daniela Hadorn and Katharina Stärk. “Evaluation and optimization of surveillance
systems for rare and emerging infectious diseases”. In: Veterinary Research 39.6
(2008), pp. 1–10. doi: 10.1051/vetres:2008033. url: https://hal.archives-
ouvertes.fr/hal-00902939.
[5]
Lisa Koeppel et al. “Automatic classification of farms and traders in the pig pro-
duction chain”. In: Preventive Veterinary Medicine 150 (2018), pp. 86–92. doi:
10.1016/j.prevetmed.2017.12.003. url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
prevetmed.2017.12.003.
[6]
Hartmut H. K. Lentz et al. “Disease Spread through Animal Movements: A Static
and Temporal Network Analysis of Pig Trade in Germany”. In: PLOS ONE (May
2016). doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155196. url: https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0155196.
[7]
Om Svineflyttedatabasen. url: https://svineflyt.fvst.dk/flsv/faces/Home
(visited on 03/21/2024).
[8]
Centrale Husdyrbrugsregister - CHR. url: https://chr.fvst.dk/chri/faces/
about (visited on 03/21/2024).
40
==PAGE:46==
REFERENCES
[9]
H. B. Korsgaard et al. DANMAP 2019 - Use of antimicrobial agents and occur-
rence of antimicrobial resistance in bacteria from food animals, food and humans in
Denmark. ISSN 1600-2032. Oct. 2020.
[10]
Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) - Danish Veterinary and Food Administration.
url: https://en.foedevarestyrelsen.dk/animals/animal-health-/animal-
diseases/foot-and-mouth-disease (visited on 04/13/2024).
[11]
African swine fever - Danish Veterinary and Food Administration. url: https:
//en.foedevarestyrelsen.dk/animals/animal-health-/animal-diseases/
african-swine-fever (visited on 04/13/2024).
[12]
Lee Benson et al. “When and why direct transmission models can be used for
environmentally persistent pathogens”. In: PLoS Computational Biology 17.12 (Dec.
2021), e1009652. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009652. url: https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009652.
[13]
Tariq Halasa et al. “A Comparison between Two Simulation Models for Spread
of Foot-and-Mouth Disease”. In: PLOS ONE 9.3 (Mar. 2014), e92521. doi: 10.
1371/journal.pone.0092521. url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.
0092521.
[14]
S. Rautureau, B. Dufour, and B. Durand. “Structural vulnerability of the French
swine industry trade network to the spread of infectious diseases”. In: Animal 6.7
(2012), pp. 1152–1162. doi: 10.1017/S1751731111002631.
[15]
Rommel Mario Aclan. “Disease Spread in Danish Pig Production: The Impact of
Movement Data on Infection Dynamics and Control Strategies”. PhD thesis. Tech-
nical University of Denmark, 2016. url: https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/
files/132027682/ACLAN_thesis_UPLOAD.pdf (visited on 06/13/2024).
[16]
Shweta Bansal, Bryan T. Grenfell, and Lauren Ancel Meyers. “When individual
behaviour matters: homogeneous and network models in epidemiology”. In: Journal
of The Royal Society Interface 4.16 (2007), pp. 879–891. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2007.
1100. url: https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2007.1100.
[17]
Matt J. Keeling and Pejman Rohani. Modeling Infectious Diseases in Humans
and Animals. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008. url: https://books.
google.dk/books?hl=da&lr=&id=LxzILSuKDhUC&oi=fnd&pg=PP1&dq=Keeling,
41
==PAGE:47==
REFERENCES
+M.+J., +%26+Rohani, +P.+(2008).+Modeling+Infectious+Diseases+in+
Humans + and + Animals . +This + book + discusses + various + approaches + to +
disease + modeling , +including + the + impact + of + multiple + index + cases +
on+the+accuracy+of+disease+spread+predictions.&ots=VKfE1fJHLj&sig=
x3qTy9UbI7qDsDPEkzZniltYQ-M&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q&f=false.
[18]
Leonard Lipkin and David Smith. Logistic Growth Model - Background: Logistic
Modeling | Mathematical Association of America. Dec. 2004. url: https://maa.
org/press/periodicals/loci/joma/logistic-growth-model-background-
logistic-modeling (visited on 04/02/2024).
[19]
James D. Murray. “Continuous Population Models for Single Species”. In: Mathe-
matical Biology (1993), pp. 1–35. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-08542-4{\_}1. url:
https://link-springer-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/chapter/10.1007/978-3-
662-08542-4_1.
[20]
Y. L. Cheung. “Partial fraction decomposition”. In: International Journal of Math-
ematical Education in Science and Technology 23.3 (1992), pp. 497–500. issn:
14645211. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4612-0267-7{\_}8/COVER. url: https://link-
springer-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4612-0267-
7_8.
[21]
Ravi P. Agarwal and Donal O’Regan. “An Introduction to Ordinary Differential
Equations”. In: An Introduction to Ordinary Differential Equations (2008). doi:
10.1007/978-0-387-71276-5.
42
==PAGE:48==
A
DATA STRUCTURE
Appendices
A
Data Structure
data_example <- raw.data %>%
slice(1:20) %>%
mutate(FARMID_SENDER = sample(10^9:(10^10-1), 20, replace = FALSE),
FARMID_RECEIVER = sample(10^9:(10^10-1), 20, replace = FALSE)) %>%
mutate(SENDER_FARMTYPE = "12 34 Production type",
RECEIVER_FARMTYPE = "12 34 Production type")
print(data_example)
Figure 14: Snapshot of Data with masked IDs and production
types. The figure illustrates the structure of the raw data upon
which the model is based
43
==PAGE:49==
B
PACKAGES AND DEFINED FUNCTIONS
B
Packages and defined functions
General packages:
• tidyverse (covers data manipulation functions from dplyr, tidyr)
• lubridate (for date manipulation)
• readxl (read and load excel files)
• deSolve (testing SI model vs logistic growth model)
• minpack.lm (estimation of beta)
Packages used in visualization:
• ggplot2 (Type of plotting in R)
• cowplot (specific options in display and allign)
• gghalves (enables option for halv plots like boxplot + violin)
• ggtext (Enables to add text to a plot)
• patchwork (display of plots)
• grid (Enabeling features when displaying in a grid)
• gridExtra (display of plots)
• RColorBrewer (extra colors and palettes)
• ggthemes (extra colors and palettes)
• paletteer (extra colors and palettes)
Packages used to build Interface:
• shiny (general use of shinys)
• shinyjs (enable more options within shinys)
Packages used in building network and creation of gif:
• network (for network analysis)
44
==PAGE:50==
B
PACKAGES AND DEFINED FUNCTIONS
• statnet (for social network analysis, which depends on the network package)
• magick (for image processing and GIF creation)
• av (for video encoding)
• scales (for rescaling data)
• gtools (for mixedsort)
45
==PAGE:51==
C
GITHUB LINK
C
GitHub Link
URL link to repository containing all scripts used in the preparation of this thesis:
https://github.com/Bjerremand4/Master-Thesis.git.
46
==PAGE:52==
D
USER INTERFACE
D
User Interface
Figure 15: Screenshot of interface
47
==PAGE:53==
E
UTILIZING THE LOGISTIC GROWTH MODEL
E
Utilizing the logistic growth model
When modeling the spread of an infectious disease in a population of individuals, a pop-
ular choice is the SIR model due to its versatility. This model exists in various versions,
each with different levels of complexity and analytical opportunities. The standard SIR
model describes the progression of the disease within a specific population over time, uti-
lizing differential equations to capture its dynamics across three stages: Susceptible(S),
Infected(I) and Recovered/removed(R). The transition between these stages depends on
the proportion of individuals in each stage along with specific rates such as β which en-
compasses the infection rate and contacts per time unit, and γ describing recovery rate.
The dynamics of the SIR model, is visualized in Figure 16 showing the compartment
flowchart.
Figure 16: Flowchart in a stadard SIR model
In context of this model, the SIR model will be employed to estimate the disease spread
within each herd, and especially estimating the prevalence within herd at a given day after
introduction and subsequently the transmission of infected animals to other herds in their
network. As the recovered state is not relevant for this scenario, it is considered adequate
to utilize the model in its simplest form, namely the SI model in a closed population.
This implies that individuals cannot recover and will remain in the infectious state. This
model is characterized by the following differential equations:
dS
dt = −βSI
N
(3)
dI
dt = βSI
N
(4)
48
==PAGE:54==
E
UTILIZING THE LOGISTIC GROWTH MODEL
When modeling a closed population, the following relationship holds:
N = S + I
(5)
Where N is the entire population size. By using this relationship from equation 5 it can
be proven that the SI model imitates the logistic growth model :
dP
dt = rP(1 −P
K )
(6)
Here P is the population size, r is the intrinsic growth rate, and K is the carrying capacity
which limits the total growth of the population [18].
We will work on equation 4 which describes the dynamics of infected individuals with the
objective of transforming it into a logistic growth model, as illustrated by Equation 6.
We start by defining the prevalence, denoted as p, as
p = I/N
(7)
Using this definition, we can express the various stages as follows:
I = pN
S = (1 −p)N
N = pn + (1 −p)N
(8)
After substituting into Equation 4 we obtain:
dI
dt = β (1 −p)N · pN
(1 −p)N + pN = β (1 −p)N · pN
(1 −p + p)N
= β (1 −p)N · pN
N
= β · (1 −p) · pN
(4 revisited)
Substituting back from equation 8 we have:
dI
dt = β · (1 −I
N ) · I = βI(1 −I
N )
(9)
The differential equation for infected individuals is now independent of Susceptibles(S)
and resembles the logistic growth model from Equation 6. In this context, the trans-
mission rate β corresponds to the intrinsic growth factor r, and the carrying capacity K
corresponds to the total population N.
49
==PAGE:55==
E
UTILIZING THE LOGISTIC GROWTH MODEL
It is advantageous to express the number of infected individuals as a function of time
rather than having to iteratively calculate for each time point. This can be accomplished
by analytically solving the logistic growth model (Equation 9) using separation of vari-
ables and integration such that we end up with infected (I) as a function of time [19].
First step is to separate the variables I and t, which is obtained by:
dI
dt ·
1
I(1 −I
N ) · dt = βI(1 −I
N ) ·
1
I(1 −I
N ) · dt ⇔
dI
I(1 −I
N ) = βdt
(10)
Now we wish to Integrate the left-hand side with respect to I and the right-hand side
with respect to t
Z
1
I(1 −I
N )dI =
Z
βdt
(11)
Now looking at the left-hand side of Equation 11. Starting by applying linearity
Z
1
I(1 −I
N )dI = −N
Z
1
I(I −N dI
(12)
and using partial fraction decomposition [20]:
Z 
1
N(I −N) −1
NI

dI = 1
N
Z
1
I −N dI −1
N
Z 1
I dI
(13)
Solving Equation 13:
1
N
Z
1
I −N dI −1
N
Z 1
I dI = 1
N

ln(I −N) −ln(I)

= ln(I −N)
N
−ln(I)
N
(13 solved)
Insert solution in Equation 12:
−N
Z
1
I(I −N dI = −N
ln(I −N)
N
−ln(I)
N

= ln(I) −ln(I −N) + C1
(12 solved)
Now we need to solve for the right-hand side of Equation 11. This however only contains
a rate so this is relatively straight forward using the constant rule [21]:
Z
βdt = β
Z
1dt = βt + C2
50
==PAGE:56==
E
UTILIZING THE LOGISTIC GROWTH MODEL
We now have the solution for Equation 11:
Z
1
I(1 −I
N )dI =
Z
βdt ⇔
ln(I) −ln(I −N) = βt + C
(11 solved)
Where C = C1 + C2 is the combined constant of integration.
Now what is left to do is isolate . We can start by exponentiate both sides of the solved
Equation 11.
ln(I) −ln(I −N) = βt + C ⇔
eln(I)eln(I−N) = eβteC
As the term eC is also constant, this can just be called C.
I
N −I = Ceβt ⇔
I = (N −I)Ceβt ⇔
I = NCeβt
1 + Ceβt
(14)
The constant of integration C can be expressed by some initial conditions. We solve
Equation 14 at time (t = 0) and infected individuals I = I0.
I0 = NCeβ0
1 + Ceβ0 = NC
1 + C
solving for C
C =
I0
N −I0
The solution for the number of infected individuals I as a function of time t is therefore
given as:
I(t) = NCeβt
1 + Ceβt,
C =
I0
N −I0
(15)
Once the analytical solution is derived, it provides a direct method for computing the
number of infectious individuals at any given time point, eliminating the need for itera-
tive calculations across all time points. Consequently, the resulting Equation 15 can be
efficiently incorporated into the main model.
51
==PAGE:57==
E
UTILIZING THE LOGISTIC GROWTH MODEL
The SI model and the Logistic growth model were run with both fast (0.2) and slow
(0.05) beta values, representing viral and bacterial infections, respectively. The results
are illustrated in Figure 17 below.
Figure 17: Difference in methods using a fast and slow beta
As seen, the results appear indistinguishable for both methods and across varying trans-
mission rates (β). The specific distinctions are visualized in Figure 18.
Figure 18: Difference in the two methods with different beta
The figures clearly demonstrate that the discrepancies between the outcomes produced
by the two models are negligible. Notably, the discrepancies peak around each curve’s
inflection point, as expected due to the higher slope in this region. However, these differ-
ences are vary small, with the largest discrepancy amounting to less than one individual.
Consequently, any potential impact on the final model results is deemed negligible.
52
==PAGE:58==
F
MOVEMENT PATTERNS
F
Movement Patterns
Total amount of movements during the period. Devided in sendings and receiings can be
seen in figure 19
Figure 19: Total Number of movements be Production type.
Total number of pigs send and received on a weekly and monthly basis is illustrated in
figure 20
Figure 20: Movemenets devided by production type over 3 yers. The two plots on the right show
sendings and on the left is receivings of pigs. The two top plots include weekly movements while the
bottom two is shown in monthly movements. The x-axes show the time and the y-axes indicate number
of moved pigs Each line in each graph is colored indicating which production type it is representing.
53
==PAGE:59==
F
MOVEMENT PATTERNS
Looking into the dynamics of herd types and individual herds. Figure 21 shows the total
flow in and out of all herd within the same production type over time.
Figure 21: the black solid line indicates the median while the
dashed lines show +- 2x standard deviation
Figure 22 illustrate the population flow (flow of pigs in and out) of individual herds during
the 3 year period. 28 random herds have been chosen and their population size over time
are visualized.
54
==PAGE:60==
F
MOVEMENT PATTERNS
Figure 22: Population flow of random herds. The netto in and
out flow of pigs through movements within 28 randomly chosen
herds. x-axes show time and y-axes indicate population size in
total number of pigs
55
==PAGE:61==
G
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
G
Sensitivity Analysis
Propagation for all index herds across 10 seeds and 5 different introduction dates cand
be seen in figure 23 below
Figure 23: The bar charts display the total number of infected herds from 2020
to 2022 for all index herds across different seeds and introduction dates. y-axes
indicate number of total infected herds.
(A) The x-axis represents each of the 10 seeds used in this analysis
(B) The x-axis represents the dates corresponding to each tested introduction point
of infection.
For all seeds, the infection was introduced to the index herd on January 1, 2020.
When varying the introduction date, the seed was kept constant at 3982.
It is clear the the variations within these parameters are very limited and the overall
transmission pattern is similar across all seeds and introduction dates. The variations
within these parameters are minimal, and the overall transmission pattern is similar across
all seeds and introduction dates. However, Figure 24 delves deeper by examining the
maximum differences across all 10 seeds and 5 dates, highlighting specific discrepancies.
56
==PAGE:62==
G
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Figure 24:
This figure describes the specific maximal difference for each herd
across the different seeds and introduction dates. Each graph show the percent of
Index herds on the y-axes while the x-axes show the corresponding maximal change
for the given herd across all tested parameters (seeds or dates)
(A) illustrate maximal differences in seeds
(B) illustrate maximal differences in introduction date
This figure supports the findings from Figure 23, showing very little variation. Most of
the index herds (80% for seeds and 75% for dates) exhibit no difference across any of the
tested seeds or dates, highlighting the resilience/robustness of the movement dynamics.
Table 5 below presents specific summary statistics for the sensitivity analysis of both
between-herd transmission (seeds) and introduction point of infection (dates).
57
==PAGE:63==
G
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Table 5: Summary statistics of simulation results for different seeds and introduction dates.
Seed
Max
Min
Mean
Median
Variance
SD
1847
575
1
15.2
3
1914
43.8
3503
632
1
15.1
3
1886
43.4
3982
627
1
15.1
3
1896
43.5
4291
627
1
15.1
3
1894
43.5
4700
630
1
15.1
3
1892
43.5
5637
627
1
15.1
3
1904
43.6
6503
631
1
15.2
3
1896
43.5
7709
628
1
15.0
3
1867
43.2
8332
634
1
15.1
3
1883
43.4
8353
629
1
15.1
3
1911
43.7
Date
Max
Min
Mean
Median
Variance
SD
01.Jan.2020
607
1
14.9
3
1829
42.8
15.Jan.2020
638
1
15.4
3
1990
44.6
01.Feb.2020
572
1
15.2
3
1898
43.6
02.Mar.2020
633
1
14.7
3
1779
42.2
31.Mar.2020
571
1
14.2
3
1600
40.0
The spread for each individual index herd facet wrapt on graphs representing the different
indroduvtion dates canbe seen in figure 25
Figure 25: Bar chart displaying the maximum transmission for all index herds. The x-axis indicates
index herds, with each bar representing an individual index herd. The y-axis shows the number of infected
farms after the 3-year period. Each graph corresponds to a specific introduction date, as indicated in
the title of each plot.
58
==PAGE:64==
G
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Here you can see some of tall bars representing index herds with i large network changing
across the introduction dates.
However the the overall pattern remains the same as
expected.
59
==PAGE:65==
H
EFFECT OF ASSUMPTIONS AND MODEL CHOICES ON TRANSMISSION
H
Effect of assumptions and model choices on trans-
mission
Table 6: Effect of choises and assumptions made in the modelling process on the transmission
Choice/ Assumption
Effect on the transmission
Exclusion of small herds + herds with undisclosed capacity
↓
Exclusion of all but the 10 largest slaughterhouses
→
constant herd capacity across all three years
→
Handling of movements exceeding capacity
↑
Not accounting for movements of infected pigs to already infected herds
↓
Infected pigs counting in more herds, not removed when send to another herd or slaughter
↑
Solely one index herd
→
Constant beta across all herds
→
Transmission route limited to movement of infected animal from one herd to another
↓
60
