==PAGE:1==
A case study of the Dinder River
Hydraulic modeling with ICESat­2 elevation
data in the Eastern Nile Basin
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
A case study of the Dinder River
Hydraulic modeling with ICESat­2 elevation data in the Eastern Nile Basin
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Maggie Henry Madsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
T. Markert, 2019, Dinder River, from photoneer.de/dinder_national_park/
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Bygn­
ingstorvet, Building 115, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
www.sustain.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at DTU Sustain, Department of Environ­
mental Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of hydraulics and remote
sensing.
The thesis was produced in collaboration with DTU and DHI A/S under the supervision of:
Peter Bauer­Gottwein, PhD, Professor in Hydrology and Water Resources Management,
DTU Sustain
Aske Folkmann Musaeus, PhD student, DTU Sustain
Cécile Marie Margaretha Kittel, PhD, Senior Remote Sensing Specialist, DHI A/S
Maggie Henry Madsen ­ s184391
A case study of the Dinder River
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Ephemeral rivers, meaning rivers that periodically cease to flow, make up half of the global
river network albeit they are notably ungauged. Estimation of river discharge is challeng­
ing to obtain in ungauged areas although essential for water management strategies and
flood prediction. Hydraulic characterization of rivers enables the conversion between wa­
ter surface elevation (WSE) and discharge. The Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite 2
(ICESat­2) laser altimetry provides river cross­section mapping with a 70 cm along track
resolution. This paper demonstrates the use of ICESat­2 ATL03 data to estimate riverbed
geometry by leveraging the exposed riverbed during the recession period of ephemeral
rivers. Riverbed geometry is a requirement for hydraulic characterization.
Discharge from the ephemeral Dinder River in Sudan is estimated in this study via a
1D hydraulic steady­state gradually varied flow model with a uniform outflow boundary,
a no­lateral inflow assumption, and a no­losses assumption. ATL03 data resulted in 44
dry river cross­section profiles of the Dinder River. A multi­step outlier filtering process
was applied to the cross­sections. In total 417 WSE observations from ATL03 and Theia
HydroWeb served as input to the model. The WSE observations from ATL03 had an
average standard error of the mean of 0.04cm after outlier filtering. The standard errors
of the mean were used for fitting the WSE profiles. Comparisons with discharge estimates
from two global hydrological models resulted in median percentage errors of 42.8% and
104.3% with a Manning’s n of 0.07 s/m1/3. The model performance would benefit from
densification of WSE observations, calibration of Manning’s n, and inclusion of lateral
inflows and losses. Applying the methodology in a gauged catchment would provide better
insights into the model’s performance.
A case study of the Dinder River
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
Peter Bauer­Gottwein, Professor, DTU Sustain
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Peter Bauer­Gottwein. His thoughtful
guidance and generosity with his time was extremely helpful throughout the thesis period.
Aske Folkmann Musaeus, PhD Student, DTU Sustain
I would like to thank Aske Musaeus for generously providing Python code for ICESat­2
data processing. His interest and guidance motivated and enriched my work. Aske’s
readiness to assist me at all times has been indispensable.
DHI A/S
I would like to acknowledge the people at DHI who supported this thesis. Jakob Luchner
facilitated the project set­up. Elise Usai provided the in­situ data. Cecilé M. M. Kittel
provided valuable feedback.
Finally, I would like to extend a heartfelt thank you to my friends and family for their support
and encouragement throughout this, at times challenging, academic journey.
A case study of the Dinder River
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Study Area
3
3
Methods and Data
5
3.1
Process Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
ICESat­2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.2.1
ICESat­2 Data Products . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2.2
ATL03 ­ Global Geolocated Photon Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.3
ATL03 Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.2.4
ATL03 Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.5
WSE Determination
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.3
Hydraulic Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3.1
Implementation of Hydraulic Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.4
Ancillary Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4.1
In­Situ Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4.2
GloFAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4.3
DHI­GHM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4.4
THEIA HydroWeb
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4.5
River Representation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4.6
HydroSHED
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4.7
Planet Explorer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4.8
Copernicus Database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
4
Results and Discussion
23
4.1
ATL03 Data Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.1.1
Dry Cross­Sections
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.1.2
WSE Estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.2
Hydraulic Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.2.1
Model Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.2.2
Gaining or Losing Discharge Across the Stretch
. . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2.3
Water Pools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.2.4
Influence of Manning’s n . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5
Limitations and Further Study
39
A case study of the Dinder River
v
==PAGE:7==
5.1
ICESat­2
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.1.1
ATL03 Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.1.2
Automization Effort . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.2
Hydraulic Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2.1
No­Lateral Inflow and No­Losses Assumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2.2
Sedimentation Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.2.3
Cross­section Densification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.3
Additional Data Products
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.3.1
ATL13 ­ Along Track Inland Surface Water Data
. . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.3.2
High Resolution Imagery
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
5.3.3
SWOT Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
6
Conclusion
45
Bibliography
46
Appendix
50
A case study of the Dinder River
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
Climate change is causing the water cycle to intensify (Arias et al., 2021). This leads to
more severe and frequent hydrological events, resulting in more intense rainfall events
and associated flooding, as well as more pronounced droughts in many regions of the
world (Hostache et al., 2009). The effects of the intensification are not globally uniformly
distributed, making it crucial for flood forecasting methodologies and water management
strategies to be tailored to specific local conditions (Arias et al., 2021). Accurate river
modeling is one of the necessary steps for predicting and responding effectively to flood
events (Hostache et al., 2009).
Ephemeral rivers and streams (ERS) refer to watercourses that periodically cease to flow
or that dry up completely at some point in time and/or space (Fovet et al., 2021). Messager
et al. (2021) found that 44–53% of the global river network ceases to flow at least one
month per year. Due to climatic drying and water abstraction, the fraction is likely to
increase (Fovet et al., 2021). ERS are notably ungauged, especially in arid and semi­arid
regions (Yang et al., 2020). This is partly due to the sporadic and unpredictable nature
of their flow, making it difficult to implement traditional hydrological monitoring methods
(Yang et al., 2020). Moreover, conflicts caused by water scarcity are particularly acute in
arid and semi­arid regions due to the infrequency and short periods of rainfall (Arias et al.,
2021). In light of this, there is an urgent need to gain hydraulic knowledge of ERS. This
would allow for discharge estimates, aid in flood prediction, and enhance the management
of water resources. Developing a methodology using remote sensing products only is
particularly advantageous due to the hard­to­access locations and unpredictable flow of
ERS (Fovet et al., 2021). In addition, hydraulic modeling efforts have been shown to be
useful for developing rating curves for ERS (Bullard, Mctainsh, and Martin, 2007) and for
ungauged locations (Clayton and Kean, 2010).
Water surface elevation (WSE), channel geometry, and discharge are traditionally mea­
sured at gauging stations, providing accurate and continuous observations, and forming
the basis for river models. In­situ measurements are generally scarce, often prohibitively
expensive, and typically not in the public domain. The global decline in active gauging
stations, coupled with the prevalence of ungauged river basins, highlights the need for
alternative methods in developing reliable hydraulic river models (Sneeuw et al., 2014).
Altimetry measurements provide a viable alternative for areas with scarce or no in­situ
data. Importantly, discharge is not directly observable using satellite observations. Radar
altimetry measurements, on the other hand, can be used to provide WSE observations.
Typically, a virtual station where the satellite crosses the water body provides WSE time
series. Due to the large ground footprints and low spatial resolutions of radar altime­
try measurements, the application is generally limited to large rivers and lakes. For in­
stance, Sentinel­3 uses Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) with an along track resolution
A case study of the Dinder River
1
==PAGE:9==
of 300m and a 52km track separation at the equator (Polehampton et al., 2023). Halicki
and Niedzielski (2022) found a root mean square error (RMSE) of 0.22m for Polish rivers
between 40 and 610m in width. Riverbed geometry measurements are, like WSE, nec­
essary for reliable modeling of river discharge. Riverbed geometry, although observable,
typically requires in­situ data or extrapolation of the submerged portion. For ERS the
entire cross­section geometry can be observed using solely remote sensing by leverag­
ing the exposed riverbed during the recession period. Lamine et al. (2021) deduced the
cross­sections of an ephemeral river based on a digital elevation model (DEM) combined
with satellite imagery and radar altimetry. This was done by examining a stretch of the
Niger River.
The NASA altimetry mission Ice, Cloud, and land Elevation Satellite (ICESat­2) offers high
resolution due to its altimetry instrument, the Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter Sys­
tem (ATLAS). ATLAS uses a lidar to detect reflections of individual photons, resulting in an
along­track resolution of 0.7m and a footprint diameter of 17m, enabling high­resolution
measurements (T. Neumann et al., 2019). A key advantage of laser altimetry over radar
altimetry is its ability to provide accurate water and land elevation observations. Cooley,
Ryan, and Smith (2021) reported accurate WSE estimates from ICESat­2, with a mean
absolute error of 0.14m and a median standard deviation of 0.017m. Additionally, Wang et
al. (2019) found the mean difference between ground elevations from ICESat­2 data and
airborne lidar data to be −0.61m, noting vegetation cover as an important factor affecting
the elevation accuracy of ICESat­2 data. The newly launched Surface Water and Ocean
Topography (SWOT) mission offers WSE at high temporal and spatial resolutions. Com­
bining cross­section geometry from ICESat­2 with WSE from SWOT, once more SWOT
data is available, holds significant potential for producing dense discharge time series.
The study aims to investigate the potential of estimating river discharge for ungauged
ephemeral rivers using the ICESat­2 ALT03 product. The modeling approach is a mod­
ified version of the method presented by Coppo Frias et al. (2023). Unlike the original
approach, the full riverbed geometry is extracted, and no in­situ discharge data is used.
By creating a hydraulic characterization of a river, altimetry WSE observations can be
converted into discharge time series. In summary, the aims of this study are twofold:
(i) to leverage satellite observations to extract river cross­sections, establishing riverbed
geometry and (ii) to create a hydraulic model for discharge estimation based on dry cross­
sections and WSE. The thesis addresses the following research questions:
• Which processing steps are required for determining cross­sections using ICESat­2
ATL03?
• Which assumptions are necessary to build a hydraulic river model?
• How does the modeled discharge compare to global hydrological model estimates?
• Which methodology and ICESat­2 product limitations impact the results and how
can they be overcome?
A case study of the Dinder River
2
==PAGE:10==
2
Study Area
The Dinder River originates west of Lake Tana in Ethiopia and flows westwards across the
Sudanese border before joining the Blue Nile approximately 200km south of Khartoum.
A geographical view of the surrounding study area is found in figure 2.1 while a more
detailed view of the studied catchment is found in figure 2.2. The Dinder River is approx­
imately 750 km long. The modeled stretch is 583 km long, starting in the vicinity of the
Sudanese border. The Dinder River provides about 6 percent of Blue Nile annual flow with
an annual average flow of 2.20 · 109 m3/yr (1972­2015) (Hassaballah, 2021). The river is
ephemeral with flow duration from July to December, typically. An example of this can be
seen in figure 2.3. The hydrological processes of the Dinder basin are poorly understood;
especially, the predictions of hydrological and hydraulic dynamics (Hassaballah, 2021).
The catchment area is 36,624 km2 (Lehner and Grill, 2013). The two larger tributaries,
Khor Abu Muha and Khor Gelagu, are shown in figure 2.2.
The average rainfall is 1,400 mm/yr in the Ethiopian highlands while being less than 400
mm/yr at the confluence with the Blue Nile (Schneider et al., 2022). The mean annual tem­
perature does not exceed 20 °C in the highlands while it exceeds 30 °C at the confluence
with the Blue Nile. The catchment is classified as arid and semi­arid land (Hassaballah,
2021).
Figure 2.1: Geographical overview of the surrounding study area. The area is indicated
with a black outline on the inserted map of countries in Northeast Africa.
A case study of the Dinder River
3
==PAGE:11==
Figure 2.2: Geographical view of the study area with HydroWeb Virtual Stations, gauging
station, tributaries, and subcatchments.
The study area was chosen as DHI had an existing project where models were to be
created or enhanced. The client of the DHI project is the Eastern Nile Technical Regional
Office (ENTRO). DHI’s project aims to improve and expand ENTRO’s flood forecasting
systems in specific basins of East Africa. The reasons for choosing the Dinder River
for this study are twofold: (i) the ephemeral nature of the river allowed for cross­section
geometry extraction and (ii) DHI did not have an existing model of the river. Ideally, flood
forecasting locally and for Khartoum could be improved based on the cross­sections and
results found in this study.
Figure 2.3: The panels a) ­c) show the seasonal aspects of the Dinder River by HydroWeb
Vitual Station 3518. Image a) shows the exposed river bottom in May 2022, b) shows the
fully submerged river bottom in August 2022 and c) shows the partially exposed river
bottom in December 2022. ( Planet Explorer, 2022)
A case study of the Dinder River
4
==PAGE:12==
3
Methods and Data
This chapter describes the data processing and modeling procedures used in this re­
search study. Theoretical background and utilized data products are introduced when
relevant. Firstly, an overview of the entire modeling process is presented. This is followed
by a description of the satellite data processing. The hydraulic model is subsequently de­
scribed. Lastly, ancillary data used in the modeling procedure is presented.
3.1
Process Overview
The study aims to investigate the potential of estimating discharge for ungauged ephemeral
rivers using ICESat­2 measurements. The discharge estimates are compared to esti­
mates from global hydrological models (GHMs). A steady­state hydraulic model forms
the basis for the discharge estimates. The workflow of the steps taken to create, run, and
evaluate the hydraulic model is depicted in figure 3.1. The steps are briefly described to
create an overview of the process. The subsequent sections describe each step in more
detail.
Figure 3.1: Schematic diagram presenting an overview of the data processing and model­
ing workflow of the study. Green, blue, and red colors denote inputs, intermediate steps,
and outputs, respectively. Q denotes discharge.
The processing of the ICESat­2 ATL03 product entails geoid correction, outlier detection,
and smoothing to create cross­sections. The outlier filtering and smoothing involves a
Hampel filter, a median filter, and finally a simple moving average. The dry cross­sections
are introduced into Mike Hydro River to extract channel geometry information. Using a
defined river roughness and WSE observations from Hydroweb and ICESat­2, discharge
values are estimated by a steady­state hydraulic solver. This produces a discharge time
series and establishes the conversion between discharge and WSE. The modeled dis­
charge is compared to discharge time series from two GHMs: Global Flood Awareness
System (GloFAS) and a GHM developed by DHI (DHI­GHM).
A case study of the Dinder River
5
==PAGE:13==
3.2
ICESat­2
Remote sensing is the process of monitoring and detecting physical characteristics from
emitted and reflected radiation. It has the advantage of enabling data collection in remote
and inaccessible areas. Satellite altimetry works by transmitting laser or radar pulses to­
ward the Earth and measuring the return time to the satellite receiver system. The return
time depends on which delays the photon experiences. The height of the satellite itself
is defined in reference to an ellipsoidal earth model. The return time of the signal can be
used to deduce the distance to the surface. The ellipsoidal height of the measured sur­
face is the difference between the distance to the surface and the ellipsoidal height of the
satellite. Modern satellites, including ICESat­2, use the World Geodetic System (WGS)
84 ellipsoid (T. Neumann et al., 2019). The geoid is a gravitational equipotential surface
of the Earth (Arora et al., 2011). The geoid models the shape that the ocean surface
would take under the influence of the Earth’s gravitation and rotation alone. Orthometric
height is the surface height of the geoid. The difference between the orthometric height
and the ellipsoidal height is the so­called geoid undulation. For sound results, the altime­
try ellipsoid measurements are referenced to a geoid model. Various geoid models exist,
including the commonly used Earth Gravitational Model 2008 (EGM2008). Different res­
olutions and accuracies of EGM2008 exist based on the number of terms considered in
the harmonic expansion series (Arora et al., 2011).
ICESat­2, launched in September 2018, is part of NASA’s Earth Observing System. On­
board is the Advanced Topographic Laser Altimeter System (ATLAS) (T. Neumann et al.,
2019). It uses photon­counting lidar and ancillary systems (GPS and star cameras) to
make three primary measurements: the position of ICESat­2 in space at the time a pho­
ton is recorded, the pointing vector at the time a photon is transmitted, and lastly the flight
time of a photon from ATLAS, to the Earth and back again. ATLAS emits 1000 laser
pulses with approximately 10,000 photons every second, resulting in a laser pulse trans­
mission (and corresponding elevation measurement) every 0.7m along the ground track.
The laser pulse is split into six beams, divided into 3 pairs. Each pair has an energy ratio
of 1:4, resulting in a ”strong” and ”weak” beam. This is for improving detection on differ­
ent surfaces and different weather conditions. The six beams are labeled based on the
ground pattern from left to right: gt1l, gt1r, gt2l, gt2r, gt3l, gt3r with ”l” and ”r” referring to
the left and right position in a beam pair. The left and right beams are separated by 90m
in the across­track direction and 2.5km in the along­track direction. The distance between
beam pairs is 3.3km in the across­track direction (T. Neumann et al., 2019). Figure 3.2
showcases the idealized beam and footprint pattern of ATLAS. One of the advantages of
the visible photon wavelength used by ATLAS is that it allows for penetration of water. It
is, however, highly dependent on water clarity, with river water often being too murky. A
severe disadvantage is that the laser cannot penetrate heavy clouds.
A case study of the Dinder River
6
==PAGE:14==
Figure 3.2: ATLAS idealized beam and footprint pattern from T. Neumann et al., 2019.
Dark green represents the strong beam and light green the weak beam.
3.2.1
ICESat­2 Data Products
The photon measurements from ATLAS result in numerous data products of multiple lev­
els, where the amount of processing done increases with the level. An overview of the
levels can be found in figure 3.3.
Figure 3.3: Overview of relevant ATLAS data products, colored by processing level. Sim­
plified from T. Neumann et al., 2019.
test
The geolocation of an ATLAS photon event is contained in level 2 (ATL03), using ATL02,
Precision Orbit Determination (POD), and Precision Pointing Determination (PPD) (T.
Neumann et al., 2019). ATL03 ­ Global Geolocated Photon data, is the data product
used in this study. The data product ATL13 ­ Along Track Inland Surface Water Elevation
A case study of the Dinder River
7
==PAGE:15==
Data is discussed in section 5.3.1 as a potential expansion of the study methodology.
All ICESat­2 data products are publicly available and provided as Hierarchical Data For­
mat 5 (hdf5) files by the US National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC). ATL03 data is
available for download at https://nsidc.org/data/ATL03. The ATL03 data product is divided
into granules, each corresponding to approximately 1/14th of an orbit (T. A. Neumann et
al., 2023). The hdf5 files were retrieved via a Python script using a username and pass­
word from the NSIDC platform. Granules with photon events in the region from 33.5° to
35.5°E and 11.8° to 14.1°N and from the data range of 2018/11/05 to 2024/02/20 were
retrieved.
3.2.2
ATL03 ­ Global Geolocated Photon Data
The ATL03 data product includes time, latitude, longitude, and ellipsoid height, among
other parameters, for each photon detected and downlinked by ICESat­2. ATL03 is the
source for all photon information required by high­level products such as ATL13. For this
reason, ATL03 has five surface masks to reduce the data volume for each surface­specific
data product. Moreover, each photon event in ATL03 is classified as a likely signal photon
or a background photon event as well as a confidence assessment on these classifica­
tions. Geophysical corrections such as geoid and dynamic atmospheric correction are
also supplied for each photon event (T. Neumann et al., 2019). There are known issues
with ATL03 precision, which are discussed in section 4.1.2 along with the impacts.
In this study, two built­in ATL03 quality parameters were used for signal and background
separation, namely ’signal_conf_ph’ and ’quality_ph’. ’signal_conf_ph’ is the confidence
level associated with each photon event with 1 indicating noise, and 2,3,4 indicating low,
medium and high confidence, respectively. A possible transmitter echo path (TEP) event
(meaning a photon entering directly into the detection optic) receives a confidence level of
­2. ­1 is given to photon events that are not associated with a specific surface type. Each
photon event is assigned these confidence levels for each surface type: land, ocean,
sea ice, land ice, and inland water. ’quality_ph’ indicates the quality of the photon with
0 indicating nominal, while 1,2, and 3 indicate a possible afterpulse, impulse response
effect, and TEP, respectively.
3.2.3
ATL03 Processing
The ATL03 data products were obtained as described in section 3.2.1. This resulted in 187
hdf5 ATL03 data product files being downloaded. Distance, latitude, longitude, ellipsoidal
height, geoid correction, and quality parameters were extracted from the hdf5 files using
a Python script. The six tracks from each hdf5 file were handled separately and converted
into csv files for easier processing. The data was reprojected from latitude/longitude into
EPSG:32637 for more precise distance calculation. Each track was converted into a
linestring based on the first and last point (the points are sorted with respect to distance).
This aided in the visualization of the spatial coverage of the tracks. Moreover, based
on the linestring of each track, the crossings between the river and the tracks could be
established. The river centerline is discussed in section 3.4.5.
A case study of the Dinder River
8
==PAGE:16==
Figure 3.4: ATL03 tracks available for river cross­section creation and WSE estimation.
The available tracks can be seen in figure 3.4. As is further evident in the figure, many
tracks are associated with multiple crossings due to the meandering nature of the river.
Each crossing was assigned a chainage based on the river centerline. An early quality
check was performed. Tracks that had data holes larger than 20 meters or had less than
400 photon events within 1000 m of the river crossing were discarded. These values
were settled by performing a test on a smaller sample of the river. Significant efforts
went into creating a generalizable dry cross­section detection method, however this was
not achieved. The methods and learning outcomes of the efforts are described in section
5.1.2. Each cross­section was therefore manually inspected to see if a well­defined cross­
section in proximity to the river center line was visible.
3.2.4
ATL03 Filtering
Filtering to remove outliers from the photon cloud for each cross­section was necessary.
Different filtering methods were tested. The final filtering process is inspired by the work
of Li et al. (2023) and Coppo Frias et al. (2023). It has four distinct steps:
1. ATL03 quality parameters
2. Hampel filter
3. Rolling median filter
4. Simple moving average (SMA)
A case study of the Dinder River
9
==PAGE:17==
In the first step, the two quality measures mentioned in section 3.2.2, namely ’signal_conf_ph’
and ’quality_ph’ were used to determine likely signal photons. Values equal to or above 3
in the ’signal_conf_ph’ for surface types of land and inland water were kept, correspond­
ing to medium and high confidence levels. For ’quality_ph’ nominal photon events were
kept, meaning events with values different from 0 were discarded.
Secondly, a Hampel filter was applied, where the median and the median absolute devi­
ation (MAD) were computed for a sliding window. The MAD was defined as:
MAD = median(|xi −median(x)|)
Data points are considered outliers if they exceed the standard deviation of the median,
using the estimator: MAD · 1.4826. This builds on the assumption that the deviations are
symmetric and follow a normal distribution. The window size was initially set to 10 points.
The size of the moving window was later manually adjusted for some cross­sections. The
Hampel filter was used as one of the first filtering steps as it is particularly effective in
identifying and mitigating the impact of outliers.
Thirdly, a rolling median filter was applied with the same ground track interval. It works
by creating a ”window” that slides over points and replaces each point value with the
median of the neighboring points. Lastly, to create a smooth and well­defined cross­
section surface, a SMA is computed for ground track intervals of the same size. The SMA
is used as the last filtering step as it averages the values within the window. Hence, it
is highly sensitive to outliers as each data point contributes equally to the final average.
The advantage of the SMA is its effectiveness in identifying the underlying trend in the
dataset.
Cross­sections that were determined to be dry, based on visual inspection, were not fur­
ther filtered. The extraction of dry cross­section geometry characteristics is described in
section 3.3.1.
3.2.5
WSE Determination
Cross­sections that were determined to be wet (via visual inspection) were further pro­
cessed. The mean WSE and the standard error associated with it were determined for
each cross­section. The mean WSE is calculated by:
µ = 1
n
n
∑
i=1
xi
where n is the number of observations. The standard error of the mean (SEM) measures
the accuracy of the mean and was used for a weighted curve fitting of the WSE profile. It
is given by:
SEM =
σ
√n =
√
1
n
∑n
i=1(xi −µ)2
√n
The WSE was established for each wet cross­section by determining the 5% lowest con­
A case study of the Dinder River
10
==PAGE:18==
tinuous filtered points. The WSE section was then expanded to either side by including
points as long as they were not exceeding 0.5m of the WSE median. The first and last 5
points were removed from the final wet stretch to avoid potential effects of the riverbank.
The filtering process including the WSE is illustrated in figure 3.5.
Figure 3.5: ATL03 photon cloud outlier filtering steps for cross­section extraction. ”Dis­
tance to center point” refers to the distance between the intersection of the satellite track
and river representation. The cross­section is from 2018/10/29 track gt3l at river chainage
594km.
3.3
Hydraulic Model
The aim of the model is to estimate discharge from altimetry measured WSE for ungauged
ephemeral rivers. To achieve this a one­dimensional (1D) steady­state gradually varied
flow model is created. Gradually varied flow is defined as steady flow whose depth varies
gradually along the length of the river (Chow, 1959). This definition leads to two conditions:
(i) the hydraulic characteristics do not change for the time interval under consideration (ii)
the streamlines remain nearly parallel to the channel bed meaning the flow direction is
predominantly horizontal with vertical accelerations being negligible (Chow, 1959). The
steady­state assumption is necessary for discharge estimation. The assumption could
break down in periods of the high discharge season, due to rapidly varied flow, such as
hydraulic jumps.
Simplifying reality, the flow can be approximated as 1D, an idealization where flow param­
eters such as velocity, depth, and pressure are assumed to vary solely in the direction of
the flow and not across the river depth or width. This simplification from 3D to 1D is
performed as the data required to parameterize a 3D model is far greater. Moreover,
modeling 3D flow is computationally impractical, however strict 1D flow does not occur in
nature (DHI, 2023).
1D river discharge can be modeled using the Saint­Venant equations expressing mass
and momentum conservation (Chow, 1959). The mass also known as the continuity equa­
A case study of the Dinder River
11
==PAGE:19==
tion describes the conservation of mass, meaning the volume added, q, in a reach section
of length, ∂x is balanced by an increase in cross­sectional area ∂A:
∂Q
∂x + ∂A
∂t = q
(3.1)
where q the lateral inflow (m3/s), A is the flow cross­sectional area (m2), Q is the discharge
(m3/s), t is the time (s) and x is the chainage along the channel (m). The momentum
equation expresses conservation of momentum and accounts for the forces acting on the
water volume:
∂Q
∂t + ∂
∂x
(
β Q2
A
)
+ gA∂h
∂x −gA(S0 −Sf) = 0
(3.2)
where β is the momentum coefficient, g is the acceleration due to gravity (set to 9.81
m2/s), and h is the channel depth (m). The first two terms are forces of inertia (local and
convective acceleration). The third term represents pressure forces due to gravity. The
fourth term represents resistance/friction. The bed slope, S0 (m/m) is given by:
S0 = −dz
dx
(3.3)
where z (m) is the bed elevation above a specified height. The friction slope, Sf (m/m),
is given by:
Sf = Q2
K2
(3.4)
where K is the conveyance (m3/s), which can be expressed as a function of channel
cross­section geometry using Manning’s equation:
K =
A
5
3
n × P
2
3
(3.5)
where n is Manning’s roughness coefficient (s/m1/3) while P is the wetted perimeter (m).
Assuming steady flow and no lateral inflow, the mass conservation equation, 3.1, becomes
equal to the lateral inflow. The Saint­Venant equations can then be simplified to:
dh
dx −Q2
gA3
dA
dx −S0 + Q2
K2 = 0
(3.6)
Taking the partial derivative of the area relative to the chainage and width as well as
expanding the first term, the momentum conservation equation, 3.2, becomes:
(
1 −Q2
gA3
∂A
∂h
) dh
dx −Q2
gA3
∂A
∂x −S0 + Q2
K2 = 0
(3.7)
Isolating for the change in depth over chainage gives the following equation:
A case study of the Dinder River
12
==PAGE:20==
dh
dx =
(
Q2
gA3 ∂A
∂x + S0 −Q2
K2
)
(
1 −Q2
gA3 ∂A
∂h
)
(3.8)
dh
dx = RHS(x, h(x))
(3.9)
Right Hand Side (RHS) in equation 3.9 is the collection of terms not containing the deriva­
tive of the depth with respect to the chainage. The derivation is based on the theory
described by Chow (1959) and the derivation described by Kittel et al. (2021).
The Saint Venant equations which are only valid for free surface flows are based on a set
of assumptions (Chow, 1959) (DHI, 2024):
• Water is incompressible and homogeneous, resulting in negligible variations in den­
sity.
• The bottom slope of pipes and canals is small, such that cosine of the angle it makes
with the horizontal can be taken as 1.
• Wave lengths are large compared to the water depth. This allows for the flow to
be regarded as having a direction parallel to the bottom everywhere, meaning ver­
tical accelerations can be neglected and a hydrostatic pressure variation along the
vertical can be assumed.
• There is no acceleration of water perpendicular to the flow direction.
Moreover, subcritical fluvial flow is assumed. Subcritical flow is characterized by (i) the
depth of flow being greater than critical depth (ii) the velocity is less than critical velocity
(iii) the Froude number is less than one (iv) the flow is primarily controlled by downstream
conditions — changes or obstructions downstream can influence the flow upstream. The
Froude number is given by (Chow, 1959):
Fr =
V
√gD
(3.10)
where V (m/s) is the flow velocity and D (m) is the hydraulic depth, which is the cross­
sectional area of the flow divided by the top width of the flow channel.
3.3.1
Implementation of Hydraulic Model
For the computation of a WSE profile using the so­called step method, the following 4
pieces of information are generally required: (1) WSE at the boundary (2) Manning’s n (the
channel roughness) (3) geometry at various cross­sections along the reach (4) discharge,
(Chow, 1959). In this study, the inverse problem is presented, where the discharge is
determined based on the WSE profile, created using altimetry WSE observations.
A case study of the Dinder River
13
==PAGE:21==
WSE at the boundary
Coppo Frias et al. (2023) created WSE profiles from a given discharge and water level at
the downstream point. The downstream water level was calculated from in­situ discharge
data using the uniform flow equation and the local bed slope bed value of the two most
downstream cross­sections. A downstream water level is necessary in this study, how­
ever, without in­situ data a slightly different approach is needed. Similarly to Coppo Frias
et al., the downstream boundary is defined as a free, uniform outflow boundary condition,
meaning the friction slope is set equal to the bed slope. The uniform flow equation is given
by (Chow, 1959):
Q = 1
nAR2/3S1/2
(3.11)
where R and A are both dependent on the water depth. The boundary is defined at the
most downstream cross­section. The bed slope at the boundary condition is calculated
as follows:
S0DS = BLD2 −BLD1
∆x
(3.12)
where BLD1 is the bottom level at the most downstream point, BLD2 is the bottom level
at the second to last downstream point, and ∆x is the chainage difference between the
two points. The boundary point is referred to as WSEDS for the remainder of the report.
The potential error introduced by an imprecise WSEDS will decrease with every step away
from the boundary condition (Chow, 1959).
Manning’s n
Manning’s n describes the internal friction of water flow and the channel’s roughness
(Chow, 1959). River roughness is not directly observable. Chow expressed that in apply­
ing the Manning formula, the greatest difficulty lies in the determination of the roughness
coefficient n; as there is no exact method of selecting the n value. Factors affecting Man­
ning’s n include surface roughness, vegetation, channel irregularity and alignment, silting,
obstruction, size and shape of channel, stage, and discharge. For instance, the mean­
dering of natural streams may increase the n value by as much as 30%. Generally, the n
value decreases with stage and discharge, as the impact of the channel bottom irregular­
ities lessens. Grassy and rough riverbanks, however, result in the opposite effect (Chow,
1959). Manning’s n is assumed to be constant throughout the river and within each cross­
section. A rough manual calibration of Manning’s n was performed using the rating curve,
discharge time series, and climatology plot from in­situ data.
Cross­section Geometry
MIKE HYDRO River is a software developed by DHI (DHI, 2023). It is a physical and
conceptual model system for catchments, rivers, and floodplains. Cross­sections are
managed outside the main model and stored in files with an .xns11 extension. MIKE
Zero, which is a Windows­integrated graphical user interface, can be used to visualize and
A case study of the Dinder River
14
==PAGE:22==
compare cross­sections (DHI, 2023). Dry river cross sections stemming from ICESat­2
data are imported via txt files, containing the cross­section profile and properties such as
river chainage and the angle correction between the river and the satellite track. Left/right
banks are defined in the downstream direction, meaning the right bank is on the right­hand
side when looking downstream. The cross­sections are defined by a local coordinate
system describing distance and the orthometric height (DHI, 2023). Markers describing
the left and right bank and the lowest point in the cross­section can be set automatically.
MIKE Zero provides flow area, radius, width, and conveyance as a function of water level
for each cross­section. These graphs can be used as quality indicators. Nearby cross­
sections are expected to have similar curves. The Mike1D Cross Section Module is called
from the steady­state solver Python script, allowing for the extraction of geometrical cross­
section information. This direct use and the visualization done in MIKE Zero was the only
use of MIKE software. MIKE HYDRO River is useful for dynamic model calculations.
Instead, a more lightweight and quick hydraulic model is favored in this research study.
Lateral Inflow
The hydraulic model is built on an assumption of no­lateral inflow. This results in con­
stant discharge within the time period of consideration, meaning the discharge can be
estimated regardless of the location of the crossing. The no­lateral inflow assumption
was investigated to determine whether the river should be divided into reaches to comply
with the assumption. This was done by firstly investigating the upstream watershed area
along the river. Figure 3.6 depicts the upstream catchment area along the river chainage.
The upstream watershed areas are based on HydroBasins level 12 (Lehner and Grill,
2013). Figure 3.6 indicates where two tributaries join the Dinder River: at river chainage
105km Khor Gelagu joins the Dinder River while Khor Abu Muha joins the Dinder River
at chainage 370km. This is evident by the increase in upstream watershed area.
Figure 3.6: Upstream watershed area along the river chainage based on HydroBasins
level 12 (Lehner and Grill, 2013).
Upstream watershed area is not necessarily proportional to runoff. Hence, the effect of
the tributaries in terms of discharge was investigated. This was done by using discharge
estimates from two GHMs, GloFAS and DHI­GHM which are described in section 3.4.2
and 3.4.3, respectively. Cumulative flow plots are seen for the first tributary in figures 3.7
and 3.8 for DHI­GHM and GloFAS, respectively. The double mass plots are based on the
A case study of the Dinder River
15
==PAGE:23==
discharge season from July to December, although the same trend was seen when all
months were included. The figures highlight that both GHMs show a discharge increase
due to Khor Gelagu, as all the points are above the 1:1 line. The year 2019 in the GloFAS is
an exception. A similar investigation was done for the second tributary, Khor Abu Muha.
Neither of the models indicated systematic increased discharges for Khor Abu Muha.
Double mass plots demonstrating this can be found in figures 1 and 2 of the appendix.
In light of this, the modeled river stretch was divided into two segments based on Khor
Gelagu to comply with the no­lateral inflow assumption. DHI­GHM time series comparing
the discharges before and after the two tributaries can be found in figures 3 and 4 of the
appendix.
Figure 3.7: Cumulative discharge before
and after 1st tributary based on DHI­GHM.
Figure 3.8: Cumulative discharge before
and after 1st tributary based on GloFAS.
Steady­state solver
An overview of the processing steps of the hydraulic solver can be seen in figure 3.9. The
hydraulic solver is implemented in a Python script. Based on the Khor Gelagu tributary,
two hydraulic solvers are created, one for the river stretch before Khor Gelagu and one
for after. They are referred to as the upstream and downstream river stretch, respectively.
Either a single WSE at a specific chainage or multiple WSEs at different chainages are
provided as input to the model. This is possible due to the multiple laser beams on ICESat­
2 and the large footprint of Sentinel­3 (for the HydroWeb WSE). Either the upstream or
downstream river stretch model is run depending on the WSE chainage. In a few cases,
both were run as there were WSE measurements in both the upstream and downstream
stretch for the same day, resulting in different discharge values for the two stretches.
Due to the presence of water pools in the dry season and sporadic water flow in smaller
segments, only WSE from the discharge season (July­December) served as input to the
hydraulic solver.
A case study of the Dinder River
16
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.9: Process overview of the hydraulic model. Green, blue, and red colors denote
inputs, intermediate steps, and outputs, respectively.
The hydraulic solver is initialized with guesses for both WSEDS and discharge. The WSE
data is pooled on a daily level for more realistic results. The river is divided into spatial
increments of ∆x along the river. The effect of the grid size is dependent on the slopes
of the river as the Saint­Venant equations assume small slopes. This assumption breaks
down if the step sizes are too large. The step size should thus be chosen to be so small
that its effect is negligible. MIKE HYDRO River is used to extract the geometry of the
cross­sections, as previously described.
The hydraulic solver works in a backward fashion, starting at the most downstream cross­
section and moving upstream in steps of ∆x. The solver starts in the downstream cross­
section as disturbances at the downstream end propagate upstream during subcritical
flow (Chow, 1959). For each grid point, the change in water depth to the previous grid
point is given by equation 3.8. The water depth of the upstream grid point of the current
point (i­1) is given by:
hi−1 = hi −RHS(xi, h) × ∆x
(3.13)
The scipy­optimize­curve­fit function was used to fit the WSE profile to the observed WSE
by adjusting the discharge values (Jones, Oliphant, Peterson, et al., 2024). It implements
a nonlinear least­squares optimization to find the discharge value that results in the best
fit between the WSE observations and the WSE profile. To increase the precision of the
discharge estimates, the SEM for each WSE observation is used as a weight if there are
multiple WSE observations on the same day:
A case study of the Dinder River
17
==PAGE:25==
weights =
1
SEMWSE2
(3.14)
The ’curve_fit’ algorithm adjusts the fit of the WSE profile based on the weighting of the
WSE observations. The covariance matrix returned by the curve_fit function provides
variance estimates for the fitted parameters along its diagonal, in this case the discharge.
Taking the square root of the diagonal results in the standard deviation of the discharge,
which is used for confidence interval calculations. This approach could only be used
for days with multiple WSE observations. For days with a single WSE observation, the
confidence interval was set to 10% of the discharge estimate.
To minimize computation time, a dictionary was created that stores the relationship be­
tween a range of valid discharges and the corresponding WSEDS. By minimizing an ob­
jective function that provides the squared difference between the given and calculated dis­
charge (using the uniform flow equation) the relationship between discharge and WSEDS
was established.
3.4
Ancillary Data
3.4.1
In­Situ Data
In order to evaluate the performance of the hydraulic model, discharge time series from
other sources were necessary, ideally based on in­situ discharge measurements from a
matching time period. Al Gewisi gauging station, located at river chainage 430km, has
been operational since 1972. The Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources, Sudan
operates the gauging station (Hassaballah, 2021). In­situ data was provided by DHI for
the period 2005­2011. The discharge time series can be seen in figure 3.10 while table
3.1 contains the discharge percentiles.
Figure 3.10: In­situ discharge time series from Al Gewisi gauging station.
A case study of the Dinder River
18
==PAGE:26==
Table 3.1: Percentiles of in­situ discharge data
Percentiles
0.05
0.25
0.5
0.75
0.95
Q (m3/s)
23.1
44.7
92.6
202.8
486.1
In lieu of in­situ discharge data of the modeled time period, discharge time series based
on GHMs were used. Several GHMs exist that provide operational global forecasts and
historical discharge estimates, for instance, the World­Wide HYPE, GloFAS and DHI­
GHM. The latter two were chosen and are described in the following subsections.
3.4.2
GloFAS
The Global Flood Awareness System (GloFAS) is part of the Copernicus Programme
and provides gridded modeled daily hydrological time series, including river discharge
(Grimaldi et al., 2022). It uses meteorological reanalysis data derived from ERA5 which
provides records of atmospheric, land surface, and oceanic conditions in 31km resolution.
It integrates observational data through data assimilation techniques. GloFAS has global
coverage with a horizontal grid resolution of 0.05◦, with daily time steps (Grimaldi et al.,
2022). The discharge time series are available for download at
https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu. A spatial extent can be specified. The discharge time
series are then created by appending the largest discharge value within the spatial extent
for each timestamp. The close proximity of the Blue Nile needs to be considered when
specifying the spatial extent. Discharge time series from areas of the river were down­
loaded to investigate the effects of water inflows and losses. The spatial extents of the
downloaded area can be found in figure 5 of the appendix.
3.4.3
DHI­GHM
The DHI­developed GHM (DHI­GHM) has been developed to provide historical, real­time,
10­day, and seasonal forecast simulations at the global scale (Murray et al., 2023). It con­
sists of a gridded rainfall­runoff model of 0.1◦resolution and a routing model that moves
water between model grid cells and subcatchments as well as within the river system. The
model setup and parameterization are determined based on globally available datasets.
Precipitation data is sourced from the IBM Weather Company database. The model does
not rely on local data sources for model calibration (Murray et al., 2023). As highlighted
by Murray et al. (2023), DHI­GHM is particularly relevant for organizations with regional
or global scope as well as for studies without resources for local scale models.
The daily discharge time series aggregated on subcatchment level were accessed through
an API using a Python script. The sub­catchments are sourced from HydroBasins level
12 (Murray et al., 2023). The HydroBasins dataset is described in section 3.4.6. The
simulated discharge time­series for the relevant sub­catchments were downloaded based
on the intersection with the river center line. The investigated level 12 HydroBasins can
be found in figure 5 of the appendix.
A case study of the Dinder River
19
==PAGE:27==
3.4.4
THEIA HydroWeb
The THEIA HydroWeb product uses radar altimetry measurements from multiple satellite
missions to create WSE time series at virtual stations (VS). The series are publicly avail­
able at https://hydroweb.next.theia­land.fr/. The methods used for estimating the water
levels are described by Normandin et al. (2018) and Da Silva et al. (2010). In the study
area, there are 7 VS, which all have a temporal resolution of 27 days. Their placement
can be seen in figure 2.2, while the source, start and end date of the virtual stations can
be found in table 3.2. The 7 VS are operational and automatically validated.
WSE observations from Hydroweb are used to densify the ICESat­2 WSE observations.
The VS in the area of interest are based on Sentinel­3 radar measurements. Radar sys­
tems have the great advantage of not being affected by clouds, as they operate in the
microwave spectrum, which has longer wavelengths compared to visible and infrared
light (Polehampton et al., 2023). These longer wavelengths are not significantly affected
by cloud particles, which are smaller than the radar wavelengths. Radar signals can thus
pass through clouds with minimal scattering or absorption (Polehampton et al., 2023).
Cloud cover is abundant in the rainfall season, resulting in less useful ICESat­2 tracks as
the laser cannot penetrate clouds. Hence, radar systems are useful for WSE densifica­
tion, particularly in the cloudy season.
Table 3.2: Overview of relevant Hydroweb virtual stations
Virtual Station
Chainage (km)
Source
Start date
End date
3518
507.5
Sentinel­3A
2019/03/18
2023/12/10
3530
495.1
Sentinel­3A
2019/03/18
2023/12/10
3543
483.1
Sentinel­3A
2019/03/18
2023/12/10
3605
421.3
Sentinel­3A
2019/03/18
2023/12/10
3611
415.7
Sentinel­3A
2019/03/18
2023/12/10
3870
157.7
Sentinel­3B
2018/12/04
2023/12/14
3983
36.9
Sentinel­3A
2019/05/05
2023/12/31
The Hydroweb product manual indicates that a geoid grid using the EGM2008 with a grid
resolution is 1x1 minute is utilized (Hydroweb, 2021). Similarly, ATL03 uses the EGM2008
geoid model (in a mean tide system) which provides reference geoid undulations that refer
to the WGS­84 reference ellipsoid with a one arc­minute resolution. It is used to interpolate
the undulation at reference photon locations (T. Neumann et al., 2019). However, upon
inspection, significant differences between the geoid corrections were found (up to 20cm
for data points within meters of each other). The reason for this was not determined. To
overcome this, geoid correction values from the closest ICESat­2 track to each Hydroweb
VS were applied to the HydroWeb WSE observations. No ICESat­2 photon point was
more than 100m away from the VS reference location.
3.4.5
River Representation
A shapefile of the river center line is essential for modeling the river. The more closely the
shapefile follows the true river, the easier the detection of the riverbed cross­section be­
A case study of the Dinder River
20
==PAGE:28==
comes. A river center line from the Global River Widths from Landsat Database (GRWL)
was tested (Allen and T. M. Pavelsky, 2018b). It proved to be quite angular, which was
problematic considering the meandering nature of the river. Moreover, Allen and T. M.
Pavelsky (2018) found that GRWL was most accurate at widths wider than 90m. DHI pro­
vided a river representation of the Dinder River in a shapefile. It followed the river more
closely when compared to satellite imagery, although the bends were still relatively angu­
lar. Lastly, a shapefile from the Surface Water and Ocean Topography River Database
(SWORD) was tested (Altenau et al., 2021). SWORD is a data product of the Surface Wa­
ter and Ocean Topography (SWOT) satellite mission. It provides high­resolution shape­
files of river reaches approximately 10 km in length for global rivers that are 30 meters or
wider (Altenau et al., 2021). SWORD was found to follow the river more accurately when
compared to satellite imagery. The SWORD shapefile performed the best as it uses some
of the most high­resoultion DEMs and the mission is built specifically for data collection
and mapping of rivers (Altenau et al., 2021). The SWORD shapefile was used for the
remainder of the modeling.
3.4.6
HydroSHED
HydroBASINS is a subset of the HydroSHEDS database and consists of polygon layers
that depict sub­basin boundaries at different scales (Lehner and Grill, 2013). There are
12 hierarchically nested sub­basin breakdowns globally. The ‘Pfafstetter’ coding system
is implemented, allowing for understanding of grouping of subbasins (Lehner and Grill,
2013). Hydrobasin levels 5, 6, and 12 were used in this research. All levels can be
downloaded at https://www.hydrosheds.org/products/hydrobasins.
HydroSHED rivers is another HydroSHEDS product used in this study. It was used for
the tributary analysis. Rivers in the product are represented in a vectorized line network.
Rivers included in the dataset have a catchment area of at least 10 km² or an average
river flow of at least 0.1 m³/sec (Lehner and Grill, 2013). The dataset can be downloaded
at https://www.hydrosheds.org/products/hydrorivers.
3.4.7
Planet Explorer
Planet Explorer is an online tool for viewing and downloading geospatial imagery. It in­
cludes imagery from PlanetScope, Sentinel­2, and Landsat 8. PlanetScope consists of
approximately 130 imagery satellites, providing images of approximately 3m per pixel res­
olution (PBC, 2024). Access to the data products was achieved by applying to the Planet’s
Education and Research Program. Various imagery products are available for download
in a GeoTIFF format at https://www.planet.com/explorer. The Visual Asset data product
is used in this study. It provides orthorectified, color­corrected, RGB imagery products,
optimized for the human eye (PBC, 2024). As such it provides images as they would look
if viewed from the perspective of the satellite. The PlanetScope constellation collects im­
agery of nearly all the landmass on Earth daily. However, due to cloud cover (and other
quality thresholds), there are days without published data in the area of study, particularly,
in the cloudy season (PBC, 2024).
A case study of the Dinder River
21
==PAGE:29==
3.4.8
Copernicus Database
Sentinel­2 is part of the Copernicus Programme developed by the European Space Agency.
It provides high­resolution images in visible and infrared wavelengths, to monitor vegeta­
tion, soil and water cover, inland waterways, and coastal areas. It has a spatial resolu­
tion of as little as 10m and a maximum revisit time of 5 days (Gatti and Bertolini, 2018).
Sentinel­2 images were used to provide insights into the discharge season and water
pooling effects due to the larger spatial resolution compared to ICESat­2. The Sentinel­2
coverage is impacted by clouds, as ICESat­2.
The Surface Water and Ocean Topography (SWOT) Satellite was launched in Decem­
ber 2022. The main aim of the mission is to provide information on Earth’s surface wa­
ter. It provides observations attached to predefined river reaches included in SWORD.
The observations include WSE, width, slope, and discharge estimates. SWOT has a
21­day cycle (Fu et al., 2024). Both SWOT and Sentinel­2 data can be accessed at
https://browser.dataspace.copernicus.eu/.
A case study of the Dinder River
22
==PAGE:30==
4
Results and Discussion
This chapter presents the results of the research and discusses the findings. It begins with
the results derived from ICESat­2 processing, followed by the outcomes of the discharge
modeling efforts. The results include comparisons between discharge estimates from the
hydraulic model and GHMs. The following chapter, 5, discusses the limitations of the
study and offers suggestions for future research.
4.1
ATL03 Data Processing
In total, 1515 crossings between ICESat­2 tracks and the river centerline were deter­
mined. The initial track quality check discarded crossings with data holes larger than
20m or fewer than 400 data points within 1000m of the river crossing. This reduced the
number of crossings to 970. The 970 cross­sections were visually inspected to ensure a
well­defined land and water topography, with limited data holes. 631 crossings had clearly
defined river cross­sections. Although the ATL03 outlier filtering method was the same,
the dry and wet cross­sections had separate results and issues and are thus discussed
separately. The spatial distribution of the ATL03 WSE observations is depicted in figure
4.1 while the distribution of the dry cross­sections is depicted in figure 4.2.
Figure 4.1: ALT03 and Hydroweb WSE ob­
servations used in the model.
Figure 4.2: ATL03 tracks containing dry
cross­sections used in the model.
A case study of the Dinder River
23
==PAGE:31==
4.1.1
Dry Cross­Sections
44 dry cross­sections were selected, defining the riverbed geometry along the 583km long
modeled river stretch. Initially, more than 100 dry cross­sections were selected but due
to the nature of ICESat­2 laser configuration, many of the cross­sections were in close
proximity. Closely spaced cross­sections were removed to reduce the computational time
and ensure a realistic WSE profile. Certain reaches of the river were affected by scarce
ICESat­2 data, mostly due to impacts of weather conditions and the north­south course of
certain stretches. This is further discussed in section 5.1. In general, the biggest inhibitor
was the fact that the dry riverbed was only exposed for about half of the year from January
to June. Even then water pools in depressions of the riverbed greatly reduced the number
of dry cross­sections. This scarcity in dry cross­sections resulted in a separation between
dry cross­sections of up to 41km in the hydraulic model. Figure 4.5 showcases the spacing
of the cross­sections along the modeled river stretch.
4.1.2
WSE Estimates
Of the 631 well­defined cross­sections, 181 cross­sections were within the discharge sea­
son. The 181 ATL03 WSE estimates had an average SEM of 0.04cm. The 7 HydroWeb
stations resulted in 236 WSE observations with an average associated uncertainty of
25.19cm. The location of the ATL03 WSEs is shown in figure 4.1. The mean WSE or bot­
tom level of each crossing was determined and plotted with its corresponding chainage
in figure 4.5. The figure further highlights the seasonal variations, showing how the WSE
varies between the no­flow and the flow season. (A detailed plot displaying this can be
found in figure 6 of the appendix.) This confirms the timing of the no­flow season found
in the in­situ data. Hence, in future research studies, if the timing of the dry season was
unknown, seasonal WSE observations could provide a viable alternative. Cloud cover,
which is more prominent in the discharge season, greatly affected the number of obtain­
able ICESat­2 WSE in the discharge season. The initial quality check is further part of the
reason for the few WSE estimates. This is discussed in section 5.3.1. Another point of
discussion is the geoid correction applied to the HydroWeb WSE observations. As men­
tioned in section 3.4.4, the closest ICESat­2 geoid value (which in no case was more than
100m away) was applied to overcome the substantial differences in geoid values. This is
a limitation of the study. A more precise approach would have been to determine geoid
correction values from the same geoid model based on the location of the ICESat­2 and
HydroWeb points.
As mentioned in section 3.2.4 there were issues with outlier filtering if the window size
remained constant for the Hampel, rolling median, and SMA. To avoid overfitting and
oversmoothing, the window size was manually adjusted for some cross­sections, and in
some cases, points were manually discarded.
An example of cross­sections requiring manual adjustment was when secondary and ter­
tiary water layers were present as seen in figure 4.3. The built­in ATL03 quality parame­
ters ’signal_conf_ph’ and ’quality_ph’ did not assign appropriate values to the photons in
A case study of the Dinder River
24
==PAGE:32==
the secondary and tertiary water layers. Specular returns occur when the laser light re­
flects directly back to the sensor with minimal dispersion or scattering. This often occurs
over calm water (NSIDC, 2023). The returning pulse is too narrow and strong compared
to what the ATLAS was designed to handle. This results in multiple surfaces being de­
tected, spaced by either one or two times the ATLAS dead time. Dead time is the time
required for a single detection element of ATLAS to detect a single photon and reset to
be able to detect a second event (NSIDC, 2023). In the cross­section example displayed
in figure 4.3, specular returns result in a primary return at 439m with a secondary surface
at 438m and a tertiary surface at 437.5m. Generally, most of the secondary and ter­
tiary surfaces detected were separated by about 0.5m, which is the effective dead space
separation (NSIDC, 2023). Figure 4.4 showcases a crossing further upstream with the
same laser from the same track. This demonstrates that the secondary and tertiary sur­
faces are an effect of the water reflectivity and not the laser. A related issue, which was
also present in some wet cross­sections, was multiple surface returns, generally seen at
∼2.3m and ∼4.2m below the primary surface. This phenomenon is most likely due to
small after­pulses in either the ATLAS transmitted laser pulse or a small amount of elec­
tronic noise following the arrival of the primary surface return (NSIDC, 2023). Due to the
lower point density of the echo surface signals, the Hampel filter effectively handled this
phenomenon, minimizing the effect on the final WSE estimate. For a more representative
SEM the points were, nevertheless, discarded.
Figure 4.3:
ATL03 crossing for gt1l on
2018/10/25 at chainage 236.4km with ob­
served and quality photons.
Secondary
and tertiary water surfaces are present af­
ter quality filtering. The largest width of wa­
ter is 285m.
Figure 4.4:
ATL03 crossing for gt1l on
2018/10/25 at chainage 221.4km with ob­
served and quality photons. The width of
water is 100m.
Figures 4.3 and 4.4 further demonstrate how the river width varies across short distances.
The river width expands from 100m to 285m within 15km. It is further seen how the
A case study of the Dinder River
25
==PAGE:33==
riverbed geometry changes with an island in the river in the downstream cross­section.
During high flows, the water width could increase to over 500m and submerge the is­
land. Of all the ATL03 WSE used in the model, the greatest width detected was 2.1km
demonstrating the presence of flood plains.
The only filtering that has been applied to the data in figure 4.3 and 4.4 is the ’sig­
nal_conf_ph’ and ’quality_ph’ described in section 3.2.4. The figures highlight that the
riverbanks are not captured after the initial quality filter has been applied, a phenomenon
that is prominent in most cross­sections. This is to be expected as the diameter of the
laser beam is 17 m (T. Neumann et al., 2019). As the laser crosses over the riverbank
there could be returns from both the riverbed and land surface resulting in unreliable data
points. However, as is especially visible on the left bank in figure 4.4, the quality filter
results in a large loss of riverbank points at times. This impacts the dry cross­sections
where the riverbanks provide important information of the cross­sectional geometry.
4.2
Hydraulic Model
Figure 4.5: Modeling results showcasing WSE profiles for the upstream and downstream
river stretch for discharge values of 50 and 500 m3/s, the modeled bottom level of the
river, and ATL03 mean bottom level and WSE observations for 631 cross­sections.
Figure 4.5 showcases the simulated WSE profile across the river stretch for discharges
of 50 and 500 m3/s. The modeled river bottom indicates a fairly smooth elevation profile
with some local variations. The elevation profile of the bottom levels suggests steeper
slopes in the upstream stretch. The elevation profile was compared to a profile based on
the Copernicus 30m resolution DEM (European Space Agency and Sinergise, 2021). The
A case study of the Dinder River
26
==PAGE:34==
DEM confirmed that the upstream stretch is expected to have a steeper profile. The effect
of step size was investigated, revealing grid convergence at 50 meters. Consequently, the
model’s grid size is set to 50 meters. However, a more computationally efficient approach
would have been to vary the step sizes based on the proximity of the cross­sections.
The simulated WSE profiles of the upstream stretch indicate shallower water depths com­
pared to the downstream stretch. This is expected due to the steeper elevation slopes
resulting in faster water flow. According to the Bernoulli principle, increased speed re­
sults in a decrease of pressure or potential energy, which in the context of river flows
includes hydraulic head (Chow, 1959). The shallower water depths are also evident in
the WSE observations in the Hydroweb data. Comparing the most upstream HydroWeb
VS (3983 at chainage 37km) and the most downstream HydroWeb VS (3518 at chainage
508km), the water depth differs substantially. The average depth differences are 3.85m
and 7.96m between the no­flow and high­flow seasons for the upstream and downstream
VS, respectively. This can be seen in figure 4.6. The figure further indicates that the sim­
ulated bottom level is higher than some WSE HydroWeb observations. Satellite system
deviations between ICESat­2 and Sentinel­3 (the source of the HydroWeb data) were not
taken into account in this research. However, Wu et al. (2023) found an average RMSE
of 0.28 m between ICESat­2 and Hydroweb WSE when investigating lakes, suggesting
an area of further research. Importantly, Wu et al. (2023) used the ALT13 product, not
ATL03. Sentinel­3, due to its radar system, provides less accurate measurements due to
the low spatial resolution (300m) (Wu et al., 2023) (Polehampton et al., 2023).
The HydroWeb WSE observations are not measured at the exact reference location of
every orbit. Excluding VS 3870, 8 out of 14 of the WSE observations below the simulated
river bottom are associated with a distance greater than 0.5km from the reference location
of the VS. This suggests the observations are not necessarily of the riverbed but likely a
nearby water pool. VS 3870 indicated WSE observations approximately 97cm below the
simulated river bottom for every dry season. Satellite imagery showed this section to
retain water throughout the dry season, thus being particularly deep, compared to the
immediate upstream and downstream river stretch. Correcting the simulated bottom level
would require more than 0.97m, as the riverbed does dry out in the no­discharge season.
For the 6 other VS, the WSE observations below the simulated river bottom are on average
21cm below the simulated river bottom. This is not corrected for in the simulated river
bottom.
A case study of the Dinder River
27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 4.6: WSE time series for the most upstream and downstream HydroWeb VS with
the simulated river bottom. a) depicts the upstream VS 3983 (chainage 36.7km) with av­
erage depth differences of 3.85m between the no­ and high­flow and 3 WSE observations
below the simulated bottom level b) depicts the upstream VS 3518 (chainage 507.7km)
with annual average depth differences of 7.96m between the no­ and high­flow and 3
WSE observations below the simulated bottom level.
The WSE changes gradually across the reach although some areas of more rapid change
become especially pronounced at higher discharge values. For instance, the bump in the
WSE profile at chainage 269km seen in figure 4.5 is caused by two cross­sections of vary­
ing geometry in close proximity. As is seen in the rating curve in figure 4.7, the two cross­
sections in question have different WSE­discharge relationships. The cross­sections are
320 meters apart. The geometries of the cross­sections are seen in figure 4.8 and 4.9.
The 8m narrower width and steeper riverbank slopes of the cross­section at chainage
268.9km (figure 4.9) result in an upwards­shifted rating curve compared to the cross­
section at chainage 268.6km. In other words, the cross­section at chainage 268.9km has
poorer conveyance. This exemplifies how the geometry of the cross­sections affects the
WSE profile and the WSE­discharge relationship. Moreover, it showcases the importance
of checking for reasonable hydraulic behavior.
A case study of the Dinder River
28
==PAGE:36==
Figure 4.7: Rating curves from hydraulic model relating WSE and discharge at two neigh­
boring cross­sections. The legend indicates the river chainage at the cross­sections.
Figure 4.8: Cross­section at river chainage
268.6km.
Bottom width of 71m.
”Obs”
refers to observed ATL03 points while ”fil”
refers to filtered ATL03 points
Figure 4.9: Cross­section at river chainage
268.9km.
Bottom width of 63m.
”Obs”
refers to observed ATL03 points while ”fil”
refers to filtered ATL03 points
The WSE profile close to the boundary condition does not diverge from the remainder of
the reach as seen in figure 4.5. This suggests that the boundary condition behaves rea­
sonably. The bed slope boundary is 0.0001 m/m for the downstream stretch and 0.0004
m/m for the upstream stretch. The impacts of the boundary condition were not investi­
gated nor was it investigated whether there was improvement potential. The boundary
condition is nevertheless expected to impact the results just upstream of it, where results
should thus be interpreted with more care. This could have been avoided by introducing
a synthetic cross­section downstream of the reach of interest. The potential error intro­
duced by an imprecise WSEDS would decrease with every step away from the boundary
condition (Chow, 1959). This is one of the advantages of using the step method for cre­
ating the flow profile (Chow, 1959). A synthetic downstream cross­section away from the
area of interest would allow for a burn­in period, minimizing the effect of the uniform flow
assumption at the boundary.
Due to the bends, varying slopes, and quickly changing flow conditions in natural rivers,
unsteady flow (3D effects) could become significant. Hence, the assumption of subcritical
flow was tested by calculating the Froude number for each ∆x at the highest discharge
value in the observed discharge time series, 620 m3/s. The Froude number, which was
A case study of the Dinder River
29
==PAGE:37==
calculated using equation 3.10, did not exceed 1. This signifies that the subcritical flow
assumption is valid.
test
Figure 4.10 depicts the WSE profile with the corresponding WSE observations used to
establish the profile. The weighted curve fitting is evident, with WSE observations with
high uncertainty being given less weight.
Figure 4.10: Example of discharge determination based on the best fit of the WSE profile.
The WSE observations are weighted based on their SEM.
Figure 4.11 illustrates the discharge estimates from the hydraulic model. The discharge
time series captures the high discharge values in August and September. For 18.9% of
the samples, the confidence intervals were set to 10% of the discharge. This was done
as the confidence intervals could not be determined from the curve fit function as there
was only a single WSE observation on that day.
Figure 4.11: Modeled discharge estimates for the upstream and downstream stretch.
A case study of the Dinder River
30
==PAGE:38==
4.2.1
Model Comparison
A direct comparison between the modeled discharge time series and in­situ data is not
possible due to the different time periods. The climatology plot in figure 4.12 compares
the mean discharge values between the in­situ data and the modeled discharge of the
downstream stretch with Manning’s n set to 0.07 s/m1/3. The figure indicates similar dis­
charge range values for the discharge season. Importantly, the plot should be interpreted
with caution for several reasons. Firstly, weather, and specifically precipitation, changes
from year to year. This is not accounted for in the plots. Secondly, the in­situ data has
daily measurements, while the WSE observations in the hydraulic model do not have even
temporal coverage.
Figure 4.12: Mean discharge comparison between in­situ and modeled data.
Figure 4.13 contains the rating curves for the in­situ and modeled discharge for a Man­
ning’s n of 0.07s/m1/3. The two rating curves follow a power law, as expected from the
Manning equation. The agreement between the two rating curves is reasonable. Some
systematic deviations between the two curves are evident. The model slightly overesti­
mates discharge for lower depths and underestimates discharge for larger depths. The
lower density curve in the in­situ data, beneath the modeled rating curve is from a single
event in October 2007, most likely representing a single flood wave. Figure 4.14 contains
the modeled rating curve for n of 0.05 s/m1/3. The model systematically overestimates
the discharge values. The agreement between the modeled and in­situ rating curve is
poorer compared to the rating curve for n of 0.07s/m1/3.
Figure 4.13: Comparison of rating curve for
Al Gewisi gauging station based on In­Situ
data and the simulated rating curve for n of
0.07 s/m1/3.
Figure 4.14: Comparison of rating curve for
Al Gewisi gauging station based on In­Situ
data and the simulated rating curve for n of
0.05 s/m1/3.
A case study of the Dinder River
31
==PAGE:39==
The in­situ data provided has an arbitrary water level scale, with the smallest water depth
being at 7.59m with a corresponding 0 m3/s flow. This difference is corrected by sub­
tracting all in­situ water levels with 7.59m. The correction has been applied to the data in
figure 4.13 and 4.14.
Figure 4.15 includes the discharge estimates from the downstream hydraulic model, as
well as the downstream discharge estimates from GloFAS and DHI­GHM. The figure
showcases the large difference between the two GHMs. GloFAS predicts smoother dis­
charge trends and lower discharge values in general compared to DHI­GHM. The hy­
draulic model discharge estimates appear to be closer to GloFAS than to DHI­GHM. Fig­
ure 4.16 compares the modeled and the GHMs discharge estimates in the form of a scatter
plot. The figure indicates poor agreement between the modeled discharge and discharge
estimates from the GHMs. Importantly, the direct comparison between daily discharge
values is sensitive to the routing models in the GHMs, particularly in extreme precipitation
events. The in­situ discharge data revealed percentage increases of up to 300% and 138
m3/s between daily values. The comparison is also sensitive to the precipitation forcings
of the GHMs. The majority of points in figure 4.16 are beneath the 1:1 line suggesting the
modeled discharge underpredicts compared to two GHMs. Percentiles of the discharge
estimates from GloFAS and DHI­GHM can be found in table 1 and 2 of the appendix.
Figure 4.15: Discharge time series from the downstream modeled stretch, GloFAS, and
DHI­GHM.
A case study of the Dinder River
32
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.16: Comparison between discharge values of GHMs (”Q Predicted”) and mod­
eled discharge values (”Q Modeled”).
Table 4.1: Comparison of mean absolute error (MAE), root mean square error (RMSE),
Bias, Median Percentage Error (Med. PE), and Mean Percentage Error (Mean PE) for
different Manning’s n values for discharge predictions between the modeled discharge
and DHI­GHM and GloFAS predictions.
Manning’s n
MAE
RMSE
Bias
Med. PE
Mean PE
(sm−1/3)
(m3/s)
(m3/s)
(m3/s)
(%)
(%)
DHI­GHM
0.09
125.9
249.8
91.6
73.2
1393
DHI­GHM
0.07
124.7
242.1
71.4
42.8
1108.4
DHI­GHM
0.05
129.9
238.6
34.3
2.0
761.8
DHI­GHM
0.03
160.7
280.3
­53.6
­42.7
397.3
GloFAS
0.09
79.1
110.7
60.0
162.7
1811.6
GloFAS
0.07
76.3
104.1
39.8
104.3
1505.2
GloFAS
0.05
81.6
115.3
2.6
45.8
1044.8
GloFAS
0.03
126.0
212.1
­85.5
­14.8
534.8
The performance of the hydraulic model compared to DHI­GHM and GloFAS can be seen
in table 4.1. For both DHI­GHM and GloFAS the lowest Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
is achieved with a Manning’s n of 0.07 s/m1/3. The MAE are 124.7 and 76.3 m3/s, re­
spectively indicating large differences between the GHMs discharge estimates and the
modeled discharge. The comparison between the in­situ data and modeled discharge
indicated the best agreement at a Manning’s n of 0.07 s/m1/3. However, the median per­
centage errors, which measure the central tendency of the percentage error, show the
best agreement for DHI­GHM at n of 0.05 s/m1/3 and for GloFAS at n of 0.03 s/m1/3 with
values of 2.0% and ­14.8%, respectively. In comparison the mean percentage errors are
761.8% and 534.8 %. The low median PE indicate good agreement for the majority of
discharge estimates while the high mean percentage error indicates that there are some
A case study of the Dinder River
33
==PAGE:41==
predictions with large errors, which significantly influence the mean. These errors are ev­
ident in figure 4.16 where points far away from the 1:1 line, particularly for DHI­GHM, can
be seen. These errors lead to the high RMSE and MAE values. The positive bias values
for n=0.05­0.09 s/m1/3 demonstrate that DHI­GHM and GloFAS systematically overesti­
mate the discharge values compared to the modeled discharge estimates. The opposite
is the case for n of 0.03 s/m1/3. In summary, the agreement between the GHMs and
the hydraulic model is poor particularly due to large outliers. The performance measures
further highlight the effect of Manning’s n.
DHI­GHM captures the ephemeral nature of the river with the discharge dropping to zero,
albeit the zero discharge period is generally 2 months as opposed to the expected 6
months. GloFAS on the other hand contains positive discharge values throughout the
dry season although the yearly average minimum is 5.4 m3/s. The historical in­situ dis­
charge data, anecdotal descriptions in Hassaballah (2021), and satellite imagery from dry
seasons clearly indicate a no­flow season for approximately half of the year.
The two GHMs have limitations. Irrigation, at a very coarse scale, is the only water use
included in DHI­GHM (Murray et al., 2023). This, however, is not thought to be of concern
as there are no large­scale industrial irrigation schemes on the Dinder River (Hassaballah,
2021). No substantial water users, such as industrial users, are mentioned in literature.
Neither of the models includes reservoir regulation. This is likewise not a problem for
the Dinder River, but it would be a limitation for reservoir­affected reaches of interest.
The DHI­GHM is shown to have poorer performance in dry areas (Murray et al., 2023).
The performance of GloFAS has been shown to decrease with decreasing upstream area
(Grimaldi et al., 2022). Water balance issues between DHI­GHM and GloFAS are present
for 2018­2023. DHI­GHM predicts larger discharge volumes 88.7% of the time compared
to GloFAS. A double mass plot highlighting this issue can be found in figure 7 in the
appendix. One of the main reasons behind the large differences in discharge predictions
is the precipitation forcings. Precipitation products vary widely. In areas with limited in­situ
data, it is challenging to determine the best­performing product. The precipitation forcings
stem from ERA5 and IBM Weather Company for GloFAS and DHI­GHM, respectively
(Grimaldi et al., 2022) (Murray et al., 2023). Researching these precipitation forcings
could shed light on which of the two GHMs is more reliable in the area of interest.
Figure 4.17 illustrates the flow exceedance curve in the discharge season from July to
December. As described in relation to the climatology plot 4.12, direct comparison be­
tween the simulated data and the hydrological and in­situ discharge time series should
be done with caution. GloFAS and DHI­GHM have the same temporal resolution, while
the in­situ data also has daily discharge values but from a different time period. Figure
4.17 indicates that GloFAS predicts lower discharge values compared to the in­situ data.
Disregarding the highest 15%, the overlap between GloFAS and the in­situ data is rea­
sonable. DHI­GHM predicts the highest discharge values. These results are in line with
what is seen in figure 4.15: DHI­GHM appears to be too spikey while GloFAS appears
A case study of the Dinder River
34
==PAGE:42==
to be too smooth compared to in­situ data. Lastly, the modeled discharge exceedance
curve seems to suggest that the modeled discharge values are underestimated. How­
ever, the modeled flow exceedance is heavily impacted by the small amount of ICESat­2
WSE observations in August and September. This sampling issue makes it very likely
that big discharge events are missed.
Figure 4.17: Flow exceedance curves based on modeled discharge, GloFAS, DHI­GHM
and in­situ data from July to December.
4.2.2
Gaining or Losing Discharge Across the Stretch
The hydraulic model builds on the assumption that discharge is constant along the mod­
eled river stretch at a given time. The model further builds on an assumption of no­lateral
inflow and no losses. This assumption is first investigated using the DHI­GHM discharge
estimates. This is done by comparing discharge estimates from the subcatchment imme­
diately following the Khor Gelagu tributary and the most downstream subcatchment. The
specific level 12 HydroBasins used can be seen in figure 5 of the appendix. DHI­GHM
discharge estimates in figure 4.18 indicate decreasing discharges for the downstream
stretch of the river. This indicates losses, suggesting the no­losses assumption along the
stretch is not valid. As previously described irrigation is the only water user accounted for
in DHI­GHM (Murray et al., 2023). No large­scale irrigation projects exist for the Dinder
River, suggesting the modeled losses are caused by natural processes such as evapora­
tion and infiltration (Hassaballah, 2021). This is likely due to swamps, spilling of the river
banks, and the arid climate.
Figure 4.19 investigates the no­lateral inflow and no losses assumption using GloFAS
discharges. For four out of the six years, the assumption of no­lateral inflow and no­
loses appears reasonable, as the discharge series follows the 1:1 line closely. Figure
4.19 indicates that the no­lateral inflow assumption is not valid for 2019 and 2021. The
reasons for this were not further investigated. However, it is noteworthy that GloFAS
suggests the river gains water in the downstream stretch in some years, while DHI­GHM
A case study of the Dinder River
35
==PAGE:43==
suggests the river loses water in the downstream stretch in most years. A double mass
plot comparing DHI­GHM and GloFAS can be found in figure 7 in the appendix.
Figure 4.18: DHI­GHM cumulative com­
parison between discharge after 1st tribu­
tary and the most downstream point.
Figure 4.19: GloFAS cumulative compar­
ison between discharge after 1st tributary
and the most downstream point.
In summary, DHI­GHM and GloFAS are in agreement that Khor Gelagu contributes with
discharge, as discussed in section 3.3.1. However, the two GHMs are not in agreement
on whether the downstream river stretch is gaining or losing water. This leads to different
conclusions on whether the no­lateral inflows and no­loses assumptions are reasonable.
Ways of overcoming this ambiguity are discussed in section 5.2.1.
As mentioned in section 3.3.1 both GloFAS and DHI­GHM indicate that the 2nd tributary,
Khor Abu Mahu, does not contribute with discharge. Considering the upstream watershed
area in figure 3.6, this highlights the fact that runoff is not necessarily proportional to the
contributing area. Runoff is among other factors dependent on precipitation, meteoro­
logical, geologic, and storage characteristics. The upstream watershed area of Khor Abu
Mahu is further away from the Ethiopian highlands compared to the upstream area of Khor
Gelagu as seen in figure 2.2. Hassaballah (2021) described that the Dinder River receives
its water mainly from the runoff generated in the Ethiopian highlands approximately 30 km
west of Lake Tana. GloFAS and DHI­GHM confirm this. Due to the distance between the
Khor Abu Mahu watershed area and the highlands, combined with the plains and gentler
slopes, it is deemed reasonable that it does not contribute with considerable discharge.
A local calibrated rainfall­runoff model would provide better insight.
4.2.3
Water Pools
Initially, surface elevations from all distinct cross­sections served as input to the hydraulic
model regardless of the season, and, subsequently, regardless of whether the cross­
sections were wet or dry. The results, however, indicated that certain areas of the river
retain their water during the dry season. These scattered water pools occur in the deep
areas of the river. This results in some WSE being below the bottom level of the dry
A case study of the Dinder River
36
==PAGE:44==
cross­sections as seen in figure 4.20 for two crossings in 2019 and 2020. The figure
further demonstrates that the water pool occurred in a similar vicinity in 2019 and 2020.
Planet Explorer Imagery from one of the days of crossings confirms the presence of a
water pool as seen in figure 4.21. Planet Explorer imagery from different years indicates
the presence of the water pool that only dries out towards the end of the dry season, if at
all. As previously mentioned, certain HydroWeb WSE estimates in the dry season also
indicated estimates below the simulated bottom level. These lower elevation segments
in the riverbed are not corrected for. The depths are likely inactive areas of the riverbed.
Figure 4.20: WSE observations for 4 cross­
ings with corresponding river chainage and
the simulated river bottom. The crossings
are from the gt1l and gt1r on the 2019­05­
27 and 2020­02­24. The 4 WSE observa­
tions are below the simulated river bottom.
Figure 4.21: Planet Explorer imagery from
2019­05­27 with representations from the
2019­05­27 and 2020­02­24 gt1l and gt1r
tracks. Due to water being retained, the
crossings measure WSE, as opposed to a
dry riverbed.
4.2.4
Influence of Manning’s n
The simple manual calibration described in section 3.3.1 resulted in a Manning’s n of
0.07 s/m1/3. The roughness describes the internal friction of water flow and the channel’s
roughness. When the resistance increases, water will experience a larger resisting force,
resulting in a decreased flow velocity, increased water depth, and decreased discharge.
The effect of varying the Manning roughness is shown in figure 4.22. n has been varied
between 0.5 s/m1/3 and 0.9 s/m1/3. The figure shows how the discharge values decrease
when Manning’s n increases. As previously mentioned, the aim of this study is to provide
a methodology for establishing discharge time series using altimetry data only. Larnier et
al. (2021) dealt with the problem of inferring flow discharge, bathymetry, and a roughness
parameter from WSE. It was demonstrated that if, among dry bathymetry and roughness
parameter, one of them can be accurately estimated, the remaining parameter can be
inferred together with the discharge. Importantly, the flow model utilized by Larnier et al.
was different. Due to time limitations, the roughness parameter was not attempted to be
inferred. Instead, as described in section 3.3.1, Mannings’s n can be used as an indicator
A case study of the Dinder River
37
==PAGE:45==
when comparing with the in­situ discharge values by determining whether the discharge
values encompass similar ranges. A further improvement would be the consideration of
spatial heterogeneity in the river length. It could be modeled by implementing sections
with varying roughness. This would also require calibration.
Figure 4.22: Modeled discharge time series with different Manning’s n values in s/m1/3.
In summary, Manning’s n significantly impacts the discharge estimates. It is a significant
limitation of the study, that an in­depth calibration of Manning’s n has not taken place.
This is an area of research for future studies and an aspect of the model that should be
improved.
A case study of the Dinder River
38
==PAGE:46==
5
Limitations and Further Study
This chapter discusses the limitations of the research methodology. Limitations of the
ICESat­2 product, the subsequent filtering process, and the hydraulic model are dis­
cussed. This is followed by the limitations and learnings of the automization effort. Finally,
future and alternative data products which could improve the methodology are discussed.
5.1
ICESat­2
One of the largest drawbacks of ICESat­2 for this particular implementation is the inability
to operate in all weather conditions. The laser altimeter cannot penetrate thick clouds.
As cross­section geometry is relatively stable over time, future acquisitions will reduce
the impact of this limitation. For WSE observations, on the other hand, this limitation
can be overcome by the use of radar altimetry. ICESat­2 orbits the Earth in a near­polar
orbit, meaning it travels mostly in a north­south direction. This orbital path allows for
more abundant and detailed cross­sections for west­east oriented river stretches. The
meandering nature of the Dinder River limited the impact of this limitation, however, for
more straight north­south oriented rivers this limitation could become more pronounced.
Weather conditions and the orbital path of ICESat­2 resulted in an uneven distribution of
WSE observations and dry cross­sections, as seen in figures 4.1 and 4.2. The proposed
method is feasible for other rivers of pronounced ephemeral nature, provided sufficient
ICESat­2 coverage. As mentioned, Messager et al. (2021) found that 44–53% of the
global river network ceases to flow at least one month per year. Hence, the potential for
expanding the method is great.
5.1.1
ATL03 Filtering
The filtering process used in this research required manual adjustments in order to estab­
lish reasonable cross­sections. For the dry cross­sections, a process with standardized
window size was not established. The balance between filtering for above­ground vege­
tation without losing essential cross­section characteristics proved hard to automate.
The ATL03 product offers a variety of data quality parameters that can be used to effec­
tively discard invalid measurements (T. Neumann et al., 2019). The quality parameters
can be extracted from the hdf5 files. In this research, ’signal_conf_ph’ and ’quality_ph’
were used. Although not investigated, there is likely a potential for improving the filtering
process by using more of the built­in quality parameters. For example, the flag ’sigma_h’
contains the estimated height uncertainty (1­sigma) of each photon event. It could poten­
tially have been used for weighting the photon events such that the outlier filtering of the
cross­sections was improved without manual adjustments.
5.1.2
Automization Effort
One of the goals of the study was to create an automatized approach for selecting dry
cross­sections for the hydraulic model. The selection was the most time­consuming man­
A case study of the Dinder River
39
==PAGE:47==
ual aspect of the study. Establishing an automized approach that is generalizable could
greatly ease the process of establishing similar hydraulic models in other areas of inter­
est. The automatization goal was not met. In general, it was found that the following three
characteristics are associated with the presence of water:
• flatness
• high density of photons
• low elevation compared to surrounding photons
Different approaches were tested using one or multiple of these characteristics to auto­
matically identify wet and subsequently dry cross­sections. The following is a summation
of some of the different dry cross­section detection methods that were tested. They were
tested on a 50km sample of the river, where all the dry cross­sections had been manually
determined. This allowed for determining the effectiveness of the approach.
• Using Sentinel­2 imagery with a Normalized Difference Water Index layer (NDWI)
it was possible to find out when and where the riverbed was exposed. (Section
3.4.8 describes how the imagery was accessed.) A matching ICESat­2 track could
then be searched for. This process was time ineffective and was hindered by the
temporal resolutions of Sentinel­2, the relatively few ICESat­2 tracks, and the water
pools in the riverbed in the dry season. For this process to be automatized low
NDWI values could be matched with ICESat­2 tracks.
• A Global Surface Water dataset map under the Copernicus Programme was tested
(Pekel et al., 2016). The map, in raster file format, contains pixel values representing
the water occurrence within that month for a specific year. Although the monthly
resolution is not ideal, it could be used as an initial filter for determining whether
there was potential for dry cross­section extraction. This method, however, was not
pursued further as the dataset only includes data up to 2021. The dataset could,
alternatively, have been used to select portions of the river with low occurrence as
targets for reaches where pools are unlikely to occur.
• Using ATL03 data, the 5% lowest consecutive elevation points in each cross­section
were determined and the slope was investigated. Water surfaces were expected to
have small slopes. This method did not work since the high photon density by water
results in slopes that even after filtering are indistinguishable from the bottom level
slopes of dry cross­sections. The lowest 5m stretch instead of percentile was also
investigated but showed similar results.
• Taking advantage of the high photon density associated with water, the point density
of 1m, 5m, and 10m bins were tested. Once again, a clear trend between wet and
dry cross­sections was not visible. This is mostly since the phenomenon of multi­
ple photon points on a vertical line (meaning multiple photon events for the same
distance) does not only occur over water. In general, the density in the lowest 5m
A case study of the Dinder River
40
==PAGE:48==
stretch was found to be the best performing method. It was, however, not deemed
robust enough nor generalizable and was hence not used for dry cross­section se­
lection over the entire river stretch.
Some key learnings were made from testing the different methods and failing to create a
generalizable dry cross­section detection method. Firstly, a sound outlier filtering process
is necessary, as outliers greatly impact water detection. Secondly, the most helpful aspect
of the selection process was knowing when the discharge season generally occurs. This
can be determined based on literature. Alternatively, as described in section 4.1.2 by
plotting water or bottom level observations from all cross­sections the seasonal discharge
trend becomes apparent. Lastly, it would be powerful to take advantage of other data
products of high temporal and spatial resolution. Some contenders for this are discussed
in section 5.3.
5.2
Hydraulic Model
Applying the study methodology in a highly instrumented catchment would be highly valu­
able in terms of validating the method. Investigating the potential of combining a GHM
with the hydraulic model could also lead to interesting findings. This would require devel­
oping a method of determining the best­performing GHM for the local application. Such
a method could also aid in the performance evaluation of the hydraulic model. Some of
the assumptions and limitations of the hydraulic model are briefly discussed.
5.2.1
No­Lateral Inflow and No­Losses Assumption
One of the limitations of the hydraulic model is that lateral inflow and losses are not ac­
counted for. As highlighted in section 4.2.2, the GHMs discharge time series vary substan­
tially, suggesting differences in lateral inflows and losses. Consequently, if the hydraulic
model were to be improved by considering lateral inflows and losses, the reliability of this
data would need to be high. Coppo Frias et al. (2023) implemented lateral inflow in a sim­
ilar hydraulic model. The MERIT flow accumulation map was utilized to distribute lateral
inflow along the chainage of the river proportional to the watershed area. The lateral inflow
was determined based on in­situ data from the upstream and downstream point (Coppo
Frias et al., 2023). This approach could potentially yield interesting results for the Dinder
River, as well as heighten the accuracy of the model. However, this would require in­situ
data in the upstream and downstream locations for the modeled time period. In order to
validate the no­lateral inflow and no­loses assumption on the different stretches of the
river, in­situ gauging stations would need to be present at the downstream and upstream
location of each river stretch. Alternatively, an appropriate calibrated rain­fall runoff model
for the specific region could elude to the effects of lateral inflow and losses and subse­
quently shed light on the reasonability of the assumptions. Lastly, in­situ discharge data
for an overlapping period of ICESat­2 data would allow for checking that ATL03 WSEs
vary consistently with discharge.
A case study of the Dinder River
41
==PAGE:49==
5.2.2
Sedimentation Effects
The hydraulic model builds on the assumption that the cross­sections are constant over
the time period being modeled. Using in­situ data from Al­Gewisi gauging station, Has­
saballah (2021) observed that sedimentation­induced morphological changes resulted in
shifts in the WSE­discharge relationship, with lower discharges for the same water levels
at the end of the 24­year period compared to the beginning. The shift was not quantified.
In this research sedimentation and changes in river geometry over time are not consid­
ered. It is a limitation to be mindful of and potentially consider in future work. Especially,
if there are large sedimentation phenomena in the area of interest or the modeled period
is longer.
5.2.3
Cross­section Densification
As discussed in section 4.1.1, the high prevalence of water pools in the no­flow season
resulted in limited dry cross­sections. Approximately half of the cross­sections were omit­
ted for either one of two reasons, namely being in close proximity to another cross­section
or resulting in unrealistic hydraulic results. Developing a more systematic methodology
for determining which cross­sections to keep in the hydraulic model would likely result in
more cross­sections in the model. In the current model there are stretches of up to 41km
without cross­sections. The precision of the model within these stretches is expected to
be limited. Extrapolating the submerged portion of the riverbed could be a solution to
overcome this problem. The submerged riverbed in the dry season likely represents an
inactive portion of the riverbed.
5.3
Additional Data Products
There are numerous alternatives to the data products used in this research, with more
being developed. A few promising data products are briefly discussed.
5.3.1
ATL13 ­ Along Track Inland Surface Water Data
The ICESat­2 level 3 data product, ATL13 ­ Along Track Inland Surface Water Data con­
tains along­track WSE for inland water bodies including rivers greater than about 50­100m
wide (M. Jasinski et al., 2023). The ATL13 data product was not directly used in this study.
However, for limiting the manual workload of filtering and processing the ATL13 provides
an easy alternative for providing WSE, compared to extracting them from ATL03. This
could for instance be practical from a commercial perspective.
The ATL13 granules were downloaded for the same spatial extent as ATL03 for a simple
comparative study (M. F. Jasinski et al., 2023). The ATL13 WSE data points showed
evidence of the water pools described in section 4.2.3 with sporadic singular points, more
likely to represent a water pool than an actual wet cross­section.
Even when disregarding the singular ALT13 WSE data points, there were more ALT13
WSE observations compared to ATL03 WSE observations. The limited ATL03 WSE ob­
servations were found to be primarily due to the overly strict initial quality check, men­
tioned in section 3.2.4: tracks that had data holes larger than 20 meters or had less than
A case study of the Dinder River
42
==PAGE:50==
400 photon events within 1000m of the river were discarded. Due to the abundance of
clouds in the discharge season, viable wet cross­sections were discarded. Due to time
limitations, this was not corrected, although it could have contributed to more ALT03 WSE
observations. Interestingly, several ATL03 tracks were not included in ATL13 tracks, de­
spite the ATL03 track containing clear wet cross­sections. Figure 5.1 depicts an example
of where the ALT03 and ALT13 result in almost identical WSE observations, illustrating
the potential of the ATL13 data product.
Figure 5.1: An ATL03 crossing (2018/10/25, gt3l at chainage 202.6 km) with the resulting
ATL13 WSE and ATL03 WSE observations.
The automated processing of the ATL13 would need to be considered to avoid lowering
the quality of the WSE estimates. For instance, the ALT13 data has known issues, such
as including land area close to water (Michael Jasinski, 2023). In summation, the ATL13
data product appears promising in the further development of the methodology of the
study, albeit, it requires further research.
5.3.2
High Resolution Imagery
High­resolution imagery could provide a valuable extension of the research method in
multiple ways. Firstly, it could aid in selecting dry cross­sections by forming the basis
of a surface water extent map. As previously mentioned, this could be used to select
target reaches with low water occurrence in the dry season. Secondly, once dry cross­
sections are selected and inserted into the hydraulic model, a width­to­WSE relation could
be established (particularly because the riverbeds are sloped rather than vertical in many
sections of the river) (Allen and T. M. Pavelsky, 2018a). As described in section 3.4.7,
PlanetScope consists of approximately 130 imagery satellites, providing images of ap­
proximately 3 meters per pixel resolution at a daily cadence, weather, and quality permit­
ting (PBC, 2024). In this study, the images were only used for visual inspection, although
it shows a large potential for extending the research method. This could provide insights
into the spatial and temporal changes of the river, as well as increase the temporal density
of the modeled discharge time series.
A case study of the Dinder River
43
==PAGE:51==
5.3.3
SWOT Data
The SWOT Mission focuses specifically on surveying the Earth’s surface water (Fu et
al., 2024). For each SWOT satellite overpass, observations attached to predefined river
reaches are stored. The observations include the WSE, width, slope, and discharge es­
timates (Fu et al., 2024). With a 21­day cycle, SWOT provides WSE observations at a
greater temporal and spatial density than ICESat­2. This is evident in figure 5.2, which
shows the densely spaced WSE observations from a single track. The SWOT data is
downloaded as described in section 3.4.8. The figure illustrates the large potential of
using SWOT for WSE observations, once more acquisitions have been made. Further­
more, SWOT uses advanced radar technology as opposed to laser, limiting the impacts
of weather effects, further increasing the amount of WSE observations (Fu et al., 2024).
The tributaries discussed in this research are not part of SWORD, except for a 20km
river stretch in the upstream part of the Khor Gelagu. Hence, only SWOT WSE observa­
tions from this short stretch are available. SWOT also includes discharge estimates. The
SWOT mission shows great potential for expanding the research methodology and will
provide insights into river dynamics, such as WSE­width and WSE­discharge relations.
Figure 5.2: SWOT WSE observations from 2024/05/19.
A case study of the Dinder River
44
==PAGE:52==
6
Conclusion
A reasonable hydraulic model for discharge estimation is essential but challenging to ob­
tain in data­scarce regions. In this study, a methodology is presented for modeling dis­
charge of ungauged ephemeral rivers using remote sensing only. Hydraulic model results
could aid in creating local flood forecasting and water management strategies. The nov­
elty of the research method is the incorporation of full cross­sectional geometry from the
ICESat­2 ATL03 product. This is achieved in ephemeral rivers which have the great ad­
vantage of having exposed riverbeds for part of the year. With approximately half of the
global river network ceasing to flow at least one month per year, the potential for applying
the study methodology in other rivers is great.
Discharge from the ephemeral Dinder River in Sudan is estimated via a 1D hydraulic
steady­state gradually varied flow model with a uniform outflow boundary, a no­lateral in­
flow, and a no­losses assumption. The river is divided into two reaches to comply with the
no­lateral inflow assumption. The hydraulic characterization of the river channel enables
the conversion of WSE to discharge.
ATL03 data resulted in 44 dry river cross­section profiles. The cross­sections were ex­
posed to a multi­step outlier filtering process. An automated outlier detection filtering
process and an automated selection of dry cross­sections were not achieved. In total
417 WSE observations from ATL03 and HydroWeb served as input to the model. The
WSE observations from ATL03 had an average standard error of the mean of 0.04cm
after outlier filtering. The standard errors of the mean were used for fitting WSE profiles
in the hydraulic model. The proposed method is feasible for other rivers of pronounced
ephemeral nature, provided sufficient altimetry, particularly ICESat­2, coverage.
The performance of the hydraulic model was challenging to determine due to the lack of
a calibrated local model or in­situ data. Comparisons with discharge estimates from two
GHMs showcased large differences in performance depending on the Manning’s n value.
In­situ data from a different time period pointed towards a Manning’s n of 0.07 s/m1/3.
This resulted in median percentage errors of 42.8% and 104.3%, and mean percentage
errors of 1,108.4% and 1,505.2% when comparing the modeled discharge estimates to
those from two GHMs. This highlights the poor agreement, as well as the presence of
large outliers, between the hydraulic model and GHMs discharge estimates.
This research highlights a series of disadvantages of the utilized methodology and possi­
ble improvements. Future research should focus on densification of WSE and implement­
ing a methodology for calibrating Manning’s n without in­situ forcing. The hydraulic model
can be expanded to include lateral inflow. Most importantly, testing the methodology in
a highly instrumented catchment would provide important insights into the performance
and applicability of the study methodology.
A case study of the Dinder River
45
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
Allen, George H and Tamlin M Pavelsky (2018a). “Global extent of rivers and streams”.
In: Science 361.6402, pp. 585–588.
– (2018b). Global River Widths from Landsat (GRWL) Database (V01. 01)[Data set]. Zen­
odo. Accessed: 20/01/2024. URL: https://zenodo.org/record/1297434.
Altenau, Eric H. et al. (2021). “The Surface Water and Ocean Topography (SWOT) Mission
River Database (SWORD): A Global River Network for Satellite Data Products”. In:
Water Resources Research. URL: https://doi.org/10.1029/2021WR030054.
Arias, P.A. et al. (2021). “Technical Summary”. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Ed. by V. Masson­Delmotte et al. Cam­
bridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, pp. 33–
144. DOI: 10.1017/9781009157896.002.
Arora, Kusumita et al. (2011). Encyclopedia of solid earth geophysics. Springer Science
& Business Media.
Bullard, Joanna E, Grant H Mctainsh, and Paul Martin (2007). “Establishing stage­discharge
relationships in multiple­channelled, ephemeral rivers: A case study of the Diamantina
river, Australia”. In: Geographical Research 45.3, pp. 233–245.
Chow, Ven Te (1959). Open­Channel Hydraulics. MC Graw Hill Book Company Inc.
Clayton, Jordan A and Jason W Kean (2010). “Establishing a multi­scale stream gaging
network in the Whitewater River basin, Kansas, USA”. In: Water resources manage­
ment 24, pp. 3641–3664.
Cooley, Sarah W, Jonathan C Ryan, and Laurence C Smith (2021). “Human alteration of
global surface water storage variability”. In: Nature 591.7848, pp. 78–81.
Coppo Frias, Monica et al. (2023). “River hydraulic modeling with ICESat­2 land and water
surface elevation”. In: Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 27.5, pp. 1011–1032.
Da Silva, Joecila Santos et al. (2010). “Water levels in the Amazon basin derived from
the ERS 2 and ENVISAT radar altimetry missions”. In: Remote sensing of environment
114.10, pp. 2160–2181.
DHI, MIKE (2023). MIKE HYDRO River User Guide. Accessed: 10/3/2024. URL: https:
//manuals.mikepoweredbydhi.help/latest/MIKE_HYDRO.htm.
– (2024). 1D­DHI Simulation Engine for 1D River and Urban Modelling­Reference Man­
ual. URL: https://manuals.mikepoweredbydhi.help/2020/Water_Resources/MIKE_1D_
reference.pdf.
European Space Agency and Sinergise (2021). Copernicus GLO­30 Digital Elevation
Model. Distributed by OpenTopography. Accessed: 30/01/2024. URL: https://doi.org/
10.5069/G9028PQB.
A case study of the Dinder River
46
==PAGE:54==
Fovet, Ophélie et al. (2021). “Intermittent rivers and ephemeral streams: Perspectives
for critical zone science and research on socio­ecosystems”. In: Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Water 8.4, e1523.
Fu, Lee­Lueng et al. (2024). “The Surface Water and Ocean Topography Mission: A break­
through in radar remote sensing of the ocean and land surface water”. In: Geophysical
Research Letters 51.4, e2023GL107652.
Gatti, A and A Bertolini (2018). “Sentinel­2 products specification document”. In: Thales
Alenia Sp, pp. 1–487.
Grimaldi, S. et al. (2022). River discharge and related historical data from the Global
Flood Awareness System. v4.0, European Commission, Joint Research Centre (JRC).
Accessed on 18­04­2024. URL: https://cds.climate.copernicus.eu/cdsapp#!/dataset/
cems-glofas-historical.
Halicki, Michał and Tomasz Niedzielski (2022). “The accuracy of the Sentinel­3A altimetry
over Polish rivers”. In: Journal of Hydrology 606, p. 127355.
Hassaballah, Khalid Elnoor Ali (2021). Land degradation in the Dinder and Rahad Basins:
Interactions between hydrology, morphology and ecohydrology in the Dinder National
Park, Sudan. CRC Press.
Hostache, Renaud et al. (2009). “Water level estimation and reduction of hydraulic model
calibration uncertainties using satellite SAR images of floods”. In: IEEE Transactions
on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 47.2, pp. 431–441.
Hydroweb (2021). Handbook Hydroweb. Version 2.1. Accessed: 5/4/2024. THEIA Land
Data Centre. URL: https://www.theia-land.fr/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/Handbook_
Hydroweb-V2.1.pdf.
Jasinski, M. et al. (2023). ICESat­2 Algorithm Theoretical Basis Document (ATBD) for
Along Track Inland Surface Water Data, ATL13, Version 6. Tech. rep. ICESat­2 Project.
DOI: 10.5067/03JYGZ0758UL. URL: https://doi.org/10.5067/03JYGZ0758UL.
Jasinski, M. F. et al. (2023). ATLAS/ICESat­2 L3A Along Track Inland Surface Water Data,
Version 6. Accessed: 10/05/2024. DOI: 10.5067/ATLAS/ATL13.006. URL: https://nsidc.
org/data/ATL13/versions/6.
Jones, E., T. Oliphant, P. Peterson, et al. (2024). SciPy: Open source scientific tools for
Python. Accessed on 18­04­2024. URL: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/tutorial/index.
html#user-guide.
Kittel, Cecile MM et al. (2021). “Hydraulic model calibration using CryoSat­2 observations
in the Zambezi catchment”. In: Water Resources Research 57.9, e2020WR029261.
Lamine, B.O.M et al. (2021). “Estimation of the Niger River cross­section and discharge
from remotely­sensed products”. In: Journal of Hydrology: Regional Studies 36, p. 100862.
Larnier, Kévin et al. (2021). “River discharge and bathymetry estimation from SWOT al­
timetry measurements”. In: Inverse problems in science and engineering 29.6, pp. 759–
789.
Lehner, Bernhard and G. Grill (2013). “Global river hydrography and network routing:
baseline data and new approaches to study the world’s large river systems”. In: Hy­
A case study of the Dinder River
47
==PAGE:55==
drological Processes 27.15. Accessed: 10/3/2024, pp. 2171–2186. URL: http://www.
hydrosheds.org.
Li, Hui et al. (2023). “On the capacity of ICESat­2 laser altimetry for river level retrieval:
An investigation in the Ohio River basin”. In: Journal of Hydrology 626, p. 130277.
Messager, Mathis L et al. (2021). “Global prevalence of non­perennial rivers and streams”.
In: Nature 594.7863, pp. 391–397.
Michael Jasinski, Jeremy Stoll (2023). ATL13 Along Track Surface Water Data, Release
006 Algorithm Summary and Known Issues. Tech. rep. Last accessed: 21/5/2024. Green­
belt, MD: NASA National Snow and Ice Data Center Distributed Active Archive Center.
URL: https://nsidc.org/data/user- resources/documents/ICESat2_ATL13_Known_
Issues_v006.pdf.
Murray, Alexandra M et al. (2023). “DHI­GHM: Real­time and forecasted hydrology for the
entire planet”. In: Journal of Hydrology 620, p. 129431.
Neumann, T et al. (2019). “Ice, cloud, and land elevation satellite–2 (ICESat­2) project:
Algorithm theoretical basis document (ATBD) for global geolocated photons (ATL03)”.
In: National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Goddard Space Flight Center.
Neumann, T. A. et al. (2023). ATLAS/ICESat­2 L2A Global Geolocated Photon Data, Ver­
sion 6. Accessed: 2024­02­02. DOI: 10.5067/ATLAS/ATL03.006. URL: https://nsidc.
org/data/ATL03/versions/6.
Normandin, Cassandra et al. (2018). “Evolution of the performances of radar altimetry
missions from ERS­2 to Sentinel­3A over the Inner Niger Delta”. In: Remote Sensing
10.6, p. 833.
NSIDC (2023). Known issues ­ Technical Reference v006. Accessed: 15/5/2024. URL:
https://nsidc.org/sites/default/files/documents/technical- reference/icesat2_atl03_
known_issues_v006.pdf.
PBC, Planet Labs (2024). Planet Scope Imagery collection versus publication. Planet.
URL: https://developers.planet.com/docs/data/planetscope/#planetscope- imagery-
collection-versus-publication.
Pekel, Jean­Francois et al. (2016). “High­resolution mapping of global surface water and
its long­term changes”. In: Nature 540. Accessed: 10/2/2024, pp. 418–422. DOI: 10.
1038/nature20584. URL: https://global-surface-water.appspot.com/download.
Planet Explorer (2022). Planet Application Program Interface: In Space for Life on Earth.
Last accessed: 20/5/2024. URL: https://www.planet.com/explorer/.
Polehampton, E. et al. (Apr. 2023). Copernicus Sentinel­3 SLSTR Land User Handbook.
Technical Report OMPC.ACR.HBK.002. Accessed: 10/5/2024. Preparation and Opera­
tions of the Mission Performance Centre (MPC) for the Copernicus Sentinel­3 Mission:
ESA. URL: Sentinel3-SLSTR-Land-Handbook-i1r3-14April2023.docx.
Schneider, Udo et al. (2022). GPCC Full Data Monthly Product Version 2022 at 1.0°:
Monthly Land­Surface Precipitation from Rain­Gauges built on GTS­based and Histor­
ical Data. Accessed: 20/3/2024. DOI: 10.5676/DWD_GPCC/FD_M_V2022_100. URL:
https://doi.org/10.5676/DWD_GPCC/FD_M_V2022_100.
A case study of the Dinder River
48
==PAGE:56==
Sneeuw, Nico et al. (2014). “Estimating runoff using hydro­geodetic approaches”. In: Sur­
veys in Geophysics 35, pp. 1333–1359.
Wang, Cheng et al. (2019). “Ground elevation accuracy verification of ICESat­2 data: A
case study in Alaska, USA”. In: Optics express 27.26, pp. 38168–38179.
Wu, Juan et al. (2023). “GEDI: A New LiDAR Altimetry to Obtain the Water Levels of
More Lakes on the Tibetan Plateau”. In: IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied
Earth Observations and Remote Sensing.
Yang, Shengtian et al. (2020). “Performance of an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) in calcu­
lating the flood peak discharge of ephemeral rivers combined with the incipient motion
of moving stones in arid ungauged regions”. In: Remote Sensing 12.10, p. 1610.
A case study of the Dinder River
49
==PAGE:57==
Appendix
Figure 1: Cumulative discharge before and
after Khor Abu Muha (2nd tributary) based
on discharge from DHI­GHM.
Figure 2: Cumulative discharge before and
after Khor Abu Muha (2nd tributary) based
on discharge from GloFAS.
Figure 3: Discharge time series from DHI­GHM showcasing the difference before and
after the first tributary, Khor Gelagu.
A case study of the Dinder River
50
==PAGE:58==
Figure 4: Discharge time series from DHI­GHM showcasing the difference before and
after the second tributary, Khor Abu Muha.
Figure 5: Spatial extents of downloaded areas and HydroBasins level 12 for extracting
discharge time­series from GloFAS and DHI­GHM, respectively.
A case study of the Dinder River
51
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6: ATL03 mean WSE or bottom level for filtered crossings with river chainages.
The points are colored based on the time of crossing.
Percentiles
0.05
0.25
0.5
0.75
0.95
Q (m3/s)
0.0
30.1
107.3
305.0
666.3
Table 1: Percentiles of DHI­GHM Discharge Data
Percentiles
0.05
0.25
0.5
0.75
0.95
Q (m3/s)
9.01
32.80
84.11
223.43
376.06
Table 2: Percentiles of GloFAS Discharge Data
A case study of the Dinder River
52
==PAGE:60==
Figure 7: Double mass curve for cumulative discharge of DHI­GHM and GloFAS.
A case study of the Dinder River
53
==PAGE:61==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby,
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.sustain.dtu.dk
