==PAGE:1==
MSc. Eng. Thesis
Master of Science in Engineering
Daily Stress Pattern from Activity and Travel Patterns
Exploring General Purpose Transformers
Anne Sophie H. Hansen (s194274)
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
Technical University of Denmark
Akademivej
DTU – Building 358
2800 Kongens Lyngby
Denmark
Phone +45 2489 8022
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary
Emotion prediction plays an essential role in mental health. While previous work has primarily focused
on emotion detection, there has been less emphasis on emotion prediction to date.
This thesis ex-
plores the application of a General Purpose Transformer (GPT) based architecture for stress response
prediction based on spatial and temporal data from daily activities and travel patterns. To achieve
this, mobility, activity and physiological data were collected from a sample of 60 participants over 14
days in the Greater Copenhagen Region. Additionally, the model incorporates individual character-
istics, environmental context and activity duration to provide comprehensive context. We developed
and evaluated several variations of the GPT-based model architecture. The primary model variation
utilized Mean HR, with three additional variations: the first used Z-scored Mean HR, the second con-
sidered synthetic Sleep and Gap activities and the third employed varying window sizes. Furthermore,
the study examines the influence of individual characteristics and environmental context. Our results
reveal that while the models capture overall trends, they fail to account for the full complexity and vari-
ability in the data. Individual characteristics proved important, and environmental context was found
influencial yet underrepresented in the dataset. The study underscored the need for more extensive and
diverse datasets, direct stress measurements and detailed environmental data. Future research should
also consider the effects of temporal factors and social interaction. Lastly, it would be beneficial to uti-
lize explainability tools to perform feature selection to ensure the inclusion of the most impactful data.
In conclusion, this thesis provides a foundation for future research to enhance the accuracy, robustness
and real-world applicability of GPT-based stress prediction models. The source code of our model and
experiments is available at https://github.com/AnneSophieHH/GPTStressResponse.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This master’s thesis was prepared in the Department of Technology, Management, and Economics at
the Technical University of Denmark in fulfillment of the requirements for acquiring a Master’s degree
in Business Analytics.
Kongens Lyngby, June 22, 2024
Anne Sophie H. Hansen (s194274)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest appreciation to all those who contributed to the success of this thesis.
First and foremost, I extend my sincere thanks to my supervisors, Carlos Miguel Lima Azevedo and
Francisco Camara Pereira, whose supervision was invaluable in the completion of this thesis. Special
thanks are due to Marta Sofia Aranha Da Conceição and Mafalda Pires for their work on the data. I
would also like to thank Line Heide, whose development of the contextual information extraction code
was critical for the contextual feature extraction. Their contributions were essential to the success of
this thesis.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Literature Review
3
2.1
Research on Stress Detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Physiological Signals as Stress Indicators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Variability in Stress Response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
The Transformer Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.5
Comparable Studies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Data
10
3.1
Data Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Activity and Physiological Signals
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.2
Individual Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.3
Environmental Context
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Data Exploration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4
Method
20
4.1
Proposed Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.1
Embedding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.1.2
Positional Encoding
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.3
Transformer Decoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.1.4
Fully Connected Residual Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.1.5
Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5
Experimental Setup
27
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
5.1
Model Variations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.2
Dataset Splits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.3
Hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.4
Model Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.4.1
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4.2
Mean Squared Error (MSE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4.3
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.4.4
Coeﬀicient of Determination (R2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4.5
Explained Variance Score (EVS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4.6
Accuracy within Tolerance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.4.7
Residual Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.5
Baseline Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.6
Explainability (SHAP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Results
34
6.1
Baseline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.2
Mean HR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Mean HR Z-scored . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
6.4
Mean HR with Sleep and Gap Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
6.5
Mean HR with Varying Window Size . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
6.6
Explainability (SHAP) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7
Discussion
53
7.1
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
8
Conclusion
57
8.1
Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
Bibliography
59
A Overview of Features
62
B Survey Questions
64
C SHAP Importance
67
==PAGE:8==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
Stress has been characterized as the body’s nonspecific and predictable reaction to any demands placed
upon it. Stress can be a normal, healthy and helpful response, that can provide the necessary moti-
vation and power to help people overcome situations such as work deadlines and exams. However, it
becomes harmful when environmental demands exceed a person’s ability to cope (Soliemanifar et al.,
2018). Studies show that continuous mental stress can lead to physical and mental conditions such
as cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, diabetes, cancer, headaches, depression, anxiety and insomnia
(Campanella et al., 2023). Thus, stress can significantly impact both psychological and physiological
health. While everyone faces stress at times, each person will experience it differently. The variability
in stress responses are influenced by numerous factors, such as variations in individual characteristics
and environmental contexts (Lamichhane et al., 2017).
Emotion prediction plays an essential role in mental health. To date, almost all previous work has
focused on emotion detection rather than prediction (Jaques et al., 2017). Furthermore, there have been
certain limitations in the previous work. Firstly, mood is often treated as a binary state (for example
stressed vs. non-stressed), which oversimplifies the complex nature of human emotions. Secondly, much
of the research has been conducted in laboratory and controlled environments, which may not accurately
reflect real-world conditions. Thirdly, and perhaps the most paramount limitation, is that they fail to
account for individual differences in stress perception and the impact of environmental context on stress
levels. The recent development and widespread adoption of smart wearables have enabled the collection
of detailed individual data, which is essential for the advancement of predictive models within the field
of stress prediction (Campanella et al., 2023).
The primary aim of this thesis is to develop a spatial and temporal sensitive model that can predict
stress responses based on daily activity and travel patterns. Additionally, the model will incorporate
individual characteristics, environmental context and activity duration to provide comprehensive con-
text. Importantly, this model does not rely on historical stress responses. The spatial elements focus
on location-based details, such as environmental context, while the temporal elements concentrate on
time-based details, i.e. the sequences of activities and their associated stress responses.
To accomplish this, we will explore the application of General Purpose Transformers (GPT), known for
their eﬀiciency in sequence prediction across various domains. In simple terms, a GPT is a sequence-
to-sequence (seq2seq) neural network architecture. It is based on the multi-head attention mechanism,
which helps the model understand how distant data points within the sequence influence and relate
to one another (Turing, 2022). Our reason for applying a GPT-based model is rooted in several key
==PAGE:9==
1 Introduction
2
benefits that this architecture offers. First and foremost, our activity and stress data can be viewed as
a sequence, and thus considered a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) problem - we are trying to convert
a sequence from one domain into a related sequence in another domain. In this scenario, the model
converts the input sequence of activities, environmental context and activity duration into a related
sequence of stress responses. Additionally, the static individual characteristics are incorporated into the
model. Arguably, the GPT is one of the most successful attention-based approaches. GPTs were initially
applied in the NLP domain, where they have proven remarkably successful. GPT-based architectures
have since demonstrated success in other domains, such as next-location prediction (Hong et al., 2022).
However, it remains unclear how GPT-based models will perform in the context of stress response
prediction. This thesis is exploratory work intended to clarify this. The primary contribution of this
thesis is the development of a GPT-based architecture for stress response prediction. In summary, our
research questions are as follows:
• How accurately can General Purpose Transformers (GPT) be used to predict stress based on
spatial and temporal data?
• To what extent do individual characteristics, such as personality and socio-demographic attributes,
influence stress level captured by the model?
• What role do contextual data elements play in stress level prediction, and how can they be
effectively incorporated into the model?
To address these questions, we will utilize mobility, activity and physiological data from a sample of 60
participants that collected their own data for 14 days in the Greater Copenhagen Region. Furthermore,
the model will account for individual characteristics, environmental context data, and the duration of
the activities.
The rest of this thesis is structured as follows. We first systematically review related work in Chapter
2. In Chapter 3, we provide a detailed description of the data collection methods and datasets utilized
in our study. Chapter 4 outlines the theoretical foundations of the GPT-based model and details the
implementation. The experimental setup is presented in Chapter 5. Chapter 6 presents the results
of our experiments. This is complemented by Chapter 7, where we explore the broader implications
of our results and discuss limitations. Finally, we conclude in Chapter 8 with a summary of our key
results, and outline potential areas for future research. Additionally, appendices in at the end includes
supplementary material that support and extend the main text.
==PAGE:10==
CHAPTER 2
Literature Review
2.1
Research on Stress Detection
The evaluation of stress has traditionally relied heavily on questionnaires as the sole assessment tool.
Despite their affordability and ease of use, these questionnaires possess inherent limitations. Firstly,
they are time-intensive and only capture responses within a restricted time frame (Smets et al., 2018).
Secondly, they rely on self-reports and are influenced by individual perception (Campanella et al., 2023)
(Soliemanifar et al., 2018). Stress is a complex experience, with different types perceived differently by
individuals. In some cases, the stress state is a subconscious process in which individuals may not detect
their own stress levels and their intensity (Giannakakis et al., 2022). Thirdly, the reliance on retro-
spective reports, influenced by memories of past events, may introduce bias (Barría et al., 2023)(Castro
et al., 2020). Ultimately, this report-bias may result in an inaccurate depiction of the actual response
as it naturally unfolds in real-life situations (Brose, 2021). People can suffer lapses in memory about
the emotional tone of a day in as little as 24 hours, which means that they may not always be aware
of our stress levels (Alberdi et al., 2016). Consequently, self-report questionnaires can result in inaccu-
rate stress level measurements. However, today’s modern wearables enable the continuous collection of
physiological data with fine temporal resolution, applicable for research and incorporation into every-
day activities within real-life environments (Kyriakou et al., 2019). A wearable medical device is worn
directly on the body; it is autonomous and it performs a specific medical function such as collection
of patient data. This then raises the question: Can physiological signals data collected by wearables
be utilized to detect stress? Multiple studies have reached an aﬀirmative conclusion, particularly for
binary classification, that differentiate between stressed and non-stressed states (Campanella et al.,
2023) (Kim et al., 2023) (Li and Liu, 2020) (Kyriakou et al., 2019) (Campanella et al., 2023), and
3-class stress classification (Ashmita Hota and Sung-won Park, 2022) (Rastgoo et al., 2019). However,
stress detection based on physiology has predominantly been explored in controlled environments, with
only a small fraction undertaken in practical, everyday scenarios (Lamichhane et al., 2017) (Kyriakou
et al., 2019). Furthermore, studies conducted in real-life contexts tend to concentrate on restricted
scenarios, notably when participants drive (Ashmita Hota and Sung-won Park, 2022)(Rastgoo et al.,
2019) or are at work (Muaremi et al., 2013)(Alberdi et al., 2016). While these narrow environments
provide a structured framework for systematic data collection and analysis, the limited scope overlooks
the broader spectrum of stress experiences, which are not confined to specific activities or time frames.
==PAGE:11==
2.2 Physiological Signals as Stress Indicators
4
2.2
Physiological Signals as Stress Indicators
Physiological signals, such as Electrodermal Activity (EDA), Skin Temperature (ST), Blood Volume
Puls (BVP), Electrodermal Activity Skin Conductance Responses (EDA SCRs), Interbeat Interval (IBI),
Heart Rate (HR) and Photoplethysmography (PPG), have been extensively researched and established
as reliable indicators of stress across various studies (Palanisamy, 2012) (Kyriakou et al., 2019) (Li
and Liu, 2020). They are indicative parameters because they are connected to the autonomic nervous
system, which is one of the neural pathways activated by stress as an attempt to re-establish homeostasis
(a “steady state”) (Campanella et al., 2023). These responses occur without conscious control and are
typically impossible to notice by external observation.
HR is the most widely adopted and simple measure to estimate levels of stress (Giannakakis et al.,
2022). It is measured as the number of heartbeats per minute (bpm). During a stressful situation, HR
increases to ensure suﬀicient oxygen delivery - a physiological response orchestrated by the autonomic
nervous system to optimize the body’s capacity to cope with the perceived threat (Barría et al., 2023).
Yet, in relation to HR, it is vital to understand that the wearable may not differentiate between stress
and alternative emotions, such as excitement, or physical activity, which underscores the critical role
of contextual factors in accurate interpretation. In the study by Giannakakis et al., 2022, HR was
found to be the most prominent feature which exhibited a substantial increase under stress conditions.
Nonetheless, the study concluded that this trend could be primarily attributed to the arousal dimension.
The main drawback with physiological signals is that they are susceptible to noise or interference due
to individual’s body parts movements or activities, most affected by this includes PPG (Giannakakis
et al., 2022).
2.3
Variability in Stress Response
In recent years, numerous studies have focused on identifying the individual characteristics that influence
the relationship between stimuli and stress reactions (Dumitru and Cozman, 2012).
Research has
established that individuals generally have differences in stress physiology (Lamichhane et al., 2017).
In other words, people react to stress differently. Stress physiology shows variability due to multitude
of factors, such as individual characteristics, environmental context and psychological influences. This
is broadly referred to as contextual information. These factors lead to differences in stress physiology
both between individuals (inter-individual differences) and even within the same individual over time
(intra-individual differences) (Giannakakis et al., 2022). Gender is an individual characteristic that has
proven to influence how stress affects people. Studies have found that women are more affected by
stress and exhibit more psychological symptoms compared to men (Dumitru and Cozman, 2012).
Since most stress-related research studies have been conducted in controlled laboratory environments,
only inter-individual differences have been considered, as the duration of these experiments is typically
short. There are several problems with this approach. First and foremost, controlled studies fail to
adequately reflect the complexities of real-life scenarios. Furthermore, to fully capture intra-individual
==PAGE:12==
2.3 Variability in Stress Response
5
differences, individuals need to be monitored over several days to observe various instances of responses
to natural stressors, which typically occur infrequently (Giannakakis et al., 2022). However, real-life
stress-related studies, i.e.
ambulatory studies, often fail to consider individuality at all.
Basic so-
ciodemographic factors and psychological baseline profiles, such as self-reported anxiety and depression
levels, are either overlooked or not assessed. Additionally, environmental context information is often
not accounted for either, despite its proven importance (Smets et al., 2018).
Given the complex nature of emotions, one modality alone cannot yield accurate predictions - they
require the combination of data from several modalities (Khalid and Sano, 2023). While contextual
data cannot measure individuals’ stress responses, it does impact their reactions and has the potential to
uncover individualized stressors (Alberdi et al., 2016). The multi-modal nature of stress demonstrates
that it is influenced by context, which is compromised of individual characteristics and environment
context, i.e external circumstances such as events, places or moments (Smets et al., 2018).
Environmental context has been proven to affect an individual’s stress level. In stress-related studies,
a variety of factors have been used to represent the environment. Particularly, weather (Rastgoo et
al., 2019) and social networks based on social media interactions (Khalid and Sano, 2023) have been
explored.
Personality traits significantly influence how individuals perceive, react to and cope with stress (Brose,
2021). Personality refers to the unique combination of consistent traits and characteristics that shape
an individual’s psychological behavior. These tendencies create a distinct and complex pattern that are
both biologically influenced and shaped by environmental factors. Personality helps explain why people
think, feel and behave differently or similarly in various situations (Soliemanifar et al., 2018). Stress
and personality are interconnected and influence each other (Brose, 2021). Stressful experiences can
even reshape personality traits over time, which showcases the dynamic relationship between personality
and stress (Soliemanifar et al., 2018). Studies have increasingly focused on the relationship between
personality and stress. These studies reveal vulnerability to stress depends on how individuals perceive
and respond to stressful situations. In this context, certain personality traits show resilience over time.
Evidence supports that personality factors, more so than than the environment, play a causal role in
how individuals cope and their stress reactions (Soliemanifar et al., 2018).
Most early studies as well as current work uses the personality traits described in the Five-Factor Model
of Personality. Commonly known by several names, the modern adaptation referred to as the OCEAN
model will be used in this study. The traits that constitute the model are:
• Openness to Experience
• Conscientiousness
• Extraversion
• Agreeableness
• Neuroticism
These traits have been extensively studied and are widely accepted in psychology for their ability to
capture the essence of human personality (Soliemanifar et al., 2018).
==PAGE:13==
2.3 Variability in Stress Response
6
Several studies have revealed that personality traits significantly influence the relationship between
stimuli and stress responses (Soliemanifar et al., 2018).
Traits like neuroticism can increase stress
vulnerability, while conscientiousness and openness can act as protective factors (Soliemanifar et al.,
2018). Neurotic individuals find it more diﬀicult to handle stress, and often experience it more frequently
and intensely compared to those with low neuroticism (Muaremi et al., 2013). Conversely, conscientious
individuals encounter fewer daily stressors and perceive them as less severe. Furthermore, they handle
stress more confidently, which contributes to reduced emotional reactivity and quicker recovery from
stress (Soliemanifar et al., 2018). Greater openness also mainly results in beneficial effects on the stress
process. While they experience more daily stressors than highly conscientious individuals, they still
perceive stressors as less severe and are more likely to see it as an obstacle to conquer rather than a threat
(Soliemanifar et al., 2018). Agreeableness is also a beneficial trait, as it leads to fewer interpersonal
stressors and are more likely to seek social support. Accordingly, these individuals experience less stress
in their interactions with others (Soliemanifar et al., 2018). Similarly, extraverted individuals tend
to handle stress better, largely due to their increased sociability. This sociability enables extraverted
individuals to seek and receive more social support (Soliemanifar et al., 2018). Other studies show that
personality factors, such as social presence, empathy, independence, likability, intellectual eﬀiciency,
intuition, work orientation and femininity, also render individuals more vulnerable to stress (Dumitru
and Cozman, 2012). In summary, personality shapes many elements of the stress response.
While the OCEAN model continues to be the most widely accepted personality theory, there has been
relatively little literature published on alternative personality model, despite new developments. In the
early 2000s, two psychologists expanded on the OCEAN model as they discovered evidence of a sixth
personality factor, which led to a new personality model called HEXACO. The distinctly new trait
is called Honesty-Humility, which reflects moral character and the extent to which one places others’
interests above their own. The other dimensions of HEXACO are more or less all variation of the
dimensions in OCEAN.
Figure 2.1: Overlap between OCEAN and HEXACO (Cohen, 2017)
Figure 2.1 depicts the overlaps between the OCEAN and HEXACO models. The two models share
several similar dimensions. As illustrated, the dimensions Extraversion, Conscientiousness and Open-
ness to Experience are nearly identical in both models. Agreeableness in HEXACO closely matches
that of the OCEAN but places more emphasis on aspects like patience. Additionally, Emotionality
in HEXACO resembles to Neuroticism in OCEAN but covers a wider array of emotional experiences.
==PAGE:14==
2.4 The Transformer Model
7
Both Neuroticism in the OCEAN model and Emotionality in the HEXACO model, while not entirely
identical, are linked to increased levels of stress, anxiety, and depression. This indicates that individuals
who are highly neurotic/emotional are more prone to adverse emotional states. While the HEXACO
model does not explicitly include Neuroticism, tools like the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS)
can effectively measure this trait. Previous studies have shown that Neuroticism and DASS scores are
positively correlated, which supports that Neuroticism is inversely related to stress resilience.
2.4
The Transformer Model
In 2017, Google researchers published a paper called ”Attention Is All You Need” in which they intro-
duced the transformer architecture. Since then, the transformer architecture has primarily demonstrated
remarkable success within Natural Language Processing (NLP). However, the transformer architecture
has proven to be a powerful tool for various time-series tasks as well (Ahmed et al., 2023). The trans-
former architecture is at the heart of revolutionary models like ChatGPT, developed by OpenAI and
launched a mere 1.5 years ago. Since then, it has been widely adopted and has pushed AI innovation.
Fundamentally, a transformer is a sequence-to-sequence neural network architecture.
As the name
implies, it transforms one sequence into another. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) and their variants
were in the early days of the transformer, one of the best ways to capture the timely dependencies in
sequences. RNNs function similarly to feed-forward neural networks, but with a key difference. Unlike
feed-forward networks that process all inputs simultaneously, RNNs process the input sequentially, i.e.
each word of a sequence is passed to the model one by one, one after the other. Transformer models,
however, can process all inputs at once which makes these models incredibly fast. While the transformers
were inspired by the encoder-decoder architecture found in RNNs, they rely entirely on the attention
mechanism rather than recurrence (Ferrer, 2024).
The attention mechanism is central to the success of the transformer model. It deals with a very impor-
tant problem, namely the problem of context. The attention mechanism examines an input sequence
and determines which parts of the sequence are important at each step (Allard, 2019). Consequently,
it enables the transformers to capture long-term dependencies, which makes it able to pay attention to
specific words no matter how distant they are.
Consider the sentence:
The book didn’t fit on the shelf because it was too tall
In this sentence, "it" refers to the book. If we replace the word "tall" with "narrow", the word "it"
now refers to the shelf. Attention will understand this. In the first sentence, the attention mechanism
links "it" to "the book" as it understands that "too tall" describes the book. In the second sentence,
the attention mechanism shifts focus to "the shelf"” as it realizes that "too narrow" describes the shelf.
This demonstrates how the attention mechanism adapts based on context.
==PAGE:15==
2.5 Comparable Studies
8
Figure 2.2: Transformer Architecture
Figure 2.2 illustrates the transformer architecture first presented in ”Attention Is All You Need” by
Vaswani et al., 2017. The full transformer has an encoder section and a decoder section. Notice that
the modules can be stacked on top of each other multiple times, which is described by Nx. From the
illustration it becomes clear that the modules consist mainly of Multi-Head Attention and Feed Forward
layers. The inputs and outputs are first embedded into an n-dimensional space. An encoder-only model
such as Google AI’s BERT is classically used for sentiment analysis due to its bidirectional nature,
while a decoder-only model (marked with red) such as OpenAI’s GPT is typically used for next word
prediction because it is unidirectional.
2.5
Comparable Studies
This section reviews the literature relevant to our study, which aims to predict stress levels (via a stress
proxy) based on activities, individual characteristics, environmental context and the duration of the
activity, without relying on historical stress level information. To achieve this, we use a GPT-based
architecture.
As mentioned, previous studies have almost exclusively focused on the application of transformer-based
models within NLP. However, these models have since been deployed in various other ways, such as
for next-location prediction. The task of next-place prediction is quite similar to the task of next-word
prediction. Therefore, studies have used an architecture similar to the GPT model, where only the
transformer decoder part is used. A recent study by Hong et al., 2022 used their transformer decoder-
based neural network to predict the next location an individual will visit based on historical data of
==PAGE:16==
2.5 Comparable Studies
9
locations, time and travel modes. Furthermore, they extend the model to predict the next travel mode
as an auxiliary task. This combination of next-location and next-mode prediction improves the perfor-
mance of both tasks, and outperforms state-of-the-art next location prediction methods significantly.
The model considers individual-specific patterns as it incorporates a simple way to identify and dif-
ferentiate between individuals. It incorporates no other individual information. For evaluation, they
applied this approach to two extensive GPS datasets, each contained over three months of data and col-
lectively involve more than 600 individuals. A similar study by Corrias et al., 2023 explored the use of a
GPT model for next-place prediction and concluded that the performance of this relatively unexplored
GPT-based solution was on par with state-of-the-art mobility prediction models. It performed best on a
dense dataset, which shows potential for future application, especially as GPS-enabled always-connected
devices continue to provide increasingly dense datasets.
In the field of emotion detection, Vazquez-Rodriguez et al., 2022 used a transformer-based model for
binary emotion detection. Their research focused on identifying levels of arousal and valence from phys-
iological signals, specifically electrocardiograms (ECGs). This study demonstrates that the proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art performance, which indicates that transformer-based models are highly
effective for emotion detection from physiological signals.
As Jaques et al., 2017 points out, most studies have primarily focused on mood detection rather than
prediction.
Furthermore, they address issues we have previously discussed in this chapter.
Firstly,
studies often treat mood as a binary state (such as stressed vs. non-stressed), which misses important
clinically relevant distinctions. Secondly, they fail to account for individual variations in mood responses
to stimuli and environmental factors. Traditional approaches have used one-size-fits-all models, which
are inadequate for mood prediction due to individual differences. While personalization can enhance
performance, it often requires separate models for each person, which is highly impractical. To address
these issues, the study proposes personalized models employing Multitask Learning (MTL) and Domain
Adaptation (DA) techniques to forecast next-day mood, health and stress levels from unobtrusive data
collection.
The study uses daily mood reports from 70 participants over a month, as well as data
from wrist-worn sensors, smartphone apps and weather. These models handle each person’s data as
an individual prediction task, while it simultaneously utilizes data from all participants to improve
accuracy. The study emphasizes that effective personalization requires at least 15 days of data from
each person.
Given the novelty of GPT-based model architectures and their predominant use in NLP, it is not
unexpected to find a scarcity of studies within related work. As far as we know, no previous research
has examined stress prediction without relying on historical data while employing a GPT-based model.
Consequently, we present the first study to explore this approach.
==PAGE:17==
CHAPTER 3
Data
This chapter provides an overview of the data collection process, describes the datasets involved, outlines
how the data was preprocessed and provides an initial data exploration. The research data in this thesis
is compromised of 60 participants who collected their own data over 14 days in the Greater Copenhagen
Region. The data was collected between November 8, 2023 and April 9, 2024. Additionally, open-source
data was used to represent participants’ environments.
3.1
Data Collection
The main data was collected by employing a combination of a wearable medical device - a smart
wristband (Empatica E4) - and a smartphone application (X-ING).
The wearable device collected physiological signals over a 14-day period. These measurements included:
• Electrodermal Activity (EDA)
• Temperature (Temp)
• Blood Volume Pulse (BVP)
• Electrodermal Activity Skin Conductance Responses (EDA SCRs)
• Interbeat Interval (IBI)
• Heart Rate (HR)
• Photoplethysmography (PPG)
Note that participants were directed not to wear the wristband while they slept.
The smartphone application continuously collected GPS location, activity incl. travel mode, and start
and stop time. Participants were prompted to respond to surveys that assess their emotional state on
a scale three times daily. Additionally, retrospective surveys were administered at the end of the day,
which contained both fixed response options and allowed participants to provide free-text responses. At
the end of day participants were also asked to verify their activity diary entries and may have needed
to answer questions about a few randomly selected activities.
In addition to other tasks, participants were required to complete both a pre-experiment and a post-
experiment survey. It is also important to note that they completed a screening survey beforehand
to determine their suitability for the study. The pre-experiment survey collected information on par-
ticipants’ education, family size, income and other potentially relevant factors. Additionally, it asked
questions used to assess their mental health status, stress levels and attitude towards transportation.
In contrast, the post-experiment survey captured data related to participants’ social media habits,
noteworthy life events and other pertinent information.
==PAGE:18==
3.2 Datasets
11
3.2
Datasets
This study utilizes three key datasets described in the subsections below. A detailed description of the
features is provided in Appendix A.
3.2.1
Activity and Physiological Signals
The primary dataset in this study contains records of activities and their associated Mean HR recorded
by wearable technology, each measured for participants across a 14-day period. Additionally, a sec-
ondary dataset was created for Mean HR Z-scored, where the HR data has been standardized for each
participant. The HR was selected based on an extensive literature search, which identified it as one of
the most widely used indicators of stress. This part of the data was preprocessed by Marta Sofia Aranha
Da Conceição and Mafalda Pires to represent the Mean HR and Mean HR Z-scored over time for each
activity. Table 3.1 displays the activities. For static activities, coordinates are provided, whereas mo-
bile activities, that occurred while the participant was in motion, lack such spatial data. The dataset
is chronologically sorted to preserve the sequential nature, as this is time series data. Additionally,
the dataset contains two identifiers, namely date and participant id. These were only used to process
data and not directly in the model. Lastly, we have also included the duration of each activity. This
addition is important because physiological signals are a mean over a period of time, which varies with
the activity. This mean can sometimes obscure short-term fluctuations that could indicate stress. For
instance, brief but intense bursts of stress can be overlooked when the mean is taken over several hours
of more relaxed periods.
Static Activities
Mobile Activities
Home
Transfer
Work
Foot
Work Related
Train
Education
Metro
Holiday
Bus
Eat Out
Car
Socialize
Bicycle
Exercise
Air
Entertain
Boat
Community
Errands
Shopping
Healthcare
Dropoff/Pickup
Other
No information provided
Table 3.1: List of Activities
==PAGE:19==
3.2 Datasets
12
For simplicity and better visualization, the names in Table 3.1 have been shortened. This does not
affect the clarity or comprehension of the activities. Furthermore, two synthetic activities, Sleep and
Gap, were constructed. More details on this can be found in Section 3.3.
Please note that since the stress level index originally intended for this thesis has not yet been calculated,
we were compelled to use physiological signals as a proxy for our stress level.
3.2.2
Individual Characteristics
This dataset includes data from the screening survey and the pre-experiment survey. The initial screen-
ing survey collected sociodemographic characteristics like age group, gender identity, occupation, edu-
cation level, household income and household size. In the pre-experiment survey, participants answered
questions intended to assess their personality traits, mental health, brain function and attitude towards
transportation.
This comprehensive evaluation included a subset of questions from the HEXACO personality model,
which focused on the domains Honesty-Humility, Conscientiousness and Emotionally. Within these
domains, the survey focused on the facets:
• Sincerity (Honesty-Humility): Genuine interactions and truthfulness.
• Fairness (Honesty-Humility): Equal treatment of others.
• Greed Avoidance (Honesty-Humility): Avoidance of selfishness.
• Modesty (Honesty-Humility): Humility in self-view.
• Prudence (Conscientiousness): Careful and sensible decisions.
• Anxiety (Emotionally): Emotions of worry and stress in diﬀicult situations.
Each question related to a facet was scored on a 1 to 5 scale. The final score for each facet was calculated
as the mean of these individual question scores. Higher scores generally indicated more pronounced
characteristics in each respective facet.
Participants’ mental health was thoroughly assessed with the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS),
a tool that quantifies the intensity of symptoms related to depression, anxiety and stress. Each question
related to a dimension was scored on a 0 to 3 scale. The final score for each dimension was calculated
as the sum of these individual question scores, multiplied by two. These scores were then classified into
severity levels based on predefined cut-off scores for conventional labels, as shown in Table 3.2.
Level
Depression
Anxiety
Stress
Rank
Normal
0-9
0-7
0-14
1
Mild
10-13
8-9
15-18
2
Moderate
14-20
10-14
19-25
3
Severe
21-27
15-19
26-33
4
Extremely Severe
28+
20+
34+
5
Table 3.2: Severity levels for depression, anxiety and stress as defined by the DASS
==PAGE:20==
3.2 Datasets
13
Participants’ sense of environmental mastery, which reflects their overall perception of control over
their circumstances, was measured employing the Ryff scale. Participants answered three questions,
each scored on a 1 to 5 scale. The final score was calculated as the mean of these individual question
scores. Higher score reflects a stronger sense of mastery.
The Ascertain Dementia 8 (AD8) questionnaire was employed to evaluate brain function, aimed at
identifying early brain function decline that could be indicative of dementia. In practice, each yes-
response scores 1 point. A cumulative score of 2 or more points is indicative of potential cognitive
impairment, which is represented by a value of 1 (else 0).
Participants’ transportation preferences were explored to better understand their personal and environ-
mental mobility needs, which may influence their everyday life. Responses were collected on a 1 to 5
Likert scale.
This particular selection of traits aimed to provide a detailed profile of each participant’s personality,
mental health, brain function and attitude towards transportation to explore their interplay with stress
responses. Appendix B provides a detailed overview of the questions used to deduce the participant’s
personality, mental health, brain function and attitude towards transportation.
3.2.3
Environmental Context
The environment contextual data includes information about points of interest (POIs) within a 50-meter
radius of the participants’ GPS locations. We used a web service from the OpenStreetMap database to
collect the POI data. The initial code, written by Line Heide, was extended to handle NaN values as
mobile activities lack coordinates. The code uses the Overpass API to query POIs within a specified
radius around each coordinate, in this case a 50 meter radius. The POIs are then divided into different
10 features:
• Food and Drink
• Buildings and Facilities
• Roads and Transportation
• Tourism and Leisure
• Greenery and Natural Features
• Public Services and Facilities
• Arts, Entertainment and Events
• Beauty, Personal Care and Health
• Miscellaneous and Other Services
• Water Body
This divide into main features was done in order to enhance the importance of the features. Ultimately,
this ensures features with more non-zero values. The elements in each column were simply summed to
combine the POIs.
==PAGE:21==
3.3 Data Preparation
14
3.3
Data Preparation
This section details the key steps taken to preprocess the data. Only the most crucial information is
included.
To incorporate duration into our analysis, we processed activity data from a dataframe with observations
recorded every 15 seconds. When the time difference between consecutive date-time entries surpassed
6 hours, we inserted a Sleep activity with a Mean HR of -1 to represent periods of inactivity. The
dataframe was then consolidated to show one entry per sequential activity for every participant. Gaps
between consecutive start and end times were filled with a Gap activity to indicate absent or unrecorded
activity, also with a Mean HR of -1. However, this approach did not handle short intervals of watch
removal, such as for a shower. This could possibly lead to inaccuracies in the recorded activity durations.
Lastly, the processed main dataset was incorporated into the duration dataset. This resulted in the
added duration column and the syntetic Sleep and Gap activities.
The HR used to calculate the Mean HR Z-score was obtained from the IBI sensor. This sensor records
HR at a lower frequency than the PPG sensor, which was used to calculate the raw Mean HR. Conse-
quently, there are fewer actual observations in Mean HR Z-scored, especially for short activities that
may not be fully captured, and more Gap actvities.
To create a comprehensive dataset, we needed to load a file that served as a link between the activity data
and the individual participant data. The activity data included a participant id, while the individual
characteristics data had an email. We used a file that contained both the participant id and email, which
enabled us to successfully connect the two data sources. To protect the privacy of the study participants,
the email address information was subsequently removed from the final dataset. The environmental
contextual data was then attached to the comprehensive dataset based on the coordinate information
present in the activity data.
3.4
Data Exploration
This section conducts an initial exploration of the data. While a comprehensive analysis was performed,
the information presented here has been carefully selected for its relevance and importance.
The dataset has 11060 observations. The participants had varying numbers of observations, with a
minimum of 92 and a maximum of 404. The mean number of observations per participant was 184.
Figure 3.1 shows that despite the experiment being conducted for residents in the Greater Copenhagen
area, it is clear from the map that participants traveled to various places in Denmark and even outside
of Denmark, such as Germany, Austria, Italy Poland and Sweden.
However, it is clear that most
observations are still lie within the Greater Region of Copenhagen.
==PAGE:22==
3.4 Data Exploration
15
Figure 3.1: A map displaying the coordinates of participants, each represented by a unique color
The Overpass API used to query POIs functions in all of Europe.
For the Mean HR, out of the
11060 observations, 5557 had environmental context data. The 5503 observations that did not have
environmental context data were due to either mobility activities (4715 observations) or the activities
Sleep (777 observations) or Gap (11 observations) which lack coordinates. For the Mean HR Z-scored,
out of the 11060 observations, only 4749 had environmental context data. The 6311 observations that
did not have environmental context data were due to either mobility activities (3595 observations) or
the activities Sleep (777 observations) or Gap (1939 observations) which lack coordinates.
Figure 3.2 illustrates the distribution of the Mean HR and the Mean HR that has been Z-scored per
individual. These visualization offer a clear view of both raw and normalized heart rate fluctuations.
Figure 3.2: Distribution of Mean HR and Mean HR Z-scored
Both distributions seem to be slightly right-skewed.
The raw Mean HR has a mean of 88.85 bpm
and a standard deviation of 13.11 bpm, which indicates that while most HR values cluster around the
mean, there are occasional peaks which extend the upper tail. The Z-scored Mean HR, with a mean
of 0.75 and a standard deviation of 1.27, indicates that the HR values are generally above individual
==PAGE:23==
3.4 Data Exploration
16
means. The broader spread in raw HR values reflects natural inter-individual variability, as different
individuals have different baseline HRs, while the Z-scored HR values show more concentrated data
around individual means. This illustrates how each individual’s HR values fluctuate around their own
mean. The small skew in both distributions points to episodes with elevated HRs, potentially due to
factors such as physical activity or stress. This underscores the variability and occasional spikes in HR
measurements.
Figure 3.3 illustrates the distribution, central tendency and outliers for the Mean HR and the Mean
HR Z-scored across the different activities.
Figure 3.3: Distribution of the Mean HR and the Mean HR Z-scored across the different activities.
==PAGE:24==
3.4 Data Exploration
17
The violin plots of Mean HR and Mean HR Z-scored by activity reveal notable patterns in HR vari-
ability across different activities. Similar to the distribution plots (Figure 3.2), the distributions for
the activities appear to be slightly right-skewed. For instance, activities such as Exercise, Bicycle and
Foot significantly elevate HR compared to other activities. This is expected, as physical activity raises
HR rather than stress levels. In contrast, activities like Home and Work display lower Mean HR and
Mean HR Z-scored, aside for outliers in particularly the raw Mean HR. Notably, these two activities
rank in the top three for mean duration, with the fake Sleep activity at number one. This is depicted in
Figure 3.4. Consequently, brief increases in HR are often balanced out by subsequent periods of lower
HR. There are some noticeable outliers. The most extreme case was that of participant 121, who found
the 8.5-minute Shopping activity highly stressful (assumption), with a Mean HR of 185 bpm. Several
potential explanations exist, such as noise in the sensor or extreme physical activity. However, this
seems doubtful due to the nature of the activity. Alternatively, the elevated HR may have been the
result of a stress, anxiety or a panic attack, where the HR can increase to 200 bpm or even faster.
It is also noticeable that not every activity is equally represented in the data, as seen from the counts on
the x-axis. This imbalance indicates that some activities could disproportionately influence the overall
results. Additionally, the plots, sorted by most to least observations on the x-axis, show that the Mean
HR Z-scored has fewer short activities such as Foot, with 744 fewer observations. Instead, these are
represented by the Gap activity due to the low collection frequency of the wristband on IBI. Figure
3.4 shows that the mean duration for Gap significantly decreases from Mean HR to Mean HR Z-scored.
This reduction occurs because Gap now encompasses all the short activities that were not captured by
the wristband on IBI. While there are fewer observations in the Mean HR Z-scored data, it does not
seem to affect the overall trend drastically, besides the Gap activity. One notable observation is that
sleep has a mean duration of 811 minutes, which corresponds to approximately 13 hours. However, it’s
uncommon for most people to sleep for such an extended period. This indicates that participants either
removed their watch early and/or did not remember to put it back on.
Figure 3.4: Mean Duration for Each Activity for Mean HR and Mean HR Z-scored
==PAGE:25==
3.4 Data Exploration
18
Figure 3.5 provides a visual representation of the relationships between various personality traits, mental
health measures and environmental mastery.
Figure 3.5: Correlation Matrix between Personality and Mental Health Traits
The heatmap clearly indicates that the DASS scores are positively correlated with each other. Stress
and Anxiety are highly correlated with each other (0.95), and significantly with Depression too (0.77 and
0.73, respectively). Sincerity, Fairness, Greed Avoidance, Modesty, and Prudence from the HEXACO
model are inversely correlated with Depression, Anxiety and Stress from the DASS. Specifically, Modesty
is notably negatively correlated with Depression (-0.48), Anxiety (-0.41) and Stress (-0.48). This could
imply that these traits may function as protective factors.
This observation is consistent with the
research discussed in Section 2.3, which emphasizes the role of personality traits in stress response
variability. Environmental Mastery is linked positively with HEXACO traits like Prudence (0.36) and
negatively with DASS measures of Depression (-0.53), Anxiety (-0.29) and Stress (-0.27), implying an
inverse relationship. However, correlation does not imply causation.
To complement the correlation analysis, it is useful to examine the distribution of DASS scores, which
reveals the overall mental health landscape of the participants.
Figure 3.6: Distribution of Participants’ DASS Scores
==PAGE:26==
3.4 Data Exploration
19
Figure 3.6 shows that most participants have low levels of depression, anxiety and stress. This is evident
from the blue cluster, which includes 51 out of 60 participants. This indicates lower levels of mental
health issues for the majority. Only two participants score above the normal level on the stress scale -
one with a mild stress and another with severe stress. Notably, the participant with the severe stress
score also displays extremely severe levels of both anxiety and depression
==PAGE:27==
CHAPTER 4
Method
In this chapter, we will explain the theory and application of our proposed GPT-based model architec-
ture. This thesis will specifically focus on the architecture of GPT models, a subset of the transformer
architecture. Note that we will refer to the physiological signal as our stress response.
4.1
Proposed Model
Figure 4.1: Proposed GPT-based model architecture
Figure 4.1 depicts the architecture of the proposed model. The model considers activity labels, indi-
vidual characteristics, environmental context and duration as inputs, and it outputs predictions for
stress repsonse based on the current activity (and previous activities) as well as the persons individual
characteristics, environmental context and duration as inputs. As our data contains more than simply
==PAGE:28==
4.1 Proposed Model
21
sequences, we need to structure our model to handle both sequence data and additional data such as
the individual characteristics, i.e. user-information. We would need to format and handle this data
in a way that’s suitable for a seq2seq model. We have constructed our model around the transformer
architecture, employing only its decoder component, which results in a decoder-only model. This is
what characterizes it as a GPT-based architecture. While the GPT block will be used to handle the
sequence data, there will be an addition to the model to handle the static user-information, i.e. the fully
connected residual block. This is a specific structure used within neural network architectures. Essen-
tially, this block learns the dependencies of the GPT output and the embedded user-information, which
in turn helps the model extract user-specific patterns to tackle the issues around inter-individual vari-
ability of the stress response. User information is beneficial for the network to identify stress response
sequences by different users and learn user-specific stress response patterns.
The practical implementation of this model was done primarily with the PyTorch library, with some
inspiration from the approach outlined by Hong et al., 2022.
4.1.1
Embedding
First, the numerical variables, such as duration, personality traits and attitude towards transport, are
standardized to ensure they are on comparable scales. This process transforms the data to have a mean
of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. This step is crucial to ensure that the model treats each feature
equally and enhances the optimization process. However, not every variable in our model is inherently
numeric. Our activities, for instance, are not naturally numerical, which poses an obstacle. Therefore,
these activities need to be encoded, i.e. converted into numerical representations. Each activity can be
considered a category and mapped to a numerical id. However, to merely use these ids is inadequate
because models in most cases treat numerical inputs as continuous variables. For instance, this means
that they would mistakenly interpret an activity like Train with an id of 22 as more important or
valuable than one with a lower id, such as Bus with an id of 3. This would misrepresents the true
nature of the data. Embeddings are therefore necessary.
Embeddings are dense numerical representations of values, expressed as vectors. Before embeddings,
one-hot encoding was commonly used to convert non-numeric variables into a format suitable for models.
Embeddings’ ability to reduce the dimensionality of data makes models more eﬀicient and less computa-
tionally expensive. Furthermore, they offer a dense and continuous representation that is better suited
for complex models like transformers (Hong et al., 2022). Lastly, they capture the relationships between
different data points, which makes it easier for models to understand and process complex information.
Their main drawback is that they are significantly more computationally expensive to create and are
less interpretable than one-hot encoded data.
==PAGE:29==
4.1 Proposed Model
22
Categorical features are embedded into a lower-dimensional space, while numerical data is linearly
transformed into an n-dimensional representation. They are then combined to form a comprehensive
feature representation, which enables the model to effectively utilize diverse types of input data for
accurate stress response predictions. While we have both dynamic and static data, they are embedded
similarly. Dynamic features vary over time for each participant and include sequence data: activity,
environmental context and duration. Static features, on the other hand, consist of user information
recorded only once by the pre-survey.
Figure 4.2: Detailed proposed GPT-based model architecture
Figure 4.2 provides a detailed illustration of the model’s treatment of various components. Our sequen-
tial data includes the dynamic elements activity, context and duration. These are combined into one
embedding and fed into the model. In contrast, static data, which comprises user-information, is not
utilized within the GPT architecture. Instead, it is embedded separately and subsequently combined
with the model’s output.
==PAGE:30==
4.1 Proposed Model
23
4.1.2
Positional Encoding
Transformer models lack inherent temporal-spatial awareness.
Unlike RNNs, which have temporal
awareness by default because they process data sequentially, transformer models process input data in
parallel. This causes them to miss out on sequential information, despite that it makes them highly eﬀi-
cient. To provide transformer models with a sense of time and space, we need to incorporate additional
information into their input. This information should represent each input’s position within the overall
sequence, thus their relative position. These positions are then added to the embedded representation
of each sequential input.
Positional encodings are well-established in the field, and there are multiple methods to compute them.
We employ the method originally proposed by Vaswani et al., 2017:
PE(pos,2i) = sin

pos
10000
2i
dmodel

(4.1)
PE(pos,2i+1) = cos

pos
10000
2i
dmodel

(4.2)
The computation is done differently for even and odd indices. For even indices in the input vector,
values are derived from the sine function. For odd indices, values are derived from the cosine function.
The choice of sine and cosine functions is deliberate due to their linear properties, which the model
can easily learn to attend to. Essentially, this method creates sinusoidal waves at different frequencies,
which enables the model to identify the relative positions of its inputs.
4.1.3
Transformer Decoder
We adopt an architecture similar to the transformer model (Figure 2.2), where only the transformer
decoder part is used.
Central to our proposed architecture is the Masked Multi-Head Attention mechanism. Firstly, we need
to understand the basic (self-)attention mechanism, known as Scaled-Dot Product Attention.
The
attention mechanism enables the model to access information from every step in the historical sequence
and evaluate its importance by learning parameter matrices (Vaswani et al., 2017). This ensures that
long-term dependencies in the historical pattern can be extracted (Ferrer, 2024).
The attention mechanism can be explained by Equation 4.3:
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax
 
QKT
√dk
!
V
(4.3)
From the equation, it is clear that the attention mechanism requires three inputs, Q, K and V - all
generally derived from the same input. These vectors are created by multiplying the embedded input
by three matrices that were learned during the training process.
==PAGE:31==
4.1 Proposed Model
24
To simplify the explanation note that we only discuss activities but there is other sequential dynamic
information included too: the environmental context and duration. The query vectors represents the
current activity for which the attention mechanism is trying to find relevant information. It acts like
a question that asks, ”Which past activities are most relevant in order to understand the impact of
this current activity on the stress response?”. The key vectors are representations of all the activities
in the sequence. Keys are used to identify the importance of different past activities with respect to
the current activity. Each key is compared with the query to determine how relevant each past activity
is to the current activity. Here dk is the dimension of the key vectors. The value vectors contain the
actual information from the sequence of activities that will be used to produce the final attention output.
Notice that the calculation is done eﬀiciently by packing the set of query, key and value vectors into
matrices Q, K and V.
Figure 4.3 illustrates the attention mechanism.
Figure 4.3: Scaled Dot-Product Attention (Vaswani et al., 2017)
The first step is to perform a matrix multiplication between the query matrix and key matrix. This
calculates the dot product between the query and key vectors for each pair of positions in the input
sequences, which results in a score matrix. These scores represent how much attention each position in
the sequence should have on every other position. Subsequently, the raw attention scores obtained from
the previous step are scaled down. The scores are scaled by dividing them by the square root of the key
vector dimension dk. This step ensures that the scores do not become excessively large, which would
cause the softmax function in the next step to produce very small gradients, which would lead to the
vanishing gradients problem. The next step involves applying a mask to implement masked attention,
also known as causal attention. This is exclusive to the decoder part of the transformer model, thus
applicable in our case. It ensures that the output for each position in a sequence relies solely on the
previously known outputs and not on any future positions. The mask effectively sets future scores to
negative infinity, which ensures that the subsequent softmax function zeroes them out. These scaled
scores are then inputted into a softmax function, which converts them into probabilities that sum up
to one. It emphasizes which positions in the sequence are most important, ultimately determines how
much attention to pay to each position. Finally, the output probabilities from the softmax are used to
compute a weighted sum of the value vectors. Another matrix multiplication is performed here between
the probabilities and the value matrix. This results in the final attention output.
==PAGE:32==
4.1 Proposed Model
25
The Scaled-Dot Product Attention allows a network to attend over a sequence. However, often there are
multiple different aspects a sequence element wants to attend to, which would be impossible to capture
with only one attention head. This is why we extend the attention mechanisms to employ multiple
attention heads (Vaswani et al., 2017).
Figure 4.4: Multi-Head Attention (Vaswani et al., 2017)
Figure 4.4 illustrates how the attention mechanism can be used in parallel on the same input sequence.
This allows the system to learn from different representations of the Q, K, and V, which enhances the
model’s ability to capture various features of the data. The outputs from these independent attention
heads are concatenated and then linearly transformed to match the expected output dimensions. Intu-
itively, employing multiple attention heads allows the model to attend to different parts of the sequence
differently, thereby capturing both short-term and long-term dependencies.
Mathematically, this process is expressed as:
MultiHead(Q, K, V) = [head1, . . . , headh]W0
(4.4)
where each attention head is computed as:
headi = Attention(QWQ
i , KWK
i , VWV
i )
(4.5)
This mechanism allows each head to concentrate on various aspects of the input sequence, which in
return results in a richer representation.
The Feed Forward block in the architecture consists of two linear transformations with a ReLU activation
function in between. It is applied independently to each position in the sequence, which means the same
feed-forward network (with identical parameters) is used for each position. This allows for additional
non-linear transformations of the features extracted by the attention mechanism, which helps the model
capture more complex patterns in the data.
==PAGE:33==
4.1 Proposed Model
26
The Add & Norm blocks in the architecture improves model stability and performance. It is strategically
positioned subsequent to the Masked Multi-Head Attention block and Feed Forward block. This block
executes two critical functions: it establishes the Residual Connection by addition (Add) and implements
Layer Normalization (Norm). This duo of operations ensure that the block ensures that the network
can effectively handle the flow of gradients during training.
4.1.4
Fully Connected Residual Layer
Lastly, the output from the GPT-based model is added with the embedded user-information and feed
into the Fully Connected Residual block. Similarly to Hong et al., 2022, we choose to add instead of
concatenate them. This method provides the model with the flexibility to balance the importance of
each feature on its own and maintain a consistent dimensionality, as this reduces the computational
complexity and makes the model less prone to overfit.
The Fully Connected Residual block learns
the dependencies of the GPT output and the embedded user-information, which in turn helps the
model extract user-specific patterns to tackle the issues around inter-individual variability of the stress
response. Essentially, user-information is beneficial for the network to identify stress response sequences
by different users and learn user-specific stress response patterns.
4.1.5
Prediction
Unlike the transformer presented in ”Attention Is All You Need” by Vaswani et al., 2017 (Figure 2.2),
our model needs to predict a numerical output rather than a probability distribution. Therefore, we
remove the softmax module as the output is real values and not probabilities. Instead, we only use a
linear layer to convert the final output of the GPT block into a continuous value, which represents the
predicted stress response. This approach enables our model to effectively process and predict stress
responses based on the activity data.
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 5
Experimental Setup
This chapter details the practical implementation around the proposed model. For the execution of the
computational tasks, the experiments were conducted on a server provided by DTU.
5.1
Model Variations
Four scenarios were examined to assess the model. The primary model used Mean HR as the stress
proxy. Furthermore, three variations were explored. The first variation used Mean HR Z-scored, as HR
is very person-specific in absolute terms. The second variation included Sleep and Gap data to help the
model identify patterns, such as a lower HR after sleep. The third scenario handled variations in the
number of previous observations used for prediction to address the variability in real-life data. These
scenarios enabled a comprehensive exploration and evaluation of the model’s effectiveness.
Figure 5.1: Overview of Model Variations
5.2
Dataset Splits
It is crucial to evaluate the model’s performance on unseen data to ensure its generalizability. This is
achieved by the process known as the train-validation-test split. The primary purpose of this split is to
assess how well the model performs on new unseen data and to tune the model’s hyperparameters. It is
important to note that since we were working with spatio-temporal data, we could not randomly shuffle
the datasets. Otherwise, the models would be trained on events that occur in the future. Consequently,
we ensured to maintain the sequential order and avoided to shuffle the data when it was split into train-
validation-test sets. Here we did a 6-2-2 split. Thus, the first 60% of the data was used to train the
predictive models. The subsequent 20%, from the 60% to 80% interval, was dedicated to the validation
set used to tune the hyperparameters - the validation set was therefore not used in the optimization
==PAGE:35==
5.3 Hyperparameters
28
but serves to monitor the network loss. Finally, the last 20% of the constituted the test set, which was
used for the final evaluation of the models. This process was conducted separately for each participant
to ensure the split is done individually for each participant’s data. Note that the participants had a
varying number of observations. This approach ensures that the temporal dependencies and patterns
within each participant’s data were preserved.
Subsequently, we applied the window method. We split up the data into sequences, i.e windows, that
overlap and contained a fixed number of consecutive observations. In this method, each window is
processed independently, which means each window of observations is treated as an input sequence.
This method is particularly suitable for sequential data as it maintains the temporal order of the
observations, which ensures that the model can learn patterns over time. We set a step size to 1. The
window size determines how many past observations are considered to predict the next value, while the
step size determines how many observations the window moves forward to create the next sequence.
A step size of 1 means that each new window starts one observation after the previous window. This
approach results in the maximum possible overlap between consecutive windows. By ensuring that each
window overlaps significantly with the previous one, the model is able to learn from the most subtle
shifts in the data. To clarify, if the window size is set to 10, it means each sequence will include 9
previous time steps and the current time step (10 time steps in total). The model will use these 10 time
steps to predict the stress proxy at the current (last) time step in the sequence.
However, since we will not have a fixed number of observations available in any real-life application,
we need the model to accommodate this variability. Therefore, we implemented an alternative method
where the window size is randomly sampled between 1 (considering only the current observation) and
20. This was explored in one model variation.
5.3
Hyperparameters
Grid search was utilized to find the best set of hyperparameters:
• The number of sub-encoder-layers in the transformer num_layers in search space {4, 8, 16}
• The number of heads in multi-head attention models num_heads in search space {4, 8}
• The size of the embedding size_emb in search space {32, 64}
• Window size in search space {2, 3, 5, 10, 20}
The best hyperparameters, as reported in Table 5.1, were determined based on the validation loss.
Model
num_layers
num_heads
size_emb
window_size
Mean HR
8
8
64
2
Z-scored
8
4
64
5
Sleep and Gap included
8
8
64
5
Varying Window Size
4
4
32
-
Table 5.1: Hyperparameters
==PAGE:36==
5.4 Model Evaluation
29
Learning rate and batch size were established at 0.001 and 32, respectively. Some initial exploration
was conducted, but it was not fine-tuned due to server problems and crashes.
The Adam optimizer with an L2 penalty of 1 × 10−6 was utilized to optimize the model’s parameters.
Learning rate warm-up and decay was implemented as reported by Vaswani et al., 2017, with a warm-up
period of 2 epochs followed by a linear decay of 0.98 per epoch. In an attempt to reduce overfit on
the dataset used to train the model, an early stopping strategy was employed to pause if the validation
loss did not decrease for three consecutive epochs. Learning rate was consequently dropped by a factor
of 0.1, and the model subsequently continued to train. This process was repeated up to three times,
which thereby allowed the model multiple opportunities to improve. Additionally, a maximum limit of
50 epochs was imposed for eﬀiciency and to avoid excessive computation.
During the training process, the MSE loss function, as defined by Equation 5.2, was minimized. In the
model variation that included Sleep and Gap activities, instances, where the stress proxy was set to
-1, were skipped. Consequently, these instances were excluded from the loss calculation. By applying
a mask to these specific activities, the presence of Sleep and Gap activities in the dataset did not
negatively impact the loss computation.
5.4
Model Evaluation
Finally, we evaluated and reported the model’s performance on the held-out test set. To assess the
performance of the predictive model for stress responses based on activity data, several evaluation
metrics were utilized to evaluate the continuous variable. These metrics include:
• Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
• Mean Squared Error (MSE)
• Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
• Coeﬀicient of Determination (R2)
• Explained Variance Score (EVS)
• Accuracy within Tolerance
The metrics were primarily calculated with the scikit-learn library.
Each of these metrics provides a different perspective on the model’s performance, which facilitated a
detailed and well-rounded analysis. Furthermore, a visual inspection of trends and a residual analysis
was conducted.
==PAGE:37==
5.4 Model Evaluation
30
5.4.1
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
The Mean Absolute Error (MAE) measures the mean distance between the actual and predicted values,
without consideration of their direction. It is defined as:
MAE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|
(5.1)
where yi represents the actual value, ˆyi represents the predicted value and n is the number of observa-
tions, and thereby predictions.
Lower MAE values indicate better model performance. MAE is a valuable metric due to its simplicity
and interpretability as the unit is the same as the predictions. Furthermore, it is quite robust to outliers.
Unlike some other metrics, MAE is less sensitive to extreme values (outliers) in the data. This makes it
a suitable choice when the dataset contains outliers that could skew other metrics like MSE. However,
this insensitivity to more substantial errors is also a limitation since MAE does not penalize these errors
any more than minor ones. Consequently, it could underestimate the influence of outliers on the model’s
predictive accuracy.
5.4.2
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
The Mean Squared Error (MSE) is another common metric used to measure the mean squared distance
between the observed and predicted values. It is defined as:
MSE = 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(5.2)
where yi represents the actual value, ˆyi represents the predicted value and n is the number of observa-
tions, and thereby predictions.
Lower MSE values indicate better model performance. This metric is particularly useful because it
penalizes substantial errors more than MAE, which makes it more sensitive to outliers. This sensitivity
is beneficial in scenarios where these substantial errors are particularly undesirable. However, compared
to MAE, MSE can be harder to interpret because it uses squared units rather than the natural data
units, which ultimately makes its interpretation less intuitive.
5.4.3
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
The Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) is the square root of the MSE and provides an error metric in
the same units as the actual value. It is defined as:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
n
n
X
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(5.3)
where yi represents the actual value, ˆyi represents the predicted value and n is the number of observa-
tions, and thereby predictions.
==PAGE:38==
5.4 Model Evaluation
31
Lower RMSE values indicate better model performance. Since RMSE is expressed in the same units as
the actual values, it is easier to interpret than MSE, yet it still penalizes more substantial errors more
severely than smaller ones. The sensitivity to outliers can be both beneficial and problematic; it aids
in identifying extreme errors but can also amplify the influence of outliers on the overall metric.
5.4.4
Coeﬀicient of Determination (R2)
The Coeﬀicient of Determination, commonly known as R2, indicates the proportion of the variance in
the dependent variable that is predictable from the independent variables. It is defined as:
R2 = 1 −
Pn
i=1(yi −ˆyi)2
Pn
i=1(yi −¯y)2
(5.4)
where yi represents the actual value, ˆyi represents the predicted value, ¯y is the mean of the actual values
and n is the number of observations, and thereby predictions.
Ranging from 0 to 1, it provides a normalized measure of model performance. An R2 value of 1 indicates
that the model perfectly explains the variance, while a value closer to 0 indicates a model that explains
little of the variance. If the R2 is 0, the predictions are no better than simply using the mean of the
actual values as a predictor. This implies that the model fails to capture any of the underlying patterns
in the data. While R2 value provides an intuitive measure of model performance, it has its limitations.
It does not indicate whether the predictive model is biased, nor does it provide information on the scale
or distribution of prediction errors.
5.4.5
Explained Variance Score (EVS)
The Explained Variance Score (EVS) measures the proportion of the variance in the dependent variable
that is explained by the independent variables in a model. It is defined as:
EVS = 1 −Var(y −ˆy)
Var(y)
(5.5)
where Var(y −ˆy) is the variance of the prediction errors (the residuals) and Var(y) is the variance of
the actual values.
The EVS provides a normalized measure of model performance, very similar to R2.
A score of 1
indicates that the model perfectly predicts the variance in the data, while a score of 0 indicates that
the model does not explain any of the variance. In some cases, the EVS is below 0 which indicates
worse performance than the mean as predictor. While both the EVS and R2 provide clarity on the
model’s predictive power, they do so from slightly different perspectives. The EVS focuses directly on
the variance explained by the model’s predictions relative to the total variance in the actual values. It
does not directly compare the model’s performance to the mean of the observed data as R2 does.
==PAGE:39==
5.5 Baseline Models
32
5.4.6
Accuracy within Tolerance
To comprehensively evaluate the predictive performance of the developed model, we employed our own
two specific accuracy metrics that measure the closeness of the predicted values to the actual values
within specified tolerances.
One metric quantifies the proportion of predictions that fall within a predefined relative threshold of the
true values. Specifically, for each prediction ˆyi and true value yi, the prediction is considered accurate
if:
|ˆyi −yi|
|yi|
≤Tolerance Percentage
Another metric assesses the proportion of predictions that lie within a fixed absolute difference from the
true values. Specifically, for each prediction ˆyi and true value yi, the prediction is considered accurate
if:
|ˆyi −yi| ≤Tolerance Value
5.4.7
Residual Analysis
In addition to these numerical metrics, residual analysis was performed to visually inspect the errors.
Residuals, defined as the difference between actual and predicted values, were plotted to check for
patterns. Ideally, residuals should be randomly scattered around zero, as this indicates that the model’s
errors are randomly distributed and that there is a linear relationship between the actual and predicted
values.
Residual = yi −ˆyi
(5.6)
Residual plots and Quantile-Quantile (QQ) plots were used to verify the normality and homoscedasticity
(constant variance) of the residuals.
5.5
Baseline Models
The baseline model serves as a simple yet effective benchmark to evaluate the performance of more com-
plex predictive models. In this study, the baseline model used the mean of each participant calculated
from the training set to predict the stress proxy in the test set. This method provided a clear benchmark,
which helped assess the performance of the advanced model relative to a very basic prediction.
==PAGE:40==
5.6 Explainability (SHAP)
33
5.6
Explainability (SHAP)
Deploying complex models often leads to reduced interpretability. While models like transformers have
shown impressive performance, their inner mechanisms can be diﬀicult to understand. This makes it
diﬀicult for policymakers and stakeholders to evaluate and validate the predictions made by the model
(Corrias et al., 2023). Recent advancements in interpretable ML provide tools to understand these
”black box” models better. For example, SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations) values can be used
to quantify the contribution of each input feature to a model’s prediction (Lundberg, 2018). It is a
widely used approach from cooperative game theory that come with desirable properties. SHAP values
quantify the contribution of each input feature to the model’s predictions, thereby identifying the most
informative relationships between the input features and the predicted outcome (Awan, 2023).
Beyond interpretation, SHAP’s calculation of feature importance can be used for feature selection.
By quantifying the impact of each feature, SHAP identifies the most influential features as well as
potentially redundant ones. This provides the opportunity to refine models by retaining only the most
impactful features, which can lead to more eﬀicient, simpler and more interpretable models.
==PAGE:41==
CHAPTER 6
Results
In this study, we used Mean HR as a metric for stress response, a proxy for stress. While the model
was intended to directly translate to a stress level index, this was not delivered in time for this thesis.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed model, we examined four distinct variations: the primary
model utilized Mean HR, while the three other variations used Z-scored Mean HR, incorporated Sleep
and Gap activities and employed varying window sizes. Furthermore, a very simple baseline model was
used as a benchmark to helps assess the performance of the advanced model relative to a very basic
prediction. Lastly, SHAP was used to uncover the key drivers behind the primary models’ predictions
by quantifying the relative contribution of each input feature to the final output.
6.1
Baseline
Various statistical measures and visualizations were used to evaluate the model’s performance. In the
next sections, we will examine the performance of more advanced models. This baseline model simply
serves as a benchmark to help assess the added value of the more sophisticated model, namely our
GPT-based model.
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
9.45
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
163.05
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
12.77
Explained Variance Score (EVS)
0.07
Coeﬀicient of Determination (R2)
0.07
Percentage of predictions within ±2 bpm
14.94%
Percentage of predictions within ±5 bpm
34.34%
Percentage of predictions within ±10%
54.66%
Percentage of predictions within ±15%
74.98%
Table 6.1: Model Performance Metrics
==PAGE:42==
6.1 Baseline
35
Figure 6.1: Comparison of Actual and Predicted Mean HR with Participant Separation
Figure 6.2: Residual Analysis
==PAGE:43==
6.1 Baseline
36
Figure 6.3: Density Comparison of Actual and Predicted Mean HR
The MAE of 9.45 bpm indicates the mean deviation of the model’s predictions from the actual Mean
HR values. The RMSE, which penalizes substantial deviations more heavily compared the MAE, is
12.77 bpm. The model’s ESV and R² values of 0.07 indicate it captures and explains only 7% of the
variance in Mean HR. They are above 0 because we have used the mean per individual as a predictor,
rather than a collective mean across all participants. The model’s accuracy within the tolerances of ±2
bpm and ±5 bpm is relatively low, as people’s HRs can vary significantly from their mean. However,
more than half of the predictions fall within ±10% of the mean, and three-quarters are within ±15%.
Figure 6.1 shows the actual Mean HR values versus the predicted values across all observations. The
predicted values are simply the mean of individual means. The minimum value is 60 and the maximum
value is 104, which indicates that individual values vary greatly. It is important to note that this is a
mean of means, which does not account for the duration of the observations.
Figure 6.2 displays the residual analysis. The QQ plots shows that the residuals deviate from the red
line, especially in the tails, which means that they are not normally distributed. This indicates potential
outliers or non-normality in the data. This could also be attributed to our observation that the Mean
HR was slightly right-skewed (Figure 3.2). The scatter plot of residuals versus predicted values shows
that the residuals are centered around zero, which indicates no systematic bias. However, it is also
visibly exhibits the presence of outliers. The histogram of residuals is slightly right-skew, which may be
a consequence of the slightly right-skewed distribution observed in the actual Mean HR values. While
the majority of residuals are concentrated around zero, there are some noticeable positive residuals.
This is also evident in the time series plot of residuals, where some noticeable spikes are present.
Figure 6.3 compares the distribution of the actual Mean HR values to the distribution of the predicted
values. Unsurprisingly, the predicted values exhibit a more narrow distribution, with most values be-
tween 80-100 bpm. In contrast, the actual Mean HR values span a much wider, from approximately 60
to 180 bpm, yet with only a few observations above 125 bpm.
==PAGE:44==
6.2 Mean HR
37
6.2
Mean HR
Various statistical measures and visualizations were used to evaluate the model’s performance.
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
8.03
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
131.97
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
11.49
Explained Variance Score (EVS)
0.25
Coeﬀicient of Determination (R2)
0.23
Percentage of predictions within ±2 bpm
18.25%
Percentage of predictions within ±5 bpm
44.21%
Percentage of predictions within ±10%
67.46%
Percentage of predictions within ±15%
83.23%
Table 6.2: Model Performance Metrics
Figure 6.4: Comparison of Actual and Predicted Mean HR with Participant Separation
==PAGE:45==
6.2 Mean HR
38
Figure 6.5: Residual Analysis
Figure 6.6: Density Comparison of Actual and Predicted Mean HR
==PAGE:46==
6.2 Mean HR
39
The MAE of 8.03 bpm represents the mean deviation from actual HR values, while the RMSE of 11.49
bpm penalizes substantial deviations more heavily. The model’s ESV of 0.25 indicates it captures 25%
of the variance in the Mean HR data. Additionally, the R2 value of 0.23 shows the model explains only
23% of the variability in Mean HR. This indicates the model has a relatively poor fit to the data, but
significantly better than the baseline. The model’s accuracy is limited, with only 18.25% of predictions
within ±2 bpm of the actual values, and 44.21% within ±5 bpm. These are also relatively small intervals
but provide an indication of how precise it is. The model achieves reasonable precision, with 67.46% of
predicted values within ±10% of the actual values and 83.23% within ±15%.
Figure 6.4 shows that the model captures some trends in the data, but there are visible discrepancies,
especially in the peaks and valleys. The predicted values seem to follow the overall trend of the actual
values, but there are instances of underestimation and overestimation.
Figure 6.5 displays our residual analysis.
The QQ plot shows that the residuals deviate from the
theoretical normal distribution, particularly in the tails. This indicates the presence of outliers and
that the residuals are not perfectly normally distributed. The deviation is more pronounced at the
extremes, which points to potential issues with the model’s ability to handle extreme values.
The
scatter plot of residuals versus predicted values displays a fairly consistent spread around the horizontal
axis, which indicates homoscedasticity. However, there is a noticeable cluster of residuals, which means
that the model’s errors are not uniformly distributed across all predicted values. The histogram of
residuals shows a distribution that is somewhat centered around zero, but with a noticeable skew. The
time series plot of residuals shows variability across observations, as the residuals fluctuate around zero.
Additionally, the model seems to have a tendency to underestimate the Mean HR values, as there are
more data points above the line than below it. While most residuals still fall within a relatively narrow
interval, the spikes indicate that there are substantial errors at certain points. The model performs well
overall, but has trouble with some observations, which affects it’s performance substantially.
Figure 6.6 shows that while both the actual values and the predicted values show a similar distribution,
the predicted values are slightly more peaked and less spread out than the actual values. The model
exhibits limitations in its ability to predict Mean HR at the extremes of the distribution, it predicts
values closer to the central tendency. However, the distribution is still significantly wider compared to
the baseline model.
==PAGE:47==
6.3 Mean HR Z-scored
40
6.3
Mean HR Z-scored
Various statistical measures and visualizations were used to evaluate the model’s performance.
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
0.76
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
1.19
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
1.09
Explained Variance Score (EVS)
0.28
Coeﬀicient of Determination (R2)
0.27
Percentage of predictions within ±10%
5.72%
Percentage of predictions within ±15%
7.78%
Table 6.3: Model Performance Metrics
Figure 6.7: Comparison of Actual and Predicted Mean HR Z-scored with Participant Separation
==PAGE:48==
6.3 Mean HR Z-scored
41
Figure 6.8: Residual Analysis
Figure 6.9: Density Comparison of Actual and Predicted Mean HR Z-scored
==PAGE:49==
6.3 Mean HR Z-scored
42
Contrary to previously, the MSE and RMSE are not in bpm, which makes them harder to interpret.
However, there is still a noticeable trend that the RMSE (1.09) is significantly higher than the MAE
(0.76). The model’s ESV and R² values of 0.28 and 0.27, respectively, are slightly improved compared
to the raw Mean HR model, but they still indicate that the model only captures and explains 27-28%
of the variance in Mean HR. The absolute accuracy within tolerance metrics do not provide any useful
information as the units are different and the thresholds have varying implications across participants.
Similarly, the relative accuracy within tolerance metrics may not make sense with z-scored values as
these values appear to be very small.
Figure 6.7 shows that the predicted values appear to closely follow the actual values. Yet, it does not
capture the variability accurately. There are instances where the predicted values deviate significantly
from the actual values. For some participants, the model significantly underestimates the HR values.
Figure 6.8 displays the residual analysis. The QQ plot shows that the residuals mostly follow the red
line, which indicates that they are approximately normally distributed. Yet, there are deviations at the
tails, especially one. The scatter plot of residuals versus predicted values displays that the residuals are
centered around zero, but their spread increases, which indicates heteroscedasticity. The histogram of
residuals is slightly right-skewed, consistent with the patterns observed in the QQ plot. The time series
plot of residuals shows the residuals appear randomly distributed across observations, without any clear
patterns or trends. This indicates the model’s errors do not depend on the order of the observations.
Still, the are a few heavy errors at first.
Figure 6.9 shows that both actual and predicted HR values peak around the same mean. This indicates
that the model captures the central tendency well. Additionally, the results seem to better represent
values above the central tendency compared to raw Mean HR Z-scored. Still, the model appears to
underestimate the variability in Mean HR Z-scored, as the distribution of predicted values is slightly
narrower compared to the actual Mean HR Z-scored data, particularly on the left side of the central
tendency. This indicates that the model does not capture the smaller values well.
==PAGE:50==
6.4 Mean HR with Sleep and Gap Activities
43
6.4
Mean HR with Sleep and Gap Activities
Various statistical measures and visualizations were used to evaluate the model’s performance.
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
8.49
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
135.87
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
11.66
Explained Variance Score (EVS)
0.21
Coeﬀicient of Determination (R2)
0.21
Percentage of predictions within ±2 bpm
15.32%
Percentage of predictions within ±5 bpm
38.60%
Percentage of predictions within ±10%
62.85%
Percentage of predictions within ±15%
80.32%
Table 6.4: Model Performance Metrics
Figure 6.10: Comparison of Actual and Predicted Mean HR with Participant Separation
==PAGE:51==
6.4 Mean HR with Sleep and Gap Activities
44
Figure 6.11: Residual Analysis
Figure 6.12: Density Comparison of Actual and Predicted Mean HR
==PAGE:52==
6.4 Mean HR with Sleep and Gap Activities
45
The MAE of 8.49 bpm represents the mean deviation from actual HR values, while the RMSE of 11.66
bpm penalizes substantial deviations more heavily. The model only explains 21% of the variation in
Mean HR, as evident from the low ESV and R2 values of 0.21. This indicates the model has a poor fit to
the data. The model’s accuracy is limited, with only 15.32% of predictions within ±2 bpm of the actual
values, and 38.60% within ±5 bpm. These are also relatively small intervals but provide an indication
of how precise it is. While the model achieves reasonable precision, with 62.85% of predicted values
within ±10% of the actual values and 80.32% within ±15%. The model’s performance falls between
that of the baseline and the raw Mean HR model.
Figure 6.13 shows that the model captures some trends in the data, but there are visible discrepancies,
especially in the peaks and valleys. The predicted values seem to follow the overall trend of the actual
values, but there are serious underestimation.
Figure 6.11 displays the residual analysis. The QQ plot indicates that the residuals do not perfectly
follow the expected normal distribution line, particularly at the one tail.
This indicates that the
residuals are not fully normally distributed. The deviation is more pronounced at the extremes, which
points to potential issues with the model’s ability to handle extreme values. The scatter plot of residuals
versus predicted values displays that the residuals are centered around zero, but they are clustered. The
histogram of residuals appears to be somewhat normally distributed. The time series plot of residuals
demonstrates substantial volatility. The errors exhibit a more pronounced tendency towards positive
deviations from the line.
Additionally, the plot features prominent spikes, which fail to accurately
capture the dynamic characteristics of the Mean HR.
Figure 6.12 shows that the predicted values are more concentrated around the mean compared to the
actual Mean HR values. This indicates that the model tends to underestimate the overall variability.
The spread is more narrow compared to the raw Mean HR variation.
==PAGE:53==
6.5 Mean HR with Varying Window Size
46
6.5
Mean HR with Varying Window Size
Various statistical measures and visualizations were used to evaluate the model’s performance.
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
9.27
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
150.62
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
12.27
Explained Variance Score (EVS)
0.10
Coeﬀicient of Determination (R2)
0.10
Percentage of predictions within ±2 bpm
14.80%
Percentage of predictions within ±5 bpm
36.06%
Percentage of predictions within ±10%
56.61%
Percentage of predictions within ±15%
77.01%
Table 6.5: Model Performance Metrics
Figure 6.13: Comparison of Actual and Predicted Mean HR with Participant Separation
==PAGE:54==
6.5 Mean HR with Varying Window Size
47
Figure 6.14: Residual Analysis
Figure 6.15: Density Comparison of Actual and Predicted Mean HR
==PAGE:55==
6.5 Mean HR with Varying Window Size
48
The MAE of 9.27 bpm represents the mean deviation from actual HR values, while the RMSE of 12.27
bpm indicates that the model produces moderate errors. The model’s ESV and R2 of 0.10 indicate it
captures merely 10% of the variance in the Mean HR data, which is quite low. The model’s accuracy
is limited, with only 14.80% of predictions within ±2 bpm of the actual values and 36.06% within
±5 bpm. These relatively small intervals provide an indication of the model’s precision. The model
achieves reasonable precision, with 56.61% of predicted values within ±10% of the actual values and
77.01% within ±15% but it is still less precise compared to the raw Mean HR variation and the model
that includes Sleep and Gap activities.
Figure 6.10 shows that the varying window size has significantly smoothed the predicted values. While
the model still captures the overall trend, it fails to accurately reflect the volatility present in the data.
Figure 6.11 displays the residual analysis. The QQ plot indicates that the residuals do not perfectly
follow the expected normal distribution line, particularly at the one tail. This indicates that the residuals
are not fully normally distributed, yet very close. The deviation is more pronounced at the extremes,
which points to potential issues with the model’s ability to handle extreme values. The scatter plot
of residuals versus predicted values displays that the residuals are centered around zero, but they are
somewhat clustered. The histogram of residuals is slightly right-skewed, consistent with the patterns
observed in the QQ plot. This implies the model has a tendency to produce positive prediction errors.
The time series plot of residuals exhibits considerably more volatility compared to the raw Mean HR.
Additionally, it displays prominent spikes.
Figure 6.12 shows that the predicted values are more concentrated around the mean compared to the
actual Mean HR values. This indicates that model does not adequately capture the full spread of the
data and thereby tends to underestimate the overall variability.
==PAGE:56==
6.6 Explainability (SHAP)
49
6.6
Explainability (SHAP)
SHAP values were calculated for the primary model predictions with the PermutationExplainer, which
is flexible across different models. The PermutationExplainer iterates over complete permutations of
the features, both forward and in reverse order, to minimize the number of model evaluations required
while ensuring eﬀiciency. The dataset contained 34 static features and 24 dynamic features (2 time steps
with 12 features each), which resulted in a total of 58 features. The dataset had 2022 test observations.
Therefore, SHAP values were calculated for all features to enabled the results to be analyzed globally
and locally. The SHAP values summarize the contribution of each feature to the model’s predictions.
Figure 6.16: SHAP Analysis Summary Plot
Figure 6.16 shows the features listed in order of importance from top to bottom, with the most impactful
feature at the top. However, this is merely the top 10. All features are listed in Appendix C. The x-axis
represents the SHAP value, which indicates the impact of each feature on the model’s output. The color
corresponds to the feature value, while the spread illustrates the variation in SHAP values, indicating
the variability in the feature’s impact.The spread shows the range of SHAP values, indicating variability
in the feature’s impact. The illustration reveals that activity, particularly current and also previous
activity, are highly impactful.
Thus, the model is highly sensitive to individuals’ activity patterns.
Furthermore, they both have a quite wide spread, which indicates that they can affect the model
both positively and negatively. Additionally, socioeconomic factors such as monthly income, education
level, and primary occupation significantly influence the predictions, albeit with a more even spread.
Therefore, socioeconomic status and related factors appear to be crucial determinants in the model.
Appendix C shows that attitudes towards transportation related features have varying importance,
with some in the top 10 most impactful features while others are more spread out. POIs generally have
less impact overall. However, Roads and Transportation POIs in the current time step did rank in the
top 10. It is notable that it is colored very red in the visualization. This indicates if there are many
points of interest related to roads and transportation, it tends to lower the prediction value. Duration
and personality traits exhibit moderate importance, while mental health factors rank relatively low in
importance, which may be due to the more uniform distribution (Figure 3.6).
==PAGE:57==
6.6 Explainability (SHAP)
50
Figure 6.17: Mean Absolute SHAP Values
Figure 6.17 is a bar plot that displays the mean absolute SHAP values for the top 10 most influ-
ential features in the model. This illustration supports that the current activity by far is the most
influential.The illustration also emphasizes the considerable influence of factors like household income,
educational attainment and primary occupation. These features exhibit substantial mean SHAP val-
ues, which indicates their notable impact on the model’s predictions. The rest has a lower but still
relevant influence, with a mean absolute SHAP value below 1. The combined influence of numerous
other features, despite individually smaller impacts, collectively contributes significantly to the model’s
accuracy. However, this plot does not indicate the direction of the influence, so we cannot determine
whether these features affect the outcome positively or negatively.
Figure 6.18: Mean SHAP Values
Figure 6.18 provides a clearer picture of the directionality of the feature effects. Notably, personality
features and environmental context features are significantly more prominent and do indeed influence
the model. However, the illustration does not indicate which specific feature values drive the model’s
predictions in the respective direction.
To better understand how features impact the model, it is
important to examine the SHAP values for specific predictions. Figure 6.19 shows the SHAP values for
a randomly selected prediction.
==PAGE:58==
6.6 Explainability (SHAP)
51
Figure 6.19: Example of SHAP Values for a Specific Prediction
In this example, the SHAP plot indicates that the prediction of Mean HR is influenced by a combination
of socioeconomic factors, activities, personal characteristics and environmental factors. The most sub-
stantial positive impact comes from the income level, with previous activity second and current activity
third. The number at the top represents the model’s predicted value (84.958), while the number at the
bottom is the base value (87.001), which is the mean prediction on the dataset used to train the model.
The actual Mean HR (81.7273) is lower than the model’s prediction. However, the model captures
that it needs to drive down the value. For instance, if this person is accustomed to transportation, it
explains why these factors lower the predicted HR. Notably, an anxiety score of 4 out of 5 appears to
decrease the person’s Mean HR. This prompts us to look into the personality traits more closely.
Figure 6.20: Influence of HEXACO Personality Traits on Mean HR
==PAGE:59==
6.6 Explainability (SHAP)
52
Figure 6.20 illustrate the relationship between various HEXACO personality traits and their SHAP
values, which indicate the contribution of each trait to the predicted Mean HR. It reveals some clear
trends. Personality traits like Sincerity, Fairness, Modesty and Prudence positively influence the model’s
predictions, as indicated by the upward trends in their SHAP value plots. These traits contribute to
an increase in the predicted outcome, which is the Mean HR. On the other hand, Greed Avoidance and
Anxiety contribute negatively on the model’s predictions. When these traits are more pronounced, they
are associated with lower SHAP values.
==PAGE:60==
CHAPTER 7
Discussion
We presented a study that explored variations of a GPT-based model for stress reaction prediction.
The primary model variation utilized Mean HR and had three other variations: the first used Z-scored
Mean HR, the second considered Sleep and Gap activities and the third employed varying window sizes.
We evaluated the models on a dense dataset that included data from 60 participants from the Greater
Copenhagen Region. The examination of our results leads us to these discoveries:
Based on the various statistical measures and visualizations used to evaluate the model’s performance,
it is evident that all the model variations fail to adequately capture the full complexity and variability
inherent in the Mean HR data. This is demonstrated by the low R2, which indicate that the model
variations only account for between 10% and 27% of the total variance in the data. This is further sup-
ported by the density illustrations, where the predicted values are generally more narrowly distributed
around the central tendency. The residual analysis also showed potential issues with the model’s ability
to handle extreme values, which indicates that the model may not be robust to outliers or unusual data
points. However, as this is sequential data, we cannot simply remove these outliers. Furthermore, they
were within realistic HR and could therefore actually be indicators of stress. Despite these limitations,
the model does appear to capture the overall trend in the data, which could still provide some utility
for applications like with a stress level index, which was originally intended for this thesis. This would
also enable real-world applicability and interpretability. Furthermore, a different dependent variable
could potentially improve results.
Based on the R2 value, the Z-scored Mean HR appears to best capture the variability. These results
were expected to be better due to the substantial individual variability in the raw Mean HR data. The
Mean HR was standardized for each individual to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of
one. The Mean HR Z-scored should consequently address both intra-individual and inter-individual
variations. Intra-individual variation refers to fluctuations in HR within a one individual over time,
while inter-individual variation refers to differences in HR between different individuals (Giannakakis
et al., 2022). The standardization enables the model to focus on fluctuations within individuals, which
may be more indicative compared to absolute HR values that can vary substantially between individuals.
This approach helps address the effects of diverse baseline HR. Additionally, to have standardized input
data should help reduce the influence of outliers and extreme values, which in turn can enhance the
model’s overall performance. While the Mean HR Z-scored variation shows promise, it still only explains
27% of the variance. Moreover, the standardized values are much harder to interpret without a way to
map them back to the normal HR scale, which is crucial for practical applications.
==PAGE:61==
7 Discussion
54
The three other model variations used the raw Mean HR. To address the accuracy, the most useful
measure is the RMSE, as this accounts for and captures outliers.
Outliers are of importance here,
as they could actually be indicators of stress. Furthermore, accuracy within tolerance metrics should
be considered. The most conservative and fair measure would be the relative within 10%. Absolute
tolerance metrics are very to moderately strict, and measures predictions very close to the actual value,
while the relative metric of 15% is too broad for this task.
In one variation, we explored whether the inclusion of Sleep and Gap activities had a positive influence
on the accuracy. In most adults, HR at rest is between 60 and 100 bpm. During sleep, the stimulation
of the nervous system is reduced, and most of the body’s processes slow down. Consequently, when in
deep sleep, the HR can decrease by 20-30% (Corliss, 2021). In an attempt to aid the model, a Sleep
activity was incorporated. This was calculated based on when people took off their watch for more
than 6 hours. However, not all participants removed their watch while they slept, which influenced the
results. Gaps were also included to signify to the model that the previous activity was unaccounted for,
so it would not rely on an activity that was not the true predecessor. Yet, compared to the primary
model (raw Mean HR), it did not enhance the performance. The predictions deviate from the actual
Mean HRs by approximately 11.66 bpm and the prediction accuracy within a 10% tolerance was 62.85%.
This indicates that the computational effort required to calculate the breaks is unnecessary.
In another variation, the model should be able to accommodate varying window sizes to be robust
across different scenarios. This addresses the limitations of a fixed window size, which may not be
adaptable to diverse stress situations. In real-world applications, individuals may not be able to recall
the exact activity, duration and location for an entire set window size. It is crucial to understand that
a window size of 5 does not always equate to a specific time period, as participants sometimes had 5
activities within one hour, while other times they had them over several days. This model performed the
worst, with predictions that deviated from the actual Mean HRs by approximately 12.27 bpm and the
prediction accuracy within a 10% tolerance was 56.61%. It could prove beneficial to use smaller window
sizes options, as it is evident that models performed better with 2-5 window sizes. Consequently, the
primary variation, that simply used the raw mean HR, may be more realistic for real-world application,
as it only incorporates the current and previous activity. The small window sizes hints there may not be
much need for an attention mechanism. Long-term dependencies in stress should be further explored,
as they may not be as apparent as in next-location prediction, where there are obvious patterns such
as work or school on weekdays.
The model variation that simply used raw Mean HR performed the best among the Mean HR variations.
The predictions deviated from the actual Mean HRs by approximately 11.49 bpm, and the prediction
accuracy within a 10% tolerance was 67.46%. Thus, two-thirds of the predictions were within 10% of
the actual values. However, there is still room for improvement. There was performed a SHAP analysis
to explain this model’s mechanisms and how it arrived at its decisions.
Explainability is important, as people are often reluctant to adopt models that they do not fully under-
stand. Many AI approaches fail to provide a user-centric explanation, and instead focus solely on the
mathematical relationships between features and predictions. (Jaber et al., 2022). SHAP values were
==PAGE:62==
7.1 Limitations
55
used to determine the contribution of features to the model. The main takeaways where that the model
appears highly sensitive to individuals’ activity patterns and socio-demographic, particularly socioeco-
nomic status. Socioeconomic features such as income, education and occupation significantly influence
the predictions.
Attitudes towards transportation-related features demonstrate varying importance.
Duration and personality traits exhibit moderate importance, while mental health and environmental
context features rank relatively low in importance. An important drawback is that we do not have
coordinates and therefore lack environmental context for approximately 50% of the dataset, which
comprises the mobile activity. When people are out for a walk for instance, that is where they truly
interact with their environment. Most of the static activities take place indoors, and in these cases, the
indoor environment matters most. Environmental features such as road noise may have some influence,
but the presence of natural elements is less impactful if individuals spend the majority of their time
in enclosed, dimly lit spaces where they cannot directly perceive the outdoor environment. Dedicated
studies have examined people’s emotional responses in the urban environment when they walk around
(Xiang et al., 2021). Despite the overall small importance of personality traits, their influence was
examined further. However, it is important to keep in mind that Mean HR is simply a stress indicator
and not a direct measure of stress level. Consequently, it is diﬀicult to directly compare these results
with previous literature. Furthermore, Sincerity, Fairness, Greed Avoidance and Modesty are part of
the Honesty-Humility dimension in HEXACO, which is not covered in most literature as it primarily
uses the OCEAN model (Soliemanifar et al., 2018). However, Prudence is indicative of the Conscien-
tiousness domain, which has been linked to lower stress levels. Additionally, Anxiety is indicative of the
Neuroticism domain, which has been linked to increased stress levels. Yet, the results of our model show
the complete opposite trend. The inconsistent results on the role of personality in stress response may
be due to limitations of the current study, such as the lack of direct stress measurement and insuﬀicient
sample size and diversity.
7.1
Limitations
This study was conducted with a relatively small dataset of 60 participants. Despite the fact that small-
scale studies (with 20–50 participants) are common in the field of ambulatory stress research (Smets
et al., 2018), our sample size constrains the ability to fully capture the variability in stress responses.
Especially as numerous studies have confirmed that physiological responses to stress vary significantly
between individuals (Smets et al., 2018). Consequently, more extensive datasets are necessary to better
comprehend individual variability. Additionally, the limited sample size restricts the performance of
advanced models, such as the GPT, which rely on extensive data to identify patterns and make accurate
predictions (Corrias et al., 2023). While more data would be beneficial, it is also crucial to ensure that
the dataset is neither biased nor incomplete. For instance, the datasets must be representative of the
population we are studying. A representative sample ensures applicability to the broader population.
This reduces selection bias, and enhances the validity and reliability of the research outcomes.
==PAGE:63==
7.1 Limitations
56
Our sample has two additional limitations that should be considered. Firstly, its location-based nature:
our study is confined to Copenhagen, which restricts the generalizability of the results. Consequently,
the model can not be applied in other cities, where the environmental and cultural context may differ
significantly. Secondly, its season-based nature: our study was conducted from early November to early
April, which may not capture potential variations in stress levels across different seasons. Research
shows that stress levels often increase from November to January, mainly due to the holiday season
(American Psychological Association, 2023). This could be related to factors like financial pressure
and social commitments. Given that the research was primarily conducted in the winter season, there
is a possibility that this could have impacted the outcomes.
Seasonal variations can impact stress
responses, so it would be beneficial to include time-related features in the analysis, such as season and
other temporal factors like time of day and day of the week. Conducting the study across all seasons
would help to account for these variations and provide a more complete picture of the stress responses
over the year.
Our dataset has another notable limitation: it lacks detailed information about individual activities,
particularly those done at home. Our initial data exploration revealed that people spent most of their
time at home. Activities carried out at home can vary widely, and stress levels may differ based on
the specific activity and additional contextual information such as the presence of others. Furthermore,
some people wore their wristbands while they slept, despite instructions not to do so, which resulted
in no sleep activity recorded due to the lack of a break when the watch was removed. Future studies
would benefit from more specific activity data, but it may be diﬀicult to accurately track and collect
such detailed information from participants - it is simply unrealistic to collect every piece of information
for a dataset.
One important aspect not explicitly accounted for in this study is the role of people. Previous research
has shown that individuals can transfer their emotions to others around them, a phenomenon known as
emotional contagion (Khalid and Sano, 2023). Emotional contagion occurs when someone’s emotions
and related behaviors lead to similar emotions and behaviors in others. This can occur via face-to-face
interaction, voice, text or movements. It can involve one or more individuals and happen over varying
time spans from seconds to weeks. The absence of explicit consideration of this phenomena in this study
may mean that the complex emotional dynamics have an unmeasured impact on the observed outcomes.
Implicitly, certain individuals are associated with specific activities, such as such as a stressful boss at
work. However, the absence of a direct measure of this phenomenon is a limitation. In the study by
Khalid and Sano, 2023, the researchers incorporated social network data into their emotion prediction
model. This provided a more comprehensive view of how emotions spread between individuals, as they
were able to capture the complex interpersonal dynamics that influence the spread of emotions.
==PAGE:64==
CHAPTER 8
Conclusion
This thesis presented exploratory work. The core aim was to explore how a GPT-based model can be
utilized to predict stress responses based on sequences of activities, environmental contexts and activity
duration as well as individual characteristics. Thus, the model did not directly rely on any historical
stress response data in order to ensure an unobtrusive real-world application. From the results, we
derived these key points:
The model used Mean HR as the stress proxy. Our results indicate that while the GPT-based model
shows some promise, the model fail to adequately capture the full complexity and variability inherent
in the Mean HR data. The model was extensively explored with different variations. The primary
model variation utilized Mean HR, with three additional variations: the first used Z-scored Mean HR,
the second considered synthetic Sleep and Gap activities and the third employed varying window sizes.
Our conclusion is that the primary model with Mean HR showed the most promise, as it performed
best on evaluation metrics, is close to real-world applicability and is easily interpretable. Despite its
limitations, the model does capture the overall trend in the data, which indicates potential utility in
applications that use a stress level index instead of Mean HR.
The model was significantly impacted by individual characteristics.
The model’s predictions were
strongly influenced by individuals’ socio-demographic characteristics. Additionally, personality traits
moderately impacted the predictions, while mental health factors had minimal influence. This under-
scores the importance of individual factors in stress response prediction.
The incorporation of environmental context into our model architecture as dynamic elements, same as
activity and activity duration, had little influence on the model’s predictions. This could be due to the
lack of detailed environmental contexts for indoor environments, as well as the fact that approximately
half of the dataset did not have any coordinates, as they were mobile activities.
In summary, our research demonstrates that GPT-based models can be applied to stress response
prediction with some success, but their accuracy is limited by the variability and complexity of the
data. Individual characteristics and contextual elements play considerable roles, and their inclusion in
the model can potentially enhance predictive accuracy. However, the current study’s limitations, such
as sample size must be addressed to improve the model’s robustness and broader applicability.
==PAGE:65==
8.1 Future Work
58
8.1
Future Work
Future research should built on the exploratory work found in this thesis and focus on several ar-
eas. Firstly, the model should be tested on a stress level index, as this would enable more real-world
applicability and interpretability. Secondly, a more extensive datasets is necessary to better compre-
hend individual variability. Future models should also include more comprehensive environmental data,
especially for outdoor activities, to better understand how different environments impact stress. Addi-
tionally, temporal factors such as time of day, day of week and season could be incorporated into the
model to help account for intra-individual variations in stress responses. Furthermore, the incorporation
of social network data could help account for how social interactions influence stress responses. Lastly,
it would be beneficial to utilize explainability tools to perform feature selection to ensure the inclusion
of the most impactful data - explanatory variables that have a decisive impact on the outcome of the
response. In conclusion, this thesis provides a foundation for future research to enhance the accuracy,
robustness and real-world applicability of GPT-based stress prediction models.
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
Ahmed, S., Nielsen, I. E., Tripathi, A., Siddiqui, S., Ramachandran, R. P., & Rasool, G. (December
2023). Transformers in Time-Series Analysis: A Tutorial. Circuits, Systems, and Signal Pro-
cessing, 42(12), 7433–7466. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00034-023-02454-8
Alberdi, A., Aztiria, A., & Basarab, A. (February 2016). Towards an automatic early stress recognition
system for oﬀice environments based on multimodal measurements: A review. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jbi.2015.11.007
Allard, M. (January 2019). What is a Transformer? https://medium.com/inside-machine-learning/
what-is-a-transformer-d07dd1fbec04
American Psychological Association. (November 2023). Even a Joyous Holiday Season Can Cause Stress
for Most Americans. https://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/2023/11/holiday-season-stress
Ashmita Hota & Sung-won Park. (2022). Stress Detection Using Physiological Signals Based On Ma-
chine Learning. Proceedings - 2022 International Conference on Computational Science and
Computational Intelligence, CSCI 2022, 85–88. https://doi.org/10.1109/CSCI58124.2022.00020
Awan, A. A. (June 2023). An Introduction to SHAP Values and Machine Learning Interpretability. https:
//www.datacamp.com/tutorial/introduction-to-shap-values-machine-learning-interpretability
Barría, C., Guevara, C. A., Jimenez-Molina, A., & Seriani, S. (May 2023). Relating emotions, psy-
chophysiological indicators and context in public transport trips: Case study and a joint frame-
work for data collection and analysis. Transportation Research Part F: Traﬀic Psychology and
Behaviour, 95, 418–431. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trf.2023.05.002
Brose, A. (January 2021). Personality and stress. In The handbook of personality dynamics and processes
(Pages 1209–1229). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813995-0.00047-9
Campanella, S., Altaleb, A., Belli, A., Pierleoni, P., & Palma, L. (April 2023). A Method for Stress
Detection Using Empatica E4 Bracelet and Machine-Learning Techniques. Sensors, 23(7). https:
//doi.org/10.3390/s23073565
Castro, M., Guevara, C. A., & Jimenez-Molina, A. (September 2020). A methodological framework
to incorporate psychophysiological indicators into transportation modeling. Transportation Re-
search Part C: Emerging Technologies, 118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2020.102712
Cohen, T. R. (2017). How to Pick a Great Worker.
Corliss, J. (January 2021). How Does Sleep Affect Your Heart Rate? https://www.health.harvard.edu/
blog/how-does-sleep-affect-your-heart-rate-2021012921846
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
60
Corrias, R., Gjoreski, M., & Langheinrich, M. (May 2023). Exploring Transformer and Graph Convo-
lutional Networks for Human Mobility Modeling. Sensors, 23(10). https://doi.org/10.3390/
s23104803
Dumitru, V. M., & Cozman, D. (2012). The Relationship between Stress and Personality Factors (tech-
nical report).
Ferrer, J. (January 2024). How Transformers Work: A Detailed Exploration of Transformer Architecture.
https://www.datacamp.com/tutorial/how-transformers-work
Giannakakis, G., Grigoriadis, D., Giannakaki, K., Simantiraki, O., Roniotis, A., & Tsiknakis, M. (2022).
Review on Psychological Stress Detection Using Biosignals. IEEE Transactions on Affective
Computing, 13(1), 440–460. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAFFC.2019.2927337
Hong, Y., Martin, H., & Raubal, M. (October 2022). How do you go where? Improving next location
prediction by learning travel mode information using transformers. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3557915.3560996
Jaber, D., Hajj, H., Maalouf, F., & El-Hajj, W. (December 2022). Medically-oriented design for explain-
able AI for stress prediction from physiological measurements. BMC Medical Informatics and
Decision Making, 22(1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-022-01772-2
Jaques, N., Taylor, S., Sano, A., & Picard, R. (2017). Predicting Tomorrow’s Mood, Health, and Stress
Level using Personalized Multitask Learning and Domain Adaptation Ognjen (Oggi) Rudovic
(technical report).
Khalid, M., & Sano, A. (December 2023). Exploiting social graph networks for emotion prediction.
Scientific Reports, 13(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-32825-9
Kim, H., Kim, M., Park, K., Kim, J., Yoon, D., Kim, W., & Park, C. H. (2023). Machine learning-
based classification analysis of knowledge worker mental stress. Frontiers in Public Health, 11.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2023.1302794
Kyriakou, K., Resch, B., Sagl, G., Petutschnig, A., Werner, C., Niederseer, D., Liedlgruber, M., Wilhelm,
F., Osborne, T., & Pykett, J. (September 2019). Detecting moments of stress from measure-
ments of wearable physiological sensors. Sensors (Switzerland), 19(17). https://doi.org/10.
3390/s19173805
Lamichhane, B., Großekathöfer, U., Schiavone, G., & Casale, P. (2017). Towards Stress Detection in
Real-Life Scenarios Using Wearable Sensors: Normalization Factor to Reduce Variability in
Stress Physiology (K. Giokas, L. Bokor, & F. Hopfgartner, Editors; Volume 181). Springer
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-49655-9
Li, R., & Liu, Z. (December 2020). Stress detection using deep neural networks. BMC Medical Infor-
matics and Decision Making, 20. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-020-01299-4
Lundberg, S. (2018). An Introduction to Explainable AI with Shapley Values. https://shap.readthedocs.
io/en/latest/example_notebooks/overviews/An%20introduction%20to%20explainable%
20AI%20with%20Shapley%20values.html
Muaremi, A., Arnrich, B., & Tröster, G. (June 2013). Towards Measuring Stress with Smartphones and
Wearable Devices During Workday and Sleep. BioNanoScience, 3(2), 172–183. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s12668-013-0089-2
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
61
Palanisamy, K. (2012). Descriptive Analysis of Skin Temperature Variability of Sympathetic Nervous
System Activity in Stress (technical report).
Rastgoo, M. N., Nakisa, B., Maire, F., Rakotonirainy, A., & Chandran, V. (December 2019). Auto-
matic driver stress level classification using multimodal deep learning. Expert Systems with
Applications, 138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2019.07.010
Smets, E., Rios Velazquez, E., Schiavone, G., Chakroun, I., D’Hondt, E., De Raedt, W., Cornelis, J.,
Janssens, O., Van Hoecke, S., Claes, S., Van Diest, I., & Van Hoof, C. (December 2018). Large-
scale wearable data reveal digital phenotypes for daily-life stress detection. Npj Digital Medicine,
1(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41746-018-0074-9
Soliemanifar, O., Soleymanifar, A., & Afrisham, R. (2018). Relationship between personality and bio-
logical reactivity to stress: A review. https://doi.org/10.30773/PI.2018.10.14.2
Turing. (2022). Understanding Transformer Neural Network Model in Deep Learning and NLP.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., & Polosukhin,
I. (June 2017). Attention Is All You Need. http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762
Vazquez-Rodriguez, J., Lefebvre, G., Cumin, J., & Crowley, J. L. (April 2022). Transformer-Based
Self-Supervised Learning for Emotion Recognition. http://arxiv.org/abs/2204.05103
Xiang, L., Cai, M., Ren, C., & Ng, E. (November 2021). Modeling pedestrian emotion in high-density
cities using visual exposure and machine learning: Tracking real-time physiology and psychology
in Hong Kong. Building and Environment, 205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108273
==PAGE:69==
APPENDIX A
Overview of Features
Activity and Physiological Signals
• participant_id (not used directly in the model)
• Activity
• Mean_HR or Mean_HR_zscored
• Duration
• Start_time (not used directly in the model)
• End_time (not used directly in the model)
• lat (not used directly in the model)
• lon (not used directly in the model)
Individual Characteristics
• Age bracket
• Which gender do you identify with?
• What is your primary occupation?
• What is the highest level of education you have completed?
• What is the monthly income of your household, after taxes?
• How many members are there in your household?
• Sincerity (HEXACO)
• Fairness (HEXACO)
• Greed Avoidance (HEXACO)
• Modesty (HEXACO)
• Prudence (HEXACO)
• Anxiety (HEXACO)
• Depression (DASS)
• Anxiety (DASS)
• Stress (DASS)
• Environmental Mastery
• Cognitive Impairment
• When sitting in a car, I feel safe and protected.
==PAGE:70==
A Overview of Features
63
• Driving a car means fun and passion to me.
• I appreciate about driving that I can decide for myself whom to drive with.
• The organisation of my everyday life requires a high level of mobility.
• I have to be mobile all the time to meet my obligations.
• I am able to relax when using public transport.
• I appreciate about public transport that I don’t have to pay attention to traﬀic myself.
• I like travelling by bus or train because I often get into conversations with other passengers.
• When using public transport, I sometimes feel bothered by other passengers.
• When travelling by bus or train, I can use my time in a meaningful way.
• I can reach many of my important destinations by bicycle.
• By bicycle I can get anywhere.
• I enjoy walking.
• Walking is good for me.
• Travel time is generally wasted time.
• The only good thing about day-to-day travel is arriving at your destination.
• Commuting can be a useful transition between home and work.
Environmental Context
• Food and Drink POI
• Buildings and Facilities POI
• Beauty, Personal Care, and Health POI
• Miscellaneous and Other Services POI
• Roads and Transportation POI
• Tourism and Leisure POI
• Arts, Entertainment, and Events POI
• Greenery and Natural Features POI
• Public Services and Facilities POI
• Water Body POI
==PAGE:71==
APPENDIX B
Survey Questions
Socio-demographic
• What is the highest level of education you have completed?
• How many children under 18 live with you?
• What is the monthly income of your household, after taxes?
• How many members are there in your household?
• What age bracket do you fall into?
• Which gender do you identify with?
• What is your primary occupation?
HEXACO
• I wouldn’t use flattery to get a raise or promotion at work, even if I thought it would succeed.
• If I want something from someone, I will laugh at that person’s worst jokes.
• I wouldn’t pretend to like someone just to get that person to do favours for me.
• If I knew that I could never get caught, I would be willing to steal a million dollars.
• I would never accept a bribe, even if it were very large.
• I’d be tempted to use counterfeit money, if I were sure I could get away with it.
• Having a lot of money is not especially important to me.
• I would get a lot of pleasure from owning expensive luxury goods.
• I think that I am entitled to more respect than the average person is.
• I want people to know that I am an important person of high status.
• I make decisions based on the feeling of the moment rather than on careful thought.
• I make a lot of mistakes because I don’t think before I act.
• I don’t allow my impulses to govern my behaviour.
• I prefer to do whatever comes to mind, rather than stick to a plan.
• I sometimes can’t help worrying about little things.
• I worry a lot less than most people do.
• I rarely, if ever, have trouble sleeping due to stress or anxiety.
• I get very anxious when waiting to hear about an important decision.
==PAGE:72==
B Survey Questions
65
DASS
• I found it hard to wind down.
• I was aware of dryness of my mouth.
• I couldn’t seem to experience any positive feeling at all.
• I experienced breathing diﬀiculty.
• I found it diﬀicult to work up the initiative to do things.
• I was unable to become enthusiastic about anything.
• I felt I wasn’t worth as a person.
• I felt that I was rather touchy.
• I was aware of the action of my heart in the absence of physical exertion.
• I felt scared without any good reason.
• I felt that life was meaningless.
• I found myself getting agitated.
• I found it diﬀicult to relax.
• I felt down-hearted and blue.
• I was intolerant of anything that kept me from getting on with what I was doing.
• I felt I was close to panic.
• I tended to over-react to situations.
• I felt that I was using a lot of nervous energy.
• I experienced trembling.
• I was worried about situations in which I might panic and make a fool of myself.
• I felt that I had nothing to look forward to.
Environmental Mastery
• The demands of everyday life often get me down.
• In general, I feel I am in charge of the situation in which I live.
• I am good at managing the responsibilities of daily life.
AD8
• I have problems with judgment (e.g., problems making decisions, bad financial decisions, problems
with thinking).
• I have less interest in hobbies/activities.
• I repeat the same things over and over (questions, stories, or statements).
• I have trouble learning how to use a tool, appliance, or gadget (e.g., VCR, computer, microwave,
remote control).
• I forget the correct month or year.
==PAGE:73==
B Survey Questions
66
• I have trouble handling complicated financial affairs (e.g., balancing checkbook, income taxes,
paying bills).
• I have trouble remembering appointments.
• I have daily problems with thinking and/or memory.
Attitude towards transportation
• When sitting in a car, I feel safe and protected.
• Driving a car means fun and passion to me.
• I appreciate about driving that I can decide for myself whom to drive with.
• The organisation of my everyday life requires a high level of mobility.
• I have to be mobile all the time to meet my obligations.
• I am able to relax when using public transport.
• I appreciate about public transport that I don’t have to pay attention to traﬀic myself.
• I like travelling by bus or train because I often get into conversations with other passengers.
• When using public transport, I sometimes feel bothered by other passengers.
• When travelling by bus or train, I can use my time in a meaningful way.
• I can reach many of my important destinations by bicycle.
==PAGE:74==
APPENDIX C
SHAP Importance
A list of features ordered by their SHAP values from most to least influential:
1. Activity (t=2)
2. What is the monthly income of your household?
3. What is the highest level of education you have completed?
4. What is your primary occupation?
5. Activity (t=1)
6. Which gender do you identify with?
7. I am able to relax when using public transport.
8. Cognitive Impairment
9. I have to be mobile all the time to meet my obligations.
10. Roads and Transportation POI (t=2)
11. I appreciate about driving that I can decide for myself whom to drive with.
12. Greed Avoidance (HEXACO)
13. Walking is good for me.
14. Water Body POI (t=2)
15. Age Bracket
16. By bicycle I can get anywhere.
17. Commuting can be a useful transition between home and work.
18. Environmental Mastery
19. Travel time is generally wasted time.
20. The only good thing about day-to-day travel is arriving at your destination.
21. I enjoy walking.
22. Duration (t=1)
23. How many members are there in your household?
24. Anxiety (HEXACO)
25. Duration (t=2)
26. Public Services and Facilities POI (t=1)
27. Water Body POI (t=1)
28. Modesty (HEXACO)
29. Greenery and Natural Features POI (t=2)
==PAGE:75==
C SHAP Importance
68
30. I can reach many of my important destinations by bicycle.
31. I like travelling by bus or train because I often get into conversations with other passengers.
32. Arts, Entertainment, and Events POI (t=1)
33. Sincerity (HEXACO)
34. Fairness (HEXACO)
35. Depression (DASS)
36. Prudence (HEXACO)
37. The organisation of my everyday life requires a high level of mobility.
38. Tourism and Leisure POI (t=2)
39. Driving a car means fun and passion to me.
40. Food and Drink POI (t=1)
41. I appreciate about public transport that I don’t have to pay attention to traﬀic myself.
42. Roads and Transportation POI (t=1)
43. When travelling by bus or train, I can use my time in a meaningful way.
44. Miscellaneous and Other Services POI (t=1)
45. When sitting in a car, I feel safe and protected.
46. Food and Drink POI (t=2)
47. Beauty, Personal Care, and Health POI (t=2)
48. Greenery and Natural Features POI (t=1)
49. Tourism and Leisure POI (t=1)
50. When using public transport, I sometimes feel bothered by other passengers.
51. Stress (DASS)
52. Arts, Entertainment, and Events POI (t=2)
53. Beauty, Personal Care, and Health POI (t=1)
54. Buildings and Facilities POI (t=2)
55. Buildings and Facilities POI (t=1)
56. Anxiety (DASS)
57. Miscellaneous and Other Services POI (t=1)
58. Public Services and Facilities POI (t=2)
