==PAGE:1==
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet
Quantum Reaction Dynamics:
Photodissociation of HOD
Master’s Thesis
Department of Chemistry
Candidate : Pietro Dal Cin, S222947
Supervisor : Niels Engolm Henriksen
June 29, 2024
Technical University of Denmark
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This work proposes a new scheme for the coherent control of the branching ratio of
HOD’s photodissociation reaction in the first electronic excited state. The scheme in-
volves induction of quantum interference between the eigenstates of the excited state
through interaction with a non-resonant NIR ultrashort laser pulse, subsequent to elec-
tronic excitation. As such, a high level, frequency-dependent excited state polarizability
surface of HOD is determined, in order to model the non-resonant coupling between pulse
and system. The results of the performance of this scheme on the control of the branching
ratio are presented, as well as an analysis of the interaction between the ultrashort pulses
and the excited state eigenstates. The understanding of the degenerate nature of these
continuum states is shown to be crucial for a correct description of the processes that lead
to a change in the reaction’s outcome, and is further discussed through an exploration of
a model system’s interaction with the laser pulses.
i of 65
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgements
I would like to give thanks to my supervisor, Niels Engolm Henriksen, for his avail-
ability and active engagement in the work that we have performed in these five months
together. We’ve had many discussions that have allowed me to overcome the difficulties
and problems that we were faced with, which I could not have hoped to solve on my own.
I would also like to thank my family for giving me the opportunity of pursuing my
studies wherever they may lead, and always showing interest and appreciation for them.
A huge thanks goes to my girlfriend, Alessia, for always supporting me from afar and
never making me feel at fault for the distance between us, and instead being there for me
in the times of need.
Finally, I would like to say thanks to the few true friends that I’ve found during these
two years at DTU, Nicolò, Aksel and Kike, as well as my office mate, Hans. Life looks
brighter with you guys around, here’s to staying in touch for many years to come.
ii of 65
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Contents
1
Theoretical Background
2
1.1
Time-Dependent Quantum Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Wavepackets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.3
The Molecular Hamiltonian
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3.1
The Adiabatic and Born-Oppenheimer approximations
. . . . . .
6
1.3.2
Internal Coordinates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.4
Interaction with External Fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4.1
Electric Field Coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.4.2
Time-Dependent Perturbation Theory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4.3
Molecular Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5
Response Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.5.1
Frequency-Dependent Properties
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.5.2
Coupled-Cluster Parameterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Numerical Methods
15
2.1
Collocation and Fourier Grid Representation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Time Evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.3
Complex Absorbing Potentials . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3
HOD Electronic Structure
21
3.1
The HOD Molecule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Potential Energy Surfaces
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.3
Dipole and Polarizability Surfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4
Quantum Dynamics
27
4.1
Field-Free Propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.1
Franck-Condon Wavepacket . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.1.2
Franck-Condon propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
4.2
Laser Interaction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.1
Ultrashort Pulses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.2.2
Branching Ratio Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Continuum Eigenstates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.1
Computational Determination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.3.2
Degeneracy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
Population and Phase Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.4.1
Phase Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.4.2
Population and Degeneracy Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.5
Modelling Degeneracy in the Two-Dimensional Harmonic Oscillator . . .
50
4.5.1
Initial States and FT Eigenstates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.5.2
Population Transfer in the Degenerate Manifold . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Conclusions
56
A Code
57
References
63
iii of 65
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Introduction
The recent experimental direct observations of wavepacket dynamics in simple di-
atomic molecules [1] and theoretical work on strong-laser-induced quantum interference
in excited states [2, 3] has sparked the main ideas behind this project. Many schemes of
coherent control of chemical reactions relying on interference between vibrational eigen-
states have been proposed [4, 5, 6, 7], and most are based on the model reaction of HOD
photodissociation and the perturbation of its ground state through laser pulses. Combin-
ing these two research lines has led us to the proposal that is the central goal of this work:
demonstrating quantum interference in the excited state of HOD and its uses in the con-
trol of the outcome of the dissociation reaction. To do so, ultrashort near-infrared (NIR)
laser pulses are applied to the system after the electronic excitation has already taken
place. Interference between the vibrational eigenstates is thus generated and scrutinized.
These processes and interactions can be simulated through the means of quantum
mechanics and its computational applications to chemical systems. To perform quantum
dynamics simulations, the electronic energy of the system as a function of its geometry
must first be obtained, as well as the molecular properties that allow for the computation
of the coupling effects with external electromagnetic fields. Once these quantities have
been obtained, the quantum dynamical evolution of the system and its perturbations can
be determined.
As mentioned, the HOD system is chosen because of its simplicity, which allows for
two-dimensional, adiabatic dynamics simulations, due to the clear-cut separation of the
first electronic excited state from all others. Once the molecule is electronically excited
to this state, it dissociates spontaneously into two possible products : HOD →OH+D or
HOD →OD + H .The main interest in applying IR pulses to the molecule in the excited
state lies in the unbound nature of its potential; the coupling with the system takes place
between the laser and vibrational eigenstates in the energy continuum. This feature sets
this interaction apart from others that have been treated before, in which interference
is induced in electronic ground states that allow only a discrete set of vibrational levels.
Understanding how laser pulses can modify the eigenstates make up of the wavepacket is
thus one of the biggest goals of the project, together with the determination of the degree
of control that can be obtained over the reaction’s outcome.
The project outline initially included a secondary theme on introducing symmetry
requirements in the description of the exchange reaction H + H2. As the main project
turned out lengthier than originally planned, and a definitive conclusion of it was the
main priority, this secondary work has been set aside in favour of the first.
The first two sections of this thesis are concerned with the description of the theoretical
and numerical tools adopted throughout the project, which can be quite involved. It’s
thus important for a reader unfamiliar with the time-dependent formulation of quantum
mechanics, as well as its numerical implementations, to have a quick read through of
these two sections and familiarize themselves with the concepts, which have been quite
condensed. The most crucial results and equations presented in these sections are usually
referred to in any discussion that relies on them, in order to suggest a quick refresh or
even a first broach of the subject, had the theoretical section been skipped.
The last two sections concern both the methodology applied and the results obtained
during the months of work in the project. These are divided in results regarding the
electronic structure of the system and those about its dynamics; the latter is the main
focus of the project, but is entirely based on the results of the first.
1 of 65
==PAGE:6==
1
Theoretical Background
This section serves as an introduction to the theories and models that form the back-
bone of all the thesis’ work, as well as setting up the nomenclature that is to be used
throughout the text. We will go through the needed quantum mechanics basics and the
various approximations and methods that have been used in order to conduct investiga-
tions into the quantum dynamics of reactions and their coherent control through laser
pulses.
1.1
Time-Dependent Quantum Mechanics
The central equation in quantum mechanics, and in this text, is the so called Time-
Dependent Schrödinger Equation (TDSE), which reads
iℏ∂
∂tΨ(R, t) = ˆHΨ(R, t)
(1.1.1)
where i is the imaginary unit, ℏ= h/2π is the reduced Planck’s constant, and ˆH is the
Hamiltonian operator, which we express for now in its most general form:
ˆH = ˆT + ˆV
(1.1.2)
with ˆT and ˆV being the kinetic and potential energy operators, respectively.
The TDSE is an equation for the evolution of the state of a system, which in the coor-
dinate representation of quantum mechanics is determined by the wavefunction Ψ(R, t),
where R is a collection of all spatial variables, and t is time. The wavefunction completely
describes the system at all times, provided that we know Ψ(R, 0), and are able to solve
the TDSE for Ψ(R, t). In the traditional interpretation of quantum mechanics, when the
system consists of a single particle, the quantity |Ψ(r, t)|2dr expresses the probability of
finding said particle between r and r + dr, on the condition that the wavefunction be
normalized, meaning
⟨Ψ|Ψ⟩=
Z ∞
−∞|Ψ(r, t)|2dr = 1
(1.1.3)
This requirement assures that the particle will be found somewhere, and we call |Ψ(R, t)|2
the probability density for finding the particle at some position and time. The vector
notation with angled brackets is termed "Dirac notation", and we’ll use it sparingly in
the text; it involves integration of the enclosed functions over some variable, usually the
spatial ones, and complex conjugation of the function on the left, which we say is a bra,
opposed to the ket on the right.
If the TDSE is solved through the method of separation of variables, which assumes
that the wavefunction may be written as a product of two functions Ψ(r, t) = ψ(r)ϕ(t),
each solely dependent on the spatial or time variable, respectively, the outcome is a simple
differential equation in time and the so called Time-Independent Schrödinger Equation
(TISE)
iℏd
dtϕ(t) = Eϕ(t)
(1.1.4)
ˆHψn(r) = Enψn(r)
(1.1.5)
Equation (1.1.4) has a simple solution given by ϕ(t) = ϕ0e−i
ℏEt, whereas the TISE is
an eigenvalue equation that depends on the specifics of the system and the potential
2 of 65
==PAGE:7==
1.1
Time-Dependent Quantum Mechanics
function, and often cannot be solved analytically. The solutions of this equation, the
eigenfunctions and eigenvalues, are the time-independent eigenstates ψn(r) and their
corresponding energies En. Bound-states potentials allow for a discrete set of eigenvalues
(and eigenstates), while unbound potentials allow for a continuous one; we call these sets
the spectrum of the Hamiltonian (and any other Hermitian operator). If the eigenstates
(or eigenfunctions) of the TISE can be determined, then the TDSE has many simple
solutions given by:
Ψ(r, t) = ψn(r)e−i
ℏEnt
(1.1.6)
in which the multiplicative factor ϕ0 has been absorbed into the eigenfunction. This
solution has a trivial time-dependence, given by a complex phase, which disappears when
considering the probability density
|Ψ(r, t)|2 = |ψn(r)|2e
i
ℏEnte−i
ℏEnt = |ψn(r)|2
(1.1.7)
The probability density, which is the actually measurable observable, is thus time-independent,
and eigenstates are thus termed "stationary states". All expectation values of observables
related to them, like their position ⟨ˆx⟩= ⟨ψn| ˆx |ψn⟩or momentum ⟨ˆp⟩= ⟨ψn| ˆp |ψn⟩for
example, will also be constant in time.
At this point it must be recognized that equation (1.1.6) is simply a "particular"
solution of the TDSE, and that the general one will be given by a linear combination of
all possible solutions. Depending on whether the spectrum of the Hamiltonian (the set
of allowed values the eigenenergies can assume) is discrete or continuous, this sum will
take two different forms
Ψ(r, t) =
X
n
cnψn(r)e−i
ℏEnt
(1.1.8)
=
Z
cEψE(r)e−i
ℏEtdE
(1.1.9)
This coherent superposition (meaning each of the component has a definite phase and
is capable of interfering with the others) of eigenstates, all having different energies, is
called a wavepacket, and it’s probability density is given by (taking the discrete spectrum
example)
|Ψ(r, t)|2 =
X
n
|cn|2|ψn(r)|2 + Re
(X
k
c∗
nckψ∗
En(r)ψEk(r)e−i Ek−En
ℏ
t
)
(1.1.10)
This time, the time-dependence has not disappeared in the probability density of the
wavepacket, and is carried by interference terms arising from the interactions of all eigen-
states with each other, yielding a "non-stationary state". We have thus shown how, in
order to observe any sort of time dependence in the expectation values of observables of
an evolving state, the latter must be represented by an interfering wavepacket, and not
a simple eigenstate.
It is interesting at this time to note that a time-dependent perturbation, such as an
external electric field, generates a time-dependence of the coefficients in equations (1.1.8)
and (1.1.9). This is an important aspects of the time-evolution of wavepackets perturbed
by laser pulses, and we will return to it later on in our discussions.
The wavepacket thus becomes the main function of interest, and we turn to stating
some of its most interesting properties.
3 of 65
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Wavepackets
1.2
Wavepackets
We have already seen how a wavepacket can be expanded into the complete basis of
eigenstates (equation (1.1.8) and (1.1.9)), which is an important and useful tool, needed
to derive many results. One-such result is that the spectrum of the wavepacket is given
by the Fourier Transform of its autocorrelation function.
The autocorrelation function of a wavepacket is the time-correlation function with its
initial distribution [8]
C(t) = ⟨Ψ(r, 0)|Ψ(r, t)⟩=
Z ∞
−∞Ψ∗(r, 0)Ψ(r, t)dr
(1.2.1)
and can be seen as a time representation of the wavepacket. Its Fourier Transform (FT)
is the wavepacket’s spectrum, representing the absolute squares of its energy components
σ(ω) =
X
n
|cn|2δ(ω −ωn)
Discrete
(1.2.2)
=
Z
|cω′|2δ(ω −ω′)dω′
Continuous
(1.2.3)
We can easily show how these two quantities are Fourier transform pairs, taking the
discrete spectrum as an example and employing the expansion on basis states:
σ(ω) = 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞⟨Ψ(r, 0)|Ψ(r, t)⟩eiωtdt
= 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
Z ∞
−∞
 X
m
c∗
mψ∗
m(r)
!  X
n
cnψn(r)e−i
ℏEnt
!
eiωt dr dt
= 1
2π
Z ∞
−∞
X
m,n
c∗
mcnδmne−i En
ℏteiωtdt
= 1
2π
X
n
|cn|2
Z ∞
−∞ei(ω−ωn)tdt
=
X
n
|cn|2δ(ω −ωn)
(1.2.4)
Recurrences in the autocorrelation function, given by some parts or the whole of
the wavepacket returning to its original distribution, generate the peaks present in the
spectrum; when the state is bound, the autocorrelation function never truly decays, and
the spectrum is ultimately resolved into δ-functions, as shown in figure 1.
Figure 1: Autocorrelation and spectrum of a harmonic oscillator in a coherent state
4 of 65
==PAGE:9==
1.3
The Molecular Hamiltonian
On the other hand, if the state is unbound and the autocorrelation function decays
irreversibly to zero, the spectrum will be a featureless single broad Gaussian peak. There
are many different in-between cases of possible decay, which yield a big variety of spectral
functions.
Another interesting result is given by Fourier Transforming the wavepacket itself, which
leads to a picture in which eigenstates can be viewed as superpositions of wavepackets,
the converse relationship to the one we have described in equations (1.1.8) and (1.1.9).
To show this, we once again expand the wavepacket, and this time we pick the continuous
spectrum expansion, as it will turn out useful for future reference:
Z ∞
−∞Ψ(R, t)e
i
ℏE′t dt =
Z ∞
−∞e−i
ℏHtΨ(R, 0)e
i
ℏE′t dt
=
Z ∞
−∞e−i
ℏHt
Z
cEψE(R)e
i
ℏE′t dE dt
=
Z ∞
−∞
Z
cEψE(R)e−i
ℏ(E−E′)t dE dt
= 2πℏ
Z
cEψE(R)δ(E −E′) dE
= 2πℏcE′ψE′(R)
(1.2.5)
We see how, when the phase factor of the FT coincides with the eigenvalue energy E′, the
corresponding eigenstate ψE′ is recovered, with some multiplicative factors in front. The
same result would hold for a discrete set of eigenstates, with the additional prerequisite
of knowing the eigenenergies En; in the continuum, all energies are allowed within the
range of the specific unbound potential.
All of the above tools require us to have a complete description of the wavepacket at all
times, be it numerical or, sometimes, analytical. To the latter end, a useful result is that
wavepackets which are initially described by a Gaussian wavefunction Ψ0(r, 0) = e−r2,
will remain Gaussian throughout their time evolution provided that the potential function
V(r) is no higher than quadratic in r. This conclusion is of much help when trying to
solve analytically the short list of systems that it is possible to, and "Gaussian dynamics"
is a powerful tool for approximations and as a general initial form of many wavepackets.
1.3
The Molecular Hamiltonian
We now turn to the description of chemical systems and the necessary approximations
to be introduced. A general system is composed of N nuclei and K electrons interacting
through electrostatic forces, which leads us to the non-relativistic molecular Hamiltonian
ˆHmol = ˆTnuc + ˆHel
(1.3.1)
with the nuclear kinetic energy operator given by [9]
ˆTnuc =
N
X
g=1
ˆpg
2Mg
(1.3.2)
where ˆpg = −iℏ∇g is the nuclei momentum operator and Mg is the mass of the gth
nucleus. The electronic Hamiltonian is
ˆHel = ˆTel + VelN + Velel + VNN
=
K
X
i=1
ˆpi
2me
−
N
X
g=1
K
X
i=1
e2
4πϵ0
Zg
rig
+
K
X
i=1
K
X
j>i
e2
4πϵ0
1
rij
+
N
X
g=1
N
X
h>g
e2
4πϵ0
ZgZh
rgh
(1.3.3)
5 of 65
==PAGE:10==
1.3
The Molecular Hamiltonian
where ˆpi = −iℏ∇i is the electrons momentum operator, me the electron mass, Zg the
electric charge of the gth nucleus and rαβ represent distances between particles (i and j for
electrons, g and h for nuclei). Many of these quantities may be set to one when switching
to the more convenient atomic units. The TDSE for this general chemical system thus
reads
iℏ∂
∂tΨ(rlab, Rlab, t) = ( ˆTnuc + ˆHel)Ψ(rlab, Rlab, t)
(1.3.4)
Seeing how ˆHel only explicitly depends on relative distances between the particles, a
change of variables to the internal r, R and center of mass RCM allows the separation of
the total translational motion from the internal degrees of freedom, and lets us focus on
the latter:
Ψ(rlab, Rlab, t) = Ψ(RCM, t)Ψ(r, R, t)
(1.3.5)
We have now made the first step in the untangling of the different degrees of freedom of
the system, but, as shown in the next section, we’ll need to introduce some approximations
if we hope to find any solutions to the equation.
1.3.1
The Adiabatic and Born-Oppenheimer approximations
We are now interested in further separating the motion between electrons and nuclei,
and we can begin by expanding the solution into a set of orthogonal nuclear Ψn(R, t) and
electronic functions Φel
n as follows:
Ψ(r, R, t) =
X
n
Ψn(R, t)Φel
n (r; R)
(1.3.6)
In this expansion, the electronic functions are parameterized on the nuclear positions
and they carry no time-dependence; this picture is chosen in view of how light and
fast the electrons are compared to the nuclei. The sum runs over the electronic state,
and associates each nuclear functions to an electronic one. This choice leads to, after
integrating over the electronic functions, a set of coupled differential equations [10]
X
n
(Tnm(R) + Vnm(R)Ψn(R, t) = iℏ∂
∂tΨm(R, t)
(1.3.7)
where
Tnm(R) =
D
Φel
n (r; R)
 ˆTnuc
Φel
n (r; R)
E
r
(1.3.8)
Vnm(R) =
D
Φel
n (r; R)
 ˆHel
Φel
n (r; R)
E
r
(1.3.9)
As a concrete example, we can restrict the number of electronic states to just two, which
yields a matrix TDSE of the form
"
T11(R) + V11(R)
T12(R) + V12(R)
T21(R) + V21(R)
T22(R) + V22(R)
# "
Ψ1(R, t)
Ψ2(R, t)
#
= iℏ∂
∂t
"
Ψ1(R, t)
Ψ2(R, t)
#
(1.3.10)
This equation can be immediately simplified by an explicit choice of the electronic func-
tions, the so called adiabatic electronic states, which are defined as eigenstates of the
electronic Hamiltonian in equation (1.3.3),
ˆHelΦel/ad
n
(r; R) = Eel
n (R)Φel/ad
n
(r; R)
(1.3.11)
6 of 65
==PAGE:11==
1.3
The Molecular Hamiltonian
meaning equation (1.3.9) reduces to
V ad
nm(R) =
D
Φel/ad
n
(r; R)
 ˆHel
Φel/ad
n
(r; R)
E
r = δnmEel
n (R)
(1.3.12)
The potential coupling terms thus disappear, and Vnn is simply found to be the electronic
energy of the nth state. The kinetic coupling terms, also called adiabatic coupling terms,
now become T ad
nm(R). At this point, the adiabatic and Born-Oppenheimer (BO) approx-
imations are invoked. Within the first, the adiabatic couplings T ad
nm are assumed to be
zero through the reduction of the sum in equation (1.3.6) into a single element,
Ψ(r, R, t) = Ψad
n (R, t)Φel/ad
n
(r; R)
(1.3.13)
which implies that no electronic transitions occur during the slow nuclear motion. This
approximation effectively uncouples the equations entirely (and could have been intro-
duced earlier as well), turning equation (1.3.10) into
"
T ad
11 (R) + Eel
1 (R)
0
0
T ad
22 (R) + Eel
2 (R)
# "
Ψad
1 (R, t)
Ψad
2 (R, t)
#
= iℏ∂
∂t
"
Ψad
1 (R, t)
Ψad
2 (R, t)
#
(1.3.14)
The BO approximation once again invokes the different scales of motion of electrons and
nuclei, in order to assume that, in T ad
nn(R) = ˆTnuc +
D
Φel/ad
n
 ˆTnuc
Φel/ad
n
E
, the last element
is so small as to be ignored.
The final equation we are left with is thus an uncoupled TDSE for the motion of the
nuclei on a single isolated Potential Energy Surface (PES) given by the electronic energy:
iℏ∂
∂tΨ(R, t) = [ ˆTnuc + ˆEn(R)]Ψ(R, t)
(1.3.15)
These approximations, which allow us to solve the nuclear motion of each molecular
state on different surfaces, will only hold when the electronic states of the system are
well separated, otherwise the adiabatic coupling terms T ad
nm(R) increase in value and the
approximation breaks down. In cases where the energy difference between states vanishes,
which are regions in the PES called conical intersections, the coupling elements diverge,
and the electronic basis set has to be diabatised in order to kill the kinetic couplings
that cause the divergence; these states though, are not electronic eigenfunctions, and the
electronic Hamiltonian matrix stops being diagonal [10]. These effects do not show up in
the current work, and will thus not be discussed further in this section.
1.3.2
Internal Coordinates
As established earlier in equation (1.3.5), the overall translational motion of the cen-
ter of mass can be separated from the internal motion. A system composed of N nuclei
yields 3N −6 (5 in case of linear molecules) internal degrees of freedom, which account
for the vibrational and rotational motion of the molecule. This work does not take into
account rotations, which have been averaged out in all calculations, as described later on
in section 4.2. Our main interest thus lies in the vibrational degrees of freedom, which
are usually best described by internal coordinates (sometimes also called valence coordi-
nates), such as bond lengths RX−Y , bond angles θ and dihedral angles ϕ. These form the
collection of nuclear coordinates R, for which equation (1.3.11) is solved repeatedly at
many different values in order to generate the potential hyper-surface. Once the surface
has been obtained, the dynamical evolution of the system is evaluated, using the exact
7 of 65
==PAGE:12==
1.4
Interaction with External Fields
same coordinates to solve equation 1.3.15. One such set of coordinates for the water
molecule is displayed in figure 2.
Figure 2: Internal coordinates of H2O
1.4
Interaction with External Fields
In the presence of an external field, the Hamiltonian operator is modified by the
interaction through a time-dependent perturbation, and can be split in two terms
ˆH(t) = ˆHmol(r, R) + ˆHext(t)
(1.4.1)
where Hmol is the molecular Hamiltonian of equation (1.3.1), and Hext describes the
interaction of the molecule with a field, which is approximated at a classical level. The
hybrid approach of treating external fields as classical objects and the molecular systems
as quantum ones is a quite standard and valid approximation, and is used throughout
the text. The only field of interest to us is the electromagnetic one, as we will be dealing
with many short laser pulses later on, and is thus the focus of this section.
1.4.1
Electric Field Coupling
The specialization from an electromagnetic field to a solely electric one is easily
achieved by noting how the Lorentz force experienced by a moving charged particle is
composed of a ratio of magnetic to electric force equal to v/c [10], with v being the ve-
locity of the particle and c the speed of light. In the case of electrons in molecules, this
ratio is of the order of the fine structure constant α = 1/137, while it grows even smaller
for the nuclei; the magnetic field can thus be ignored to a good approximation.
The second step to get to an expression for ˆHext, involves invoking the long-wave ap-
proximation, which is valid when the size of the molecule is considerably smaller than the
wavelength of the radiation. This is surely the case for small molecules and wavelengths
up to the UV regime, and can thus be adopted correctly.
The expression for the external field interaction is thus given, along z, by
ˆHext(t) = −E0
z
X
i
qizi cos ωt
(1.4.2)
and, by identifying the zth component of the dipole moment as µz = P
i qizi, rewritten
in general terms as
ˆHext(t) = −µ(r, R)E(t)
(1.4.3)
This last equation is known as the dipole approximation, and is found by assuming that the
electron cloud is not affected by the field. In the presence of high-intensity fields however,
8 of 65
==PAGE:13==
1.4
Interaction with External Fields
the electrons are perturbed and induced dipoles arise; this effect can be represented
through a series expansion of the dipole [11]
µ = µ0 + αE + 1
2βE2 + . . .
(1.4.4)
where µ0 is the permanent dipole moment vector, α is the (dipole) polarizability tensor,
β is the (first) hyper-polarizability tensor and so on. The external Hamiltonian operator
can then be written as an expansion of static and induced dipole moments terms, of which
we only keep the first two
ˆHext(t) = −µ0(r, R)E(t) −1
2α(r, R)E2(t)
(1.4.5)
These terms are related to different regimes of excitation, namely the resonant one (tran-
sitions at specific frequencies), in which the permanent dipole term dominates, and the
non-resonant one (transitions independent of frequencies), in which the polarizability
term dominates.
1.4.2
Time-Dependent Perturbation Theory
As we will later need to describe resonant transitions that cause electronic excitation,
we now lay down the key results of first order Time-Dependent Perturbation Theory
(TDPT), valid when the strength of the electric field causing the excitation is relatively
weak.
The basis on which TDPT work is being able to split the Hamiltonian operator into
a part for which the time evolution can be computed, and one for which it cannot
ˆH = ˆH0 + λ ˆH1
(1.4.6)
ˆH0 being the first and ˆH1 being the latter. The λ parameter is used to organize the
orders of the perturbation. We expand the wavefunction in a series in λ [8], setting aside
the spatial variables R for the moment
Ψ(t) = Ψ(0)(t) + λΨ(1)(t) + λ2Ψ(2)(t) + · · · =
X
n
λnΨ(n)(t)
(1.4.7)
Plugging this expansion into equation (1.1.1) and ordering the terms according to powers
of λ leads to the TDSE equations for the zeroth and first order TDPT
iℏ∂
∂tΨ(0)(t) = ˆH0Ψ(0)(t)
(1.4.8)
iℏ∂
∂tΨ(1)(t) = ˆH0Ψ(1)(t) + ˆH1Ψ(0)(t)
(1.4.9)
Solving these equations, of which the first is simply the standard unperturbed TDSE,
leads to
Ψ(0)(t) = e−i ˆH0t/ℏΨ(0)(0)
(1.4.10)
Ψ(1)(t) = 1
iℏe−i ˆH0t/ℏ
Z t
0 ei ˆH0t′/ℏˆH1(t′)Ψ(0)(t′)dt′ + e−i ˆH0t/ℏΨ(1)(0)
(1.4.11)
By assuming that Ψ(0) = Ψ(0)(0), i.e. the unperturbed wavefunction at time zero, we
can immediately set Ψ(1)(0) = 0, yielding the main result of first order TDPT
Ψ(1)(t) = 1
iℏ
Z t
0 e−i ˆH0(t−t′)/ℏˆH1(t′)e−i ˆH0(t′−0)/ℏΨ(0)(0)dt′
(1.4.12)
9 of 65
==PAGE:14==
1.4
Interaction with External Fields
Now, by specializing now to a two state system, the ground electronic state a and
the excited one b, within the Born-Oppenheimer and adiabatic approximations (section
1.3.1), we can write ˆH0 and ˆH1 as
ˆH0 =
" ˆHa
0
0
ˆHb
#
(1.4.13)
ˆH1 =
"
0
−µabE∗(t)
−µbaE(t)
0
#
(1.4.14)
where µab/ba =

D
Φa/b
 µ
Φb/a
E are the transition dipole moment vectors, computed
through the electronic wavefunctions of the ground and excited state. The phenomenon
we are interested in is electronic excitation of the nuclear wavefunction, and we thus set
the initial state as having no prior amplitude in the excited state
Ψ(0)(R, 0) =
"
Ψa(R, 0)
0
#
(1.4.15)
where we reintroduced the spatial variables.
We can now plug these system specific
quantities into the general 1st order TDPT equation, (1.4.12), and find
Ψ(1)(R, t) = 1
iℏ
Z t
0
"
e−i ˆHa(t−t′)/ℏ
0
0
e−i ˆHb(t−t′)/ℏ
# "
0
−µabE∗(t′)
−µbaE(t′)
0
#
×
"
e−i ˆHat′/ℏ
0
0
e−i ˆHbt′/ℏ
# "
Ψa(R, 0)
0
#
dt′
=
"
0
1
iℏ
R t
0 e−i ˆHb(t−t′)/ℏ{−µbaE(t′)} e−i ˆHat′/ℏΨa(R, 0)dt′
#
(1.4.16)
This last equation has a very interesting interpretation when read right to left. We see that
the wavefunction at time zero, which we have defined in equation (1.4.15), evolves until
time t′ under the ground electronic state Hamiltonian ˆHa. At time t = t′, the interaction
between the electronic transition dipole moment and the electric field generates amplitude
in the excited electronic state, which evolves from that point onward under the excited
state Hamiltonian, ˆHb. The Feynman diagram in figure 3 schematically represents this
process.
Figure 3:
Feynman diagram representing equation (1.4.16), read from right to left.
Adapted from Figure 13.1 in reference [8].
By choosing two explicit expressions for the initial ground state wavefunction and the
electric field, further results can be drawn. First of, the initial state can be chosen to be
a vibrational eigenstate of the ground electronic Hamiltonian, ˆHaψn = Enψn, which will
have no spatial evolution on the ground state potential, and only accumulate a complex
10 of 65
==PAGE:15==
1.5
Response Theory
phase before the interaction with the electric field at time t′. We can thus substitute the
first two elements from the right of equation (1.4.16) (which we don’t consider a vector
equation anymore, the first element being zero) with e−i ˆHat′/ℏψ0(R) = e−iE0t′/ℏψ0(R),
where we have specialized to the vibrational ground state, n = 0. Next, we choose the
electric field to be represented by a δ-pulse, E(t′) = δ(t′ −t1), a picture in which all of
the electric field interacts instantaneously with the system. This choice will thus kill the
integration over time, and we will be left with
Ψ(1)(R, t) = i
ℏe−i ˆHb(t−t1)/ℏϕ(R, t1)
(1.4.17)
where we have gathered ϕ(R, t1) = e−iE0t1/ℏϕ(R), with ϕ(R) = µabψ0(R) being the so
called Franck-Condon wavepacket, that is, the effective initial state that experiences a
vertical, or Franck-Condon (FC), transition to the electronic excited state. This type
of transition, pictured later on in figure 5, is a product of approximating the transition
dipole moment as to having no dependence on the nuclear coordinates, and being thus
a simple multiplicative factor for the vibrational eigenstate. This procedure is called the
Condon approximation.
We have thus obtained the result that the first-order amplitude is simply given by a
replica of the ground vibrational eigenstate propagating on the excited state PES.
1.4.3
Molecular Properties
The permanent dipole moment is a frequency independent quantity and can be simply
obtained from the wavefunction as the expectation value of the dipole operator
µ0 = ⟨Φ0| ˆµ |Φ0⟩
(1.4.18)
The polarizability tensor, on the other hand, can be both static or frequency dependent,
and from the second order perturbation theory formulation, we see that the frequency
dependent polarizability is given by a sum-over-states (SOS) formula [11]
αi,j(ω) =
X
n̸=f
⟨Φf| ˆµi |Φn⟩⟨Φn| ˆµj |Φf⟩
ωn,f −ω
+ ⟨Φf| ˆµj |Φn⟩⟨Φn| ˆµi |Φf⟩
ωn,f + ω
≈2
X
n̸=f
⟨Φf| ˆµi |Φn⟩⟨Φn| ˆµj |Φf⟩
ωn,f
(1.4.19)
where ωn,f refers to the energy difference between excited states n and the reference state
f. The formula can be approximated to the static one when the frequency of the field
is much lower than the energy difference between electronic states; in the case that the
frequency were actually zero, the formula would be exact. The decision of whether to use
the static approximation is heavily influenced by the reference state: when determining
the ground state polarizability, the first excitation energy is typically in the UV region,
whereas excitation energies from an already excited state usually drop to way lower
energies. As most vibrational excitations require pulse frequencies in the IR region, the
static polarizability will be a good approximation in ground state applications, whereas
excited state polarizabilities may need to account for frequency dependence.
1.5
Response Theory
We now introduce some of the backbone formulae of response theory, which is a pow-
erful tool that circumvents the need of applying the SOS formula and thus having to
11 of 65
==PAGE:16==
1.5
Response Theory
determine excited state wavefunctions. Response theory allows the determination of high
order ground state or excited state quantities, such as excitation energies and ground
or excited state molecular properties (e.g. polarizabilities and excited state dipole mo-
ments), strictly through changes in the ground state wavefunction due to perturbing
external fields. We will discuss the frequency (or time) dependent formulation, of which
static properties can be seen as being a special case when ω →0.
1.5.1
Frequency-Dependent Properties
When a time-dependent perturbation is applied to an isolated system, its wavefunction
will start evolving according to the TDSE
ˆH(t) |Ψ(t)⟩= ( ˆH0 + V (t)) |Ψ(t)⟩= i ∂
∂t |Ψ(t)⟩
(1.5.1)
and the expectation value of an operator ˆA will gain a time-dependence, and may be
expanded as
⟨A⟩(t) = ⟨Ψ(t)| A |Ψ(t)⟩= ⟨Ψ| A |Ψ⟩+
X
k1
X
X
⟨⟨A; X⟩⟩ωk1ϵX(ωk1)e−iωk1t
+ 1
2⟨⟨A; X, Y ⟩⟩ωk1,ωk2ϵX(ωk1)ϵY (ωk2)e−i(ωk1+ωk2)t + . . .
(1.5.2)
where the first term is the unperturbed expectation value, ⟨⟨A; X⟩⟩ωk1 is the linear re-
sponse function, ⟨⟨A; X, Y ⟩⟩ωk1,ωk2 is the quadratic one, and so on. X and Y are Hermi-
tian operators and ϵ(ωk) are the field strengths for the frequency (ωk); they arise from a
Fourier expansion of the perturbation operator in the frequency domain.
The time-dependent wavefunction can be rewritten so as to yield the phase-isolated
wavefunction
|Ψ(t)⟩= e−iR t
0 W(t′)dt′ ˜Ψ(t)
E
(1.5.3)
where
W(t) =
D ˜
Ψ(t)

 
ˆH(t) −i ∂
∂t
!  ˜
Ψ(t)
E
(1.5.4)
is the time-dependent quasienergy. The time-dependent expectation value of an operator
A only depends on the phase-isolated wavefunction, and only the latter’s time-evolution
is thus required to determine the response functions. This leads to the phase-isolated
TDSE
 
ˆH(t) −i ∂
∂t −W(t)
!  ˜
Ψ(t)
E
= 0
(1.5.5)
Explicit equation for the response functions are then given by a specific parameteriza-
tion of the wavefunction. In the case of exact eigenstates of ˆH0, for example, the linear
response function can be written as
⟨⟨X0; X1⟩⟩ω1 = ˆP 01 X
k̸=O
⟨O| X0 ⟨k|O⟩X1 |k⟩
ω1 −ωk
(1.5.6)
where we substituted A with X0, ˆP 01 is a permutation generator of operators and fre-
quencies, and ωk are the excitation energies between states. The linear response function
gives frequency dependent second-order properties such as the dipole polarizability, which
is found as
αij(−ω; ω) = −⟨⟨µi; µj⟩⟩w
(1.5.7)
12 of 65
==PAGE:17==
1.5
Response Theory
By substituting the operators X0 = µi and X1 = µj into equation (1.5.6), we have fully
recovered the SOS formula from equation (1.4.19). The (static) linear response equa-
tion has poles that yield the excitation energies of the system, while their residues give
the transition elements for first order processes. The residues of higher order response
functions are instead identified with quantities such as excited state properties and multi-
photon transition elements. Specifically, the double residue of the cubic response function
gives the excited state polarizability tensor without having to compute the excited wave-
functions
α(ωk) = lim
wc→ωe(ωc + ωe)[ lim
wd→ωf(ωd + ωf)⟨⟨µa; µb, µc, µd⟩⟩ωb,ωc,ωd]
(1.5.8)
the resulting expression can be found in reference [12]. Similarly, the double residue of the
quadratic response function returns the excited state dipole moment. It’s important to
remember that all of these excited state properties are actually returned as the differences
with respect to the ground state ones.
These results are strictly valid for exact methods, while for approximate parameteri-
zation of the wavefunction, the identification of the expressions for the response functions
is more arduous. The approach to be taken in these cases relies on an alternative descrip-
tion based on an energy like derivative. The response functions are then identified by the
derivatives, with respect to the perturbation strength, of the time-averaged quasienergy
⟨⟨X0; X1, . . . , Xn⟩⟩ω1,...,ωn =
dn+1{WT}
dϵ0(ω0)dϵ1(ω1) . . . ϵn(ωn)

ϵ=0
(1.5.9)
This formulation is particularly convenient for non-variational parameterizations.
1.5.2
Coupled-Cluster Parameterization
The identification of the response functions from equation (1.5.2) relies on an unam-
biguous definition of expectation values, which is not guaranteed in non-variational pa-
rameterizations, such as Coupled-Cluster (CC) theory. In these cases, a time-dependent
Lagrangian, combining the quasienergy and equations for the wavefunction parameters,
is introduced
W(t) →L(t) = W(t) +
X
µ
¯λµ(t)eµ(t)
(1.5.10)
in order to make use of its variational condition and find expressions for the response
functions in a similar fashion to equation (1.5.9).
The CC time-dependent parameterization of the wavefunction is
|CC(t, ϵ)⟩= e−iR t
0 W(t′,ϵ)dt′e
ˆT(t,ϵ) |HF⟩
(1.5.11)
where ˆT(t, ϵ) = P
ν tν(t, ϵ)ˆτν is the field and time-dependent cluster operator, with τν
being the excitation operators and tν(t, ϵ) the corresponding amplitudes.
The quasi energy is obtained by projection onto the Hartree-Fock reference
W(t, ϵ) = ⟨HF|
"
ˆH(t, ϵ) −i ∂
∂t
#
e
ˆT(t,ϵ) |HF⟩= ⟨HF| ˆH(t, ϵ)e
ˆT(t,ϵ) |HF⟩
(1.5.12)
and the variational formulation is achieved by construction of the Lagrangian
L(t, ϵ) = W(t, ϵ) +
X
µ
¯tµ(t, ϵ)[eµ(t, ϵ) −i d
dttµ(t, ϵ)]
(1.5.13)
13 of 65
==PAGE:18==
1.5
Response Theory
where ¯tµ(t, ϵ) are the Lagrange multipliers and the constraints are the time-dependent
coupled-cluster equations, given by projection onto the states ⟨HF| τ †
µe−t(t,ϵ) = ⟨µ| e−t(t,ϵ).
The CC response equations are a result of applying the variational condition of the
the time-averaged Lagrangian {L}T with respect to the amplitudes and multipliers, and
substituting into equation (1.5.9) its real part.
The linear response equation can finally be written as
⟨⟨X; Y ⟩⟩ωY = 1
2C±ω ˆP XY
1
2F tX(ωX) + ηX

(1.5.14)
Expressions for η and the F super-matrix can be found in reference [13], as well as
analytical expressions for the higher order response functions.
14 of 65
==PAGE:19==
2
Numerical Methods
No chemical system of interest exists for which the TDSE of equation (1.3.15) can
be solved analytically.
First and foremost, the PES, which is a prerequisite for even
attempting to evaluate the dynamics of the system, cannot be determined analytically
for any molecule other than H+
2 ; a numerical construction of the PES forces the whole
equation to be solved numerically. This section will thus quickly discuss the implementa-
tion of a numerical representation of the wavepacket and the time evolution operations.
The key results include: the possibility of representing a wavefunction on a spatial grid
as a matrix representation given by the values of the wavefunction at each grid point;
an equivalent representation of the potential energy operator; the implementation of a
Fourier grid in momentum space in order to compute the action of the kinetic energy
term on the wavepacket.
In order to perform these numerical calculations, a MATLAB code was developed,
using as a starting point a script from former Ph.D. student Alexandre Voute, consist-
ing of a two-dimensional Fourier grid setup and the Split Operator method loop. This
code has then been extensively expanded in order to account for laser pulse interactions
through time-dependent Hamiltonians, autocorrelation functions, eigenstates and spectra
determination, and many other sections. Snippets of this code are given in appendix A.
2.1
Collocation and Fourier Grid Representation
The main idea of any numerical approach to the TDSE consists in the reduction of the
infinite dimensional Hilbert space to a truncated space of dimension N [8]. We can thus
define a spectral projection operator such that a wavefunction expansion is truncated at
the Nth orthogonal basis function
˜ψ(r) = PNψ(r) =
N
X
n=1
anϕn(r)
(2.1.1)
This is defined as the spectral representation of a wavefunction, which relies on the
orthogonal set of basis functions {ϕj}, and thus leads to an orthogonal projection onto
the reduced Hilbert space. The same reduced vector space of dimension N can be reached
through the collocation projection, which arises from the requirement that the projected
wavefunction be equal to the original one at a set of discrete collocation points {ri}
˜ψ(ri) = PNψ(ri) =
N
X
n=1
bnϕn(ri) = ψ(ri)
(2.1.2)
This is a non-orthogonal projection, in virtue of the difference between the bn and the
an coefficients. One can, nevertheless, require the that the basis functions obey discrete
orthogonality relations at the collocation points, leading to an equation for the coefficients
of an orthogonal collocation scheme
bn =
N
X
j=1
ψ(xj)ϕ∗
n(xj)∆j
(2.1.3)
By redefining Φn(xj) =
q
∆jϕn(xj), we reach both a grid and a basis orthogonality
relation
N
X
j=1
Φ∗
m(xj)Φn(xj) = δmn
(2.1.4)
15 of 65
==PAGE:20==
2.1
Collocation and Fourier Grid Representation
N
X
n=1
Φ∗
n(xi)Φn(xj) = δij
(2.1.5)
The projection operator may be represented in a different basis, provided it correlates
to the spectral one through a unitary transformation. We can thus introduce the pseu-
dospectral basis, a set of spatially localized functions each centered around a different
spatial point. They emerge from the collocation basis orthogonality relation (2.1.5) as
PN
n=1 ϕn(x)Φ∗
n(xj) ≡θj(x),
Φ†ϕ(x) = θ(x)
(2.1.6)
and they satisfy the modified Kronecker function θj = ∆1/2
j
δij. We can use equation
(2.1.6) to redefine the collocation relation
˜ψ(ri) =
N
X
i=1
ψ(ri)θi(ri)∆1/2
i
= ψ(ri)
(2.1.7)
in which the coefficients of the basis functions are seen to simply be the value of the exact
wavefunction at the collocation points {ri}.
This is the basis for the representation of wavefunctions on a grid simply as its values
at each different grid point. In our case, a two dimensional Nx × Ny grid is constructed,
with dimensions corresponding to the internal coordinates of the HOD molecule ROH and
ROD, and the equidistant points on the grid identified as
xi = i∆x,
yj = j∆y
(2.1.8)
where
∆x = Lx
Nx,
∆y = Ly
Ny
(2.1.9)
with Lx = max(x) −min(x), and an equivalent relation for Ly.
A two-dimensional
wavefunction is then represented on this grid as
Ψ(ROH, ROD, t) =


Ψ(x0, y0)
. . .
Ψ(x0, yNy−1)
...
...
...
Ψ(xNx−1, y0)
. . .
Ψ(xNx−1, yNy−1)


(2.1.10)
Now, reverting to one dimension, this representation also allows for the evaluation of
integrals as a discrete weighted sum of the integrand at the collocation point, with N
quadrature points
Z
f(x)dx =
N
X
i=1
f(xi)∆i
(2.1.11)
Within pseudospectral bases, the potential energy operator is also simply represented
as its values at each grid point, through the relation
Vij = ⟨θi| V (ˆx) |θj⟩= V (xi)δij
(2.1.12)
where we employed the orthonormality relations of the pseudospectral basis {θ}. This
turns out to be the case for any choice of pseudospectral basis functions, but in order to
represent the kinetic energy operator, a specific choice must be made.
The Fourier method relies on choosing the Fourier basis functions
ϕk(x) ∝eikx
(2.1.13)
16 of 65
==PAGE:21==
2.2
Time Evolution
While the spatial grid is constructed as discussed in equations (2.1.8) and (2.1.9), this
method further leads to the construction of another, related grid, the Fourier grid, also
built of equidistant points in momentum space, given by
kx,i = i∆kx,
ky,j = j∆ky
(2.1.14)
and related to the spatial coordinate grid by
∆kx = 2π
Lx =
2π
Nx∆x,
∆ky = 2π
Ly =
2π
Ny∆y
(2.1.15)
The merit of this procedure is found in the easy determination that it affords of the effect
of the kinetic energy operator on the wavefunction, which, as explained later in equation
(2.2.7), is simply given by multiplication of the wavefunction in momentum space. The
grid we set up is primed for this operation, combined with the FFT/IFFT method that
shifts the wavefunction to k-representation and back.
An important feature of the Fourier Grid that will be recalled in section 2.3, is its
periodicity.
Due to the discrete nature of the k-basis (equation (2.1.15)), an infinite
periodic series of replicas of the wavefunction is generated beyond the 0 < x < L domain.
In this way, the function returned by the discretized projection operator on the finite
support interval [0, L] contains the same information as the one returned by a continuous
k-basis operator.
2.2
Time Evolution
The TDSE, being a differential equation, may be slightly annoying to computationally
solve in its standard form. An easier to handle operation is found when recasting equation
(1.1.1) into an equation for its solution, the wavefunction
Ψ(R, t) = ˆU(t)Ψ(R, 0) = e−i ˆHt/ℏΨ(R, 0)
(2.2.1)
where ˆU(t) is the time evolution operator, called the propagator, a linear operator map-
ping Ψ(R, 0) onto Ψ(R, t). We now have a direct equation for the wavepacket at any
time t in the future, provided we know its initial state, the Hamiltonian of the system,
and how to apply the propagator to the wavepacket.
The Split Operator method (SO method) is a numerical approach to the problem of
applying the propagator to the wavepacket. The first step of the method is to repre-
sent the total propagator, over the whole propagation time, as a product of propagators
operating in short time intervals
ˆU(t) =
Y
N
e−i ˆH∆t/ℏ
(2.2.2)
where Nδt = t, the total propagation time. Then, at each time step, the propagator is
approximated into a product of a kinetic and potential energy term
ˆUSO(∆t) = e−i ˆH∆t/ℏ= e−i(T+V )∆t/ℏ≈e−iT∆t/ℏe−iV ∆t/ℏ+ O(∆t2)
(2.2.3)
This last transformation is an approximation with an error of the order of the time-step
squared, due to the commutator [T, V ] being non-zero. The error in the approximation
is found by taking the difference between the exact expansion and the approximated one
e−i(T+V )∆t/ℏ−e−iT∆t/ℏe−iV ∆t/ℏ= [T, V ]
2
∆t2
ℏ2 + . . .
(2.2.4)
17 of 65
==PAGE:22==
2.3
Complex Absorbing Potentials
The leading term in the error can be eliminated by forming a symmetrized product,
instead of a simple one, of the kinetic and potential factors:
e−i ˆH∆t/ℏ≈

e−iV ∆t/2ℏe−iT∆t/2ℏ 
e−iT∆t/2ℏe−iV ∆t/2ℏ
+ O(∆t3)
= e−iV ∆t/2ℏe−iT∆t/ℏe−iV ∆t/2ℏ+ O(∆t3)
(2.2.5)
We are thus left with an operation yielding an error of the order of the time-step cubed,
which can be minimized by choosing a really short step. If many subsequent steps are con-
catenated, the first and second half of the potential term coalesce and the total operation
becomes
e−i ˆHSOt/ℏ= e−iV ∆t/2ℏ
 N−1
Y
e−iT∆t/ℏe−iV ∆t/ℏ
!
e−iT∆t/ℏe−iV ∆t/2ℏ
(2.2.6)
The wavefunction is thus propagated at each time-step by ˆUSO(∆t)Ψ(R, t), where the
operation is performed in three distinct steps:
First, the first half of the potential energy term is applied, and since V (R) is a numerical
matrix representation of the potential energy surface, the operation amounts to a simple
element-wise matrix (or vector, in one-dimensional systems) multiplication.
Applying the kinetic energy term is not as simple a matter, because of it being a dif-
ferential operator. In order to solve this problem we first note how differentiation in
coordinate space is equal to multiplication in momentum space
∂Ψ(R, t)
∂ROH
= iˆpΨ(R, t) = i · IFFT
h
kOH ˜Ψ(p, t)
i
(2.2.7)
Making use of the Fourier grid we have set up, the kinetic term operation can then be car-
ried out by Fourier transforming the wavepacket to its momentum space representation,
applying the kinetic energy operator as a simple element-wise product, and transforming
back to coordinate space through an Inverse Fourier Transform. These operations are
achieved in the code (given in appendix A) through the optimized FFT and IFFT meth-
ods natively present in MATLAB.
The last step is then to apply the second half of the potential energy term, which is an
identical operation to the first one, described above.
These three operations are thus performed at each time-step throughout the whole
propagation time, with the first and third step being coalesced as described in equation
(2.2.6) when the wavepacket is only being updated and not saved to memory.
2.3
Complex Absorbing Potentials
In a Fourier grid representation, when any point of the wavepacket distribution reaches
the edge of the grid, it gets reflected to the opposite side due to the periodic nature of the
grid. This would not be a problem in bound state potentials, in which it is unlikely that
the wavepacket would leave the minimum potential region, but it needs to be addressed
in dissociation processes involving repulsive potentials. When simulating said systems,
the wavepacket will surely reach the grid edges if a long enough propagation time is
warranted. The grid could be extended to accommodate the long propagation times, but
computational costs would quickly rise as a consequence.
Complex absorbing potentials (CAPs) provide a solution to this problem, by gently
dampening the norm of the wavepacket before it reaches the grid edge. A CAP is defined,
18 of 65
==PAGE:23==
2.3
Complex Absorbing Potentials
in one dimension, as [10]
−iηW(r) = −iη(r −rc)nθ(r −rc)
(2.3.1)
where W(r) is a real function, which we have set to a monomial form in this case, elevated
to some power n and modulated by the strength parameter η, and switched on at rc by
the step function θ.
The effect of the CAP on the norm of the wavepacket is
d
dt∥Ψ(r, t)∥2 = −2η ⟨Ψ(r, t)| W |Ψ(r, t)⟩
(2.3.2)
as mentioned above, the CAP decreases the norm of the wavepacket as they start inter-
acting.
This interaction, if too strong, can cause reflections, and allow transmission if too
weak. The parameters of the CAP, namely the strength η and its length L (relating to
rc through the grid boundaries), can be optimized through two equations derived in ref.
[14]
|R|2 =

n!
2n+2

2
·
 1
2m
n
·
η2
En+2
(2.3.3)
|T|2 = exp(−ηW(L)
E
· k · L
n + 1)
(2.3.4)
Solving equation (2.3.3) for small values of reflection |R|2, yields a value of η which can
be plugged into equation (2.3.4) to find the needed length of the potential leading to
small transmission |T|2. Since wavepackets have a wide range of momentum components
Figure 4: The decreasing norm of a wavepacket as it experiences an increasing CAP. The
wavepacket is a one-dimensional cut along ROH, at ROD = 1 Å and t = 20 fs, of the
Franck-Condon wavepacket discussed in section 4.1.1
.
19 of 65
==PAGE:24==
2.3
Complex Absorbing Potentials
k, a single value needs to be determined in order to solve these equations; a value for
the optimal energy to be used in such cases can be computed through equation 20 of ref.
[15].
20 of 65
==PAGE:25==
3
HOD Electronic Structure
This section showcases the computational results of the electronic structure aspects of
the system. Both the PES and the molecular properties obtained are discussed, as well
as the general features of the system and the choice of coordinate representation.
3.1
The HOD Molecule
The main case study of this project is the photodissociation reaction of the HOD
molecule, which takes place as a direct consequence of resonant electronic excitation to
its first excited state, of symmetry 1B1, termed the ˜A state in spectroscopic notation,
from the ground electronic state, termed the ˜X state. This is considered a model system
of non-adiabatic dynamics, as the potential surface of the ˜A state is well separated both
from the ground and further excited states, giving full validity to the application of
non-adiabatic Born-Oppenheimer dynamics.
Excitation leads to a dissociation of the triatomic molecule into a diatomic and an
atomic fragment; in the H2O molecule, all fragments are identical and both protons
dissociate with equal probability, whereas its isotopologue, HOD, allows for two different
product channels, populated with differing probabilities.
HOD →
(
OD + H
OH + D
(3.1.1)
The process is clearly a true unimolecular reaction, activated by interaction with
an external field and separate of any collisions taking place.
The choice of internal
nuclear coordinates then becomes the obvious one, also due to prior knowledge that,
after dissociation, no interaction between the fragments ever occurs again. The two bond
distance, ROH and ROD, and the bond angle θ, are thus adopted throughout the text
as the nuclear coordinates. These coordinates are depicted in figure 2, where one of the
protons should be substituted with a deuterium atom.
Figure 5: Vertical transition from the ˜X to the ˜A state, given as 1D cuts of the PES
described in section 3.2. The wavepacket is an exact replica of the ground state eigenstate.
21 of 65
==PAGE:26==
3.2
Potential Energy Surfaces
The electronic excitation is modeled as a δ-pulse excitation, which, as discussed in
section 1.4.2 and specifically as a result of equation (1.4.17), leads to a vertical transition
into the excited state. As a consequence of this choice, both PES are needed for compu-
tations: the ˜X surface is only needed to determine the ground state eigenstate ψ
˜X
0 , initial
state of the simulation, while the ˜A surface dictates the dissociation dynamics, as per the
results of the adiabatic and BO approximations, given in equation (1.3.15).
This process is depicted in figure 5 as a one-dimensional cut of the two potential
surfaces along one of the equilibrium bond length and fixed equilibrium bond angle.
3.2
Potential Energy Surfaces
Owing to the Born-Oppenheimer uncoupling of electronic and nuclear motion, the PES
of two isotopologues, such as H2O and HOD, are identical. As such, all computations
performed on quantum chemical programs is referred to the H2O molecule.
Due to the small number of electrons (10) present in the molecule, high accuracy
ab initio methods can be employed to compute electronic energies. Many such studies
have been performed on H2O, and many published subroutines are freely available for
obtaining numerical values of the ground state PES. In this study, we employ the ˜X state
non-relativistic PES published by Polyansky et al. [16], which shows excellent levels of
agreement with experimental data. The ab initio calculations were performed at the all-
electron, Davidson corrected (+Q) IC-MRCI level, using the aug-cc-pCVnZ (n = Q,5,6)
basis sets, and fit with 1260 points to analytically represent the PES.
The excited ˜A state of H2O has comparatively received much less attention, with
only a few PES published in many years. Of these, the Engel-Schinke-Staemmler-Palma
(ESSP) surface [17], product of a fit using the Correlated Electron Pair Approximation
(CEPA) calculations of Staemmler and Palma [18], has been chosen for this study, as its
accuracy is up to par with other published PES [19], and a FORTRAN subroutine of its
analytic fit was readily available.
Figure 6: PES of the ˜X and ˜A electronic states in atomic units, shifted as described in
the text.
22 of 65
==PAGE:27==
3.3
Dipole and Polarizability Surfaces
The two surfaces have thus been generated as two-dimensional PES, along the ROH
and ROD bond distances.
As the reaction cross section of the photodissociaiton was
found to be weakly dependent on the bond angle θ [17], the third degree of freedom
has been fixed at its equilibrium value of 104.52°, in order to reduce the dimensionality
of the problem. Due to the dissociative nature of the reaction, the grid was chosen to
extend from 0.6 Å to 5 Å, in order to allow enough free propagation space outside of the
interaction region of the potential. The grid spacing was chosen to be 0.044 Å, resulting
in a 1001 × 1001 points grid. The ˜X surface us shifted to zero at its minimum point,
and joined with the ˜A surface along the minimum points of the asymptotic channels,
corresponding to the dissociation product states. The values of the potential are set to
atomic units, Hartrees, as are all other quantities to be used in computations so as to
facilitate operations.
Looking at the PES plot of figure 6, compenetrations and discrepancies between the two
surfaces can be observed.
Specifically, the values of the two triatomic fragmentation
regions (long bond distances in both coordinates) disagree by a small shift, with the
ground state PES overtaking the excited state one. As the first is solely used to compute
ground state vibrational eigenstates, which only occupy the Franck-Condon region around
the equilibrium bond lengths of 0.952 Å, disagreements in these long stretch regions is
inconsequential.
3.3
Dipole and Polarizability Surfaces
As discussed in section 1.4.1, the interaction with laser pulses is mediated, to second
order, by a coupling of the electric field with the permanent molecular dipole moment and
the molecular polarizability, as stated by equation (1.4.5). In order to model the coherent
control of the excited wavepacket with a IR pulse, both a dipole and a polarizability
surface of the ground and excited state have been computed, using the quantum chemistry
software Dalton [20, 21]; the excited state properties are the focus of the section.
The Coupled Cluster Singles and Doubles (CCSD) method with the d-aug-ccPVTZ basis
set has been chosen as the level of theory to perform these computations. The ˜X →˜A
excitation has been found to have a strong single electron character, and the corresponding
excitation energy, given by the poles of the CCSD linear response function as discussed
in equation (1.5.14), to be in good agreement with the vertical energy difference of the
two PES at the Franck-Condon point. The main drawback of employing this method in
Dalton, is that it does not support unrestricted calculations, meaning that when the bond
length values become too high, the results may be unreliable. All of the results presented
in the following have thus been checked through computations at the UKS-DFT/MOM
level, and seeing how the general features of all surfaces agree with each other, have been
deemed correct enough for our sought-after levels of accuracy.
Excited state properties such as the dipole moment and the polarizability are provided
in Dalton as differences with respect to the reference state. As such, in order to obtain
the total value of these properties, both ground state and excited state calculations have
been performed. As mentioned earlier in section 1.4.3, the ground state dipole moment
is simply computed through the electronic ground state wavefunction in the first orders
properties section of Dalton, CCFOP. The excited state analogue is computed in the
excited state first order properties section, CCEXGR, and is given by the double residue
of the quadratic response function, as discussed in section 1.5.1, such that no information
of the excited state wavefunction needs to actually be determined. Orbital relaxation of
23 of 65
==PAGE:28==
3.3
Dipole and Polarizability Surfaces
the ground state properties needs to be turned off, as the excited state one is computed
in an orbital unrelaxed fashion.
The main quantity of interest in a rotationally averaged simulation becomes the length
of the dipole moment vector, given by
¯µ = ∥µ0∥=
q
µ2
x + µ2
y + µ2
z
(3.3.1)
The resulting surface is showcased in figure 7, from which it’s pretty clear how the values
of the dipole moment are not significant and do not change much throughout the surface;
a weak coupling is to be expected in dipole transitions.
Figure 7: Norm of the excited state dipole moment of HOD.
The ground state contributions to the polarizability have been computed in Dalton
in the linear response section, CCLR, through the linear response function of equation
(1.5.14). These haven then been added to the results of the excited state polarizability,
which is computed, as discussed, as the difference with respect to the ground state. The
computation is performed in the excited linear response section, CCEXCLR [22, 23], by
taking the double residue of the cubic response function, shown in equation (1.5.7).
(a)
(b)
Figure 8: The isotropic surfaces of the static (a) and frequency-dependent (b) polariz-
ability of HOD, both in atomic units.
24 of 65
==PAGE:29==
3.3
Dipole and Polarizability Surfaces
The rotationally averaged quantity corresponds to the mean or isotropic polarizability,
given by
αiso = Tr[α]/3 = αxx + αyy + αzz
3
(3.3.2)
Both the static and frequency dependent (at ω = 800 nm, the chosen pulse frequency,
discussed later) variants have been determined, in order to assess the magnitude of the
static approximation; their isotropic values are displayed in figure 8.
It becomes immediately clear that a huge increase of about five-fold in the values of
the excited state polarizability is brought about when its frequency-dependent nature is
taken into account, making the static approximation not a viable option. This behaviour
can be understood from the nature of the electronic state, as discussed in section 1.4.3:
the excitation energies, when the reference is shifted to the ˜A state, become of the order
of about 2 eV, which are close to that of the IR pulse frequency of about 1.5 eV. The
two values are so close that a huge decrease in the polarizability is expected when the
frequency of the pulse is ignored. Fortunately, a more polarizable molecule implies better
coupling with the field, which means that employing the frequency-dependent surface has
a positive effect on the type of laser control that is proposed in the later sections. From
these results it can already be easily predicted that non-resonant transitions would be
much more efficient than resonant ones, due to the stark difference in values between the
dipole and polarizability surfaces.
It is worth noting that polarizability results have turned out to be highly basis-set-
sensitive, as earlier calculations of the static αiso with the aug-ccPVTZ basis had yielded
an overall decrease of the values of about 25%. The nature of the excited states must
be very diffused, as it is best captured by the utilised doubly-augmented correlation-
consistent basis, containing a great number of diffused basis functions.
All these surfaces have been computed through ab initio calculations at 3600 different
geometry points (60 × 60 equidistant points in the two coordinates, ranging from 0.6 Å
to 5 Å), and have later been fitted with Scikit-Learn’s [24] Gaussian Process Regression
(GPR) model [25], initialised with a simple kernel consisting of a 2D decaying radial
basis function. After fitting, 1001 × 1001 points have been generated through the pre-
diction model, with axes matching exactly those of the PESs of section 3.2; this is an
obvious requirement for consistent construction of the time-dependent representation of
the Hamiltonian.
Figure 9: Ground state isotropic polarizability of HOD
25 of 65
==PAGE:30==
3.3
Dipole and Polarizability Surfaces
Lastly, we note in passing that a published ground state polarizability surface of HOD
by Avila [26] has been shortly utilised in later computations. Its isotropic representation
can be seen in figure 9. Comparing this with the values in figure 8a a staggering increase of
polarizability, of about ten-fold, is experienced by the molecule in its excited state under
the effect of the electric field. This phenomenon is readily explained as the consequence
of transitioning to an open-shell electronic state, which is much more exposed to external
influences compared to its former closed-shell character.
26 of 65
==PAGE:31==
4
Quantum Dynamics
This section presents the full body of results that has been obtained on the dynamics,
laser control and wavepacket composition throughout the project. All results are a prod-
uct of computations performed exclusively on MATLAB (version 2024a) code, based on
the numerical techniques described in section 2.
4.1
Field-Free Propagation
The first objective of the project, before attempting any sort of laser-induced manip-
ulation of the wavepacket, has been to correctly simulate the standard photodissociation
reaction of HOD, in order to make sure that later results would not be falsified by er-
rors in the code of the fundamental process. This reaction, being a model system of
non-adiabatic dynamics, has been thoroughly studied, and lots of data is thus available
for validating results, such as absorption spectra and reported values of the reaction
branching ratio (ratio of the two product channel probabilities).
The Hamiltonian of the system is time-independent, and given by
ˆH = ˆTnuc + E˜A(ROH, ROD)
(4.1.1)
where E˜A(ROH, ROD) is the PES of section 3.2 and the kinetic energy operator takes the
form [27]
ˆTnuc = ˆp2
OH
µOH
+ ˆp2
OD
µOD
+ ˆpOH ˆpOD
mO
cos(θeq)
(4.1.2)
where µOH = mHmO/(mH +mO) and µOD = mDmO/(mD +mO) are the reduced masses
of the two coordinates, and the conjugated momenta, ˆpOH and ˆpOD, given by
ˆpOH = −iℏ
∂
∂ROH ,
ˆpOD = −iℏ
∂
∂ROD ,
(4.1.3)
are weakly coupled by the last term of the kinetic energy operator.
In order to perform the propagation, first and foremost, a representation of the initial
state of the wavepacket Ψ(ROH, ROD, 0) is needed; its determination has thus been the
first result of all computations.
4.1.1
Franck-Condon Wavepacket
From the results of first-order time-dependent perturbation theory, discussed in section
1.4.2, the wavepacket generated by electronic excitation, when performed with a δ-pulse,
is an identical copy of the ground-state wavefunction (equation (1.4.17)). We have taken
the ground-state wavefunction prior to excitation to be the vibrational ground state
eigenstate, ψ
˜X
0 . While other reports [5], which employed a Morse modified potential to
model the ˜X electronic state, had analytic eigenstates available to them, we have chosen
both PES to be ab initio in our study, and thus do not have access to analytic solutions.
This being the case, a relaxation method to obtain numerical eigenstates on a PES
has been employed. The method involves propagating an arbitrary initial wavepacket
in imaginary time [28], by performing the substitution τ = −it →ˆU(τ) = e−ˆHτ; this
operation turns the wavepacket expansion of equation (1.1.8) into a set of exponentially
decaying wavefunctions
Ψ(τ) = ˆU(τ)Ψ(0) = e−ˆHτ X
n
cnψn =
X
n
e−Enτcnψn
(4.1.4)
27 of 65
==PAGE:32==
4.1
Field-Free Propagation
These wavefunctions correspond to the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian operator, given in
equation (4.1.1), and their decay rate is related to their eigenenergies; after a sufficiently
long propagation time, only the ground state wavefunction will be left in the expansion,
having the lowest energy of all. As this method clearly violates norm conservation, a
renormalization procedure has been introduced in the propagation loop. Once the ground
state wavefunction has been obtained, excited states can be computed by filtering out
of the propagating wavepacket the lower energy eigenstates. Their convergence can be
checked through either the autocorrelation function (equation (1.2.1)) or the change in the
energy; when they stabilize the eigenstate is converged (the code is found in appendix A).
An important factor in speeding up the convergence of the computation is the choice of
initial state; in order to converge quickly, the eigenstates of interest should be reasonably
well represented in the wavepacket expansion.
If the choice of initial state were too
similar to a specific eigenstate, for example, the convergence would be slower due to the
low population of other states in the wavepacket.
Ten eigenstates of HOD have thus been determined; the first three are pictured in
figure 10, where convergence of the wavefunction has been set to 10−6, while that of the
energy to 10−8. As the two bond stretch modes of HOD are weakly coupled with each
other, their eigenstates are expected to resemble product states of individual vibrational
modes of the OH and OD stretches.
The computed eigenstates have been found to
meet this expectation on their spatial distributions, and have thus been deemed correctly
generated.
Figure 10: Probability density of: the ground state eigenstate (upper-left) of ˜X super-
imposed on the ˜A state PES, the first excited state (upper-right) with one excitation
quantum in the OD stretch, and the second excited state (lower-left) with one excitation
quantum in the OH stretch. Autocorrelation function (lower-right) of the imaginary time
propagations (ITP).
28 of 65
==PAGE:33==
4.1
Field-Free Propagation
4.1.2
Franck-Condon propagation
After determination of the Franck-Condon wavepacket, chosen to be ψ
˜X
0 , the corre-
sponding field-free propagation has been performed, on a Fourier grid, with parameters
aligned with those of the PES: a 1001 × 1001 grid ranging from 0.6 Å to 5 Å, and a grid
spacing of 0.044 Å. The conjugated momentum grid has been constructed through the
relations of equation (2.1.15), and the time-step and total simulation time have been
chosen to be 0.02 fs = 0.8268 a.u. and 30 fs, respectively. The propagation time has
been sometimes extended and others shortened, according to the specific needs of the
quantity of interest; the value of 30 fs has been employed the most. In order to reach
such lengthy propagation times with a grid extending to only 5 Å, a complex absorbing
potential (CAPs are discussed in section 2.3) has been placed at both ends of the grid to
get rid of nonphysical reflections. The parameters of the CAP have been estimated using
equations (2.3.3) and (2.3.4) to minimize reflection and transmission. A shortened propa-
gation had been run beforehand (up until 15 fs, at which the wavepacket reaches the grid
edge in the OH channel) in order to determine the asymptotic momentum distribution in
both channels; the optimal value of k to parameterize the CAP has thus been determined
through equation 20 in ref. [15]. The CAP has been chosen to be quadratic in R, and the
computed optimal parameters are found to be η = 0.22160 a.u., L = 0.6380 Å in the ROD
coordinate, and η = 0.40385 a.u., L = 0.5192 Å in the ROH coordinate. These differing
values are a consequence of the lower momentum distribution in the ROD coordinate
compared to that of the ROH one; a gentler and thus longer CAP is needed to minimize
reflection for low values of momentum. The spatial distribution of the CAP on the grid
is visualized in figure 13 as the two orange shaded areas in all plots.
The main quantity of interest throughout this work is the branching ratio (BR) of the
reaction, determined by the fraction of wavepacket ending up in the ROH and ROD asymp-
totic regions, correlating with the OD + H and OH + D product channels, respectively,
and written as
BR = JOD+H
JOH+D
(4.1.5)
where the time and space-integrated fluxes, JOD+H and JOH+D, are determined by inte-
grating in time and over two grid lines lying in the different channels [27]
JOD+H =
Z tsim
0
Z RODmax
RODmin
ℏ
µOH
Im
"
Ψ∗∂Ψ
∂ROH
#
rf
+ cos θeq
mO
Im
"
Ψ∗∂Ψ
∂ROD
#
rf
dROD dt
(4.1.6)
where tsim is the final time of the simulation, µOH is the reduced mass of the ROH
stretch coordinate, rf is the fixed value along ROH on which the flux-line lies and Ψ ≡
Ψ(ROH, ROD, t). A similar expression holds for JOH+D. The operation
∂Ψ
∂ROH is carried
out as described in equation (2.2.7). The branching ratio of the field-free Franck-Condon
propagation has thus been determined as described, yielding a value of BR = 3.89. This
value was found to be slightly lower in previous reports [5]; this discrepancy, of about
4% probability of population in each channel, may be explained by the different initial
states utilised (Morse model solution vs ab initio ITP eigenstate), as well as the longer
propagation time employed in this work. Comparing the presented initial state with that
of reference [5], a slightly larger asymmetry along the ROH coordinate can be found in
the first.
29 of 65
==PAGE:34==
4.1
Field-Free Propagation
Figure 11: Space-integrated outgoing flux in the two channels, in the restricted time
frame [0 −25] fs.
The autocorrelation function of the propagation, has been determined as the overlap
in time with the initial Franck-Condon state, as given by equation (1.2.1), and is shown
in figure 12a. A really small recurrence of the wavepacket (the bump at around 32 fs) can
be noticed which had not been reported before.
From the Franck-Condon wavepacket propagation it is also possible to obtain the ab-
sorption spectrum of HOD through Fourier Transform of the autocorrelation function, as
shown in equation (1.2.3). In section 1.2 we discussed how recurrences in the autocorre-
lation function lead to a better resolution of the features of the spectrum.
(a)
(b)
Figure 12: a) Autocorrelation function of HOD. The zoomed inlet shows the small re-
currence happening at around 32 fs. b) Absorption spectrum of HOD in cm−1. Since the
zero of energy has been set at the minimum of the ˜X surface, the zero point vibrational
energy of the electronic ground state has been subtracted on the energy axis, in order to
match with experimental observations.
30 of 65
==PAGE:35==
4.1
Field-Free Propagation
(a) t = 0 fs
(b) t = 3 fs
(c) t = 6 fs
(d) t = 9 fs
(e) t = 12 fs
(f) t = 20 fs
Figure 13: Snapshots of the FC wavepacket propagation. The Franck-Condon wavepacket
is pictured in (a), a closer look is given in figure 10. The orange shaded area represents
the CAP, its interaction with the OH+D fragment wavepacket can be seen in (f). The red
and green lines are the gridlines placed in the two channels to evaluate the flux, pictured
in figure 11.
Even though a recurrence has indeed been found, it seems to be too weak to generate
further resolution in the spectrum, given in figure 12b, which seems not much different
compared to previous reports.
31 of 65
==PAGE:36==
4.2
Laser Interaction
The eigenstate composition of this wavepacket propagation is reported in a later sec-
tion, where it is discussed together with other propagations compositions.
4.2
Laser Interaction
The central question that this work addresses is whether the wavepacket in the excited
stated can be manipulated through an interaction with a laser pulse, in order to modify
the branching ratio of the reaction. Many different schemes have been proposed to achieve
this same result [4, 5, 6, 7], such as excitation of ground state vibrational modes [5],
generation of non-stationary states in the electronic ground state [5], or modulation of
the UV pulse which excites the molecule to the ˜A state in a pump-dump scheme [6].
These set ups all include either a combination of a IR laser with a following UV "pump",
or an optimally designed pump pulse by itself.
As stated, the new scheme that is being proposed through this work involves excita-
tion of vibrational modes in the already generated excited state wavepacket, and thus
subsequent to electronic excitation by the pump pulse, through the interaction with a
NIR non-resonant pulse. This scheme has not been explored before, and a big part of the
motivation behind it also lies in understanding the coupling effects between the second
pulse and the continuum eigenstates ψ
˜A
E of the ˜A state.
4.2.1
Ultrashort Pulses
The use of non-resonant fields had always been the goal in the scheme set-up, but it
has quickly turned out to be the more valuable option as well. For resonant transitions to
occur, the transition dipole moments µE→E′ =
D
ψ
˜A
E
 ¯µ
ψ
˜A
E′
E
must differ from zero, and for
this to be the case, the two eigenstates must overlap reasonably well with each other, given
that the dipole operator is described by an even function in the interaction region (figure
7). In the continuum, the biggest overlap is found between states adjacent in energy. A
laser pulse coupling such states would thus have a really low frequency, and a really long
duration of the pulse would have to be employed, making the interaction more akin to a
continuous wave excitation than a laser pulse one, considering the really short time frame
on which dissociation occurs. At the higher frequency of 800 nm that we have chosen for
our pulses, resonant dipole transitions do not occur, because eigenstates at such different
energies do not overlap well with each other. At the same time, the polarizability of the
molecule is much higher than its dipole moment, as discussed in section 3.3; the non-
resonant term in the interaction is thus completely dominant over the resonant one. This
theoretical discussion has been checked computationally by performing propagations with
both terms in the Hamiltonian and others with only the non-resonant one: no difference
can be made out in the excitation dynamics between the two cases.
The full time-
dependent Hamiltonian for the time-evolution on the ˜A state has thus been described,
from then on out, with a fully non-resonant interaction term, written as:
ˆH(t) = ˆTnuc + E˜A(ROH, ROD) −1
2α800nm
iso
E2(t)
(4.2.1)
where ˆTnuc is given in equation (4.1.2), E˜A(ROH, ROD) and α800nm
iso
are the PES and
frequency-dependent isotropic polarizability of the ˜A state, and the laser pulse is modeled
as a Gaussian pulse
E(t) = E0e−(t−τ)2
2σ2 cos(ω(t −τ))
(4.2.2)
32 of 65
==PAGE:37==
4.2
Laser Interaction
where E0 is the peak amplitude, τ is the central time of the pulse, σ is the pulse duration
and ω its frequency. The pulse has no spatial dependence as it couples with an averaged
polarizability. In order to have a more quantitative description of the process, the rota-
tional states and orientation of the molecule would have to be taken into account, as well
as the anisotropy of the polarizability
Some constraint have been placed on the pulses parameters in order to make them
realistic. First of, while the ˜A state is well separated from other excited states, there still
needs to be precautions in place regarding unwanted excitations to higher states, which
impact the range of frequencies, pulse durations and peak amplitudes that are accessible.
The closest state, ˜B, lies about 2 eV above ˜A in the Franck-Condon region according to
CCSD response; this is the highest energy import we can introduce in the system. Sec-
ondly, the integral of E(t) in time needs to be (numerically close to) 0. The combination
of these requirement has led us to choose the widely used wavelength of 800 nm (1.55 eV)
to be used in all pulses, which in turn makes E0 = 0.03 a.u. and σ = 1.5 fs the higher
and lower limits of peak amplitude and pulse duration; a higher amplitude would lead to
two-photon absorption phenomena (which would introduce 3.1 eV of energy in the system
and thus excite to higher states) and a shorter pulse duration would result in integrals of
E(t) with values noticeably above 0.
Figure 14: Gaussian pulse with central time τ = 8 fs, pulse duration σ = 2 fs and
frequency ω = 0.057 a.u.
The propagation code has thus been adapted (appendix A) to allow for the introduction of
the time-dependent Hamiltonian described in equation (4.2.1). In the first computations,
the whole three-dimensional matrix of the Hamiltonian, given by the two spatial coordi-
nates and by the newly introduced time coordinate, had been computed. This procedure
yielded high computation times and memory requirements. Later on, the construction of
the Hamiltonian has thus been switched to an "on-the-fly" mode, and shifted back to a
two-dimensional matrix, computed at each time-step within the propagation loop, before
the application of the propagator. This change greatly reduces the computational costs,
making them similar to those of the field-free propagation, and thus much more efficient.
An exploration of the pulses effects on the branching ratio of the reaction has thus been
performed, with the discussed limits set on the pulses parameters. The frequency and
33 of 65
==PAGE:38==
4.2
Laser Interaction
(a)
(b)
Figure 15: a) Autocorrelation function of the ground state wavepacket as it interacts with
the first half of a laser pulse. b) Laser pulse interacting with the wavepacket in a), with
the negative time section highlighted in green. The pulse parameters are τ = 0 fs, σ = 5 fs.
peak amplitude of the pulses have been kept constant throughout, at ω = 800 nm, E0 =
0.03 a.u., while the duration σ and the time of peak amplitude τ have been varied in order
to understand their impact. The results are presented in figure 16, where a color-map of
the BR is given as a function of the varied pulse parameters.
Before analyzing the results, a quick point needs to be discussed on some of the time and
duration parameters combinations. When τ is chosen to be in the first few femtoseconds,
many of the available choices for σ generate a pulse with amplitude in the negative times,
which is to be interpreted as some of the pulse acting on the ground state wavefunction
before excitation to the ˜A state takes place. In order to allow for these pulses, the ground
state wavefunction must not be perturbed by the short interaction, otherwise the initial
FC state used in all propagations would cease being valid. A propagation involving the
first half of a laser pulse has thus been performed in the ground state in order to check
its outcome, and as mentioned in section 3.3, a ground state polarizability surface by
Avila [26] has been employed to model the coupling. The interaction between the ground
state wavepacket and a pulse of the longest duration we explored, σ = 5 fs, and centered
at t = 0 fs, has been found to be minimal, with the wavepacket maintaining more than
99.99% of its initial distribution, as shown in figure 15. The use of the FC wavepacket
as initial state of the propagation is thus justified for all of these pulses, even the most
extreme ones.
4.2.2
Branching Ratio Control
The general trend of the results seen in figure 16a, is that the laser pulse interaction
has the effect of lowering the standard FC branching ratio of 3.89, barring the pulses
peaking at the earliest of times. The induction of a BR lower than 2, which is the case
for some of the mid-range pulse parameters, is a good result for any control scheme of
HOD photodissociation, as simple frequency-dependent excitation to the ˜A state can at
most induce a BR equal to 2, as seen in the plot from Zhang et al. [29], reprinted in
figure 16b.
The proposed scheme is thus reasonably effective, but not as much as others that have
34 of 65
==PAGE:39==
4.2
Laser Interaction
(a)
(b)
Figure 16: a) Branching ratios of different propagations as a function of the two pa-
rameters σ and τ, the duration and peak time of the pulse. The peak amplitude and
frequency are fixed at ω = 800 nm, E0 = 0.03 a.u.. b) HOD reaction cross section (top)
and frequency dependent branching ratio (bottom), reprinted from [29].
been reported [5], which can yield full control over both product channels. The main
drawback of this set-up is the limited timescale on which it can act. As a consequence of
the extremely fast dissociation times, all of the pulse amplitude needs to be delivered in
the first few femtoseconds, before the wavepacket vacates the FC region and fragments;
after this point, the BR is fixed and cannot be changed by reasonable pulses.
The
chosen molecular system is possibly the most sensitive to this specific problem, as the
reduced masses of the two coordinates are the lowest possible ones, given by X-H and
X-D bonds, with X being the other atom in the bond. As such, many other molecules,
such as ones with X-Cl or X-Br bonds, would surely prove more susceptible to this control
scheme, where bigger reduced masses would lead to considerably lower velocities at equal
momentum, and possibly higher polarizabilities to stronger couplings.
Three snapshots of the wavepacket being perturbed by a laser pulse with σ = 2 fs and
τ = 4 fs are pictured in figure 17. The pulse seems to effectively "kick" the wavepacket
into the minority channel, OH + D, as seen from a comparison of figures 17a and 17b
with 13d and 13d, both at times t = 6 fs and t = 9 fs, respectively. The final result of this
push is that when the pulse has decayed, at t = 12 fs (once again comparable between
figures 17c and 13e), the final distribution of the probability density is more balanced in
the two channels. Another clear effect of the pulse, which can be seen as a consequence,
or byproduct, of the discussed kick, is a confinement of the wavepacket in the FC region
for a longer time compared to that seen in the field free propagation. This delay can
be observed at all three times pictured in the figure, as well as in the flux analysis of
figure 17d: the flux peaks are shifted in both channels, especially in the OH + D one,
and the distribution is widened compared to the original one. This effect is even more
prominent when longer pulses are employed. We have found this feature to be directly
correlated with the linear complex phase pattern generated by the pulse in the eigenstate
composition of the wavepacket, as will be discussed later.
In order to better understand the interaction between the molecular system and
35 of 65
==PAGE:40==
4.2
Laser Interaction
(a) t = 6 fs
(b) t = 9 fs
(c) t = 12 fs
(d) Flux
Figure 17: a), b), c) Snapshots of a propagation with laser pulse interactions, σ = 2 fs, τ =
4 fs. The resulting branching ratio is BR = 1.885, extracted from the flux analysis in d).
the laser pulse, a population and phase analysis of the eigenstate composition of the
wavepacket, given by equation (1.1.9), has been performed.
The analysis consists in
obtaining the coefficients of the expansion, which, as mentioned in section 1.1, gain a
time-dependence when the system is perturbed by an external field. This feature can
thus help in understanding the evolution of the composition of the wavepacket in time,
as it interacts with the laser pulse; once the perturbation decays, the coefficients become
stationary once again. In order to obtain the coefficients, the standard accumulated time-
dependent phase of each eigenstate must be divided out, which gives us the expression
for the coefficients at each time step
cE(t) = ⟨ψE|Ψ(t)⟩
e−iEt/ℏ
(4.2.3)
As becomes immediately clear from this equation, in order to obtain the coefficient at
energy E, cE(t), we first need to have a numerical representation of the eigenstate ψE. The
next section is thus dedicated to the determination of these eigenstates and a discussion
of their nature.
36 of 65
==PAGE:41==
4.3
Continuum Eigenstates
4.3
Continuum Eigenstates
The eigenstates of the excited ˜A state belong in a continuum of energy, due to the
repulsive nature of the potential not allowing for bound states.
In order to obtain a numerical representation of these states, the same method de-
scribed in section 4.1.1, imaginary time propagation, has been tentatively employed as
a first try. The computation, as expected, has turned out to be nowhere near conver-
gence after tens of hours. The expectation of not being able to successfully employ this
method arises by recognising that, in order to converge, ITP necessitates a significant
energy separation between the states, otherwise the rates of decay are too similar with
each other and convergence is never reached. This criteria is thus not met in our sys-
tem, being the states theoretically adjacent with each other in energy (this is not exactly
the case in numerical computations, but to a close approximation), which has lead to
employment of the converse relationship between wavepackets and eigenstates discussed
at the end of section 1.2 instead. Equation (1.2.5) tells us that an eigenstate may be
obtained by Fourier transforming a wavepacket at the eigenenergy corresponding to it.
This method turns out to be partiality superior to ITP, in continuum states cases, as it
allows for the determination of only the desired states, while performing ITP leads to a
forced computation of all states in succession, by virtue of its inner workings.
4.3.1
Computational Determination
Seeing how propagations only run in positive times, the integral of equation (1.2.5) is
recast into
Z ∞
−∞Ψ(ROH, ROD, t)e
i
ℏE′t dt =
Z ∞
0
2 · Re
h
Ψ(ROH, ROD, t)e
i
ℏE′ti
dt
(4.3.1)
which only holds for real valued representations of Ψ(ROH, ROD, 0), and leads to only real
valued eigenstates. A wavepacket, the Franck-Condon one in our case, is thus propagated
for a certain amount of time, and then Fourier transformed at different energies to obtain
all the desired eigenstates; two main issues presents themselves when trying to apply this
method. First, continuum states, unlike their bound counterpart, are delocalized in all
space, and should thus extend to infinity in both coordinates. This is simply impossible
in a numerical representation of the states, as they must be confined on the same 0.6−5 Å
grid that standard propagations take place on. Secondly, the integral in equation (4.3.1)
is supposed to run to infinite time for the equivalence to hold; once again, this requirement
cannot be fulfilled.
Three different scenarios have thus been tested and ranked based on the accuracy of the
computed states, in relation to the use that is to be made of them:
• First, a larger grid, spanning from 0.6 Å to 20 Å, has been employed, in order to
allow the wavepacket to completely leave the 0.6−5 Å region on which the standard
propagations are performed. Once a long enough propagation time has passed, the
FT is performed. With a grid this large, the total propagation time has only been
able to be pushed up to a value of 65 fs, before arrival of the wavepacket at the
grid edges, due to computational resources constraints.
This method produces
eigenstates that have a reasonable spatial profile (bar the far regions, which show
some clear fluctuations), but an energy expectation value that is not converged to
that of the FT phase, with an average error of magnitude 10−3 EH. The energy
37 of 65
==PAGE:42==
4.3
Continuum Eigenstates
uncertainty of the state, given by ∆E =
q
⟨E2⟩−⟨E⟩2, which would be a zero
at full convergence, has also been evaluated and found to not be small either, at
10−2EH. The generated eigenstates are thus not well-converged on the large grid.
By confining these states to the standard grid, a noticeable shift in energy and
increase in uncertainty, both of about 1.5 orders of magnitude, has been observed.
We have attributed this behaviour to their being abruptly cut off at the 5 Å grid
edge, making them unconfined and thus more energetic than they would be on their
native grid.
• In the second set up, a CAP has been included in the potential, in order to kill the
wavepacket at the edges of the large grid, which has been reduced to 9Å: as the
CAP allows for longer propagation times, a huge grid is not needed anymore. By
dampening the wavepacket all the way to zero, a sort of artificial infinity can be
reached in the FT, since the wavepacket stops changing from that point onward.
This method, by having the states go gently to zero close to the edges, converges the
states much better, with the first variation in energy observed at the 4th decimal
place and a quite small uncertainty of .
Unfortunately, it does not resolve the
problem of grid reduction, since the states are cut-off, much in the same way as
they were before.
• As a final set up the wavepacket has been propagated on the original 5 Å grid
instead, and the same CAP used in the standard propagations has been employed.
The resulting states appear to slowly dampen to zero as they approach the edge,
avoiding the nonphysical cut-off.
The energy shift, as a consequence, is not a
concern.
The energy differences compared to the reference one (the one at which the FT is per-
formed) and the uncertainties generated by all 3 different set ups onto the standard 5 Å
grid are displayed in figure 18, from which it’s immediately clear how the third method
ranks best in both parameters. The final method has thus been chosen to compute all
sets of eigenstates discussed from here on out, as it provides the most useful set. Fur-
thermore, as the wavepacket never enters the farther regions of the grid, a description
Figure 18: Energy differences (in Hartrees) between the expectation value and the FT
reference (top) and the uncertainty in the energy (bottom) of each state computed in the
three different set ups described in the text. The values are computed on the 5 Å grid,
and thus include the errors that the first and second set up suffer from
38 of 65
==PAGE:43==
4.3
Continuum Eigenstates
Figure 19: Comparison between a state produced by the third and final setup (left) and
one produced by the second set up (right). The rise in energy of the second state is
printed in the title, due to the abrupt cut off seen at the rightmost edge of the grid.
of the eigenstates at these points is not needed, and the use of the same CAP that the
wavepacket interacts with is justifiable.
Another problem to be mindful of, is the acces-
sibility of the eigenstates from the electronic ground state. From the absorption spectrum
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 20: Eigenstates generated through the FT method, and the chosen computational
set up. Those in a), b) and c) are a product of the FC propagation, while the one in
d) is given by a different initial state, given in equation (4.4.2) with its center shifted at
ROH = 1.1 Å, ROD = 1.1 Å, .
39 of 65
==PAGE:44==
4.3
Continuum Eigenstates
of HOD (given in figure 12b), one can determine which range of eigenenergies is accessible
by the Franck-Condon wavepacket. The eigenstates with energies that lie outside of the
spectrum, sometimes called "dark states" in a spectroscopic context, do not generate a
correct eigenstate when applying the FT method to a propagation of the FC wavepacket.
If one tries to generate these states anyway, they will turn out incorrect and unusable,
because they play an insignificant role in the makeup of the wavepacket.
A set of 100 states has thus been computed through the FC propagation, evenly
distributed in an energy range spanning from E = 0.25 EH to E = 0.36 EH, the limits
of the absorption spectrum.
These states, which are evenly spaced in energy, are in
visual agreement with the branching ratio plot of Zhang et al. [29] reprinted in figure
16b, which suggests an almost complete branching into the OD + H channel in the
edge states, compatible with the state in 20a and 20c, and a more balanced one in the
mid-range energy ones, compatible with 20b. This set of eigenstates has been validated
by a successful replication of the FC wavepacket using a superposition of the states
(constructed through the coefficients that are discussed in later sections), which is a
discretized approximation of the expansion in equation (1.1.9). We shall call this set the
"FC eigenstates".
4.3.2
Degeneracy
It is important to note at this point that scattering potentials such as the one we
are dealing with usually lead to a certain amount of degeneracy in the spectrum. This
is due, in our specific case, to the different available combinations of bound energy in
the diatomic product (OD or OH) and the relative translational energy between the two
fragments (OD + H or OH + D). At the same energy E, multiple eigenstates may thus
be found, and Fourier transforming the wavepacket leads to a specific linear combination
of these, such that
ψE =
X
n
⟨ψn
E|Ψ(R, 0)⟩|ψn
E⟩
(4.3.2)
where ψn
E is the nth degenerate state at energy E. It is the initial state, Ψ(ROH, ROD, 0),
that is the determining factor of which set of eigenstates from the degenerate manifold will
be generated by Fourier transforming at many different energies [8]: propagating the first
vibrational excited state of ˜X, for example, will lead to a different set of states compared
to the ones given by the FC wavepacket. There exists indeed a one to one correspondence
Ψ(0) ⇔ψE, such that a specific initial wavepacket will always lead to the same linear
combination when transformed. This correspondence is better explored in a later section
through the adoption of a model system with limited degeneracy, a two-dimensional
harmonic oscillator model of H2O.
A look at the state in figure 20d showcases how
different these linear combinations can end up looking. This state, generated at the same
energy as the one in 20a, but from a different initial wavepacket, displays a much more
similar branching in the two product channels compared to its degenerate counterpart,
and must thus be constructed by an entirely different linear combination of available
degenerate states.
The accessible vibrational states of the diatomic fragment at a given total energy
of the wavepacket yield the so called open channels, which indicate the possible final
state of the products after the reaction has occurred, and correspond to the degenerate
eigenstates ψN
E of equation (4.3.2). A good example is given by the energy profile of the
eigenstate shown in figure 20a, with its open channels given in figure 21, which sits at
0.25 EH (51400 cm−1); at this energy, 6 channels are open in the OD + H asymptotic
40 of 65
==PAGE:45==
4.4
Population and Phase Analysis
(a)
(b)
Figure 21: a) Open channels for the degenerate superposition ψE=0.25 EH in an asymptotic
cut of the ˜A potential surface. The black arrows indicate the translational kinetic energy
of each degenerate ψn
E state, while the corresponding horizontal white line indicates its
bound energy. b) Product states in the degenerate manifold exemplified through the
individual free-particle (red) and bound (green) states.
region, while only 4 are open in the other one.
The individual states ψn
E in the degenerate manifold, are a product of the free-particle
eigenstate and the diatomic bound eigenstate, at least in the asymptotic regions; this is
reflected in the two-dimensional state through the density of oscillations in the atomic
fragment coordinate, representing the momentum, and the oscillations along the diatomic
coordinate, representing the vibrational energy. This nature is exemplified in figure 21b,
where the free-particle state and the bound state corresponding to the energies in figure
21a are plotted individually for all six open channels. The inverse relationship between
momentum and vibrational energy can be clearly observed.
Inspection of the full eigenstate in 20a, generated by the FC propagation at E =
0.25 EH, can give us an idea of how the degenerate combination is structured. Lateral
oscillation along the OD and OH stretch seem minimal, implying that the vibrational
ground state plays the dominant roles in the make up of the ψE=0.25 EH state.
Once
can indeed easily draw the correspondence between a product of the two states seen
in the upper left quadrant of figure 21b and the full eigenstate of figure 20a. As the
energy of the eigenstate increases, as is the case in the progression of figure 20, more and
more channels open up, and the combination of degenerate states can be seen to acquire
excitation features in the diatomic stretches.
We now proceed to the next section, keeping in mind the crucial point of the existing
degenerate degrees of freedom within the computed eigenstates.
4.4
Population and Phase Analysis
Once a set of eigenstates has been obtained in the energy range of interest, which
we have taken to be around the energies covered by the absorption spectrum of HOD,
the composition of the wavepacket and its change in time can be determined through
41 of 65
==PAGE:46==
4.4
Population and Phase Analysis
(a)
(b)
Figure 22: Field-free FC propagation. The eigenstate population distribution is given in
a) and the complex phases in b). The phases are given from [−π; π]. Both quantities
stay constant throughout the propagation, they are thus only reported up to 10, fs.
equation (4.2.3). Specifically, we are interested in recasting the coefficients, which are
complex numbers, into their polar forms,
cE = Re(cE) + i · Im(cE) = reiϕ,
r =
q
Re(cE)2 + Im(cE)2,
ϕ = tan−1(Im(cE)
Re(cE))
(4.4.1)
where r is the magnitude and ϕ is the phase of cE. The magnitude squared (which equals
the coefficient itself squared), gives us the population of each eigenstate in the wavepacket.
On the other hand, the phase usually has a relationship with electromagnetic pulses and
is thus another quantity of interest. The fixed population of eigenstates of a field-free
propagation can be seen in figure 22, as well as the phase pattern. These values have
been determined through equation (4.2.3) and (4.4.1) using the FC eigenstates set. Each
eigenstate is referred to by its energy (or frequency), which has been adjusted so as
to take its zero at the zero point vibrational energy of the ˜X state. While the phases
and population are, as expected in the absence of a perturbation, constant in time, the
arisen phase pattern itself is already an interesting result: all eigenstates making up this
superposition are totally in phase with each other. This is what we would call a "simple"
linear combination, achieved by simply adding up the states with no phase dependence
between them.
As mentioned before in section 4.3, these coefficients can be used to
regenerate the wavepacket at any point in time by constructing the superposition of
equation (1.1.9), albeit in an approximate way, as only 100 states have been generated.
This operation has thus been performed at all time-step in order to check the accuracy
of the generated eigenstates; the resulting wavepacket resembles to a great degree the
standard FC one, and its BR is also quite close to the original one with a value of
4.05. This result implies that we can trust these eigenstates to yield accurate phases and
populations, and that a discretized approximation of one hundred states is enough to
qualitatively reconstruct the wavepacket.
Next, an investigation on how the phases and populations are modified by the interac-
tion with laser pulses has been performed, in order to determine whether a relationship
can be drawn between this modulation and the final branching ratio that is induced. The
results of this investigation on four different pulses are printed in figure 23, where the
populations and phases originating from the same pulse are set next to each other. Two
values of the peak amplitude time τ and of the pulse duration σ have been chosen, such
42 of 65
==PAGE:47==
4.4
Population and Phase Analysis
(a) τ = 1.4 fs, σ = 1.5 fs, BR ≈2.9
(b) τ = 1.4 fs, σ = 1.5 fs, BR ≈2.9
(c) τ = 1.4 fs, σ = 3 fs, BR ≈3.2
(d) τ = 1.4 fs, σ = 3 fs, BR ≈3.2
(e) τ = 4 fs, σ = 1.5 fs, BR ≈2.5
(f) τ = 4 fs, σ = 1.5 fs, BR ≈2.5
(g) τ = 4 fs, σ = 3 fs, BR ≈1.5
(h) τ = 4 fs, σ = 3 fs, BR ≈1.5
Figure 23: Eigenstate population distribution and phase patterns generated by pulses.
43 of 65
==PAGE:48==
4.4
Population and Phase Analysis
that two pulses with equal τ but different σ, and two with equal σ but different τ, are
considered, in order to understand how changes in these parameters affect the distribu-
tions. These combinations and the accurate values of BR that they induce can be found
in figure 16a, or in the flux analyses of figure 24 (only the value of BR).
The chosen pulse parameters combinations all lead to a decrease in the value of the
branching ratio, with the first two (distributions in figures 23a, 23b, 23c, 23d), which
share τ = 1.4 fs, having a mild effect, and the last two (distributions in figures 23e, 23f,
23g, 23h), which share τ = 4 fs, having a much stronger one.
In all plots, the initial distributions are seen to correctly match those of the FC propa-
gation, and gradually evolve as the coupling with the field takes place. Once the pulse
decays, both the populations and the phases settle into their respective final distribution,
and remain fixed in time from there on out.
The population distribution is shifted towards lower energies in all cases, but in the
first two (23a,23c) the effect is clearly weaker compared to the last two (23e,23g). Shifts
in the distribution seem thus correlated with the chosen peak time of the pulse. On the
other hand, it seems possible to correlate the generated phase patterns with the value of
the pulse duration, as the pulses with longer σ, for both values of τ, generate stronger
phase patterns (by which we mean higher differences in phases between adjacent states).
It is also interesting to note that the value of the phases seems pretty much periodic
across the frequencies, meaning that neither the energy nor the population of a state is
(a) τ = 1.4 fs, σ = 1.5 fs
(b) τ = 1.4 fs, σ = 3 fs
(c) τ = 4 fs, σ = 1.5 fs
(d) τ = 4 fs, σ = 3 fs
Figure 24: Flux analyses of the four propagations, with laser pulse parameters given in
each caption, and the resulting BRs given in the titles.
44 of 65
==PAGE:49==
4.4
Population and Phase Analysis
correlated with the phase gained during the interaction with the pulse.
The aim is now to try to understand if the change in the branching ratio can be
assigned to one of these two quantities. It seems clear that the phases gained by the
eigenstates cannot be simply correlated to the final branching ratio, as the phases in 23d
are stronger than those of 23b, but induce a lower branching ratio. The phases generated
in 23f are the weakest of all, while the resulting branching ratio is the second highest
in ∆BR; it seems thus impossible to link these phase pattern to any specific value of
the BR. A different connection can be made, though, when observing the flux analyses
of these four propagations, which are displayed in figure 24. Comparing figures 24b and
24a, a longer confinement of the wavepacket can be inferred by a shift of the peaks of
the flux lines by about 2 fs. This shift is even stronger when comparing 24d to 24c. As
mentioned, the phase patterns grow between pulses with fixed τ when σ is increased, and
the stronger phases thus seem a good candidate for the reason of the time shifts between
these pairs of propagations, as argued by Amitay et al. [30] for linear phase patterns.
This claim has been computationally checked by investigating the effect of applying an
instantaneous phase pattern to the FC wavepacket at time t = 0.
4.4.1
Phase Effects
Operationally, these propagations have been performed "manually", in the same way
as when the accuracy of the FC eigenstates had been checked: using the one hundred
generated eigenstates, a linear combination has been constructed, with coefficients given
by the populations in 22a at all times, and the phases replaced by the ad-hoc ones to
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 25: Linear a) and inversely linear c) phase patterns imprinted onto the FC popu-
lations, and their respective flux analyses b), d).
45 of 65
==PAGE:50==
4.4
Population and Phase Analysis
(a)
(b)
Figure 26: a) Sinusoidal phase pattern set as a constant value over the whole propagation
time.
b) Resulting flux analysis, which appears to indicate a pulsing motion of the
wavepacket fragmentation. The induced BR is given in the title.
be tested. The code needed to perform this type of propagation is given in the last code
section of appendix A A. These phases have been chosen, as already mentioned, to be set
at the beginning of the propagation, and have been kept constant throughout.
First, the effect of phase patterns linearly dependent on the energy of the eigenstates
has been explored. The FC propagation can be thought of as the "standard" result, against
which we can measure occurring deviations. Once again, we use the flux analysis plots
in order to determine the progression of the wavepacket on the grid, and, simultaneously,
obtain the value of BR. A couple of different phase patterns have been imposed, but two
specific examples are enough to prove the point. These two phase patterns, one linear
and one inversely linear, both constant in time, are printed in figure 25, alongside the
corresponding flux analysis arising from the propagation. The first notable result is that,
in both propagations, the value of the branching ratio has remained almost unchanged
compared to that obtained from the manual propagation, with standard population and
phases.
This once again confirms the earlier findings that phase patterns cannot be
correlated with changes in the BR; these further results lead to a picture in which the
BR is not influenced by the phases at all.
Now, comparing the the two fluxes of figure 25b and 25d with the standard FC one in
figure 11, the time shift experienced in these two propagations is immediately apparent:
when the imprinted phase pattern is linear, a time delay is experienced by the wavepacket,
whereas a time advancement takes place when the phase pattern is inversely linear instead.
The time shifts takes the form of a displacement in the wavepacket, both in coordinate
and momentum space. In the case of time delays, the wavepacket starts out already
fragmented, and with enough negative momentum such that the initial state of the FC
propagation is reached in the future of the wavepacket, at Ψ(t′) = ΨFC(0). Since all
laser pulses employed in the propagations seem to lead to linear phase patterns, we can
conclude that the only effect that these bring about is a confinement of the wavepacket,
and that no advancement ever takes place (the FC wavepacket is indeed the fastest of all
to leave the FC region, due to its overall zero phases).
An interesting phenomenon arises from the introduction of a sinusoidal phase pattern,
shown in figure 26, which is a pattern that has not been observed to arise from interaction
with any laser pulse that has been used. The effect of this specific pattern seems to be that
46 of 65
==PAGE:51==
4.4
Population and Phase Analysis
of inducing a pulsing motion in the fragmentation of the wavepacket, which takes place in
multiple bursts instead of one continuous event. Visual inspection of the individual bursts
of flux, given in 26b seems to indicate that the probability density leaving the wavepacket
for the two channels nevertheless remains rationed in the standard FC manner. It thus
seems likely that other phase patterns would also not affect the final branching ratio,
and our attention should be shifted towards the effect of the population shifts in order
to determine whether they can be deemed responsible for the BR changes.
4.4.2
Population and Degeneracy Effects
From the conclusions of last section, it would seem reasonable at this point to assign the
change of the branching ratio to be due to the modulation of the population distribution,
driven by interactions with the the laser pulses.
A correlation can indeed be drawn
between the amount of population shift and the resulting branching ratio when analysing
the population plots in figure 23: using the intensity of the shift as a predictor, one
would correctly rank the change in branching ratios from strongest to weakest. This
result would be satisfactory, if not for the fact that the frequency dependent branching
ratios reported by Zhang et al. [29] (given in figure 16b) show an increase in the lower
energy states, which is the opposite of what our population shift leads to. Furthermore,
as discussed earlier, the frequency dependent values never dip below 2, whereas we have
shown, for a bunch of different pulse parameters, the ability to reach lower values through
the interaction.
A further hint that a different explanation of this phenomenon is warranted, has been
found when trying to replicate these propagations through the superpositions utilised in
the last section: the wavepacket cannot be reconstructed through a linear combination of
the eigenstates. This failure to replicate the perturbed wavepacket is evident in the flux
analyses of figure 27, which result from the attempt at replicating the τ = 4 fs, σ = 1.5 fs
and the τ = 4 fs, σ = 3 fs propagations. These two yield branching ratios of approximately
2.5 and 1.5, respectively, while the superpositions of FC states give results of 3.4 and
3.8, far from being correct.
The slow drift from a correct representation of the true
wavepacket can also be observed from the correlation functions in figures 27b and 27d
with the superposition state, denominated ΨSP.
In order to try and fix this, a higher number of eigenstates has been computed at
first, to check whether the discrete approximation might have been too crude to properly
describe the perturbed wavepacket. Increasing the number of states from 100 to 200 in
the same energy range has yielded no appreciable improvements of the computed BRs,
and as going to even higher numbers would have weighted too much on the computational
resources, this path has been dismissed as unfeasbale.
As a second option, a new set of eigenstates has been computed, to check whether
a different initial state might yield eigenstates that can better represent the perturbed
wavepacket. The presented results only deal with the outcomes for the second of the
two mentioned propagations, which is taken as an example being the one with the bigger
change in BR; the results are transferable to the other as well as all tested propagations.
A wavepacket leading to a similar value of the branching ratio as that induced by the
laser pulse has been adopted as initial state for the determination of the eigenstates. This
state is described by a product of Gaussian functions in the two bond stretches [31]
Ψ(ROH, ROD, 0) =
1
(πℏ)2e−(αH(ROH−r′
OH)2+αD(ROD−r′
OD)2)
(4.4.2)
47 of 65
==PAGE:52==
4.4
Population and Phase Analysis
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 27: Flux analyses of the manual propagations (equation 1.1.9, described at the
beginning of section 4.4.1) that fail to replicate the correct ones.
The superposition
yielding a) is built using the populations and phases in 23e and 23f, while that in c) by
those in 23g and 23h. The flux in a) should be compared with 24c, while that in c) with
24d. b) and d) are the correlation between the superpositions and the true wavepackets.
with αH = 67.28Å
−2, αD = 82.79Å
−2.
The initial bond lengths have both been set
to r′
OH = 1.1Å, r′
OD = 1.1Å, in order to prepare a slightly more biased state towards
the OH + D channel. Propagating this wavefunction yields a BR of 1.6, and Fourier
transforming it yields a new set of eigenstates which differ from the FC ones, due to the
degeneracy degree of freedom, influenced by the chosen initial state. The first state of
this set is given in figure 20d.
The time-dependent coefficients of the new set have been determined in the usual way,
and a manual propagation has been performed. The branching ratio resulting from the
superposition turns out to be in better agreement with the correct one compared to the
FC states superposition, whereas the early time-steps of the propagations are not being
correctly replicated, as can be seen from the plot of the population distribution in 28a,
which shows little to no overlap between the states and the wavepacket in the first few
femtoseconds. To obtain a reasonable picture throughout the whole propagation, the
Franck-Condon eigenstates have been used in the early time-step before interaction with
the pulse, and then slowly replaced by the new set as the coupling takes place, as seen
in figure 28b. This operation turns out to give a better approximation of the wavepacket
at later times, as seen from the correlation function with the superposition state in 28d,
48 of 65
==PAGE:53==
4.4
Population and Phase Analysis
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 28: a) Populations of the new set’s states, and the ones of the mixed set b).
c) Resulting flux analysis from the superposition displayed in b), and corresponding
correlation function d).
and can also better replicate the true flux (in figure 28c), albeit not in an exact fashion,
since the second set of eigenstates that has been chosen is not the correct one, but just an
informed guess based on the final branching ratio of the perturbed wavepacket. It is also
interesting to note that, while the states are clearly different, the population distribution
as a function of energy is still more or less in the same region as that given by the FC set,
and the switch between the two doesn’t cause abrupt jumps or too many discontinuities.
The phase patterns are in even greater accord, to the point that the shift between the
two sets is not even noticeable, and there is no need to report a new plot of it. This falls
in line with the earlier observation that the generated phases seem to not be particularly
tied to the state’s populations, nor their energy, and, at this point, not even their spatial
distributions, it seems to be simply imparted as a linear pattern throughout the states.
The takeaway from this encountered need of replacing eigenstates on the fly, seem to be
that the FC eigenstates can act as a complete basis (insofar as a discrete approximation
can go) only for the expansion of the FC wavepacket, and none others. The further away
a propagation is from the FC one, the worse the result will be when trying to expand it
on the FC eigenstates. The same can then be said for any specific initial wavepacket; as
we mentioned earlier, a one to one correspondence exists between the propagated initial
state and the generated eigenstates. The only set of eigenstates which forms a complete
basis for a propagation, is the one generated from that propagation itself (sections 7.2.2
49 of 65
==PAGE:54==
4.5
Modelling Degeneracy in the Two-Dimensional Harmonic Oscillator
and 17.3.2 in [8]).
Therefore, no single set of states can be generated from which a
perturbed wavepacket may be described. The optimal set of eigenstates changes in time
as the perturbation of the laser pulse is in action, starting as the FC one and ending up
as a different final set.
The underlying physical phenomenon that explains this need to transitions between
different computed sets to represent the wavepacket expansion, seems to lie in the possi-
bility that the laser pulse, other than modify the coefficients across the energy spectrum,
can also interact with those constituting the degenerate linear combinations of equation
4.3.2. By allowing for this possibility, which doesn’t seem to violate any rule of exter-
nal fields interaction, it becomes clear how the eigenstate set is modified throughout the
interaction, and can end up looking extremely different by the end of it. At the same
time, the need for an explanation of how a combination of FC states may lead to a BR
lower than 2, goes away, as the states have been effectively turned into different ones
(once again, we can note the differences between the two degenerate states in figure 20d
and 20a). The shortcoming of the completeness of the basis seems to be a strictly com-
putational one, as the degenerate manifold problem only arises in methods which rely
on the state’s energy to be determined, such as the Fourier Transform method we’ve
employed, and the ITP one as well, were it ever to converge. If access to the individual
states ψn
E within the degenerate manifold was possible, the problem of population and
phase determination would simply become two-dimensional instead, on the energy and
degeneracy axes, and the full superposition could be constructed. In order to expound on
the relationship between the initial state of the propagation and the generated eigenstates
in the FT method, we turn to considering a simple system with reduced degeneracy, the
two-dimensional harmonic oscillator.
4.5
Modelling Degeneracy in the Two-Dimensional Harmonic
Oscillator
In this section, the HOD molecule is set a side in favour of a two-dimensional har-
monic oscillator model system, which allows us to perform degeneracy analysis due to
its accessible analytical solutions. In order to maintain the degeneracy of the system,
while making it as similar to the original one as possible, the model has been chosen to
be that of a H2O molecule, with a harmonic frequency of ω = 3600 cm−1. This system is
adopted in order to draw a conclusive relationship between the FT eigenstates and the
initial state of the propagation, as well as to further the results of the last section on the
interaction between the laser pulses and the degenerate manifold.
The analytical solutions of the uncoupled two-dimensional harmonic oscillator, are
given by a simple product of one-dimensional solutions [32]
ψn1,n2(R1, R2) =
s
α1α2
π(2n1n1!)(2n2n2!)Hn1(α1)Hn2(α2)e−α2
1R2
1/2e−α2
2R2
2/2
(4.5.1)
where αi =
q
mωi/ℏand the Hni(αi) functions are Hermite polynomials [32]. The energy
is given as the sum of the energies of each individual oscillator, which is reduced to a
single term when the two oscillators are identical and thus share the same frequency
En1,n2 = ℏω1(n1 + 1
2) + ℏω2(n2 + 1
2) = ℏω(n1 + n2 + 1
2)
(4.5.2)
50 of 65
==PAGE:55==
4.5
Modelling Degeneracy in the Two-Dimensional Harmonic Oscillator
A degeneracy arises at each energy level, given by the different possible combinations of
the quantum numbers n1+n2 = N which yield the same total number; since the values of
the quantum numbers n1, n2 can only take on discrete values from {0; +∞}, the number
of degenerate states is given by g = N +1. Thus, for example, at N = 0, the only possible
available state is ψ0,0, while at N = 1, two degenerate states are found, ψ1,0, ψ0,1. At
N = 2 we instead have ψ0,2, ψ2,0, ψ1,1, and so on.
4.5.1
Initial States and FT Eigenstates
We now turn to constructing an initial state given by a superposition of eigenstates,
to be later Fourier transformed in order to understand the inner workings of the method
when degeneracy is at play. The spatial form of the eigenstate themselves is not really
needed, only their energy is, as the Fourier transform only deals with the time variable.
We can thus start at a simple picture in which the initial wavepacket is given by a linear
combination of the ground state and one of the two states in the first excited energy level
Ψ(R, 0) =
q
1
2 (ψ0,0 + ψ1,0)
(4.5.3)
The Fourier transform of the propagated wavepacket at the energy of the ground state
yields
Z ∞
−∞Ψ(R, t)e
i
ℏE0,0t dt =
Z ∞
−∞
q
1
2

ψ0,0e−i
ℏE0,0t + ψ1,0e−i
ℏE1,0t
e
i
ℏE0,0tdt
=
q
1
2
Z ∞
−∞ψ0,0e−i
ℏ(E0,0−E0,0)tdt +
q
1
2
Z ∞
−∞ψ1,0e−i
ℏ(E1,0−E0,0)tdt
= 2πℏ
√
2 ψ0,0δ(E0,0 −E0,0) + 2πℏ
√
2 ψ1,0δ(E1,0 −E0,0)
= 2πℏ
√
2 ψ0,0
(4.5.4)
where we can recognize
q
1/2 as the coefficient of ψ0,0 in the initial linear combination, in
agreement with the result of equation (1.2.5). It’s superfluous to demonstrate that, the
other eigenstate, is computed by switching the FT energy to be E1,0 instead. This model
also validates the discussion in section 4.3.2 about the dark states of the FC wavepacket:
when the propagated wavepacket doesn’t contain an eigenstate in its initial superposition,
that state cannot be generated by the FT method, as it is not accessible. In much the
same way, no other eigenstates than the two present in the initial definition of equation
(4.5.3) can be generated through the current wavepacket.
Let’s now switch to a different linear combination for the description of the initial
state, one which contains both degenerate states
Ψ(R, 0) =
q
1
2

ψ0,0 +
q
1
2(ψ1,0 + ψ0,1)

(4.5.5)
The second eigenstate in the wavepacket is thus given by a linear combination of the two
degenerate states, with equal weights. The result of transforming at the energy E0,0 is
unchanged, so we concentrate on the result of transforming at E1 = E1,0 = E0,1 instead,
51 of 65
==PAGE:56==
4.5
Modelling Degeneracy in the Two-Dimensional Harmonic Oscillator
given by
Z ∞
−∞Ψ(R, t)e
i
ℏE1t dt =
q
1
2
Z ∞
−∞ψ0,0e−i
ℏ(E0,0−E1)t +
q
1
4
Z ∞
−∞ψ1,0e−i
ℏ(E1,0−E1)t
+
q
1
4
Z ∞
−∞ψ0,1e−i
ℏ(E0,1−E1)tdt
= 2πℏ
√
2

ψ0,0δ(E0,0 −E1) +
q
1
2(ψ1,0δ(E1,0 −E1) + ψ0,1δ(E0,1 −E1))

= 2πℏ
q
1
2(
q
1
2ψ1,0 +
q
1
2ψ0,1)
(4.5.6)
In this case, the eigenstate generated at the energy E1, is the exact linear combination
constituting the second term of the initial wavepacket expansion. This result defines the
direct correlation between the initial representation of a wavepacket and the eigenstates
generated by Fourier transforming its propagation, and it can be easily extrapolated to
higher degeneracies situations, such as the one we are dealing with in the case of the
continuum eigenstates of HOD.
It’s thus clear how, if a set of eigenstate is obtained from an initial state given, for
example, in equation (4.5.3), a propagation of the state in equation (4.5.5) will not be
well replicated through a superposition of the chosen states, in this specific case due to
the absence of the ψ0,1 eigenstate from the initial linear combination. This result can be
easily extrapolated to higher degeneracy states, such as the ones encountered in section
4.4.2.
4.5.2
Population Transfer in the Degenerate Manifold
Lastly, we turn to an exploration of the effects that the laser pulses have on the
population of the harmonic oscillator states, with a focus on the degeneracy aspects.
We have chosen to utilise the same pulse frequency that was used for the HOD system,
ω = 800 nm, and as we now find ourselves in a bound state, the arrival time of the pulse is
no longer an interesting parameter. Instead, we have focused on the pulse duration and its
peak amplitude, and the effect their variation has on the population transfer between the
states. In order to couple these pulses to the system, a polarizability surface, similar to
the one employed for the HOD molecule (discussed in section 3.3), has been constructed,
this time as an analytical function extending on a 0 −3 Å grid. The function has been
chosen to be a two-dimensional Gaussian, with bias along the symmetric stretch of the
two coordinates,
α = e−[(R1−req/2)2+(R2−req/2)2−R1R2]/2σ
(4.5.7)
and the parameters have been chosen such that the surface is as similar as possible to the
computed HOD one, in the region starting at 0.6 Å, yielding req = 0.6 Å and σ = 0.2 Å
2.
The initial state of these propagations has been chosen to be one of the two degenerate
states in the first excited state, Ψ(R1, R2, 0) = ψ1,0. This choice has been made with
the goal of trying to determine whether a pulse can transfer population between two
degenerate states, which is the tentative conclusion drawn in the last two sections, after
examination of the results. In order to contain the population transfer to the lower energy
states, a small amplitude pulse has been used at first, with E0 = 0.01 [a.u.], and different
pulse durations have been employed. Of these, the most significant are shown in figure
29, which shows the population transfers induced by pulses with σ = 5 fs (29a) and
σ = 9 fs (29b. In both cases, as the pulse starts to interact with the system, multiple
52 of 65
==PAGE:57==
4.5
Modelling Degeneracy in the Two-Dimensional Harmonic Oscillator
(a)
(b)
Figure 29: a), b) Population transfers within the two-dimensional harmonic oscillator
system, induced by a laser pulse of E0 = 0.01 a.u. peak amplitude. The pulse durations
are specified in the respective plot titles. Higher energy states than those represented in
the legend are not populated (to an excellent approximation) by these pulses.
states are populated, such as ψ0,0, ψ0,1, ψ1,1, ψ2,0 and ψ2,1. It’s interesting to note that,
had ψ0,1 been chosen to be the initial state, the ψ0,2 and ψ1,2 states would have been
populated instead of ψ2,0 and ψ2,1, as if the second quantum number would have been
the "preferential" degenerate avenue instead of the first.
After the pulse peaks in amplitude, we can observe, in both figures, how all states except
ψ0,1 lose the population they gained. In the (comparatively) short pulse case, it seems
like this amplitude is being transferred back to both the initial state, since its population
rises at the same time that the others decay, and into ψ0,1, which keeps increasing in
occupation all the way through.
The overall effect, following the complete decay of the laser pulse, is that of an elastic
population transfer: the amplitude lost by ψ1,0 is all gained by its degenerate counterpart,
ψ0,1. As showcased by figure 29b, as the pulse gets longer, the transferred population
(a)
(b)
Figure 30: a), b) Frequency distributions of two pulses with increasing duration.
A
gradual resolution towards a single δ-function can be observed.
53 of 65
==PAGE:58==
4.5
Modelling Degeneracy in the Two-Dimensional Harmonic Oscillator
(a)
(b)
Figure 31: a), b) Population transfer driven by two pulses with peak amplitude E0 = 0.02
a.u., with pulse durations given in the titles. A greater amount of energy transfer is found
when the amplitude is increased.
increases, and the amount that is initially located into different energy states decreases.
This may be understood as the sharpening of the energy distribution of a pulse as its
duration increases, exemplified in figure 30: ultrashort pulses carry a great number of
frequencies, which resolve into a single one at infinite duration.
Asymptotically, the
pulse thus becomes a continuous wave radiation that induces Rayleigh scattering into the
opposite degenerate state, without ever populating any state at a different energy.
A second set of pulses has also been explored, with doubled amplitude E0 = 0.02
a.u., in order to assess the effects that this change has on the states occupations. The
resulting population transfers are displayed in figure 31 for two significant pulse durations.
The most obvious difference that can be noticed compared to the earlier pulses, is that
the overall magnitude of the transfers is greatly increased, as one would expect, and
ψ1,0 ceases to be the most occupied state at the end of the interaction. In the shorter
pulse case of figure 31a, the states populated through inelastic scattering gain a much
higher amplitude than before, and most of them do not yield it all back to one of the
degenerate states at E = E1, unlike before. The mechanism is still active though, but
only yields amplitude towards the ψ0,1 state, as the value of the initial state’s occupation
plateaus around the time of peak pulse amplitude. At the end of the interaction, some
energy transfer has thus taken place, with many states having differing occupations, the
degenerate counterpart of the initial one having the highest by far.
When the pulse duration is increased to 7 fs, the elastic transfer is once again dominant to
an almost full extent. The amplitude gained by the other excited states (and the ground
state), is this time almost completely transferred to the ψ0,1 state, which basically replaces
the degenerate initial state at the end of the process in an energy conserving fashion.
Compared to the case of a weaker pulse, explored earlier, the mechanism that leads to
the overall elastic transfer is now clearly driven by the inelastic ones, and direct coupling
between the two degenerate states is actually a pretty minimal component of the total
effect.
These results clearly demonstrate the ability of the non-resonant pulses that we have
employed on the HOD system to manipulate the degenerate linear combination of states
at each eigenenergy.
As seen for some pulse parameters combinations, an eigenstate
54 of 65
==PAGE:59==
4.5
Modelling Degeneracy in the Two-Dimensional Harmonic Oscillator
at a specific energy can be turned into a completely different state, even orthogonal
to its initial distribution, whilst retaining its original energy.
This process has been
extremely simplified compared to the situation that we are faced with when dealing with
the enormous degree of degeneracy and amount of populated states that are characteristic
of the HOD system, but can nonetheless be of great importance as a proof of principle.
The initial aim of demonstrating transfer of population between degenerate states has
been achieved flawlessly, and is the key takeaway of this section.
55 of 65
==PAGE:60==
5
Conclusions
In this work, we set out to explore the potential of a new scheme for the coherent
control of the photodissociation reaction dynamics of the HOD molecule, and the type
of coupling that takes place between laser pulses and continuum eigenstates.
The scheme we introduced is based on the interaction of the system in its first excited
state with a non-resonant NIR ultrashort pulse coupling with the continuum vibrational
eigenstates making up the wavepacket, which is generated by an ultrashort UV excita-
tion to the its first electronic excited state. We have successfully generated a isotropic
polarizability surface of HOD in the ˜A state at the CCSD/d-aug-ccPVTZ level of theory,
and highlighted the importance of employing a highly diffused basis set, as well as taking
into account the frequency-dependent nature of this property when dealing with excited
state and high-frequency lasers. Not accounting for these two key points yields a much
reduced polarizability, which undercuts the possibilities of coherent control.
We have found that a good degree of control over the final branching ratio of the
dissociation reaction can be achieved with the proposed scheme, albeit not a perfect one;
other schemes have been proposed in the past which manage to fully guide the outcome
of the reaction into either product channel (OD + H and OH + D), by perturbing the
wavepacket’s distribution prior to electronic excitation. The major shortcoming of this
scheme has indeed been found to be the extremely short time frame on which the pulse
needs to be applied, due to the particularly high dissociation velocity. We are thus lead
to predict that systems composed of heavier dissociating atoms would display a much
better response to the proposed method, as well as a possibly higher polarizability for
the pulse to couple with.
The investigations of the populations and phases manipulation as a consequence of
coupling with an ultrashort laser pulse has lead to some interesting findings. First of,
we have shown how the phase patterns induced by the pulse do not affect at all the
final value of the reaction’s branching ratio. Their effect amounts to a confinement of
the wavepacket in the Franck-Condon region, due to the simple linear pattern that is
generated, which is known to induce wavepacket time shifts. On the other hand, the
shift of population distribution experienced by the wavepacket has also been found to be
insufficient to explain the considerable lowering of the branching ratios brought about by
some pulses.
By observing the incapability of the standard Franck-Condon eigenstates to replicate
the perturbed wavepackets, we have deduced that the eigenstates themselves are mod-
ified by the interaction with the external fields. This additional degree of freedom can
be ascribed to the high degeneracy of all continuum eigenstates in the interested energy
range. In order to confirm this finding, we have explored the effect that these same pulses
have on a two-dimensional harmonic oscillator model of H2O, equipped with a polariz-
ability surface almost identical to the computed one. Through the available analytical
solutions of all states, we have managed to show complete transfer of population between
degenerate states in this model system. We can thus feel highly confident in assigning
the change of branching ratio imparted by the proposed laser pulses to their ability to
interfere in the degenerate manifold of continuum eigenstates.
56 of 65
==PAGE:61==
Appendix A
Code
This appendix is devoted to some of the most crucial code used throughout the thesis
work. Only original or heavily modified code is reported in this section.
The code for the adapted Split Operator loop, which now allows for time-dependent
Hamiltonians and contains the flux analysis, is as follows
1 step = 1;
2
3 for s = 2:n_outSteps+1
4
5
% Time-Dependent Potential
6
E = E0.*exp(-(t(1,step)-tau).^2/(2*sigma^2)).*cos(omega.*(t(1,step)-tau));
7
V(1:CAP1-1,1:CAP2-1) = B1(1:CAP1-1,1:CAP2-1) - 0.5*Pol(1:CAP1-1,1:CAP2-1).*E.^2;
8
V(CAP1:end,:) = B1(CAP1:end,:) - 1i * 0.2216 .* (R1(CAP1:end,:)-R1(CAP1,CAP1)).^4
... - 0.5*Pol(CAP1:end,:).*E.^2;
9
V(:,CAP2:end) = B1(:,CAP2:end) - 1i * 0.40385 .* (R2(:,CAP2:end)-R2(CAP2,CAP2)).^4
... - 0.5*Pol(:,CAP2:end).*E.^2;
10
expV_2
= exp(- 0.5i * V * dt);
11
expV
= expV_2.^2;
12
13
% First potential part
14
psi_t(:,:,s) = expV_2 .* psi_t(:,:,s-1);
15
16
for i=1:n_silentSteps-1
17
psi_t(:,:,s) = fftn(psi_t(:,:,s));
18
psi_t(:,:,s) = expT .* psi_t(:,:,s);
19
psi_t(:,:,s) = ifftn(psi_t(:,:,s));
20
psi_t(:,:,s) = expV_2 .* psi_t(:,:,s);
21
22
% Fluxline determination
23
psi_p_1 = ifftn(P1.*fftn(psi_t(:,:,s)));
24
psi_p_2 = ifftn(P2.*fftn(psi_t(:,:,s)));
25
26
fluxline_OD_H = imag(conj(psi_t(:,:,s)).*1i.*psi_p_1)./m(1) ...
27
+ cos(theta).*imag(conj(psi_t(:,:,s)).*1i.*psi_p_2)./(m_O*SI.m_u/SI.m_e);
28
fluxline_OH_D = imag(conj(psi_t(:,:,s)).*1i.*psi_p_2)./m(2) ...
29
+ cos(theta).*imag(conj(psi_t(:,:,s)).*1i.*psi_p_1)./(m_O*SI.m_u/SI.m_e);
30
31
flux_OD_H(1,step) = trapz(r2,fluxline_OD_H(line1,:));
32
flux_OH_D(1,step) = trapz(r1,fluxline_OH_D(:,line2));
33
34
step = step+1;
35
36
% Time-Dependent Potential
37
.
38
.
39
.
% Redetermine Potential and Propagators at new time-step
40
.
41
.
42
43
psi_t(:,:,s) = expV_2 .* psi_t(:,:,s);
44
end
45
46
% Kinetic part
47
psi_t(:,:,s) = fftn(psi_t(:,:,s));
48
psi_t(:,:,s) = expT .* psi_t(:,:,s);
57 of 65
==PAGE:62==
49
psi_t(:,:,s) = ifftn(psi_t(:,:,s));
50
51
% Second potential part
52
psi_t(:,:,s) = expV_2 .* psi_t(:,:,s);
53
54
% Fluxline determination
55
.
56
.
57
.
% Redetermine fluxlines as earlier
58
.
59
.
60
61
step = step+1;
62
63
disp( [’Step ’, num2str((s-1)*n_silentSteps), ...
64
’ out of ’, num2str(n_steps), ...
65
’ completed’ ] );
66 end
The flux analysis has been inserted into the propagation loop in order to obtain the flux
at every time-step, instead of every print-step, and achieve greater accuracy. The two
section represented by dots are simple reapplications of earlier code, as stated in the
comments.
Next, the code for the imaginary time propagation method, used to obtain eigenstates
of the ground state, is given here as a modified version of the Split Operator loop
1 %% Operators
2
3 % *** Potential and kinetic energy
4 V = X1;
5 T = 0.5 * (P1.^2/m(1) + P2.^2/m(2)) + P1.*P2.*cos(theta)./(m_O*SI.m_u/SI.m_e);
6
7 % Imaginary Time Propagator
8 expV_2
= exp(- 0.5 * V * dt);
9 expV
= expV_2.^2;
10 expT
= exp(- 1 * T * dt);
11
12 %% Vibrational States set up
13 psi_v = zeros(N(1),N(2),2);
14 coeff_v = zeros(1,2);
15 E = zeros(1,1);
16 filters = zeros(N(1),N(2),2);
17
18 %% ITP
19
20 for k = 1:states
21
22
% Wavepacket at other times
23
psi_t = psi_0 - sum(filters,3); % Resetting the ground state to get next excited
state;
24
25
%% Imaginary Time Propagation
26
27
time = 1;
28
29
cond1 = 1;
30
cond2 = 1;
58 of 65
==PAGE:63==
31
32
while cond1 > 1E-8 || cond2 > 1E-5
33
34
H_psi = ifftn(T.*fftn(psi_t)) + V.*psi_t;
35
E_1 = trapz(r1,trapz(r2,conj(psi_t).*H_psi,2),1);
% Energy
36
37
auto(k,time) = trapz(r1,trapz(r2,psi_t.*conj(psi_0),2),1); % Autocorrelation
38
if time == 1
39
cond2 = 1;
40
else
41
cond2 = auto(k,time-1)-auto(k,time);
42
end
43
time = time+1;
44
45
% SOM propagator loop
46
.
47
.
48
.
% Equal to earlier loop, no flux determination
49
.
50
.
51
52
% Filtering
53
for e = 1:length(coeff_v)
54
coeff_v(1,e) = trapz(r1,trapz(r2,conj(psi_v(:,:,e)).*psi_t,2),1);
55
filters(:,:,e) = coeff_v(1,e).*psi_v(:,:,e);
56
end
57
psi_t = psi_t - sum(filters,3);
58
59
% Renormalization
60
dens_t = psi_t.*conj(psi_t);
61
N_t = sqrt(trapz(r1, ...
62
trapz(r2,dens_t,2), ...
63
1)
);
64
psi_t = psi_t./N_t;
65
66
H_psi = ifftn(T.*fftn(psi_t)) + V.*psi_t;
67
E = trapz(r1,trapz(r2,conj(psi_t).*H_psi,2),1);
68
69
cond1 = E_1 - E;
70
71
disp( [’Step ’,num2str(time),’, E ’,num2str(cond1)] );
72
end
73
74
%% State determination
75
76
% Definition of state and overlap with wavepacket
77
psi_v(:,:,k+1) = psi_t;
78
coeff_v(1,k+1) = trapz(r1,trapz(r2,conj(psi_v(:,:,k+1)).*psi_0,2),1);
79
filters(:,:,k+1) = coeff_v(1,k+1).*psi_v(:,:,k+1);
80 end
Once again, the dotted section is omitted as it’s given by simple adoption of the standard
Split Operator Method loop, found in the code above.
The determination of eigenstates through the Fourier method of section 4.3 is another
crucial section of the code, and consists of a written out Fourier transform to the energy
domain across the desired discretized energy range,
59 of 65
==PAGE:64==
1 % Eigenstates
2
3 t = linspace(0,tfinal,n_outSteps+1);
4 t = t.*1E-15/SI.ta;
% Time in atomic units
5
6 energy = linspace(0.25,0.36,100);
% Selected energies
7
8 eig = zeros(N(1),N(2),length(energy));
% 3D Matrix initialization
9
10 for k = 1:length(energy)
11
complexp = exp(1i.*energy(k).*t);
% Complex exponential
12
fourier = psi_t .* reshape(complexp,1,1,[]);
% Product with wavepacket
13
eig(:,:,k) = trapz(2*real(fourier),3);
% Integration over time
14
dens = trapz(r1,trapz(r2,abs(eig(:,:,k)).^2,2),1);
15
eig(:,:,k) = eig(:,:,k)/sqrt(dens);
% Normalization
16
H_psi = ifftn(T.*fftn(eig(:,:,k))) + V.*eig(:,:,k);
17
E = trapz(r1,trapz(r2,conj(eig(:,:,k)).*H_psi,2),1); % Energy determination
18 end
19
20 save(’Eigenstates’,’eig’,’-v7.3’);
Autocorrelation functions are computed over the whole propagation time, but only
every print-step, as a higher resolution turns out to not be necessary to obtain accurate
results. The code is composed of a simple loop through all the print-steps, at which the
overlap with the initial wavepacket distribution is evaluated. The absorption spectrum
code is given by Fourier transforming the autocorrelation function,
1 %% Autocorrelation
2
3 auto = zeros(1,n_outSteps+1);
% Matrix initialization
4
5 for time = 1:n_outSteps+1
% Loop over print-steps
6
auto(1,time) = trapz(r1, trapz(r2,conj(psi_0).*psi_t(:,:,time),2), 1);
7 end
8
9 %% Absorption Spectrum
10
11 spectrum = zeros(1,n_outSteps+1);
% Matrix initialization
12 freq = linspace(0.24,0.38,n_outSteps+1);
% Range of frequencies
13
14 t = linspace(0,tfinal,n_outSteps+1);
15 t = t.*1E-15/SI.ta;
16
17 for f = 1:n_outSteps
% Loop over frequencies
18
complexp = exp(1i.*freq(f).*t);
% Complex exponential
19
spectrum(1,f) = trapz(2*real(auto.*complexp))/(2*pi);
% Integration over time
20 end
The population and phase analyses performed according to equations (4.2.3) and
(4.4.1), over all print-steps or in a restricted time frame, are determined as follows
1 %% Wavepacket Composition
2
3 % Matrices set-up
4
5 ovlp = zeros(finstep,length(B1Eigenstates(1,1,:)));
60 of 65
==PAGE:65==
6 phase = zeros(size(ovlp));
7 magn = zeros(size(phase));
8 c = zeros(size(ovlp));
9
10 time = linspace(0,tfinal,n_outSteps+1);
11 time = time.*1E-15/SI.ta;
12 energies = linspace(0.25,0.36,100);
% Energy of the eigenstates
13
14 for t = 1:finalstep
% Loop over desired steps
15
for i = 1:length(energies)
16
product = conj(B1Eigenstates(:,:,i)).*psi_t(:,:,t);
17
ovlp(t,i) = trapz(r1,trapz(r2,product,2),1);
18
c(t,i) = ovlp(t,i)/exp(-1i*energies(i)*time(t));
% Polar form recast
19
[phase(t,i), magn(t,i)] = cart2pol(real(c(t,i)), imag(c(t,i)));
20
end
21
22
disp(num2str(t))
23
24
% Section for the gradual replacement of the eigenstate set, optional
25
if mod(t,2) == 0 && t < 51
26
B1Eigenstates = cat(3,B1_new(:,:,1:t/2),B1_old(:,:,t/2+1:end));
27
end
28 end
29
30 pop = conj(ovlp).*ovlp;
% Population determination
As mentioned in the comment, the section for the gradual replacement of the old set with
the new one, introduced to account for the interaction of the pulse with the degenerate
manifold, is optional. The analysis of the FC propagation, for example, does not need it.
From this code, follows the one to obtain the ’manual’ propagation, performed through
a discretized approximation of equation (1.1.9), and using the coefficients determined in
the previous code section
1 %% Manual Propagation
2
3 time = linspace(0,tfinal,n_outSteps+1);
4 time = time(1:finstep)*1E-15/SI.ta;
5 energies = linspace(0.25,0.36,100);
6
7 % Matrices initialization
8
9 psi_t_SP = zeros(N(1),N(2),n_outSteps+1);
10 flux_OD_H = zeros(1,finstep);
11 flux_OH_D = zeros(1,finstep);
12 B1Eigenstates = B1_old;
% Eigenstates reset
13
14 for t = 1:finstep
% Loop over desired steps
15
for i = 1:length(B1Eigenstates(1,1,:))
% Loop over states
16
psi_t_SP(:,:,t) = psi_t_SP(:,:,t) + c(t,i).*B1Eigenstates(:,:,i).*exp(-1i*
energies(i)*time(t));
17
end
18
19
% Fluxline determination
20
21
psi_p_1 = ifftn(P1.*fftn(psi_t_SP(:,:,t)));
22
psi_p_2 = ifftn(P2.*fftn(psi_t_SP(:,:,t)));
23
61 of 65
==PAGE:66==
24
fluxline_OD_H = imag(conj(psi_t_SP(:,:,t)).*1i.*psi_p_1)./m(1) ...
25
+ cos(theta).*imag(conj(psi_t_SP(:,:,t)).*1i.*psi_p_2)./(m_O*SI.
m_u/SI.m_e);
26
fluxline_OH_D = imag(conj(psi_t_SP(:,:,t)).*1i.*psi_p_2)./m(2) ...
27
+ cos(theta).*imag(conj(psi_t_SP(:,:,t)).*1i.*psi_p_1)./(m_O*SI.
m_u/SI.m_e);
28
29
flux_OD_H(1,t) = trapz(r2,fluxline_OD_H(line1,:));
30
flux_OH_D(1,t) = trapz(r1,fluxline_OH_D(:,line2));
31
32
disp(num2str(t))
33
34
% Section for the gradual replacement of the eigenstate set, optional
35
36
if mod(t,2) == 0 && t < 51
37
B1Eigenstates = cat(3,B1_new(:,:,1:t/2),B1_old(:,:,t/2+1:end));
38
end
39 end
Once again, the section for replacement of the eigenstates is optional, but it’s important
it always matches with the choice made in the coefficient analysis.
62 of 65
==PAGE:67==
References
References
[1] T. Baumert, “Wave packets get a kick,” Nature Physics, vol. 7, pp. 373–374, May
2011.
[2] H. Goto, H. Katsuki, H. Ibrahim, H. Chiba, and K. Ohmori, “Strong-laser-induced
quantum interference,” Nature Physics, vol. 7, pp. 383–385, May 2011.
[3] Y. Ohtsuki, H. Goto, H. Katsuki, and K. Ohmori, “Theoretical/numerical study on
strong-laser-induced interference in the b state of i2,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys.,
vol. 16, pp. 5689–5697, 2014.
[4] N. Engholm Henriksen and B. Amstrup, “Coherent control of hod photodissociation
dynamics in the first absorption band,” Chemical Physics Letters, vol. 213, no. 1,
pp. 65–70, 1993.
[5] B. Amstrup and N. E. Henriksen, “Control of HOD photodissociation dynamics via
bond-selective infrared multiphoton excitation and a femtosecond ultraviolet laser
pulse,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 97, pp. 8285–8295, 12 1992.
[6] A. K. Tiwari, K. B. Møller, and N. E. Henriksen, “Selective bond breakage within
the hod molecule using optimized femtosecond ultraviolet laser pulses,” Phys. Rev.
A, vol. 78, p. 065402, Dec 2008.
[7] K. Mishima and K. Yamashita, “Theoretical study on quantum control of photodis-
sociation and photodesorption dynamics by femtosecond chirped laser pulses,” The
Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 110, pp. 7756–7769, 04 1999.
[8] D. J. Tannor, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics: A Time-Dependent Perspective.
University Science Books,U.S., 2007.
[9] N. E. Henriksen and F. Y. Hansen, Theories of Molecular Reaction Dynamics. Oxford
University Press, 2019.
[10] F. Gatti, B. Lasorne, H.-D. Meyer, and A. Nauts, Applications of Quantum Dy-
namics in Chemistry, vol. 98 of Lecture Notes in Chemistry. Springer International
Publishing, 2017.
[11] F. Jensen, Introduction to computational chemistry. John wiley & sons, 2017.
[12] J. Olsen and P. Jørgensen, “Linear and nonlinear response functions for an exact
state and for an MCSCF state,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 82, pp. 3235–
3264, 04 1985.
[13] O. Christiansen, A. Halkier, H. Koch, P. Jørgensen, and T. Helgaker, “Integral-direct
coupled cluster calculations of frequency-dependent polarizabilities, transition prob-
abilities and excited-state properties,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 108,
pp. 2801–2816, 02 1998.
[14] U. V. Riss and H. Meyer, “Investigation on the reflection and transmission proper-
ties of complex absorbing potentials,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 105,
pp. 1409–1419, 07 1996.
63 of 65
==PAGE:68==
References
[15] A. Vibok and G. G. Balint-Kurti, “Parametrization of complex absorbing potentials
for time-dependent quantum dynamics,” The Journal of Physical Chemistry, vol. 96,
no. 22, pp. 8712–8719, 1992.
[16] O. L. Polyansky, R. I. Ovsyannikov, A. A. Kyuberis, L. Lodi, J. Tennyson, and
N. F. Zobov, “Calculation of rotation–vibration energy levels of the water molecule
with near-experimental accuracy based on an ab initio potential energy surface,”
The Journal of Physical Chemistry A, vol. 117, no. 39, pp. 9633–9643, 2013. PMID:
23517285.
[17] V. Engel, R. Schinke, and V. Staemmler, “Photodissociation dynamics of H2O and
D2O in the first absorption band: A complete ab-initio treatment,” The Journal of
Chemical Physics, vol. 88, pp. 129–148, 01 1988.
[18] V. Staemmler and A. Palma, “Cepa calculations of potential energy surfaces for open-
shell systems.: Iv. photodissociation of h2o in the a1b1 state,” Chemical Physics,
vol. 93, no. 1, pp. 63–69, 1985.
[19] R. van Harrevelt and M. C. van Hemert, “Photodissociation of water in the Ã band
revisited with new potential energy surfaces,” The Journal of Chemical Physics,
vol. 114, pp. 9453–9462, 06 2001.
[20] Dalton, a molecular electronic structure program, see http://daltonprogram.org.
[21] K. Aidas, C. Angeli, K. L. Bak, V. Bakken, R. Bast, L. Boman, O. Christiansen,
R. Cimiraglia, S. Coriani, P. Dahle, E. K. Dalskov, U. Ekström, T. Enevoldsen,
J. J. Eriksen, P. Ettenhuber, B. Fernández, L. Ferrighi, H. Fliegl, L. Frediani,
K. Hald, A. Halkier, C. Hättig, H. Heiberg, T. Helgaker, A. C. Hennum, H. Het-
tema, E. Hjertenæs, S. Høst, I.-M. Høyvik, M. F. Iozzi, B. Jansík, H. J. Aa. Jensen,
D. Jonsson, P. Jørgensen, J. Kauczor, S. Kirpekar, T. Kjærgaard, W. Klopper,
S. Knecht, R. Kobayashi, H. Koch, J. Kongsted, A. Krapp, K. Kristensen, A. Lig-
abue, O. B. Lutnæs, J. I. Melo, K. V. Mikkelsen, R. H. Myhre, C. Neiss, C. B.
Nielsen, P. Norman, J. Olsen, J. M. H. Olsen, A. Osted, M. J. Packer, F. Pawlowski,
T. B. Pedersen, P. F. Provasi, S. Reine, Z. Rinkevicius, T. A. Ruden, K. Ruud,
V. V. Rybkin, P. Sałek, C. C. M. Samson, A. S. de Merás, T. Saue, S. P. A. Sauer,
B. Schimmelpfennig, K. Sneskov, A. H. Steindal, K. O. Sylvester-Hvid, P. R. Taylor,
A. M. Teale, E. I. Tellgren, D. P. Tew, A. J. Thorvaldsen, L. Thøgersen, O. Vahtras,
M. A. Watson, D. J. D. Wilson, M. Ziolkowski, and H. Ågren, “The Dalton quantum
chemistry program system,” WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 269–284,
2014.
[22] C. Hättig and P. Jørgensen, “Derivation of coupled cluster excited states response
functions and multiphoton transition moments between two excited states as deriva-
tives of variational functionals,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 109, pp. 9219–
9236, 12 1998.
[23] C. Hättig, O. Christiansen, S. Coriani, and P. Jørgensen, “Static and frequency-
dependent polarizabilities of excited singlet states using coupled cluster response
theory,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 109, pp. 9237–9243, 12 1998.
64 of 65
==PAGE:69==
References
[24] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blon-
del, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Courna-
peau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in
Python,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[25] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning.
The MIT Press, 11 2005.
[26] G. Avila, “Ab initio dipole polarizability surfaces of water molecule: Static and
dynamic at 514.5nm,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 122, p. 144310, 04
2005.
[27] D. Dey and N. E. Henriksen, “Non-resonant vibrational excitation of HOD and
selective bond breaking,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 148, p. 234307, 06
2018.
[28] R. Kosloff and H. Tal-Ezer, “A direct relaxation method for calculating eigenfunc-
tions and eigenvalues of the schrödinger equation on a grid,” Chemical Physics Let-
ters, vol. 127, pp. 223–230, June 1986.
[29] J. Zhang, D. G. Imre, and J. H. Frederick, “Hod spectroscopy and photodissocia-
tion dynamics: selectivity in hydroxyl/hydroxyl-d bond breaking,” The Journal of
Physical Chemistry, vol. 93, no. 5, pp. 1840–1851, 1989.
[30] Z. Amitay, J. B. Ballard, H. U. Stauffer, and S. R. Leone, “Phase-tailoring molec-
ular wave packets to time shift their dynamics,” Chemical Physics, vol. 267, no. 1,
pp. 141–149, 2001.
[31] N. E. Henriksen, K. B. Møller, and V. Engel, “Isotope effects in the photofragmenta-
tion of symmetric molecules: The branching ratio of OD/OH in water,” The Journal
of Chemical Physics, vol. 122, p. 204320, 05 2005.
[32] D. J. Griffiths and D. F. Schroeter, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge
University Press, 3 ed., 2018.
65 of 65
