==PAGE:1==
Picture by: Tom Mckenzie
Assesment of a fixed link across Øresund,
’Europasporet’
Traffic modelling in GMM and Sampers
Master Thesis
Jeppe Paludan-M¨uller, S185048
Technical University of Denmark, DTU
Department of Management Engineering
June, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Europasporet
Assesment of a fixed link across Øresund, ’Europasporet’
Project type:
Master’s thesis
ECTS points:
30
Project period:
29.01.24 - 29.06.24
Author:
Jeppe Paludan-M¨uller
S185048
Education:
Transport & Logistics (MSc)
Place of Education:
Technical University of Denmark
Department:
Department of Management Engineering
Supervisors:
Stefan Eriksen Mabit,
Associate Professor, DTU Management Engineering
Henrik Sylvan,
Head of Center, DTU Management Engineering
Jeppe Paludan-M¨uller - S185048
Date
i
29/6-2024
==PAGE:3==
Europasporet
Preface
The presented thesis has been prepared over five months as a final project for the degree
MSc.Eng. Transport and Logistics at the Technical University of Denmark.
The project was suggested in a collaboration between the author and supervisors although
minor adjustments have been made during the project. The project is credited to 30 ECTS
points and completed from February 2024 to June 2024.
As a part of the project, the latest version of the Danish national transport model, ’GMM’ V.
3.0, the latest version of the Swedish national transport model, ’Sampers’ V. 3.4.6, and Ha-
con’s train planning software, ’TPS’ V. 4.11, has been used. Furthermore, the latest version of
the Excel sheet ’TERESA’ V. 6.0 has been used to carry out the socioeconomic analysis.
It is assumed that the reader has basic knowledge in the areas of railway timetabling and
infrastructure, traffic modelling, and socioeconomic.
I want to express my gratitude towards my supervisors from DTU, Stefan Eriksen Mabit and
Henrik Sylvan, who offered their guidance throughout the project.
Thanks to the team behind GMM from Vejdirektoratet for providing access to the model and
guidance in model setup.
Thanks to Trafikstyrelsen for providing access to TPS and valuable guidance in timetable
planning and the usage of GMM.
Thanks to Trafikverket for providing access to and guidance in Sampers as well as timetable
planning in Sweden.
Lastly, thanks to all other parts involved, including colleagues and friends, who provided
feedback during the project.
ii
==PAGE:4==
Europasporet
Abstract
Today, The Øresund Bridge is a vital link for traffic between the European continent and Scan-
dinavia and traffic in the Øresund region. With an increasing focus on network capacity and
redundancy, a new fixed link across Øresund has therefore been suggested. Lately, an analysis
of a fixed link between Helsingør and Helsingborg as well as a metro between Copenhagen
and Malm¨o has been conducted. A third option of a fixed link between Copenhagen and Land-
skrona, called Europasporet/Europavejen has additionally been suggested as an alternative to
the above-mentioned.
The purpose of this thesis is to asses two scenarios of Europasporet/Europavejen with the
main focus on passenger transport:
• Scenario 1 with a railway junction at Copenhagen central and a drilled tunnel under-
neath Copenhagen followed by a 22.5 km submerged tunnel across Øresund for both
road and rail traffic
• Scenario 2 with a railway junction at Østerport and a tunnel underneath Nordhavn fol-
lowed by a 19.5 km submerged tunnel for both road and rail traffic.
A suggestion for the rail service in the Øresund region is presented for both scenarios evalu-
ating how these impact the capacity utilisation in the network.
To evaluate the effects of a new fixed link both the Danish national transport model, GMM,
and the Swedish national transport model, Sampers, were used alongside a comparison of
the two models. The scenarios will further be evaluated from a socio-economic perspective
as well as the potential impact from a regional and national perspective. As a reference, a
base scenario for the year 2040 is used with input from reports from the Danish respectively
Swedish transport authorities.
The capacity utilisation is evaluated using Trafikverkets method of estimating capacity con-
sumption. This method is chosen due to its simplicity when predicting the capacity utilisation
of future traffic. In both scenarios, a new connection provides the possibility to run additional
trains across Øresund. A capacity relief is in general not predicted on adjacent lines due to
the higher number of trains.
Both scenarios show an increase in the number of trips across Øresund, with the greatest
effects naturally predicted along the west coast of Sk˚ane achieving significant travel time
reductions to/from Zealand.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Europasporet
Both GMM and Sampers produce reasonable results on trips conducted by public transport
with an increase of 18%-26% in rail passengers across Øresund.
A significant difference in the predictions of car trips across Øresund is observed between
the two models, GMM predicting approximately 4.5% increase, Sampers approximately 30%
increase. One explanation is, that Sampers shows a much higher sensitivity to travel time
changes and a lower substitution between public transport and road transport compared to
GMM. Additionally, Sampers predicts all trips based on Swedish estimations of travel be-
haviour and economic prerequisites while a sub-model for cross-border trips is implemented
in GMM. For those reasons, it is generally recommended, that GMM is used as ’main model’
for future analysis.
From a Danish socio-economic perspective, both scenarios yield a negative net present value
(NPV) which is mainly due to a high construction cost. Scenario 2 presents the highest NPV
and is from a user perspective the most attractive providing the greatest user benefits.
From the Socio-economic sensitivity analysis, it has been found that with a higher input of
traffic growth or value of time (VoT) it yields the highest NPV, however still negative.
Overall the analysis shows, that Europasporet/Europavejen provides significant travel time
benefits for the affected region and particularly the areas around Helsingborg and Landskrona
will experience traffic growth. The link will provide a boost in rail capacity across Øresund
but a higher capacity consumption must be expected on some adjacent lines. Due to high con-
struction costs none of the two assessed scenarios are however socio-economic viable.
Although the scenarios are not economically viable, there may be other political reasons for
investing in a new fixed link across Øresund. This could be to improve the accessibility in
the affected areas, provide a stronger integration across the Øresund region and the European
continent, and provide a transport network less vulnerable to disturbances or closures of the
existing connections.
It is recommended that a further investigation of Europasporet is undertaken. This should
include a collaboration between Danish and Swedish authorities where it is important to agree
on general prerequisites, expectations of development in the Øresund region and calculation
methods. A further assessment of the objectives for the future of Copenhagen Central is
relevant to better highlight the impacts of Europasporet. Finally, it is recommended that the
project is viewed from a broader perspective and as a part of an expansion of the European
transport network.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface
ii
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
2
2
Development in the Øresund region
3
2.1
Traffic development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Regional population development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Infrastructure
11
3.1
Road infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.1.1
Planned expansions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Rail infrastructure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.1
Planned expansions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2.2
Rolling Stock . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.2.3
Traffic patterns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Rail Capacity
20
4.1
Capacity consumption in the rail network
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.2
Comparison of UIC-406 and Trafikverkets capacity calculation . . . . . . . .
23
5
Traffic modelling
25
5.1
Model prerequisites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.1.1
Modelling flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Major differences between GMM and Sampers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.2.1
Model elasticities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.3
Calibration of Sampers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6
Traffic in 2040
35
6.1
Public transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.2
Road transport . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
7
Europasporet scenarios
41
7.1
Infrastructure and travel times
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
7.1.1
Landskrona rail junction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
v
==PAGE:7==
Europasporet
Contents
7.1.2
Copenhagen Central rail junction (Scn 1)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
7.1.3
Østerport rail junction (scn 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.1.4
Travel/Run time calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.2
Traffic scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
7.2.1
Effects on capacity consumption . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
8
Traffic Modelling Results
57
8.1
Rail traffic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
8.2
Road traffic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
9
Socio-economic assessment
73
9.1
General assumptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
9.2
Construction cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
9.3
Maintenance and operation costs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
9.4
User effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
9.5
Toll payment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
9.6
Other effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
9.7
Cost benefit analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
9.8
CBA in TERESA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
9.8.1
Sensitivity analysis TERESA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
10 Other economic and strategic impacts
90
10.1 Accessibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
10.2 Redundancy in the network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
10.3 Benefits rail freight . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
10.4 EU-Subsidy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
11 Discussion
98
11.1 Transport policy objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
98
11.2 Capacity utilisation of The Øresund bridge and Europasporet . . . . . . . . . 100
11.3 Alternative alignments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101
11.4 Ferry operation Helsingør-Helsingborg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 103
11.5 GMM or Sampers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
11.6 Proposals for further analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
11.7 Final recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
12 Conclusion
109
vi
==PAGE:8==
Europasporet
Contents
Reference list
111
A Appendix - Learning objectives
117
B
Appendix - Rail traffic
118
B.1
Changes to the expected traffic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 118
B.2
Traffic patterns
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
B.3
Scheduled rail service across Øresund
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
C Appendix - Basis timetable Øresundsbanen
124
D Appendix - Trafikverkets method of capacity utilisation
126
E
Appendix - Sampers barrier constants
127
F
Appendix - Alignment
128
G Appendix - Link filters
136
H Appendix - Link loads
141
I
Appendix - Socio-economic
149
J
Appendix - Accessibility
152
K Appendix - List of abbreviations
156
Page 1 of 156
==PAGE:9==
Europasporet
1
Introduction
The objective of this master thesis is to investigate what influence the implementation of a
new fixed rail and road connection across the Øresund strait between Copenhagen and Land-
skrona will have on mobility in the Øresund region. At present the only fixed connection
between the two metropolitan areas of Copenhagen and Malm¨o is the Øresund Bridge. With
an increasing focus on international rail transport and the opening of the Fehmarn connection
in 2029, it is questioned if a new fixed link between Zealand and Sk˚ane is needed to cope
with future travel demand. Potential advantages and disadvantages of a connection between
Copenhagen and Landskrona, called ”Europasporet” or ”Europavejen”, will be assessed, with
the primary focus on passenger transport and railway traffic. Changes in travel demand and
mode choice will be assessed and compared across the Danish and Swedish traffic models and
similar infrastructure projects. Finally, the project will be evaluated from a socio-economic
perspective.
Chapter 2 to 3 introduces the current development in the Øresund region. Chapter 4 presents
the concept of rail capacity and the expected capacity levels by 2040. Chapter 5 presents
the two traffic models and chapter 6 presents the predicted traffic level by 2040. Chapter 7
presents the evaluated scenario followed by Chapter 8 to 11 presenting and evaluating the
results and other impacts.
Research questions:
• What opportunities does a fixed rail (and road) link between Copenhagen and Land-
skrona provide concerning future traffic demand and infrastructure challenges?
• How can two national transport models be used to predict the impact of an international
infrastructure project?
• What is the effect of the proposed infrastructure project on travel demand and mobility
across the Øresund region?
• What are the advantages and disadvantages of the infrastructure project compared to
other proposals?
Page 2 of 156
==PAGE:10==
Europasporet
2
Development in the Øresund region
Since the opening of the Øresund Bridge in 2000, a steady increase in traffic and a strong
interregional development have continued. The traffic across Øresund has increased from
around 65,000 travellers per day in 2000 to around 85,000 travellers per day in 2022.
The growth has primarily been driven by the Øresund Bridge, handling 82% of the car traffic
and 79% of the trips by public transport across Øresund. For heavy traffic, the distribution
is slightly different, with the Øresund Bridge carrying 60% of the traffic, while the remain-
ing 40% uses the ferries between Helsingør-Helsingborg (’HH ferries’) [DST 2024a][ ¨Orestat
2024]. Furthermore, the traffic composition differs between the two connections. The Øre-
sund Bridge sees more commuter traffic, while the HH ferries experience more leisure and
long-distance travel. The development in traffic can be seen together with a strong regional
development in the same period with a 14% increase in the population in the Øresund re-
gion. Compared to the rest of Denmark and Sweden an increase of 7% respectively 11% was
observed [DST 2024a][SCB 2024].
2.1
Traffic development
Figure 1 presents the traffic development across Øresund. The increase in traffic has primarily
been driven by the bridge while the number of travellers using the HH ferries has slowly
decreased.
The largest increase was observed from the opening of the bridge in 2000 until 2008 followed
by a slow increase until 2019. During Covid-19 a drastic decrease was observed in 2020 and
2021. In 2022 the number of travellers is almost back at pre Covid-19 level.
By 2022 the Øresund bridge accounts for approximately 80 % of the total number of travellers
across Øresund. The train itself accounts for 41%.
Page 3 of 156
==PAGE:11==
Europasporet
2.1
Traffic development
Figure 1: Number of travellers across Øresund, AADT. The ferry includes cars, pedestrians,
and bikes. The number of travellers per car is set to 1,79 [DST 2024a, J. Andersson and
Wessman 2023]
Approximately 42 % of the total number of trips across Øresund in 2019 were stated to be
commuter trips with the vast majority, 91 %, being commuters from Sweden to Denmark
[ ¨Orestat 2024].
The trips crossing the bridge are affected by the ’short’ distance between the two metropolitan
cities, Copenhagen and Malm¨o, and commuter, education, or business accounts for 55 % of
the trips crossing the bridge. The ferry’s catchment area has a lower population density and
commuter, education, or business trips account for around 28 % instead providing an attractive
choice for leisure trips to/from areas outside Sk˚ane [J. Andersson and Wessman 2023].
For freight transport, a steady increase in the number of trucks crossing the bridge is observed
while the level of traffic on the ferry is at a steady level with minor fluctuations (Figure 2)1.
The freight volume on rail has also increased significantly since 2000 but at a much slower
rate since 2012.
1Only data of number of vehicles and not tonnage are public available
Page 4 of 156
==PAGE:12==
Europasporet
2.1
Traffic development
Figure 2: Freight transports across Øresund [DST 2024a, J. Andersson and Wessman 2023]
Figure 3 shows the development in rail traffic since 2015 and expected development towards
2035. The development in number of passengers in Øresund follows approximately the same
rate as the rest of the Danish rail network but with a higher rate of increase in passengers be-
tween 2017 and 2019. This might be explained by the Swedish national railway operator, SJ,
reintroducing their high-speed connection towards Stockholm after being temporarily discon-
tinued. Interesting is a much faster return of rail passengers across Øresund after Covid-19.
Additionally is the ”comeback” of international travel and expected development in number
of passengers towards 2035. The primary reason for the increase in other international is due
to the opening of the Femern connection which is expected to happen in 2029. The forecast
for both Øresund and other International is however a conservative guess, as it does not ac-
count for a possible increase in transit passengers as well as an upgrade of the infrastructure
in both Germany and Sweden [Trafikstyrelsen 2023].
Page 5 of 156
==PAGE:13==
Europasporet
2.1
Traffic development
Figure 3: Development in number of passenger and passenger km. [DST 2024a, Eurostat
2024] 2035 official forecasts [Lennefors 2023][Trafikstyrelsen 2023]
In December 2022 Sk˚anetrafiken took over the responsibility for the regional train service
between Denmark and Sweden and Region Sk˚ane has a clear vision for expanding the op-
eration across Øresund. In contrast to the Danish transport authority’s forecast provided in
”Trafikplan for den statslige jernbane 2023”, both Region Sk˚ane and Sk˚anetrafikken expect
a significant increase in passenger numbers between Malm¨o and Copenhagen (Table 1), cor-
responding to a 5.4% growth pr. year. A prerequisite for this growth however is an increase
in service level and number of departures. ¨Oresundst˚ag AB expects an increase of 3% per
year towards 2040 providing the same number of departures as today but with increased seat
capacity [Schi¨oth 2020].
Table 1: Region Sk˚anes expected number of passenger between Copenhagen and Malm¨o in
their ”train strategy” compared to the Danish forecast. [Magnus Andersson et al. 2021]
[Trafikstyrelsen 2023]
Page 6 of 156
==PAGE:14==
Europasporet
2.1
Traffic development
Since the opening of the Øresund bridge, the number of trains scheduled in a day has been
around 200 of which on average 165 are passenger trains. However, within peak hours the
number of trains varies depending on the composition of passenger- and freight trains (Fig-
ure 4). The maximum during peak hours was in 2020 with 14 respectively 2 passenger- and
freight trains [DST 2024a].
Figure 4: Number of trains scheduled across Øresund during peak hour (both directions).
[DST 2024a]
Provided that the available rail capacity and number of trains scheduled a day in 2035 is
at the same level as in 2023 [Trafikstyrelsen 2023], the number of passengers per train by
2035 would be approximately 245 following the Danish forecast or 475 following Region
Sk˚anes vision. Considering the capacity of 237 passengers with the units used today it is thus
necessary to run consist of multiple units. It must however be expected that the units used
today will be gradually replaced within the next 15 to 20 years providing an increased seat
capacity. [Magnus Andersson et al. 2021][Schi¨oth 2020].
Page 7 of 156
==PAGE:15==
Europasporet
2.2
Regional population development
2.2
Regional population development
The expected development in passengers follows approximately the same rate of increase as
the expected growth in population in western Sk˚ane and Copenhagen (Figure 5, Figure 6)
which are some of the areas that potentially would benefit the most of a new Øresund connec-
tion daily.
Figure 5: Population development and forecast for Zealand.
2015 chosen as base year.
Copenhagen includes Frederiksberg and Amager [DST 2024a]
Page 8 of 156
==PAGE:16==
Europasporet
2.2
Regional population development
Figure 6: Population development and forecast for Sk˚ane. 2015 chosen as base year [SCB
2024].
It is noted that the majority of the daily travellers across Øresund are Swedish citizens, with
the Copenhagen labour market as the attracting force. The expected development in work-
places in Zealand and Sk˚ane is presented in Figure 7 and Figure 8.
The largest relative increase in the number of workplaces is expected to be in the region of
Sk˚ane, most significant in the western part. This is followed by Copenhagen while a slower
rate is predicted in surrounding areas. It must be noted however, that Copenhagen is still
expected to be the largest labour market in the Øresund region by 2040 with approximately
twice as many jobs as in Southern Sk˚ane. The presented predictions thus suggest that a pos-
sible change/intensification in rail connections should be targeted towards Copenhagen and
Western Sk˚ane as hubs for commuter traffic.
Page 9 of 156
==PAGE:17==
Europasporet
2.2
Regional population development
Figure 7: Workplace development and forecast for Zealand. 2015 chosen as base year. Copen-
hagen includes Frederiksberg and Amager [DST 2024a]
Figure 8: Workplace development and forecast for Sk˚ane. 2015 chosen as basis year [SCB
2024]
Page 10 of 156
==PAGE:18==
Europasporet
3
Infrastructure
The following chapter introduces the current infrastructure, planned expansions, and other
relevant changes to the transport supply towards 2040 focusing on the Eastern part of Zealand
and the Western part of Sk˚ane. 2040 is selected as the base year being the latest predictions
on both the Danish National Transport Model, GMM, and the Swedish National Transport
Model, Sampers. 2040 is thus used as the ’technical’ year in which a potential new connection
could open.
3.1
Road infrastructure
Road traffic across Oeresund are on Zealand generally distributed on the Øresund motorway
(E20) and Helsingør motorway (E47) both joining the major ring roads around Copenhagen
and the Køgebugt motorway (E20) towards south/east.
In Sk˚ane the traffic around Malm¨o is served by Yttra Ringroad (E20/E6) distributing traffic
to other main roads further into Sweden. The E6 motorway running along the west coast of
Sk˚ane to Helsingborg serves as a vital link connecting Sk˚ane and Central Sweden.
The majority of the motorway network is characterised by 4 lanes (2+2), some roads closer to
Copenhagen up to 8 lanes, and a permitted speed of 110 km/h.
3.1.1
Planned expansions
Several road projects are planned towards 2040 and described in ”Infrastrukturplan 2035”
[Tansportministeriet 2021] and ”Regional transportinfrastrukturplan Sk˚ane” [Sk˚ane 2021].
The most relevant projects includes (Figure 9):
Capacity increase on Øresund motorway (E20) Additional lane in both directions (3+3) on
the Øresund Motorway between the Airport and west of Ørestad.
Capacity increase on Amager motorway (E20) Connecting Amager and Zealand additional
lanes (4+4) between the Øresund Motorway and Advedøre Holme has been decided. Addi-
tional ’distribution roads’ parallel to the existing motorway between Advedøre Holme and
Advedøre are also a part of the project.
Capacity increase on Trelleborgsv¨agen (E6) Connecting Trelleborg and Malm¨o the motor-
way serves as a vital link for commuter and freight traffic. To relieve capacity additional lanes
(3+3) are decided.
Page 11 of 156
==PAGE:19==
Europasporet
3.1
Road infrastructure
Eastern Ringroad The Copenhagen Eastern Ring road connecting Nordhavn and Kastrup
Airport through a tunnel east of Amager is still undergoing further analysis. The Eastern
ringroad is however considered a prerequisite for the road connection Landskrona-Copenhagen
and is thus included in this analysis. Alignment ’Ø4’ being the recommended alternative in-
cludes 2+2 lanes, a permitted speed of 80 km/h, and junctions at Lynetteholmen and Prøvestenen
[VD et al. 2020].
Figure 9: Planned expansions in the road network marked with red
Page 12 of 156
==PAGE:20==
Europasporet
3.2
Rail infrastructure
3.2
Rail infrastructure
The Danish and Swedish railway is undergoing substantial developments with the construc-
tion of new railway lines, upgrade of signalling systems, and commissioning of new rolling
stock.
The national railway infrastructure of Zealand and Sk˚ane are generally characterised by dou-
ble tracks with lines oriented towards Copenhagen and Malm¨o. Vestbanen, Ringstedbanen,
and Øresundsbanen in Zealand as well as V¨astkustbanan and S¨odra Stambanan in Sk˚ane are
all parts of the Scandinavian-Mediterranean rail corridor and serve both regional and long-
distance passenger trains and freight trains [Cox 2020]. While this project will focus on Øre-
sundsbanen and V¨astkustbanan several upgrades are underway in the railway network. Most
significant is the Femern Belt fixed link between Lolland, Denmark, and Femern, Germany,
which is expected to open in 2029 and increase the demand for both freight and passenger
trains between Scandinavia and the European Continent [Lennefors 2024].
Additionally, the digital signalling system, ERTMS, is expected to be implemented on all main
lines by 2031 in Denmark and all main lines by 2040 in Sweden [Banedanmark 2023b][Westin
2021].
3.2.1
Planned expansions
Apart from the above-mentioned, several other extensions to the current rail infrastructure
towards 2040 in both Denmark and Sweden are either under construction or planned. For the
analysis area the relevant projects mentioned in ”Infrastrukturplan 2035” [Tansportministeriet
2021] and ”T˚agtrafik 2045” [Lennefors 2024] includes the following (Figure 10):
Page 13 of 156
==PAGE:21==
Europasporet
3.2
Rail infrastructure
Figure 10: Planned expansions in the rail network marked with red
The southern Corridor
Freight trains and a few passenger trains to/from Kastrup Airport currently run via the existing
freight tracks bypassing Copenhagen Central Station. The project includes new platforms at
Copenhagen South (earlier known as Ny Ellebjerg) for trains bypassing Copenhagen Central.
The project aims to benefit the capacity in and out of Copenhagen Central by making Copen-
hagen South a new ’hub’ for regional and potentially long-distance trains. Two sidings are
additionally planned at Kalvebod to allow passenger trains to overtake freight trains.
Page 14 of 156
==PAGE:22==
Europasporet
3.2
Rail infrastructure
Directional operation at Kastrup airport
The station of Kastrup Airport (CPH) currently consists of 2 platforms for passenger traffic
and 2 bypassing freight tracks. While freight trains in the eastern direction must traverse
opposing traffic this creates capacity restrictions on the line. By establishing directional oper-
ation two new platforms will be constructed at the current freight tracks as well as eliminating
conflicting paths enabling freight trains to run on the tracks currently allocated passenger traf-
fic. Furthermore, a turnaround track has been suggested west of the station enabling trains
from Sweden to terminate at Kastrup airport without obstructing other traffic.
Simplification of Copenhagen Central
Copenhagen Central Station is a major traffic junction serving three lines south of the station
to/from Roskilde, Ringsted, and Kastrup, and one line north of the station to/from Helsingør.
Today’s track layout permits a high level of options to serve all lines from all platforms.
However, due to a complicated track layout delays are easily spread throughout the network.
Suggestions have thus been made, but not decided, to simplify the track layout separating
traffic on the lines in/out of Copenhagen Central (Figure 11).
Figure 11: Suggested track layout at Copenhagen Central separating traffic in/out of the sta-
tion [Banedanmark 2023a]
2 tracks Helsingborg-Maria- ¨Angelholm
The 24 km single-track railway line between Helsingborg and ¨Angelholm is/was a signifi-
cant bottleneck on V¨astkustbanan. To relieve capacity the construction of an additional track
thus started in 2020 and the final stretch is expected to open in 2035 [Wedin and S. Nilsson
2023].
Page 15 of 156
==PAGE:23==
Europasporet
3.2
Rail infrastructure
Capacity increase Raml¨osa-Helsingborg C
The short railway section on V¨astkustbanan between Raml¨osa and Helsingborg C is consid-
ered a bottleneck with two branch lines merging with V¨astkustbanan. Plans have been made
to increase the capacity on the approximately 3 km. stretch by constructing an additional
platform and tracks at Raml¨osa and a third track between Raml¨osa and Helsingborg C [Wedin
and S. Nilsson 2023].
2+2 tracks (Malm¨o C) - Lund C - H¨assleholm
While the capacity between Malm¨o C and Lund C was significantly increased in 2022 pro-
viding 4 tracks between the two stations, plans are made to also increase the capacity be-
tween Lund C and H¨assleholm. This, by either supplementing the existing line with an ad-
ditional two tracks (in total four tracks) or by constructing a new (parallel) line. [Lennefors
2023].
Other projects
Not included in current governmental plans for network expansions is the possibility of ex-
tending the S-train network to Helsingør using the existing main line from either Klampen-
borg, Hellerup, or Copenhagen. Additionally, a new tunnel for S-trains has been suggested
between Ryparken/Hellerup and Copenhagen taking up space at ’Vesterport Graven’ just north
of Copenhagen Central.
While these projects aren’t included in the following analysis some potentially have a signif-
icant impact on the possibilities of implementing Europasporet. This is further discussed in
section 11.6.
3.2.2
Rolling Stock
When determining travel times and traffic patterns as well as capacity on the rail the rolling
stock used is an important decision factor. Several types of rolling stock and services operate
in both Denmark and Sweden on the affected lines. By 2040 a major part of the existing fleet
of rolling stock will be replaced. This includes the ’next generation of ¨Oresundst˚ag’ with
the capability of running at least 200 km/h [Schi¨oth 2020], new SJ high-speed trains with a
maximum speed of 250 [Wedin and S. Nilsson 2023], and new DSB long distance/regional
train (’IC5’) with a maximum speed of 200 km/h. While technical data about new rolling
stock isn’t available the parameters of the current class X31/ ET, ¨Oresundst¨ag is used with
modified max speed, length, and weight to determine run times (Table 2).
Page 16 of 156
==PAGE:24==
Europasporet
3.2
Rail infrastructure
Table 2: Rolling stock specifications used in TPS
3.2.3
Traffic patterns
Given the infrastructure network, it is possible to determine the traffic patterns in the base
situation in 2040. While this project focuses on traffic across Øresund only the affected lines
are assessed. This includes the following:
• Østerport - Copenhagen Central (Boulevardbanen)
• Copenhagen Central - CPH Airport (Øresundsbanen)
• CPH Airport - Lernacken (Øresund bridge)
• Lernacken - Malm¨o C Nedre (Citytunnel)
• Lernacken - Malm¨o C Øvra (Kontinentalbanan)
• Malm¨o C - Lund C (S¨odra Stambanan)
• Lund C - Maria (V¨astkustbanan)
• Billeberga - Teckomatorp (R˚a˚abanan)
A useful starting point to gain an overview of future train operations is the traffic plans pub-
lished by the Danish and Swedish transport authority, ”Trafikplan for den statslige jernbane
2017-2032” [Trafikstyrelsen 2017] respectively ”T˚agtrafik 2045 med fastst¨alld plan 2022–2033”
[Lennefors 2024].
However, the drafts do not agree on the level of traffic across Øresund. Furthermore, various
stakeholders and operators might have different views on train operation and it can be chal-
lenging to estimate future traffic patterns.
Page 17 of 156
==PAGE:25==
Europasporet
3.2
Rail infrastructure
The expected increase in passengers by Region Sk˚ane (mentioned in section 2.1) would re-
quire additional services across Øresund and Sk˚anetrafikken intends to increase the number
of regional trains between Zealand and Sk˚ane. At the same time the Swedish national car-
rier, SJ, intends to increase their international service with additional connections to/through
Denmark as well as other operators stating their interest in running Danish-Swedish and other
international/transit services. A significant increase in demand for rail capacity across Øre-
sund must thus be expected [Trafikstyrelsen 2023][Magnus Andersson et al. 2021] [J. Nilsson
2019] [Baumgarten 2023] [Marco Andersson 2024]. The two above-mentioned drafts by the
transport authorities are used as a basis for national traffic in the two countries with some
changes to accommodate other stakeholders. Regional traffic across Øresund will be based on
the strategy ” ¨Oresundst˚ag Trafikutvecklingsplan 2025-2030” presented by ˆOresundst˚ag AB
[Schi¨oth and Bergmark 2023]. For long-distance and freight trains a combination of the two
traffic plans is used focusing on the utilisation of the Øresund line between Malm¨o and Copen-
hagen. The traffic patterns across Øresund in the base situation are depicted in Figure 12. The
services across Øresund are listed in Table 43 appendix B.3. Appendix B.1 explains some of
the major differences compared to the above-mentioned drafts.
Page 18 of 156
==PAGE:26==
Europasporet
3.2
Rail infrastructure
Figure 12: Traffic patterns in the base scenario 2040. One line = one train per hour. Only
trains crossing Øresund shown. A map showing additional trains is found in appendix B.2
The provided drafts for future traffic outline the anticipated traffic patterns when analysing
an infrastructure project. However, these patterns are likely to change which may be driven
by specific regional demands or increased commercial traffic. In the base scenario, 50 freight
trains are assumed to cross Øresund each day [Lennefors 2024]. This prediction has however
varied significantly in the last few years. Consequently, it is crucial to account for potential
changes in traffic volumes and patterns, influenced by political objectives and projects, when
planning new infrastructure.
Page 19 of 156
==PAGE:27==
Europasporet
4
Rail Capacity
This chapter describes the rail network constraints and capacity based on the defined infras-
tructure and service level by 2040. Calculations of capacity are done to assess the performance
and the possible restrictions in the rail network to evaluate the possibilities of running addi-
tional trains
4.1
Capacity consumption in the rail network
Capacity on a railway line is a complex measure and difficult to define. Various parameters
influence the capacity including the signalling system, performance of the rolling stock, and
the traffic patterns/drive time. Capacity utilisation is instead used to describe the amount of
traffic that runs/can run on a given railway line. A correlation is often observed between four
parameters shown in Figure 13. The national railway traffic in both Denmark and Sweden is
characterised as a ”mixed-train working” with the use of different rolling stock, train types,
speeds, and stopping patterns. A relatively small number of trains can thus yield a high
capacity utilisation. The sections between Copenhagen Central and Østerport as well as the
Citytunnel are an exception with only passenger trains operating with identical stop patterns
and a lower average speed. Running a more ”metro-train working” traffic pattern is thus also
used as a method enabling additional trains on an existing line. This is, as an example, used on
the line between Kalvebod and Kastrup Airport where passing trains run with additional buffer
time and lower speed to traverse the line at the same time as stopping trains thus providing a
more homogeneous timetable.
Figure 13: Railway capacity balancing. [Pouryousef et al. 2015]
Page 20 of 156
==PAGE:28==
Europasporet
4.1
Capacity consumption in the rail network
Calculations of capacity utilisation are in Denmark based on the standardised ’UIC-406’
method developed by The International Union of Railways (UIC). The method relies on a
’compressed’ timetable where the buffer time between trains is set to 0, hence, the minimum
headway between subsequent trains.
The capacity consumption is then calculated according to the following formula:
K = k
U ∗100
(1)
Where K denotes the capacity consumption on the specified line as a fraction of the total time
in which the trains occupy the line (in minutes), k, within a chosen time frame, U. Typically,
the time frame varies. In this project, the time frame is set to 2 hours (120 minutes) to include
trains that run only every second hour.
The method applies for both single and double track while on double track sections, the capac-
ity consumption is calculated for each track/direction. To apply the method it is necessary to
divide the infrastructure into smaller sections. This is typically done at junctions and/or larger
stations where there is a significant change in the number of trains traversing the investigated
line.
In addition to the UIC-406 method UIC provides some general recommendations for maxi-
mum capacity utilisation (Table 3).
Type of service
Peak
Daily
Dedicated suburban
85%
70%
Mixed traffic
75%
60%
Dedicated High-speed
75%
60%
Table 3: UIC maximum capacity utilisation recommendations[Pouryousef et al. 2015]
A higher capacity consumption is ’allowed’ during peak to accommodate additional trains for
a short period. Possible traffic disturbances can thus be restored later.
In Sweden, a different calculation method of capacity consumption, developed by Trafikver-
ket, has been adopted based on the UIC-406 method [Lundberg 2020]. In this method, the
total occupancy is calculated according to the following on double track sections (for each
direction):
k = Σt=n
t=1(Thead + (|Trunt −Tavg|)t + Σj=m
j=1 Tcross
(2)
Page 21 of 156
==PAGE:29==
Europasporet
4.1
Capacity consumption in the rail network
And on single track sections:
k = Σt=n
t=1(Trunt + TPass)t
(3)
Where:
k is to total occupancy time
t is the number of trains running on the evaluated section
Thead is the minimum headway between two trains on the defining segment for the evaluated
section.
Trunt is the run time for train t
Tavg is the weighted average run time for all trains on the evaluated section
Tcross is a 2-minute buffer time for crossing train paths, j.
TPass is a 3-minute buffer time for passing trains on a single track section.
The minimum headway for all Swedish railway lines is found in the publication ”T¨athet mel-
lan t˚ag” [Mattiosson and Lundberg 2022]
The total capacity consumption are then calculated as in the UIC-406 method Equation 1.
Additionally Trafikverket provides its own guidelines for capacity utilisation (Table 4).
Level
capacity consumption
Comments
High
>0,81
Comprehensive level of traffic.
Difficult to find place for additional trains.
The requested service level might not be provided
Medium
0,61 - 0,81
Medium-high level of traffic.
The requested service level might not
be provided for additional trains
Low
<0,61
Available capacity
Table 4: Trafikverkets capacity utilisation guidelines [Lundberg 2020]
It is noted that using Trafikverkets guidelines there is no distinction between different types
of service and time of day. While Trafikverkets guidelines apply to all types of railway lines
the levels of capacity consumption are in general higher than the UIC-406 method.
Page 22 of 156
==PAGE:30==
Europasporet
4.2
Comparison of UIC-406 and Trafikverkets capacity calculation
4.2
Comparison of UIC-406 and Trafikverkets capacity calculation
To better understand the differences between the ’traditional’ UIC-406’ method and Trafikver-
kets method, a comparison has been conducted. With a foundation in the presented base sit-
uation (section 3.2.3) a draft for a timetable between (Copenhagen Central), Kalvebod, and
Lernacken has been constructed (see appendix C).
The line has been divided into two segments in order to calculate the capacity consumption;
Kalvebod-Kastrup and Kastrup-Lernacken. The timetable has been coded in the software
’TPS’ and the UIC-406 compression has been applied for a 2-hour peak period.
To calculate the capacity consumption using Trafikverkets method the defining section/ min-
imum headway must be determined for each service type traversing the evaluated line. This
is done using TPS which holds information about the infrastructure. A calculation example is
shown in appendix D
The calculated capacity consumption using the two different methods is shown in Table 5.
Line
UIC-406
Trafikverket
Kalvebod-Kastrup East
71.6%
75.4%
Kalvebod-Kastrup West
68.4%
72.1%
Kastrup-Lernacken East
53.9%
56.5%
Kastrup-Lernacken West
55.9%
58.1%
Table 5: Comparison of UIC-406 and Trafikverkets methods of calculating capacity
Trafikverkets method tends to return a slightly higher capacity consumption than the UIC-406
method. The reason behind this is that Trafikverkets method does not account for stations with
multiple platforms in one direction. This is e.g. the case in Kastrup, where two subsequent
arriving trains can be distributed to two different platforms. This allows for a shorter distance
between the trains when compressing the timetable in the UIC-406 method.
The advantage of Trafikverkets method is its possibility to provide a quick overview of a
(future) traffic level without the need to choose a specified timetable. For the following stated
capacity levels Trafikverkets method has been used to calculate the capacity consumption.
Table 6 states the capacity consumption for the evaluated network in the base scenario.
Page 23 of 156
==PAGE:31==
Europasporet
4.2
Comparison of UIC-406 and Trafikverkets capacity calculation
Line
Northbound
Southbound
Østerport-Copenhagen Central
80.0%
76.4%
(Copenhagen)-Kalvebod-Kastrup
72.1%
75.4%
Kastrup-Lernacken
58.1%
56.5%
Lernacken-Hyllie-Malm¨o C
85.8%
84.4%
Lernacken-Sv˚agertop-Malm¨o C
47.4%
46.6%
Malm¨o C-Lund C
69.4%
69.1%
Lund C-K¨avlinge
58.9%
57.7%
K¨avlinge-Landskrona
89.2%
87.1%
Landskrona-Raml¨osa
Raml¨osa-Helsingborg C
50.0%
52.1%
Billeberga-Teckomatorp
17.9%
Table 6: Capacity consumption base scenario, 2-hour peak period (Trafikverkets method)
Several sections already classify in the ”high” level of capacity consumption others being
close to the limit. This includes K¨avlinge-Landskrona-Raml¨osa (”V¨astkustbanan”) and Kalvebod-
Kastrup (Øresundsbanen) which experience a high level of mixed traffic with different stop-
ping patterns and services. Between Østerport-Copenhagen (”Boulevardbanen”) and Lernacken-
Malm¨o (”City tunnel”) a high utilisation is also experienced. However, a homogeneous traffic
structure is in place to better accommodate the high amount of traffic. While a lower capac-
ity consumption on other segments is shown this does not necessarily yield the possibility
to run additional trains as these segments might be limited by ’bottlenecks’ elsewhere in the
network. This is e.g. the case between Kastrup and Lernacken (The Øresund bridge) which
shows to have additional capacity. However, limitations between Kalvebod and Kastrup and
in the Citytunnel, Hyllie-Malm¨o C reduces the number of trains across Øresund.
Additionally, capacity problems arise at some of the main stations including Copenhagen
Central. While capacity consumption at Copenhagen Central is not investigated in detail in
this project it will be shortly discussed what impact each scenario has on the station capacity.
A previous study estimated that the current capacity limit at Copenhagen Central is estimated
to be 18 through trains in each direction and 9 turnarounds per hour, the 9 turnarounds utilising
3 platforms [S. A. Trafikstyrelsen 2013]. In practice, this however possibly not likely due to
e.g. conflicting paths. In the presented base situation 16 through trains and 7 turnarounds
are used for this project following ”DSB trafikvision 2030” [DSB 2022] and Trafikplan 2017-
2032 [Trafikstyrelsen 2017].
Page 24 of 156
==PAGE:32==
Europasporet
5
Traffic modelling
To illustrate future traffic demands as well as the impacts of a new fixed link, traffic model
calculations are performed using the Danish National Transport Model, ’GMM’ V. 3.0 and
Swedish National Transport Model, ’Sampers’ V. 3.4.6. In the presented results prognoses for
2040’ has been used as the base year in both models. The following chapter further introduces
the two models and highlights some of their key differences.
While the focus in this project has been on passenger traffic this report does not further de-
scribe sub-models for freight and air traffic.
5.1
Model prerequisites
GMM and Sampers are both advanced transport demand models that encompass multiple
modes of transportation and cover large geographical areas. GMM models traffic in Denmark
for a typical weekday across road- and public transport, while Sampers are capable of mod-
elling traffic in Sweden on an average day during a year or an average weekday. Journeys
are in both models modelled between zones and mapped onto a detailed network of roads and
public transport links.
The infrastructure network for road and rail transport is constructed as links in a GIS program.
Stations, bus stops and intersections are located at nodes between these links. Since trips oc-
cur at a zone level, each zone has a centroid where trips start and end. From the centroid,
traffic is distributed into the network via zone connectors, which link to bus stops and train
stations on the public network or major roads in the road network. Zone connectors represent
the smallest roads or the routes public travellers take to and from their stops. Furthermore, all
zones hold information about demographics for the specific area.
Denmark is divided into 907 zones in the model whereof 377 zones cover Zealand and
Lolland-Falster. Additional 371 international zones, hereof 38 zones covering Sk˚ane, are
added to model traffic to and from abroad.
Sampers consists of 5 individual regional models covering different geographical areas across
Sweden as well as a National model covering the entire Sweden. The regional model of
’Sk˚ane’ consists of both the region of Sk˚ane, covered by 1765 zones, as well as Zealand and
Lolland-Falster in Denmark covered by 377 zones.
To ensure that GMM and Sampers share the same input with regard to infrastructure, popula-
tion and workplaces this has been updated in the two models accordingly.
Page 25 of 156
==PAGE:33==
Europasporet
5.1
Model prerequisites
5.1.1
Modelling flow
The model flow of Sampers is built as a traditional ’four-stage model’. The purpose of the
four-stage model is to predict the demand and supply of travel within a network. Demand
determines the number of travellers in specific modes, while supply defines the available
transport system, such as public transport services, the road network, and travel times.
The four-stage model takes a static approach to transport modelling, as it follows four specific
sequential steps illustrated in Figure 14. The upper levels set conditions for the lower levels,
and the lower levels induce changes in the inputs for the upper levels [S. Mabit 2022].
Figure 14: Overview of the modelling flow in a four-stage model (Sampers)
The first step is to determine the number of trips generated and attracted from and to each
zone in the network. The step models all tours in the network and secures that the number of
attracted trips equals the number of generated trips. The trip generation is based on various
socioeconomic and demographic variables of a zone.
The second step, Trip Distribution, allocates trips to specific OD pairs. This step considers the
general cost of a trip from the origin zone i to the destination zone j. The cost, expressed as
cij, describes a weighted sum of various travel components such as driving costs, travel time
and length. The model for the total number of trips Tij can be expressed as followed:
Tij = AiBjOiDjf(cij)
(4)
Where Ai and Bi are balancing factors that ensure the sum of generated trips in the OD-matrix
equals the demanded trips, and vice versa for attracted trips.
Page 26 of 156
==PAGE:34==
Europasporet
5.1
Model prerequisites
The transport mode choice is done through a discrete choice model. Selecting one transport
mode excludes the others. A ’utility’ for choosing a specific transport mode for an OD pair is
defined as:
Ui = αi + βixi + εi
(5)
Where
Ui is the utility of choosing transport mode i,
xi describes demographic variables, travel time and/or costs
αi, βi refers to parameters corresponding to the x variables (travel time and/or costs compo-
nents)
εi is an error term
The probability of choosing a specific transport mode i among all modes j between each OD
pair is given by the logit model:
P(i|xn) =
exp(V (xni))
Σjexp(V (xnj))
(6)
Where n refers to individuals
Given the mode and destination choice, the OD matrix is transposed in Sampers to model the
return trip.
The last step, Route assignment/choice, determines the specific route for a trip. The primary
goal of this step is to find the equilibrium flow pattern in the transport network, balancing
demand/traffic load and available capacity on a given link. While there is no capacity limit
in public transport, an iterative calculation of travel times in the road network is performed to
account for congestion.
GMM is inspired by some of the same principles as the four-stage model that is implemented
in Sampers. However, the model is reformulated in some calculation steps.
Figure 15 shows the overall calculation process in GMM (including inputs).
The generated traffic from a zone, destination, and mode choice, are calculated in the demand
model (“Passenger Demand Model” top blue box in Figure 15). In GMM the generation
model does not model trips but rather tours. Tours only account for directional information
(GA-matrix) and not the symmetrical outbound and return trip (OD-matrix). Instead, a tour
connects an outbound trip to its return trip to better catch variables that describe the genera-
tion/attraction and/or to model more complex tours (’trip-chains’). Tours are modelled using
a logit model determining the probability of a specific number of tours which subsequently
Page 27 of 156
==PAGE:35==
Europasporet
5.1
Model prerequisites
are converted to OD-matrices to model trips as outputs.
Additionally the trip distribution and mode choice are combined in a single stage. Here the
choice of mode and destination is modelled using a nested logit model, where different choices
are divided into several subsets. The demand model is linked with the route assignment/choice
model in a loop to account for e.g., congestion effects.
GMM additionally uses a pivoting approach in the demand model. Here, the computed de-
mand is adjusted so that the forecasting replicates the structure in the baseline and uses model
elasticities in forecasting.
Figure 15: Overview of the modelling flow in GMM 3.0
Page 28 of 156
==PAGE:36==
Europasporet
5.1
Model prerequisites
Demographics and workplaces form the basis for the fundamental demand for trips in a
zone for both models. The cost of a trip is determined by travel resistance and the net-
work’s/infrastructure level of service (LoS). Changes in the level of service can lead to changes
in travel resistance and the initiation of trips that were not previously attractive, resulting in
traffic increases.
Travel resistance is monetarily determined based on direct travel or ticket costs and travel
time. Travel costs depend on the journey’s length, while ticket prices are assumed uniform
for all public transport modes and specified between model zone pairs. Travel time is divided
into several elements, with varying valuations – for example, hidden waiting time is valued
the lowest as it can be utilised for other purposes to some extent.
Since car travel resistance partly depends on congestion, route choice is calculated iterative
with a pre-set number of iterations. This process distributes car traffic in the road network
multiple times until an approximate user equilibrium is reached (“Level of Service” Right
grey box in Figure 15). The resulting travel resistances for car trips influence the traffic
demand (“Passenger Demand Model”), which is recalculated a set number of times. Thus,
road network congestion also affects public transport demand in the model.
Both models conduct a final route assignment/choice of the calculated traffic to the road net-
work and public transport. Based on this final assignment, results for traffic flows in the cal-
culated scenario are available at station and link levels, as well as total numbers for trips and
generalised travel costs (GRO) between each zone pair which can be used in a socio-economic
assessment. These results are divided by trip purpose and transport mode.
GMM and Sampers are comprehensive tools that require significant resources to use. How-
ever, it enables the analysis of traffic flows for the entire network across transport modes
based on underlying travel demand and service level. Besides requiring careful use, Sampers
and GMM need about two days to a week of calculation time depending on the configura-
tion.
Page 29 of 156
==PAGE:37==
Europasporet
5.2
Major differences between GMM and Sampers
5.2
Major differences between GMM and Sampers
Apart from the different approaches of traffic modelling in GMM and Sampers some addi-
tional differences apply between the two models:
Traffic across Øresund in GMM is managed by a separate ’Øresund model’. This includes
separately estimated ’Values of times’ (VoT) and utility functions/parameters for traffic specif-
ically between eastern Denmark and Sk˚ane.
Sampers handles all travel within and between Sweden and Denmark on an equal set of ’VoT’
and utility functions estimated on travel behaviour in Sweden. Hence, all journeys are mod-
elled as ’Swedes’ regardless of cultural and economic differences. Additionally, a differ-
ent VoT applies for various modes in Sampers while GMM uses the same VoT across all
modes.
In GMM, trips within Sweden are not modelled. Only trips to and from Denmark are included
in the results. Additionally, GMM does not account for congestion in the Swedish network and
thus, cross-border traffic is not affected by e.g. congestion outside of Denmark. Conversely,
trips within eastern Denmark are modelled in Sampers. Long-distance trips to/from outside
Sk˚ane and Eastern Denmark are otherwise a fixed input to Samper’s regional model.
Trucks and lorries are in Sampers a fixed input which only is affected by travel time in the
route choice. GMM conversely models changes in freight demand with travel time, monetary
costs etc. as a contributing factor.
GMM uses 10-time bands to handle congestion, while Sampers uses a single travel time for
the entire day for the demand model and route choice, which is the same for all purposes and
vehicles.
Sampers are calibrated to model traffic as an average annual daily traffic but do provide the op-
portunity to calculate as an average weekday daily traffic. GMM are calibrated to model only
average weekday daily traffic. In this project, Sampers are set to calculate average weekday
daily traffic.
Additionally, other uncertainties apply regarding e.g., different predictions of economic growth
and tax levels in the two models. Furthermore, GMM is calibrated on data from 2015 while
Sampers are calibrated on data from 2017.
Table 7 shows the traffic volumes in the two models’ calibration year compared to actual
traffic counts (weekday traffic). As seen, the two models provide reasonable results on public
transport being close to the actual count while the modelled road traffic is higher in both
Page 30 of 156
==PAGE:38==
Europasporet
5.2
Major differences between GMM and Sampers
models. Overall, GMM calculates a traffic level slightly closer to the actual count compared
to Sampers in their respective calibration year.
Public transport
Count
2015
GMM
2015
Diff.
Count
2017
Sampers
2017
Diff.
Bridge
32,885
33,110
0.7%
32,507
33,201
2.1%
HH ferries
7,843
8,240
5.1%
7,310
7,625
4.3%
Total Øresund
40,728
41,350
1.5%
39,817
40,826
2.5%
Road transport
Count
2015
GMM
2015
Diff.
Count
2017
Sampers
2017
Diff.
Bridge car
17,299
21,100
22.0%
19,527
23,880
22.3%
Bridge trucks
1,229
1,490
21.2%
1,332
2,275
70.8%
HH ferries car
3,547
3,340
-5.8%
3,578
2,899
-19.0%
HH ferries truck
1,072
1,610
50.2%
1,173
1,886
60.8%
Total Øresund
23,147
27,540
19.0%
25,610
30,940
20.8%
Table 7: Difference between model calibration year and actual counts (Daily traffic)
5.2.1
Model elasticities
While a lot of factors come into play when modelling a specific scenario the elasticity con-
cerning ’in-vehicle time’ (IvT) has been computed to gain further knowledge about the two
models ’behaviour’. Two scenarios have been calculated for each model. One with a 10%
decrease in ’in-vehicle travel time’ for public transport and one with a 10% decrease in ’free
drive time’ for road transport. The reduction of travel time has only been made for the ge-
ographical areas that both GMM and Sampers cover, hence, zone-pairs Eastern Denmark to
Sk˚ane/ Sk˚ane to Eastern Denmark. Table 8 and Table 9 shows the elasticities on travel demand
across Øresund.
IvT time public -10%
Mode/purpose
Commute
Business
Other
All
Car Sampers
-0.8%
-0.2%
-0.9%
-0.6%
Public Sampers
14.1%
15.8%
19.5%
16.7%
Car GMM
-1.6%
-1.3
-0.7%
-1.1%
Public GMM
9.8%
8.6%
3.7%
6.9%
Table 8: Effects of a 10% reduction in IvT public transport on travel demand
Page 31 of 156
==PAGE:39==
Europasporet
5.2
Major differences between GMM and Sampers
Free time car -10%
Mode/purpose
Commute
Business
Other
All
Car Sampers
23.9%
17.7%
24.1%
22.3%
Public Sampers
-0.4%
-0.2%
-0.2%
-0.3%
Car GMM
13.7%
8.2%
4.4%
8.0%
Public GMM
-0.4%
-2.4%
-1.4%
-1.1%
Table 9: Effects of a 10% reduction in car travel time on travel demand
The computed elasticities are overall in level with other studies of transport elasticities [Ped-
ersen and Tønning 2021][Litman 2024][Jelin 2017] though Sampers presents a higher direct
elasticity. The travel demand in Sampers seems to be more sensitive to travel time reductions
with a high increase in both road and public transport respectively. Significantly is the number
of car trips with an overall increase of 22,3% which is considered high even for long-distance
trips. Additionally, the cross elasticity in Sampers is not proportional to the direct elasticity
when compared to GMM and other studies. Hence, the substitution between car and public
transport is lower in Sampers compared to GMM. Across the various purposes GMM models
commuter trips to be most sensitive to travel time changes while Leisure/other trips are the
most sensitive in Sampers. Presented by other studies Business trips are usually the least sen-
sitive to travel time changes. This is however not the case in GMM. The reason behind this can
be explained by the fact that the two trip purposes commute and business are estimated using
the same dataset in GMM’s sub-model for Øresund traffic [S. L. Mabit et al. 2017].
A lot of other factors, e.g., congestion time, number of departures, etc., come into play when
modelling new infrastructure. However, with drive time/in-vehicle time usually being the
main component of a journey it must thus be expected that Sampers probably tends to produce
a higher travel demand on both public and road transport compared to GMM if upgrades are
made to the infrastructure.
While it’s difficult to predict the future traffic level, and thus state which of the two models
that provides a more precise result, it has been decided to use GMM as the ’main model’ and
reference for the base year in this project. This is mainly due to its additional complexity in
handling cross-border traffic in a sub-model. Furthermore, GMM seems to provide a more
precise traffic volume in the calibration year and the model elasticities follow an expected
level compared to other studies.
Page 32 of 156
==PAGE:40==
Europasporet
5.3
Calibration of Sampers
5.3
Calibration of Sampers
While Sampers models travel based on Swedish behaviour, the cultural, economic, and po-
litical barriers for cross-border traffic are reflected in so-called ’barrier constants’ adding an
additional cost to traffic across Øresund. These constants are used to ’calibrate’ Sampers to
achieve the same traffic level in the base situation.
In total, eight barrier constants apply for cross-border traffic divided into car and public trans-
port, the direction of travel, Commuter trips and Other trips. While the constants affect the
mode for which it applies it also affects the mode split. E.g., a higher barrier for car traffic
results in an increase in public transport.
The calibration was done in an iterative process. First, the constants were changed for one
mode only to define the impact on the number of trips both directly on the specific mode and
on the other mode. The barrier constant only has a cross effect on trips in the same direction
and for the same purpose. Hence, if e.g. Car Commute to DK is increased an effect will also
be experienced on the Public Commute to DK, but not on the Car and Public in the opposite
direction. The elasticity and cross elasticity of the barrier constants are presented in appendix
E.
Knowing the elasticity it was possible to change the barrier constants simultaneously. A total
of 7 simulations were conducted to achieve a satisfactory result. Figure 16 shows the differ-
ence in the total number of vehicles and rail passengers crossing Øresund between Sampers
and GMM for each iteration. It is noted, that Sampers initially predicts a (much) higher level
of traffic across Øresund before calibrating the model despite the alignment of infrastructure
and level of public transport.
The final barrier constants are shown in Table 10.
Page 33 of 156
==PAGE:41==
Europasporet
5.3
Calibration of Sampers
Figure 16: Difference in the total number of vehicles and passengers across Øresund between
GMM and Sampers in the calibration process
Barrier constants
To DK
From DK
Car
Commute
14.5
65
Other
221.5
-19.5
Pub
Commute
1,885
5,522
Other
38
-27
Table 10: Applied barrier constants in Sampers
The results after the calibration are presented in the following chapters.
Page 34 of 156
==PAGE:42==
Europasporet
6
Traffic in 2040
Two simulations have been done for the base year 2040. One in GMM and one in Sampers. As
mentioned in section 5.3 Sampers are calibrated to reflect the same traffic level as GMM across
Øresund. The presented results include the added traffic for long-distance and freight.
6.1
Public transport
The number of public trips across Øresund in the base situation is shown in Table 11.
The results show that Sampers estimates a slightly higher level of 1274 trips conducted by
public transport than GMM after the calibration. The difference is however insignificant con-
sidering the differences between the two models. This distribution of trips using the Øresund
bridge and the Ferries, Helsingør-Helsingborg are estimated equally in the two models.
Public transport
Base 2040
Diff Sampers-GMM
Number of trips
GMM
Sampers
Abs
Rel
Øresundsbroen
43,710
44,868
1,158
2.7%
HH ferries
10,085
10,200
115
1.1%
Total
53,794
55,068
1,274
2.4%
Distribution
GMM
Sampers
Øresundsbroen
81.3%
81.5%
HH ferries
19.7%
19.5%
Total
100%
100%
Table 11: Number of passengers public transport across Øresund in 2040 base situation
Looking at the distribution across the various purposes, Table 12, the two models share similar
results after the calibration of Sampers. A slight difference is noted, but as the two purposes
Business and Leisure/Other share the same barrier constant in Sampers it hasn’t been possible
to achieve the same split between the various purposes.
Page 35 of 156
==PAGE:43==
Europasporet
6.1
Public transport
Purpose Public
Base 2040
Diff Sampers-GMM
Number of trips
GMM
Sampers
Abs
Rel
Commute/Business
29,580
29,350
-230
-0.8%
Leisure/other
24,214
25,718
1,504
6.2%
Total
53,794
55,068
1,274
2.4%
Distribution
GMM
Sampers
Commute/Business
55.0%
53.3%
Leisure/Other
45.0%
46.7%
Total
100%
100%
Table 12: Number of trips by public transport across Øresund in 2040 for each trip purpose
The passenger loads on an additional 5 Danish railway segments are shown in Table 13. In
general, Sampers tends to show a higher level of passengers. The major differences are shown
on the radial lines while the difference is lower in the central parts. This could suggest that
passengers travel longer in public transport in Sampers compared to GMM. The difference
should also be compared to the number of vehicles on some of the major roads, where Sam-
pers tends to predict a lower level compared to GMM. This is further commented on in the
following section.
No. passengers
GMM
Sampers
Abs diff
Rel diff.
Boulevardbanen
(Østerport-Nørreport)
123,472
124,226
754
1%
Kystbanen
(Niv˚a-Kokkedal)
19,079
24,323
5,244
27%
Øresundsbanen
(Ørestad-T˚arnby)
38,164
38,629
465
1%
Ringstedbanen
(Copenhagen S - Køge N)
43,301
47,708
4,407
10%
Vestbanen
(Høje Taastrup-Hedehusene)
42,787
43,369
782
2%
Table 13: Number of passengers on 5 chosen railway segments in 2040 base situation
Page 36 of 156
==PAGE:44==
Europasporet
6.2
Road transport
6.2
Road transport
The number of vehicles across Øresund estimated by the two models in the base situation is
shown in Table 14. A slightly lower amount of cars are modelled in Sampers. This is primarily
noticeable in the number of trucks and vans. The total differences are however insignificant.
The distribution of vehicles between the two connections across Øresund varies by two per-
centage points with a higher amount of traffic on the HH ferries in GMM respectively lower
on the Øresundbridge.
Road traffic
Base 2040
Diff Sampers-GMM
Number of vehicles
GMM
Sampers
Abs
Rel
Cars
Øresundsbroen
32,462
32,633
171
0.5%
HH ferries
5,122
6,120
998
19.5%
Total
37,583
38,753
1,170
3.1%
Trucks and Vans
Øresundsbroen
4,041
2,672
-1,369
-33.9%
HH ferries
2,484
2,288
-196
-7.9%
Total
6,525
4,960
-1,565
-24.0%
Road traffic total
Øresundsbroen
36,503
35,305
-1,198
-3.3%
HH ferries
7,606
8,408
802
10.6%
Total
44,108
43,713
-395
-0.9%
Distribution
GMM
Sampers
Øresundsbroen
82.8%
80.8%
HH ferries
17.2%
19.2%
Total
100%
100%
Table 14: Number of vehicles across Øresund in 2040
The distribution across the various trip purposes for road traffic is shown in Table 15. Showing
similar results on the number of commuter trips a high variation in the number of modelled
business trips is shown. It has however not been possible to reduce the number of business
trips in Sampers without reducing the number of leisure/other trips as the two purposes share
the same barrier constant. Additionally, the number of freight trips is a fixed input in Sampers
and thus cannot be changed.
Page 37 of 156
==PAGE:45==
Europasporet
6.2
Road transport
Purpose Road
Base 2040
Diff Sampers-GMM
Number of trips
GMM
Sampers
Abs
Rel
Commute
11,842
11,210
-632
-5.3%
Business
6,979
9,954
2,975
42.6%
Leisure/other
18,762
17,589
-1,173
-6.3%
Freight
6,525
4,960
-1,565
-24.0%
Total
44,108
43,713
-395
-0.9%
Distribution Purpose
GMM
Sampers
Commute
26.8%
25.6%
Business
15.8%
22.8%
Leisure/other
42.5%
40.2%
Freight
14.8%
11.3%
Total
100%
100%
Table 15: Number of trips by road transport across Øresund in 2040 for each trip purpose
Table 16 shows the travel times in minutes by car between selected OD pairs for the base
situation in 2040. The travel times for both models are based on morning data.
Base 2040
Travel time
LTM
Travel time
Sampers
Diff LTM-
Sampers
Helsingør-Helsingborg
50
51
1
Helsingør-Copenhagen
49
46
-3
Helsingborg-Copenhagen
71
82
11
Malm¨o-Copenhagen
70
68
-2
Malm¨o-Roskilde
72
68
-4
Lund-Copenhagen
72
74
2
Kastrup-Køge
31
26
-5
¨Angleholm-Køge
114
137
23
H¨assleholm-Køge
106
126
20
Table 16: Difference in average drive time by car during morning peak in GMM and Sampers
Between Helsingør-Helsingborg the travel times are nearly identical in both models. How-
ever, for routes with the majority of the length driven in Sweden, Sampers predicts a higher
drive time than GMM. Conversely, GMM predicts a slightly higher drive time for routes
Page 38 of 156
==PAGE:46==
Europasporet
6.2
Road transport
where the majority of the length is driven in Denmark. This discrepancy may be due to the
higher number of zones in Sampers for Sweden and the greater detail in Sweden’s road net-
work in Sampers compared to GMM. Additionally, GMM does not account for congestion
on the Swedish road network, resulting in lower travel times in GMM for Sweden. On the
other hand, it seems like GMM catches some congestion effects in the Danish network that
aren’t noticeable in Sampers. It is additionally noted, that GMM predicts about 5-25% higher
traffic load on some of the major roads around Copenhagen including Øresundsmotorvejen,
Køgebugtmotorvejen and Ring road 3 as shown in Table 17. One reason behind this is the fact,
that the number of freight vehicles in Sampers is a fixed input which only concerns vehicles
within and to/from Sweden. Additionally, as mentioned in the previous section the lower level
of vehicles should be compared to a higher level of passengers in public transport. Another
reason behind this difference is that Sampers predictions in Zealand are based on Swedish
travel behaviour. With a slightly higher market share of public transport in Sk˚ane than in the
capital region of Denmark, respectively 20% and 17%, this might explain the observed differ-
ences in traffic load [Hedlund 2018] [Lindqvist 2019]. It should be noted, however, that the
market share differs drastically between local areas. Furthermore, Sampers is not calibrated
to model traffic loads in Zealand.
No. Vehicles
GMM
Sampers
Abs diff.
Rel diff.
Øresundsmotorvejen (Kalvebodbroen)
162520
138232
-24288
-15%
Nordhavsntunnel (Svanemølle Kaserne)
71775
54657
-17118
-24%
Helsingørmotorvejen (7 - Kokkedal)
67820
64087
-3733
-6%
Køgebugtmotorvejen (29 - Greve)
166856
147718
-19138
-11%
Motorring 3 (24 - Roskildevej)
156630
117452
-39178
-25%
Table 17: Number of vehicles on 5 chosen road segments in 2040 base situation
By applying a so-called ’link-filter’ it is possible to determine where in the network the traffic
is distributed (in GMM) In appendix G two maps with an applied link filter on the existing
connections are shown.
From the maps it can be derived that the majority of the HH-ferries catchment area is to/from
E4 and E6 in Sweden towards Gothenburg and central Sweden. In Denmark, the majority of
the traffic is to/from Helsingørmotorvejen continuing down on E47 towards southern Zealand.
The Øresund bridge has a larger catchment area most significantly serving the Copenhagen
area, the Malm¨o area and southern Sk˚ane. However, a lot of traffic is also to/from E6 towards
Gothenburg and E47 towards southern Zealand.
Page 39 of 156
==PAGE:47==
Europasporet
6.2
Road transport
All together the difference in traffic across Øresund between the two models after the cali-
bration of Sampers is thought to be at a reasonable level. The number of modelled business
trips is higher in Sampers while the number of modelled freight trips is lower. The distribu-
tion between purposes has proven difficult to adjust. The differences in trip purposes between
the two models can partly be attributed to differences in the definitions of purposes and the
categories in which they are placed.
With different travel times and traffic loads it is further noticed, that care must be taken when
determining the benefits of a new fixed link.
The differences thus have an effect when modelling the scenarios resulting in different out-
comes of the two models.
Page 40 of 156
==PAGE:48==
Europasporet
7
Europasporet scenarios
A fixed link between Denmark and Sweden via Vedbæk and Landskrona was originally pro-
posed in a study back in 1952 together with other alignments. Since then, various connections
and alignments between the two countries have been included in several intergovernmen-
tal studies. During the studies for the Øresund Bridge, a proposal to combine a rail link
via Helsingør-Helsingborg with a road link via Copenhagen and Malm¨o culminated in the
selection of a combined road and rail link between Copenhagen and Malm¨o: the Øresund
Bridge.
With the future predictions of increasing transport demand, an upgrade of the infrastructure
connecting the two countries has been investigated in several regionally anchored projects
focusing on the urban development of the Øresund region. The most recent of these is the
IBU project, which identified a rail connection between Helsingør station and Helsingborg
C combined with a road connection linking the Helsingør motorway E47 south of Helsingør
with E4/E6/E20 south of Helsingborg as the main scenario for an HH-connection.
With a short distance between Helsingør and Helsingborg the seabed is however deeper at
this location complicating the railway alignment to secure the necessary gradient to run both
long-distance passenger and freight trains.
Additionally the HH-connection implies some concerns about the railway between Copen-
hagen and Helsingør, ’Kystbanen’, which today sees an intensive level of local traffic and
suggestions about transforming the line to a suburban railway system lower the possibility of
running international services via the HH-connection.
A proposal by several stakeholders was thus made in 2015 to ’move’ the rail connection to
run via Landskrona and Copenhagen Central to be able to serve international rail traffic. A
suggestion to include a parallel road connection was later added to the proposal. The proposal
was named ’Europasporet/ Europavejen’
The following chapter presents the evaluated scenarios for a new fixed link, Europasporet/Eu-
ropavejen, across Øresund. The chapter describes how a new fixed link can complement
existing traffic across Øresund in the scope of making a redundant connection and offer a
higher level of service for traffic in the Øresund region.
The primary focus is investigating the effects Europasporet have in the Øresund Region. How
the precise technical construction of the connection is managed is outside of this project scope.
Some preliminary considerations however have been made about the alignment for the rail-
way.
Page 41 of 156
==PAGE:49==
Europasporet
7.1
Infrastructure and travel times
Based on section 2 a series of goals have been set to be achieved by the implementation of
Europasporet:
• Strengthen the mobility and integration in the Øresund region
• Increase the number of trains between Denmark and Sweden
• Provide new and faster services
• Provide redundancy in the network in case of a closure of infrastructure
• Provide a capacity level on the railway that does not exceed the limitations
The above goals are often conflicting. Increasing the number of trains and introducing new
services and stopping patterns, increases the heterogeneity, and results in higher capacity
utilisation and reduced reliability.
7.1
Infrastructure and travel times
The inspiration for a new fixed link between Copenhagen and Landskrona is the proposal
made by Landskrona Stadt in 2015 [Schriever-Abeln et al. 2015]. The main part of the pro-
posal includes a double-track railway and 4 lane motorway in a submerged tunnel between
Copenhagen and Landskrona. Several proposals for how the fixed link should be connected
to the existing infrastructure have since been presented. In the following two different pro-
posals for the alignment on the Danish side have been evaluated. Scenario 1 follows the latest
proposal from 2022 [Alexandersson 2023] with a junction at Prøvestenen for the road and at
Copenhagen Central for the rail (Figure 17 and 18). Across Øresund the road and rail runs
in a 22.5 km submerged tunnel. Scenario 2 suggests an alternative alignment with a junction
at Nordhavn for the road and at Østerport for the Rail (Figure 17 and 18) followed by a 19.5
km submerged tunnel across Øresund. The two scenarios share the same infrastructure on the
Swedish side. The proposed scenario for the fixed link does not include any new stations in
Copenhagen or Sweden.
Page 42 of 156
==PAGE:50==
Europasporet
7.1
Infrastructure and travel times
(a) Road alignment
(b) Rail alignment
Figure 17: Alignment of Europasporet/Europavejen. Large scales are shown in appendix F
Figure 18: Alignment of the railway in Copenhagen. A large scale is shown in appendix F
Page 43 of 156
==PAGE:51==
Europasporet
7.1
Infrastructure and travel times
Road junction
The road is in both scenarios constructed parallel the to railway across Øresund and joins E6
just south of route 17 on the Swedish side. The permitted speed in the tunnel is set to 90
km/h. On the Danish side, a junction is built connecting Østlig Ringvej at Prøvestenen on an
artificial island in scenario 1. In scenario 2 the junction is moved further north connecting to
Østlig Ringvej at Nordhavnen through a ’cut n’ cover’ tunnel.
The toll payment for crossing Europavejen is assumed to be the same as for the Øresund
bridge. The applied toll is shown in Table 18. The same toll (converted to SEK.) is applied
in Sampers for commute, business and leisure/other trips. Trucks are only affected by travel
time in Sampers.
Purpose
Øresund bridge/
Europavejen
HH ferries
Car, Commute
113
70
Car/Van, Business
120
135
Car/Van, Leisure/Other
220
200
Truck, Less than 12 tonnes
780
758
Truck, More than 12 tonnes
780
899
Trucks with hanger
1,170
1,355
Truck, discount
45%
48%
Table 18: Applied user payment for the connections across Øresund
7.1.1
Landskrona rail junction
On the Swedish side, the rail tunnel emerges at Landskrona in the southern part of the city.
The railway will be constructed over ground towards the existing Landskrona station where
a new junction is needed to connect Europasporet to V¨astkustbanan. In the northern direc-
tion, Europasporet connects to V¨astkustbanan just north of Landskrona. In the Southern di-
rection, an approximately 6.5 km new double-track railway over ground is needed to ’loop
around’ and connect to ’V¨astkustbanan’ just south of the station ’H¨aljarp’. In the eastern di-
rection, Europasporet is connected to ’R˚a˚abanan’ just north of Billeberga through a 7.2 km
double-track railway over ground. An overview of the connection at Landskrona is shown in
Figure 19
Page 44 of 156
==PAGE:52==
Europasporet
7.1
Infrastructure and travel times
Figure 19: Railway junction at Landskrona, both alternatives. A large scale of the map is
shown in appendix F
7.1.2
Copenhagen Central rail junction (Scn 1)
In the original proposal of Europasporet a new underground railway station at Copenhagen
Central was proposed. Lately, this has however been opt-out instead making a junction and
tunnel portal at ’Vesterportgraven’ just north of the central station. While this should imply a
lower cost an adaption of the existing track layout at Copenhagen Central is needed. A double-
track tunnel portal is constructed in Vesterportgraven from where Europasporet turns east in a
5.1 km drilled tunnel towards Prøvestenen followed by the submerged tunnel (Figure 18).
A prerequisite of connection Europasporet at Copenhagen Central is a simplification of the
central station similar to the mentioned in section 3.2. Platform 1-4 (and 26) serves as terminus
platforms, platform 5-6 trains to/from Europasporet and 7-8 trains to/from Østerport. Further
modifications are however needed.
South of the station a new ramp from Øresundsbanens outbound track is built joining the
previous inbound track from Vestbanen. The out- and inbound tracks from Øresundsbanen
hereby cross each other using the existing flyover and run on the left-hand track the last
stretch into Copenhagen Central (Figure 20). By adding a crossing on the existing ’KØR’
fly-over a conflict-free connection between Europasporet, Ringstedbanen and Øresundsbanen
is achieved.
North of the station track 301 and 302 are redesigned to serve as the arrival/departure track
Page 45 of 156
==PAGE:53==
Europasporet
7.1
Infrastructure and travel times
towards Europasporet, and track 303 and 304 as departure/arrival tracks towards Østerport.
It must be noted that this solution requires significant changes to the track layout and major
traffic disturbances must be expected during construction due to the challenging environment
north of the station.
Figure 21 shows a simplified layout of the northern part of Copenhagen Central after the
changes.
Figure 20: Overview of the changes south of Copenhagen Central. Ringstedbanen, Vestbanen,
Øresundsbanen, Freight shunt. A large scale of the map is shown in appendix F
Page 46 of 156
==PAGE:54==
Europasporet
7.1
Infrastructure and travel times
Figure 21: Overview of the changes north of Copenhagen Central. Ringstedbanen, Vestbanen,
Øresundsbanen A large scale of the map is shown in appendix F
The tunnel for freight trains is constructed as a 4.7 km single-track drilled tunnel submerg-
ing just east of the station Carlsberg, marked with purple in Figure 20. The alignment turns
northeast running along Copenhagen harbour and joins the main tracks underneath Christian-
shavn.
7.1.3
Østerport rail junction (scn 2)
With some of the above challenges mentioned connecting Europasporet at Copenhagen Cen-
tral a scenario with a junction at Østerport/Nordhavn has been made. Just north of Østerport
station, the turnaround tracks 21 to 23 are redesigned to serve as a double track ramp and
tunnel portal. The alignment turns northeast in a 3.7 km drilled tunnel underneath Nordhavn
followed by a submerged tunnel (Figure 22 and 18). While this scenario proposes a simpler
infrastructure design with fewer changes needed to the existing network the construction cost
should be reduced with the need of a shorter tunnel.
Page 47 of 156
==PAGE:55==
Europasporet
7.1
Infrastructure and travel times
Figure 22: Overview of the track layout at Østerport with Europasporet implemented. To/from
Europasporet A large scale of the map is shown in appendix F
As in scenario 1 the tunnel for freight trains submerges just east of the station Carlsberg. In
scenario 2 the alignment turns further north through a 6.2 km single-track tunnel joining the
main tracks just north of Østerport.
7.1.4
Travel/Run time calculations
To determine the travel time by train for the two presented scenarios the speed profile for the
new infrastructure must be determined. The calculated speed profile can be found in appendix
F. The proposed infrastructure is coded into the program ’TPS’ which additionally holds infor-
mation about the specification of the signalling system and performance of the rolling stock.
The minimum travel time, acceleration, running at constant speed, and deceleration are calcu-
lated in TPS according to the performance of the rolling stock.
To the minimum travel time, an additional supplement is initially added to provide a certain
buffer in the schedule. This project takes a simple approach where the supplement is based on
the rolling stock maximum speed.
Page 48 of 156
==PAGE:56==
Europasporet
7.1
Infrastructure and travel times
Run time supplement
Speed (km/h)
Supplement (%)
<75
3
100
4
120
5
140
7
160
9
180
11
>200
13
Table 19: Added supplement to the run time
Table 19 shows the added minimum supplement. The calculated run times are then used to
determine the capacity consumption using Trafikverkets calculation method as well as coded
into the traffic models. It is noted, that a detailed timetable draft has not been made for this
project. In addition to the calculated minimum travel time and supplementary time, other
scheduling conditions may thus necessitate further supplements when determining a more
detailed schedule. This includes, for example, short distances between two trains or waiting
for crossing train paths.
In addition to the runtime, dwell times must be added to the entire run of the service. In this
project, existing dwell times are considered sufficient and used for additional services.
Page 49 of 156
==PAGE:57==
Europasporet
7.2
Traffic scenarios
7.2
Traffic scenarios
Having determined the infrastructure and travel times it is possible to define the traffic patterns
in a future scenario. The two scenarios are compared to the base situation mentioned in section
3.2.3.
Scenario 1
Scenario 1 presents a solution where the rail service on Europasporet primarily is integrated
with the existing services across Øresund, Figure 23 (and appendix B.3 Table 44). Trains
to/from Kristianstad and Karlskrona are extended from Copenhagen C towards Helsingborg/-
Gothenburg instead of terminating at Østerport. The long-distance train between Oslo/Gothen-
burg and Copenhagen is relocated to Europasporet while an extra service between Copen-
hagen and Stockholm running 5-6 departures a day runs via R˚a˚abanan and Europasporet. The
long-distance services can be further extended towards other destinations in Denmark or Ger-
many either as a supplement to existing long-distance services or as a replacement. Providing
new connections to central Sk˚ane an hourly service between Kristianstad and Kastrup Airport
via R˚a˚abanan and Europasporet is introduced. During rush hour the service is extended to
Malm¨o/Helsingborg. Lastly a new ’circle line’ is introduced. Running every half hour in rush
hour the service provides a redundant connection to existing services between (Malm¨o), Lund,
and Copenhagen. The circle line starts/terminates at Malm¨o C’s upper part and thus runs via
the old main line ’Kontinentalbanan’ serving additional destinations in the Malm¨o area.
The scenario provides significant travel time savings to the central and northwestern parts of
Sk˚ane. The service levels between Malm¨o C and Kastrup/Copenhagen Central are however
somewhat reduced as the ’circle line’ is directed around Malm¨o resulting in a longer travel
time than through the Citytunnel. The effects of this are further commented on in the results,
section 8.1.
Page 50 of 156
==PAGE:58==
Europasporet
7.2
Traffic scenarios
Figure 23: scenario 1 traffic patterns with Europasporet connecting at Copenhagen Central
and the introduction of a Øresund ’circle line’. One line = one train per hour. Only traffic
crossing Øresund are shown. Additional traffic are shown in appendix B
Page 51 of 156
==PAGE:59==
Europasporet
7.2
Traffic scenarios
Scenario 2
Scenario 2 shares to a wide extent the same proposal for rail service as scenario 1.
With Europasporet connecting at Østerport scenario 2 however provides a possibility to extend
services to additional destinations in Zealand/Denmark. In scenario 2 the ’circle line’ is omit-
ted and a loop to/from Vestbanen on Zealand is introduced integrating Danish regional trains
into the ’Øresund system’. The two regional trains between Ringsted/Roskilde and Kastrup
are extended to Malm¨o C and Lund C. Continuing to Landskrona and returning to Østerport
via Europasporet the service is further extended to/from Holbæk/Kalundborg ’replacing’ the
existing regional trains, Figure 24 (and appendix B.3 Table 45).
The scenario introduces a 5-minute longer travel time to/from Copenhagen Central via Eu-
ropasporet but offers direct services to Nørreport and Østerport
Page 52 of 156
==PAGE:60==
Europasporet
7.2
Traffic scenarios
Figure 24: scenario 2 traffic patterns with Europasporet connecting at Østerport and the
introduction of a Øresund ’loop’. One line = one train per hour. Only traffic crossing Øresund
are shown. Additional traffic are shown in appendix B
Page 53 of 156
==PAGE:61==
Europasporet
7.2
Traffic scenarios
Comparison of travel time by rail
Table 20 shows the travel times to/from Copenhagen for selected destinations. The introduc-
tion of additional train systems in the Øresund Region additionally increases the number of
connections for several stations in the two scenarios. The greatest travel time savings are
achieved for travellers to/from Landskrona with up to 59 minutes saved in scenario 1. To
Helsingborg and Gothenburg up to 52 minutes saved. In scenario 2 the travel is longer than
in scenario 1 due to the added distance between Copenhagen C and Østerport. However, it
should be noted that travel times to Østerport and Nørreport increase for passengers to/from
Sweden in scenario 1 as a change at Copenhagen Central is required.
Travel times to/from
Copenhagen C
Base
Scn 1
Scn 2
Landskrona
73
14
19
Lund C
48
32
37
Helsingborg C
74
23
28
H¨assleholm C
75
42
47
Gothenburg C
169
117
122
Stockholm C
286
254
259
Table 20: Travel time (in minutes) by train from Copenhagen C in the base situation, scenario
1, and 2
For freight trains an average travel time reduction of 22 minutes is achieved depending on the
destination. The largest reduction towards Gothenburg.
7.2.1
Effects on capacity consumption
The proposed scenarios introduce a change or increase in the existing traffic and thus im-
ply a higher capacity consumption on several lines including sections of V¨astkustbanan and
R˚a˚abanan as shown in Table 21. Scenario 1 and 2 do in general not relief capacity of any
of the evaluated lines in Sweden and several lines are at/or above the ’high’ capacity limit of
81% presented by Trafikverket. A high capacity increase is observed on the single track sec-
tion between Billeberga and Teckomatorp on R˚a˚abanan which sees an increase from 2 trains
per hour to up to 9 trains per hour.
Page 54 of 156
==PAGE:62==
Europasporet
7.2
Traffic scenarios
Line
Base
Scn 1
Scn 2
Østerport-Copenhagen Central
80.0%
40.0%*
80.0%
(Copenhagen)-Kalvebod-Kastrup
81.1%
67.8%
57.3%
Kastrup-Lernacken
71.1%
52.5%
52.5%
Lernacken-Hyllie-Malm¨o C
85.8%
81.2%
81.2%
Lernacken-Sv˚agertop-Malm¨o C
47.4%
52.3%
37.0%
Malm¨o C-Lund C
69.4%
69.4%
69.4%
Lund C-K¨avlinge
58.9%
62.9%
62.9%
K¨avlinge-Landskrona
89.2%
70.6%
70.6%
Landskrona-Raml¨osa
73.4%
73.4%
Raml¨osa-Helsingborg C
60.6%
62.6%
62.6%
Billeberga-Teckomatorp
17.9%
77.2%
77.2%
Copenhagen Central -Landskrona
-
72.4%
72.4%
Freight shunt
-
0.38%
0.45%
Table 21: Capacity consumption i the evaluated scenarios in peak. Only the highest direction
is shown being the limiting factor in introducing additional services.
*After a simplification of Copenhagen Central
A peculiar instance is the section K¨avlinge-Landskrona-Raml¨osa on V¨astkustbanan with an
89.2% capacity consumption in the base situation, a decrease is shown in the two scenarios
despite additional services. In the base situation, K¨avlinge-Landskrona-Raml¨osa is calculated
as one long section as there are no junctions with the possibility to ’alter’ traffic. The imple-
mentation of Europasporet with a junction at Landskrona provides a possibility to ’squeeze’
in the new services in the gaps between existing services utilising capacity that previously was
limited due to the dependency between the two segments.
With freight trains relocated from The Øresund bridge a relief of capacity is observed Kalvebod-
Kastrup and Kastrup-Lernacken and with the integration of Danish regional trains in the Øre-
sund system, scenario 2, capacity consumption between Kalvebod, Kastrup and Lernacken is
categorised ’low’.
It is likely to assume that the capacity relive could be used to run additional trains. However, as
mentioned in section 4.1, a low capacity consumption on some segments does not necessarily
yield the possibility of running additional trains at these segments. Running additional trains
across the Øresund bridge thus adds a higher capacity consumption on the connecting lines
which will result in an inappropriate and vulnerable system in the case of traffic disturbances.
Page 55 of 156
==PAGE:63==
Europasporet
7.2
Traffic scenarios
Additional safety regulations apply in the case of tunnel operations requiring a maximum of
3 trains at one time per direction in the tunnel. This is not a problem in the existing tunnel
Kastrup-Peberholm. With the option to run freight trains through Europasporet the maximum
number of trains that can be served per direction in the tunnel is estimated to be 9 trains per
hour due to a longer travel time for freight trains.
A high capacity consumption at Copenhagen Central will most likely be experienced in both
scenarios. Table 22 shows the expected number of through- and turnaround trains during peak
hours.
Base
Alt 1*
Alt 2
Through trains
16
14
16
Turnarounds
7
10
6
Total
23
24
22
Table 22: Number of trains at Copenhagen Central during peak hour
*After a simplification of Copenhagen Central
While an increase in the number of turnarounds in scenario 1 is presented it must be noted this
solution requires a simplification of the station. With the proposed track layout 5 platforms
are reserved for turnarounds yielding approximately 30 minutes for each turnaround including
all movements in and out of the station which is considered sufficient [S. A. Trafikstyrelsen
2013][Banedanmark 2021a]. This leaves 2 platforms for trains to/from Europasporet with a
maximum handling time of 8.5 minutes and two platforms for trains to/from Vestbanen with
a maximum handling time of 7.5 minutes.
Scenario 2 reduces the number of turnarounds with 1 train per hour compared to the base
situation. The capacity is thus increased slightly but must not be expected to yield a noticeable
change. The number of through trains in scenario 2 is kept at the same level.
Page 56 of 156
==PAGE:64==
Europasporet
8
Traffic Modelling Results
As described the two traffic models, GMM and Sampers, provide information about the ex-
pected traffic level for each scenario. The results for the two scenarios with a new fixed link
are compared to the base scenario. This section reviews the overall results for both scenar-
ios while subsections provide a further analysis of the distinct for the individual scenario.
Sampers has not been ’re-calibrated’ for the two scenarios yielding some (major) differences
between the two models which are further highlighted and commented on.
With the implementation of Europasporet the demand increases for both public and road trans-
port. Additionally, some existing trips might change their preferred route which results in a
change in the number of users on the existing connections. It must be noted, that the number
of departures of the HH ferries was not changed in the analysis. While the ferries experience
a decrease in the number of users in both scenarios it is thus likely, that the current sched-
ule must be reduced making it even less attractive. This is further commented on in section
11.4.
8.1
Rail traffic
While both scenarios provide new connections and reduced travel times, one of the main
results is the number of passengers that can be expected in the system. Table 23 presents the
number of passengers across Øresund, the change from the base scenario, and the distribution
between the three connections.
Public transport
Scn 1
Scn 1 Change
Scn 2
Scn 2 Change
No. trips
GMM Sampers GMM Sampers GMM Sampers GMM Sampers
Øresund Bridge
32,355
38,720 -26.0%
-13.7% 34,224
38,257 -21.7%
-14.7%
HH ferries
5,278
5,310 -47.7%
-47.9%
4,798
4,913 -52.4%
-51.8%
Europasporet
25,705
23,658
N/A
N/A
27,365
26,524
N/A
N/A
Øresund Total
63,337
67,688
17.7%
22.9% 66,387
69,694
23.4%
26.6%
Distribution
GMM Sampers
GMM Sampers
Øresund Bridge
51%
57%
53%
55%
HH ferries
8%
8%
7%
7%
Europasporet
41%
35%
41%
38%
Total
100%
100%
100%
100%
Table 23: Number of trips by public transport across Øresund in scenario 1 and 2
Page 57 of 156
==PAGE:65==
Europasporet
8.1
Rail traffic
Both GMM and Sampers predict a similar change in traffic on the HH connection for both
scenarios. The differences between the two models are most significant in scenario 1 with a
17.7% increase in total passengers in GMM and, a 22.9% increase in Sampers. In scenario
2 the increase is predicted to 23.4% and 26.6% in GMM and Sampers respectively. The
distribution between the Øresund Bridge and Europasporet however differs between the two
models with a 6 percentage point higher passenger load on Europasporet in GMM scenario
1 and a 3 percentage point higher load in scenario 2. It must thus be assumed, that a larger
proportion of the existing travellers continue to use the connection via the Øresund Bridge in
Sampers than GMM.
With travel time savings being one of the main components to attract new users the results
are somewhat aligned with the computed elasticities, Sampers showing a higher sensitivity
towards travel time and thus a higher increase in the number of generated trips. The differ-
ence is however lower than initially expected, considering that Sampers showed a lot higher
sensitivity to travel time than GMM. Hence it could be suggested that other factors, such as
e.g, frequency and/or wait time are weighed differently in GMM and Sampers.
Table 24 shows the number of passengers across Øresund and distribution between each pur-
pose. While the two models generated approximately the same distribution on each trip pur-
pose in the base scenario, a noticeable change is modelled in both scenarios. Sampers predicts
a higher change in Leisure trips than commuter/business trips. GMM conversely a higher
change in commuter/business trips than Leisure. This is again expected referring back to the
elasticities, Sampers predicting leisure trips to be more time-sensitive than commuter trips
and GMM predicting commuter trips to be more time-sensitive than leisure trips.
Purpose Public
Scn 1
Scn 1 Change
Scn 2
Scn 2 Change
No. trips
GMM Sampers GMM Sampers GMM Sampers GMM Sampers
Commute+Business 36,853
35,124 26.6%
19.7% 39,058
35,690 32.0%
21.6%
Leisure/other
26,484
32,564
9.4%
26.6% 27,329
34,004 12.9%
32.2%
Total
63,337
67,688 17.7%
22.9% 66,387
69,694 23.4%
26.6%
Distribution
GMM Sampers
GMM Sampers
Commute+Business
58%
52%
59%
51%
Leisure/other
42%
48%
41%
49%
Total
100%
100%
100%
100%
Table 24: Number of trips by public transport across Øresund for each trip purpose
Page 58 of 156
==PAGE:66==
Europasporet
8.1
Rail traffic
Altogether the two models predict an 18-23% increase in public travel demand for scenario 1
and a 23-27% increase in scenario 2. Compared to other proposed large infrastructure projects
this is thought to be in the high span e.g., Kattegatforbindelsen with predicted 31% increase
[Sund&Bælt et al. 2022] or the HH-connection with predicted 11% increase [Trafikverket et
al. 2021].
With a difference of 5-7% in the total number of passengers between GMM and Sampers the
results seem reasonable considering the model’s differences.
Scenario 1
Figure 25 shows the change in the number of passengers on link level for scenario 1 compared
to the base scenario.
With the implementation of Europasporet a relocation of passengers in the network is shown.
On the Swedish V¨astkustbanan, an increase is predicted while the number of passengers on
the Øresund Bridge and the Danish Kystbanen decreases. A total increase in the number of
passengers is predicted with the vast majority being trips from the Helsingborg area which is
also shown by an increase in the number of passengers at Helsingborg C (Table 25). Addi-
tionally, changes on the radial lines in the Copenhagen area are predicted including Vestbanen
towards Høje Taastrup. This is also shown by an increase in the number of changes to the
S-train and the Metro at Copenhagen Central (Table 25), indicating that a large amount of the
passengers have destinations further around Copenhagen.
In scenario 1 a new ’circle line’ is introduced adding three stations, (Sv˚agertorp, Persborg, and
Roseng˚ard) in the South Eastern Malm¨o area to the ’Øresund network’. A total increase of
5,000 passengers is modelled on these stations (Table 25). 2,200 of these are however ’local’
travellers to other destinations in Sweden, while 2,800 are predicted to use the service for
journeys across Øresund (Sampers predictions). With 44 departures during a day, this yields
an average load of 64 passengers per departure.
The predicted number of passengers to/from Eastern Malm¨o in GMM is slightly higher with
3,200 passengers during a day. This is however most likely due to the larger zones in GMM
and thus a larger catchment area of the three stations.
The change in passengers to/from Eastern Malm¨o should be compared to a total reduction
of 9,000 passengers to/from Hyllie and Triangeln which in scenario 1 experiences a decrease
in the number of departures. Some of these passengers must be expected to use Sv˚agertorp,
Persborg, and Roseng˚ard instead, while other trips are ’lost’. Around 56,000 passengers still
have Hyllie or Triangeln as their start/final destination in scenario 1 from where 19,000 are
travellers across Øresund. This yields an average load of 244 passengers per departure with
Page 59 of 156
==PAGE:67==
Europasporet
8.1
Rail traffic
78 departures during a day between Hyllie/Triangeln and Denmark. As a result, the additional
service of Eastern Malm¨o is thus omitted in scenario 2 to preserve a high level of service of
Hyllie or Triangeln for journeys across Øresund.
Figure 25: Change in number of passengers on link-level for scenario 1 compared to base.
Results in Zealand based on GMM, Sweden on Sampers. A large scale of the map is shown in
appendix H
Page 60 of 156
==PAGE:68==
Europasporet
8.1
Rail traffic
Additionally, R˚a˚abanan in central Sk˚ane are also connected to the Øresund network adding
Billebeberga, Teckomatorp, and Marieholm stations to the network. A total increase of 600
daily passengers is predicted in Sampers on these three stations in scenario 1 (Table 25) which
is considered low. Together with a long-distance service to Stockholm, the service provides
a fast connection between Copenhagen and H¨assleholm with a total of 3500 daily users. In
GMM only Teckomatorp is added to the network, as the three stations share the same zone.
The total increase in the number of travellers in GMM from Teckomatorp is predicted to be
500 passengers while 3500 passengers use the service via R˚a˚abanan.
Page 61 of 156
==PAGE:69==
Europasporet
8.1
Rail traffic
Number of daily passengers
Basis
Scn 1
Scn 2
Copenhagen H (Regional/Long distance)
85,100
108,000
76,100
Transfer Metro
16,900
22,000
16,100
Transfer Bus
6,300
7,900
6,400
Transfer S-train
23,000
32,700
17,100
Kastrup Airport (Regional/Long distance)
33,400
29,100
29,000
Transfer Metro
17,800
14,100
13,700
Transfer Bus
600
500
500
Nørreport (Regional/Long distance)
12,900
11,900
18,400
Transfer Metro
5,800
5,500
7,900
Transfer Bus
1,100
1,000
1,800
Transfer S-train
700
500
1,100
Østerport (Regional/Long distance)
5,300
4,400
21,300
Transfer Metro
2,000
1,800
4,500
Transfer Bus
1,000
800
2,000
Transfer S-train
1,100
800
10,700
Copenhagen S (Regional/Long distance)
18,400
18,100
24,900
Transfer Metro
1,100
1,100
2,500
Transfer S-train
5,500
5,500
7,900
Malm¨o
56,300
51,900
54,200
Transfer
32,100
27,000
29,600
Lund C
41,600
42,700
45,800
Transfer
25,800
26,100
28,600
Helsingborg C
29,400
33,100
41,200
Transfer
11,600
14,800
21,800
Landskrona
15,100
23,900
28,100
Transfer
4,900
12,700
16,200
Billeberga/Teckomatorp/Marieholm
3,400
4,000
3,800
Transfer
1,100
1,500
1,500
Hyllie
30,700
25,700
28,500
Transfer
23,600
19,500
21,700
Triangeln
34,800
30,800
31,600
Transfer
20,800
18,600
17,900
Reseng˚ard/Persborg/Sv˚agertorp
2,300
7,300
4,400
Transfer
300
2,900
1,800
Table 25: Passenger loads on selected stations (Based on GMM in Denmark, Sampers in
Sweden)
Page 62 of 156
==PAGE:70==
Europasporet
8.1
Rail traffic
Scenario 2
Figure 26 shows the change in number of passengers on link-level for scenario 2 compared
to the base scenario. The results are somewhat similar to scenario 1 with some changes. A
slightly higher amount of passengers traversing Europasporet is predicted with an additional
increase in the passenger load on V¨astkustbanan. An increase in the number of passengers and
transfers at Helsingborg C, Landskrona and Lund C is predicted while a reduction is shown
at Malm¨o C, Triangeln and Hyllie as in scenario 1 (Table 25). A change in the distribution
of passengers on stations in the Copenhagen area as well as along the radial lines is also
observed. A high increase in the number of passengers at Østerport and Nørreport is predicted
from which a large amount of the passengers change to either the S-train or the Metro.
In scenario 2 regional trains to/from western Zealand are connected to the Øresund Network
in a ’loop’ around Lund and Malm¨o. The introduction of a direct connection from Roskilde
to Sweden primarily relocates passengers who previously travelled via Copenhagen Central
to Ring Syd. The increase in the number of passengers on Vestbanen is however limited west
of Høje Taastrup.
Page 63 of 156
==PAGE:71==
Europasporet
8.1
Rail traffic
Figure 26: Change in number of passengers on link-level for scenario 2 compared to base.
Results in Zealand based on GMM, Sweden on Sampers. A large scale of the map is shown in
appendix H
Page 64 of 156
==PAGE:72==
Europasporet
8.2
Road traffic
8.2
Road traffic
As for the rail connection, a new road connection would also be expected to have an impact on
the number of vehicles crossing Øresund. Table 26 presents the predicted number of vehicles
and the distribution between the three connections. While a higher increase in the number of
vehicles is predicted in scenario 2, the results do not differ significantly between each scenario
as the road connection is similar in the two proposals. However, the predicted traffic compared
across GMM and Sampers is significantly different.
The two models somewhat agree on the impact on the HH ferries with more than a 55%
reduction in the number of vehicles. GMM however, models a higher relocation of vehicles
from the Øresundbridge despite a much lower traffic volume on Europavejen than Sampers.
This is further noticeable in the total traffic increase where Sampers models a span of 28.0-
34.5% increase, GMM 4.5-4.7% increase. Hence, Sampers generates a much higher level of
new trips across Øresund than GMM.
Page 65 of 156
==PAGE:73==
Europasporet
8.2
Road traffic
Road traffic
Scn 1
Scn 1 Change
Scn 2
Scn 2 Change
No. Vehicles
GMM Sampers GMM Sampers GMM Sampers GMM Sampers
Cars
Øresund Bridge
25,321
28,179 -22.0%
-13.6% 24,873
27,893 -23.4%
-14.5%
HH ferries
2,050
1,768 -60.0%
-71.1%
1,883
1,606 -63.2%
-73.8%
Europavejen
11,459
21,031
N/A
N/A
12,141
24,348
N/A
N/A
Øresund Total
38,831
50,978
3.3%
31.5% 38,896
53,847
1,313
15,094
Truck and Vans*
Øresund Bridge
934
1,940 -76.9%
-27.4%
1,041
1,938 -74.2%
-27.5%
HH ferries
228
1,975 -90.8%
-13.7%
199
1,906 -92.0%
-16.7%
Europavejen
6,079
1,045
N/A
N/A
6,053
1,116
N/A
N/A
Øresund Total
7,241
4,960
11.0%
0.0%
7,292
4,960
11.8%
0.0%
Road, total
Øresund Bridge
26,255
30,119 -28.1%
-14.7% 25,914
29,831 -29.0%
-15.5%
HH ferries
2,278
37,43 -70.0%
-55.5%
2,082
3,512 -72.6%
-58.2%
Europasporet
17,539
22,076
N/A
N/A
18,193
25,464
N/A
N/A
Øresund Total
46,072
55,938
4.5%
28.8% 46,189
58,807
4.7%
34.5%
Distribution
GMM Sampers
GMM Sampers
Øresund Bridge
57%
54%
56%
51%
HH ferries
5%
7%
5%
6%
Europavejen
38%
39%
39%
43%
Total
100%
100%
100%
100%
Table 26: Number of vehicles across Øresund in scenario 1 and 2. (*Trucks and Vans is a
fixed input in Sampers and does not change)
The major difference can partly be explained by a high sensitivity to travel time combined
with lower substitution between road and rail transport in Sampers as mentioned in section
5.2. Table 27 shows the number of vehicles for each trip purpose and the distribution between
them. A high increase is modelled across all trip proposes in Sampers with a 50-60% increase
in commuter trips, a 23-28% increase in business trips, and a 25-31% increase in leisure/other
trips in scenario 1 and 2 respectively. The increase in GMM is much lower with 6% respec-
tively 7% for commuter trips in scenario 1 and 2. In scenario 1 a slightly higher increase in
business and leisure trips at 2.9% and 1.6% is expected compared to scenario 2 at 2.7% and
1.6% respectively. The difference in GMM between the two scenarios is however minor and
Page 66 of 156
==PAGE:74==
Europasporet
8.2
Road traffic
subject to stochastic.
Freight traffic has the biggest relative change in GMM with an 11-12% increase correspond-
ing to approximately 36% of the total increase in traffic.
The distribution across the various purposes has also changed compared to the basis with a
higher share of commuters in both GMM and Sampers.
Purpose Road
Scn 1
Scn 1 Change
Scn 2
Scn 2 Change
Commute
12,584
16,798
6.3% 49.8% 12,736
18,038
7.6% 60.9%
Business
7,185
12,249
2.9% 23.1%
7,167
12,744
2.7% 28.0%
Leisure/other
19,062
21,931
1.6% 24.7% 18,993
23,065
1.2% 31.1%
Freight
7,241
4,960 11.0%
0.0%
7,292
4,960 11.8%
0.0%
Total
46,072
55,938
4.5% 28.0% 46,189
58,807
4.7% 34.5%
Distribution
GMM Sampers
GMM Sampers
Commute
27%
30%
28%
31%
Business
16%
22%
16%
22%
Lesiure/other
41%
39%
41%
39%
Freight
16%
9%
16%
8%
Total
100%
100%
100%
100%
Table 27: Number of vehicles across Øresund for each trip purpose in scenario 1 and 2
To better understand why such a significant difference in road is predicted between the two
models a further evaluation of the modelled travel time savings for specific OD relations has
been conducted and shown in Table 28.
Page 67 of 156
==PAGE:75==
Europasporet
8.2
Road traffic
Travel time savings road
Scn 1
Scn 2
GMM
Sampers
GMM
Sampers
Helsingør-Copenhagen
-1
-2
-1
-2
Helsingborg-Copenhagen
-20
-22
-21
-24
Malm¨o-Copenhagen
0
-4
0
-4
Malm¨o-Roskilde
+1
-3
-1
-3
Lund-Copenhagen
0
-5
-1
-7
Kastrup-Køge
+1
+1
+1
-1
¨Angleholm-Køge
-19
-23
-19
-24
H¨assleholm-Køge
-7
-12
-8
-12
Table 28: Predicted average travel time savings by car in minutes in GMM and Sampers for
specific OD relations
Looking at Table 28 it is noted that the predicted travel time savings differ between the two
models, with Sampers showing a higher reduction than GMM for all the analysed OD rela-
tions. An explanation behind this is that GMM does not account for congestion in the Swedish
network as mentioned in section 5.2. Thus a relief in congestion on e.g., E22 and E6 in Swe-
den is not accounted for. Furthermore, the predicted traffic level on some of the major roads
in Denmark is much lower in Sampers than GMM (Table 29). Hence, a higher level of con-
gestion might be modelled in the Danish network in GMM.
Base
Scn 1
Scn 2
No. Vehicles
GMM
Sampers
GMM
Sampers
GMM
Sampers
Øresundsmotorvejen
(Kalvebodbroen)
162,520
138,232
165,082
143,208
162,934
139,741
Nordhavsntunnel
(Svanemølle Kaserne)
71,775
54,657
71,926
62,103
73,915
66,652
Helsingørmotorvejen
(7 - Kokkedal)
67,820
64,087
64,273
60,088
64,205
59,821
Køgebugtmotorvejen
(29 - Greve)
166,856
147,718
167,076
147,686
167,278
145,653
Motorring 3
(24 - Roskildevej)
156,630
117,452
155,474
116,509
155,870
114,395
Table 29: Number of vehicles on 5 chosen road segments in 2040 base situation
Page 68 of 156
==PAGE:76==
Europasporet
8.2
Road traffic
Higher travel time savings in combination with a higher sensitivity to travel time in Sampers
can thus explain some of the differences in the predictions for road traffic between Sampers
and GMM.
Compared to other proposed ’parallel’ connections presenting similar travel time savings and
demand is the HH-connection [Trafikverket et al. 2021] and Bogense-Juelsminde (Lillebælt)
connection [Vejdirektoratet and Trafikstyrelsen 2013] where a 9% respectively 3% increase in
road traffic were predicted in GMM. On the Kattegat connection, with a higher demand and
travel time savings, a 29% increase was predicted.
The predictions by GMM are thus considered in the lower span but still reasonable, while
Sampers tends to overshoot.
Scenario 1
Figure 27 shows the change in number of vehicles on link-level for scenario 1 compared to
the base scenario.
A major part of the traffic crossing Europavejen is a shift from the HH ferries and the Øre-
sund Bridge. A decrease in traffic load on Helsingørmotorvejen is thus predicted while a
higher load on E6 on the Swedish west coast must be expected. The predicted traffic load on
Øresundsmotorvejen and the Eastern Ring Road in the Danish Network shows that the addi-
tional traffic volume from Europavejen more or less outweighs the decrease from the Øresund
Bridge when the two routes join at the Eastern Ring Road/Øresundsmotorvejen. A small in-
crease is predicted on Amager Boulevard towards Copenhagen city centre. The relief of traffic
on the southern part of E6/E22 in Sweden is depicted as being moved further north to route
17 and 110 from Landskrona to inland Sk˚ane.
Page 69 of 156
==PAGE:77==
Europasporet
8.2
Road traffic
Figure 27: Change in number of vehicles on link-level for scenario 1 compared to base.
Results in Zealand based on GMM, Sweden on Sampers. A large scale of the map is shown in
appendix H
Page 70 of 156
==PAGE:78==
Europasporet
8.2
Road traffic
Scenario 2
Depicted in Figure 28 the change in number of vehicles on link-level is shown for scenario 2.
The grand picture is quite similar to scenario 1 with a slightly higher shift from the Øresund
Bridge and the HH ferries to Europavejen. In scenario 2 Europavejen junction is moved
further north to Nordhavnen on the Danish side. The result of this is that a larger amount of
the traffic chooses a northwestern route around Copenhagen via Ring Road 2 instead of the
southeastern alternative via Øresundsmotorvejen.
Figure 28: Change in number of vehicles on link-level for scenario 2 compared to base.
Results in Zealand based on GMM, Sweden on Sampers. A large scale of the map is shown in
appendix H
Page 71 of 156
==PAGE:79==
Europasporet
8.2
Road traffic
With a higher amount of traffic crossing Europavejen in Sampers, it has been investigated
where Sampers predicts the additional load to be distributed in the network. The picture is
similar to the predictions made by GMM for both scenario 1 and 2 but with a two to three
times higher increase. The results of the change in link loads predicted by the individual
model are shown in appendix H, Figure 53 to 56.
As mentioned in section 6.2 Sampers predictions of traffic load in the base scenario differ
significantly on some of the major roads in the Copenhagen area with a lower traffic volume
than GMM. This might yield the possibility of increasing the traffic load in Sampers more
than GMM without having a major effect on congestion.
In appendix G Figure 46-48, the catchment area of each connection is shown by applying a
link filter (GMM). The catchment area of the HH-ferries has significantly decreased with the
majority of the traffic to/from E6 and E4 relocated via Europavejen. Furthermore, a lot of
the traffic from Central Sk˚ane seems to be relocated from the Øresund bridge to Europave-
jen.
Page 72 of 156
==PAGE:80==
Europasporet
9
Socio-economic assessment
As an essential tool for evaluating and comparing the different alternatives, a socio-economic
analysis is conducted focusing on the Danish effects using values from GMM. The analysis
quantifies the individual effects of an initiative to determine its value to society against the
cost. Effects are expressed monetarily as the social utility value and are calculated for each
scenario relative to the baseline scenario. For all the years in the calculation period, the ef-
fects are discounted to reflect their value in a selected base year, allowing present effects to be
compared with future effects.
In order to conduct a socio-economic analysis various inputs are needed. The following chap-
ters further describe these inputs and calculation methods. Due to various difficulties in as-
sessing benefits for rail freight, this part has not been included in the following but is further
described in section 10.3. The analysis is conducted according to national guidelines using
the Danish Transport Ministry’s spreadsheet model TERESA 6.0.
9.1
General assumptions
Discount Rate: Allows for the comparison of effects over different years, by giving less
weight to values in the future compared to those occurring today.
The rate is in Denmark currently 3.5% per annum for the first 35 years from the calculation
year, and 2.5% per annum. for the subsequent years [Finansministeriet et al. 2022].
Economic Growth Expectations (GDP): The value impact of a change in the transport sector
depends on the overall economic development (GDP) and willingness to pay. Projections for
values such as time savings, and thus user effects for the future, are based on forecasts from
the Danish Ministry of Finance.
Net Tax Factor (NAF): To convert factor prices to market prices, the current NAF of 1.28 is
used in Denmark [Finansministeriet et al. 2022].
Marginal cost of public funds: Since public expenditure determines the level of tax financ-
ing, which negatively impacts labour supply, the tax distortion factor accounts for changes in
all public costs in the calculation. In Denmark, a factor is set at 10%. The factor is also used
to determine the gain in labour supply resulting from time savings in transport.
Page 73 of 156
==PAGE:81==
Europasporet
9.1
General assumptions
Transport Economic Unit Prices: Unit prices include official estimates for values such as
time savings, operating costs, or emission costs, typically reflecting a national average per
km, hour, or unit. Estimates are provided for each year and are projected with expected price
developments. The latest version, provided by the Ministry of Transport is used for the socio-
economic analyses [Finansministeriet et al. 2022].
Price level: For this project, 2023 market prices are used, representing the value as perceived
by a citizen in 2023.
Opening and calculation Year: The predictions made in GMM and Sampers are based on
the year 2040 and will thus be used as the technical opening year. With a construction period
of eight years, the calculation year is set to 2032 [Trafikverket et al. 2021].
Calculation Period: To assess the profitability of an infrastructure project a 50-year calcula-
tion period is used in Denmark
Adjustment Period: Since it is assumed that new users will take some time to adapt and
benefit from the changes, an adjustment period is specified. In the first 4 years, 78%, 84%,
92%, and 100% of the effects for new users and the associated ticket revenues are accounted
for respectively. This is the same practice used for the HH-connection [Trafikverket et al.
2021].
Traffic Growth: Traffic growth depends on many factors, particularly the supply of services.
Referring back to section 2.1 the average growth in traffic between 2009 and 2019 has been
1.3% for rail traffic, 0.8% for road traffic, and 2,0% for freight traffic. In the future, the
situation might be different but this project assumes an underlying traffic growth independent
of the supply of transport according to the above for the first 25 years. After 25 years a steady
level is assumed which is a standard used in similar projects [Incentive, Odgaard, and Kolstrup
2015] [Trafikverket et al. 2021]. The estimates are roughly in line with forecasts made in the
analysis of the HH-connection [Trafikverket et al. 2021].
Scrap value: Scrap Value is the value of the project after the calculation period. The scrap
value is calculated as the original construction cost discounted from the last year of the calcu-
lation period.
Page 74 of 156
==PAGE:82==
Europasporet
9.2
Construction cost
9.2
Construction cost
The primary cost of Europasporet including an adaption of the existing network is accumu-
lated in the construction cost. Since this project involves analysing new infrastructure, it is
assumed to be in the ”definition phase” following the ’New budgeting principles’ (NPB). The
primary goal of this phase is to conduct preliminary investigations regarding the project’s rele-
vance, economic feasibility, and potential alternative solutions. The aim is to make simplified
estimates of various construction costs, which can be carried over to a further detailed analy-
sis if necessary. For projects in the definition phase, the guidelines presented in Figure 29 are
used to estimate the construction budget [Heydari 2022].
The overall project is divided into various technical sub-elements, which are then multiplied
by their respective unit prices. Determining the unit prices can be challenging due to varia-
tions in construction sites, work conditions, and construction difficulty. Therefore, unit prices
can be adjusted if specific challenges are identified in the project. Since the project is in the
preliminary phase, a 50% contingency reserve is added.
Figure 29: Budget composition used in the projects preliminary phase [Heydari 2022]
Page 75 of 156
==PAGE:83==
Europasporet
9.2
Construction cost
A preliminary assessment of the construction cost of Europasporet has previously been con-
ducted in 2019 and updated in 2023 and will thus be used as the main input [LandskronaStadt
and Kreera 2019][Alexandersson 2023].
The following projects have additionally been used as a reference:
• Strategic assessment of a fixed link Helsingør-Helsingborg [Trafikverket et al. 2021]
• Assessment of Østlig Ringvej [VD et al. 2020]
• Assessment of a fixed link across Fehmarn Belt [Incentive, Odgaard, and Kolstrup 2015]
• Assessment of a simplification of Copenhagen central station [Banedanmark 2023a]
All unit prices from the above projects are projected to a 2023 price level. As the exchange
rate between Swedish and Danish kroner an average of the last 5 years has been used, 1 SEK
= 1.44 DKK [DST 2024b].
Table 30 shows the calculated budget for the two scenarios including a 50% contingency
reserve added. It must be noted, that significant uncertainties are implied when using unit
prices for the construction cost. This especially applies to tunnel construction as only a limited
amount of e.g., drilled tunnels for long-distance trains exist in Denmark and drilling under
Copenhagen is more complicated concerning the alignment. The tunnel construction cost is
primarily based on studies concerning the HH-connection where additional specifications for
underwater tunnels are needed.
Page 76 of 156
==PAGE:84==
Europasporet
9.2
Construction cost
Post
Qty. Scn 1
Scn 1
(M. DKK)
Qty. Scn 2
Scn 2
(M. DKK)
Submerged tunnel* (km)
- Road + Rail
22.5
32,144
19.5
27,858
Drilled tunnel, rail* (km)
- 2 tracks
10.2
4,108
7.4
2,951
Tunnel connection
- drilled/submerged
1
907
1
907
Tunnelportal rail
2
900
2
900
Tunnelportal road
2
677
2
677
Ramp Copenhagen C (km)
0.5
149
N/A
Trackwork Copenhagen C
103
N/A
Ramp Østerport
N/A
0.4
127
Trackwork Østerport
N/A
41
Connection V¨astkustbanan (km)
11.7
2,946
11.7
2,946
Connection R˚a˚abanan (km)
7.2
1,813
7.2
1,813
Connection Teckomatorp (km)
0.9
113
0.9
113
Connection Esl¨ov (km)
3.2
403
3.2
403
New Landskrona St
1
413
1
413
Cut and cover tunnel* (km)
- Road
N/A
2
1,914
Road connection Østlig Ringvej
1,128
1,128
Road connection E6
1,356
1,356
Construction Sites (7%)
3,301
3,048
Sum
50,460
46,594
Correcctional reserve 50%
Total sum
75,690
69,891
50/50 DK/SE
37,845
34,945
Freight shunt* (km)
- Drilled tunnel, 1 track
4.7
2,915
7.1
4,403
Table 30: Construction cost for the tunnel and additional infrastructure (*Including all tech-
nical installations
Page 77 of 156
==PAGE:85==
Europasporet
9.3
Maintenance and operation costs
Scenario 1 implies an approximately 6% higher cost than scenario 2. The most considerable
expense is the tunnel construction. The alignment proposed in scenario 2 reduces the tunnel
length needed. Scenario 1 also includes a higher cost connecting the railway at Copenhagen
Central which implies a complicated modification of the existing track layout.
Several elements are not included in the presented budget cost as they are too challenging to
asses in the definition phase. This includes area acquisition, civil works, relocating pipes and
cables and nuisance during construction. Furthermore, the areas in which construction sites
should be placed have not further been defined. An extra 7% of the calculated cost has been
added to cover the cost of construction sites [Trafikverket et al. 2021]. But considering the
challenging environment in which the construction should take place a higher cost might be
expected and the additional costs should be defined in a more detailed analysis.
The construction cost is assumed to be split 50/50 between Denmark and Sweden. Based on
other similar projects a construction period of eight years is assumed with the cost distributed
as shown in Table 31.
Year
2032
2033
2034
2035
2036
2037
2038
2039
Share
2%
6%
14%
18%
21%
21%
12%
6%
Table 31: Distribution of construction cost during the construction period [Trafikverket et al.
2021]
9.3
Maintenance and operation costs
The above costs only include the actual construction costs. An additional maintenance cost
of 1.2% of the construction cost has been added per year for all years during the evaluation
period of the project [Trafikverket et al. 2021].
An additional cost for the extended train operation must also be included in the cost-benefit
analysis. The following changes compared to the base scenario are calculated based on train
kilometres (for electric trains) or timetable hours and are multiplied by the respective unit
prices:
• Infrastructure Wear Costs: Calculated based on the change in train kilometres.
• Ongoing Maintenance of Trains: Based on the change in train kilometres.
• Personnel Costs: Calculated based on the change in timetable hours
Page 78 of 156
==PAGE:86==
Europasporet
9.4
User effects
For train systems operating only on weekdays, train kilometres and timetable hours are annu-
alised by multiplying by a factor of 225. Timetable hours and train kilometres do not include
turnaround time at end stations or movements related to shunting [Transportministeriet 2015].
The calculated change is thus based on the added running time for trains that are e.g., extended
from Copenhagen Central to Gothenburg.
For scenarios where train services are increased, there will be a need for additional train units.
The number of units is based on a rough estimate given the additional timetable hours and
does not account for etc. long turnarounds and reserve units. The number of additional units
is multiplied by a unit price for the provision of train sets. This unit price covers depreciation,
insurance, and other fixed costs, including maintenance [Finansministeriet et al. 2022].
The estimated change in timetable and train kilometres is shown in Table 32.
Scn 1
Scn 2
Timetable hours (year)
21,702
21,618
Train kilometres (year)
3,779,025
3,723,684
Units
20
20
Table 32: Change in timetable hours, train kilometres and units (passenger trains)
Though the majority of the additional timetable hours and train kilometres take place on
Swedish infrastructure a 50/50 split of the operation costs between Denmark and Sweden is as-
sumed which is the same practice used for the HH-connection [Trafikverket et al. 2021].
9.4
User effects
User effects are measured in time savings, including travel time, waiting time, and hidden
waiting time. Also included is the number of transfers made for public transport and drive
time and length for road transport. Changes compared to the base scenario are calculated in
GMM (and Sampers), divided by trip purpose and categorised by new and existing travellers.
These changes are multiplied by unit prices for each type of change in the socio-economic
analysis. For cross-border traffic, only half of the benefit is applied while the benefits in tran-
sit traffic aren’t included.
Table 33 presents the savings for existing and new users of public transport. The tables show
that the effects are greatest for existing travellers. This is because the improvements primarily
benefit existing users achieving the full effect, and the effects for new travellers are calculated
Page 79 of 156
==PAGE:87==
Europasporet
9.4
User effects
using the ”Rule of a Half” achieving half of the effect. In general, a benefit is shown on all
elements, scenario 1 and 2 only showing a negative value in wait time.
Overall Scenario 2 provides the highest user benefits which is considered due to the direct con-
nection to and from Østerport and reduced travel times to other central parts of Copenhagen.
On average a journey between the western part of Sk˚ane and Copenhagen would experience
approximately a 30 minutes reduced travel time. Scenario 2 also generates the largest increase
in the number of passengers. Therefore, from a public transport user perspective, Scenario 2
appears to be the most preferred.
User effects
(1000 hours/year)
Scn 1
Scn 2
In vehicle time
- existing users
2,621
2,688
-new users
945
994
Wait time
- existing users
-10
-3
- new users
-0.3
-0.1
Change time
- existing users
57
123
- new users
60
98
Hidden waitng time
- existing users
2,096
3,264
- new users
66
180
Access egress time
- existing users
134
125
- new users
18
24
No. Changes (x 1000)
- existing users
1,588
2,428
- new users
766
1,187
Table 33: Travel time savings in public transport (GMM). Positive values imply a benefit
Table 34 presents the user effects in private road transport for existing and new users. As
for public transport, the benefits are greatest for existing users. A benefit is shown on all
elements for both scenarios. Scenario 2 provides the highest savings in free travel time and
travel distance while a lower benefit on congestion is achieved. This is probably due to an
Page 80 of 156
==PAGE:88==
Europasporet
9.5
Toll payment
overall higher level of road traffic in scenario 2 than in scenario 1. The difference is however
minor. On average a journey between northwestern Sk˚ane and Copenhagen would experience
approximately a 20 minutes reduced travel time.
User effects
(1000 hours/year)
Scn 1
Scn 2
Free time
- existing users
837
980
- new users
125
144
Congestion time
- existing users
38
24
- new users
3
1
Distance Km (x 1000)
- existing users
13,087
14,898
- new users
3,429
3,990
Table 34: Travel time savings in private road transport (GMM). Positive values imply a benefit
9.5
Toll payment
A user fee is assumed to be collected for all vehicles crossing Europavejen to help finance the
project. The price is assumed to be the same as for The Øresundbridge. While a relocation of
vehicles from the Øresundbridge to Europavejen is predicted the income will just outweigh the
loss from these users. However, the ferry company serving Helsingør-Helsingborg is driven
by a private firm and the full payment of users moving from the HH ferries to Europavejen
will thus be accounted for. The change in total income from user payments is shown in
Table 35.
M. DKK/Year
Scn 1
Scn 2
Commute
11.6
13.6
Business
3.8
3.8
Leisure
80.5
81.5
Vans+Trucks
195.6
201.0
Total
291.5
299.8
Table 35: Change in total toll payment for Øresundsbroen and Europavejen (GMM values)
Page 81 of 156
==PAGE:89==
Europasporet
9.6
Other effects
A toll is also added for trains crossing Europasporet assumed to be 2.320 DKK per crossing
similar to Øresundsbroen [Trafikverket et al. 2021].
The income from the toll is assumed to be split 50/50 between Denmark and Sweden.
9.6
Other effects
Ticket Revenue: Changes compared to the zero-scenario are calculated in GMM. A 5% de-
duction from ticket revenue is made in TERESA to account for administration and ticket sales
[Transportministeriet 2015]. Note that user ticket expenses are not included in TERESA since
the ticket price is already factored into the generalised travel cost in the traffic model.
External Effects: Noise and emissions are calculated based on the changes in the number of
train and road kilometres travelled.
9.7
Cost benefit analysis
Given the above inputs, the total societal benefit of a scenario over a given calculation period
can be expressed by the net present value (NPV):
NPV = ΣT
t=0
Bt −Ct
(1 + r)t
(7)
where:
Bt represents the positive benefits of the initiative,
Ct represents the costs,
r is the discount rate in year t, and
T denotes the calculation period in years.
If the evaluated project is profitable, the NPV should be positive.
Two other evaluation factors are used in Denmark to determine the profitability of the invest-
ments.
The internal rate of return (IRR) determines the rate, i, that balances the cost and benefit
streams. For a project to be profitable, this rate must exceed the discount rate. A higher IRR
indicates a more favourable project.
The Net Benefit Investment Ratio (NBIR), indicates the repayment of public money invested
in the project. The net benefit should be greater than 0.
Page 82 of 156
==PAGE:90==
Europasporet
9.8
CBA in TERESA
The results of the calculation inherently carry some uncertainty due to the underlying assump-
tions. The unit prices used are general estimates for Danish transport projects, and there is
increased uncertainty in estimating values such as time savings and the cost of externalities,
as these are not traded in a traditional market. Additionally, the calculations rely on general
projections about the future. Since the analysis considers the overall societal benefit, it does
not address distributional policy aspects across regions or social groups. Despite the analy-
sis’s attempt to be comprehensive, some effects are not included in the analysis.
Therefore, the socio-economic analysis cannot be the sole basis for decision-making. A sep-
arate assessment of other evaluation points is done in section 10.
9.8
CBA in TERESA
An overview of the cost-benefit analysis conducted in TERESA is presented in Table 36. All
entries to the CBA are presented in appendix I. The major cost driver is the construction cost
for both scenarios. Scenario 1 yields a higher cost than scenario 2 due to a longer alignment
for the tunnel. The majority of the revenue is achieved by travel time savings from where
the savings in public transport play a significant part. This however cannot outweigh the
construction cost. A higher level of travel time savings users in scenario 2 yields a higher
benefit which, however, neither yields a positive return in scenario 2.
With the addition of the toll the total ’loss’ in scenario 1 and 2 is reduced. The number of
road users however is not high enough to meet a break-even in operation and maintenance
cost yielding a negative outcome.
External impacts add in both scenarios a benefit. This is primarily due to a reduction in
travelled kilometres in car despite an increase in the number of vehicles.
Page 83 of 156
==PAGE:91==
Europasporet
9.8
CBA in TERESA
Base assumptions
Scn 1
Scn 2
Construction cost
-34,181
-31,562
- Inclusive scrap value
Operation- and
-4,300
-3,292
maintenance cost
- Operation and maintenance
-13,900
-13,183
- Toll and ticket revenue
9,600
9,891
User effects
23,768
28,662
- Time savings road transport
7,191
7,909
- Time savings public transport
15,238
19,250
- Other user effects
1,339
1,503
External impacts
1,589
1,622
Other impacts
-4,210
-3,447
NPV
-17,335
-8,016
Table 36: Main results from the CBA 2023 price level (only main entries presented)
In total, scenario 1 yields a negative NPV of -17,335 M. DKK. Scenario 2 a NPV of -8,016
M. DKK. However, it can be concluded that with a significantly higher NPV scenario 2 is
the most profitable. This is due to a combination of higher travel time savings, toll income
and an approximately 6% lower construction cost than scenario 1. None of the two scenarios
is socio-economic beneficial from a Danish perspective. While socio-economic assessments
in Sweden are carried out much similarly as in Denmark some variations apply. However,
similar results must be expected from a Swedish perspective2.
2If only input from Sampers is used, a higher traffic level and hence benefits are likely achieved
Page 84 of 156
==PAGE:92==
Europasporet
9.8
CBA in TERESA
9.8.1
Sensitivity analysis TERESA
At this phase of the project, the analysis is encumbered with some uncertainties. Thus, a
sensitivity analysis of some of the significant factors in the CBA analysis has been conducted
(Figure 30).
Sampers travel time savings
As shown in section section 8, GMM and Sampers do not predict the same results in the inves-
tigated scenarios. An analysis in TERESA using the predicted travel time savings by Sampers
has therefore been conducted. In order not to include travel time savings achieved for trips
within Sweden in TERESA, only the travel time savings for trips in the zone relations across
Øresund have been derived from Sampers. Table 37 presents the difference in total travel
time savings between GMM and Sampers for trips across Øresund for existing users. A table
showing how the benefits are distributed across the various purposes is shown in appendix I.
The IvT savings in public transport is lower in Sampers with approximately 170,000 hours
per year. It has been secured that the service level (scheduled time) is the same for trains
across Øresund between the two models and the reason must thus be found elsewhere in the
network. An explanation behind this is that the transfer of trips from the Øresund bridge is
lower in Sampers than GMM.
A significantly higher travel time saving is modelled on road traffic in Sampers with approx-
imately 445,000 hours per year. Some explanations behind this difference are first of all a
much more detailed infrastructure in Sweden in Sampers and that congestion is modelled in
the Swedish network in Sampers which is not modelled in GMM. Hence, Sampers catches
some effects in the Swedish road network that GMM might not capture.
Page 85 of 156
==PAGE:93==
Europasporet
9.8
CBA in TERESA
Scn 1
User benefits
(1000 hours/year)
GMM
Sampers
Diff Sampers-GMM
Public*
Exs. Users
2,504
2,338
-6.6%
Car**
Exs. Users
1,749
2,171
24.2%
Scn 2
User benefits
(1000 hours/year)
GMM
Sampers
Diff Sampers-GMM
Public*
Exs. Users
2,551
2,378
-6.8%
Car**
Exs. Users
1,913
2,414
26.2%
Table 37:
Travel time savings for existing users predicted in GMM and Sampers. Only
travel time savings for trips across Øresund are presented. (*Public IvT. **Car IvT includes
congestion time)
The results are presented in Table 38. As seen, a minor decrease is noted in the user benefits
on public transport due to the lower benefits from existing users. With higher time savings
in Sampers an increase in the user benefits on road transport at approximately 1,600 M DKK
is shown for both scenarios. With Sampers predictions in travel time savings for existing
users, a significant change in the NPV is observed. Scenario 1 yields a negative NPV of -
15,721 M. DKK., Scenario 2 yields a negative NPV of -6,378 M. DKK. The time benefits
modelled on existing cross-border trips in Sampers are however not enough to outweigh the
high construction cost.
Page 86 of 156
==PAGE:94==
Europasporet
9.8
CBA in TERESA
Sampers user benefits (existing users)
Scn 1
Scn 2
Construction cost
- 34,181
-31,562
- Inclusive scrap value
Operation- and
-4,300
-3,292
maintenance cost
- Operation and maintenance
-13,900
-13,183
- Toll and ticket revenue
9,600
9,891
User effects
25,246
30,176
- Time savings road transport
8,669
9,624
- Time savings public transport
15,237
19,049
- Other user effects
1,339
1,503
External impacts
1,589
1,622
Other impacts
-4,074
-3,323
NPV
-15,721
-6,378
Table 38: Main results from the CBA, 2023 price level, using Samper’s travel time benefits for
existing users (only main entries presented)
Additional sensitivity analysis has been calculated and presented in Figure 30.
Traffic growth
As presented in section 2.1 a 3% yearly growth in the number of rail passengers is expected
according to ¨Oresundst˚ag AB [Schi¨oth 2020]. Additionally, a higher traffic growth of 2% is
expected by Øresundsbrokonsortiet on the road traffic towards 2040 [Øresundbron 2019][Øre-
sundbron 2023]. If such growth is expected to continue after 2040 towards 2065 scenario 1
and 2 would yield a NPV of -11,934 M DKK and -1,082 M DKK respectively (Figure 30).
Such traffic growth is however high for public transport in Denmark [Jelin 2017] and should
thus be carried by other factors such as strong regional and urban development.
Construction cost
The major cost driver is as mentioned the construction cost. In this project, the budget is
derived from various references to similar infrastructure projects. However, this approach has
several limitations as it overlooks many uncertain factors. Specifically, the cost estimation
does not account for potential obstacles in e.g., the drilled tunnel, such as underground cables
and pipelines, a difficult construction environment around Copenhagen Central, as well as
traffic disturbances with temporary closures of roads and railways during construction. Ele-
ments that can add a significant increase in the total cost.
Page 87 of 156
==PAGE:95==
Europasporet
9.8
CBA in TERESA
This problem is well known during initial assessments of infrastructure projects and described
as ’optimism bias’ [Barfod and Leleur 2021]. To counteract such uncertainties uplifts should
be applied according to an acceptable level of optimism bias stated in Table 39. A fixed link
project should e.g., include a 55% contingency reserve to achieve an acceptable optimism bias
level of 80%.
Level of acceptance
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Road
15%
24%
27%
32%
45%
Rail
40%
45%
51%
57%
68%
Fixed link
23%
26%
34%
55%
83%
Table 39: Construction costs reserves depending on the level of optimism bias
Applying the above levels of 50% and 90% of acceptance level, two scenarios with a 23%
respectively 83% reserve have been conducted (Figure 30).
With a low level of acceptance and contingency reserve scenario 2 yields the best NPV of
-1,630 M DKK, however not socio-economic viable.
Values of Time
The estimation of values of time (VoT) implies additional uncertainties, especially for future
traffic scenarios. Additionally, other cultures might have a different perspective on VoT. While
GMM accounts for this in the Øresund sub-model for mode and route choice, Danish values
are applied in TERESA for the socio-economic assessment. It is noted that Swedish VoT
estimates differ from the Danish, and are generally lower [ASEK 2024]. A sensitivity analysis
with a 25% lower VoT and 25% higher VoT in TERESA has been conducted (Figure 30).
With a 25% higher VoT and willingness to pay for time, scenario 1 returns an NPV of -11,404
M. DKK. Scenario 2 is close to yielding a positive return with an NPV of -815 M. DKK.
A significantly higher willingness to pay for time would hence be required to make both
scenarios socio-economically viable.
Page 88 of 156
==PAGE:96==
Europasporet
9.8
CBA in TERESA
Figure 30: NPV by changes to individual parameters
Page 89 of 156
==PAGE:97==
Europasporet
10
Other economic and strategic impacts
As described in section 9.7, the scenarios should be viewed from a broader perspective than
just the socio-economic analysis. There may be other strategic reasons to invest in new in-
frastructure, even if it is not necessarily economically profitable. Whether to invest in the
infrastructure is largely a political decision, depending on which geographical areas or popu-
lation groups are prioritised.
10.1
Accessibility
In addition to leading to an increase and relocation of traffic, improved travel times and higher
frequencies can make affected areas more attractive to potential residents and businesses and
therefore lead to a change in demographics. These factors are not considered in the traffic
models. Such factors can e.g., be expressed in terms of accessibility to workplaces. On the
Danish side of Øresund, the entire metropolitan area forms Denmark’s largest contiguous
labour market, while Malm¨o-Lund-Helsingborg, on the Swedish side, constitutes Sweden’s
second-largest labour market area [DST 2024a][SCB 2024]. Improved accessibility across
Øresund can thus be seen as an opportunity to reach a larger pool of job opportunities and
workforce as well as make it more attractive for residents to settle in the area. Figure 31
and Figure 32 show the changes in accessibility for scenario 1 and 2 compared to the base
scenario, measured by the number of workplaces reachable within one hour by public trans-
port and by car respectively. One hour is considered the maximum reasonable commute time
[Nielsen 2012]. The results are based on the overall travel time, including access/egress time
and wait/change time in public transport, and congestion time during morning peak in road
transport.
Results in Zealand are based on GMM and for Sweden on Sampers. Zones in Sweden covers
in GMM a much larger geographical area. For that reason, a linear weight between 1 and 0
has been given to each zone in the interval of 55 to 65 minutes. Thus assuming, that the entire
zone is reachable if e.g., the travel time is 55 minutes, and half of the zone if the travel time is
60 minutes.
Page 90 of 156
==PAGE:98==
Europasporet
10.1
Accessibility
(a) Scenario 1
(b) Scenario 2
Figure 31: Change in accessibility within 60 minutes by public transport compared to base.
Results in Zealand based on GMM and for Sweden on Sampers. A large scale of the map is
shown in appendix J
In both scenarios, accessibility improves along the coasts of Øresund with Helsingborg and
Landskrona achieving the greatest increase in accessibility to the Danish labour market. The
greatest improvements in accessibility by public transport are seen in Scenario 2, where direct
connections to Østerport and Nørreport are achieved. Scenario 1 shows a minor negative
change in public transport around central Malm¨o and Nørrebro which is considered due to the
loss of direct services between Nørreport/Østerport and Malm¨o. The effects on accessibility
by public transport are likely underestimated, as the maps do not account for changes in
’hidden waiting times’ resulting from lower/higher frequency.
Page 91 of 156
==PAGE:99==
Europasporet
10.1
Accessibility
(a) Scenario 1
(b) Scenario 2
Figure 32: Change in accessibility within 60 minutes by car compared to base. Results in
Zealand based on GMM and for Sweden on Sampers. A large scale of the map is shown in
appendix J
The same picture applies to road transport but with a slightly lower increase than public trans-
port. This is because the travel time savings are lower by car than public transport e.g., Hels-
ingborg to Copenhagen 46 minutes by train and 24 minutes by car (in scenario 2).
In scenario 1 an increase in the reachable workforce within 60 minutes by public transport of
6.0% is achieved from the entire region of Sk˚ane corresponding to 8,000 workplaces. From
the region of Zealand, a 0.8% increase corresponding to 4,100 workplaces is achieved.
In car respectively 5.0% corresponding to 27,000 workplaces is achieved from Sk˚ane and
1.5% corresponding to 13,000 workplaces from Zealand.
When the changes, in general, are higher from the Swedish side of Øresund, it is due to a
higher concentration in the workforce in the Copenhagen metropolitan area. When Europas-
poret/Europavejen provides access to the workforce in the central parts of the metropolitan
Page 92 of 156
==PAGE:100==
Europasporet
10.2
Redundancy in the network
area within a travel time of e.g., 60 minutes from Helsingborg, a significant relative change in
accessibility in the Helsingborg area is thus achieved.
In scenario 2 an increase in the reachable workforce within 60 minutes by public transport
of 7.1% is achieved from Sk˚ane corresponding to 9,500 workplaces and 1.1% corresponding
to 5,700 workplaces from Zealand. By car respectively 5.2% corresponding to 28,000 is
achieved from Sk˚ane and 1.3% corresponding to 6,700 from Zealand.
Not only an improvement in accessibility will be achieved by a new connection between the
two countries. Reduced travel time also implies a larger catchment area of universities and a
greater supply of educational opportunities for students on both sides of the Øresund region.
Public transport is a significant mode choice by students and with Europasporet, Lund Univer-
sity would e.g., be reachable within an hour from Copenhagen while the majority of Copen-
hagen University’s departments would be reachable within an hour from Helsingborg.
As the existing connections across Øresund are significant links for leisure trips, Europas-
poret/Europavejen would also improve the accessibility to tourist attractions and other leisure
activities in the Øresund region.
Investment in infrastructure can also be linked to regional development (particularly densi-
fication) in the affected areas. In this case, the traveller base for Europavejen/Europasporet
would increase, making the connection an attractive option for potential residents.
10.2
Redundancy in the network
Another effect which is difficult to assign a monetary value is the benefit of establishing a
redundant connection. The Øresund Bridge is today the only fixed link between Sweden and
the European continent and an interruption and closure would imply significant disturbances
and travel time increase with a socio-economic loss to follow. Both for passenger- and freight
transport. A new fixed link would maintain robustness in the network and security of supply.
It has previously been assessed that a closure of The Øresund bridge would imply a socio-
economic loss of 6.1 M. DKK. per day [Kyster-Hansen et al. 2018]. The loss is primarily
driven by freight traffic due to limited options for alternative routes. A similar assessment has
been conducted as a part of the analysis of the Kattegat fixed link in the Danish East-West
corridor. The assessment found that the redundant connection would yield a socio-economic
gain of 340 M. DKK over 50 years as an effect of greater security of supply [Eltved et al.
2021]. The effects would presumably be higher for a new fixed link across Øresund due to a
higher level of freight transport.
Page 93 of 156
==PAGE:101==
Europasporet
10.3
Benefits rail freight
10.3
Benefits rail freight
Rail freight is not modelled in either GMM or Sampers. Thus, the cost and benefits have been
kept out of the presented socio-economic assessment. While the benefits of rail freight need
further quantification a preliminary assessment has been made.
Today, approximately 90% of the rail freight in Denmark is transit traffic [Incentive, Odgaard,
and Kolstrup 2015], and it can thus quickly be concluded that a shunt and tunnel for freight
trains wouldn’t be socio-economic viable from a Danish perspective. The following thus
presents the impact of a shunt for freight trains in an international perspective, but based on
the Danish Transport Economic Unit Prices as it were the case for the Femern connection
[Incentive, Odgaard, and Kolstrup 2015]. The savings per freight train across Øresund with
a freight shunt under Copenhagen is stated in Table 40. While the distance and travel time
savings are much similar in the two scenarios, the construction cost is higher for scenario 2
due to a longer alignment before joining the main tracks of Europasporet at Østerport.
Distance saved (km)
Time saved (min)
Scn 1
19.5
24.0
Scn 2
19.2
23.8
Table 40: Distance and travel time savings of freight trains across Øresund
Table 41 shows the calculated benefits in TERESA over a 50-year evaluation period assuming
50 freight trains per day [Lennefors 2024]. The benefits primarily consist of saved operation
costs (70% in base assumption), as the distance via Europasporet is approximately 19 km
shorter than via The Øresund bridge. As seen, both scenarios yield a relatively low benefit
compared to an additional construction cost of 2,915 M. DKK. in scenario 1 respectively 4,403
M. DKK in scenario 2 to build the freight shunt (see section 9.2). Not including the added
maintenance cost. The VoT of goods however differs from country to country. A sensitivity
analysis of the achieved benefits has thus been conducted. Table 41 shows the calculated
benefits using Swedish VoT of goods (32% lower than danish VoT’s) [Incentive, Odgaard,
and Kolstrup 2015] respectively a 4 times higher VoT.
Page 94 of 156
==PAGE:102==
Europasporet
10.3
Benefits rail freight
Benefits rail freight (M. DKK)
Scn 1
Scn 2
Base VoT
1,913
1,879
(4.8 DKK/Tonn hour)
Swedish VoT
1,715
1,684
(1.53 DKK/Tonn hour)
High VoT
4,404
4,317
(19.2 DKK/Tonn hour)
Table 41: Achieved benefits (M. DKK) for rail freight over 50 years (2023 price level)
With Swedish estimates of VoT, the benefits are reduced by approximately 10%. A high VoT
implies a 130% increase in benefits for both scenarios.
With the construction of a shunt for freight trains, the attractiveness of rail freight would likely
change due to shorter travel time. Previous studies show, that the international socio-economic
benefit of running one freight train as a replacement for trucks would be 147,000 DKK per
train [Incentive and Banedanmark 2010]. Hence, if rail freight increased even further, the gain
would be higher.
As mentioned above, the estimated benefits are viewed from an international viewpoint of rail
freight. The costs and benefits of the freight shunt should thus be added to the perspective
of the entire project. Considering the estimated cost for adding a shunt for freight trains and
the achieved benefits, it is difficult to say whether it would profit the total socio-economic
viability of Europasporet. A positive NPV would however likely not be achieved.
Without a tunnel for freight trains, Europasporet would still provide a redundant connection
across Øresund in the case of traffic disturbances. In this case, freight trains could exception-
ally run through Copenhagen Central. With a full integration of rail freight in Europasporet
a further capacity increase across Øresund would be achieved. Additionally, an infrastructure
project yielding improvements in rail freight could apply for (additional) EU subsidy.
Page 95 of 156
==PAGE:103==
Europasporet
10.4
EU-Subsidy
10.4
EU-Subsidy
An infrastructure project yielding benefits across borders would be able to apply for EU sub-
sidy. The so-called ’award criteria’ are shortly described as follows [CEF 2023b]:
• Assessing correspondence with sectoral policy objectives, EU added-value, and possi-
ble synergies with other sectors
• Assessing the maturity of the project, including the ability to start and finish the project
as proposed, status of contracting and permits, and information about the financial avail-
ability needed
• Assessing the soundness of the implementation plan from a technical and financial per-
spective including project design, organisational structures, risk analysis, control pro-
cedures, quality management, and communication strategy. Also assessing the mainte-
nance strategy for the completed project
• Assessing economic, social, environmental, and climate impact, supported by a Cost
Benefit Analysis or other forecasts. Also evaluating innovation, digitalisation, safety,
interoperability, accessibility, and cross-border effects
• Evaluating the impact of EU financial assistance in overcoming financial gaps, mobil-
ising investment sources, improving project quality, or accelerating the investment plan
Additionally, some specific actions on railways will be supported such as the construction
and upgrade of cross-border and/or missing links, enhancing the capacity and performance
of existing lines (in the TEN-T corridor), and improving international rail transport. Increas-
ing capacity in nodes for better coordination between long-distance and local traffic is also
emphasised [CEF 2023a].
The overall criteria are primarily targeted towards rail traffic but it is believed that Europas-
poret could yield a relatively high score. As neighbouring countries, Denmark and Sweden
have previously shown the ability to form a strong and organised ’joint venture’ in the case
of e.g., Sund & Bælt/Øresundsbrokonsortiet. Europasporet would yield benefits for both road
and especially cross-border rail traffic and could thus be a catalyst for the integration and
development in the Øresund region. Not only on ’short distances’ a significant travel time
reduction could be achieved but also to further destinations in Scandinavia/Europe for both
passenger and rail traffic.
Finally, an additional subsidy can be given to projects with military interest where it can be
argued that the link would increase military mobility in northern Europa.
Page 96 of 156
==PAGE:104==
Europasporet
10.4
EU-Subsidy
The previously presented socio-economic assessment did not include EU subsidy. However,
from the above the project could likely receive a relatively high subsidy3. For the project,
including a freight shunt, to meet break even in the NPV, a subsidy of roughly 40% should
apply for scenario 1 or 25% for scenario 2 (seen from a Danish context). The calculation is
shown in appendix I.
3In correspondence with Henrik Sylvan and Henrik Tornblad - CEF Coordinator in Denmark
Page 97 of 156
==PAGE:105==
Europasporet
11
Discussion
With the previously presented observations and results, the following chapter discusses some
further perspectives that could be added to the analysis. In addition, the results from GMM
and Sampers are further discussed to provide initiatives that could be used in further studies
of traffic development in the Øresund region.
11.1
Transport policy objectives
The Cost-Benefit Analysis provides a clear and consistent framework for calculating eco-
nomic effects, making it a valuable tool for policymakers making different infrastructure
projects comparable. However, as mentioned, the method faces challenges when evaluating
non-quantifiable effects which can lead to a misinterpretation of a project’s justification. A
large infrastructure project can thus potentially lead to changes in demographics, and provide
a more reliable/redundant infrastructure with increased traffic flow and capacity.
As in Denmark, projects in Sweden and other Nordic countries are assessed according to
numerous parameters, including cost-benefit analysis. In addition to the CBA, several effects
are in Sweden further described under the ’transport policy target analysis’. This includes a
study of an infrastructure project’s results concerning the overall transport policy objectives
of the government. The broad objectives are as follows [Regeringskansliet 2024]:
• The overall goal of the transport policy is to ensure a socio-economically efficient and
long-term sustainable transport supply for citizens and businesses throughout the coun-
try.
• The design, function, and use of the transport system should contribute to providing
everyone with basic accessibility of good quality and usability, as well as fostering
development across the entire country.
• The design, function, and use of the transport system should be adapted so that no
one is killed or seriously injured, and contribute to the achievement of the overarching
generational goal for the environment and environmental quality objectives, as well as
to improved health.
While it is difficult to find a comparative project for Europasporet/Europavejen, in which
a ’transport policy target analysis’ has been conducted, a comparison of ’Ostl¨anken’ in the
eastern part of central Sweden is presented. Ostl¨anken is a new 160 km double-track high-
Page 98 of 156
==PAGE:106==
Europasporet
11.1
Transport policy objectives
speed railway between Link¨oping and S¨odert¨alje with four new stations expected to open in
2035. The project is part of a major extension of the Swedish railway ”Nya Stambanor”. The
overall results of the assessment of Ostl¨anken are shown in Table 42.
Socio-economic
NPV (M. SEK)
-85,447 (Not viable)
Unpriced effects
Environmental effects
Positive
Other effects
Insignificant
Transport policy targets
Accessibility objectives
Positive
Climate objectives
Positive
Landscape objectives
Negative
Health objectives
Positive
Total viability (weighted)
Uncertain
Table 42: Summary of the assessment of Ostl¨anken in eastern Sweden
While Ostl¨anken is a rail project only it is noted, that some of the reasons behind the positive
assessments were due to a predicted reduction in road transport. Despite the socio-economic
results showing a negative return, the combined analysis stated that the project potentially
could be beneficial and Trafikverket concluded: ”The socio-economic assessment shows that
the project is not viable. The project contributes positively to fulfil the transport policy tar-
gets, regional development in the area, and have national significance ... and in the broader
approach of the entire project ’Nya Stambanor’, Ostl¨anken might be socioeconomically justi-
fied” [Hellervik et al. 2021]
In Denmark no such transport policy is specifically written and the latest infrastructure plan
towards 2035 stated ”The parties agree that public transport must be more attractive to far
more Danes. Better public transport can help alleviate congestion on the roads, contribute
to the green transition, and at the same time relieve everyday life for numerous families”
[Tansportministeriet 2021]. Hence, it can be argued that the objectives are somewhat vague,
making it challenging to assess the specific contributions of individual projects or in a greater
context.
Page 99 of 156
==PAGE:107==
Europasporet
11.2
Capacity utilisation of The Øresund bridge and Europasporet
Based on the above, it would be interesting to further discuss the transport policy objectives,
both regional and international, from the perspective of a new fixed link across Øresund.
What should be the main goals when exploring new solutions? Some considerations could
include:
• Secure network redundancy and ensure reliability of supply
• Stimulate and increase commuter flow and accessibility across Øresund as a part of the
already rapidly growing region.
• Strengthen the European rail network with faster travel times and direct services pro-
viding an environmentally friendly transport alternative
• Strengthen Copenhagen’s status as an international hub and gateway for rail traffic be-
tween Scandinavia and the European continent
The objectives should not necessarily apply to Europasporet only but could be part of a larger
infrastructure strategy. This could further include the pooling of several independent infras-
tructure projects which can contribute to a significant change in the outcome of the CBA.
Such studies could e.g., include a road connection between Helsingør and Helsingborg or
new high-speed railways in Sweden.
11.2
Capacity utilisation of The Øresund bridge and Europasporet
A disadvantage of Europasporet is the missing possibility to fully utilise the added capacity
in the network. In both scenarios, the capacity utilisation is at 72% with six passenger trains
and two freight trains per direction per hour. On the Øresund bridge, the capacity utilisation
is at 53% with nine passenger trains per hour. The number of trains is however limited due to
other factors such as tunnel regulations and the available capacity on adjacent lines. As shown
in Table 21, section 7.2.1 the bottlenecks are not located at the fixed links but on the adjacent
lines to/from Malm¨o and Copenhagen due to an additional high number of national trains.
An upgrade of Øresundsbanen, (Copenhagen)-Kalvebod-Kastrup-(Lernacken), would thus be
a cheaper option if only increased capacity and the ability to run additional services is the
concern. Such an upgrade has previously been investigated stating that running up to 4 freight
trains and 12 passenger trains per direction should be possible [Schi¨oth, H. Andersson, and
Gustafsson 2024]. The upgrade would however imply significant construction costs of up to
23,000 M. DKK considering that travel time savings would be low. Capacity at Copenhagen
Central is an additional concern being a complex station with turnarounds between several
Page 100 of 156
==PAGE:108==
Europasporet
11.3
Alternative alignments
lines. Even though a higher number of trains through Europasporet or the Øresund bridge
would be an option, it would be difficult to secure train movements through Copenhagen and
Malm¨o Central.
In scenario 2 it has been suggested to integrate some of the regional trains from mid/west
Zealand into the Øresund system. The option of a stronger integration of existing services
would yield the possibility of better distributed capacity utilisation on the adjacent lines. This
is e.g., the case between Kalvebod and Lernacken in scenario 2, where regional trains that be-
forehand terminated at Kastrup continue onward to Malm¨o/Sweden. To utilise the additional
capacity across Øresund a stronger integration of national services in the Øresund system is
thus suggested. This could e.g., be local trains on V¨astkustbanan that continue as regional
services into Zealand. Not included in the two scenarios is also an extension of the inter-
national trains between Germany and Denmark onwards to Gothenburg and Oslo - a service
that already has been proposed by the European Commission together with DSB, DB, and SJ
[Bencke 2023].
A stronger integration of existing services however applies greater vulnerability in the net-
work in case of traffic disturbances. Delays could then spread to a greater part of the network
affecting other lines and services. This is a concern that previously has been addressed on
Kystbanen being one of the reasons that trains from Sweden today terminate at Østerport
instead of Niv˚a/Helsingør.
11.3
Alternative alignments
This report studied two alternatives of Europasporet/Europavejen. Scenario 1 is the latest
proposal by Kreera and Landskrona Stadt with a junction at Copenhagen Central, and sce-
nario 2 suggests an alternative alignment from Østerport. While scenario 1 provides slightly
shorter travel times to/from Copenhagen Central, scenario 2 offers a shorter alignment and
construction cost as well as direct services to Østerport and Nørreport making connections to
the entire Copenhagen Metro system possible. However, as stated in section 9.2, the construc-
tion cost implies a rather high expenditure in the socio-economic assessment resulting in both
scenarios not being socio-economic viable from a Danish perspective. With the highest user
benefits achieved by public transport, a fixed link with only rail could be further investigated
reducing the construction cost with lower expenditures on the submerged tunnel as well as
the needed junctions for the motorway. A rail tunnel only would however not induce a benefit
from the road toll and with no user benefits on the road, it would require the construction cost
for scenario 2 should be roughly halved to be socio-economic viable.
Page 101 of 156
==PAGE:109==
Europasporet
11.3
Alternative alignments
Another option is to move the alignment even further north with a (rail)tunnel between Klam-
penborg and Landskrona reducing the tunnel length from approximately 19.5 km to 17.5 km
compared to scenario 2. A short assessment of this idea identified the following advantages
and disadvantages:
Advantages:
• Construction cost
– Shorter submerged tunnel, approximately 2.0 km shorter than scenario 2, via
Nordhavnen or 5.0 km shorter than scenario 1, via Prøvestenen
– No need for a drilled tunnel in a complex construction environment
– Less complex connection to the existing railway compared to Scenario 1
• Shorter travel times to northern Copenhagen and surrounding area
– Direct services via Europasporet to Hellerup
– Interchange possibility to Line F on the S-train network
Disadvantages:
• Challenging to include a road connection
– The Nearest motorway is approximately 4.5 km. from the coast separated by
protected nature
– A connection to Strandvejen/Kystvejen would likely call for a capacity increase of
the road and yield an increase in traffic in the surrounding urban areas.
• Longer travel times to Central Copenhagen
– Around 8 minutes longer travel time to Østerport compared to scenario 2 and 12-
14 minutes longer to Copenhagen central.
– Longer travel times to interchange stations on the Metro Network
• Shunt for freight trains and interference with other passenger services
– A higher level of interference with the regional services on Kystbanen adds a
greater risk of delays spreading out in the network.
– A shunt for freight trains is still needed if allowed daily on Europasporet.
Page 102 of 156
==PAGE:110==
Europasporet
11.4
Ferry operation Helsingør-Helsingborg
Compared to other proposed projects of a new fixed link across Øresund i.e., the HH-connection
and the Øresund Metro, Europasporet/Europavejen presents the most extensive construction
cost but provides the highest benefit in user effects [Trafikverket et al. 2021][Incentive, Kol-
strup, and Espensen 2021][Schi¨oth, H. Andersson, and Gustafsson 2024]. Furthermore, Eu-
ropasporet would provide reduced travel times to a larger part of the Øresund region as well
as the ability to serve commuter, long-distance, and freight trains, providing redundancy in
the network which is requested by several stakeholders. The road part, Europavejen, however,
seems not to provide the same capabilities as an HH-connection (GMM predictions). This is
probably due to Europavejens’ closer vicinity to the Øresund bridge thus ’competing’ for the
same traffic.
11.4
Ferry operation Helsingør-Helsingborg
While it was decided to keep the ferry connection at Helsingør-Helsingborg in full operation
in both evaluated scenarios, a reduction of approximately 50% on public transport respectively
66% on road transport was observed. The HH ferries are today operated by a private firm and
it is not unlikely, that they will continue to operate as long as possible as is the case of the
ferries across Femern despite the new tunnel currently under construction [Tiirikainen 2022].
However, such a decrease in traffic would possibly imply a reduced schedule or a complete
closure after a few years relocating even more traffic to Europavejen. By applying a link filter,
it has been identified that around 25% of the reaming road traffic on the ferries in scenario 2
is to/from areas in or south of Central Copenhagen as well as southern Sk˚ane (see appendix
G, Figure 46). Traffic that would benefit from Europavejen. This amount of traffic would
however not add a significant increase in the revenue from road tolls if moved to Europavejen.
However, if all the remaining traffic from the HH-connection were moved to Europavejen, an
approximately 11% higher revenue from the road toll would make scenario 2 on the verge of
being socio-economic beneficial. The change in user benefit by altering the ferry schedule
or ceasing operation is generally unknown as some users from the northern part of Zealand
to/from areas north of Helsingborg would experience a reduced supply and should. This
should be further quantified in a new assessment.
Page 103 of 156
==PAGE:111==
Europasporet
11.5
GMM or Sampers
11.5
GMM or Sampers
Modelling cross-border traffic is a challenge for international infrastructure projects as it calls
for data on the travel behaviour of various cultures, as well as an imitation of various cultural,
economic, and political differences. While GMM includes a sub-model for cross-border traffic
based on travel behaviour surveys specific to these regions, Sampers models all traffic based
on Swedish data only. It could thus be argued that GMM provides a better prediction of cross-
border traffic. In this project, it was chosen to calibrate Sampers to replicate the same level
of traffic in the base scenario as in GMM. However, GMM does not include effects outside
of Denmark. A good example of this is e.g., the difference in travel times by car between the
two models.
As noted in section 5.2.1 a significant difference in travel time elasticities between the two
models was observed, Sampers showing a relatively high sensitivity to travel time which to
some extent explains some of the differences in the predicted increase in traffic between the
two models.
Surprisingly the predictions in public transport however turned out relatively similar between
GMM and Sampers despite the model differences. The coding of public transport in the two
models however provides better possibilities to secure similar effects.
A further investigation of the changes in car traffic showed, that the total increase in the num-
ber of car trips for the entire coverage area in Sampers was much lower than the increase in
trips across Øresund. The total change in trips conducted by car for the entire model was thus
estimated to be 9,730 trips compared to 15,094 car trips across Øresund. Hence, a difference
of 5364 trips per day (scenario 2). In GMM the change in car trips for the entire model was
estimated to be 1,785, compared to 2,081 across Øresund. A difference of 296 trips (scenario
2).
In GMM, trips across Øresund are handled in a sub-model. Hence, there must be 296 fewer
trips elsewhere in the model. This is considered minimal, and it is assumed reasonable con-
sidering the stochastic nature of the model.
In Sampers, all trips are handled under the same conditions, and therefore, there must be a
larger redistribution of trips within the model. This discrepancy requires a more thorough in-
vestigation to determine exactly where this redistribution occurs. In a preliminary assessment
of the number of trips between the Helsingborg area and the Malm¨o area, a decrease of roughly
1600 trips was observed. At the same time, the number of trips between the Helsingborg area
and the Copenhagen area increases by around 2100 trips. Similarly, for the Landskrona area,
the number of trips to/from the Malm¨o area decreased by around 900 trips, while trips to/from
Page 104 of 156
==PAGE:112==
Europasporet
11.5
GMM or Sampers
the Copenhagen area increased by around 1200 trips. It could be argued that from e.g., Hels-
ingborg and Landskrona travellers would be more likely to travel towards Copenhagen, which
provides a larger labour market with higher wages as well as more cultural opportunities, if a
new fixed link is implemented. Those economic differences are however not accounted for in
Sampers.
The exact nature of the trip generation model in Sampers is unfortunately not known. A large
labour market in the Copenhagen area naturally becomes a significant attraction for trips from
Northwestern Sk˚ane with reduced travel times. But in the case, that the number of generated
commuter trips are not balanced against the number of jobs, this could further explain some
of the differences.
Furthermore, the barrier constants are presumably calculated to replicate the baseline situation
in which Sampers are calibrated, to imitate the cultural, economic, and political obstacles that
e.g., a Swede faces when commuting to Denmark and vice versa. For trips across Øresund, it
can thus be argued, that the barrier constants aren’t able to handle large changes in the infras-
tructure.
Additionally, the calibration process of the base scenario in Sampers proved difficult consid-
ering the purpose split between business and leisure trips. This is due to the two purposes
sharing the same barrier constant. This is considered a fault in the model as the two purposes
should be very distinct and hence, should not necessarily share the same hindrance in con-
ducting a trip across Øresund. It is thus recommended that the barriers for the two purposes
are split in future analysis of cross-border traffic in Sampers.
Some measures that could be taken to further align the two models could be a calibration of
traffic in Denmark in Sampers. Other possibilities to counteract some of the differences could
be to rely on one model only and use input matrices in the other. E.g., fixed input matrices in
GMM for trips within Sweden, as it is the practice of long-distance trips in Sampers as well
as calculating congestion in Sk˚ane. Or conversely exclude Zealand from Sampers and induce
cross border traffic as ’port zone’ traffic. These changes would be comprehensive and complex
to integrate in the two models and could easily imply inconsistency when aggregating zones,
complicating the model predictions and reducing the reliability.
The link across Øresund is a vital connection for not only the greater Copenhagen area but
also for Northern Europe/Scandinavia and it could thus be argued that the two models provide
a rather narrow perspective when predicting a future scenario. As an example, the European
traffic model ’Transtools’ was additionally used to highlight some of the effects of the existing
bridge between Denmark and Sweden. Transtools could thus further provide possibilities
Page 105 of 156
==PAGE:113==
Europasporet
11.6
Proposals for further analysis
to assess the effects on (long-distance) passenger- and freight traffic in a European context.
Transtools however also have some drawbacks with e.g., a relatively aggregated zone structure
in Denmark and Sweden.
In a previous analysis of a fixed link Helsingør-Helsingborg, it was decided to rely on the re-
sults in GMM with additional calibration of Sampers in the evaluated scenarios [Trafikverket
et al. 2021]. Re-calibrating a model for the evaluated scenarios is however an unusual prac-
tice and it was also noted that it implies some difficulties in the subsequent socio-economic
assessment of the achieved benefits in Sweden.
From the above it is suggested, that GMM provides the most reliable results concerning traf-
fic across Øresund. However, care must be taken by addressing some of the disadvantages of
the model and their impact especially when predicting road traffic to/from regions outside of
Denmark.
In April 2024 Trafikverket released a new version of Sampers - ’Sampers V. 4’. This model
presents a revised calculation and model structure compared to Sampers 3.4.6 (used in this
project), as well as updated input data on several parameters. In a future assessment of traffic
across Øresund, Sampers V. 4 should be included in the assessment and it will be interesting
to see how Sampers V. 4 differs from Sampers 3.4.6 and GMM.
11.6
Proposals for further analysis
The next step would be to prepare a study on a more detailed level in collaboration with both
countries. In this early phase, it is estimated that several factors regarding construction costs
and assessment imply a high level of uncertainty.
Currently, other infrastructure projects are under investigation which potentially could have
an impact on Europasporet. This includes projects such as ’Eksprestunnelen’, a simplification
of Copenhagen Central, the HH-connection and a metro across Øresund.
Eksprestunnelen is a new tunnel for S-trains. The main purpose is to relieve capacity on the
existing line through Nørreport and provide shorter travel times to/from the radial lines. The
main proposal includes a junction at Vesterportgraven as in Europasporet scenario 1 requiring
a change of the track layout north of the Central station in a complex construction environment
with limited space. It is thus recommended to further investigate whether the needed adaption
of the track layout in scenario 1 is possible as well in combination with Eksprestunnelen.
Lastly, an adaption of the track layout would imply the necessity to reduce or cease operation
on the affected lines for a longer period. With an already high traffic level and passenger
Page 106 of 156
==PAGE:114==
Europasporet
11.7
Final recommendations
flow between Østerport and Copenhagen Central, the level of traffic disturbance should be
quantified as this has a negative impact on the socio-economic assessment.
A simplification of Copenhagen Central is presented as a prerequisite for scenario 1. However,
this project is still under investigation. If the simplification is decided, adapting track 1-4 as
’dead end’ tracks, would limit the possibilities in scenario 2 to establish a direct connection
to Ringstedbanen. It is thus necessary to reconsider the service of long-distance trains via
Europasporet as in this case they must run via the ’old’ main line through Roskilde reducing
some of the travel time savings otherwise achieved.
Speaking of Copenhagen Central, many concerns also arise regarding station capacity and
punctuality. One way to address these concerns could be the inclusion of a ’macroscopic
analysis’ of train route utilisation, occupancy time and capacity utilisation [Banedanmark
2021b] which could provide a further estimation of the impacts of an increase in traffic. In
this case, it would also be possible to compare considerable differences in the infrastructure
such as different alternatives to the track layout.
Throughout the project, a road toll equal to Øresundsbroen has been assumed. The toll is not
insignificant when predicting the traffic flow and subsequent socio-economic assessment. It is
thus proposed that a sensitivity assessment of the toll should be conducted in a future analysis
if a road connection is included. A reduced toll could imply that additional users would move
from the HH ferries. If large enough, the increased flow could yield an increase in the total
revenue. On the other hand, users could also be moved from Øresundsbroen resulting in a
loss from this connection. Conversely, a higher toll could imply additional revenue if not too
many users change to other connections.
11.7
Final recommendations
Based on the findings in this report, a further assessment of Europasporet is recommended if
the political willingness of a new fixed link across Øresund withstands. It is strongly recom-
mended that a joint venture between Denmark and Sweden is established to define and agree
on prerequisites, calculation methods, and especially future expectations of the development
in the Øresund region as well as the service level of the transport system.
Despite the differences between GMM and Sampers both models should be included to as-
sess the project, otherwise implying comprehensive adaptions if only one is used. It is noted,
that this project made use of an outdated version of Sampers (Sampers 3.4.6). However, it is
expected that some of the same differences will be present in the new version (Sampers V. 4)
It is suggested that GMM is used as ’main model’ to predict the changes in demand due to
Page 107 of 156
==PAGE:115==
Europasporet
11.7
Final recommendations
its more comprehensive calculation method including a sub-model for international traffic. It
is however thought, that the predicted benefit of (existing) cross-border travellers in Sampers
should be compared to GMM in order to make a stronger quantification of the potential bene-
fits and sensitivity. If decided to re-calibrate Sampers for scenario runs, it should be assessed
how this impacts the achieved benefits.
To address the concerns about capacity at Copenhagen Central a further assessment of the
train flow should be included. In addition, options for stronger integration of regional/local
train services in the Øresund system should also be investigated. However, with various on-
going investigations of changes in and around Copenhagen Central, the project should await
a decision on the strategy for a future Copenhagen Central. Meanwhile, it is suggested that
the current investigations of Copenhagen Central include an option for a later connection to
Europasporet.
A prior assessment of the expectations in rail freight, time values, and operational expen-
ditures on rail freight is also suggested to make a stronger quantification of the achieved
benefits.
Lastly, it could be beneficial to investigate Europasporet in combination with other infrastruc-
ture projects. This could e.g., include a fixed link for road transport between Helsingør and
Helsingborg.
Page 108 of 156
==PAGE:116==
Europasporet
12
Conclusion
The Øresund Bridge is today the only fixed link between Scandinavia and mainland Europe
serving both road- and rail traffic. With a fast-growing region and increasing focus on rail
transport, additional rail capacity is needed. This report investigated the impacts of a new
rail and road connection across Øresund between Copenhagen and Landskrona, ”Europas-
poret/Europavejen”.
Two scenarios were investigated: scenario 1 with a junction at Copenhagen Central/Prøvestenen
and scenario 2 with a junction at Østerport/Nordhavnen.
With the presented railway capacity levels, it is proven possible to implement Europasporet
in the existing rail network increasing rail traffic across Øresund. However, a new connection
will in general not be able to relieve capacity on adjacent lines, instead ’moving’ bottlenecks
elsewhere in the network. This is e.g., the case between Østerport-Copenhagen C-Kastrup,
Lernacken-Hyllie-Malm¨o C, and Billeberga-Teckomatorp with a capacity consumption of up
to 81% (Trafikverkets calculation method). Additionally, there is already a concern about
the capacity at Copenhagen Central, although the implementation of Europasporet does not
contribute to any change in capacity. The capacity issues are thus on adjacent lines, and not
on the connections across Øresund itself.
With the use of the Danish national transport model, GMM, and Swedish national transport
model, Sampers, the impacts of Europasporet/Europavejen have been assessed. It was cho-
sen to calibrate Sampers to replicate the results from GMM in the base scenario. However,
aligning the results of business and leisure trips proved difficult as they share the same barrier
constant. The barrier constant should be split in a future project.
Due to several differences between the two models the prediction of traffic in the two scenar-
ios across Øresund differs.
Reasonable results are observed on rail traffic, with both models predicting approximately the
same level of increase in the number of passengers. The major changes being to/from the
Helsingborg and Landskrona area.
For road traffic the difference between the two models is significant. A total increase of ve-
hicles crossing Øresund in scenario 1 is predicted to be 4.5% in GMM and 28% in Sampers.
In scenario 2, GMM predicts a 4.7% increase in road traffic crossing Øresund, Sampers 34%.
At the same time, Sampers presented higher travel time reductions by car than GMM.
The distribution of traffic load between the two models showed however similar results, the
major changes being on E6 between Helsingborg-Landskrona, the Eastern Ring Road, and
Page 109 of 156
==PAGE:117==
Europasporet
Ring Road 2.
The differences are probably due to the different calculation methods of the two models as
well as a high sensitivity to travel time and lower substitution between modes in Sampers
compared to GMM. It was additionally found, that a large part of the ’new’ trips across Øre-
sund in Sampers is a relocation of existing trips, that in the base situation took place within
Sk˚ane.
These differences highlight the issues of having two models for the same area, necessitating
strong coordination between stakeholders. Measures can be taken to mitigate the differences
but are however deemed comprehensive.
As a result of the findings in the report, it is believed that GMM provides the most reliable
results for cross-border traffic
From a Danish socio-economic perspective, based on GMM results, both scenarios showed
unprofitable: scenario 1 with an NPV of -17,335 M. DKK and scenario 2 with -8,016 M. DKK.
User benefits and road tolls cannot counterweight the construction and maintenance costs. The
sensitivity analysis shows, that neither of the two scenarios can yield a positive NPV in the
evaluated parameters. It can however be concluded, that Scenario 2 is the most attractive
providing higher user benefits and the lowest construction cost and it is recommended that
further analysis of Scenario 2 is conducted.
The assessment conducted in this report shows that Europasporet/Europavejen provides the
potential to strengthen mobility in the Øresund region, with significant travel time reductions
of up to 55 minutes by train and 25 minutes by car between Zealand and a large part of the
central and northern Sk˚ane, thereby increasing mobility and accessibility as well as providing
redundancy in the network. A high construction cost however does not justify the achieved
benefits predicted by GMM.
This report recommends a further analysis of Europasporet/Europavejen with the scope of
determining the most significant costs and benefits accurately. This should be done in a col-
laboration between Danish and Swedish authorities to agree on the prerequisites for future
analysis as well as the used calculation methods and traffic models predicting the impacts of
the project. A re-calibration/adaption of the existing transport models would be preferred but
requires comprehensive work and it is therefore recommended that future analysis should use
one traffic model as the ’main model’, namely GMM. Sampers can then be used to highlight
local effects and as a method to highlight the sensitivity of the achieved benefits.
Page 110 of 156
==PAGE:118==
Europasporet
Reference list
Reference list
Alexandersson, C. (2023). En ny f¨orbindelse mellan sverige och danmark - europasporet.
Landskrona Stadt.
Andersson, J., & Wessman, J. (2023). Trafikken over øresund [Accessed: 2024-02-12]. Øre-
sundsinstituttet. https://www.oresundsinstituttet.dk/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/
20230223-Oresundsindex-Q4-DK.pdf
Andersson, M. [Magnus], Cronberg, N., Lind, D., Ohlsson, M., & Risberg, M. (2021). Per-
sont˚agsstrategi, strategi f¨or utveckling av den regionala t˚agtrafiken i sk˚ane 2020–2040
[Accessed: 2024-02-15]. Region Sk˚ane. https://utveckling.skane.se/siteassets/publikationer/
kommunrapporter-rvu-2018/persontagsstrategi-2020-2040.pdf
Andersson, M. [Marco]. (2024). Webinar: ”sn¨allt˚agets planer for trafik gennem og i danmark”.
IDA Rail.
ASEK. (2024). Analysmetod och samh¨allsekonomiska kalkylv¨arden f¨or transportsektorn, asek
8.0. Trafikverket.
Banedanmark. (2021a). Forenkling af københavns hovedbaneg˚ard – en vej til bedre punkt-
lighed. Banedanmark.
Banedanmark. (2021b). Kapacitetsudvidelse og hastighedsopgradering ved ringsted. Banedan-
mark.
Banedanmark. (2023a). Københavns hovedbaneg˚ard- id´eoplæg til forenkling og fremtidssikring.
Banedanmark.
Banedanmark. (2023b). Om fjernbanens nye signalsystem [Accessed: 2024-04-23]. Banedan-
mark. https://www.bane.dk/da/Borger/Baneprojekter/Signalprogrammet/Fjernbane
Barfod, M. B., & Leleur, S. (2021). Decision support and strategic assessment - dtu manage-
ment compendium version 2021. DTU Management.
Page 111 of 156
==PAGE:119==
Europasporet
Reference list
Baumgarten, H. (2023). Flixtrain ser p˚a international togkørsel via danmark [Accessed: 2024-
02-19]. Standby. https://standby.dk/global-bus-og-togtransportoer-saetter-omsaetningsrekord/
Bencke, S. H. (2023). Dsb vil ˚abne to nye internationale togruter [Accessed: 2024-06-10].
Politiken. https://politiken.dk/rejser/togrejser/art9206965/DSB-vil-%C3%A5bne-to-
nye-internationale-togruter
CEF. (2023a). Commission implementing decision. European commision.
CEF. (2023b). Connecting europe facility (cef) - cef 2 transport - projects on the core network
– general envelope. European commision.
Cox, P. (2020). Scandinavian - mediterranean corridor [Accessed: 2024-04-23]. European
Comission. https://transport.ec.europa.eu/transport- themes/infrastructure- and-
investment/trans- european-transport-network- ten-t/scandinavian-mediterranean-
corridor en
DSB. (2022). Dsb trafikvision 2030. De Danske Statsbaner.
DST. (2024a). Danmarks statistik, statistikbanken [Accessed: 2024-02-12]. Statistics Den-
mark. https://www.statistikbanken.dk/
DST. (2024b). Valutakurser [Accessed: 2024-05-31]. Statistics Denmark. https://www.dst.dk/
da/Statistik/emner/oekonomi/finansielle-markeder/valutakurser
Eltved, M., Høj, J., Paag, H., Mikkelsen, M. B., & Kolstrup, K. (2021). Samfundsøkonomisk
analyse af kattegatforbindelsens bidrag til forsyningssikkerheden. Vejdirektoratet.
Eurostat. (2024). Eurostat, database [Accessed: 2024-02-14]. European Union. https://ec.
europa.eu/eurostat/data/database
Finansministeriet, Incentive, & DTU. (2022). Teresa og transportøkonomiske enhedspriser
[Accessed: 2024-06-15]. DTU Management. https://www.man.dtu.dk/myndighedsbetjening/
teresa-og-transportoekonomiske-enhedspriser
Page 112 of 156
==PAGE:120==
Europasporet
Reference list
Hedlund, J. (2018). S˚a reser vi i sk˚ane resvaneunders¨okningen 2018. Region Sk˚ane.
Hellervik, A., Boke, C.-J., & Sterky, P. (2021). Ostl¨anken nytt dubbelsp˚ar j¨arna-link¨oping, del
av nya stambanor. Trafikverket.
Heydari, N. (2022). Dtu lecture: Railway design and maintenance, railway budgetting. DTU.
Incentive & Banedanmark. (2010). Samfundsøkonomisk screening af kapacitetsforbedringer.
Incentive.
Incentive, Kolstrup, K., & Espensen, P. F. (2021). Samfundsøkonomisk analyse af en øre-
sundsmetro. Incentive.
Incentive, Odgaard, T., & Kolstrup, K. (2015). Samfundsøkonomisk analyse af en fast forbindelse
over femern bælt. Incentive.
Jelin, A. (2017). Trafikplan 2017 - vækst p˚a jernbanen, og hvad skal der til [Accessed: 2024-
05-31]. Trafikdage. https://www.trafikdage.dk/papers 2017/508 AdnanJelin.pdf
Kyster-Hansen, H., Henriques, M., Sewring, G., Ney, T., & Ahlberg, J. (2018). Rapport re-
dundans i gr¨ans¨overskridande j¨arnv¨agstrafik. Region Sk˚ane.
LandskronaStadt & Kreera. (2019). Europasp˚aret, landskrona-k¨openhamn. Landskrona Stadt.
Lennefors, L. (2023). Prognos f¨or persontrafiken 2040. Trafikverket.
Lennefors, L. (2024). T˚agtrafik 2045 med fastst¨alld plan 2022–2033. Trafikverket.
Lindqvist, A. (2019). Offentlig transports sidste bastion: Nu flygter ogs˚a hovedstadens pendlere
over i bilerne [Accessed: 2024-05-31]. Trafikdage. https://ing.dk/artikel/offentlig-
transports-sidste-bastion-nu-flygter-ogsaa-hovedstadens-pendlere-over-i-bilerne
Litman, T. (2024). Understanding transport demands and elasticities - how prices and other
factors affect travel behavior. Victoria Transport Policy Institute.
Page 113 of 156
==PAGE:121==
Europasporet
Reference list
Lundberg, P. ˚A. (2020). Trafikverkets modell f¨or ber¨akning av linjekapacitet. Trafikverket.
Mabit, S. (2022). Dtu lecture: Transportation system analysis - trip distribution. DTU.
Mabit, S. L., Thorhauge, M., Jensen, A. F., & Rich, J. (2017). The international ltm demand
models. DTU.
Mattiosson, J., & Lundberg, P. ˚A. (2022). T¨athet mellan t˚ag, planeringsf¨oruts¨attningar t˚agplan
2022 [Accessed: 2024-05-23]. Trafikverket. https://bransch.trafikverket.se/contentassets/
41fe5cc2874a4d2aa21ef9e6cf053110/tathet-mellan-tag-tagplan-2022-v2.0.pdf
Nielsen, O. A. (2012). Definitioner og m˚al for mobilitet og tilgængelighed. DTU.
Nilsson, J. (2019). ¨Oresund centralt i ny sj-satsning – vill expandera i danmark [Accessed:
2024-02-14]. Øresunds Instituttet. https : / / www. oresundsinstituttet . dk / oresund -
centralt-i-ny-sj-satsning-vill-expandera-i-danmark/
¨Orestat. (2024). Utveckling sk˚ane [Accessed: 2024-02-12]. Statistics Oerestad. https://utveckling.
skane.se/regional-utveckling/statistik-och-analys/oresundsdatabasen/orestat/orestat-
pa-dansk/
Øresundbron. (2019). ˚Arsrapport øresundbro konsortiet i/s 2019. Øresundbro konsortiet I/S.
Øresundbron. (2023). ˚Arsrapport øresundbro konsortiet i/s 2023. Øresundbro konsortiet I/S.
Pedersen, T. R., & Tønning, A. (2021). Test af efterspørgselsmodel for personture i ltm, ver.
2.3 [Accessed: 2024-05-31]. Vejdirektoratet. https : / / api . vejdirektoratet . dk / sites /
default / files / 2021 - 04 / LTM % 202 . 3 % 20 - %20Test % 20af % 20eftersp % C3 %
B8rgselsmodel%20for%20personture rev1 web.pdf
Pouryousef, H., Lautala, P. T., & White, T. (2015). Railroad capacity tools and methodolo-
gies in the u.s. and europe [Accessed: 2024-05-23]. Researchgate. https : / / www.
researchgate.net/publication/273159309 Railroad capacity tools and methodologies
in the US and Europe
Page 114 of 156
==PAGE:122==
Europasporet
Reference list
Regeringskansliet. (2024). M˚al f¨or transportpolitiken [Accessed: 2024-06-10]. Regeringskansliet.
https://www.regeringen.se/regeringens-politik/transporter-och-infrastruktur/mal-for-
transporter-och-infrastruktur/
SCB. (2024). Statistikmyndigheten, statistikdatabasen [Accessed: 2024-02-12]. Statistics Swe-
den. https://www.statistikdatabasen.scb.se/pxweb/sv/ssd/
Schi¨oth, M. (2020). Strategisk plan ¨oresundst˚ag. Sweco, ¨Oresundst˚ag AB.
Schi¨oth, M., Andersson, H., & Gustafsson, S. (2024). Potential i befintlig ¨oresundsf¨orbindelse
- s˚a kan ¨oresundsbron framtidss¨akras till ˚ar 2100. Sweco.
Schi¨oth, M., & Bergmark, J.- ˚A. (2023). ¨Oresundst˚ag trafikutvecklingsplan 2025-2030. Sweco,
¨Oresundst˚ag AB.
Schriever-Abeln, M., Nilsson, J., & Alexandersson, C. (2015). Europasp˚aret - utredning om
nya core network-f¨orbindelser i ¨oresundsregionen f¨or internationell och regional utveck-
ling. Landskrona Stadt.
Sk˚ane, R. (2021). Regional transportinfrastrukturplan sk˚ane 2022–2033 [Accessed: 2024-04-
23]. Region Sk˚ane. https://www.skane.se/namndshandlingar/3473549/
Sund&Bælt, Vejdirektoratet, & Trafikstyrelsen. (2022). En fast forbindelse over kattegat, forun-
dersøgelse - kombineret vej- og jernbaneforbindelse. Vejdirektoratet.
Tansportministeriet. (2021). Infrastrukturplan 2035 [Accessed: 2024-04-23]. Transportminis-
teriet. https://www.trm.dk/media/rt1h51td/endelig- aftaletekst- infrastrukturplan-
2035-final-a.pdf
Tiirikainen, M. (2022). Rederi opruster i kamp om femern - køber batterifærge for over en
halv milliard [Accessed: 2024-06-10]. TV2. https://www.tv2east.dk/lolland/rederi-
opruster-i-kamp-om-femern-koeber-batterifaerge-for-over-en-halv-milliard
Trafikstyrelsen. (2017). Trafikplan for den statslige jernbane 2017-2032. Trafikstyrelsen.
Page 115 of 156
==PAGE:123==
Europasporet
Reference list
Trafikstyrelsen. (2023). Trafikplan for den statslige jernbane 2023. Trafikstyrelsen.
Trafikstyrelsen, S. A. (2013). Stationskapaciteten ved københavn h [Accessed: 2024-05-25].
Trafikstyrelsen. https : / / www. trafikstyrelsen . dk / media / 12310 / Analyse % 20af %
20stationskapaciteten%20ved%20K%C3%B8benhavn%20H%20dec%202013.pdf
Trafikverket, Vejdirektoratet, & Trafikstyrelsen. (2021). Fast forbindelse mellem helsingør
och helsingborg. Vejdirektoratet.
Transportministeriet. (2015). Dsb-trafikkontrakt [Accessed: 2024-06-15]. Transportministeriet.
https://www.trm.dk/publikationer/2015/dsb-trafikkontrakt/
VD, TRM, RH, & KK. (2020). Forundersøgelse af østlig ringvej [Accessed: 2024-04-23].
Vejdirektoratet. https://www.vejdirektoratet.dk/api/drupal/sites/default/files/2020-
08/%C3%98stlig%20Ringvej RESUMERAPPORT.pdf
Vejdirektoratet & Trafikstyrelsen. (2013). Lillebælt - ny bane og vejforbindelse, strategisk
analyse. Transportministeriet.
Wedin, M., & Nilsson, S. (2023). Kapacitetsh¨ojande ˚atg¨arder i j¨arnv¨agssystemet i sk˚ane.
Trafikverket.
Westin, P.-E. (2021). F¨orslag till nationell plan f¨or transportinfrastrukturen 2022–2033 [Ac-
cessed: 2024-04-23]. Trafikverket. https://trafikverket.diva- portal.org/smash/get/
diva2:1615267/FULLTEXT02.pdf
Page 116 of 156
==PAGE:124==
Europasporet
A
Appendix - Learning objectives
• Analyse current rail service and capacity consumption in the Øresund network. Evalu-
ate the need for an expansion of the infrastructure and present previously investigated
options.
• Explain and apply the structure of a transport model in the context of ”Europasporet”/
”Europavejen”.
• Evaluate key indicators in the project including differences between the Danish and
Swedish traffic models and comparison to other infrastructure projects
• Analyse and evaluate the results from a transport model and apply them to a socioeco-
nomic analysis
• Evaluate the profitability of the project together with a sensitivity analysis and formulate
a conclusion as a basis for decision-making
Page 117 of 156
==PAGE:125==
Europasporet
B
Appendix - Rail traffic
B.1
Changes to the expected traffic
With the traffic plans provided by the transport authorities this section describes the signficant
changes that were made in this project. As stated in section 3.2.3, the traffic patterns in this
project are formed based on expectations from operators and transport authorities. Some
patterns are changed, with the primary being:
• Two systems crossing Øresund are discontinued and terminates at Hyllie instead as ca-
pacity on Øresundsbanen otherwise would exceed limitations. The project thus follows
the danish ”Trafikplan for den statslige jernbane 2017-2032” [Trafikstyrelsen 2017], but
differs from the Swedish expectations [Lennefors 2024].
• The EuroCity/long distance trains to/from Stockholm serves Copenhagen every hour.
It is uncertain how often it is considered necessary to run EuroCity trains in the future,
and therefore considered reasonable to assign a train path every hour. Additionally a
few trains continues onwards to Jutland/Germany
• At Copenhagen C, a large part of the trains that would terminate at Copenhagen C
continues towards Østerport following the expectation from DSB K30 [DSB 2022].
Page 118 of 156
==PAGE:126==
Europasporet
B.2
Traffic patterns
B.2
Traffic patterns
Figure 33: Traffic patterns in the base situation 2040. One line represents one train per hour
Page 119 of 156
==PAGE:127==
Europasporet
B.2
Traffic patterns
Figure 34: Traffic patterns in scenario 1. One line represents one train per hour
Page 120 of 156
==PAGE:128==
Europasporet
B.2
Traffic patterns
Figure 35: Traffic patterns in scenario 2. One line represents one train per hour
Page 121 of 156
==PAGE:129==
Europasporet
B.3
Scheduled rail service across Øresund
B.3
Scheduled rail service across Øresund
Scheduled service basis 2040
Service type
Route
No. of trains /hour
Long distance
(Oslo)-Gothenburg-
Malm¨o-(Copenhagen)
½
Long distance
Stockholm-Malm¨o-
Copenhagen-(Jutland/Germany)
1
Long distance
Stockholm-Malm¨o-
Copenhagen S-Germany
1
Regional
Gothenburg-Malm¨o-
Copenhagen/Østerport
2
Regional (Rush hour)
Helsingborg-Malm¨o-
Copenhagen/Østerport
2
Regional
Kalmar-Malm¨o-
Copenhagen/Østerport
1
Regional
Karlskrona-Malm¨o-
Copenhagen/Østerport
1
Table 43: Scheduled passenger service across Øresund in the base situation 2040
Page 122 of 156
==PAGE:130==
Europasporet
B.3
Scheduled rail service across Øresund
Scheduled service scenario 1
Service type
Route
No. of trains /hour
Long distance
(Oslo)-Gothenburg-
Copenhagen-(Jutland/Germany)
½
Long distance
Stockholm-Copenhagen-
Jutland/Germany
½
Long distance
Stockholm-Malm¨o-Copenhagen
1
Long distance
Stockholm-Malm¨o-
Copenhagen S-Germany
1
Regional
Helsingborg-Copenhagen-
Malm¨o-Kalmar
1
Regional
Gothenburg-Copenhagen-
Malm¨o-Karlskrona
1
Regional
Gothenburg-Malm¨o-Copenhagen
2
Regional (Rush hour)
(Helsingborg-Malm¨o)-
Copenhagen-Kristianstad
1
Regional (Rush hour)
Malm¨o-Sv˚agertorp-Copenhagen-
Landskrona-Malm¨o
1 ( 2)
Table 44: Scheduled passenger service across Øresund in scenario 1
Page 123 of 156
==PAGE:131==
Europasporet
Scheduled service scenario 2
Service type
Route
No. of trains /hour
Long distance
(Oslo)-Gothenburg-Copenhagen
-(Jutland/Germany)
½
Long distance
Stockholm-Copenhagen
-Jutland/Germany
½
Long distance
Stockholm-Malm¨o-Copenhagen
1
Long distance
Stockholm-Malm¨o-
Copenhagen S-Germany
1
Regional
Helsingborg-Copenhagen-
Malm¨o-Kalmar
1
Regional
Gothenburg-Copenhagen-
Malm¨o-Karlskrona
1
Regional
Gothenburg-Malm¨o-Copenhagen
2
Regional (Rush hour)
(Helsingborg-Malm¨o)-
Copenhagen-Kristianstad
1
Regional (Rush hour)
Holbæk-Copenhagen-Landskrona-
Malm¨o-Roskilde/Ringsted
1 ( 2)
Table 45: Scheduled passenger service across Øresund in scenario 2
C
Appendix - Basis timetable Øresundsbanen
Page 124 of 156
==PAGE:132==
Europasporet
Figure 36: Timetable draft between Copenhagen C and Lernacken base 2040 (For UIC-406 comparison)
Page 125 of 156
==PAGE:133==
Europasporet
D
Appendix - Trafikverkets method of capacity utilisation
The following presents an example of how the capacity utilisation between Kalvebod and Kas-
trup is calculated using Trafikverkets method over a two hour peak period. First of all the input
parameters, runtime and minimum headway, are defined with the use of TPS (Table 46).
Kalvebod-Kastrup 2 hour peak (Basis)
Long distance
Regional
Freight
No. of trains per direction
7
16
2
Run time East (min)
6.0
7.5
6.3
Min headway East (min)
2.8
3.05
2.9
Run time West (min)
5.9
7.4
6.2
Min headway West (min)
2.6
2.9
2.7
Table 46: Input parameters Kalvebod-Kastrup in Trafikverkets capacity calculation method
The weighted average runtime are then calculated:
Average runtime east = 6.98 minutes
Average runtime west = 6.88 minutes
The total occupancy time is then calculated according to:
k = Σt=n
t=1(Thead + (|Trunt −Tavg|)t + Σj=m
j=1 Tcross
Total occupancy east, k = 90.51 minutes
Total occupancy west, k = 86.51 minutes
And the capacity consumption are finally found as:
K =
k
120 ∗100
Capacity consumption east, K = 75.4%
Capacity consumption west, K = 72.1%
Page 126 of 156
==PAGE:134==
Europasporet
E
Appendix - Sampers barrier constants
Elasticity to DK
Direct/Cross
Car Commute
Car Other
Pub Commute
Pub Other
Car Commute
-0.04
-
0.01
-
Car Other
-
-0.48
-
0.01
Pub Commute
0.02
-
-0.25
-
Pub Other
-
0.06
-
-0.09
Table 47: Direct and Cross elasticity of barrier constants to DK
Elasticity from DK
Direct/Cross
Car Commute
Car Other
Pub Commute
Pub Other
Car Commute
-0.38
-
0.06
-
Car Other
-
-0.26
-
0.08
Pub Commute
0.07
-
-0.95
-
Pub Other
-
0.03
-
-0.59
Table 48: Direct and Cross elasticity of barrier constants from DK
Page 127 of 156
==PAGE:135==
Europasporet
F
Appendix - Alignment
Figure 37: Alignment of Europavejen (Road). Combined road/rail tunnel across Øresund
Page 128 of 156
==PAGE:136==
Europasporet
Figure 38: Alignment of Europasporet (Rail). Combined road/rail tunnel across Øresund
Page 129 of 156
==PAGE:137==
Europasporet
Figure 39: Junction at Landskrona, both alternatives.
Page 130 of 156
==PAGE:138==
Europasporet
Figure 40: Changes south of Copenhagen Central. Ringstedbanen, Vestbanen, Øresundsbanen, Freight shunt
Page 131 of 156
==PAGE:139==
Europasporet
Figure 41: Changes north of Copenhagen Central. Ringstedbanen, Vestbanen, Øresundsbanen
Page 132 of 156
==PAGE:140==
Europasporet
Figure 42: Overview of the track layout at Østerport with Europasporet implemented. To/from Europasporet
Page 133 of 156
==PAGE:141==
Europasporet
Figure 43: Overview of the alignment of the railway in/around Copenhagen
Page 134 of 156
==PAGE:142==
Europasporet
Table 49: Estimated speed profile (Using dansih guidelines)
Page 135 of 156
==PAGE:143==
Europasporet
G
Appendix - Link filters
Figure 44: Distribution of traffic from the HH-ferries. Annual average weekday traffic base
scenario (GMM)
Page 136 of 156
==PAGE:144==
Europasporet
Figure 45: Distribution of traffic from the Øresund bridge. Annual average weekday traffic
base scenario (GMM)
Page 137 of 156
==PAGE:145==
Europasporet
Figure 46: Distribution of traffic from the HH-ferries. Annual average weekday traffic sce-
nario 2 (GMM)
Page 138 of 156
==PAGE:146==
Europasporet
Figure 47: Distribution of traffic from the Øresund bridge. Annual average weekday traffic
scenario 2 (GMM)
Page 139 of 156
==PAGE:147==
Europasporet
Figure 48: Distribution of traffic from Europavejen. Annual average weekday traffic scenario
2 (GMM)
Page 140 of 156
==PAGE:148==
Europasporet
H
Appendix - Link loads
Figure 49: Change in number of passenger on link-level for scenario 1 compared to base.
Results in Zealand based on GMM, Sweden on Sampers
Page 141 of 156
==PAGE:149==
Europasporet
Figure 50: Change in number of passenger on link-level for scenario 2 compared to base.
Results in Zealand based on GMM, Sweden on Sampers
Page 142 of 156
==PAGE:150==
Europasporet
Figure 51: Change in number of vehicles on link-level for scenario 1 compared to base.
Results in Zealand based on GMM, Sweden on Sampers
Page 143 of 156
==PAGE:151==
Europasporet
Figure 52: Change in number of vehicles on link-level for scenario 2 compared to base.
Results in Zealand based on GMM, Sweden on Sampers
Page 144 of 156
==PAGE:152==
Europasporet
Figure 53: Change in number of vehicles on link-level for scenario 1 compared to base, GMM
predictions
Page 145 of 156
==PAGE:153==
Europasporet
Figure 54: Change in number of vehicles on link-level for scenario 1 compared to base,
Sampers predictions
Page 146 of 156
==PAGE:154==
Europasporet
Figure 55: Change in number of vehicles on link-level for scenario 2 compared to base, GMM
predictions
Page 147 of 156
==PAGE:155==
Europasporet
Figure 56: Change in number of vehicles on link-level for scenario 2 compared to base,
Sampers predictions
Page 148 of 156
==PAGE:156==
Europasporet
I
Appendix - Socio-economic
Figure 57: Main results from the CBA (2023 price level)
Page 149 of 156
==PAGE:157==
Europasporet
1000 hours/year
Scn 1
Scn 2
Pub IvT
GMM
Sampers
Diff
GMM
Sampers
Diff
Exs. Users
Commute
369,633
409,807
40,174
414,064
419,626
5,562
Business
287,942
335,100
47,157
281,805
298,055
16,250
Other
1,845,983
1,593,462
-252,521
1,855,155
1,660,048
-195,107
1000 hours/year
Scn 1
Scn 2
Car Time
GMM
Sampers
Diff
GMM
Sampers
Diff
Exs. Users
Commute Free
178,340
248,544
70,204
203,102
307,008
103,906
Commute Cong
7,391
27,868
20,476
10,386
30,071
19,685
Business Free
140,285
221,371
81,085
154,675
251,410
96,735
Business Cong
-1,577
2,937
4,514
463
4,498
4,035
Other Free
1,421,229
1,660,834
239,605
1,532,194
1,803,172
270,978
Other Cong
3,235
9,775
6,540
11,852
18,007
6,155
Table 50:
Travel time savings (hours per year) for existing users predicted in GMM and
Sampers. Only travel time savings for trips across Øresund is presented
Page 150 of 156
==PAGE:158==
Europasporet
Figure 58: Main results from the CBA with 40% EU-subsidy Scn1, 25% EU-subsidy Scn2
(2023 price level)
Page 151 of 156
==PAGE:159==
Europasporet
J
Appendix - Accessibility
Figure 59: Change in accessibility within 60 minutes by public transport scenario 1 compared
to base
Page 152 of 156
==PAGE:160==
Europasporet
Figure 60: Change in accessibility within 60 minutes by public transport scenario 2 compared
to base
Page 153 of 156
==PAGE:161==
Europasporet
Figure 61: Change in accessibility within 60 minutes by car scenario 1 compared to base
Page 154 of 156
==PAGE:162==
Europasporet
Figure 62: Change in accessibility within 60 minutes by car scenario 2 compared to base
Page 155 of 156
==PAGE:163==
Europasporet
K
Appendix - List of abbreviations
Abbrevation
Terms
GMM
Danish national transport model
Sampers
Swedish national transport model for passenger transport
NPV
Net present value
VoT
Value of time
TPS
Train planning software
TERESA
Danish Transport Ministry’s spreadsheet model
HH
The link between Helsingør-Helsingborg
GRO
Generalised travel cost
IvT
In vehicle time
Page 156 of 156
