==PAGE:1==
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
Master Thesis
DTU Civil Engineering
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Tore Vang Rasmussen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment
for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Tore Vang Rasmussen ­ s183778
Signature
Date
ii
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the calibration of uncertainties in a Faster R­CNN model applied
to a music score dataset. We implemented a Bayesian version of Faster R­CNN and
used deep ensemble and vector scaling methods as calibration baselines. We aimed to
approximate the model’s posterior distribution using Hamiltonian Monte Carlo sampling.
However, sampling from our Bayesian Faster R­CNN model effectively introduced noise
to the parameters rather than optimizing them. Due to a lack of optimization, the influ­
ence of the prior was non­existent, and no significant change could be observed for the
classification stage. We successfully showed that maximizing the marginal likelihood with
respect to the model hyperparameters minimized the calibration error for the regression
problem.
Thus, the initial behavior of the Bayesian Faster R­CNN is as expected, but we could not
conclude how it converged due to the lack of optimization.
Adding noise and drawing samples produced several slightly varied models that allowed
for a calibration analysis of both the regression and classification stages. These models
lead to well­calibrated uncertainty estimates in the regression stage, outperforming the
deep ensemble method. Given the limited number of models in both the Bayesian and
deep ensemble approaches, the calibration of the classification stage was not entirely
reliable. However, it did yield reasonable results.
Calibrating uncertainty by comparing models with noise added to them generalizes poorly,
and results should be handled carefully.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
0.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1
Background
2
1.1
Bayesian Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Bayesian Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Sampling methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Faster R­CNN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.5
Metrics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.6
Uncertainty calibration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Bayesian Regression Results
13
2.1
Bayesian Linear Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2
Bayesian Neural Network for Regression
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3
Bayesian Neural Networks for Classification
25
4
Faster R­CNN Experiments
29
4.1
Implementation of Faster R­CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.2
Data preprocessing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.3
Training of traditional Faster R­CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
4.4
Bayesian Faster R­CNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.5
Calibration Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5
Conclusion
44
Bibliography
45
A Anchor Selection
47
B Training Procedure of Faster R­CNN
48
B.1 Average precision
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
B.2 Proposal Samples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
C Sampling procedure of Faster R­CNN
50
C.1 Likelihood development plots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
D Training of Deep Ensembles
52
E
Sampling From RetinaNet
53
F
Code
54
F.1
Rejection Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
F.2
Metropolis Sampling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
F.3
Base Class for HMC and NUTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
F.4
HMC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
F.5
NUTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
v
==PAGE:8==
F.6
Vector Scaling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
vi
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:9==
0.1
Introduction
Accurate uncertainties inform and guide decision­making processes and are crucial in
high­stakes scenarios where errors can have severe consequences. Uncertainty estima­
tion is highly beneficial in detecting symbols in music scores, an essential step in digi­
tizing music sheets. In a digitizing world, the music archives worldwide struggle to keep
up. Musicians still rely on old scores written by hand several decades ago, which wors­
ens with increasing handwritten corrections. People in music archives worldwide spend
thousands of hours preparing old scores for musicians that are still difficult to read. If the
music scores are digitized, the scores can be uploaded into a music program for editing
and be reprinted in high­quality and modern notation.
Object detection algorithms are the first step in the digitization process, but correcting
their flaws still requires extensive manual labor. Accurate uncertainties are helpful in a
program that tracks manual adjustments, such as rejecting false model proposals, insert­
ing missing objects, and adjusting bounding boxes. In this case, uncertainties and active
learning can be used for decision­making to adjust future proposals based on our cor­
rections. For classification, the algorithm can learn the acceptance threshold for each
class, thus accepting objects with lower uncertainty that are not represented properly in
the training data but are in the test data.
For regression, a few objects are consequently detected as being too small. If the algo­
rithm learns the user’s corrections, it can automatically adjust the most uncertain coor­
dinates class­wise. Uncertainties can also warn the user if the algorithm is unsure of a
particular classification.
Several attempts have been made to build an object detector for detecting music symbols,
most notably [1] present a Faster R­CNN with the HRNet as the backbone, which they
found was the best combination of several object detectors and backbones.
Deep neural networks like Faster R­CNN have become standard for object detection
tasks. Since object detection involves regression and classification tasks, it is essential
to estimate uncertainties for both. However, neural networks typically provide uncertainty
estimates only for classification problems, not regression problems. Even in classification
tasks, reliable uncertainty estimates for model predictions remain challenging in many
machine learning models. Uncertainty calibration is particularly problematic for neural
networks, as methods that enhance accuracy often worsen calibration. [2] demonstrated
that calibration worsens with increasing network depth and decreasing weight loss. Gen­
erally, model complexity and lack of regularization in neural networks contribute to mis­
calibration, a problem that has been rising with modern architectures.
Various calibration methods exist, but only a few address regression problems. Bayesian
neural networks offer several other benefits in addition to being well­calibrated. They are
resistant to overfitting, generalize well, and could help guide active learning processes
like data set annotation by telling which datasets have the lowest probability, thus making
the training procedure more informed.
This thesis is an extension of [1] and investigates how to obtain reliable uncertainty esti­
mates on regression and classification predictions from a Bayesian framework. Chapter
2.1 investigates a Bayesian neural network for regression tasks and uses various sam­
pling methods for approximating its posterior. Similarly, Chapter 3 investigates a Bayesian
neural network for classification tasks. The results from these chapters are combined
when creating a Bayesian version of the Faster R­CNN in Section 4.4. Finally, we com­
pare the calibration results from the Bayesian Faster R­CNN with the calibration baselines,
post­processing techniques, and deep ensemble methods in Section 4.5.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
1
==PAGE:10==
1
Background
1.1
Bayesian Learning
Bayesian learning is a probabilistic approach to learning that aims to model all unknown
quantities in a model. Thus, the goal is not to find the single best set of parameters for
the model but the distribution for each parameter that best describes the model. From
a Bayesian perspective, probability is viewed as a measure of belief in a particular ob­
servation instead of the frequentist approach that views probabilities as the frequency of
observations after observing infinitely many observations [3]. In the Bayesian framework,
we use the Bayes equation to compute the probability of observing a set of parameters
given some data, this is the posterior distribution:
p(θ|x) = p(x|θ)p(θ)
p(x)
(1.1)
x is the training dataset and θ is the parameters. The posterior is based on a prior p(θ)
and likelihood p(x|θ) and the marginal likelihood p(x). The prior is the belief about the
distribution of the quantities before observing any data. The prior acts as regularization
for the model, and most regularization methods used for deterministic models can be seen
from a Bayesian perspective as setting a prior[3]. Bayesian methods are often less prone
to overfitting due to the prior’s regularizing effect and work very well on small datasets.
This is opposed to maximum likelihood approaches that can be problematic for flexible
models when it comes to overfitting.
The likelihood describes the likelihood of observing the data given a set of parameters
and encodes the aleatoric uncertainty due to noise in the model. The posterior encodes
the epistemic uncertainty due to noise or lack of data [3].
p(x) is a normalization constant called the Evidence or the marginal likelihood because it
is the integrated joint probability: p(x) =
∫
θ p(x|θ)p(θ)dθ which ensures that the posterior
is a valid probability distribution. The posterior can be used iteratively to update our belief
about the distribution of parameters based on new observations.
To make model predictions, the predictive posterior distribution is required:
p(y | x, D) =
∫
θ
p
(
y | x, θ′)
p
(
θ′ | x
)
dθ′
where y is the model prediction.
The posterior and predictive posterior are often in­
tractable, but for simple models like linear regression, they can be computed, as reviewed
in Section 2.
1.2
Bayesian Neural Network
A Bayesian Neural Network (BNN) is a stochastic neural network with priors on either the
weights or the activation function. An explanation of standard neural networks has been
omitted, but more can be read in [4]. BNNs offer a well­defined method for obtaining
calibrated uncertainties, compared to standard deterministic neural networks, which tend
to be overconfident. Several methods exist to obtain better­calibrated uncertainties, but
stochastic neural networks are one of the best [3].
2
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:11==
1.2.1
Symmetries
Neural networks are often overparametrized, resulting in nonunique results, meaning
that different parameter choices can lead to the same solution. The neural network’s
nonuniqueness makes some posterior approximation methods difficult because multiple
modes with equal probability exist. This is especially true for sampling methods, which
ideally would sample from all modes equally. Thus, the mean parameter estimate would
become significantly worse than the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate, and the vari­
ance of the parameters would have become meaningless.
The two most common problems with nonuniqueness are weight­space symmetry and
scaling symmetry [3]. Weight­space symmetry is the property where multiple weight con­
figurations lead to the same solution. Scaling symmetry refers to the property of neural
networks in which multiplying the weights of one layer by a constant and dividing the
weights of the subsequent layer by the same constant does not change the network’s
output. This problem arises when using an activation function like the Rectified Linear
unit (ReLU).
1.2.2
Selecting a network model and prior
Choosing the prior distribution over the parameters for an extensive neural network with
millions of parameters is not intuitive since the variables have no ”meaning” related to
the problem. There are, however, a few default prior definitions. The priors are often
distributed around 0 with a diagonal matrix as the covariance matrix [3]. This is equivalent
to the weight decay in a classical network, penalizing large weights [5].
1.2.3
Posterior Approximating
The exact posterior can no longer be found for neural networks, and approximations are
complex due to symmetries and nonlinearities [6]. Posterior approximation methods can
roughly be divided into sampling techniques and analytical methods. The sampling tech­
niques approximate the posterior using inference to update the Bayes equation iteratively,
thus updating our belief about it. In contrast, the analytical methods approximate the pos­
terior in an optimization process. Despite difficulties, many approximations have shown
to be sufficient to obtain a well­calibrated model with uncertainty estimates [3].
A common posterior simplification method is the Last­n­layer approximation, which helps
all approximations. Research shows that taking account of uncertainty throughout a deep
neural network is often redundant. Adding stochasticity to the last few layers is often
enough to obtain good uncertainty estimates [3].
1.3
Sampling methods
Sampling methods can approximate distributions by comparing individual samples from
the exact distributions.
1.3.1
Monte Carlo
Monte Carlo (MC) is a broad class of methods using stochastic sampling to approximate
deterministic problems numerically. Many MC methods take advantage of the relation
between the integral and expectation of a target function, which can be approximated by
sampling:
Ep(θ)(f) =
∫
f(θ)p(θ)dθ ≈1
N
N
∑
i=1
f (θi) , θ ∼p(θ)
(1.2)
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
3
==PAGE:12==
It says that the expectation of the target function can be approximated as the average of
f evaluated at θ sampled from p(θ). For this to hold, the samples drawn from p must be
independent and identically distributed (iid).
Rejection sampling
is a naive MC approach to sample from the target distribution f(x). It
uses a proposal distribution q(θ), which is easy to sample from, which satisfies q(x) > f(x)
for all θ. New proposal parameters θ are then sampled from q(θ), and y is uniformly
sampled between 0 and q(θ). The sample is then accepted if y ≤f(θ).
1.3.2
Markov Chain Monte Carlo
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is an extension of MC, where new samples depend
on previous samples. This makes convergence potentially faster, but since samples are
no longer i.i.d., one should be careful accepting samples. MCMC methods also make it
more challenging to explore the entire parameter space because it may become unlikely
for the algorithm to escape from a local minima.
An MCMC must satisfy two constraints[7]:
• Mixing requires that repeated sampling from the posterior results in the whole pa­
rameter space being explored. In other words, the sampler must be able to explore
any part of parameter space with a non­zero probability and can, therefore, not be
trapped in a local optimum.
• The target distribution p(x) must be a fixed point of the transitional kernel T(x,x’).
Transition from x to x’ must thus not change the posterior distribution p(x) and can
be expressed by the fixed point equation:
∫
p(x)T (x′ | x) dx = p (x′).
The most common way to satisfy the fixed point equation is using the default balance
constraint: p(x)T (x′ | x) = p (x′) T (x | x′). Default balance says that the probability of
being in state x multiplied by the probability of changing state from x to x’ must be equal
to that of being in state x’ multiplied by the state of transitioning to state x from x’.
The benefit of detailed balance is that it can easily be applied to any proposal distribution
using the Metropolis­Hastings acceptance condition [8],
u < f(θ′)
f(θn), u ∼uniform(0, 1)
(1.3)
where θn is the current sample, and θ′ is the proposal sample. The drawback, however, is
that it results in a random walk of the accepted samples because forward and backward
transitioning happen with equal likelihood, thus lower acceptance and convergence rates.
To investigate an MCMC’s convergence rate, several sampling chains are run in parallel
to see if or when they converge towards the same posterior.
Metropolis­Hasting
is an MCMC method that has the advantage that it only requires
a function f that is proportional to the posterior. The idea is to sample parameters θ from
a proposal distribution Q that depends on the parameters accepted in the step before.
If Q is Gaussian, it is located at the current sample with variance τ. A proposal sample
is accepted according to Metropolis Hasting condition in Equation 1.3. The acceptance
criteria change if the proposal distribution is no longer symmetric.
The choice of proposal distribution Q is essential for how Metropolis­Hastings performs. If
τ is too large, many samples will be rejected, but samples will be autocorrelated if it is too
4
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:13==
small. Another drawback is the random walk in weight space that increases the rejection
rate because no information is used about the path of the accepted samples. This makes
convergence slow.
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC)
solves the random walk problem in traditional MCMC
methods by proposing parameters that are more likely to visit high­density regions while
exploring parameter space more efficiently. Samples in HMC are also less autocorrelated
and require a shorter burn­in time.
The idea of HMC is to use a Hamiltonian system, which represents the total energy, de­
fined as the sum of the kinetic and potential energies: H(p, q) = U(q) + K(q, p). Here, q
denotes the position, and p denotes a newly added momentum of each parameter [9].
Imagine a ”particle” in parameter space, with potential energy defined by its position q = θ
and kinetic defined by its momentum. The current sample lies in position q, and the
proposal sample is the end position of the trajectory with L steps of step length ϵ. The
energy in this system is conserved so that when a new momentum is sampled (using
Gibbs sampling), the system is initialized with a fixed amount of energy. The ”particle”,
therefore, never converges and stays in areas with lower potential energy than the initial
total energy. The energy is conserved during each step of a single Hamiltonian iteration,
meaning the probability density is equal in every step. Therefore, HMC can run exactly
backward with the opposite velocity, thus satisfying the default balance. The algorithm for
drawing a sample from HMC is shown in Algorithm 1 taken from [10].
A typical choice for the kinetic energy is K(p) =
p·M−1·p.T
2
and the potential energy is
determined from the target distribution as U(q) = −log(p(D|q)p(q)), where p(D|q) is the
likelihood and p(q) is prior. A Hamiltonian system satisfies the two Hamiltonian differential
equations [9]:
˙q = ∂K
∂p , ˙p = −∂K
∂q −∂V
∂q
Which is used to define the path of the ”particle”. Notice that ∂V
∂q is the gradients of the
target distribution. Integration is required for position and momentum, but it is intractable.
Leapfrog is a common method for approximating integrals. Leapfrog approximates the
curve in several time steps. It starts at t=0, evaluates the momentum at the half­time
steps, and evaluates the position in the whole­time steps [10].
pi
(
t + ϵ
2
)
= pi(t) −
( ϵ
2
) ∂U(q(t))
∂qi
qi(t + ϵ) = qi(t) + ϵ∂K
(
p
(
t + ϵ
2
))
dpi
pi(t + ϵ) = pi
(
t + ϵ
2
)
−
( ϵ
2
) ∂U
∂xi
Leapfrog gives only an approximate solution, which is the reason why the total energy of
each leapfrog step is not exactly conserved. The better the approximation (the smaller
the step size and number of steps), the greater the acceptance rate. Samples are al­
ways accepted if Leapfrog returns no approximation error. Otherwise, samples are only
accepted with a certain probability [7] to avoid the sampler from being stuck.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
5
==PAGE:14==
The acceptance criteria for HMC can thus be seen as the proportion of error made by the
leapfrog algorithm, and we only accept the proposal sample according to the Metropolis
algorithm condition in Equation 1.3 [8]. If accepted, the sign of the momentum is reversed.
HMC is very sensitive to the hyperparameters step size and number of leapfrog iterations.
If the number of steps is too low, we see behavior like random walk, while too many cause
excessive computations. A large step size causes a high rejection rate and, thus, slow
converging, while a short step size causes high autocorrelation.
No­U­Turn Sampler (NUTS)
is an extension of HMC, introduced to eliminate the num­
ber of steps by terminating the algorithm when the trajectory makes a U­turn. The algo­
rithm is shown in Algorithm 2 taken from [10].
This adaptive approach allows NUTS to explore the parameter space more efficiently,
traversing high­density regions while avoiding unnecessary computation in low­density
areas. As a result, NUTS often requires fewer iterations to achieve convergence com­
pared to traditional HMC, making it a powerful tool for Bayesian inference and probabilistic
modeling [10].
The algorithm starts with initial parameters θ and momentum sampled from a normal dis­
tribution around 0. It then iterates over j, each iteration taking 2j leapfrog steps in either
the direction of the momentum or the opposite. At each iteration, the number of leapfrog
steps is doubled. Thus, it can be considered a binary tree of height j with 2j leaf nodes,
one for each leapfrog step. After the completion of each of these subtree, the right­most
leaf θ+ with momentum p+ is compared to the left­most leaf θ−with momentum p−, to
form the stopping criteria:
(
θ+ −θ−)
· p−< 0 or
(
θ+ −θ−)
· p+ < 0.
This terminates the algorithm if it turns back on itself; in other words, if the vector from
the proposal to one of the ends and the momentum vector form an angle less than 90
degrees. Each sub­binary tree is combined into a single large binary tree, and the same
stopping criteria are checked after each iteration before doubling leapfrog steps again.
6
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:15==
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.1: Example of the body of an HRNet with 4 stages and mixing between each
stage. Visualization is made by [11].
1.4
Faster R­CNN
Faster R­CNN (Region­based Convolutional Neural Network) is one of the most prominent
object detection algorithms. It comprises a backbone and two stages: Region Proposal
Network (RPN) and Region of Interest (ROI Head). The backbone creates a set of feature
maps used in both stages. The Region Proposal Network (RPN) uses the feature maps
to regress initial anchors into proposal bounding boxes and divides them into foreground
(bounding box captures an object) and background (bounding box captures no object).
The Region of Interest (ROI Head) fine­tunes the foreground proposals and classifies
them into the final classes using the feature maps.
1.4.1
Backbone
The backbone consists of several convolutional layers, creating high­quality feature maps.
Resnet is most commonly used as the backbone for Faster R­CNN. However, the High­
Resolution Net (HRNet) works very well for object detection of small objects [1] and is
thus chosen for this project.
The HRNet consists of several stages, each with several convolutions and parallel levels.
An HRNet with four stages is visually represented by [11] in Figure 1.1. The first stage
has only one level focusing on the smallest objects, using a low­strided convolutional
layer. At the end of each stage, two things happen: 1) a new level is added using a
strided convolution of the output of the stage before, gradually focusing on larger objects
in higher levels, 2) the information from all levels is mixed so that the feature representing
small objects learns about the features found in the higher levels and vice versa. Mixing
levels is done using strided convolutions for downscaling and upsampling for upscaling
feature maps [11]. The idea is that the next stage’s input consists of all the stacked feature
maps from all levels.
Finally, feature maps from all levels after the last stage are inputted into a stem or head
that mixes the feature map into a single feature map with information about all levels.
Many variations of an HRNet stem exist, and Figure 1.1 shows only the body structure.
In modern implementations of Faster R­CNN, no stem is used since the feature maps are
directly passed into FPN, which mixes the features.
1.4.2
FPN
Feature pyramid network (FPN) is a method to extract feature maps at multiple scales
efficiently and is typically used in combination with a backbone. Each output focuses on
objects in different image scales to capture objects of all sizes. The FPN uses first the
bottom­up pathways (strided convolution) and, afterward, the top­down pathways (up­
sampling) to combine the feature maps. During the top­down pathway, features from the
top are stacked with features of the same size from the bottom­up pathway and returned.
This is the typical procedure of FPN and is shown in Figure 1.2 taken from [12]. FPN in
Faster R­CNN uses the backbone as the bottom­up pathway, such that the output features
8
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.2: Feature pyramid network that takes in an image and creates three feature
maps focusing on different­sized objects. Visualization taken from [12]
of the backbone used in the top­down pathway are mixed and returned.
1.4.3
Region Proposal Networks
Region Proposal Network (RPN) makes bounding box proposals and classifies them into
foreground and background. The RPN has three convolutional layers. The first is a 3 by
3 (1 strided) convolution with 256 input and 256 output channels. This is then fed into
two disconnected 1 by 1 (1 strided) convolutional layers with 2 and 8 output channels
representing the binary classification and regression stages, respectively [13]. This way,
RPN can take arbitrarily sized images and return bounding­box proposals very efficiently.
This architecture results in 592.650 trainable parameters.
RPN often takes in feature maps at different scales from the FPN. For each pixel in each
feature map, n*m anchors are placed, with n sizes and m aspect ratios, to capture objects
of different sizes and shapes. [14]. All anchors with IoU greater than 0.7 with a ground
true bounding box are considered foreground, and all proposals with IoU less than 0.3
are considered background.
This procedure regresses millions of anchors and becomes very memory intensive. After
the RPN, the following steps are performed to pick only the best proposals, train, and
proceed to the next stage:
1. All proposals that exceed image boundaries are removed
2. Pick the best (typically 12000) scoring proposals (this is to reduce the number of
proposals before NMS since NMS is very memory intensive).
3. Apply Non­maximum suppression (NMS) to remove overlapping proposals with low
scores.
4. Select the best (typically 2000) scoring proposals. These proposals are used in the
next ROI stage.
5. Sample an equal amount of foreground and background proposals used for training
(sample size/batch size per image is typically 256).
This procedure is the same when testing except for choosing fewer proposals in steps 2
and 4.
A high NMS allows a large overlap between proposals; thus, more proposals are generally
getting through the model. A low NMS means the model only picks the proposals it is
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
9
==PAGE:18==
entirely sure of. The computation time is much larger with a high NMS, but the result is
often better.
Loss
The regression stage uses L1 loss to predict [∆x, ∆y, ∆h, ∆w] on all foreground anchors.
Here (x,y) are the coordinates of the upper left corner of an anchor with height h and width
w, and ∆symbolizes the difference from the anchor to the true bounding box.
The binary classification loss uses binary cross­entropy to predict if an anchor is a fore­
ground or background on an equal amount of foreground and background anchors.
1.4.4
Roi Head
The proposed regions of the RPN are now put into a RoI pooling layer, which takes in
bounding boxes and returns the image of the object scaled to 7*7 with 256 channels.
Each object is then put into a fully connected layer of 7*7*256 inputs and 1024 outputs and
continues into a 1024 by 1024 fully connected layer. Finally, two disconnected, fully con­
nected layers separate the features into regression (1024, classes*4 outputs) and classi­
fication (1024 inputs, classes + 1 outputs) [15]. The ROI Head ends up with 14.286.205
trainable parameters.
RoI pooling
The benefit of the RoI pooling layer is that resizing normally is not differentiable, and
backpropagation can thus not be applied during this step. Roi pooling is a simple process
where the image is divided into subregions, and max­pooling is then applied to resize the
image.
Loss
The regression loss is calculated similarly to RPN, and the multiclass classification prob­
lem is modeled with cross­entropy for multiclass problems.
The total loss is the sum of the classification and regression loss in the RPN and ROI
Head stage. A constant λ weighs the regression and classification loss equally.
1.5
Metrics
1.5.1
mean Average Precision
Mean Average Precision (mAP) is a metric used to estimate the performance of an object
detection algorithm. Both precision and recall are used in the computation:
Precision =
TP
TP + FP
Recall =
TP
TP + FN
Where TP, TN, FP, and FN are defined as follows. A proposal bounding box with IoU
greater than some threshold with a ground truth bounding box is True Positive (TP) if the
class is correctly guessed and False Positive (FP) if the class is wrong. If a proposal
intersects with no ground true object, it is a True Negative (TN) if the guessed class is the
background class and a False Negative (FN) if it is any other class.
Precision and recall are often plotted against each other for all confidence scores (the
predicted proposal score) to get an overview of the model’s performance. When the con­
fidence scores are low, we only allow the very best proposals to contribute to the com­
putation; thus, FP is close to 0, and the precision is close to 1. On the other hand, if the
10
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:19==
confidence score is large, most proposals are allowed, FN is close to zero, and recall is
large.
Average Precision (AP) is now computed as the area under the precision­recall curve.
This AP is still for a specific IoU, and mAP is the mean of AP calculated at a range of IoU
thresholds.
1.6
Uncertainty calibration
Accurate uncertainties are crucial in high­stakes scenarios like the medical field, where
errors can have severe consequences. Reliable uncertainty estimates are generally ben­
eficial, as they can inform and guide decision­making processes.
Reliable uncertainty estimates for model predictions are a major problem for many ma­
chine learning models. The calibration problem is especially severe for neural networks
since many modern methods for increasing accuracy badly influence calibration.
[2]
showed that calibration decreased with the depths of the network and with reducing weight
loss. In general, model complexity and lack of regularization in neural networks are related
to miscalibration.
1.6.1
Calibration methods
Calibrating regression and classification uncertainties are widely different problems. Since
we can access predicted probabilities (or scores), a range of post­processing techniques
is available for classification problems. For post­processing techniques, the calibration
task only involves adjusting the scores to correspond more accurately with the observed
frequencies of those events.
Vector scaling
Vector scaling is a post­processing technique for adjusting the calibration of a multi­class
classification model. Vector scaling is a simple extension of the Platt scaling, which scales
the logits with two parameters a and b: ˆqi = σ (azi + b), where σ is the sigmoid, zi the log­
its, and ˆqi the adjusted propabilities. Temperature Scaling learns a weight for each class:
ˆqi = maxk σSM (zi/a)(k), where a is the learnable parameters and σSM is the softmax.
Ensemble methods
Ensemble methods offer a simple way of calibrating regression and classification models
by standard training techniques, using several models with different initializations. En­
semble learning has been shown to give very reliable prediction uncertainties [3].
Bayesian methods
Bayesian methods offer uncertainties in regression and classification problems as well.
They are, by definition, calibrated since every step of the model is probabilistic. The
problem is that Bayesian methods are rarely tractable, so the calibration quality of the
model depends on the approximation method.
We achieve models of slightly different parameters in both Ensemble and Bayesian meth­
ods approximated by samplers. In a regression model, the final prediction is the mean
prediction over all models, and the uncertainty is simply the variance in the estimates. In
a classification, the final prediction is the class most models guessed. And the probability
that the class of correct is the ratio of true predictions: Predictions on class n
All predictions
.
1.6.2
Reliability diagrams
Model calibration can be visualized using reliability diagrams applicable to regression and
classification tasks.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
11
==PAGE:20==
Calibration of a classification model
is visualized by plotting the weighted average ac­
curacy against the confidence in M quantiles sorted based on the predicted uncertainty.
The confidence is the expected ratio of true predictions in an interval, calculated as the
average prediction score within the interval. The accuracy is the weighted accuracy calcu­
lated for all predictions in each quantile. Ideally, accuracy should be equal to confidence
in every interval, and any mismatch is due to miscalibration [2].
Calibration of a regression model
is not a well­defined problem, and many different
solutions exist to this problem. This thesis uses the definition used by [16] behind imple­
menting the Uncertainty Toolbox Python Library.
The predictions are sorted into M quantiles based on the predicted uncertainty. The relia­
bility diagram has ”observed proportion in interval” on the y­axis and ”predicted proportion
in interval” on the x­axis. The ”observed proportion in interval” is the expected proportion
of observations in each quantile. Since we hope that the proportion of predictions falls
equally into each bin, this is an array from 0 to 1 in steps of bins.
The ”predicted proportion in interval” is the number of predictions that lie within quantilelower <
ytrue−ypred
ystd
< quantileupper, where quantilelower = 0.5 −quantilen and quantileupper =
0.5 + quantilen in a normal distribution with mean 0 and std 1 and is called the Percent
point function [16].
This method assumes that the data is normally distributed around the prediction mean.
The idea is that in a well­calibrated model, there must be some relation between the dis­
tance to the target ytrue −ypred and the predicted standard deviation ystd. If the prediction
is off, the model must correspond to uncertainty. In practice, the values are normally dis­
tributed around 0, and this calibration method says that x% of the predictions must lie
with the x% quantile of the normal distribution. This is only true if ytrue−ypred
ystd
is perfectly
normally distributed.
1.6.3
Model calibration metrics
Comparing the calibration of models with one measure can often be misleading. Here,
we cover a few metrics with different characteristics to capture the model’s behavior.
Expected calibration error (ECE)
is the average difference between the expected and
predicted uncertainty over all intervals in the reliability plot.
Maimum calibration error (MCE)
is the maximum difference between the expected
and predicted uncertainty over all intervals in the reliability plot.
MCE is a good metric for investigating if the model has outliers, while ECE gives the
average behavior.
12
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:21==
2
Bayesian Regression Results
We introduce Bayesian linear regression to investigate regression from a Bayesian per­
spective, which also allows for an analytical comparison to our approximation method.
With the foundations of the Bayesian regression in place, we continue with an analysis
of a Bayesian neural network for regression tasks, which will play an essential role in
constructing the Bayesian Faster R­CNN.
In the following section, x ∈RN×D is the input data transformed by ϕ. t is the target and y
the model prediction. ˆx and ˆy are input data and predictions in the test set. All described
models have learnable variables θ ∈RD, and constants α and β describing the precision
of the prior and likelihood respectively modeled as Gaussian distributions. All bold letters
resemble vectors or matrices.
2.1
Bayesian Linear Regression
A linear regression model maps input x to output y, using two parameters θ (slope and
bias), given as:
t = y + ϵ, y = ϕ(x)θ, ϵn ∼N(0, β−1)
(2.1)
Where ϵn is the aleatoric error in the line itself, and the epistemic error is the variance
in the model predictions ϕ(x)θ. Figure 2.1 shows the training and test data used in this
section. The training data consists of 30 observations, and the test data consists of 1000
observations. The data is expected to be linearly explained if the input x is squared.
Posterior distribution
Using Bayes equation, the linear regression model in Equation 2.1 gives rise to the joint
probability:
p(θ, t|x, α, β) = p(t|θ, x, β)p(θ|α) = N(t|ϕ(x)θ, β−1I)N(θ|0, α−1I)
α and β are precision parameters and determine the influence of the prior and likelihood,
respectively. This expression is proportionate to the posterior p(θ|t, x, α, β), making it
preferable because of its computational simplicity.
Figure 2.1: Training and test data used for the regression example.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
13
==PAGE:22==
A Gaussian prior and likelihood combine to form a conjugate model, resulting in a Gaus­
sian posterior distribution: p(θ|t, x, α, β) = N(µ, Λ−1), where µ and Λ can be found
analytically. To obtain these parameters, we take the logarithm of the joint probability:
ln p(θ, t|x, α, β) = ln N(t|ϕ(x)θ, β−1I) + ln N(θ|0, α−1I)
We use the fact that the log of a Gaussian distribution can be written as:
ln N(θ | µ, Λ−1) = −1
2(θ −µ)T Λ(θ −µ) −D
2 ln(2π) −D
2 ln(Λ−1)
= µT Λθ −1
2θT Λθ + constant
(2.2)
Arriving at
ln p(θ, t|x, α, β) = −β
2 (t−ϕ(x)θ)⊤(t−ϕ(x)θ)−N
2 ln
(
2πβ−1I
)
−α
2 θ⊤θ−D
2 ln
(
2πα−1I
)
=
−β
2 (t −ϕ(x)θ)⊤(t −ϕ(x)θ) −α
2 θ⊤θ + constant
−β
2 (t⊤t −2t⊤ϕ(x)θ −(ϕ(x)θ)⊤ϕ(x)θ) −α
2 θ⊤θ + constant
−β
2 (−2t⊤ϕ(x)θ −(ϕ(x)θ)⊤ϕ(x)θ) −α
2 θ⊤θ + constant
βt⊤ϕ(x)θ −1
2θ(βϕ(x)⊤ϕ(x) + αI)θ + constant
By comparing this to the log of a Gaussian in Equation 2.2, we see that the final posterior
distribution is described by:
p(θ|t, x, α, β) = N(µ, Λ−1) where, Λ = αI + βϕ(x)⊤ϕ(x), µ = βt⊤ϕ(x)Λ−1
(2.3)
The analytical posterior is visualized as contour lines in Figure 2.2 for different choices
of prior precision (α) and likelihood precision (β). The left plot is the values of α and β,
optimized for the BLR model on this specific dataset. The derivation of these parameters is
described at the end of the section. In the middle plot, it is seen that when β is increased,
the likelihood and, thus, the impact of the data increases. The regularization effect of
the prior is visualized in the right plot where α is increased, which prevents overfitting by
reducing the effect of the data, which is why the contour lines become more circular than
ellipsoidal.
14
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:23==
Figure 2.2: The effect of the prior and likelihood on the posterior distribution estimation
is shown using different precision parameters. When the prior is dominant (α is great), it
forces the posterior towards the initial prior guess, while the effect of the data becomes
less. When the likelihood is dominant, the data becomes more influential, as seen by the
ellipsoidal shape.
Figure 2.3: Different sampling methods are used to sample from the posterior. All sam­
plers seem to approximate the true posterior well, while Rejection Sampling struggles with
accepting enough samples.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
15
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.4: Autocorrelation of samples drawn from posterior using Metropolis­Hastings,
HMC, and NUTS. Samples drawn using Metropolis­Hastings have a very high correlation,
and it takes many samples before the sampler converges to the true posterior. HMC and
NUTS quickly converge towards the true posterior and have little correlation.
Posterior approximation
The posterior is often not tractable, so an approximation method is required. This the­
sis focuses on sampling, and for this section, four sampling methods were implemented
and compared: Rejection Sampling, Metropolis­Hastings, HMC, and NUTS. Our imple­
mentation for drawing a sample can be found in Appendix F.1, F.2, F.4, and F.5 for each
sampler, respectively. These are some of the most common samplers and vary from
the most naive to the most complex, thus gaining insight into the pros and cons of most
sampling methods.
All figures used in this section (2.3, 2.4, 2.5, 2.7) are created using the same parameters.
The parameters α and β have been optimized for the given dataset and estimated to be
α = 2.54 and β = 0.97. All samplers have been initialized at (0.5, 1). All methods ran for
3000 iterations, except Rejection Sampling, which ran for 150.000 iterations due to this
low acceptance rate. For HMC and NUTS, the step size was set to 0.003, and for HMC,
50 leapfrog steps were used. The choice of step size is crucial to get the approximation
right. In this case, the step size used was not too small to converge but not too large
to cause a high rejection rate for HMC. There exist methods for estimating the step size
during runtime, which have not been investigated in this thesis.
The four sampling methods are compared in Figure 2.3 and plotted on top of the log joint
probability evaluated at both parameters in a grid. The initial (faulty) proposals in the
warmup stage are also included.
The effectiveness of a sampling technique relies on factors such as the acceptance rate
and the degree of autocorrelation present in the samples. Most evident from Figure 2.3
is the difference in acceptance rate. Rejection Sampling is the most naive sampling ap­
proach and suffers from a very low acceptance rate of 0.012%, Metropolis­Hastings with
59%, HMC with 94%, and NUTS, which accepts all proposals.
However, Rejection Sampling has the advantage that all samples drawn are independent
and can be accepted without hesitation, unlike Metropolis­Hastings, HMC, and NUTS.
The effect of autocorrelation on these three methods is visualized in Figure 2.4. Each
method ran for 200 iterations, 4 times with different initialization, to investigate when (or
if) they converge around the same mode.
Samples drawn using Metropolis­Hastings seem very autocorrelated, and its warmup
stage is long compared to HMC and NUTS, which converges to the true posterior al­
16
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.5: The ability of different samplers to approximate the posterior slope and bias.
All samplers perform very well, but HMC and NUTS match the analytical solution perfectly.
most immediately (while still efficiently exploring parameter space) and seem to have
very little autocorrelation between samples. NUTS does seem to have some correlation
between samples, which is explained later. One should be careful accepting samples
from Metropolis­Hastings; typically, only every nth sample is accepted to reduce autocor­
relation.
In Figure 2.5, we investigate how these samplers approximate the analytically derived
posterior mode and variance in Equation 2.3. All samplers approximate the true posterior
well, and NUTS and HMC perfectly match the analytical solution.
As mentioned, this plot required 3000 samples to generate such a good approximation,
but ideally, the sampler would approximate the true posterior after only a few samples.
It is expected but not shown that Metropolis­Hastings requires many more samples (due
to the autocorrelation) than HMC and NUTS, while Rejection Sampling requires the least
amount. This may also explain why Rejection Sampling approximates the posterior only
after a few samples. In this regard, NUTS performs best because it accepts all samples
and has a low correlation between samples.
HMC and NUTS
are the most commonly used methods to sample from a posterior dis­
tribution for large problems. Figure 2.6 shows an example of the first 3 iterations of HMC
and NUTS. A big red dot is shown for every accepted sample. A small dot is shown for
every leapfrog step. If the small dot is red in HMC, it will lead to a rejected sample. In
NUTS, all small dots are parameter proposals; if the dot is red, it is rejected either due to a
sharp U­turn in the subtree or if a sample has a high approximation error during leapfrog.
Both samplers in Figure 2.6 were initialized in (0.6, 0.9) with step size = 0.009, and 40
steps were used for HMC. This resulted in a good leapfrog approximation, and no samples
were rejected during HMC. It can be seen how each new sample is initialized with a new
momentum (and a new energy) and why it does not instantly move toward the maximum.
When samples are rejected in HMC, the following sample is initialized from the same
location as the currently accepted sample but with a different momentum.
The NUTS accepts all samples and keeps iterating until it turns back on itself. This is
seen in the second sample, which chooses the same direction for its iterations of 1, 2, 4,
8, 16, and 32 leapfrog steps. In the last stage, it turns back on itself and stops iterating.
All proposals from the previous step are then rejected. It then randomly picks a sample
from all its proposals and iterates again.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
17
==PAGE:26==
Figure 2.6: The trajectory of three samples drawn using HMC (left) and NUTS (right).
NUTS has so far behaved as expected, but this plot, together with later experimentation
with larger models and Figure 2.4, reveals that our implementation of NUTS has a slower
convergence than HMC, which is unexpected. Figure 2.4 shows how NUTS sometimes
get stuck and accept several samples in almost the exact location. An example of this
happens in the third sample in the NUTS trajectory plot (Figure 2.6). In this case, it takes 1
and 2 leapfrog steps in one direction and 4 in the opposite direction. It terminates because
the momentum vector and directional vector from the endpoints form an angle larger than
90 degrees. This is our understanding of the paper [10].
Posterior predictive distribution
We now have an estimation for the parameters in the model and want to evaluate the
posterior predictive distribution p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t, α, β), to make predictions with the model and
to know how sure it is in its predictions. The posterior predictive distribution is found
by integrating the product between the posterior and the likelihood of a new observation
p(ˆt|ˆx, θ, β) over the weights:
p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t, α, β) =
∫
p
(ˆt | ˆx, θ, β
)
p(θ|t, x, α, β)dθ
(2.4)
The analytical predictive distribution is rarely tractable, but it is for this simple problem.
We start by multiplying the two Gaussian distributions and rewriting the terms:
p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t, α, β) =
∫
N
(ˆt | ϕ(ˆx)θ, β−1)
N
(
θ | µ, Λ−1)
dθ
∝
∫
exp
(
−β
2
(ˆt −ϕ(ˆx)θ
)2 −1
2(θ −µ)T Λ(θ −µ)
)
dθ
∝
∫
exp
(
−β
2
(
ˆt
2 −2ϕ(ˆx)θˆt + (ϕ(ˆx)θ)2)
−1
2
(
θT Λθ −2θT Λµ + µT Λµ
))
dθ
Where
∫
exp
(
−1
2µT Λµ
)
)dθ is neglected because it is a constant.
18
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:27==
p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t, α, β) ∝
∫
exp
(
−1
2
(
βˆt
2 −2ϕ(ˆx)θˆtβ + βϕ(ˆx)T θT ϕ(ˆx)θ + θT Λθ −2θT Λµ
))
dθ
∝
∫
exp
(
−1
2
(
θT (
βϕ(ˆx)T ϕ(ˆx) + Λ
)
θ −2θT (ϕ(ˆx)ˆtβ + Λµ) + βˆt
2))
dθ
We now make a substitution with L = βϕ(ˆx)T ϕ(ˆx) + Λ and m = L−1(ϕ(ˆx)T ˆtβ + Λµ).
p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t, α, β) ∝
∫
exp
(
−1
2
(
θT Lθ −2θT Lm + mT Lm −mT Lm + βˆt
2))
dθ
∝
∫
exp
(
−1
2
(
(θ −m)T L(θ −m) −mT Lm + βˆt
2))
dθ
∝exp
(
−1
2
(
βˆt
2 −mT Lm
)) ∫
exp
(
−1
2(θ −m)T L(θ −m)
)
dθ
∝exp
(
−1
2
(
βˆt
2 −mT Lm
))
· 1
Notice that the whole integral evaluates to 1 since the integral of a probability density
function is always equal to 1.
We have that
mT Lm = (βˆtϕ(x) + Λµ)T L−1LL−1(βˆtϕ(x) + Λµ)
= (βˆtϕ(x) + Λµ)T L−1(βˆtx + Λµ)
=
(
β2ϕ(x)T L−1ϕ(x)
)
ˆt
2 + 2
(
βϕ(x)T L−1Λµ
)
ˆt + µT ΛL−1µ
By plugging this into the predictive posterior, we get that.
p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t, α, β) ∝exp
(
−1
2
(
βˆt
2 −mT Lm
))
∝exp
(
−1
2
(
βˆt
2 −
(
β2ϕ(x)L−1ϕ(x)T )
ˆt
2 + 2
(
βϕ(x)L−1Λµ
) ˆt + µT ΛL−1µ
))
∝exp
(
−1
2
((
β −β2ϕ(x)L−1ϕ(x)T )
ˆt
2 −2
(
βϕ(x)L−1Λµ
) ˆt −µT ΛL−1µ
))
By inspection, this can now be written on the form.
−1
2k(ˆt −u)2, where k = β −β2ϕ(x)L−1ϕ(x)T , u = 1
k
(
βϕ(x)L−1Λµ
)
The final predictive posterior is therefore given as follows.
ˆt ∼N
(
µT ϕ(x), ϕ(x)T Λ−1ϕ(x) + β−1)
(2.5)
The first term of the variance is the epistemic noise, and the second is the constant
aleatoric noise.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
19
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2.7: Numerical (yellow) and analytical (blue) implementation of the predictive pos­
terior. Left: The predictive posterior on the test data with the uncertainty as the variance.
Right: Reliability plot of the model calibration.
Posterior predictive approximation
The numerical predictive distribution can be found by noticing that Equation 2.4 can be
written as an expectation instead of the integral:
p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t, α, β) =
∫
p
(ˆt | ˆx, θ, β
)
p(θ|t, x, α, β)dθ = Ep(θ|t,x,α,β)
(
p
(ˆt | ˆx, θ, β
))
It says that the predictive posterior can be found by sampling parameters from the pos­
terior, predicting the test data for each parameter sample, evaluating the likelihood of
observing the test data, and finally computing the mean likelihood over the parameter
samples to get a final distribution.
However, the mean and variance for the predictive posterior can be found without explicitly
calculating the likelihood. The likelihood is a Gaussian distribution located at the predic­
tion with variance β−1. The mode of the predictive distribution is thus the average of all
predictions, and the variance is the sum of the variance in the predictions (the epistemic
term) and β−1 (the aleatoric term).
Figure 2.7 compares the analytical predictive distribution (Equation 2.5) to the numerical
solution. The left plot shows the numerical solution (yellow) and the analytical solution
(blue) for the predictive distribution. The thick line is the mean of the distributions, and the
filled area is the variance. NUTS was used to draw samples from the posterior. The linear
predictions have been squared into the original shape of the data to match its format.
Both the mean and variance estimates are close to the true solution. Experiments showed
that using only a few more data points, the numerical solution matched the analytical
solution perfectly.
Due to the epistemic error, the variance is expected to be smallest where the observations
are most and largest where the observations are least. This is the case in the plot, but
the difference is too small to be observed.
The prediction uncertainties of a model must reflect the noise in the training data if it is
well­calibrated. The uncertainty toolbox in Python was used to plot all reliability diagrams
20
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:29==
for regression problems in this thesis. In this case, the model uncertainty in Figure 2.7 is
under­confident, but overall, it seems well­calibrated with a low miscalibration area. The
miscalibration area is identical to the expected calibration error (ECE) [16].
Model selection using evidence approximation
So far, α and β are assumed to be known constants chosen for a specific model to give
the predictive posterior p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t, α, β). These choices are crucial for a well­calibrated
model and must be found for every new dataset. β is large when the model fits the data
easily. If the data is very noisy, α should counteract the influence of the data by forcing the
prediction towards the prior belief. Ideally, in a fully Bayesian model, α and β are modeled
as distributions and integrated so we do not have to make this hyperparameter choice.
The predictive posterior for a fully Bayesian model would, therefore, become:
p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t) =
∫∫∫
p(ˆt|θ, x, β)p(θ|t, x, α, β)p(α, β | t)dθdαdβ
The fully Bayesian setup is of interest but rarely tractable. Marginal likelihood (evidence)
p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t) can, however, be approximated by p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t, α, β) if ˆα and ˆβ are delta distri­
butions with mode α and β, every sample would simply be α and β, and the above can
be reduced to [6]:
p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t, α, β) =
∫
p(ˆt|θ, x, β)p(θ|t, x, α, β)dθ
We now need to estimate α and β. Assuming flat priors on α and β, gives rise to the
following relation:
p(α, β | t) ∝p(t | α, β)p(α, β) ∝p(t | α, β)
This equation tells us that the best choice of α and β is the pair that maximizes the marginal
likelihood:
ˆα, ˆβ = arg max
α,β log p(t | α, β)
In practice this is done by defining α and β, sample posterior weights using the training
data, use these weights to calculate the likelihood p(ˆt|ˆx, x, t, α, β) on the test or validation
dataset.
In the case of linear regression, the marginal likelihood is, in fact, tractable but not derived.
With an analytically derived marginal likelihood, we can replace the ineffective grid search
with a proper minimization strategy that uses gradient information.
The marginal likelihood is plotted in Figure 2.8 for different choices of α and β. The blue
dot at α = 2.54 and β = 0.97 is the optimum found using the quasi­Newton method imple­
mented by Scipy, which was the parameters used throughout this section. The marginal
likelihood has some very sudden changes, which may be because the same step size
was used for all parameter choices. A much more well­defined contour map is expected
if trained for long enough.
2.2
Bayesian Neural Network for Regression
The above regression example is continued using a Bayesian neural network (BNN) in­
stead. The BNN has one hidden layer of 20 units implemented using torch in Python and
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 2.8: Contour of the marginal likelihood for different values of α and β. The choice
of α and β are the values that maximize the marginal likelihood, symbolized as a blue dot
in the plot.
is fully Bayesian with a prior on every weight in the network. The prior and likelihood are
Gaussian distributions with precision parameters α = 1.9 and β = 1.1, respectively, found
using a grid search.
Figure 2.9 shows this BNN trained on the same data as before but without transforming
the data. NUTS was used to draw samples from the posterior. The analytical solution for
BLR was used, as this is the expected shape of the data. The numerical solution differs
much from the analytical solution, where there is no data, but matches well near data
points and achieves slightly better calibration. As expected, the uncertainty is reduced
around the data points and increases where the observations are few. The uncertainty
continues to increase the further away from the data it gets. The seven thinner yellow
lines on the plot resemble seven samples from the posterior. Each one evaluates the test
data to determine how different the posterior samples are, but combined, they still show
the correct image of the predictive posterior.
The calibration plot shows an underconfident model but an overall well­calibrated model.
The BNN performs slightly better than the analytical solution, which is not expected since
the data was created from a linear model, so more parameters should not be a benefit.
To investigate the complexity of the BNN, it was trained on a more complex dataset that
mimics a sigmoid function. The predictive posterior is shown in Figure 2.10 of the same
BNN optimized with NUTS. The parameters were optimized for this new dataset, and
α = 6.5 and β = 105.0 maximized the marginal likelihood.
Since the analytical predictive distribution is not tractable, the same BNN was imple­
mented in Pyro with a Pyro implementation of NUTS for comparison. Both implemen­
tations match each other very closely for the expectation value and the variance, which
22
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:31==
Figure 2.9: Predictive posterior found using a BNN and NUTS.
Figure 2.10: Our implementation of a BNN and NUTS (blue) and a corresponding imple­
mentation in Pyro (yellow) of the predictive posterior. Left: The predictive posterior on
the test data with the variance. Right: A calibration plot shows that the model calibration
behaves nicely.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
23
==PAGE:32==
keeps increasing the further away from the data we get. They also approach the expected
sigmoid shape of the data and the variance increase between and outside the two groups
of observations. The model seems a little over­confident in the calibration, but overall
well­calibrated.
Summary
We successfully implemented HMC and NUTS to approximate the posterior distribution of
a Bayesian linear regression model and a Bayesian neural network. The approximation
perfectly fitted the analytically computed Bayesian linear regression, and the Bayesian
neural network closely fitted the standard implementation by Pyro. The model parameters
were successfully chosen to minimize the miscalibration area.
For later experiments, we will use how we successfully replaced the loss computation
in a standard neural network for regression tasks with the posterior computation using a
likelihood and prior to construct a functioning Bayesian neural network.
These results will create the regression stage in the Bayesian Faster R­CNN at the end
of the thesis. To compute the full posterior distribution of the Faster R­CNN, we now need
to be able to rewrite the classification loss in a neural network to a likelihood used in the
posterior computation.
24
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:33==
3
Bayesian Neural Networks for
Classification
In classification, the joint probability p(θ, t|x, α) = p(t|θ, x)p(θ|α) is of interest.
The prior distribution on the parameters is similar to the regression example, acting as a
regulator on the weights:
p(θ|α) = N(θ|0, 1
αI)
A typical choice for a Bayesian multiclass classification problem is the negative cross­
entropy, which measures the difference between probability densities:
p(t|θ, x) =
N
∑
n
C
∑
c
p(xnc) log q(xnc)
Where p is the target probability, and q is the predicted probability of a given class (softmax
of the output model logits). Since p(xnc) is only 1 for the true class and 0 everywhere
else, this is equivalent to summing up the log of the predicted probabilities of the true
class. Notice that cross­entropy uses the negative log­likelihood because it is meant for
minimization. In a Bayesian model, the probability is maximized, so the sign is reversed.
Notice also that the classification example has no parameter for adjusting the likelihood.
For this example, a full BNN was implemented to classify the individual symbols in all 62
pages of the music score Frühlingsstimmen by Johann Strauss II, which we annotated.
The dataset comprises 76 classes and 53619 symbols/images, 46619 in the training set,
and 7000 in the test set. All music score datasets are highly imbalanced, but nothing was
done to investigate its effect in this example. Ten selected classes have been shown in
Figure 3.1, which are the 10 most common classes in the dataset and are investigated
throughout this section. For the BNN to be able to take the images as inputs, all images
were scaled to 28*28 pixels, which may confuse the classifier for non­square classes.
The BNN consists of an input (one unit per image pixel, thus 28 * 28 units), a ReLU layer,
one hidden layer (64 units), the output (76 units, one for each class), and finally, a batch
norm. NUTS was used to draw samples from the joint probability of the likelihood and
prior.
In this model, α is the only hyperparameter optimized for the dataset. This is done similarly
to the regression example by determining α, sampling posterior weights using the training
data, evaluating the predictive posterior on the test data, and finally picking the value for
α that results in the largest marginal likelihood. This procedure is shown in Figure 3.2,
which leads to α = 25.0.
The BNN was able to achieve very reasonable results after only 10 samples. Figure 3.1
shows some classification statistics for the 10 selected classes in the test data. The av­
erage precision is 0.97, and the average recall is 0.97. The fact that the average recall
and precision are somewhat equal is a good sign of a well­balanced model. The class
”quarter_InSpace” is the object with the lowest precision, meaning the model falsely clas­
sifies this class as other classes (high false negative rate). The confusion matrix in Figure
3.3 supports this and says that it often believes that ”quater_InSpace” is ”quater_OnLine”.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
25
==PAGE:34==
Figure 3.1: Example of 10 selected classes.
Figure 3.2: Maximizing the marginal likelihood for hyperparameter α selection.
26
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:35==
Figure 3.3: a) Confusion matrix.
precision
recall
support
beam
0.98
0.95
146
dot
0.98
0.95
307
flag8th
0.94
0.95
191
flat
0.98
0.98
276
quarter InSpace
0.92
0.97
1003
quarter OnLine
0.98
0.92
1112
restQuarter
1.00
0.99
652
restwhole
1.00
0.99
249
slur
0.96
0.93
289
stem
0.97
0.99
1822
macro avg
0.97
0.96
6047
weighted avg
0.97
0.97
6047
Table 3.1: Classification statistics.
Figure 3.4: Reliability plot for the classification model.
On the other hand, ”quater_OnLine” is one of the classes with the lowest recall, mean­
ing that the model falsely classifies other classes as this object (high false positive rate).
According to the confusion matrix, this object is most often ”quater_InSpace.”
The most challenging object to detect is the ”slur,” which may occasionally seem very
different. In general, it is long and thin, which does not match the rescaling of the images
to 28*28 format. Overall, the model performs very well, so the color map on the confusion
matrix is on a logarithmic scale to visualize its few mistakes.
A well­calibrated classification model assigns a certain x percent uncertainty to a pre­
diction if the prediction is wrong x percent of the time. The calculation follows from the
Background section and is shown in Figure 3.4. The confidence is the mean prediction
score in each bin, and the accuracy is the weighted accuracy of observations with the
prediction score in a given interval corresponding to a bin. The model seems to be well­
calibrated.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
27
==PAGE:36==
ECE
MCE
F1­score
α = 0.1
0.10
0.30
0.98
α = 1
0.06
0.19
0.97
α = 10
0.05
0.10
0.97
α = 25
0.06
0.10
0.97
α = 40
0.11
0.20
0.97
α = 100
0.16
0.32
0.96
Table 3.2: Classifier metrics are shown for different choices of α. 25.0 is expected to be
the best­performing model, which also is the case.
We expect the model to best calibrate at α = 25.0 since this optimizes the marginal like­
lihood. The same model ran for different prior choices, and results are shown in Table
3.2. Again, the step size was difficult to choose, and small changes had severe conse­
quences. Step size 0.002 was used for all models, which may not be optimal since it
depends on the hyperparameters, but it seemed sufficient in this case. ECE and MCE
perform best at the expected α = 25 and α = 10. It does, however, seem that the model
makes the fewest mistakes when the α is low, meaning no regularization. The model is,
therefore, not overfitting, as one could expect from a low α, and is gaining information
from the low regularization. The high F1 score comes at a cost, which is the calibration.
The calibration gets worse the farther away the model is from the optimum.
Summary
We successfully saw how the cross­entropy used as loss in a typical neural network for
classification could be used as the negative likelihood in a Bayesian neural network to­
gether with a prior. The Bayesian model performed well in classifying music symbols, with
a weighted precision and recall of 0.97 and well­calibrated uncertainties. We also showed
that the regularization required for good calibration may negatively affect the model per­
formance.
We have now discussed constructing Bayesian neural networks to solve regression and
classification tasks. Our implementation of NUTS gave good results in both instances.
These results will now be used to experiment with constructing a Bayesian Faster R­
CNN.
28
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:37==
4
Faster R­CNN Experiments
Faster R­CNN is a complex architecture for object detection. For demonstration purposes
and because it requires several optimal decisions to make good predictions on a specific
dataset with Faster R­CNN, we will implement and experiment with the traditional Faster
R­CNN before diving into the Bayesian aspect of the algorithm,
4.1
Implementation of Faster R­CNN
[1] inspires this model architecture, which compared RetinaNet with Faster R­CNN using
several backbones trained on the DeepScore music dataset (Section 4.2). They found
that Faster R­CNN with the HRNet gave the best results due to HRNet’s ability to focus
on small objects and the benefits of a two­stage detector (Faster R­CNN) compared to a
one­stage detector (Retinanet).
4.1.1
HRNet
An HRNet was used as the backbone for Faster R­CNN implemented by timm called
”hrnet_w32” [17]. The HRNet consists of 4 stages: 32 channels on the first level, 64 on
the second, etc. A convolution with 4 strides forms the first level, the second level with
8 strides, the third with 16, and the fourth with 32. Objects in a music score are rarely
large enough for a 64­strided convolution to make sense, which is why it is left out. Each
level in each stage consists of 4 blocks of convolutional layers. No stem was used in the
HRNet since the backbone was used as the backward pathway in the FPN for mixing the
levels.
4.1.2
Faster R­CNN
Detectron2 was used to create the framework for all the Faster R­CNN models in this
thesis [15].
FPN
takes in the output 4 stages of the HRNet and outputs layers p2, p3, p4, and p5,
each with 256 channels, corresponding to convolutions with 4, 8, 16, and 32 strides.
Since HRNet can already output feature maps at different scales, the FPN’s job is solely
the stem’s job in a normal HRNet: to mix the feature maps (if, on the other hand, Resnet
was used as a backbone, FPN is crucial for returning feature maps at several scales.)
The FPN implemented in Detectron2 is defined by [12].
RPN
takes in feature maps p2, p3, p4, and p5 from the FPN and is applied to the RPN
independently. The RPN used in Detectron2 is defined in [13].
In this setup, we pick the 6000 highest scoring anchors, and then NMS is applied with
a threshold of 0.7 to remove overlapping bounding boxes. The best 3000 proposals are
selected and used in the ROI Head,
When testing, the top 3000 scoring anchors were selected, followed by an NMS of 0.4,
and the top 2000 scoring proposals were inputted to the ROI Head.
ROI head
takes in the 3000 (2000 when testing) best proposals from the RPN and p2,
p3, p4, and p5 feature maps from the FPN. It regresses and classifies all 3000 proposals.
Proposals with IoU > 0.5 are foreground proposals; the remaining are background. 512
proposals (including the ground true bounding boxes) are sampled for regression and
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
29
==PAGE:38==
(a) Image instance of the DeepScore dataset
(b) Image instance of the Frühlingsstimmen dataset
multi­class classification loss computation. By default, 1/4 are foreground anchors, and
3/4 are background anchors. Class 0 is always the background class.
Anchor selection
The anchor sizes and ratios should initially fit the ground true bounding boxes as well as
possible. This is done by maximizing the average IoU between anchors and ground truth
bounding boxes using Kmeans with IoU as a distance for anchor proposal as proposed
by [18]. Appendix A.1 shows figures and a short explanation of how this was done.
Since all feature maps must have the same number of anchors, we used these compu­
tations as guidelines for choosing the anchors. After experimentation, we noticed only
a minimal performance decrease after replacing the default 16 anchors with the newly
found 2 anchors per feature map, thus 8 in total. Since the feature maps from FPN focus
on the image at different scales, the anchor size is almost invariant, so we only used a
single size but two different aspect ratios.
Anchors in Detectron2 are defined by the area of the anchor, which is called the size,
and the height­to­width ratio called the aspect ratio. One size was used for the anchors
for each feature map p2: 5.6, p3: 15, p4: 25, p5: 54. Two aspect ratios were used for
each feature map p2: (0.673719, 6.73719), p3: (0.191043, 9.140131), p4: (0.036153,
2.652877), and p5 (0.113858, 1.13858).
4.2
Data preprocessing
Two datasets were used in this thesis
1. Frühlingsstimmen by Johann Strauss II, which we annotated, consists of 62 pages.
The dataset consists of 76 classes and 56612 individual objects. Figure 4.1b shows
an image instance of the dataset.
2. DeepScore is a digitally made dataset of 255,385 annotated pages with 113 different
classes [1]. The scores are all computer­made, and most symbols look identical.
Figure 4.1a shows an example from the dataset.
Both datasets were pre­processed the same way.
1. One page from a music score typically has more than 1000 objects and is very large.
To reduce the problem, all pages were split into staffs (Figure 4.1a and 4.1b are each
one staff). When mentioning ”image”, from now on, we refer to an image of one staff
line and never a whole page.
2. All images are scaled/aligned to have exactly 14 pixels between each of the 5 staff
lines (due to this, the note heads will, for example, always have the same height of
30
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:39==
Figure 4.2: Standard training procedure of Faster R­CNN involves four losses. All losses
decreased as expected.
14 pixels). This makes the object detection problem much easier and reduces the
need for many anchors that can lead to out­of­memory errors.
3. Images with more pixels than 600000 were removed to speed up training and reduce
the risk of OOM errors (this was a problem after the image scaling above).
4. Unrealistic scores with less than 10 objects have been removed.
5. Many objects in the DeepScore dataset are rare and have been removed to match
the 76 classes in the Frühlingsstimmen dataset.
6. The most common object, ”stem,” is 1 pixel wide in the DeepScore data set, which
was impossible for the detector to find. We added one pixel to each side of the stem
to improve AP.
4.3
Training of traditional Faster R­CNN
For comparison, a Faster R­CNN and its backbone were trained traditionally on the whole
DeepScore dataset for 10,000 iterations and tested on 300 images from the DeepScore
dataset. This model continues several earlier training procedures and converges quickly
to the parameters described in the Setup Chapter 4.1.
The four losses of Faster R­CNN are plotted in Figure 4.2 for all 10,000 iterations. For
comparison, the span over the y­axis is the same for all losses. All losses have been
normalized, and the regression losses have been scaled to be comparable with the clas­
sification loss. The regression loss seems to dominate the total loss, and the classification
loss almost stagnates in comparison.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 4.3: The combined loss of the four losses in Faster R­CNN. It can be seen that the
model could have benefitted from further training.
The RPN classification is generally an easier problem since it is a binary classification
problem compared to the multi­class problem in the ROI Head, which is more than twice
as high. Similarly, the regression problem in the ROI Head is easier than in the RPN
because the initial anchors have already been regressed once at this stage. Because of
this, twice as many proposals are used in the ROI Head loss computation, which may be
a problem if there are only a few objects (because NMS removes many good detections
if overlapping). Therefore, The ROI Head may be forced to use implausible proposals for
its loss computation, which may be why the regression loss is more than twice as large
as in the RPN. Adjusting the ROI Batch Size Per Image (number of training instances) to
see this effect could be interesting but was not examined.
The steep increase in the ROI Head losses happens when the model initially behaves
poorly, and the model can only find very few foreground proposals (proposals with IoU>0.6
with a ground true bounding box). In the loss computation of ROI Head, one­fourth of
proposals used are foreground proposals, and the remaining are background, but if there
are not enough foreground proposals, background proposals are used to fill in the space.
Since most classes are background, classification becomes easy, and regression be­
comes ill­defined because background proposals are not regressed. Appendix B.2 shows
the development of the number of foreground and background proposal samples support­
ing this hypothesis.
Most important is the total loss, as seen in Figure 4.3, which suggests that the model
could benefit from further training since the loss was not completely saturated. This was
noticed after training the model, and we decided to discontinue training since the objective
of the thesis is not to make the best­performing Faster R­CNN. This figure lacks the test
loss that tells us if the model overfits. However, experience from evaluating the test data
during the training has never shown signs of overfitting (this is supported by the training
of the ensemble learning, which evaluates the mAP during training in Appendix D, which
should have been done for this model as well).
After training, the test data was evaluated and is shown in Table 4.1, where AP50 is AP
at IoU=0.5, AP75 is AP at IoU=0.75. AP is calculated according to the COCO challenge
evaluation guidelines [19] as a mean over IoU from 0.5 to 0.95 in steps of 0.05. The AP is
shown for 10 classes (also investigated in the Bayesian Classification results in Chapter
3). The performance of all classes is shown in Appendix B.1. A comparison was added
to Table 4.1 by [1], which also trained a Faster R­CNN with HRNet as the backbone of the
32
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:41==
Our Faster R­CNN
Faster R­CNN by [1]
AP
68.29
70.0
AP50
93.89
79.9
AP75
82.61
­
AP­beam
64.73
81.9
AP­dot
31.05
76.5
AP­flag8th
66.14
92.6
AP­flat
75.12
88.8
AP­quarter_InSpace
71.84
93.4
AP­quarter_OnLine
70.23
93.3
AP­restQuarter
71.21
85.2
AP­restWhole
49.38
6.90
AP­slur
64.94
77.4
AP­stem
46.50
0.4
Table 4.1: The 10 classes used in the classification Example section 3 are investigated.
Here, AP is measured by the COCO standard as a mean over a range of IoU, as explained
in Metrics.
whole DeepScore dataset. The only difference is the Faster R­CNN specifications, and
we reduced the number of classes from 113 to only 76. This might be the reason why
the general AP is somewhat equal, while at the same time, their implementation performs
much better on most single instances of classes.
The stem object is the most frequent class and is expected to have the highest AP. This
is because AP is not designed for tiny objects and behaves poorly when objects become
very small. The width of the stem in the original DeepScore dataset was 1 pixel, which
is almost impossible to detect. In our framework, we added one pixel to each side of the
stem to improve AP. restWhole is similarly off, and it is difficult to say which changes in
our implementation improved the detection of this specific class.
Our implementation does not fully compete with the reference implementation, but the
results are good enough for further testing.
Summary
We successfully implemented and trained the traditional Faster R­CNN. Each of the four
losses was investigated and showed expected behavior. The performance of our model
was comparable with the reference implementation. We are now ready to connect all
results in the thesis so far to implement the Bayesian Faster R­CNN.
4.4
Bayesian Faster R­CNN
Rewriting Faster R­CNN into a Bayesian framework is a challenge we, to our knowledge,
are the first to do. We will use the Bayesian regression and classification analysis results
to make Faster R­CNN return a point estimate of its posterior distribution. This can ap­
proximate its posterior when sampling from the Bayesian implementation of the Faster
R­CNN.
4.4.1
Faster R­CNN with Bayesian approximation
The Faster R­CNN uses four losses: a classification and a regression loss in its two
stages. The RPN classification loss is originally a binary cross­entropy loss, and the ROI
Head classification loss is a multi­class cross­entropy. The negative cross­entropy loss
can be interpreted as a likelihood in a Bayesian model, as seen in the classification results
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
33
==PAGE:42==
in Chapter 3.
The RPN and the ROI Heads regression loss is replaced with the likelihood N(t|ϕ(x)θ, β−1I)
as in the regression results in Section 2.1. The same precision parameter β was used for
both regression likelihood, which is not ideal but is a necessary simplification to reduce
the complexity of the thesis.
Finally a prior distribution N(θ|0, α−1I) is added over selected parameters, where α is the
precision of the Gaussian prior. We placed priors on only the two fully connected output
layers of the ROI Head (1024 by 4 for regression and 1024 by 77 for classification). This
is a last­layer approximation and is often sufficient for a good approximation [3].
The final joint probability returned is the sum of all four log likelihoods and the log prior.
The log is used to ease the optimization procedure. In the regression and classification
analysis, the final posterior was the sum of the likelihood and prior. Since differently sized
inputs are used in the RPN, ROI Head, and prior computations, each component has
been normalized to balance the likelihoods and the prior.
The original implementation of Faster R­CNN scales the regression losses (typically with
a factor of 10 [13]) to match the classification loss so that no loss dominates. The likeli­
hoods and prior seem much better balanced than the original loss computations. Thus,
no scaling was used, which may not be ideal.
Apart from the loss computation, the Faster R­CNN used in this section is the same as
the one used during the traditional training.
4.4.2
Sampler
To sample from the Faster R­CNN, we used our implementation of HMC (code for drawing
one sample in Appendix F.4). NUTS was preferable, but some errors in our implemen­
tation led to slower convergence than HMC. The root of this error is explained in the
regression analysis chapter Section 2.1. Experimentation with the number of leapfrog
steps in HMC showed that a few could lead to a bad approximation, while a few samples
with enough leapfrog steps often behave much nicer. Therefore, we ensured that enough
leapfrog steps were used, which we estimated to be 70 steps. Some gradient clipping was
necessary during leapfrog computation to get reasonable results, as seen in the Appendix
for leapfrog code F.3.
4.4.3
Selecting step size
Selecting the correct step size is crucial when sampling models with millions of param­
eters. We want to pick the highest step size, leading to a reasonable acceptance rate.
A short step size leads to many unnecessary leapfrog steps, thus slowing convergence.
The step size also depends on the model parameters α and β, making the process difficult
when setting the value manually.
To settle on a step size, β was chosen to balance the four likelihoods equally, and α
was chosen to ensure a low regularization effect of the prior. This led to α = 0.1 and
β = 1. A step size that leads to an acceptance rate of 0.6­0.8 is reasonable. After some
experimentation, this was achieved with a step size of 2·10−4 when sampling from Faster
R­CNN with random parameters and 2 · 10−5 when sampling from a pre­trained Faster
R­CNN. These values are used for all models throughout the remaining chapter.
4.4.4
Sampling from Faster R­CNN with random parameters
To investigate how the implementation works, all parameters in the pre­trained Faster R­
CNN trained in Section 4.3 except the backbone were reset to see how the HMC samples
from the model. Since HMC computes leapfrog samples continuously from one sample
34
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:43==
to the next, we can plot every step during the optimization. 20 samples were drawn
with 70 leapfrog steps. Two steps are reported at each iteration because the gradients
are computed twice for each leapfrog step. To see if any learning was possible in the
Bayesian Faster R­CNN, the training data set consisted of only a single image instance
(This is the image shown in Figure 4.1a).
This sampling procedure can be seen in Figure 4.4. Each leapfrog iteration is plotted in
light, while the mean/smoothed tendency is shown in thick. Smoothing was done using a
(50,) kernel convolution of the leapfrog iterations. The red areas are leapfrog steps that
lead to a rejected sample. These happen most often during big drops in the likelihood as
expected.
The general trend of Figure 4.4 shows that the Bayesian Faster R­CNN, unfortunately,
could not learn correctly. Since the total loss quickly becomes dominated by the regres­
sion loss in the ROI Head, which diverges, the algorithm was stopped. The regression
loss is initially more important than the classification loss since the model needs to find
the object before it can classify it.
Failed tests
We have two suggestions for the source of the error, which did not explain the mistake
but are included for an overview.
1) The source of the error was believed to lie in the HMC acceptance criteria, which only
uses the posterior, which might ignore large likelihood drops in one or more stages due
to an increase in another. To test this, a significantly lower step size (2 · 10−5) was used
to decrease the leapfrog error and, thus, the need for the HMC acceptance criteria. In
Appendix C.1, the same plot was made with a smaller step size. Unfortunately, this shows
the same tendency for the regression likelihood.
2) According to [20], each stage of the two­stage detector can be interpreted as proba­
bilistic separately but not combined due to the discontinuation between the stages. This
could potentially become a problem when transforming the Faster R­CNN into Bayesian.
On the other hand, one­stage detectors keep their probabilistic interpretation and should,
therefore, be easier to change into a Bayesian version.
To test this theory, a Bayesian version of the one­stage architecture RetinaNet was also
implemented for comparison. This is a much simpler but larger architecture, with only one
classification and one regression loss at the final layer. The same backbone was used
as in the Faster R­CNN, and every other layer was reset. Priors were again placed on
the two output layers for regression and classification. α = 0.1 and β = 1 and HMC were
used with a step size of 2 · 10−4. Appendix E shows the sampling procedure with HMC
from a Retinanet.
Unfortunately, this shows the same trend as the Faster R­CNN. The regression loss
quickly diverges and dominates the total loss.
4.4.5
Hyperparameter influence on pre­trained Faster R­CNN
We continue experimentation and focus only on sampling from the pre­trained Faster R­
CNN from Section 4.3. HMC is used as a sampler with step size 2 · 10−5.
Figure 4.5 shows 2800 leapfrog steps (20 samples) drawn from four different models,
initialized with the same pre­trained Faster R­CNN (from Section 4.3). We investigate
three choices of β and two of α. The training data consists of 300 DeepScore images.
The red areas symbolize rejected proposals.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 4.4: The sampling procedure of a Bayesian Faster R­CNN model with randomized
weights. Light areas resemble the precise leapfrog steps, the thick line is the smoothed
steps, and the red areas are leapfrog steps that lead to rejected proposals. No proper
optimization was performed.
36
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:45==
Figure 4.5: The sampling procedure of 4 Bayesian Faster R­CNN models have been
compared. Light areas resemble the precise leapfrog steps, the thick line is the smoothed
steps, and the red areas are leapfrog steps that lead to rejected proposals. No proper
optimization was performed for any model.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
37
==PAGE:46==
At this step size, all models seem to stagnate or slightly decrease in likelihood. However,
the acceptance rate suggests that the step size should not be increased. The posterior
is expected to converge at a higher likelihood if it is sampled for long enough. This was
tested in Appendix C.1, which shows all 12000 leapfrog steps of the model α = 0.1 and
β = 1 from above. The general trend is that the posterior, unfortunately, is decreasing
too.
Apart from the sampler behaving unexpectedly, each independent run is very unstable,
and one should be careful in making conclusions based on Figure 4.5. We can, however,
say a few things based on this figure.
Prior
The prior regularizes the model, and higher alpha makes the prior distribution steeper and
more influential in the posterior computation. Since we can see no optimization, the prior
acts simply as a constant added to the posterior. We expect that a specific alpha opti­
mizes the posterior of the pre­trained Faster R­CNN model because it best describes the
parameters in the model. Still, it will not affect the final samples drawn from the posterior
(due to no optimization).
Classification
Since the classification likelihood is the negative of the original loss, we expect this like­
lihood to continue from the final loss computation, which was around ­0.01 in the RPN
stage and ­0.04 in the ROI Head. The sampler is very noisy in the classification estimates
and jumps from high to low likelihood in very few steps. The mean behavior is, however,
reasonable. All models differ significantly in the mean and variance likelihood estimates,
which is purely due to the initialization of the model, which differs a little even though the
parameters are the same. If the sampler had functioned properly, it would have explored
more weight space and converged towards the same posterior.
Regression mean behavior
Increasing β makes the regression likelihood more steep and its effect more influential.
Thus, an increase in β is expected to increase the regression likelihood if the prediction is
good but decreases the regression likelihood if it is bad. This is because the likelihood of
a slightly off prediction gets 0 probability but a higher likelihood if it is exactly on center. As
the standard training shows, the model has more trouble with regression in the ROI Head
stage than in the RPN. This is the case for the sampler: when β increases, the likelihood
increases in the RPN stage but decreases in the ROI Head stage.
Regression variance behavior
When β is large, the regression likelihood becomes steeper, and the posterior is expected
to become more localized because the HMC requires more energy to escape the steep
optimum. However, when the same step size is used, the leapfrog steps would result in
a more significant change in the likelihood because even small steps lead to substantial
changes. This behavior can be seen in the figure: the regression likelihood varies most
at β = 10, little at β = 1, and almost none at β = 0.1, backed up by several different runs
that show the same behavior.
A significant β is still expected to lead to more localized behavior in the final regression
predictions. This was tested in Table 4.2 Section 4.4.6, which backs this theory up. The
difference in the variance estimates for each model was so large that it was challenging
to say if it was significant.
Posterior
It is observed that β = 0.1 and β = 10 result in a low likelihood for the given set of model
38
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:47==
α
β
Marginal Likelihood
Regression Variance
0.1
0.1
­7.00 (­6.95, ­7.04, ­7.01)
1.66 (1.20, 1.36, 2.43)
0.1
1
­6.99 (­7.01, ­7.00, ­6.93, ­7.04, ­6.99)
1.21 (1.40, 1.58, 1.05, 0.87, 1.14)
0.1
2
­6.94 (­6.91, ­7.00, ­6.923, ­6.930, ­6.929)
1.328 (2.03, 1.02, 0.69, 1.05, 1.85)
0.1
10
­6.95 (­6.95, ­6.93, ­7.03, ­6.87)
1.18 (0.82, 0.833, 1.74, 1.35)
Table 4.2:
4 Bayesian Faster R­CNN models have been compared with respect to
marginal likelihood and regression variance. No model shows any significant difference.
parameters, but β = 1 gives a significantly better posterior. β = 2 and α = 0.1 were also
implemented, providing a greater posterior probability. Here, we ignored the model with
a differing prior because it gives the illusion that α has an effect.
4.4.6
Selecting hyperparameters
Model comparison
When comparing different object detection models, each model’s predictions must be
aligned with ground­truth instances, as the number and location of predictions vary across
models. This alignment was achieved by calculating the IoU for all predicted and ground­
truth bounding boxes. A prediction is considered to match a ground­truth bounding box if
the IoU exceeds 0.8. The final prediction accepts only predictions made by at least three
models on the same location ground­true bounding box to obtain a reasonable variance
estimate. The regression variance is simply the variance computed over all predictions.
The classification probability is calculated as the sum of correct predictions divided by the
total number of predictions.
Selecting hyperparameters
We continue finding the appropriate hyperparameters for the Faster R­CNN that result in
the best­calibrated model. As shown earlier, the best parameters are the set that maxi­
mizes the marginal likelihood. The marginal likelihood is the mean joint probability over
all test instances and samples/models. In this case, the test data was 15 instances of
the handmade frühlingsstimmen dataset because the DeepScore dataset was a too easy
challenge for the model. Notice that since no optimization is done, the hyperparame­
ters that maximize the marginal likelihood are the parameters that best fit the pre­trained
model, not the true posterior.
Since the models do not optimize, they greatly depend on the initialization, which slightly
deviates even though the same parameters are used. The solution was to sample from
3­5 different models with the same parameters and average their performance (sampling
for longer does not change the behavior).
Table 4.2 shows the marginal likelihood and the variance in the regression estimates for
the models sampled in Figure 4.5, including one extra model β = 2 and α = 0.1. The
model with α = 100 and β = 1 was left out since the marginal likelihood is confusing and
not comparable with the other models and does not differ significantly from the samples
drawn from the posterior with α = 0.1 and β = 1. The results of each model are given in
parentheses, and the average performance is shown in bold font.
A proper analysis of all the models in the table should include a significant test to deter­
mine whether they can be differentiated. Due to time restrictions, this was omitted in this
analysis.
We expect that the model with the highest marginal likelihood is the β = 2 model that gave
the highest probability on the training data set. This should be close to β = 1 but with
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
39
==PAGE:48==
β
mAP avg
mAP var
Miscalibration area (reg)
ECE (cls)
MCE (cls)
0.1
64.00
1.56
0.32 (0.33, 0.33, 0.30)
0.20
0.38
1
65.76
3.65
0.11 (0.11, 0.12, 0.12, 0.10, 0.12)
0.15
0.39
2
64.78
2.90
0.03 (0.02, 0.01, 0.06, 0.02, 0.05)
0.18
0.40
10
67.60
0.87
0.18 (0.19, 0.20, 0.17, 0.18)
0.18
0.38
Table 4.3: 4 Bayesian Faster R­CNN models have been compared with respect to mAP
and calibration. Unlike calibration, mAP shows no significant difference, which is the
lowest at β = 2. α = 0.1 for all models.
β = 10 and β = 0.1 significantly behind. The marginal likelihood computed in the table
seems to give very noisy estimates that slightly support this. However, the differences
are so small that it can be challenging to say whether they are significant. This may be
because another dataset was used.
Table 4.2 also gives the regression variance (corresponding to the epistemic uncertainty
in regression). It is expected that high values of β lead to more localized behavior while
small β allows for more exploration during optimization. The mean behavior in the table
supports this. The table’s smallest value of β leads to the highest regression variance,
and the greatest β leads to the smallest regression variance.
The variance in the classification could also be investigated, but this is not informative due
to the lack of optimization (which is the only reason why classification uncertainty should
differ since it does not have any hyperparameter that controls its behavior).
4.4.7
Model evaluation
The model performance is not expected to change dramatically as the changes made
to the parameters are small. The test dataset is 300 instances of the Frühlingstimmen
dataset used to compute the mAP and the variance over all samples in the model shown
in Table 4.3. As a reference, the Faster R­CNN trained in Section 4.3 yielded an mAP of
68.35 on this dataset.
All models result in a performance decrease compared with the Faster R­CNN trained
traditionally. The table shows only the evaluation of a random model from each group of
models. Still, experiments on models from the same group showed no relation between
mAP, hyperparameter, or variance in mAP. The mean behavior is not expected to change
from model to model. Still, the variance is, since we showed the β can control the variance
in the regression variance, thus also in the posterior and the final predictions.
4.4.8
Uncertainty estimates
Finally, the miscalibration area for regression and ECE for classification are computed for
each model in Table 4.3 (miscalibration area is a term used by [16], which is essentially the
same as ECE.) The reliability plot for each model is plotted for regression and classification
in Figure 4.6. Regression calibration plot made using Uncertainty Tool Box [16].
Classification
The ECE for the classification is little informative since it is not expected to depend on the
choice of hyperparameter without optimization. Generally, it shows low calibration, but
as seen in Figure 4.6, the classification calibration is ill­defined. The problem still seems
too easy for a classification problem (This becomes even worse using DeepScore as
test data). Still, this model performs too well in investigating the classification calibration
precisely. Most models have a few sharp peaks because only 1 or 2 data points are
classified with that specific low probability. Increasing the test data could fix this.
40
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:49==
Figure 4.6: Regression and classification calibration of Bayesian Faster R­CNN with dif­
ferent model parameters. One model has the best­calibrated regression. All models
struggle with the classification problem due to few detections with low probability.
As mentioned, uncertainty is computed as the ratio of models making correct decisions
to models making wrong decisions. On average, each model has 15 accepted samples/­
models, which may not be enough to get a precise calibration image.
Regression
From Table 4.3, a significant difference can be seen in the calibration of the models, with
the best­calibrated model at β = 2 as expected.
The regression calibration consists of the epistemic uncertainty (the regression variance
shown in Table 4.2) and the aleatoric uncertainty ( 1
β). The effect of the epistemic uncer­
tainty is insignificant to the aleatoric.
Summary
We were not able to create a Bayesian Faster R­CNN model. The optimization process
did not optimize the parameters but effectively added noise to them instead. The noise did
not significantly damage the model’s performance, which is why we could draw several
”samples”/models that differed in performance and could be used for calibration analysis.
The difference or noise in the models could be controlled by the likelihood parameter β.
We obtained reasonable uncertainty estimates in the regression stage by selecting the
β that maximized the marginal likelihood (not of the test data but of the training data).
The calibration of the uncertainties in the classification stage was not well­defined. This
may be due to a small test dataset, few models/samples for comparison, or because the
models were not sampled correctly but were versions of the pre­trained Faster R­CNN
with noise added to them.
We will now compare the Bayesian method with other baselines for calibrating a Faster
R­CNN.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
41
==PAGE:50==
4.5
Calibration Results
This study aims to calibrate the regression and classification loss outputted from the
ROI Head in a Faster R­CNN. We now review vector scaling, deep ensemble, and the
Bayesian method to calibrate classification uncertainties. We review the deep ensemble
and the Bayesian method for the regression uncertainties.
The best calibrated Bayesian model from Section 4.4 was selected for this comparison,
which was β = 2 and α = 0.1.
4.5.1
Vector Scaling
Our implementation of Vector Scaling uses the Adam optimizer to minimize a cross­
entropy loss between the scaled logits and the ground true classes. To do this, the predic­
tion stage of Detectron2 was rewritten to return logits, which was not the default behavior.
A subset of Detectron2 was used as a validation dataset to determine the scaling param­
eters. Our code for finding scaling parameters a and b is in Appendix F.6. Vector­scaling
uses logits returned by the Faster R­CNN trained in Section 4.3.
4.5.2
Deep Ensemble
Ten independent Faster R­CNN models were trained traditionally with SGD using the
Detectron2 training framework. All ensembles use the backbone of the Faster R­CNN
trained in Section 4.3; the remaining layers were reset randomly. The training proceeded
for 10000 iterations on the subset of DeepScore training data of 300 images. The sat­
uration of the training loss can be seen in Appendix D. During training, the model was
evaluated on the test data to calculate mAP and check for overfitting. This is plotted in
the same figure. All models were trained until saturation and did not overfit.
4.5.3
Performance Evaluation
The performance of each model after calibration is compared according to mAP. The test
set is all 300 instances of the Frühlingstimmen dataset.
1. The Faster R­CNN trained in Section 4.3 yielded an mAP of 68.35 on this dataset.
2. Vector scaling does not change the model’s performance; it only scales the scores
and, therefore, performs similarly to the pre­trained Faster R­CNN.
3. The Bayesian model yielded an mAP of 64.78, as seen in Section 4.4.6.
4. The Ensemble method yielded 56.16 mAP (averaged over all 10 models).
The ensemble methods’ performance is not expected to drop significantly as long as they
have been trained for a long time. The reason why the Faster R­CNN from Section 4.3
performs much better (therefore also the Bayesian model) is that it is trained for longer on
more data, while the ensembles were trained on 300 instances of the DeepScore dataset
to see a quick convergence.
The performance of the Bayesian model may decrease or increase. Most likely, the pa­
rameter choice in the Bayesian model is not as optimal as the standard implementation,
and the performance will drop. The performance of our implementation also falls, but this
is due to the optimization that will always seem to decrease the posterior.
4.5.4
Comparing calibration methods
The final calibration results of the regression and classification predictions in the ROI
Heads are plotted in Figure 4.7. The test set used was 100 instances of the handmade
Fruhlingsstimmen dataset. In the Bayesian model and Ensemble method, the bounding
boxes were combined and compared according to the description in Section 4.4.6.
42
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:51==
Figure 4.7: Reliability diagram for regression and classification stage of Faster R­CNN.
Three methods are compared: the Bayesian method, deep ensemble, and vector scaling.
Classification
The raw scores shown in the figure are the ground true class of the softmax of the logits.
These values are not reliable and give a poor calibration score. An unexpectedly large
dip in performance is observed at 0.6 confidence. This happened because only very few
instances were predicted at that specific probability.
Experiments showed that vector scaling of the raw scores usually performs well, but in
this case, it performed worse than the raw scores compared to ECE and MCE. This may
be because the raw scores are not well­defined and have a large drop in performance.
Ensemble methods are easy to implement and generalize well. The problem with clas­
sification is that it requires many models to see a well­calibrated curve. The ECE and
MCE are the second best, but no observations were observed with low confidence. Thus,
in no instances in the test data did most models make a wrong prediction. This is the
same problem as trusting the calibration results in the Bayesian model. There are too few
models, and the test data is too easy for a good comparison.
Regression
The Bayesian model performs best in the regression task. Still, as reviewed, the method
for calibrating this model generalizes badly. The deep ensemble performed well, with a
slightly higher miscalibration area that may have been fixed with more than ten ensembles.
Similar to the classification stage, we should be careful when accepting the results of the
Bayesian Faster R­CNN.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
43
==PAGE:52==
5
Conclusion
We have shown how sampling methods can approximate the posterior distribution in
Bayesian neural networks for regression and classification problems. HMC and NUTS
were successfully implemented and perfectly approximated the analytically computed
posterior distribution in a Bayesian linear regression problem. We found the hyperpa­
rameters that best describe the neural networks, leading to well­calibrated uncertainties
for both the regression and classification problems.
The findings from these sections were used to implement a Bayesian version of the object
detection algorithm, Faster R­CNN. Initially, the standard implementation of Faster R­CNN
was trained on a large dataset of music scores. The results were compared to a similar
study on the same dataset using the same model and backbone and showed comparable
results with respect to mAP.
Rewriting Faster R­CNN within the Bayesian framework was challenging, as we are, to
our knowledge, the first to attempt this. This presented several issues that needed to be
addressed. The Faster R­CNN model was rewritten with likelihoods and prior so we could
draw samples from the model’s posterior distribution using our implementation of HMC.
However, sampling did not optimize the parameters; instead, it effectively added noise to
them. Due to a lack of optimization, the influence of the prior was non­existent, and no
significant change could be observed for the classification stage. We successfully showed
that maximizing the marginal likelihood with respect to the hyperparameters minimized the
calibration error for the regression problem.
We implemented vector scaling and used a deep ensemble as a baseline for the final
calibration comparison. Vector scaling performed poorly on this small test dataset. The
deep ensemble performed better, and the Bayesian model performed the best. However,
both methods lacked low probability predictors and were, therefore, only defined in a
small confidence range. The Bayesian model also outperformed the deep ensemble in
calibrating the regression uncertainties, but the deep ensemble is expected to perform
better with more ensembles.
In the Bayesian model, we effectively added noise and drew samples, resulting in several
slightly different models. Although this seems to work in practice, adding noise to a pre­
trained model for uncertainty estimation generalizes badly.
Because the HMC sampler was used, our simulations depended heavily on the step size
and number of steps. Much time was spent optimizing these and investigating whether
they led to the correct solution. To avoid errors in future implementations of a Bayesian
Faster R­CNN, the NUTS sampler should be used to prevent the number of steps, with a
step size algorithm that computes the step size in run­time.
In future experiments, the effect of the regression scaling parameter used in the origi­
nal loss computation by Faster R­CNN should be investigated, which balances the four
losses. Additionally, whether two different hyperparameters should be considered for the
two regression likelihoods.
44
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:53==
Bibliography
[1]
Lukas Tuggener et al. The DeepScoresV2 dataset and benchmark for music object
detection. https://doi.org/10.21256/zhaw­20647.
[2]
Chuan Guo et al. On Calibration of Modern Neural Networks. 2017. arXiv: 1706.
04599 [cs.LG].
[3]
Laurent Valentin Jospin et al. “Hands­On Bayesian Neural Networks—A Tutorial for
Deep Learning Users”. In: IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine 17.2 (May
2022), pp. 29–48. ISSN: 1556­6048. DOI: 10.1109/mci.2022.3155327. URL: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCI.2022.3155327.
[4]
Ian J. Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. http://
www.deeplearningbook.org. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2016.
[5]
Radford M. Neal. Bayesian learning for neural networks. Springer, 1995.
[6]
Christopher M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. Springer, 2009.
[7]
Jascha Sohl­Dickstein, Mayur Mudigonda, and Michael R. DeWeese. Hamiltonian
Monte Carlo Without Detailed Balance. 2016. arXiv: 1409.5191 [stat.CO].
[8]
Nicholas Metropolis et al. “Equation of State Calculations by Fast Computing Ma­
chines”. In: The Journal of Chemical Physics 21.6 (June 1953), pp. 1087–1092.
ISSN: 0021­9606. DOI: 10.1063/1.1699114. eprint: https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jcp/
article-pdf/21/6/1087/18802390/1087\_1\_online.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.
1063/1.1699114.
[9]
Michael Betancourt. A Conceptual Introduction to Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. 2018.
arXiv: 1701.02434 [stat.ME].
[10]
Matthew D. Hoffman and Andrew Gelman. The No­U­Turn Sampler: Adaptively Set­
ting Path Lengths in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. 2011. arXiv: 1111.4246 [stat.CO].
[11]
Jingdong Wang et al. Deep High­Resolution Representation Learning for Visual
Recognition. 2020. arXiv: 1908.07919 [cs.CV].
[12]
Tsung­Yi Lin et al. Feature Pyramid Networks for Object Detection. 2017. arXiv:
1612.03144.
[13]
Shaoqing Ren et al. Faster R­CNN: Towards Real­Time Object Detection with Re­
gion Proposal Networks. 2016. arXiv: 1506.01497.
[14]
Hiroto Honda. Digging­into­detectron­2. https://medium.com/@hirotoschwert/digging­
into­detectron­2­part­4­3d1436f91266.
[15]
Yuxin Wu et al. Detectron2. https://github.com/facebookresearch/detectron2. 2019.
[16]
Youngseog Chung et al. “Uncertainty Toolbox: an Open­Source Library for Assess­
ing, Visualizing, and Improving Uncertainty Quantification”. In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.10254
(2021).
[17]
Ross Wightman. PyTorch Image Models. https://github.com/rwightman/pytorch-
image-models. 2019. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.4414861.
[18]
Joseph Redmon and Ali Farhadi. YOLO9000: Better, Faster, Stronger. 2016. arXiv:
1612.08242 [cs.CV].
[19]
Tsung­Yi Lin et al. Microsoft COCO: Common Objects in Context. 2015. arXiv: 1405.
0312.
[20]
Xingyi Zhou, Vladlen Koltun, and Philipp Krähenbühl. Probabilistic two­stage detec­
tion. 2021. arXiv: 2103.07461 [cs.CV].
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
45
==PAGE:54==
46
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:55==
A
Anchor Selection
Figure A.1: We want to select the initial anchors to fit the ground truth bounding boxes
with the highest initial IoU possible. Anchors were selected using Kmeans with IoU as a
distance measure. Each dot in the left plot resembles a bounding box in the validation
dataset. All bounding boxes have been grouped using Kmeans, where the red dot is the
group’s center. The more clusters/anchors of different sizes and aspect ratios, the greater
the average IoU with the ground truth bounding boxes, as seen in the right plot. We want
to select the lowest number of anchors to speed up training but with the highest average
IoU. Based on this plot, we decided that a total of 8 anchors was sufficient for our given
dataset.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
47
==PAGE:56==
B
Training Procedure of Faster R­CNN
B.1
Average precision
Figure B.1: mAP for all classes predicted by the Faster R­CNN trained in Section 4.3.
Many classes are completely missing in the subset of the training data.
48
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:57==
B.2
Proposal Samples
Figure B.2: Number of foreground and background proposals sampled for loss computa­
tion in the RPN stage. Initially, most proposals are background, leading to a very low loss
in the ROI Head stage.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
49
==PAGE:58==
C
Sampling procedure of Faster R­CNN
C.1
Likelihood development plots
Figure C.1: Sampling from the Bayesian Faster R­CNN, with random parameters and a
small step size for the HMC sampler. The sampler diverges and can not optimize the
model.
50
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:59==
Figure C.2: Sampling from pre­trained Faster R­CNN with a small step size. It required
many samples to see if the model increased or decreased the posterior probability. Still,
after 12000 iterations, we concluded a significant drop in posterior, and it was assumed
that the sampler could not optimize the problem properly.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
51
==PAGE:60==
D
Training of Deep Ensembles
Figure D.1: Training procedure of 5 out of 10 instances of the Deep ensembles. All layers
except the backbone were reset, and it can be seen that the total loss is saturated without
overfitting the mAP.
52
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:61==
E
Sampling From RetinaNet
Figure E.1: Sampling from a Bayesian RetinaNet. All layers have been reset except the
backbone. HMC was not able to optimize the problem.
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
53
==PAGE:62==
F
Code
Code implementations for Rejection Sampling, Metropolis Sampling, HMC, and NUTS are
classes that show how to draw a sample and how to accept it from a distribution imple­
mented defined in the class ”model” with the method ”LogJoint” that returns the posterior
probability of observing a particular set of parameters.
F.1
Rejection Sampling
1
2
class RejectionSampling():
3
def __init__(self, model, tau = 0.3, qx = -100, **kwargs):
4
super().__init__(model, **kwargs)
5
self.qx = qx
6
self.tau = tau
7
8
def sample(self):
9
new_params = [self.noise(param.shape, mean = 1., std=self.tau) for
param in self.model.parameters()]
10
self.model.replace_params(new_params)
11
return self.model.LogJoint().clone().detach().numpy()
12
13
def accept(self, log_p_theta_star , _):
14
A = log_p_theta_star - np.log(np.random.rand()) + self.qx
15
samp = np.log(np.random.uniform())
16
return samp < min(A,0)
F.2
Metropolis Sampling
1
2
class MetropolisHastings():
3
def __init__(self, model, tau=0.3, **kwargs):
4
super().__init__(model, **kwargs)
5
self.tau = tau
6
7
def sample(self):
8
with torch.no_grad():
9
for param in self.model.parameters():
10
param += self.noise(param.shape)
11
return self.model.LogJoint().clone().detach().numpy()
12
13
def accept(self, log_p_theta_star , log_p_theta):
14
A = log_p_theta_star - log_p_theta
15
samp = np.log(np.random.uniform())
16
return samp < min(A,0)
F.3
Base Class for HMC and NUTS
1
2
class HMC_base():
3
4
def __init__(self, model, step_size = 0.1):
5
self.model = model
6
self.step_size = step_size
7
8
def accept(self, log_p_theta_star , log_p_theta):
9
A = log_p_theta_star - log_p_theta
54
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:63==
10
samp = np.log(np.random.uniform())
11
return samp < min(A,0)
12
13
def init_momentum(self):
14
# Initialize momentum for all parameters
15
return [self.noise(i.shape, std=1) for i in self.model.parameters()]
16
17
def get_rr2(self, r):
18
# calculate momentum squared for all parameters
19
return np.sum([p.flatten() @ p.flatten() for p in r])/2
20
21
def leapfrog(self, p, mass=1, v=1):
22
# step direction
23
if self.max_itt - self.model.i < self.max_ittstate[0]:
24
id_ = 0
25
else:
26
id_ = 1
27
step_size = self.step_size[id_] if isinstance(self.step_size , tuple)
else self.step_size
28
eps = v * step_size
29
30
# Calculate momentum in half and then position in whole timesteps
31
z = self.model.LogJoint()
32
z.backward()
33
for pi, q0 in zip(p, self.model.parameters()):
34
torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(q0, 10**3)
35
# half step momentum
36
pi += eps/2 * q0.grad
37
# whole step position
38
with torch.no_grad():
39
q0 += eps * pi/mass
40
41
# calculate momentum again in the whole time step
42
z = self.model.LogJoint()
43
z.backward()
44
for pi, q0 in zip(p, self.model.parameters()):
45
torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(q0, 10**3)
46
pi += eps/2 * q0.grad
47
48
return z.clone().detach().numpy()
F.4
HMC
1
2
3
class HMC(HMC_base):
4
def __init__(self, model, steps=35, **kwargs):
5
super().__init__(model, **kwargs)
6
self.steps = steps
7
8
def sample(self):
9
# sample momentum
10
p = self.init_momentum()
11
energy_init = self.model.LogJoint().clone().detach() - self.get_rr2(p)
12
13
# take "steps" leapfrog steps
14
for _ in range(self.steps):
15
log_p_theta_star = self.leapfrog(p)
16
17
energy_end = log_p_theta_star - self.get_rr2(p)
18
19
# accept or reject sample
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
55
==PAGE:64==
20
accept = self.accept(energy_end , energy_init)
21
22
return log_p_theta_star , accept
F.5
NUTS
1
2
class HMC_NUTS(HMC_base):
3
def __init__(self, model, **kwargs):
4
super().__init__(model, **kwargs)
5
6
def sample(self):
7
def S_(s2, thetaP, thetaM, rP, rM):
8
if not s2: return False
9
paramP = np.concatenate(([item.detach().numpy().flatten() for item
in thetaP]))
10
paramM = np.concatenate(([item.detach().numpy().flatten() for item
in thetaM]))
11
pP = np.concatenate(([item.clone().detach().numpy().flatten() for
item in rP]))
12
pM = np.concatenate(([item.clone().detach().numpy().flatten() for
item in rM]))
13
diff = paramP - paramM
14
return s2 and (np.dot(diff, pP) >= 0) and (np.dot(diff, pM) >= 0)
15
16
def BuildTree(r, u, v, j):
17
# theta = stationary point of the other end
18
if j:
19
rM, rP, C1, s1, z1
= BuildTree(r, u, v, j-1)
20
if v == 1:
21
_, rP, C11, s11, z11 = BuildTree(r, u, v, j-1)
22
s1 = S_(s11, self.model.parameters(), theta, rP, rM) and
s1
23
else:
24
rM, _, C11, s11, z11 = BuildTree(r, u, v, j-1)
25
s1 = S_(s11, theta, self.model.parameters(), rP, rM) and
s1
26
C1 = C1 + C11
27
z1 = z1 + z11
28
else:
29
z1 = [self.leapfrog(r, v=v)]
30
energy_end = z1[0] - self.get_rr2(r)
31
cri = u < energy_end
32
C1 = [(get_param(), cri)]
33
34
s1 = u < (energy_end + delta)
35
36
rM = r
37
rP = self.cloneG(r)
38
return rM, rP, C1, s1, z1
39
40
get_param = lambda: [i.clone() for i in self.model.parameters()]
41
delta = 10
42
43
# resample momentum
44
p = self.init_momentum()
45
# resample slice
46
z = [self.model.LogJoint().detach().numpy()]
47
u = np.log(np.random.rand()) + (z[0] - self.get_rr2(p))
48
49
# init
50
thetaM = get_param()
56
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:65==
51
thetaP = get_param()
52
rM = self.cloneG(p); rP = p
53
B = [(get_param(), True)]
54
Cidx = 0; j = 0; s = True
55
while s:
56
# Stop at 2**5 = 64 steps
57
if j > 6: break
58
59
# sample direction
60
v = np.random.choice([-1, 1])
61
62
# Copy currect parameters into model.
63
# Clone converts the variables from Parameter object to tensor
64
theta2 = thetaP if v == 1 else thetaM
65
theta = theta2
66
# Replace all parameters of the model with the new parameters
67
self.model.replace_params(theta2)
68
69
# Take 2**j steps in forward of backward
70
if v == 1:
71
_, rP, C1, s1, z1 = BuildTree(rP, u, v, j)
72
thetaP = get_param()
73
B = B + C1
74
z = z + z1
75
else:
76
rM, _, C1, s1, z1 = BuildTree(rM, u, v, j)
77
thetaM = get_param()
78
B = C1[::-1] + B
79
z = z1[::-1] + z
80
81
if not s1:
82
Cidx = -v * len(C1)
83
84
# stopping criteria , stop when left most note and right most note
turns back on itself
85
s = S_(s1, thetaP , thetaM , rP, rM)
86
j += 1
87
88
# get accepted samples , remove the ends if not accepted
89
num = np.where([i[-1] for i in B])[0]
90
Cidx2 = num[Cidx:] if Cidx >= 0 else num[:Cidx]
91
92
# Select the final sample from all proposals
93
idx = np.random.choice(Cidx2) if len(Cidx2) else 1
94
final_weight = list(B[idx][0])
95
96
self.model.replace_params(final_weight)
97
98
return z[idx], len(Cidx2)
F.6
Vector Scaling
1
import torch
2
import numpy as np
3
4
def MatrixVectorScaling(y_cal_true , logits_cal , classes_):
5
# loss function
6
loss_fn = torch.nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
7
8
def eval():
9
optimizer.zero_grad()
10
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
57
==PAGE:66==
11
W1 = torch.minimum(W, torch.tensor(2))
12
scaled_logits = logits_cal * torch.exp(W1) + b
13
14
loss = loss_fn(scaled_logits , y_cal_true)
15
loss.backward()
16
return loss
17
18
iterations = 10
19
ws = []; bs = []
20
for _ in range(iterations):
21
# Parameters to optimize
22
# init weight to be random between 0.5 and 1.5
23
W = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.rand(classes_ , requires_grad=True) + 0.5)
24
# init bias to be random between -1 and 1
25
b = torch.nn.Parameter(torch.rand(classes_ , requires_grad=True) * 2. -
1.0)
26
27
# define optimizer
28
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam([W, b], lr=0.01)
29
30
# Optimization loop
31
for _ in range(1000):
32
optimizer.step(eval)
33
34
ws.append(torch.exp(W).detach().numpy())
35
bs.append(b.detach().numpy())
36
37
print(f'Std of Weight: {np.mean(np.std(ws, 0))}, bias {np.mean(np.std(bs,
0))}')
38
return np.mean(ws, 0), np.mean(bs, 0)
58
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
==PAGE:67==
Probabilistic object detection in music scores
59
==PAGE:68==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
