==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Thesis report
The role of the microbiome for
Anorexia Nervosa
Thomas Morning Boel - s124865
DTU Management
DTU National Food Institute
Submitted on June 11, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Acknowledgements
This master thesis project in Management Engineering was done in collaboration with
the DTU National Food Institute, Technical University of Denmark as a second attempt
in the three months period over March to June 2024.
For starters I extend a thanks to DTU Career Center for leading me to discover this
project in their project database. Without that database, it is unlikely I would have
found and contacted Kenneth Klingenberg Barfod, to whom I also owe a big thanks; We
had the initial conversations about this project, and he provided the dataset, that is the
foundation for this project. Throughout the project Kenneth has been eager to guide and
help me, and for that i am grateful.
The greatest of thanks is directed at my supervisor for the project, Martin Steen Mortensen,
who throughout the project has always made himself available to help, teach, and answer
any question I had. Assisting me pick up the knowledge I did not arrive with, I imagine,
must have taken patience. I am thankful I have got the project under his supervision.
I also owe some thanks to Theresa Helena Østergaard, who did the original thesis project
in 2020-2021, that prompted the experiment and gathered the data. Her work has helped
me understand the structure and details of the experiment in invaluable extent.
A good amount of thanks also goes to the AI LLMs, who tirelessly at any time helped
me understand concepts and contexts in complex subjects and provided inspiration and
debugging for the data analysis.
Finally a big thanks to my girlfriend and parents for their love, support and cooking when
I had little time.
Thomas Morning Boel
Technical University of Denmark
Page i
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Anorexia nervosa is a severe eating disorder, that has it victims starving themselves,
suppressed by a disturbed body image. It is characterized by unwillingness to eat and
overexercising leading to dangerously low body weight and even death.
The cause of the disorder is yet unknown, and therefore treatment and hope for recovery
is lackluster. Unveiling the causes or even clues to them is long sought, as better under-
standing of the causes and mechanisms in anorexia nervosa could lead to early diagnosis,
potential mitigation strategies, or even effective treatment.
Clues to causes of anorexia has been found in between psychiatric, sociological and bio-
logical factors. With the recent decade’s advancement in bioinformatics and facilities, the
path has opened towards discovering more measurable clues to causes within the micro-
biome of our guts. Building on understanding anorexia nervosa and other health / mental
disorders through microbiome data in connection to other biomarkers and clinical data
holds the promise of remarkable advancements in treatments for anorexia.
For this project we were given access to reanalyse data from an earlier thesis project, that
includes ASV-data from the gut microbiome of 48 anorexia colonized mice in collection
with metadata, clinical data, and hunger-related hormones blood concentrations, to ex-
plore and build on existing knowledge, or even find new insights or trends. The results
show that anorexia nervosa to great extent can be induced in mice via fecal matter trans-
plantation and also reconfirms some of the already to anorexia associated patterns in the
biomarkers. Machine learning as a tool to test tendencies and unveil yet unknown insights
is explored. As the studies that explore the details and mechanisms within the context
of fecal matter transplanted, anorexia-induced mice are still few, more studies of similar
scope is needed to continuously build and accelerate our understanding of the role of the
microbiome for anorexia nervosa.
Technical University of Denmark
Page ii
==PAGE:4==
Abbreviations used in this report
AB: Antibiotic
ABA: Activity-based anorexia
AgRP: Agouti related peptide
AN: Anorexia nervosa
ANOVA: Analysis of variance
ASV: Amplicon sequence Variant
BMI: Body mass index
CNS: Central nervous system
DAA: Differential abundance analysis
ED: Eating disorder
FMT: Fecal matter transplant
GABA: γ-aminobutyric acid
GMBA: Gut microbiome brain axis
GF: Germ-free
GI: Gastrointestinal
GLP-1: Glucagon-like peptide-1
GM: Gut microbiota
MDD: Major depressive disorder
NPY: Neuropeptide Y
OTU: Operational Taxonomic Unit
PCoA: Principal Coordinate Analysis
PERMANOVA: Permutational analysis of variance
PYY: Peptide tyrosine tyrosine
RFC: Random forest classifier
SPF: : Specific-pathogen free
Technical University of Denmark
Page iii
==PAGE:5==
Frequently used variable names explained
AN: Referring to treatment with GM from anorectic donor or to group of mice treated
with AN.
CO: Referring to treatment with GM from control donor or to group of mice treated with
CO.
KO: Seen in data and graphs, referring to treatment with GM from control donor or to
group of mice treated with CO.
FMT1: Fecal matter transplantation in phase one.
FMT2: Fecal matter transplantation in phase two.
END: Variable name for column describing the combined treatment.
END_TREATMENT: Variable name for column describing the FMT2-treatment.
TREATMENT: Variable name for column describing the FMT1-treatment.
A / B: Referring to group A or B from staggered runs of experiment.
FS: Feces sampling.
FS1-FS5: Feces sampling from step 1-5, there is no FS4 - used to describe the four
timestamps in experiment.
Human donor names: COD, COE, COF, ANX, ANY, and ANZ.
twgp1 / twgp2: accumulated absolute weight change over phase one / two.
tfip1 / tfip2: accumulated food intake for a cage over phase one and two.
Technical University of Denmark
Page iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Introduction to this project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Introduction to Anorexia Nervosa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Biomarkers of Anorexia Nervosa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.4
Gut microbiota relations to AN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Modeling AN in mice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.6
The language of bioinformatics
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6.1
α-diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6.2
β-diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.6.3
Differential abundance analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.6.4
Random Forest Classification
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.7
Hypothesis and aim of this study
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2
Materials and Methods
12
2.1
Data structure and nomenclature of the data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Data processing and statistical analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3
Results
20
3.1
How the FMT affected the mice’s gut microbiota
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
3.2
Random forest finding important ASVs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
3.3
Results from clinical data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
Technical University of Denmark
Page v
==PAGE:7==
4
Discussion
40
5
Appendix
56
Technical University of Denmark
Page vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
1.1
Introduction to this project
This thesis project is a study into statistical analysis and correlations of genetic data
from microbiome of anorexic patients and anorexia-induced mice against a healthy control
group. It was made possible by being granted access to analyse data from an earlier thesis
projectØstergaard [2021] by Theresa Østergaard, that prompted the experiment in 2021,
from which the genetic data, metadata and clinical data was was gathered. The genetic
data from the earlier thesis was not analysed back then, so in this project we will analyse
that data and correlate it to other data from the experiment. The findings will be assessed
in context to literature in the field.
1.2
Introduction to Anorexia Nervosa
Anorexia Nervosa (AN) is a serious and dangerous disorder, that affects mostly adolescent
women, but that can affect any sex- and age group Steinhausen and Jensen [2015]. It man-
ifests in victims as a disturbed view on their bodies, making them feel fat or overweight,
regardless of their typically already low body weight, and it has them adopting behaviors
to lose more weight by eating less or overexercising Snijders and van Furth [2023]. Over
longer periods the continuous unwillingness to eat and loss of weight, AN is often accom-
panied by to severe comorbidities such as major depression disorder Fernandez-Aranda
[2007], increased risk of self harm or even suicide Anderson et al. [2002], and severe mal-
nutrition that in severe cases has lead to organ failureOgawa and Suzuki [1996].
Although AN can also affect males, for whom it typically has its onset in the ages of early
20’s, AN is vastly less prevalent for males. However, over recent years AN has been seen
more frequently in males Kotadia [2023]. For females, who are by far the most affected
demographic, it typically has its onset in the pre-teenage yearsGueguen et al. [2012].
There is no direct cure for AN, so the outlook for its victims varies a lot depending on
Technical University of Denmark
Page 1
==PAGE:9==
severity of the disorder. For many it is a life long disorder, that afflicts irreparably damage
on their bodies along the way, but some do recover after years of therapy or given enough
time. A followup-study from Sweden conducted over 30 years, has found that 64% of
patients had fully recovered from their symptoms after 30 years.
Anorexia Nervosa is regarded as a mental disorder, often accompanied or preceded by
other mental disorders as depression and angst, and its mechanisms of onset is far from
understood Moskowitz and Weiselberg [2017]. Therefore the treatments offered are very
limited and often ineffective. It is believed, that the causes for AN can be found in a
combination of psychological, biological, and social factors. Even as some therapeutic
treatment has lead to recovery in the short term, the long term effects of therapy are
often falling off, after treatment has endAbbate-Daga et al. [2012].
1.3
Biomarkers of Anorexia Nervosa
As AN has been studied for decades, and yet the treatments discovered so far are largely
limited to psychological and behavioral therapy, we need to look deeper into the biomark-
ers of AN in hopes of understanding its mechanisms better and perhaps discover new
avenues for treating AN more effectively. Of course, body weight, food intake, and ac-
tivity levels have been the obvious data to start with. A range of hormones and their
concentrations in the blood have also been subject of study related to not just AN but
also other disorders.
Insulin has long been known to regulate metabolism by facilitating conversion of glucose,
and is perhaps most commonly known for its role in and treatment of diabetes. Insulin is
regarded as an anorexigenic hormone, as it is associated with stimulating a signal cascade,
that suppresses orexigenic peptides such as neuropeptide Y (NPY) and agouti-related
peptide (AgRP) Austin and Marks [2009].
Glucogon is considered to also be anorexigenic, similarly to insulin, but working in the
opposite way. It raises the blood glucose and fatty acid concentrations Habegger [2010]
and is seen as the main catabolic hormone.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 2
==PAGE:10==
Glucagon-like-peptide-1 (GLP-1), is known for lowering the blood glucose concentration
by inhibiting glucagon secretion and boosting insulin secretion, and it is also considered
an anorexigenic hormone Austin and Marks [2009].
Peptide tyrosine tyrosine (PYY) acts like the counterpart to NPY, inhibiting NPY, and
thus PYY is considered anorexigenic. PYY is produced as response to food intake, and
it is delaying gastric emptying by inhibiting NPY.
Leptin is also an important hormone related to eating behavior, as it is inhibiting hunger
by binding to leptin receptors on the brain stem, and that is experienced as a feeling sati-
ated, making it anorexigenic. However, its secretion is not correlated with meal patterns,
but rather following a circadian rhythm. Higher levels of leptin between midnight and
early morning helps inhibiting hunger while sleeping Austin and Marks [2009].
Ghrelin which is also known as the "hunger hormone" is an orexigenic hormone, is stimu-
lating hunger by increasing the concentrations of NPY and inhibiting the effects of leptin
Hebebrand [2006]. It is produced in the stomach and gastrointestinal tract, and its con-
centration is correlated to hunger, as it is observed in higher concentrations while hungry,
and returns to lower levels after eating Cummings [2001]. In a study by Tolle et al. Tolle
[2003] ghrelin has been found in surprisingly high concentrations in the blood AN-patients
compared to otherwise thin or normal weight control groups.
These six mentioned hormones are all thought to have an intrinsic role related to hunger,
satiety, digestion, and eating behavior. While they are produced in various organs such
as the pancreas, GI-tract, stomach, colon and adipose cells Austin and Marks [2009], it is
when they are secreted into the blood stream they become active.
1.4
Gut microbiota relations to AN
Another avenue for studying an understanding life / health and a broad range of disor-
ders is the study of the microbiome, which is the composition and development of the
microorganisms and bacteria that are discovered to populate more and more organs of
our bodies. Over the past couple of decades, it has been discovered and firmly estab-
Technical University of Denmark
Page 3
==PAGE:11==
lished, that bacteria, fungi and various other microorganisms populate not just our guts,
mouths and skin but also lungs and even the brain Branton [2013], through out health and
disease Shreiner [2015]. These microbiomes constant presence and development regulate
our health, and dysbiosis in these have been linked to ever more conditions and diseases,
especially over the past decade, as more sophisticated techniques for studying them, such
as rapid 16S RNA sequencing, has caught up to scale.
In a study done by Morita et al. [2015] in 2015, it was found that AN-patients have a
lower diversity of their GM compared to healthy counterparts, so it is considered, that
AN as a range of other disorders is tractable in the GM. Furthermore, the diversity of the
GM is not easily regained for AN patients, even if they recover and regain weightMack
et al. [2016].
A growing number of specific microorganisms and their relatively higher or lower abun-
dances has also been found to be associated with anorexia nervosa. Many of these bacteria
are to some extent permanent inhabitants of our bodies and organs, but it is their shift
in abundance or presence / absence in various systems of the body that gives clues to
their roles in disorders such as AN. To mention a few that is considered to play a role in
the development and treatment of AN, Lachnospiraceae and Faecalibacterium are both
observed to be less abundant in AN-patients Fan [2023], and increased abundance of Fae-
calibacterium is associated with weight gain for hospitalized AN-patients, while higher
abundance of Lachnospiraceae at time of hospitalisation of AN-patients was associated
with shorter hospitalisation Schulz [2021]. In the table below 1 we have gathered a brief
overview of some of the relevant bacteria, that can be found to play a role in the GM for
AN-patients, and what study can be referenced for the context.
Of course this list is not complete, and the underlying mechanisms and roles these bacteria
play is an ongoing study to be further understood. But the table gives a useful overview to
start from of what ASVs to keep track of in research into GM-composition in AN-studies.
Another important aspect to keep notice of, when studying microbiome relation to AN,
is that the mechanisms in which these microorganisms are often not restricted to just the
guts. More complex interplay between GM and the microbiome of the brain and other
organs, and other biomarkers such as the hormone levels are thought to be responsible
Technical University of Denmark
Page 4
==PAGE:12==
Table 1: Studies Linking Specific GM Bacteria to Eating Behaviors and Mental
Disorders
Bacteria
Observation / Presumed Ef-
fect
Reference
Lachnospiraceae
If higher: shorter hospitalisation
If higher: faster weight gain
after AB-treatment
Found lower in AN patients
Schulz [2021]
Seitz [2021]
Fan [2023]
Faecalibacterium
Found lower in AN-patients
at hospitalisation,
Increased with weight gain
Found lower in AN-patients
compared to CO
Associated with weight loss
reduction body fat
Schulz [2021]
Fan [2023]
Sanmiguel [2017]
Ruminococcaceae
Found lower in AN patients,
Influenced by weight gain
Schulz [2021]
Clostridium
Implicated in regulating eating
behavior and neuropsychiatric
symptoms
Roager and Licht [2018]
Bilophila
Associated with weight loss
Reduction body fat
Sanmiguel [2017]
Akermansia
Reduced hedonic eating
after surgery
Sanmiguel [2017]
Enterococcus
Lower appetite
Sanmiguel [2017]
Coprococcus
Lower / depleted in a wide range
of neurological disorder patients
(Eating disorders not examined)
Notting [2023]
Methanobrevibacter
smithii
Higher in AN patients,
Optimizes food transformation
in low calorie diets
Armougom et al. [2009]
Technical University of Denmark
Page 5
==PAGE:13==
for some of the observed effects and symptoms. Alongside the advances and discoveries
made in the field of microbiotics over the last decades, the interplay between the GM
as a whole, various specific microorganisms and their communications signals such as
neurotransmitter γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), points to more convoluted effects and
responses between the gut, stomach, brain and other organs Strandwitz et al. [2019]. To
unveil a more complete picture, of what is going on, future research may seek to pair
up data from more organs, the nervous system and blood samples, together with clinical
data, to better understand the what role the gut microbiome brain axis (GMBA) plays
in neurological and mental disorders.
1.5
Modeling AN in mice
With the ongoing unveiling of the microbiome, and the discoveries of more ways in which
it affects human health, diseases and disorders, the ways in which we can model and
study AN has shifted. Until relatively recent, the ways to study was limited to human
studies and animal studies with fairly limited tools and approaches available. Research
of AN with only human subjects are limited to observational studies with very limited
options for intervention outside behavioral / therapeutic treatment. Meanwhile, studies
of AN and modeling AN in animals also have had and still has limitations. So far the vast
majority of AN-studies in animals have been with mice / rodents, but at the same time
they have been mostly limited to activity based anorexia (ABA). In an extensive litera-
ture study into overview of AN-studies in animals, done by Stengel and Schaner in 2020
Stengel and Scharner [2020], they found that out of 108 studies examined the majority
of these were using the ABA-approach. In these studies an AN-like state was induced in
the animal subjects by restricting access to food while providing unrestricted access to
exercise. Earlier approaches of modeling AN in mice in a genetic fashion has been done
with anx/anx mice, which are born with a genetic disorder, that in several ways resem-
bles AN Maltais [1984]. More recent studies have however shown, that despite having
symptoms resembling AN-patients, the anx/anx-mice’s emaciation closer resembled that
of cachexia syndrome Mercader [2008] making them less fit for studying AN. Only over
the last decade, and really mostly over the past five years, research has gained ground
Technical University of Denmark
Page 6
==PAGE:14==
by studying AN-like states induced in animals by fecal matter transplantation (FMT)
and GM analyses. Since 2019, as far as we have been able to find, only three studies of
FMT-induces AN in mice have been published: Hata et al.’s study from 2019 Hata [2019],
Glenny et al.’s study from 2021 Glenny [2021], and Fan et al.’s study from 2023 Fan [2023].
Theresa’s study Østergaard [2021] from which we have the data for this study was done
in 2021. All of these four studies have similarities and differences in both setup and find-
ings. Only Theresa’s used specific pathogen free-mice (SPF), while the three others all
used germ free (GF) mice, and also they did not have antibiotic treatment of the mice
as part of their experiment. They ran over shorter time, 10 weeks, 4 weeks and 3 weeks,
respectively for Hata’s, Glenny’s and Fan’s, whereas Theresa’s ran over 14 weeks with
two phases. They also all came to dissimilar conclusions. With Hata’s and Fan’s, they
found that the AN-treated mice gained weight slower compared to the control group, but
with regards to development of Shannon index, they disagree, as Hata found, that the
Shannon index of the AN’treated group was slightly lower, while it was slightly higher
for the AN-treated mice in Hata’s. Glenny found that the Shannon index of AN-treated
mice was slightly higher as well, but they also found that the treatment, AN or CO, had
no effect on the body weight of the mice, dissimilarly to Hata’s and Fan’s findings.
Another challenge, that the studies of induced AN-like states in mice face, is that the
mice live so much shorter than humans, so the effects and symptoms of AN have much
shorter time to develop in the mice, compared to how they can develop in humans over
many years. This does not prevent the studies from successfully inducing AN-like states
in the mice, that can help us understand AN, but it does to some extent prevent a fair,
1:1 comparison between what we see in mice and what we see in humans.
1.6
The language of bioinformatics
So, how do we compare the data, we have access to, to the other studies in the field?
In this study we want to find results, that are easily comparable to the findings of the
similar enough studies, to continue building on the features in which AN can be under-
stood. That means, we want to assess α-diversity, β-diversity, while also honing in on the
change of variation we can observe in groups / states of the GM, and between specific
Technical University of Denmark
Page 7
==PAGE:15==
ASVs, to assess how much they change between states. For this we can use analysis of
variance (ANOVA), Jaccard-distances, principal coordinates analysis (PCoA), and dif-
ferential abundance analysis (DAA). To rank the importance of specific features in the
data, such as specific ASVs or hormone levels, random forest classification can be used in
associating features with states.
1.6.1
α-diversity
For assessing the immediate diversity within a specific sample or groups of samples, α-
diversity is used to give that overview. Here the samples richness and Shannon-diversity
give a good first estimate of the diversity within samples or groups or groups of samples,
as the richness is a count of how many unique ASVs are found in a sample, and that
is easily comparable to other samples’ richness. We can then take the average of the
richness of samples we group together i.e. in groups of treatment-type or timestamp.
The Shannon-index allows for something similar, but also takes the abundance of each
ASV into account, to see if the sample is dominated by a single or few ASVs, or if it is
evenly distributed across most ASVs. The Shannon-Weiner index can be calculated as
H′ = −PR
i=1 pi ln pi, where H′ is the Shannon-Wiener index and pi is the proportion of
the i’th species[Zach, 2021]. As the proportion is the count of a specific ASV divided
by the total count across all ASV in the sample, the Shannon-index is sensitive to the
richness in the samples, and therefore it is considered biased towards measuring species
richness [Kiernan, 2024].
1.6.2
β-diversity
Then we want to compare the diversity between samples or groups of samples, known
as the β-diversity, and that can be done with Jaccard-disance, ANOVA, PERMANOVA,
and PCoA.
With the Jaccard-distance or Jaccard-index, we are assessing the size of the overlap
between two samples and dividing it by the size of the union or total size of both samples.
This of course can also be done with groups of samples vs other samples. The Jaccard-
Technical University of Denmark
Page 8
==PAGE:16==
index is given by J(A, B) = |A∩B|
|A∪B|[Chung, 2019], and it can range in values between 0 and
1, so that it would be 0 when there is no overlap, no ASVs in common, or 1 when there
is total overlap and nothing is unique to one of the samples / groups. This is a good
measure of how similar or dissimilar a sample or group of samples are to other samples or
groups, as it gives a gathered picture, but it does not go into specific ASVs. The Jaccard-
distance can then be extended to a Jaccard-distance-matrix, with which PERMANOVA
can be found and plotted in a PCoA-plot, which is a visualization of these similarities or
differences. In a PCoA-plot we can easily overview the degree of similarity or dissimilarity
between samples and groups. It is a rather robust method, as the PERMANOVA also
employs a permutation-based statistical inference, that randomly shuffles the relationship
between variables, all while maintaining the overall structure of the data [Anderson, 2001].
Another way to calculate the similarities and variance within samples and groups is the
ANOVA and distance to centroid, which also finds the variance within groups of samples
and divides them into quartiles around the mean sample, the centroid[Hinkelmann, 2005].
This too provides a visual representation of the variance within and between groups of
data but does not give insights into specific ASVs on their own.
1.6.3
Differential abundance analysis
Differential abundance analysis allows us to see the abundance change of specific features
/ ASVs between two states in the data. That could either be between different timestamps
of data, or between different treatments. With DAA we can have a look into which specific
ASVs change the most between the AN-treated mice and the control group and thus get
a sense of how much the treatment affected specific ASVs. At the same time, we also
want to sort for statistical significance, meaning a sufficiently low p-value, to focus on the
abundance changes of ASVs that rejects the null hypothesis, meaning that the variance
in abundance between the states is unlikely due to random variance within the states.
Of course, this still allows us to zoom in on specific features that were not found to be
statistically significant and assess their abundance change between two states. But in that
case one has to remember, that the variance in abundance and changes between states
to some likelihood could have occurred by chance, from the variance in counts within the
Technical University of Denmark
Page 9
==PAGE:17==
group.
1.6.4
Random Forest Classification
One more tool, that we can use to assess the individual features role in AN (or other
contexts) is the random forest classifier (RFC). It is a model that can predict or guess
categorical features, such as treatment-type, from other features, and it yields an accuracy
score, on the rate of correct prediction, and an importance score associated with the
features that were most important for the prediction. It works by splitting the data into
subsets of training data and test data, which each have the target variable, the variable we
are predicting, and the features that are used to predict the target. The data is typically
split into 80:20, where 80% of the data goes into the training set, and the remaining 20%
is the test set, and then it creates ensembles of decision trees. Each tree works like a
bunch of nested if/else loops, that has a root node with the first condition (for example
an inequality, ASV_010 count > 5) that splits the data into the next nodes. This process
is repeated at the following nodes, until it ends up with "pure nodes" that only holds data
from one of target values, and along the way it seeks to split the data by maximising
the information gained, that approximates the purity of the child-node subtracted from
the purity of the parent-node Nerd [2021]. Again this process is the repeated for a larger
number of decision trees turning it into a random forest classifier.
At the end, each
decision tree casts a vote to predict the target. The final prediction is determined by
majority voting – the target value with the most votes across all trees[Hastie, 2009]. This
will allow us to predict for example the treatment-type from the ASV-counts, but it could
as well be used to predict other features like the specific human donor from the hormone
levels found in the mice, as long as all the data we use have all these features. With a
series of random forest classifications across many targets, we can get a view into if any
specific features / ASVs are important for a variety of targets. For example, we can see
if the same ASVs are important for predicting the first treatment, the second treatment,
and the combination of treatments and in that way establish a ranking of relevance of the
ASV in regards to one or several treatments.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 10
==PAGE:18==
1.7
Hypothesis and aim of this study
As of this point, we have established an overview of what anorexia is, how it has been
treated and studied so far, and what approaches we can use to study AN further.
The goal of this project is to analyze the data made available to us from Theresa Øster-
gaard’s project Østergaard [2021], with an emphasis on the ASV-data, as it was not ready
for analysis when Theresa did her project. With this study, the aim is to be able to con-
tinue building on the growing knowledge base on how AN can be understood and affected
via the gut microbiota. So we are looking to test already established trends from the
literature, and to keep an eye open for new trends in the data. This can be on both from
an overall whole GM-composition perspective, and by addressing specific taxa or even
groups of taxa. The aspiration of this project is to touch on both of these.
The hypotheses of this study are:
1. Transplanted fecal matter from AN-patients will alter the GM composition of the
mice to closer resemble that of an AN-patient’s.
2. Fecal matter transplantation will produce measurable symptoms of AN in the mice.
3. Specific taxa found in specific human donors-types will also be found in mice treated
with that type of treatment.
4. A predictive algorithm should be able to predict what treatment (AN or control) a
mouse has had from the GM composition.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 11
==PAGE:19==
2
Materials and Methods
The data analysis for this project relies on data made available to us from the thesis
project done by Theresa Østergaard in 2020-2021 Østergaard [2021], so we will just briefly
go over some practicalities of how the experiment was conducted to better understand
the structure and nomenclature of the data.
Generally it was an experiment that used feces samples from human donors to transplant
GM from anorectic patients into mice, to induce AN-like states in the mice. There were
two phases, each beginning with antibiotic treatment of the mice followed by the fecal
matter transplantation to the mice. Through the experiment feces samples were collected
from the mice, and the mice were weighed and underwent behavioral tests. At the end,
final samples were taken, the mice were euthanized, and other materials for samples were
collected and processed to be ready for analysis. The following section describing the
experimental procedures is a brief summary or paraphrasing of what can be understood
from Theresa’s description of it in her thesis report Østergaard [2021], aimed at including
only brief conceptualization of the most crucial facets, to reveal the structure of the data.
The six human donors were recruited with the condition, that they had not undergone
antibiotic treatment within the last three months leading up to the stool sampling. All
six donors were women in the age range 18-30 at the time. The three AN-donors were
from Mental Health Centre Ballerup, where they were being treated for AN, and the three
CO-donors were of normal body mass index (BMI) (18.5 - 24.9) and had no history of
digestive diseases. Stool samples from all donors were collected, suspended to a lower
concentration and kept frozen until use in the experiment. The samples were labeled X,
Y, and Z for the AN-donors, and D, E, and F for the control donors. From this we have
the six donors: COD, COE, COF, ANX, ANY, and ANZ.
A total of 48 female mice of the type BALB/cJTac, bread to be specific pathogen free
(SPF), arrived three to four weeks old at Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Uni-
versity of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg, where the experiment would be conducted over 14
weeks in early 2021. The mice were kept at ordinary experiment environments regarding
temperature, humidity and light cycle, and they had access to unlimited food during the
Technical University of Denmark
Page 12
==PAGE:20==
experiment. Other installments such as nestlets, housing, chewing block and fun-tunnel
were in the cages, the ethical standards were kept.
The figure below 1 illustrates the timeline and some of the tests / samples taken during
the experiment.
Figure 1: Timeline of the experiment. Over 14 weeks the mice went through two
phases of antibiotic treatment followed by fecal matter transplant from
anorexic or control human donors. Feces samples were taken four times
during this period, so the fourth feces sampling at week 11 did not take place
as shown in the figure. In the end of the experiment, blood, caecum, brain
and one last feces sampling was collected.
During phase one, the mice were kept four pr. cage in 12 cages, and in phase two, they
were divided into 24 cages with two mice in each cage. Alongside that, all mice were
divided into two groups, A and B, to stagger the experiment one week and run two
similar experiments parallel.
The experiment was conducted over 14 weeks split into two phases of seven weeks each.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 13
==PAGE:21==
Each phase began with antibiotic treatment for two weeks in phase one and three weeks
in phase two. Following the antibiotic treatments the mice were administered fecal matter
transplantation once a week by feeding them the FMT-suspension once a week for five
weeks in phase one and for four weeks in phase two.
During phase two, the mice were split into smaller groups, so there would be groups of
mice that had same type of treatment in both phases and groups of mice that switched
to the other treatment in phase two. This way it gave combined treatments of ANAN,
ANCO, COAN, and COCO.
Feces samples were collected four times during the experiment. First at the beginning,
then after the antibiotic treatment of phase one, then again at the end of phase one
and lastly in the end of phase two. No feces samples were collected after the antibiotic
treatment of phase two, as it is assumed, it would be similar to the ones collected after
the first antibiotic treatment. This gives us four timestamps of feces samples: FS1 (start,
mouse GM), FS2 (antibiotic-treated), FS3 (end of phase 1, after FMT1), and FS5 (end
of phase 2, after FMT2).
At the end of phase two, after the last feces sampling was collected, the mice were eutha-
nized, and samples of blood, the brain, and the caecum was collected for further analysis.
Throughout the experiment the mice were weighed twice pr. week, and their food intake
was weighed on a cage level weekly.
After the experiment, the blood was analyzed for active hormone levels of ghrelin, glucagon,
GLP-1, leptin, PYY, and insulin. All the feces samplings were analyzed by 16S-rRNA
sequencing to produce the OTU-table of 417 ASVs from 201 samples, from which six of
them were the human donors. Alongside that a taxonomy table was also created.
This concludes the section paraphrasing the procedures taken for the experimental part
as described in Theresa Østergaard’s thesis Østergaard [2021]. More tests than mentioned
here, like activity- and novel food item-test, were conducted during the experiment, and
more data was collected from them, but this description has walked you through the
procedures, that yielded the data used for the analyses of this project, including: (see
next section)2.1
Technical University of Denmark
Page 14
==PAGE:22==
2.1
Data structure and nomenclature of the data
An OTU-table with 417 ASV-counts from 201 samples, 195 of these from the mice in the
experiment, the other six from the human donors, and a taxonomy table to pair up with
the ASVs.
Metadata-table based on 200 feces samples ids, with relevant data columns such as
"Name", that is the mouse’s number 1-48, and it has the names of the six human donors,
"COD", "COE", "COF", "ANX", "ANY", "ANZ". It has "Cagenbr", the cage number, "Fe-
ces_sampling", FS1, FS2, FS3, or FS5, "Group", that is A / B from the staggering of
the two parallel experimental runs, "FMT_1_donor" and "FMT_2 _donor", that holds
which human donor name had been given to this sample, and "Donor_type", that just
tells whether it was AN or CO that was given most recently for the sample.
The table "Gut_hormones" for the 48 mice, based on mouse number 1-48, with relevant
columns such as the treatment of FMT1; "TREATMENT", the treatment in FMT2;
"END_TREATMENT", the combined treatment run; "END", "GROUP", A/B, and the
six hormones GLP, Ghrelin, Glucagon, Insulin, Leptin, and PYY -levels numerically.
Tables for the weights of the individual mice bi-weekly measured, and tables of the weekly
accumulated food intake on cage level.
2.2
Data processing and statistical analysis
The data was analyzed using python in Jupiter notebook environment in Visual Studio
Code.
First the script to load all the data was created, and it is also in that script
that the majority of the cleaning and pre-processing took place. Across all the analyses,
the necessary libraries were gathered in the top of the loading script to carry them over
between the following up scripts that would carry out different analyses. Some of the more
bioinformatics-oriented libraries known from RStudio, such as phyloseq and DESeq2 are
not available for python, so for some of the analyses, we had to create functions or other
manual calculations to carry out the analyses.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 15
==PAGE:23==
The ASV-data was normalized by relative abundance within the sample, and for the
taxonomy table a function to find and ascribe the most specific taxon was created to add
the taxon-name as a column in the taxonomy table. The richness and Shannon-index for
each sample was found and stored in tables with same index, "sample_id", as the ASV-
data. Then the metadata was loaded and manipulated a bit, since there was a row where
the mouse that was named "X4" while number 36 (out of 1-48) was missing, so the "X4"
was replaced with the number 36. This pattern of an "X4"-Name and a missing number
36 was also seen in other tables and renamed. Probably a typo had caused a white space
to be in the column name of "FMT_2 _donor", so that was corrected. Then the index of
the ASV-dataframe, "sample_id" was used to keep only the same rows from the metadata
dataframe, and after sorting all tables by the sample ids, the Shannon-index and richness
columns were appended to the metadata. Grouping by "Feces_sampling" and then by
combined FS3+FMT1-treatment and FS5+FMT2-treatment, let us print out the average
values for the Shannon-index and the richness for these groups.
Gut_hormones tables was loaded and also had the "X4" replaced with 36, and for each of
the six hormones in the table, an extra column was created to ascribe them what third,
low, mid or high, the mouse ranked in for each hormone.
The weights data was loaded into a dataframe, also fixing the X4/36-naming and ascribing
them their total weight change for each phase, "twgp1" and twgp2", and another two
columns with the total weight change as a percentage of initial weight were added. Lastly,
they were also ascribed which thirds by percentage total weight change they ranked in,
as done for the hormones.
With the food intake only found on cage level, we did not have to clean the names for
it, so the only processing with the tables for the food intake was to ascribe the columns
with accumulated food intake for the cage by the end of each phase. These were then also
used to rank them in thirds by total food intake for both phases.
The last pre-processing done in the loading part of the script was a merge of the Gut_hormones
dataframe and the metadata dataframe through their common column "MOUSE" / "Name",
even though the Gut_hormones-dataframe only had 48 rows, and the metadata had 187
rows. This was done to make some of the later calculations flow more smoothly, by having
Technical University of Denmark
Page 16
==PAGE:24==
the intended targets and grouping variables in the same table, even though we are aware
of, that it would create some redundancy in the data, we would have to navigate around
and not apply by oversight.
All these dividing into thirds rankings of weight change, food intake, and hormone levels
were done, as these divisions gave some more options for grouping variables, that could
be useful for the rest of the analyses, but in all the setups they were tested in, they gave
less significant results, than the grouping variables we already had.
From here new scripts were created for most of the different analyses we went through
on top of the basis of the described loading script. First the relative abundances of ASVs
were found for the human donors, by filtering out only the data from the human donors
in the metadata and ASV-table, removing all ASVs with 0 counts across all samples,
sorting them by relative abundance and plotting it in a stacked bar-chart. The top25
abundant ASVs for all donors was used as legend for the plot, and for each donor a top10
of abundant ASVs were found for further analysis of what ASVs were in top10 for all
donors, all of donor type, and in more than one of each donor type.
Next, the jaccard_score was used to find the jaccard distances and append them to each
other for the jaccard distance matrix. With the FMT1-treatment as grouping variable,
PERMANOVA was used for Principal Coordinate Analysis, and the PCoA-plot could be
created. For the plotting, a combination of "Feces_sampling" and FMT-donor was used
for grouping and color dictionary, to empathise the difference of progression and treatment
they had undergone.
From the ANOVA and throughout the rest of the analyses, we established a new dataframe
from the combined metadata, gut_hormones-table and some of the data from weights
excluding the human donor samples, called "nhmetaghw" that was used as a template
data set allowing us to copy into a new temporary variable and filter from. For all of the
analyses, this reset data and filtering to only include the relevant rows of that and the
ASV-data by grouping of interest allowed us to test out many different setups, grouping
variables and targets of interest. With ANOVA, "Feces_sampling" alone was first used
as grouping variable, and then the combined grouping of "Feces_sampling" and FMT1-
treatment, plotted in a boxplot with distance to centroid by group, so the effects of FMT1
Technical University of Denmark
Page 17
==PAGE:25==
could be compared to FS1 and FS2. Then the same was done for FS5-FMT2-treatment
and lastly for FS5-combined-treatment.
P-values for the overall analysis and for the
individual ASVs were found with f_oneway and the significant ASVs were printed.
The differential abundance analysis was one of the functions, that does not have a ded-
icated library in python, so here we created a function that takes the data subset of
interest, and for all the ASVs grouped by the grouping variable, it uses "kruskal" to find
and append the p-value in a results-dataframe, which then gets the corrected p-value from
"multipletests" in a new column and the log2fold change appended. This was run for FS3
vs. FS2, FS5 vs. FS2, and for AN vs. CO in FS3-data, and plotted by log2fold-change
vs. -log10Adjusted p-value for the ASVs with significant p-value. The lists of significant
ASVs and their log2fold change was saved for comparison. It was also done for AN vs.
CO of FMT2 with FS5-data, but gave no significant ASVs.
For some specific ASVs that was noticed to show up in the significant ASVs several times,
and known from the literature to may have an effect on eating behavior, Bilophila and
Coprococcus, difference in mean abundance by group was also found, and grouped by
FMT1-treatment using only FS3-data, they were plotted in violin plots with absolute and
relative differences in mean abundance, to illustrate their sizable differences while also dis-
playing their limited overall abundances yet noticeable relative differences in abundance.
The random forest classifiers were initially done in the setup that was used to predict
the three treatments, FMT1, FMT2, and the combined treatment from all the ASV-data,
that has a value in the target. It was done in a script that lets us define the targets
we want to predict in the top and then loops over those targets and predicts its unique
value from the relevant ASV-data with the random forest classifier.
In this loop the
metadata is merged with the ASV-data in a temporary variable, and the data with no
value in target was dropped, while the percentage of data used is kept track of, to ensure
catching if unexpected proportions of data was used by mistake. The data is then split
80:20 into training and test-sets, and the classifier runs to find its accuracy score and the
top10 most important features / ASVs for the prediction. Outside the loop, the most
important ASVs are stored in a overall top important ASVs -table, so when this setup
was repeated with other targets, such as specific FMT-donors, donor types, cage number,
Technical University of Denmark
Page 18
==PAGE:26==
group A/B, and feces sampling, the combination of all the top10 important ASVs from all
these runs were gathered in a table for easier comparison. In search for higher accuracy in
predicting the treatments, a slightly modified version of the random forest classifier was
predicting the treatments from only the ASV-data from the to the treatment most recent
feces samples, FMT1-treatment from FS3-samples, and FMT2 and combined -treatment
from FS5-samples. Their top10 important ASVs were also saved for comparison. One last
attempt to redistribute the data for higher accuracy had us introducing a new feature
used in prediction of the treatments: The ASV-difference, where the FS2-ASV-counts
was subtracted from the to the treatment most recent ASV-counts. This new feature,
ASV-difference, was introduced, as it emphasises the change the treatment affected ASV-
counts with between the antibiotic treatment and through the FMT-treatment.
Also
from these the important ASVs were saved for comparison. Finlay, the initial random
forest classifier setup was applied to predict the treatments from the hormone levels, and
here the gut_hormones-table was switched in instead of the metadata to not mistakenly
over-sample.
Mean weight developments by groups of treatment in phase one and combined treatment
in phase two were plotted. Same for total food intake pr. cage, but for phase two they were
also split into A / B groups as the expected pattern, confirming some effect of the FMT,
was noticed. Lastly, the hormone levels were plotted in groups of combined treatment.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 19
==PAGE:27==
3
Results
For this study various data sources was available for analysis. They can be divided into
some categories; the ASV and taxonomy data from feces samples from the mice during
the experiment and the human donors taken before the experiment, the metadata related
to the feces samples taken during the experiment, and then the gut_hormones table with
the serum levels and more metadata taken at the end of the experiment. Furthermore
data from the weights of the individual mice throughout the experiment and the food
intake on a cage level taken through the experiment.
3.1
How the FMT affected the mice’s gut microbiota
To appreciate the ways in which the mice GM were influenced by the FMT from hu-
man AN and CO -donors, we first look at the ASV-data from the human donors. In
the figure below2 the relative abundances of the ASVs found in the six human donors
are shown. There are the three AN-donors in the left side of the plot and the three CO
donors in the right side of the plot. For the all of the six human donors the Family-
Ruminococcaceae, Order-Clostridiales, Family-Lachnospiraceae, and Genus-Blautia are
found to be in the top10 most abundant ASVs, although Family_Ruminococcaceae (or-
ange) and Family_Lachnospiraceae (green) are more abundant in the AN-donors com-
pared to the CO-donors. Looking at what were among the top10 abundances of ASVs in
at least two out of three of each donor-type while not in top10 in two out of three of the
other donor-type, it was found that for the AN-donors at least two of three donors had
Genus_Ruminococcus (grey), Genus_Coprococcus (2nd blue), and Faecaalibacterium
prausnitzii (pink) in their top10 most abundant ASVs while the CO-donors did not. And
for the CO-donors Bifidobacterium adolescentis (2nd red), Akkermancia muciniphila (3rd
green), Colinsella aerofaciens (olive green), and Genus-Bifidobacterium (red) were found
in the top10 for at least two of three CO-donors while not in the AN-donors.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 20
==PAGE:28==
Figure 2: Relative abundances of ASVs found in each human donor. The first blue
found in all the donors is Genus_Blautia. Noticeably the orange
Family_Ruminococcaceae is present in all donors, but more abundant in the
AN-donors. Same trend is seen with the Family_Lachnospiraceae (green).
Comparing the α-diversity of the donors to the mice we found that the observed richness
and shannon-wiener indices for the samples from the ASV-data, and their average values
over the groups are generally lower in the mice in all stages of the experiment.
The
richness and shannon index are shown in the table 2 below.
The diversity is larger for the AN-donors than for the CO-donors, and for the mice it is
observed that the diversity changes up and down during the experiment, and that the AN-
treated mice have slightly higher diversity than the CO-treated after FMT1 and FMT2.
It is also found that the α-diversity in the GM of the mice was highest at the beginning
of the experiment and lowest at its ending.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 21
==PAGE:29==
Table 2: Average values of richness and Shannon index found in groups.
Group
Richness
Shannon Index
Human donor AN
54.66
2.82
Human donor CO
44.33
2.72
FS1
26.17
1.78
FS2
19.93
1.67
FS3
25.44
1.48
FS5
18.36
1.23
AN FS3
26.0
1.56
CO FS3
24.88
1.40
AN FS5
18.45
1.20
CO FS5
18.25
1.26
Figure 3: PCoA . As described in the legend, each group of feces sampling has its own
shape and color, while for FS3 and FS5 the same treatments in FMT1 and
FMT2 have the same but slightly lighter/darker color.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 22
==PAGE:30==
The results from the ANOVA analysis shows the variance in distance to centroid of the
GM composition within and between the groups. In the figure 4 it is seen FS1 and FS2
have similar variance, although FS2 have slightly larger variance, and after FMT1 the
internal variance of the AN-treated mice is smaller, while the CO-treated mice’s variance
is slightly larger. Looking at FMT2 (FS5), it can be seen in figure 5, the observed trend is
the opposite; with FMT2 the AN-treated mice have larger variance compared to FS1 and
FS2, while the CO-treated has smaller variance. That trend is repeated when looking at
combined treatment, see figure 6, where the ANAN and COAN-treated have even larger
variance compared to FS1 and FS2, while the ANCO and COCO-treated mice have smaller
variances. For all of these ANOVA-results the overall p-value is landing them well outside
statistical significance with a p-value just below 1, while when looking at individual ASVs
variance between groups, 30, 29, and 20, respectively, ASVs were found to vary with a
p-value lower than 0,05.
Figure 4: Variance for AN-treated mice is slightly smaller, while CO-treated has
slightly larger variance after FMT1. FS1 and FS2 are show for comparison.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 23
==PAGE:31==
Figure 5: After FMT2 variance for AN-treated mice is larger, while CO-treated has
smaller variance, FS1 and FS2 are show for comparison.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 24
==PAGE:32==
Figure 6: Combined treatment groups after FMT2: The ANAN and COAN have
higher variance compared to ANCO and COCO, FS1 and FS2 are show for
comparison.
With differential abundance between two groups, we can identify which ASV’s abun-
dance changes the most between two states. Looking at the figures 7 and 8 below, the
ASVs are distributed by log2fold change between states along horizontal axis and neg-
ative p-value vertically, and a lot of the taxa we have encountered in other analyses
show up again. Family_S24-7, Family_mitochondria, Genus_Clostridium, Akkermansai
muciniphila, and many others have changed significantly between the AB-treatment to
after either FMT.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 25
==PAGE:33==
Figure 7: DAA plot showing the log2fold changes for significant ASVs between FS2
and FS3.
Figure 8: DAA plot showing the log2fold changes for significant ASVs between FS2
and FS5.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 26
==PAGE:34==
Gathering the top10 ASVs by absolute log2fold change in a table 3, we see Genus_Clostridium
checks in at the 9th place. It is also noticeable that both Family_S24-7 and Genus_Bilophila
are significant in both plots but did not make it into the top10 by absolute log2fold change.
Table 3: Differential abundance analysis top10 significant ASV gathered from FS2-3
and FS2-5, sorted by absolute log2fold change.
ASV
Corrected p-value
Log2 Fold Change
Family mitochondria
7.27 × 10−12
-12.04
Family Enterobacteriaceae
9.47 × 10−4
11.87
Escherichia coli
1.54 × 10−2
-9.37
Genus Enterococcus
5.07 × 10−4
8.67
Akkermansia muciniphila
5.65 × 10−5
7.92
Genus Staphylococcus
9.38 × 10−7
-7.64
Genus Bacillus
2.48 × 10−5
-7.58
Staphylococcus sciuri
1.05 × 10−5
-7.47
Genus Clostridium
3.88 × 10−4
6.60
Genus Sutterella
1.05 × 10−5
6.22
Technical University of Denmark
Page 27
==PAGE:35==
Figure 9: DAA plot showing the log2fold changes for significant ASVs between
AN-treated and control-treated, FS3-data only. Only four significant ASVs
found with this grouping.
Comparing DAA of ASVs after FMT1, grouped by AN and CO -treatment, FS3-samples
only, just four significant ASVs were found, see table 4. Blautia producta, Genus_Coprococcus
are on the positive side, more abundant in AN-treated, and Genus_Dehalobacterium, and
Genus_Candidatus Arthromitus are found in the negative side, more abundant in control
group.
Table 4: DAA top4 significant ASVs log2fold changes between AN / CO for FS3
Taxon
Corrected p-value
Log2 Fold Change
Blautia producta
0.028
6.58
Genus Coprococcus
0.028
5.76
Genus Dehalobacterium
0.028
-1.92
Genus Candidatus Arthromitus
0.028
-3.47
Looking at ASVs associated with AN, body weight or eating behavior, it was found
that Genus_Bilophila was significantly more abundant in the mice treated with AN in
Technical University of Denmark
Page 28
==PAGE:36==
FMT1 with a p-value of 0.006, see in the figure 10. Also Genus_Coprococcus was found
consistently in AN-treated mice after FMT1, but in little or no amounts in the CO-treated,
see figure 11.
Figure 10: Genus_Bilophila was found significantly more abundant in AN-treated
mice’s GM after FMT1. FS3 data only.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 29
==PAGE:37==
Figure 11: Genus_Coprococcus was found significantly more abundant in AN-treated
mice’s GM after FMT1. FS3 data only.
For comparing data from FS5 in groups of "END_TREATMENT", the treatment admin-
istered in phase two, FMT2, there were no statistically significant ASVs found.
3.2
Random forest finding important ASVs
With random forest classification ASV-data for different groups of data was investigated
to look for how accurate various values of the variables would be predicted from their
associated distribution of ASVs and which ASVs were most important for the prediction.
This will allow us to ask which features / ASVs are most important or impactfull for
predicting various categorical properties such as treatment, donor, group or really any
categorical property that can be associated with the rest of the data. Thus it also pro-
vides a ranking of association strength between properties and variables. Using all the
ASV-data, it was found that the Feces_sampling corresponding to the four timestamps
during the experiment could be predicted with a 92% accuracy mentioning the top5 most
Technical University of Denmark
Page 30
==PAGE:38==
important ASVs: Order_Bacteroidales, Genus_Oscillospira, Genus_Lactobacillus, Fam-
ily_Ruminococcaceae, and Family_S24-7. Given that there are four options for the value
of Feces_sampling, predicting it with an accuracy of 92% is quite accurate, as it would
have a 25% by random chance. This and a few other findings using all ASV-data are show
in table 5. Cage number being predicted with a 35% accuracy from the ASV-data is like-
wise noteworthy, as there were 24 cages, giving it a 4% chance to be guessed by random.
The three types of treatment, FMT1, FMT2, and the combination of FMT1 and FMT2,
were also predicted from all the ASV-data, but with less impressive results for accuracy.
59%, 41%, and 14% respectively, and predicting them with only the latest ASV-data
from that phase, gave slightly better accuracy, but not a lot. The combined treatment
after FMT2 with only ASV-data from FS5 gave a 33% prediction rate, while the FMT2-
treatment with only FS5-data gave 44% accuracy. FMT1-treatment with FS3-ASVs hit
the correct prediction 80% of the time.
Table 5: Random Forest predictions from all ASVs
Predicted Variable
Data Used
Accuracy
Top 5 Important ASVs
Feces_sampling
[FS1, FS2, FS3, FS5]
All ASV-data
92%
Order_Bacteroidales
Genus_Oscillospira
Genus_Lactobacillus
Family_Ruminococcaceae
Family_S24-7
Group
[A, B]
All ASV-data
81%
Genus_Streptococcus
Family_Ruminococcaceae
Family_Rikenellaceae
Genus_Bacteroides
Family_Lachnospiraceae
Cage number
[1, 2, 3, ..., 24]
All ASV-data
35%
Genus_Streptococcus
Order_Clostridiales
Family_S24-7
Family_Ruminococcaceae
Ruminococcus gnavus
Technical University of Denmark
Page 31
==PAGE:39==
Further dividing the data into groups and using their associated subsets of data, we
introduced another feature derived from the ASV-data: The ASV-difference, or abundance
change if you will. Subtracting the former ASV-counts in FS2 from either FS3- or FS5-
counts, this difference was used as feature to predict the treatments more accurately. This
way it was found that the treatment in phase one could be predicted with a 90% accuracy
from the difference in ASVs between FS2 and FS3. The treatment in phase two and
the combined treatment were also predicted using the associated ASV-differences and the
results are shown in the table 6.
Table 6: Random Forest predicting treatment-types from ASV-difference
Predicted Variable
Data Used
Accuracy
Top 5 Important ASVs
Treatment
FMT1
[AN, CO]
ASV-difference
FS3 - FS2
90%
Genus_Bilophila
Genus_Coprococcus
Genus_Lactobacillus
Order_Clostridiales
Family_mitochondria
Treatment
FMT2
[AN, CO]
ASV-difference
FS5 - FS2
62.5%
Family_Rikenellaceae
Genus_Lactobacillus
Genus_Bacteroides
Genus_Leadbetterella
Clostridium cocleatum
END combined
treatment
[ANAN, COAN,
ANCO, COCO]
ASV-difference
FS5 - FS2
37.5%
Genus_Lactobacillus
Order_Clostridiales
Genus_Bacteroides
Genus_Stenotrophomonas
Family_Mogibacteriaceae
The specific donors and donor-type was predicted from the relevant subset of ASV-data,
and results can be seen in the table below 7. With the ASV-data from FS3 the random
forest was able to pick out the correct donor out of six in 80% of cases. Overall it is
noticed that Genus_Coprococcus and Genus_Biliphila made it into the top5 for predict-
ing donor-type, and Genus_Adlercreutzia is important for predicting both the specific
Technical University of Denmark
Page 32
==PAGE:40==
donors in FMT1 and FMT2 and the general donor-type in both phase one and two. Fam-
ily_Lachnospiraceae is in the top5 for predicting donor-type and FMT2-doner.
Table 7: Random Forest Classification results for donor-type predictions
Predicted Variable
Data Used
Accuracy
Top 5 Important ASVs
FMT_1_donor
[COD, COE, COF,
ANX, ANY, ANZ]
ASV from FS3
80%
Bacteroides uniformis
Lactobacillus reuteri
Family_Rikenellaceae
Family_S24-7
Genus_Adlercreutzia
FMT_2_donor
[COD, COE, COF,
ANX, ANY, ANZ]
ASV from FS5
22%
Family_Lachnospiraceae
Genus_Oscillospira
Order_Clostridiales
Genus_Adlercreutzia
Family_Ruminococcaceae
Donor-type
[AN, CO]
ASV from FS3
and FS5
82%
Genus_Coprococcus
Genus_Prevotella
Family_Lachnospiraceae
Genus_Bilophila
Genus_Adlercreutzia
With the above results from predicting the treatments from either all ASVs, only the latest
ASVs, or the latest minus FS2, a total of nine prediction runs of treatments has been made,
and gathering the top10 most important ASVs from each of them gives us a summed up
overall top10 with the following taxa: Family_Lachnospiraceae, Genus_Ruminococcus,
Genus_Prevotella, Genus_Streptococcus, Order_Clostridiales, Family_Rikenellaceae, Genus_Lactobac
Genus_Bacteroides, Clostridium cocleatum, Genus_Adlercreutzia. All 10 of these were
in all of the top10 most important ASVs in all nine treatment prediction runs, and the
number of unique ASVs that made it into the nine top10s was 57.
Prediction of the treatments from the hormone levels taken at the end of the experiment
was also tested, but the accuracy is lower compared to using the ASVs to classify. Only
Technical University of Denmark
Page 33
==PAGE:41==
the levels of ghrelin managed to hit 80% accuracy for predicting treatment in phase one,
and insulin and PYY have above average prediction strength for the treatment through
all treatments, see table 8.
Data used
FMT1-treatment
FMT2-treatment
combined treatment
GLP-1
0.50
0.40
0.20
Ghrelin
0.80
0.40
0.30
Glucagon
0.50
0.40
0.20
Insulin
0.60
0.70
0.40
Leptin
0.60
0.50
0.20
PYY
0.60
0.60
0.30
Table 8: Random Forest prediction of treatment from the hormone levels. Ghrelin
levels let the random forest predict the FMT1-treatment in 80% of cases and
insulin is a strong predictor for all treatments.
3.3
Results from clinical data
With the results from the clinical data we can look into if the treatments and variations
of GM have effects on key parameters associated with AN, such as body weights and food
intake and hormone levels. Looking at the weights in groups of treatment, see figure 12,
we see that the groups of mice develop their weight uniformly through the experiment
with no significant deviations that can be attributed to the treatment or AN. It is however
noticed, that the mice did not gain much weight in the first two weeks of AB-treatment,
and for all groups their weight decreased a bit in the first week of 2nd AB-treatment,
phase two.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 34
==PAGE:42==
Figure 12: Development of mean weights by treatment group for the mice. Antibiotic
treatment phases are marked yellow. All the mice weights follow each other
closely regardless of group / treatment.
However, looking at the food intake on a cage level for phase one, the AN-treated mice
had a lower food intake compared to the control group, see figure 13.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 35
==PAGE:43==
Figure 13: Total food intake pr. cage during FMT1 grouped by treatment. There were
four mice in each cage in phase one.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 36
==PAGE:44==
Figure 14: Total food intake pr. cage during FMT2 grouped by combined treatment
and in subsets of Group A / B. There were 2 mice in each cage in phase
two.
In phase two the trend in repeated only for the group B mice. Figure 14 shows group A
and B separated and grouped by combined treatment, and for the group B the food intake
over phase two is lower for ANAN, and COAN is lower than ANCO, suggesting that the
latest treatment is more influential at this stage. This however was not reproduced to
same extent in the A group.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 37
==PAGE:45==
For the hormone levels, the concentrations were plotted by groups of combined treat-
ment, see figure 15. In the last two subplots of figure 15 we see that both leptin and
PYY are higher in ANAN-treated and COAN-treated mice. Insulin and glucagon are also
slightly higher in ANAN and COAN-treated mice, but not as drastically as leptin and
PYY. Disregarding outliers there is somewhat a trend to see lower ghrelin in ANAN and
COAN-treated mice. For GLP-1 the mean concentrations stay the same for all groups,
but the variance in concentration within the groups are higher for ANAN and COAN-
treated mice.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 38
==PAGE:46==
Technical University of Denmark
Page 39
==PAGE:47==
4
Discussion
With this project, we have analysed the microbiome data from the feces samples of 48
mice induced with AN via fecal matter transplantation from AN (and control) -patients
in the earlier thesis project of Theresa Østergaard Østergaard [2021]. The GM of the
human donors has also been mapped for comparison, and the findings in the ASV-data
can be compared to serum levels of six appetite / body weight -related hormones as well
as the mice’s weight developments and food intake measured during the experiment.
From the literature on the gut microbiota’s relation to AN, we have learned, that AN
in humans is associated with a lower microbial diversity in the GM Morita et al. [2015],
and also identified a series of bacteria, that is associated with hunger, eating behavior or
weight gain, see table 1. Among the bacteria mentioned in the table, it is a mixed bag, if
their AN-associated effect manifests, if the bacteria is found in higher or lower abundance.
That means it is not strictly a one way case of, that higher diversity in GM or higher
abundances the specific bacteria will lead to AN symptoms, as some of them associates
AN with relatively lower abundances or depletion of the bacteria.
Among all six human donors bacteria from the Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae
-families were found in high abundances, but these two families that are also associated
with AN-traits were found in higher abundances in the AN-donors compared to the CO-
donors, contrary to what was expected from Shulz’s and Fan’s findings Schulz [2021] and
Fan [2023]. For the majority of AN-donors Genus_Ruminococcus, Genus_Coprococcus
, and Faecaalibacterium prausnitzii were also found amongst the most abundant ASVs,
again against the expectation, as they are inversely associated with AN-traits Notting
[2023] , Schulz [2021], Fan [2023]. To clarify, Coprococcus was not inversely associated
with specifically AN in Notting’s findings Notting [2023], as they found it inversely asso-
ciated with a broad range of other neurological disorders, while eating disorders were not
examined in that study. For the majority of CO-donors Akkermansia muciniphila was
found in higher abundances, which is also against what we expected, as Akkermansia is
associated with reduced hedonic eating after surgery Sanmiguel [2017], an anorectic trait,
so it would make more sense, if it was found higher in the AN-donors. More ASVs than
Technical University of Denmark
Page 40
==PAGE:48==
just mentioned here were found in the top10 of these three groups, see results 3.1, but
none of which have an apparent connection to AN. The richness and Shannon-index was
also found to be higher for the AN-donors compared to the control 2, which is contrary
to what Morita et al. Morita et al. [2015] found in their study, so overall, the findings
from the donors GM does not reproduce the trends found in AN-patients and controls
from the studies we are comparing to.
Comparing the mice’s GM richness and Shannon-indices in the groups by feces sampling
and by treatment to what similar work has found, does not give a clearer picture of what
to expect. Generally, the mice have much less diverse GM compared to the human donors,
and the diversity of the mice’s GM is highest at the beginning of the experiment. During
the experiment, two contradictory trends are observed. In phase one, we see that the
AB-treatment works and knocks down the diversity of the GM for FS2, and then over
the five weeks of treatment, the GM regains its diversity almost back as high as in the
beginning, although the AN-treated gains more than the CO-treated mice. Then in phase
two, assuming the 2nd AB treatment brought the diversity back down to levels comparable
to what was observed in FS2, the GM-diversity in the mice does not regain, as observed in
phase one. In FS5-samples from the end of the experiment, the GM-diversity observed in
the mice is the lowest measured, even slightly lower than from the FS2 (AB-treatment).
However, the phase two AN-treated mice still have just slightly higher richness in their
GM than the CO-treated, but their Shannon-index is slightly lower, meaning that the
ASV-counts for the CO-treated mice were slightly more evenly distributed among all
observed ASVs in phase two. In the body of work we can compare to, Fan et al. Fan
[2023] found that AN-treated mice had higher Shannon-index in their GM compared to
the control, like what we found, but Hata et al. Hata [2019] found the opposite, slightly
lower GM Shannon-index for their AN-treated mice, while Glenny et al. Glenny [2021]
found that their AN-treated mice’s GM had unchanged / very slightly higher Shannon-
index compared to their control group. This points in all directions, making it difficult
to guess what to expect regarding changes in GM-diversity when inducing AN in mice
by FMT. The methods and mice used in this and the research we compare with are not
identical to each other, so that could perhaps explain some of the inconsistency observed
in the treatments effects on the diversity of the GMs. Future studies comparing these
Technical University of Denmark
Page 41
==PAGE:49==
can contribute to establish a more clear trend and perhaps even distinguish features or
methods that contribute to it.
The PCoA-plot 3 gives a better visualisation on what happens to the GM through the
steps of the experiment and between AN or CO treatment. If we follow it from FS1-FS5,
we can start by comparing FS1 (orance circles) to FS2 (red +). Here we see, that the
AB treatment worked by that almost all of the FS2 points are in the left side of the plot
as outliers from all other samples. Towards the bottom right corner of the plot are most
of the green and blue points representing the treated mice from FS3 and FS5, while the
human donors are the purple diamonds and pink x’s closer to the middle, but still towards
the right side. This illustrates, that during the treatments in phase one and two, the GM
regains, moving from the left side of, towards the donors in the middle, but not back
towards the upper right corner (FS1) where they came from, but rather down towards
the bottom right corner. The difference between the GM from FS1 to FS3 and FS5 is
mostly along the PCoA2-coordinate, and as the donors are lower on that coordinate than
the mice were in FS1, it makes sense that the FS3 and FS5 are even lower, as they were
dragged in that direction by the donors. This means that mice to some extent regained
a more human-like GM composition through the FMTs. Although Fan [2023], Glenny
[2021], and Hata [2019] also carried out and plotted similar analyses, the results from
these are not easy to compare. In Glenny’s plot, the AN-treated are shifted further than
their controls, for which we can compare our blue points with the greens 3, and see if
the blue points are further from the middle of the figure. The trend from Glenny is not
unambiguously reproduced in our case.
From the ANOVA results 4 when grouped by feces sampling corresponding to the pro-
gression of the experiment, and also grouped by treatment, we see that after phase one
both the internal variance in the groups and the variance between the groups has not
changed much. In figure 4 FS3_AN, the mice that had AN in FMT1, is the outlier with
unchanged mean distance to centroid compered to any other but with smaller internal
variance, while CO has slightly larger internal variance. That picture is inverted when
looking at FS5 AN / CO and combined treatment, see 5 and 6. After phase two the
mean distance to centroid for the mice treated with AN in FMT2 (ANAN and COAN)
has shifted slightly up, while the mice treated with CO in FMT2 (COCO and ANCO)
Technical University of Denmark
Page 42
==PAGE:50==
distance to centroid has shifted down. The internal variance in AN-treated mice in phase
two also became larger, while it got smaller for CO-treated. This points to, that the effect
observed in phase one was not fully developed and reversed while phase two was running,
which could be an argument for running experiments for longer. The studies we compare
our results with all ran for shorter time. Fan [2023] ran for three weeks, Glenny [2021]
ran for four weeks, and only Hata [2019] come close to our 14 weeks with a 10 weeks long
experiment. From what we have seen in this ANOVA result, the first trend we saw, was
quite subtle and ended up opposite after phase two.
With the findings from the differential abundance analysis, we go from looking at the
GM as a whole for groups over into finding specific ASVs that exhibit changes between
groups.
Looking over the DAA-plots of log2fold changes of significant ASVs between
FS2-FS3 and FS2-FS5, see figure 7 and 8, we see that in both cases there are 20-30
ASVs with a p-value lower than 0,05. From them we recognize a plethora of bacteria, we
have encountered earlier, like Family_S24-7, Family_Rominococcaceae, Genus_Bilophila
and Family_Lachnospiraceae, of which the latter three are associated with AN 1. This
means that the bacteria named in the plots were at the same time statistically signifi-
cant between the groups and especially for the FS2-FS3-plot they changed significantly in
abundance between the groups assessed by how far from the center (0) they moved on the
log2fold change axis. The table gathering the top10 by absolute log2fold change 3 shows
us that Family_Enterobacteriaceae, Akkermansia muciniphila, and Genus_Clostridium
were amongst the significant ASVs that changed the most in abundance. The Akkerman-
sia and Enterococcus are associated to AN by regulating appetite, so as they are found
to be amongst the ones that change most in abundance between AB-treatment and after
FMT1/FMT2 it points to that the treatments could be expected to have an impact on
appetite levels. Comparing AN-treatment to CO after FMT1 in figure 9 and table 4 we
are down to four significant ASVs. Blautia producta, Genus_Coprococcus, with higher
abundance in the AN-treated, while Genus_Dehalobacterium and Genus_Candidatus
Arthromitus were more abundance in the CO-treated. That checks out with, that Genus_Coprococcus
was amongst the top10 abundant ASVs in the AN-donors, but referring to its rela-
tive difference in mean abundance, see figure 11, it is largely absent in the CO-treated
while still yielding 5,4% difference in mean abundance, meaning it was a significant part
Technical University of Denmark
Page 43
==PAGE:51==
by abundance of the AN-samples.
On the contrary, looking at the same analysis for
Genus_Bilophila, see figure 10, it to had a high relative difference in mean abundance
(121,7%) between AN and CO -treated mice after FMT1, but it was only at 0,34% in
absolute difference in mean abundance, and not amongst the statistically significant ASVs
in this analysis. Bilophila is the one of the two that is more directly associated with AN,
as it it linked to weight loss Sanmiguel [2017], but as it was found in minuscule amounts
in both AN and CO, while Coprococcus, which is less directly implicated in AN, by being
low or depleted for a range of neurological disorders (EDs not examined here) Notting
[2023], and concurrently found exclusively in the AN-donors and AN-treated mice, it leads
to two interesting points / questions. First, if assuming Notting’s findings could be ex-
tended to also apply for EDs, then it is counter intuitive that we only found Coprococcus
in the AN-donors and mice, when it should be lower or depleted. And second, which is
more impactfull for the anticipated effect of a bacteria; Absolute change in abundance,
relative change in abundance, or binary presence, if it was there or not?
On the topic of ranking impactfulness, that is what we achieved with the results from
the random forest classifications. A lot of different contexts were tested here to both test
if there is a context and if so, then what are the most associated features? Some of the
contexts we tested, can seems less relevant than others, but if predicted with a surprisingly
high accuracy, the importance of the features can suggest other features and mechanisms
to explore. Take for example cage number predicted from all ASV-data with an accuracy
of 35% and Streptococcus, Clostridiales, S24-7, and Ruminococcus dominating the top5
important ASVs. As there were 24 cages, an accuracy of 35% is quite impressive, as it
would predict correctly just 4% of the time by pure chance. It begs the question, whether
it was the specific ASVs mentioned, that somehow gave away the cage number in yet
unintelligible ways. Or if it could rather be that the different cages, as long as the number
of cages is smaller than the average richness of the samples, could be distinguished by
individual ASVs or sets of ASVs in similar abundances within the cages but unlike those
ASVs abundances in other cages. More contexts that seemingly has no relation to the
treatment or donor could likewise be predicted from the ASVs with fair accuracy. The
feces sampling with four option could be predicted with a 92% accuracy and the group
A / B with 81%. Several of the same ASVs as in the other tests were mentioned as
Technical University of Denmark
Page 44
==PAGE:52==
most important again for these predictions, such as Streptococcus and Ruminococcaceae,
while, pointing to that also these contexts are to some extent recognizable from distinct
GM compositions.
Predicting the treatment or combined treatment from the ASVs, which is intuitively closer
related to the GM composition, it showed a couple of interesting points. First, when the
treatments were predicted from all the ASV-data with a mediocre accuracy, it hinted that
using the full picture of GM compositions through the experiment would be oversampling
for predicting the treatment at a specific time. But picking out just the samples from
the most recent treatment was not the most accurate solution either, suggesting that
the most recent treatment, which could be assumed to represent a distinct GM compo-
sition, was less descriptive of the treatments received. The most accurate predictions
of the treatments came from creating a new feature to predict them from, subtracting
the starting point of the treatment, FS2-samples from right after AB-treatment, from
the samples after the treatment, see table 6. Essentially, the differential abundance for
each ASV in the relevant samples. With these new features, the FMT1-treatment was
predicted with a 90% accuracy, mentioning Bilophila and Coprococcus as the most im-
portant for this prediction. The two bacteria we already know from other studies 1 to
play roles related to AN or neurological disorders. The other two treatments, FMT2-
treatment and the combined FMT1-FMT2-treatments, were also predicted with slightly
less but still better than a coin flip accuracy mentioning some ASVs, that from the lit-
erature are not (yet) associated with AN, but in this context repeated important ASVs,
such as Genus_Lactobacillus and Genus_Bacteroides. From gathering all the top10 im-
portant ASVs from the predictions of treatments from ASVs, a suggestion for the size of
the community of ASVs important in predicting treatment is given. A total of 57 unique
ASVs were found in the top10 important ASVs for predicting treatment, meaning that
the treatments are guided by dozens of unique bacteria or sets of bacteria in interplay
with each other. Taking the top10 from these 57 bacteria by how many of the prediction
top10s they were in, all 10 bacteria mentioned were in all 9 of the top10s ASVs for pre-
dicting treatments: Family_Lachnospiraceae, Genus_Ruminococcus, Genus_Prevotella,
Genus_Streptococcus, Order_Clostridiales, Family_Rikenellaceae, Genus_Lactobacillus,
Genus_Bacteroides, Clostridium cocleatum, Genus_Adlercreutzia. The other 47 bacteria
Technical University of Denmark
Page 45
==PAGE:53==
from the list were all found in fewer of the top10s. This points out some bacteria already
associated with AN, eating behavior or weight management, such as Rominococcus and
Lichnospiraceae, but it also adds a few more to the list of bacteria for which to take note
of to perhaps discover new trends or mechanisms related, such as Genus_Adlercreutzia
and Clostridium cocleatum.
The hypothesis that the GM of the human donors guides the development of the FMT-
recipient’s GM is further strengthened by the predictions of what donor was given to
the mice.
From the ASV-data from FS3 the FMT1-donor was accurately picked out
in 80% of the cases from six options, which is suggesting a strong relation between the
GM-composition after treatment and the specific donor’s GM composition. Predicting
also the FMT2-donor and donor-type from relevant ASV samples, and comparing their
most important ASVs 7 to previous results, we do see a few repeats like Ruminococcaceae
and Lachnospiraceae, but the majority of the bacteria found important for predicting the
donor, are not found amongst the most abundant in the donors, but are rather found
amongst bacteria already associated to AN / metabolism or found important to predict
other contexts, despite their lower abundances. This suggests, that the abundance of
individual bacteria is less important than their presence, if they are there or not.
The hormone levels showed to be less impressive for predicting the treatments, but here
it is worth remembering, that the hormone levels were sampled only at the end of the
experiment, so the FMT1-treatment was seven weeks in the past, when the hormone levels
that predicts it was measured. Only ghrelin predicted FMT1 correct with a somewhat
impressive rate of 80% 8, while insulin performed better than average for predicting all
treatments, FMT1, FMT2 and the combined. This suggests, assuming the treatments
successfully induced AN or CO to the mice, that the hormone levels are less impacted
than expected, and although receiving some impact from the type of treatment, the
hormones is far from the full story, and other biomarkers such as the ASV-counts are still
more accurate predictors for the treatments.
Correlating that to the hormone levels plotted as grouped by combined treatment, see fig-
ure 15, we found that PYY and leptin correlated well with what was expected, assuming
the treatments induced AN-like states in recipients. Blood concentrations of these two
Technical University of Denmark
Page 46
==PAGE:54==
anorexigenic hormones were highest for ANAN-treated and COAN-treeated, where AN
was the most recent treatment, which suggests the AN-treatments affected these hormones
levels as would be expected for AN. However, that trend is not repeated as clearly for the
other hormones, perhaps with a slight exception of ghrelin, that almost has the expected
outlook. However, all the hormones except for insulin and ghrelin shows another tendency
comparable to the ANOVA results 5 and 6: When grouped by combined treatment the
internal variance in hormone levels for GLP-1, Glucagon, leptin, and PYY is bigger for
ANAN and COAN, as is the internal variance in ASV-counts for these groups, as is the
richness and Shannon-index for AN vs. CO 2. This suggests a trend that can be observed
through all the data, from the donors to the results from almost all the analyses we have
done: The AN-donors’s GM, the resulting GM from their recipients, the concentrations
of hormone levels, and even the food intake in phase one, see figure 13, all these counts
and measurements generally have higher internal variance in AN-treated compared to the
control group. As if the AN-infliction scrambles their associated biomarkers, opposed to
the CO-state dragging them towards or keeping them in a more homogeneous and steady
equilibrium. Naturally this trend is vaguely defined, as it is influenced by unlimited fac-
tors, one could test for. And exceptions to it were found within the data, for example the
food intake in phase two 14, where the CO-treated had larger variance in measurements
of food intake. But the tendency is easily testable with all kinds of data from similar
experiment setups.
So, did the AN-treatments induce AN symptoms in the mice in the to an extent, where it
can be seen in the clinical data such as weight gain or food intake, and we could say if the
FMT has potential to induce or perhaps even alleviate the AN-symptoms? Both yes and
no; from looking at the accumulated food intake by groups of treatment, we see in figure
13, that for most of the mice there is clear tendency after FMT1, that the AN-treated
consumed less food compared to the CO-treated, pointing to that the treatment did have
the expected effect and induced symptoms making them eat less. The trend however is
repeated only for the B-group when evaluating the accumulated food intake for phase two
by combined treatment, see figure 14, while the reversely treated, COAN and ANCO,
breaks this trend for the A-group. This suggest, that to a great extent, we can induce AN
to mice via FMT, while the reversal, bringing an AN-inflicted back to normal is not clear
Technical University of Denmark
Page 47
==PAGE:55==
cut. However, we would still assess these results as a strong indicator for that AN can be
induced and even reversed by FMT-treatments, as that was what was alluded to in this
an many other of our results. Here it is also important to remember the limitations of
the experiment. For one, it is still a question how comparable the development of AN is
between human and mice. Some of the symptoms are replicated in the mice, as they were
in humans, while the ones that deviated and did not replicate the symptoms prompts
speculation to if the treatment was somehow different from the others, was received /
resisted differently in the mice, or if the treatment just did not work in the expected way.
Another factor limiting the expected reproducibility of AN-induction of mice is their
vastly shorter lifespan. For human patients, the disorder typically has years to develop,
while for these mice it had seven to 14 weeks to develop in order for measurements. That
too is seen in the weight developments for the mice through the experiment, see figure 12,
where all groups of treatment has indistinguishable developments of weights. So from just
looking at the weight development, it appears that the treatment with AN or CO had no
effect, while the most noticeable feature in the plot is the sudden drop in weight for all
mice, suggesting that it was not a AN, CO or the reversal treatment that caused the drop,
but perhaps rather 2nd AB-treatment or the switching of cages and new roommates, that
could explain the drop in weights across all mice.
To revisit and provide answers for our hypotheses, they held up to great extent: For
the first and third, we did demonstrate, that FMT from AN-patients altered the GM
composition of AN-treated mice to closer resemble the AN-patients. In the PCoA-plot 3
the differences between the steps are well defined with clear directions in which first the
AB-treatment dragged the GM composition to the left side of the plot, and then back over
the center and donors, but now back to the origin, rather towards the lower right corner.
It can also be recognized from the answer to the third hypothesis, where we demonstrated,
that specific taxa found in the donors were also found in the recipients of their FMT. In
the GM of AN-treated mice Bilophila and Coprococcus were found in greater abundances
than in the CO-treated, while that was also the case for the AN-donors. For whether or
not FMT produced measurable symptoms of AN in the mice, it is mostly a yes, but it
can be viewed in several ways. What are the known symptoms of AN? If we regard it
through what has been well established for decades, we have the characteristics of low
Technical University of Denmark
Page 48
==PAGE:56==
body weight, unwillingness to eat and excessive exercise to accelerate weight loss, and
ranges of associated mental disorders. Of those we only have the data on weight 12 and
food intake 13, and the results from open field test from Theresa’s thesis Østergaard
[2021]. It is a mixed picture. The weight development does not look symptomatic for
AN, the food intake however does decrease for the AN-treated mice, but the excessive
exercise is not mimicked in the AN-mice. Rather all mice decreased exercise activity, but
AN-treated decreased activity further than the CO-treated, under the assumption that
their reduced food intake could be the cause of less activity. This suggests they are not
exhibiting symptoms for all the same reasons as the humans do. And then there are
all the more recently associated symptoms of AN, the hormones, GM composition and
specific ASVs. Some of them open the door to scaling what a symptom is, in the way that
for example insulin regulates metabolism directly accelerating AN, so irregular levels of
insulin could be a symptom of AN. At the same time with other biomarkers that could
be potential symptoms, like Bilophila or lower abundance of Lachnospiraceae, that are
both associated with AN, it is not always clear, if they directly influence AN, if they play
a role in a sub-process that lead to AN, or if they are a correlated but mute byproduct /
symptom of AN. The data analysis has demonstrated, that the FMT produced measurable
symptoms of AN in the mice, but the definition of symptoms, new unveiling of symptoms,
and accepted degree of overlap in symptoms covered, could leave this hypothesis partially
open.
We also demonstrated, that a predictive algorithm indeed could predict or guess what
treatment a mouse had received by classifying it with random forest classification from
the GM composition. This means that there is order to predicting and diagnosing AN
from the GM composition with an already fair degree of accuracy. The implications of
this is possibility of early diagnosis and intervention. But it also provided a glimpse of
the potential prospect of achieving a more complete understanding of specific microor-
ganisms’s roles in AN-development, along with some suggestions on what to keep track
of. The top10 ASVs gathered from the treatment predictions’s top10s of important ASVs
named some bacteria already associated with AN, which mechanisms can still be better
understood. But even that top10, and especially if more ASVs from down the list was
included, already provided some not yet to AN associated taxa, that with more research
Technical University of Denmark
Page 49
==PAGE:57==
in the years to come could be added to the list of symptoms.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 50
==PAGE:58==
References
Giovanni Abbate-Daga, Sara Buzzichelli, Enrica Marzola, Federico Amianto, and Secondo
Fassino. Effectiveness of cognitive remediation therapy (CRT) in anorexia nervosa: A
case series. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 34(10):1009–1015,
12 2012. ISSN 13803395. doi: 10.1080/13803395.2012.704900.
Charles B. Anderson, Frances A. Carter, Virginia V. McIntosh, Peter R. Joyce, and Cyn-
thia M. Bulik. Self-Harm and Suicide Attempts in Individuals with Bulimia Nervosa.
Eating Disorders, 10(3):227–243, 9 2002. ISSN 1064-0266. doi: 10.1002/erv.472.
Marti J Anderson. A new method for non-parametric multivariate analysis of variance.
Austral Ecology, 26(1):32–46, 2001.
ISSN 14429993 and 14429985.
doi: 10.1046/j.
1442-9993.2001.01070.x.
Fabrice Armougom, Mireille Henry, Bernard Vialettes, Denis Raccah, and Didier Raoult.
Monitoring bacterial community of human gut microbiota reveals an increase in Lac-
tobacillus in obese patients and Methanogens in anorexic patients. PLoS ONE, 4(9):
e7125, 9 2009. ISSN 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007125.
Juliana Austin and Daniel Marks. Hormonal Regulators of Appetite. International Jour-
nal of Pediatric Endocrinology, pages 1–9, 2009. ISSN 16879848 and 16879856. doi:
10.1186/1687-9856-2009-141753.
Kristofor K. Maingat Ferdinand Wheatley-B. Matt Rud Erling; Warren René L. Holt-
Robert A. Surette Michael G. Power Christopher Branton, William G. Ellestad. Brain
Microbial Populations in HIV/AIDS: -Proteobacteria Predominate Independent of Host
Immune Status. PLOS ONE, 8(1):e54673, 2013. ISSN 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0054673.
Bla Zej; Startek Michal; Gambin-Anna Chung, Neo Christopher; Miasojedow.
Jac-
card/Tanimoto similarity test and estimation methods for biological presence-absence
data.
Bmc Bioinformatics, 20(15):644, 2019.
ISSN 14712105.
doi:
10.1186/
s12859-019-3118-5.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 51
==PAGE:59==
Jonathan Q.; Frayo R. Scott; Schmidova Karin; Wisse Brent E.; Weigle David S
Cummings, David E.2; Purnell. A Preprandial Rise in Plasma Ghrelin Levels Sug-
gests a Role in Meal Initiation in Humans.
Diabetes, 50(8):1714–1719, 2001.
doi:
10.2337/diabetes.50.8.1714.
Fan. The gut microbiota contributes to the pathogenesis of anorexia nervosa in humans
and mice. nature microbiology, 8(5):787—-802, 2023. ISSN 20585276. doi: 10.1038/
s41564-023-01355-5.
Fernando et al. Fernandez-Aranda.
Symptom profile of major depressive disorder in
women with eating disorders.
Journal, 216(2):24–31, 6 2007.
ISSN 00048674 and
14401614. doi: 10.1080/00048670601057718.
Farnaz; Thomas Stephanie A.; Bulik-Sullivan Emily C.; Tang Quyen; Djukic Zorka; Trillo-
Ordonez Yesel S.; A. Fodor Anthony; Tarantino Lisa M.; M. Bulik Cynthia et al. Glenny,
Elaine M.; Fouladi. Gut microbial communities from patients with anorexia nervosa do
not influence body weight in recipient germ-free mice. Journal, 13(1):1–15, 2021. ISSN
19490984 and 19490976. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2021.1897216.
Juliette Gueguen, Nathalie Godart, Jean Chambry, Annick Brun-Eberentz, Christine
Foulon, Snezana M. Divac, Julien Daniel Guelfi, Frédéric Rouillon, Bruno Falissard,
and Caroline Huas. Severe anorexia nervosa in men: Comparison with severe AN in
women and analysis of mortality. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 45(4):
537–545, 5 2012. ISSN 02763478. doi: 10.1002/eat.20987.
Kristy M.; Geary Nori; Bartness-Timothy J.; DiMarchi Richard; Tschöp Matthias H.
Habegger, Kirk M.; Heppner.
The metabolic actions of glucagon revisited. Nature
Reviews Endocrinology, 6(12):689–697, 2010. ISSN 17595037. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.
2010.187.
Jerome H.; Tibshirani Robert Hastie, Trevor; Friedman.
The Elements of Statistical
Learning : Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction : Data mining, inference, and
prediction, volume 2.
Springer New York, 2009.
ISBN 0387848576 , 0387848584 ,
1282126741 , 9780387848570 , 9780387848587 and 9781282126749.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 52
==PAGE:60==
Noriyuki; Takakura Shu; Yoshihara Kazufumi; Asano-Yasunari; Kimura-Todani Tae; Ya-
mashita Makoto; Zhang Xue Ting; Watanabe Natsuru2; Mikami Katsunaka Hata,
Tomokazu; Miyata. The Gut Microbiome Derived From Anorexia Nervosa Patients
Impairs Weight Gain and Behavioral Performance in Female Mice. Endocrinology, 160
(10):2441–2452, 2019. ISSN 19457170 and 00137227. doi: 10.1210/en.2019-00408.
T. D.; Holtkamp K.; Herpertz-Dahlmann-B. Hebebrand, J.; Muller. The role of leptin in
anorexia nervosa: Clinical implications. Molecular Psychiatry, 12(1):23–35, 2006. doi:
10.1038/sj.mp.4001909.
Oscar Hinkelmann, Klaus; Kempthorne. Design and Analysis of Experiments, Volume 2:
Advanced Experimental Design, volume 2. Wiley, 2005. ISBN 978-0-471-70993-0.
Diane Kiernan. Introduction, simpson’s index and shannon-weiner index, 2024. URL
https://stats.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Applied_Statistics/Natural_
Resources_Biometrics_(Kiernan)/10:_Quantitative_Measures_of_Diversity_
Site_Similarity_and_Habitat_Suitability/10.01:_Introduction__Simpsons_
Index_and_Shannon-Weiner_Index. Accessed 07-02-2024.
Hiral Kotadia.
Gender Aspects of Anorexia Nervosa: The Male, volume 1.
Springer
International Publishing, 1 2023. ISBN 9783031166914. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-16691-4_27.
Isabelle Mack, Ulrich Cuntz, Claudia Grmer, Sabrina Niedermaier, Charlotte Pohl, An-
dreas Schwiertz, Kurt Zimmermann, Stephan Zipfel, Paul Enck, and John Penders.
Weight gain in anorexia nervosa does not ameliorate the faecal microbiota, branched
chain fatty acid profiles, and gastrointestinal complaints. Scientific Reports, 6(1):26752,
5 2016. ISSN 20452322. doi: 10.1038/srep26752.
PW; BEAMER WG Maltais, LJ; LANE.
ANOREXIA, A RECESSIVE MUTATION
CAUSING STARVATION IN PREWEANLING MICE. Journal of Heredity, (6):468–
472, 1984. ISSN 00221503 and 14657333. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jhered.a109987.
Juan José; Sumoy Lauro; Dierssen-Mara; Visa-Joana; Gratacòs Mònica; Estivill Xavier1
Mercader, Josep Maria; Lozano.
Hypothalamus transcriptome profile suggests an
anorexia-cachexia syndrome in the anx/anx mouse model.
Physiological Genomics,
Technical University of Denmark
Page 53
==PAGE:61==
35(3):341–350, 2008.
ISSN 15312267 and 10948341.
doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.
90255.2008.
Chihiro Morita, Hirokazu Tsuji, Tomokazu Hata, Motoharu Gondo, Shu Takakura,
Keisuke Kawai, Kazufumi Yoshihara, Kiyohito Ogata, Koji Nomoto, Kouji Miyazaki,
and Nobuyuki Sudo. Gut Dysbiosis in Patients with Anorexia Nervosa. PLoS ONE, 10
(12):1–13, 12 2015. ISSN 19326203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145274.
Lindsay Moskowitz and Eric Weiselberg. Anorexia Nervosa/Atypical Anorexia Nervosa.
Current Problems in Pediatric and Adolescent Health Care, 47(4):70–84, 2017. ISSN
15383199 and 15385442. doi: 10.1016/j.cppeds.2017.02.003.
Normalized Nerd.
Decision tree classification clearly explained!, 2021.
URL https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZVR2Way4nwQ&t=557s. Accessed 03-06-2024.
Notting. The butyrate-producing and spore-forming bacterial genus Coprococcus as a
potential biomarker forneurological disorders. Gut Microbiome, 4(16):1–29, 2023. ISSN
26322897. doi: 10.1017/gmb.2023.14.
Shiro Ogawa and Yutaka Suzuki. A Case of Anorexia Nervosa with Multiple Organ Fail-
ure, Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation Syndrome and Mediastinal Emphysema.
Japanese Journal of Psychosomatic Medicine, 39(8):703–707, 1996. ISSN 21895996 and
03850307.
Henrik Munch Roager and Tine Rask Licht. Microbial tryptophan catabolites in health
and disease. Nature Communications, 9(1):3294, 2018. ISSN 20411723. doi: 10.1038/
s41467-018-05470-4.
Claudia P. et al Sanmiguel. Surgically Induced Changes in Gut Microbiome and Hedonic
Eating as Related to Weight Loss: Preliminary Findings in Obese Women Undergoing
Bariatric Surgery. Psychosomatic Medicine, 79(8):880–887, 2017. ISSN 15347796 and
00333174. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000494.
Nina et al. Schulz. Gut microbiota alteration in adolescent anorexia nervosa does not nor-
malize with short-term weight restoration. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
54(6):969–980, 2021. ISSN 1098108x and 02763478. doi: 10.1002/eat.23435.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 54
==PAGE:62==
Brigitte; Keller Lara; Herpertz-Dahlmann Beate Seitz, Jochen; Dahmen. Gut feelings:
How microbiota might impact the development and course of anorexia nervosa. Nutri-
ents, 12(11):1–14, 2021. ISSN 20726643. doi: 10.3390/nu12113295.
Shreiner. The gut microbiome in health and in disease. Curr Opin Gastroenterol, 31(1):
69–75, 1 2015. doi: 10.1097/MOG.0000000000000139.
Fransje Snijders and Eric F. van Furth. Compulsive exercise in anorexia nervosa. Neder-
lands Tijdschrift Voor Geneeskunde, 167(5):D6823, 2023. ISSN 18768784 and 00282162.
Hans Christoph Steinhausen and Christina Mohr Jensen. Time trends in lifetime incidence
rates of first-time diagnosed anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa across 16 years in a
danish nationwide psychiatric registry study. International Journal of Eating Disorders,
48(7):845–850, 11 2015. ISSN 1098108X. doi: 10.1002/eat.22402.
Andreas Stengel and Sophie Scharner. Animal Models for Anorexia Nervosa—A System-
atic Review. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 14:596381, 2020. ISSN 16625161. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2020.596381.
Philip Strandwitz, Ki Hyun Kim, Darya Terekhova, Joanne K. Liu, Anukriti Sharma,
Jennifer Levering, Daniel McDonald, David Dietrich, Timothy R. Ramadhar, Asama
Lekbua, Nader Mroue, Conor Liston, Eric J. Stewart, Marc J. Dubin, Karsten Zengler,
Rob Knight, Jack A. Gilbert, Jon Clardy, and Kim Lewis. GABA-modulating bac-
teria of the human gut microbiota. Nature Microbiology, 4(3):396–403, 3 2019. ISSN
20585276. doi: 10.1038/s41564-018-0307-3.
Myriam; Bluet-Pajot Marie Therese; Frere-Delphine; Foulon-Christine1; Bossu Ce-
cile; Dardennes Roland1; Mounier Chantal; Zizzari Philippe; Lang François et al.
Tolle, Virginie; Kadem. BalanceinGhrelinandLeptinPlasmaLevelsin AnorexiaNervos-
aPatientsandConstitutionally ThinWomen.
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and
Metabolism, 88(1):109–116, 2003. doi: 10.1210/jc.2002-020645.
Zach.
Shannon diversity index:
Definition
example, 2021.
URL https://www.
statology.org/shannon-diversity-index/. Accessed 02-02-2024.
Theresa Helena Østergaard. The Impact of Gut Microbiota from Anorexia Nervosa Pa-
tients on Weight, Food Intake, and Behaviour in Mice, 2021.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 55
==PAGE:63==
5
Appendix
Link to access data files and programming scripts created in Python:
Google Drive Private folder
Please note that anyone with this link can access the folder and the files. Therefore the contents of the folder will be removed
after this project has been graded.
Technical University of Denmark
Page 56
