==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines.
AUTHOR
Lijo Thattil
SUPERVISORS
Matteo Tollemeto
Laura De Vittorio
Anja Boisen
June 29, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
Master Thesis
June 2024
By
Lijo Thattil
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary bibliographic citation,
including author attribution, report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, IDUN, Department of Health Technology, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
==PAGE:3==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
Approval
This thesis has been prepared for 5 months at the Center for Intelligent Drug Delivery and Sensing
Using Microcontainers and Nanomechanics (IDUN) at the Department of Health Technology, Technical
University of Denmark, DTU, in fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng
in Advanced Materials and Healthcare Engineering.
Lijo Thattil - s222794
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
Signature
−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
Date
ii
29.06.2024
==PAGE:4==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
Acknowledgements
Matteo Tollemeto, PhD Candidate, DTU
First of all, I want to say thanks to my brilliant supervisor Matteo. His support and expertise have been
fundamental and valuable throughout the realization of the project. Particularly during encounters of
obstacles, his advice and extensive know-how directed me toward the right path. The combination of his
expertise with the ability to find quick and efficient solutions to challenges is truly remarkable and has
significantly enriched my project.
Laura De Vittorio, PhD Candidate, DTU
I would also like to thank my second supervisor Laura for her close guidance and patience. Her sup-
port and advice helped me immensely to carry out the project. Knowing I could always consult her
with anything and she’ll have a willing and open ear for my questions, problems and discussions was a
tremendous amount of support along the way.
Anja Boisen, Professor, Head of Section, IDUN, DTU Health Technology
I want to thank Anja for enabling me to complete the project as part of her research group. I am extremely
happy to finish my thesis in a subject area I am deeply fascinated by. I learned a deep appreciation and
understanding of the importance of research and the role of an open mind in finding innovative ap-
proaches to complex challenges.
IDUN
I am thankful to all the IDUN research group members for giving an amazing experience and offering
precious discussions and recommendations throughout my project. I greatly enjoyed being part of the
group and being surrounded by inspiring personalities.
My dearest family and friends
My path to engineering never would have started without the encouragement of my family, who were my
constant supporters throughout my studies abroad. I want to say thank you to my parents for inspiring
me to pursue a career in engineering. I sincerely hope I make them feel proud. My heartfelt gratitude
goes to all my close friends in Copenhagen for giving me strong moral support. Studying in Copenhagen
definitely never been the same for me if it wasn’t for their continuous support and the amazing shared
memories.
iii
==PAGE:5==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
Abstract
This project focuses on the fabrication and characterization of porous poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
(PLGA) microparticles (MPs) for intranasal drug delivery. During the synthesis procedure, the PLGA
and PVA (polyvinyl alcohol) are adjusted to optimise particle size, size distribution and the porosity. A
series of analyses aim to determine the impact of those parameters on the MPs’ characteristics. High
molecular weights (Mw) of PVA and PLGA result in larger particles due to higher viscosity and better
steric stability in the emulsification step. It is shown the filtration using Pluriselect©strainers is effective
in reducing the size range. As a result, more uniformed MPs within the target range of 20 - 30 µm are
obtained. Using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) the surface structure and morphology are evalu-
ated. The studies reveal the Mw of is connected to the obtained level of porosity on the MPs’ surface.
Witepsol H14 demonstrated an effective technique for coating Rhodamine B within the porous MPs.
The subsequent removal process verified this lipid layer is removable with no loss of MPs’ structural or
functional integrity. The variations caused as a result of the coating and de-coating steps were confirmed
by measurements of the surface charge using a Malvern Nano ZS Zetasizer. The zeta potential measures
for pure MPs -11.6 ± 1.6 mV. It changes to -25.7 ± 4.6 mV following Witepsol H14 application and
further varies to -15.3 ± 1.12 mV following de-coating.
The dependency of the lipid-coated MPs on specific conditions of temperature is confirmed by the re-
lease studies. The encapsulated model drug Rhodamine B releases significantly higher amounts within
physiological temperature (37 °C) compared to room temperature (25 °C). This aligns with the stated
hypothesis concerning the temperature being an efficient facilitator to demonstrate the controlled release
of Rhodamine from Witepsol H14-coated porous MPs. The result implies the potential of the MPs in
therapeutics and intranasal vaccine delivery.
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Acknowledgments
i
Abstract
i
1
Introduction
1
2
State of the Art
2
2.1
Nasal Administration of Vaccines
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2.1.1
Nasal vaccines: Example COVID - 19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Barriers to respiratory delivery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Advantages nasal administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.4
Challenges and Limitations: Nasal administration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Porous polymers micro-spheres as carriers for vaccines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5.1
Application of porous microparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.6
Aims and Hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Experimental
9
3.1
Materials
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Preparation of PVA, PLGA and Ammonium Bicarbonate Mixture
. . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
Solvent Evaporation Method: Synthesis of Porous Micro-Particles . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.4
Particle size selection using Pluriselect © Strainers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.5
Stability Test Porous Microparticles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.6
Coating Synthesized Particles with Witepsol H14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.7
Uncoating of PLGA Microparticles Post-Witepsol H14 Coating
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.8
Encapsulation efficiency, drug loading capacity and drug release . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.9
Characterization of porous micro-particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Results and Discussion
17
4.1
Solvent Evaporation Method: Synthesis of Porous Micro-Particles . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Stability Tests of Particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.3
Coating Synthesized Particles with Witepsol H14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4.4
Uncoating of PLGA Microparticles Post-Witepsol H14 Coating
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4.5
Encapsulation efficiency, drug loading capacity and drug release . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5
Conclusion
31
6
Future Prospects
31
v
==PAGE:7==
List of Figures
2.1
Schematic comparison of the reaction elicited by an intramuscular vaccine and an in-
tranasal vaccine.[1] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Structure of the PLGA. x is the number of lactic acid monomers and y number of glycolic
acid monomers.[2]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.1
PVA Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
PLGA Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.3
NH4HCO3 Solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.4
A schematic illustration showing the process of the synthesis for the production of porous
microspheres using the solvent evaporation method.[3] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.5
Illustration of using Pluriselect © strainers with connector ring and syringe to obtain
particles within the desired range of 20 - 30 µm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6
A schematic illustration showing the process of the coating of the porous MPs with
Witepsol H14. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.7
A schematic illustration showing the process of the un-coating of the porous MPs from
Witepsol H14. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.8
A schematic illustration showing the 2mL Eppendorf with top chamber (200 µL PBS)
and bottom chamber (1,5mL PBS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.9
A schematic illustration showing the 2mL Eppendorf containing loaded-coated particles
transferred to oven. Samples taken at 5, 10, 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 210, 240
minutes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1
Surface morphology observations of porous microparticles prepared using 150 µL of the
solid phase (ammonium bicarbonate in DI water); 750 µL of oil phase (PLGA (Mw = 28
- 38) and DCM); 4 mL of aqueous phase (PVA (Mw = 89 - 98) and DI Water) . . . . . .
17
4.2
Impact on MP size through PLGA Mw and PLGA PVA. The mean (± SD) size of PLGA
synthesized MPs prior to filtration with varying Mw of PLGA and PVA are displayed.
Blue: PLGA Mw 7-17 and PVA Mw = 89-98; Green: PLGA Mw 28-38 and PVA Mw =
89-98; Red: PLGA Mw 28-38 and PVA Mw = 146 - 186 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Size distribution of MPs prior (green) and post (blue) filtration (n = 55)
. . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Pore size variation across different samples showing individual pore size data points and
overlays the mean pore size with error bars representing the standard deviations. . . . . .
22
4.5
SEM Image of porous MPs using lower Molecular Weight PVA: 31,000-50,00 . . . . . .
23
4.6
SEM Image of porous MPs using lower Molecular Weight PVA: 146,000-186,000 . . . .
23
4.7
MPs stability test using different Mw over 35 days. Sample are taken at 0 days, 15days
and 35 days. Blue: PLGA: Mw 7 - 17; Orange: Mw 24 - 38; Green: Mw 38 - 54 . . . . .
25
4.8
SEM Images of the porous MPs after coating procedure with Witepsol H14 . . . . . . .
26
vi
==PAGE:8==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
4.9
SEM Image of MPs after uncoating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.10 SEM Image of MPs after uncoating
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.11 Zeta potential for all four samples: PLGA Microparticles, PLGA-Witepsol H14 Coated,
Witepsol H14 and Uncoated PLGA MPs. The zoom demonstrates the uncoated sample’s
zeta potential peaks in detail as the average of the two peaks between the lipid (-32.3 mV)
and the uncoated PLGA (-13.9 mV). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.12 Rhodamine B Release Profile over 240 minutes. Samples are taken at 5, 10, 15, 30, 45,
60, 120, 150, 180, 210, 240 minutes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
vii
==PAGE:9==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
1
Introduction
The availability of more convenient and cost-effective vaccines may be realized through intranasal
vaccination strategies. Anxiety towards vaccinations tends to be aggravated through the phobia of sy-
ringes or the inconvenience of intramuscular injections. Conversely, vaccines for the upper respiratory
system require less expertise for administration and are less invasive. Hence they are considered as a
good alternative to intramuscular vaccination in communities without sufficient medical resources.[1]
The application of porous polymeric microparticles (MP) is well established and studied within the
areas of bio-sensing technology, tissue engineering and drug delivery. The primary driving factor for
this recognition is the variety of associated advantages of the MPs. The benefits for the bigger picture
are the potential to scale up to the industrial level and the relative procedural simplicity. Within the
field of drug delivery systems (DDS), they facilitate the potential of different routes of drug adminis-
tration. It can be controlled by selecting the appropriate polymer type along with the molecular weight
(MW), crystallinity, glass transition temperature (Tg) and viscosity. A variety of polymers such as algi-
nate, chitosan, gelatine or PLGA are suitable to formulate porous MPs.[2] They are favored due to their
non-toxic degradation and easy elimination behavior. Additionally, they provide low density and large
specific surface area. Conventional MPs have a diameter ranging from 1 to 1000 µm. In the majority of
applications, the drugs either are adsorbed directly at the surface or distributed within the matrix. The
porosity has a significant impact on encapsulation efficiency and release profiles. The porosity, size and
surface area of porous MPs determine their applications. The variables regulate on how effectively they
can contain specific compounds and function as their release mechanisms. Concerning vaccine delivery,
porous MPs represent an innovative and effective treatment method. They have attributes to overcome
the constraints of traditional drug formulations and simultaneously enhance compliance by eliminating
the requirement for syringe injections.[3]
Page 1 of 40
==PAGE:10==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
2
State of the Art
2.1
Nasal Administration of Vaccines
By filtering and moisturizing incoming air, the nose provides regulation and shields the airways
against exposure to hazardous contaminants.
It is the sensory organ involved in the perception of
flavors.[4] The internal surface of the nasal cavity serves as the target of the nasal vaccination, where
the aim is to trigger an immune response. The human nasal cavity measures approximately 160cm2. It
is divided by the nasal septum into two sections and separated into several distinct parts.[5] The front
part of the nose contains the nostrils. The inner side is coated with epithelial cells and hairs to filter
the inhaled air.[6] A mucus covers the ciliated layer of the airway epithelium, which makes up the nasal
epithelium. External particles in the nasal cavity are cleared by the ciliary body, by pushing the mucus
layer backwards. For healthy adults, the clearance requires approximately 15 minutes. It might be sig-
nificantly prolonged if ciliary functionality is compromised.[7] This clearance is an essential concern for
a nasal vaccine, given the fact that formulations have a limited interaction window with epithelium and
immunocompetent cells.[8] Moreover, the nose is a highly patient-specific organ.[5] It differs in shape,
dimensions and airways channels.[9] This is the result of an irregular nose septum, polyps and the nasal
cycle. For 80% of the population, this cycle is characterized by fluctuating nasal swelling from one
nostril and preferential passage to the other (varies on magnitude and obstruction). Throughout the day
this alternates every three to five hours.[10] The pH within the nose is approximately 6.0 to 6.4. It has
a minimized enzymatic activity in comparison to the gastrointestinal tract. As a result, the mucosa of
the nose represents a convenient target for vaccine delivery.[11] The nose’s primary physiological pur-
pose involves pre-heating, moisturizing and filtering the incoming air prior to it reaching the lungs.[12]
Hence, the nose possesses the capability of trapping particles. For successful deposition in the nasal cav-
ity, the particles should ideally average in size from 12.5µm to 50µm. In vivo studies determined 80%
of particles up to 12.5µm and 100% greater than 50µm were captured within the nasal cavity. Particles
with sizes lower than 10µm will enter the lower respiratory tract. Generally, they do not accumulate
in one particular nasal section. The particles are scattered in the entire cavity since the line separating
nasal regions is less pronounced compared to characteristics in the lungs.[13] The nose forms the upper
respiratory tract. Therefore, it is considered a key gateway to pathogens. The nasal cavity is known
to have a large number of immune-competent cells, which provide a suitable target for nasal vaccines.
Nasal vaccines induce a response in this tissue. It demonstrated to enhance the effectiveness, particularly
on live attenuated vaccines like the influenza vaccine FluMist.[14] Since 2019 the interests have shifted
more towards the comprehensive control against COVID-19. A pipeline for intranasal vaccines (e.g.
AdCOVID and NasoVAX) is under clinical trials demonstrating compelling and optimistic prospects
within the control of COVID-19.[1][15] Therefore, nasal administration provides a versatile approach to
immunization in order to avoid respiratory tract transmitted diseases.[14]
Page 2 of 40
==PAGE:11==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
2.1.1
Nasal vaccines: Example COVID - 19
At the moment all COVID-19 vaccines authorized for intramuscular administration (IM) trigger
an antibody- and cell-mediated resistance. Consequently, they inhibit the replication of the virus. Ad-
ditionally, they generate immunity against further progression of the disease.[16] They cause immune
responses, rather than inducing a suppressive mucosal reaction. Hence, the levels of immunity delivered
using alone IM vaccines can be insufficient.[17] For mucosally spread pathogens, including SARS-CoV-
2, the nasal route is highly beneficial due to its dual systemic, strong local mucosal immune reaction.
Individuals who are immunized still might fail to establish a locally secretory IgA antibody (sIgA) de-
fense. As a result, the risk of acquiring an infection while transmitting the disease is increased.[16]
Unlike intramuscular vaccination, an intranasal vaccination (IN) induces a greater protective reaction.
The activation of effector T cells, IgA and the sIgA in the upper respiratory system increases the potent
level and reliable immunological resistance towards SARS-CoV-2. The resulting high responsiveness in
the mucous membranes minimizes the spreading (see Figure 2.1).
Figure 2.1: Schematic comparison of the reaction elicited by an intramuscular vaccine and an intranasal vaccine.[1]
COVID-19 is transmitted through the nasal mucosal surface. Therefore, the nasal area is consid-
ered as the first barrier against an SARS-CoV-2 infection. In order for the virus to infect the lungs, it
first must penetrate this line of defense.[18] Intra-nasal vaccination is able to trigger harmless, sustained
upper and lower respiratory tract immune responses. Consequently, they generate a protection against
the SARS-CoV-2 infection.[19] Thus, the intra-nasal administration prevents virus infection, the poten-
tial replication and the transmission of the pathogen.[16] A combined approach guarantees an restraint
concerning the replication of the virus via an IM vaccination combined with an IN booster.[20] For ex-
Page 3 of 40
==PAGE:12==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
ample, AdCOVID is designed to stimulate mucosal IgA for a potent and immunological reply versus
the SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain. It is known to be a dependable and effective IN vaccination
candidate due to its systemic and local mucosal immunity.[15]
2.2
Barriers to respiratory delivery
The vaccines aimed towards the upper respiratory tract are preferable for numerous respiratory
diseases. The goal is to prevent infections from developing in the nose. They can be targeted to reach
particular respiratory areas using controlled micro-particles to address the nasal regions. Following the
administration, the pharmaceutical component needs to break different barriers to achieve the required
immunity. Once a foreign substance is inhaled, the mucus lining of the airways functions as a semi-
permeable barrier. This allows the cilia covering the surface of the epithelium within the airways to
rapidly clear the virus.[21] Vaccines containing proteins, polymers, nucleic acids and/or entire viruses
get trapped in the mucus following the inhalation, based primarily on the size and surface characteristics.
As an example, the adenoviral vectors utilized in the preparation of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines can adhere
to mucus. They prevent the virus from penetrating to the target cells (e.g. pulmonary dendritic cells) and
triggering significant mucosal immune reactions. Using polymer- or lipid-based vaccine vehicles holds
the prospect of penetrating the mucus barrier to facilitate immunization within the respiratory tract. As an
example, a polyethylene glycol (PEG)-coated micro-particle immunization delivered by inhalation can
penetrate the barrier rapidly and enhance the proliferation of T-cells expressing specific antigens in lung
and lymph nodes as opposed to an intramuscular administration of a vaccine containing no vehicles.[22]
2.3
Advantages nasal administration
IN vaccines have the potential to induce both systemic and mucosal immune responses, which offer
advantages compared to IM vaccines. Preclinical studies have demonstrated they elicit a robust systemic
immunity similar to that achieved with intramuscular vaccination. They demonstrated a significant rise
in serum antibodies and local IgG and IgA in mice compared to subcutaneous injections.[23] Further-
more, the clinical efficacy was proven already using the intranasal vaccine FluMist© for the prevention
of influenza.[24][25] Alongside the enhanced immunity, it offers a significant advantage concerning
self-administration. This can be achieved using inhalers or nose sprays. With additional educational
support accessible on mobile phones, the IN-vaccine devices can contribute positively to faster herd im-
munity. Especially, if social distancing is required and healthcare availability is compromised.[26] This
represents a crucial improvement compared to IM vaccines, given they require trained professionals to
deliver the drug. There are challenges concerning cases of acute myocarditis linked to COVID-19 intra-
muscular vaccinations.[27] IN vaccinations are on the other hand considerably less invasive. They can
be locally applied on the target site. Moreover, they are more tolerated in the site of exposure to the
antigen and in addition they have a reduced margin in terms of administrative failures. Additionally,
Page 4 of 40
==PAGE:13==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
intra-nasal vaccines eliminate the necessity to reconstitute and administer medication in a sterile facility.
Hence, large-scale immunization campaigns can be implemented with reduced constraints. The severely
burdened healthcare professional can be reallocated to focus on those requiring closer monitoring. An
additional advantage is they eliminate the necessity of syringes. Trypanophobia is thought to affect 20%
to 50% among teenagers and 20% to 30% among young adults.[28] The associated aversion towards
vaccination can be decreased. Although this anxiety sinks with age, it still contributes to up to 27% of
healthcare workers and adult patients’ unwillingness to receive vaccination.[29] Similarly, there is no
prospect of blood-borne illness transmission through puncture wounds or cross-contamination because
the medication is administered non-invasively. It is especially relevant within regions characterized by
a lack of accessible medical services. Approximately 44% of healthcare professionals worldwide ex-
perienced needle-stick injuries. Most of them especially occur in regions across Southeast Asia and
Africa.[30] Furthermore, the significant interest among users for inhalers could encourage and speed up
the design of sustainable inhalers and single-use inhalers.[31] Moreover, the syringes need to be han-
dled in the same way as surgical equipment. This could thereby involve higher expenses associated
with their disposal and present further environmental concerns. Regions with limited availability of
resources, especially those that are strongly dependent on non-standardized practices regarding proper
waste management are public and ecological levels of health.[32] Additionally, all commercially autho-
rized vaccines are given in liquid form. Similar to other biopharmaceuticals, those necessitate specific
storage conditions due to their unstable liquid compositions. In consideration of the rush towards time
through a pandemic, the consequences of improving efficiency can have a considerable adverse impact in
terms of public health due to higher expenses to provide adequate supplies of doses and decreased rates
of immunization. Maintaining a supply of vaccines in the event of an outbreak is expensive because the
vaccine cannot be stored indefinitely while ensuring compliance with the storage criteria. The manu-
facturing, supply, transport, storing and waste associated costs of liquid formulations can be optimized
using a dry powder version to reduce the expenses.[33] Reconstituting vaccines requires greater amounts
of work and additional expertise as it tends at times to generate mistakes, making it difficult to resolve all
the challenges. Incorrect sampling of vials containing vaccines and accidental contamination or spoilage
of products while processing are the most frequent vaccine-connected failures.[34] The risk of acciden-
tally administering undiluted concentrated or diluted doses to patients is a possibility. Avoiding these
potential hazards is feasible by administering intranasal vaccines through direct delivery.[35]
2.4
Challenges and Limitations: Nasal administration
Despite the strengths provided by IN vaccines, it creates a number of obstacles concerning the
design of such carriers. An initial host reaction to counteract the virus is ideally characterized by the
neutralisation of the pathogen. Whereby the immunization at the site of entry to the pathogen results
in a suppressive resistance.[36] Mucosal immunity is an integral component of herd immunization. It
Page 5 of 40
==PAGE:14==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
prevents the spread of the virus via protection against an infection. Yet since mucous membranes do have
environmental contact, there is the possibility of its adaptation to withstand outside stimuli. As a result, it
can stop the body’s immunity from activating itself and causing overwhelming effects.[37] Consequently,
the intra-nasal stimulants require to be designed to trigger an appropriate immunological reaction in
order to be efficient. The absence of appropriate adjuvants further increases the risk of insufficient
defense mechanisms. Adjuvants are frequently utilized within formulations to promote immunogenicity.
Common adjuvants for IM vaccines include for example aluminium salts.[38] While the mechanism
behind adjuvants is unclear, a possible connection to the route of administration exists. It can function
as a repository on which the antigens are attached and continuously released. This causes a prolonged
immunological reaction leading to a potent inherent response after a minor inflammatory event at the site
of application. The adjuvants are proven to exert an effect on the immunogenicity of intranasal vaccines.
Still, the precise nature of how they provide a boost is uncertain.[39] Moreover, developing formulations
for IN is more challenging, given no authorized excipients exist. Excipients must possess characteristics
including a good security performance record, compatibility related to the constituents/adjuvants and the
capability to stabilize the formula throughout production, transport and storage. Another challenging
obstacle is the fact that IN-vaccines are less reliable because of dosage fluctuation. It spreads the vaccine
directly into the nostril. The quantity of the inhaled drug can be dosed, however the antigen number
actually settling in the target can be influenced by multiple determination factors as the surface tension,
spray angles, particle dimensions, viscosity and spray velocities. Moreover, the variability concerning
the structure and physiology of the nasal cavity is another less controllable factor, that possess an impact
in terms of dose variability. Furthermore, to guarantee precise dosing, the effectiveness and reliability
of IN-vaccines require comprehensive evaluation during clinical studies. The differences in mucosal
tolerance across patients can complicate dose determination given their higher dose variability. Less
homogeneous particle deposition within the respiratory system is a possible outcome. The possibility
that a portion of the delivered particles settle at the back of the neck or even are ingested is given.[40]
Such off-target deposition affects the immune response and vaccination safety. This features more unique
fluctuations which are different from their injectable equivalents.[35]
2.5
Porous polymers micro-spheres as carriers for vaccines
Polymeric microparticles (MP) show excellent potential as vehicles to enhance lipophilic and hy-
drophilic bioavailability and distribution. Besides areas like biosensing and tissue engineering, there
has been a significant rise in interest in drug delivery. The main factor contributing to this recognition
is linked to the numerous benefits of using such particles. One of these features is the comparatively
easy fabrication technique plus the potential for large-scale industrial production.[41] In terms of drug
delivery systems, they provide multiple beneficial properties, including the utilization of diverse delivery
routes and the possibility to encapsulate molecules ranging from proteins to nucleic acids.[2] MPs are ex-
Page 6 of 40
==PAGE:15==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
cellent candidates for guaranteeing a controlled release of drugs. This is regulated depending on the type
of the polymer and its molecular and chemical characteristics including molecular weight (MW), com-
position of the monomer, crystallinity, glass transition temperature (Tg) and inherent viscosity.[42] Dif-
ferent biodegradable polymer materials including alginate, chitosan, gelatine or poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid) (PLGA) are suitable candidates for the synthesis MPs. The stated polymers are known to be non-
toxic and easily degradable. In this report, the focus will be on PLGA (see Figure 2.2).
Figure 2.2: Structure of the PLGA. x is the number of lactic acid monomers and y number of glycolic acid monomers.[2]
Different MP exhibit different dimensions, polydispersity indices (PDI) or certain types of surface prop-
erties based on the synthesis method. All of them are essential properties regarding particle stability,
encapsulation efficiency and proper release profiles.[43] Hence, the choice of the synthesis method is
connected closely to the drug and application. Generally, for molecules soluble in water and highly
unstable compounds such as proteins, the double emulsion method serves as the gold standard. This is
due to their property concerning the prevention of breakdown. In contrast, the single emulsion method
enables lipophilic molecules to be easily encapsulated.[44] Generally, the biopharmaceutical is either
absorbed or dispersed within the porous matrix. Besides the mentioned beneficial aspects, MPs possess
a low density with a large surface area. This makes them ideal candidates as carriers for pulmonary
or nasal administration of pharmaceuticals. They have external pores at the surface and the internally
connected within the center. Depending on the pore size they are categorized as microporous (< 2 nm),
mesoporous (2-50 nm) and macroporous materials (> 50 nm). Further key considerations regarding the
applicability of MPs relate to porosity. Generally, the porogens determine the size of the pores. The
porosity is modifiable by altering parameters within the synthesis procedure (temperature, pH, etc.).
Ultimately these aspects can influence the encapsulation efficiencies and release.[3]
Page 7 of 40
==PAGE:16==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
2.5.1
Application of porous microparticles
As briefly mentioned the present applications using MPs as carriers for pharmacological substances
are mostly within the area of biosensing, drug delivery or tissue engineering. The large surface area
provided by porous structures allows substances including proteins, peptides and genes to be easily in-
corporated. This allows a high quantity of medications to be administered.[45] Pulmonary applications
gained a great amount of interest due to the fact that they offer a non-invasive alternative for the admin-
istration of proteins. It is possible to ensure the efficient uptake of biomacromolecules on a pulmonary
surface area of approximately 100m2 whilst passing the narrow barrier at the lung site. Incorporating
the MPs within an inhalable spray allows encapsulated proteins or other pharmacological substances to
overcome the first-pass mechanisms and as a result obtain continuous delivery. Controlling its size and
maintaining a uniform distribution is essential for the delivery of medicines to the pulmonary system.
The porous microspheres need an aerodynamic particle diameter of approximately 5µm. This will guar-
antee a significant deposition of the encapsulated proteins within the lung.[46] This application of MPs
extends to intranasal vaccine delivery. Due to its extensive vascularisation with a high surface area, it
represents an advantageous site for the administration of vaccines. An important factor contributing to
it is the ability to avoid the first-pass metabolism and allow quick uptake. As in pulmonary delivery,
the size, as well as the density level, is critical to achieve a sustained deposition and release of the MPs
within the nasal route. The development of MPs can be optimized to enhance the immunological ef-
fect via a targeted introduction to the surface of the mucous membrane. As a result, it will enhance the
effectiveness of vaccines delivered intranasally.[47]
2.6
Aims and Hypothesis
The objective of this master thesis is to evaluate the properties of porous micro-particles as a novel
drug delivery system suitable for the administration of nasal vaccines. It focuses on the development
and optimization methods for the synthesis of porous MPs regarding size and surface properties suitable
for nasal delivery. This involves the evaluation of characteristics like size distribution, surface charge,
and stability suitable in the nasal environment. To evaluate the release kinetics and bio-availability a
model drug will be encapsulated within the MPs and assessed concerning temperature responsiveness
and release behavior. The release characteristics are assessed to identify the effects of MP attributes on
the controlled release of the model drug. Furthermore, prospects for this novel system will be explored
to define the required procedures for additional validation for the drug delivery system.
THE HYPOTHESIS IS THE FOLLOWING:
H1: Witepsol H14 - coated porous MPs will exhibit sustained release of encapsulated Rhodamine B by
allowing the temperature-responsive porous MPs additional control over the release rate.
Page 8 of 40
==PAGE:17==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
3
Experimental
3.1
Materials
Unless specified differently, all substances were used exactly as received. If not stated differently,
all chemicals are purchased through Sigma-Aldrich. Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) (Mw: 31,000-50,000,
98-99+% hydrolyzed); PVA (Mw: 89,000-98,000, 99+% hydrolyzed); PVA (Mw: 146,000-186,000,
99+% hydrolyzed); Poly(DL-lactide-co-glycolide)(PLGA) 50:50 (Mw 7,000-17,000 RESOMER®RG
502 H); PLGA 50:50(Mw: 24,000-38,000 RESOMER ®RG 653 H; PLGA 50:50 (Mw: 38,000-54,000
RESOMER®RG 504 H); Dichloromethane (DCM) (Mw: 84.93, CAS Number: 75-09-2), Ammonium
hydrogen carbonate (98%, CAS: 1066-33-7, Crystalline Powder, Mw: 79.06 (Thermo Scientific Chemi-
cals)); Phophate Buffered Saline (PBS) (REF 18912-014, LOT 2685251); Witepsol H14 (melting point
33.5 - 35.5 °C); Rhodamine B (> 95% HPLC); If not stated distilled (DI) water is applied for the prepa-
ration of all the solutions.
3.2
Preparation of PVA, PLGA and Ammonium Bicarbonate Mixture
In order to create the porous MPs, several key solutions with various materials (see Chapter 3.1) are
prepared. The PVA suspension is obtained by weighing 750 mg PVA and dissolving it in 15 ml of DI
water. The final concentration of the attained suspension is 3% (w/v). The solution is prepared within a
beaker containing a magnet. This ensures a continuous mixing inside the beaker. It is put on a magnetic
heater at 150°C and 400 rpm until fully dissolved (see Figure 3.1). The second prepared solution is the
oil phase. This is obtained by weighing 100 mg PLGA on a scale. It is mixed inside a beaker with 1.5
mL DCM (see Figure 3.2. The solution is put on a stirrer without heat for 20 minutes. This ensures no
residues are left after the dissolution. The final concentration of the attained suspension is 6%. The final
solution is the ammonium bicarbonate suspension. This is prepared by weighing 250 mg of ammonium
hydrogen carbonate (98%) on a scale and dissolving it in 5mL of DI water (see Figure 3.3). It is put
on a magnetic stirrer without heat and mixed for 20 minutes until dissolved completely. These steps are
identical for all solutions containing different molecular weights (Mw)
Figure 3.1: PVA Solution
Figure 3.2: PLGA Solution
Figure 3.3: NH4HCO3 Solution
Page 9 of 40
==PAGE:18==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
3.3
Solvent Evaporation Method: Synthesis of Porous Micro-Particles
The steps for the synthesis of the porous MPs are based on the technique referred to as the solvent
evaporation method. The polymer (PLGA) is dissolved within a non-polar organic solvent (DCM) to
form the oil phase (O) suspension (see Chapter 3.2). Particles consisting of solid materials such as am-
monium bicarbonate get mixed with the oil phase to prepare a solid-in-oil (S/O) solution. Hence, 150
µL of ammonium bicarbonate is added to 750µL of the oil suspension. A magnetic stir bar is added to
the mixture. The S/O solution is mixed for 10 seconds. This guarantees the ammonium bicarbonate is
evenly dispersed within the oil phase. This S/O suspension is emulsified to create a S/O/W1 suspen-
sion. This is obtained with an aqueous phase (W1) used as an emulsifier (PVA). Consequently, the S/O
suspension is slowly pipetted under constant stirring into 4mL PVA. The mixture is stirred for 2 hours
at room temperature without the application of heat. Due to the continuous stirring, the organic media
slowly starts to diffuse from the S/O droplets towards the W1 phase. This causes a solidification process.
PVA surrounds the PLGA molecules during this procedure. The DCM is contained inside the develop-
ing MPs. The concentration of the polymer increases along with the relative amount of the W1 phase
in the droplets. Hence, as the polymer chain continues to break down, droplets in the polymer escape
and become adsorbed onto the surface. This additionally helps in stabilizing the S/O/W1 emulsion. The
organic solvent (DCM) evaporates over the time period, allowing the polymer (PLGA) to stabilize and
facilitate the generation of the solid porous MPs. Once the emulsification is finished, they are purified
through a series of centrifuging cycles. This process facilitated the generation of pores within the par-
ticles since the separation of DCM leaves cavities within the polymer matrix. Centrifugation is carried
out to extract the MPs and remove all excess supernatant. Once the supernatant is removed, the MPs are
resuspended within 500 µL DI water. This sequence is conducted three times repeatedly. This guaran-
tees the separation of any residual solvents and non-reacted constituents. A nitrogen gas stream (N2) is
utilized for additional drying. This eliminates any additional residual traces of the solvent. As a result,
the porous MPs become free of residual solvents, which enhances their stability. The MPs are stored
inside a fridge at a temperature of 8 °C until subsequent analytical procedures. To generate different
particle sizes, multiple batches of MPs are synthesized with this method under different conditions.
Figure 3.4: A schematic illustration showing the process of the synthesis for the production of porous microspheres using
the solvent evaporation method.[3]
Page 10 of 40
==PAGE:19==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
3.4
Particle size selection using Pluriselect © Strainers
To obtain porous MPs within the desired size range of 20 - 30 µm Pluriselect© filters are employed.
The strainers facilitate precise sieving. Due to their design, they avoid clogging which generates simple
recovery of the filtered samples. The following methodology outlines the steps to obtain the targeted
particle size. Before starting the sieving process, the Pluriselect© strainers are thoroughly washed with
Milli-Q water to remove any potential contaminants. This step ensures the sieves are clean and ready for
accurate particle size selection. Multiple Pluriselect© strainers are stacked on top together on a 50mL
falcon tube. Starting with the 30 µm strainer on top and the 20 µm strainer underneath. This configu-
ration allows sequential sieving of the porous MPs to isolate particles within the 20 - 30 µm size range.
The sample material containing the fully polymerized MPs is carefully added with a pipette on a 30 µm
filter. This configuration guarantees larger particles are trapped within the 30 µm sieve, whereas smaller
particles pass through to the 20 µm filter. After all the sampled materials have passed each filter, they are
thoroughly rinsed using DI water The washing step is essential in order to aid particle movement across
the strainers to avoid blockage. The washing buffer further facilitated the separation of any particles
adhering to the sieve meshes. Furthermore, in order to simplify the flow of samples passing through the
filter, a connector ring in combination with a syringe is used. When the washing procedure is finished
and all the collected particles completely passed through the sieves, the 30 µm filter is removed and
inserted upside down over an empty 50 mL falcon tube. Gentle tapping is allowed to ensure the particles
captured by the 30 µm sieve are collected. Thereafter, the same procedure using the 20 µm sieve is car-
ried out to recover the particles trapped inside the 20 µm sieve (see Figure 3.5). In order to guarantee as
much of the filtered particles are collected, 1mL of DI water is pipetted through the sieves. The collected
particles are saved for further analysis.
Figure 3.5: Illustration of using Pluriselect © strainers with connector ring and syringe to obtain particles within the desired
range of 20 - 30 µm
Page 11 of 40
==PAGE:20==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
3.5
Stability Test Porous Microparticles
In order to ascertain the stability, a comprehensive assessment is conducted with the synthesized
porous MPs. It confirms the particles maintain the designed characteristics and properties over a defined
period of storage. Following the synthesis, the purified particles are transferred immediately to a fridge
to preserve functionality and stability (see Chapter 3.3). To retain their integrity a regulated storage
condition is needed. Samples are taken every two weeks for further stability assessment. The periodic
analysis is conducted over three months to observe morphological or structural variations within the par-
ticles. The sampled particles are prepared for analysis using a scanning electron microscope (SEM). It
provides accurate monitoring for structural and morphological information. The stability is evaluated
using parameters including morphological integrity, surface characteristics and particle size variations.
Morphology, signs of deformation, agglomeration or other significant structural changes are investigated.
In terms of surface properties, the porosity and structure of the samples are assessed based on measure-
ments taken after synthesis. Regarding the size, they are analyzed using the image software tools FIJI to
identify potential variations occurring during the storage period.
3.6
Coating Synthesized Particles with Witepsol H14
In order to improve the functionality as well as stability within the nasal environment, the porous
MPs are coated with the lipid Witepsol H14. 100 µL of the lipid Witepsol H14 is added to the fully
polymerized porous MPs, which have been prior synthesized and filtered (see Chapter 3.3 and Chapter
3.5). The coating of the particles is based on the original composition. A lipid-particle solution is ob-
tained. A thorough mixing process consisting mainly of pipetting the lipid and particles is necessary to
obtain a sufficient coating of the Witepsol H14 over the porous MPs. Given the fact the lipid solidifies
naturally at room temperature within a period of a few minutes, additional heating of the lipid-particle
sample is necessary. Once the lipid is heated, another mixing step is conducted to enhance the coating
quality. To ensure a consistent and uniform lipid layer on the surface of the particles, multiple repeti-
tions of this cycle are required. After a homogeneous mixture is achieved, approximately 10 - 20 µL of
the lipid-particle solution is transferred into an Eppendorf tube for solidification. In order to properly
solidify the lipid surrounding the particles, it is placed in a refrigerator for 15 minutes. Once the lipids
are completely solidified, 90 µL of DI water is pipetted directly into the Eppendorf tube. To break up
the hardened lipids remaining suspended at the bottom of the tube, a pipette is used. In the event the
lipid fails to immediately disperse, the Eppendorf tube is heated shortly in the oven for 15 seconds and
afterward manually stirred using a pipette to fully separate the remaining lipids chunks. Additionally, a
vortex is utilized to eliminate the formation of agglomerated lipid fractions. To ensure the lipid chunks
broke up and mixed thoroughly, additional DI water is transferred directly within the Eppendorf tube.
This mixture needed further vortexing to ensure a thorough and uniform distribution of the lipid-coated
particles. In order to extract the lipid-coated particles, the mixture is centrifuged. Following the care-
Page 12 of 40
==PAGE:21==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
ful extraction of the supernatant, the samples are re-suspended using a small volume of DI water. The
procedure is performed repeatedly until all impurities and unbound lipids are removed. The lipid-coated
particles are subsequently stored for further characterization.
Figure 3.6: A schematic illustration showing the process of the coating of the porous MPs with Witepsol H14.
3.7
Uncoating of PLGA Microparticles Post-Witepsol H14 Coating
After applying Witepsol H14 as a coating to the porous MPs, it was necessary to remove the layers
to assess the particles’ integrity and post-coating. A magnetic stir bar is placed inside the Eppendorf tube
containing the coated particles. 500 µL DI water is added to facilitate the removal of the lipid layer to
the Eppendorf. This setup is transferred onto a magnetic stirrer in an oven at 37 °C. This layout provides
a gentle stirring with a constant temperature facilitating the separation of the lipids. They are stirred for
two hours. The time is critical to allow the lipid coating to entirely detach while preserving the integrity
of the particles. The Eppendorf tube is taken out of the oven following the 2-hour stirring process. The
uncoated particles are quickly separated using the centrifuge. Once centrifuged down for two minutes at
2000 rpm the supernatant is removed and the particles are re-suspended in DI water. This procedure is
repeated three times to ensure all lipid residues are separated from the particles. Additionally, to prevent
potential agglomeration of lipid chunks inside the Eppendorf and possibly attached to the uncoated
samples, the particles are vortexed after each centrifuging step. The uncoated particles are characterized
using an SEM to detect potential alterations regarding morphology and surface properties. This confirms
the effective separation of the Witepsol H14.
Page 13 of 40
==PAGE:22==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
Figure 3.7: A schematic illustration showing the process of the un-coating of the porous MPs from Witepsol H14.
3.8
Encapsulation efficiency, drug loading capacity and drug release
For the preparation of the release studies, 1 mg Rhodamine B is weighed and transferred to a 2 mL
Eppendorf tube. Next 1 mL of DI water is added to the tube to create a rhodamine B solution at a concen-
tration level of 1 mg/mL. To ensure thorough dissolving of Rhodamine B it is mixed with a vortex. The
supernatant analysis is used to calculate the encapsulation efficiency (EE%) and drug loading capacity
(DLC%). The synthesized porous MPs are weighed. The particles are centrifuged for one minute at 3000
rpm to obtain a pellet. The excess supernatant is discarded resulting in dry particles. The Rhodamine B
solution with a concentration of 1mg/mL is added to the dried samples. It is mixed using a vortex and to
improve the loading they are additionally sonicated. The particles are washed a minimum of three times
by agitating, centrifuging, removal of the supernatant and re-suspending with DI water after every cycle.
The pellet kept its pink color after the washing, but the supernatant was nearly transparent. This indi-
cates the excess Rhodamine B is removed. 40 µL Witepsol H14 is applied to the Rhodamine B-loaded
particles in order to coat the particles. The precise steps for the coating are shown in Chapter 3.6. Once
the coated particles solidified in the fridge 160 µL of DI water is pipetted to the mixture. A vortex is used
to break down possible agglomerations of Witepsol H14. Subsequently, the samples are spun down. The
supernatant consisting of the water and lipid residues is removed. The Eppendorf tube’s bottom held the
Rhodamine-loaded and lipid-coated particles throughout this procedure.
The Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis flask is used following the instructions provided by the manufacturer (Thermo
Fisher, product no. 69570). No direct contact with the membrane at the flask’s bottom should be made.
In an empty 2mL Eppendorf, 1,5mL of PBS and a magnetic bar is added. This is categorized as the bot-
tom chamber. The Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis flask is placed on the 2mL Eppendorf containing the 1.5mL
PBS. This represents the top chamber (see Figure 3.8). Prior to using the membrane, it needs to be ini-
tially washed. Therefore, 200 µL PBS is pipetted to the upper chamber. The setup is placed in an oven
for three minutes at 37 °C. To ensure sufficient membrane cleanliness, the wash cycle is performed twice
using new PBS. The cleaning ends with the removal of the 200 µL from the top chamber.
Page 14 of 40
==PAGE:23==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
Figure 3.8: A schematic illustration showing the 2mL Eppendorf with top chamber (200 µL PBS) and bottom chamber
(1,5mL PBS)
150 µL of PBS is pipetted onto the Rhodamine B-loaded lipid-coated samples inside the Eppendorf tube.
The solution is mixed using a vortex to maximize the homogeneity. The release study begins by pipetting
150 µL of the particle suspension carefully in the upper chamber. To avoid any residual particles within
the first Eppendorf, an additional 50 µL of PBS is added to the tube to rinse any leftover samples. This
is pipetted to the top chamber. The total volume inside the bottom and top chamber is 1,7mL.
The setup is transferred inside the oven at 37 °C. Following completion of the set time frames, the
top chamber is gently detached from the 2mL Eppendorf. A 96-well plate is filled with 50 µL of the
sample taken from the bottom chamber. Next 50 µL of fresh PBS buffer is pipetted to the lower chamber
in order to maintain the volume. This process is conducted repeatedly at intervals of 5, 10, 15, 30, 45,
60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 210, 240 minutes.
Figure 3.9: A schematic illustration showing the 2mL Eppendorf containing loaded-coated particles transferred to oven.
Samples taken at 5, 10, 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120, 150, 180, 210, 240 minutes
Page 15 of 40
==PAGE:24==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
3.9
Characterization of porous micro-particles
The characterizations are all presented in triplicates. All data is presented as mean ± standard devi-
ation (SD) except stated differently. As a representation of the acidity level within the nasal environment,
all measurements are conducted in neutral pH 7 using DI water or in PBS with a pH 6.[11]. The data
analysis is conducted with Microsoft Excel and Spyder. The figures are created with Biorender©.
Morphology and Particle size distribution:
The synthesized MPs are re-suspended in DI water and examined using the HITACHI TM3030Plus
Tabletop Microscope. 20 µL is placed on a carbon tape. The SEM accelerating voltage is set to 15kV.
The magnification varies in each picture. The images are characterized by surface properties and poros-
ity. For the Witepsol H14 coated particles, the uniformity and integrity of the lipid layer are examined.
With the image processing software FIJI, the data is analyzed to determine the average MP’s sizes and to
estimate the size distribution. 50 particles are measured from different batches to calculate the average
particle diameter.
Zeta Potential:
The zeta potential for the porous MPs, the Witepsol H14 coated particles and the Witepsol H14 uncoated
particles are measured with a Malvern Nano ZS Zetasizer using disposable folded capillary cuvettes
(DTS1070). 200 µL from each sample are freshly prepared (see Chapter 3.3, Chapter 3.6 and Chapter
3.7). They are diluted in 1 mL of DI water and measured three times at room temperature to determine
the surface charge.
Encapsulation efficiency, drug loading capacity and drug release:
The standard curve is plotted from the Rhodamine B dilutions. This allows the characterization of the
present drug concentration within the supernatant. The concentration is assessed with a spectrofluorimet-
ric microplate reader (Shimadzu, Japan). The obtained fluorescence is fitted into a standard curve ranging
in concentration from 0.015625 to 0.00012207. The resulting standard curve is y = 86553x −20, 139
R2 = 0.9951. Using the spectrofluorimetric microplate reader at an excitation wavelength of λ = 545nm
and emission wavelength of λ = 566nm the Rhodamine B fluorescence is measured. To calculate the
EE of loaded particles is calculated using Equation 3.1. The drug loading capacity using Equation 3.2.
EE [%] =
Total Drug Encapsulated
Initial Weight of added Drug · 100
(3.1)
DLC [%] = Total Drug Encapsulated
Total mass of MPs
· 100
(3.2)
Page 16 of 40
==PAGE:25==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
4
Results and Discussion
4.1
Solvent Evaporation Method: Synthesis of Porous Micro-Particles
The obtained image proves the synthesis method utilized for the production the porous MPs is suc-
cessful (see Figure 4.1). 150 µL of the solid phase (ammonium bicarbonate in DI water) is added to 750
µL of oil phase (PLGA Mw = 28 - 38 in DCM). This S/O phase is added to 4 mL of the aqueous phase
(PVA (Mw = 89 - 98) in DI Water). The details for the synthesis are shown in Chapter 3.3. The porous
MP shows a high level of porosity, whereby the surface features a large amount of homogeneously dis-
tributed pores in a wide range of dimensions. It indicates a large surface area within the particle, making
it a suitable candidate for application requiring controlled drug loading and release. Besides the porous
characteristics, it appears the surface structure is spherical and smooth. The smoothness illustrates the
fabrication method is properly optimized, resulting in uniformly scattered pores and no significant irreg-
ularities or asperities. The spherical appearance is indicative of strong structural integrity. The particle
exhibits no indications of deformation or disintegration. As a result, the particle has the requirements
concerning durability and is expected to be stable throughout the storage period. Using FIJI the exact
size of the shown porous MP is 42.23µm.
Figure 4.1: Surface morphology observations of porous microparticles prepared using 150 µL of the solid phase (ammonium
bicarbonate in DI water); 750 µL of oil phase (PLGA (Mw = 28 - 38) and DCM); 4 mL of aqueous phase (PVA (Mw = 89 -
98) and DI Water)
Page 17 of 40
==PAGE:26==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
The impact of PLGA molecular weights (Mw) on the particle size of the MPs via solvent evapo-
ration method is illustrated in Figure 4.2. For the synthesis of the MPs two PLGA Mw are utilised: 1)
Mw = 7 - 17 and 2) Mw = 28 - 38. For 1) and 2) PVA with Mw = 89.000 - 98.000 is used. Sample 3)
shows the PLGA Mw = 28 - 38 with PVA Mw = 146 -186. Based on the data, a clear correlation be-
tween the molecular weight and the resulting size exists. Generally, PLGA with reduced Mw exhibit less
viscosity.[48] The resistance against the flow during the emulsifying process is minimized. The reduced
viscosity implies faster evaporation rates of DCM.[49] Hence, the particles stabilize quicker, which leads
to smaller MPs. This correlates with the mean particle size of 30.77 ± 5,20 µm for the PLGA Mw = 7
- 17. In comparison increasing the Mw of PLGA features a greater viscosity. [50] It leads to a slightly
reduced flow rate during the emulsification process and hence to bigger particles. Moreover, it delays
the evaporation of DCM in order to keep a bigger particle size during stabilizing. The particles with Mw
= 28 - 38 are larger and possess a mean size of 42.23 ± 6.07 µm. To further evaluate this fact, another
aspect is taken into account. Using PLGA Mw = 28-38 with PVA Mw = 146 -186 ought to form larger
particles as well. The resulting mean size is 52.56 ± 5.92. The longer polymer chains in the used PVA
with higher Mw make the aqueous phase viscous. Similarly, this leads to the synthesis of bigger MPs
during the emulsification. Additionally, the resulting MPs can be stabilized by more extensive steric
barriers formed around them by higher Mw.[51]
Figure 4.2: Impact on MP size through PLGA Mw and PLGA PVA. The mean (± SD) size of PLGA synthesized MPs prior
to filtration with varying Mw of PLGA and PVA are displayed. Blue: PLGA Mw 7-17 and PVA Mw = 89-98; Green: PLGA
Mw 28-38 and PVA Mw = 89-98; Red: PLGA Mw 28-38 and PVA Mw = 146 - 186
Page 18 of 40
==PAGE:27==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
The characteristics of PLGA are significantly affected by alterations at its end terminals (e.g. ester
end-capping of its free carboxylic acid end-group). As an example, PLGA with a carboxyl group are
generally more hydrophobic than PLGA with a terminal ester group.[52] One factor influencing the hy-
drophilicity within a polymer is the end group. Thus, the particle will be more hydrophobic if a carboxyl
group is at the end of the polymer.[53] Further reasoning to explain the size growth for higher Mw is the
mentioned corresponding rise in viscosity found in the organic phase. Beside the Mw a possible increase
in the amount of PLGA can generate larger particles during the micro-precipitation stage.[54] Based on
the results, it appears Mw and potentially the quantity of PLGA plays an essential factor in determining
the final size for the porous MPs.
Besides the shown effects concerning size, the Mw within the emulsion is essential for the characteristics
and performance of the resulting porous MPs. The degradation rate is dependent on the Mw of PLGA.
PLGA with a low Mw will break down quicker than its counterpart with a high Mw.[55] Consequently,
a different Mw can be utilized depending on the wanted drug release pattern. A slower degradation of
PLGA is obtained with a high Mw.[56] As a result, it can prolong the duration of drug release. Besides
the variation concerning size, mechanical strength and resistance against deformation can be enhanced
through the Mw of PLGA.[57] Higher rates enable less tendency concerning deformation and improved
stability. The design considerations must consider biodegradability and bio-compatibility. Lower Mw in
emulsions affect these properties. PLGA shows a greater tendency to decompose rapidly into lactic acid
and glycolic acid, substances considered biocompatible and thus more easily removed by the body.
Within one batch of synthesized MPs, there are significant size variations. The green histogram vi-
sualizes the size distribution of unfiltered MPs immediately following synthesis and purification (see
Figure 4.3). The diameters of the MPs range from 19,04 µm to 56.66 µm. It indicates a wide distribu-
tion. It indicates the unpredictability within the process of the synthesis. The graph suggests a significant
number of large particles exist prior to filtration. The mean particle size is 40.51 ± 8.94 µm. This is
shown by the peak in the histogram. 45 µm is the highest occurrence in size for the analyzed particles.
The normal distribution curve is shifted slightly to the left of it. A shift in the distribution is suggested by
the mean being smaller than the most frequent particle size. This is caused by the existence of particles
smaller than 45 µm (20-40 µm). In an ideal distribution, the mode, median and mean would align. The
variability in the sample is reflected in the spread of MP sizes. This is demonstrated by the standard
deviation (8.94 µm). It implies further optimization to create a more uniform particle size distribution
is necessary. Fluctuations in the emulsification process could account for the broad size range. Due
to the shear force, the emulsifier concentration and mixing speed, the resulting droplets may solidify
into particles with varying diameters.[58] To achieve effective deposition in the nasal cavity and avoid
particles from entering the lungs, the desired particle size range for nasal administration is essential.
Particles bigger than 30 µm may not lodge in the nasal cavity. MPs smaller than 20 µm are more likely
Page 19 of 40
==PAGE:28==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
to accumulate within the lungs.[59] To reach the intended particle size, the current distribution points to
the necessity of filtration.
Figure 4.3: Size distribution of MPs prior (green) and post (blue) filtration (n = 55)
Pluriselect© filters are utilized to obtain the MPs within the specified 20-30 µm range (see Chapter 3.4).
The blue histogram (see Figure 4.3) shows the differences caused by the filtration procedure. It visu-
alizes the size distribution of the MPs prior to and post-filtration. The particle sizes are significantly
decreased following the filtration. It shows a distinct peak at 26.84 ± 6.98 µm. The histogram’s peak
represents the most frequent particle size. It is located between 20 and 25 µm. Significant occurrences
of MPs bigger than 25 µm raise the mean value. Tthe range varies from 12.95 µm to 55.78 µm. The
data reveals a normally distributed pattern with a positively sloped curve. A small peak at 40 µm in
the particle size distribution indicates evidence of larger MPs present. It is possible the filter is unable
to fully trap bigger particles when its pore diameter becomes too small. A strainer intended to retain
particles greater than 30 µm can still allow some particles of approximately 40 µm in size to penetrate
it if they have a non-uniform size distribution. This can be also affected by an asymmetric form. Small
particles can also clog the strainers. This causes potential pathways for bigger particles to pass through.
Another aspect is the filtration technique. The filtration efficiency can be impacted by the pressure and
flow rate. As described in Chapter 3.4 a syringe is used to facilitate a better filtration process. As a result,
Page 20 of 40
==PAGE:29==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
unwanted larger MPs can be pushed through the sieves under high pressure. Whereas smaller particles
might fail to travel through the filter under low pressure. While the initial size distribution is broad, it
can be challenging to obtain a perfectly precise filtration. If the initial synthesis leads to a large variety in
the size of the particles, the filtration system cannot fully separate the bigger end of the distribution. The
initial synthesis creates MPs of larger sizes within multiple distinct ranges. This is demonstrated by the
several smaller peaks (see Figure 4.3 blue). The filtration can reduce, but never completely remove all
of the bigger fractions. Nevertheless, the presence of particles centered around the 25 µm range suggests
a consistent production efficiency. Yet the outliers indicate potential improvements are needed to obtain
more uniformly sized porous MPs.
The analysis of pore sizes of five different samples delivers data regarding the distribution and range
of pore widths. The box plot illustrates the pore size spread across 5 samples. It demonstrates the av-
erage size, scatter and potential outliers (see Figure 4.4). For the first analyzed sample, the pores vary
from 2.7 µm to 4.2 µm with a median of 3.4 µm. For sample two the range is from 2.3 µm to 6.5 µm. It
indicates the presence of a few significantly larger and smaller pores. In comparison to the others, this
illustrates a wider distribution, which shows greater pore size diversity. In sample three, the range is 1.7
µm m to 4.7 µm, with a median value of 2.9 µm. The scattering is narrower in comparison to sample 2,
suggesting more consistent porosity. In sample four the the pore diameters range from 3.5 µm to 5.7 µm,
with a median of 4.3 µm. The few outliers suggest the presence of a few significantly bigger pores. The
median pore size for sample five is around 3.7 µm, with a range of approximately 2.6 µm to 4.6 µm. The
data exhibits a narrower distribution containing a few outliers at 2.6 and 4.6 µm.
The mean pore size for sample one is 3.4417 ± 0.49 µm. The size of the particle is 44.01 µm. For
sample two with a size of 20.59 µm the average pore size is 3.665 ± 1.31 µm. There are noticeable
fluctuations concentrated at 3.5 µm, with considerable dispersion, which shows a less uniform pore size
distribution. For sample three the particle size is 17.15 µm. The mean pore size is 2.86 ± 0.94 µm.
The majority are between 2.5 and 3.5 µm. Sample four has a particle size of 47.43 µm. The analyzed
mean pore sizes vary from 4.26 ± 0.64 µm, whereas most are observed at 4 µm. Sample five has a
particle size of 41.62 µm and a mean pore size of 3.74 ± 0.61 µm. They are between 3.5 and 4 µm. This
exhibits a more uniform size distribution similar to sample one. There is a significant variability among
the pore sizes. Samples one and three show greater consistency in pore diameters. Whereas sample two
demonstrates the most fluctuation. Sample four has the biggest average pore size. This is followed by
samples five and two. As stated the mean pore size of samples one and three are lower. As suggested by
sample four, there is an indication that bigger particle sizes are correlated with higher pore sizes. The
analysed five samples show to a certain degree similar characteristics concerning the pore sizes. Sample
2 demonstrates to be an anomaly. This is due to its significant pore variability.
Page 21 of 40
==PAGE:30==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
Figure 4.4: Pore size variation across different samples showing individual pore size data points and overlays the mean pore
size with error bars representing the standard deviations.
An additional factor that is taken into account during the synthesis is the Mw of PVA in the aqueous
phase. Within the experiments three different Mw are used (see Chapter 3.1). The final concentration for
the PVA suspensions is 3%. Besides the Mw the amount of PVA is a key factor in the emulsification and
solvent evaporation stage. It prevents the PLGA containing droplets from unwanted coalescing.[53] In
the conducted tests different Mw of PVA seem to have no significant influence concerning the particle
size. The higher Mw however possesses a substantial impact on other characteristics. The SEM images
shown in Figure 4.5 and Figure 4.6 illustrate how the porous MPs’ morphology and structure are affected
by the Mw of PVA. Image A exhibits smooth surfaces covered with pores. The noticeable porosity sug-
gests indicate the PVA with a lower Mw makes the structure more porous and open. Image B shows
more surface porosity than in Image A. They are well defined in comparison to Figure A. The increased
viscosity of PVA together with the enhanced capacity to form layers to stabilize the particle, could ex-
Page 22 of 40
==PAGE:31==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
plain its greater level of porosity. As illustrated both Mw of PVA produces porous MPs. The higher Mw
samples exhibit a more noticeable degree of porosity. Image A shows minimal signs of agglomeration.
Significant particle clustering appears to be avoided. This supports the degree of enough steric stabiliza-
tion provided by the aqueous phase. Image B does not indicate any visible agglomeration. PVA with
a larger molecular weight probably offers superior steric stability.[60] This allows for maintaining the
MPs’ uniform distribution. High Mw PVA appears to facilitate more consistent and pronounced porosity
to match the surface structures. Consequently, it appears it can enhance the functionality properties in
specific applications requiring a large surface area.
Figure 4.5: SEM Image of porous MPs using lower
Molecular Weight PVA: 31,000-50,00
Figure 4.6: SEM Image of porous MPs using lower Molecular
Weight PVA: 146,000-186,000
There are multiple aspects that have an effect on the porosity of MPs during the synthesis. The
viscosity in the emulsion is directly impacted also by the polymer solution’s concentration. Higher vis-
cosity levels caused by a higher polymer concentration stabilizes the emulsion droplets.[53] As a result
more consistent and defined pores are expected. Furthermore, the solvent type influences the evaporation
rate.[61] This affects the porosity level within the MPs. More viscous solvents evaporate quicker, which
results in more porous patterns. The interaction of the used solvent (DCM) with the non-solvent (here
DI water) can change the porosity. As an example, the rapid phase separation process of methanol can
lead to quick evaporation, which results in bigger pores. Due to the fact that it is less soluble for many
polymers, it is more frequently utilized as a co-solvent rather than a primary solvent.[62] Comparable
pore formation characteristics are expected from chloroform. It possesses a similar evaporation rate to
DCM. However, due to its higher toxicity, there is a significant disadvantage.[63] Moreover, the porosity
can be impacted by the type and concentration of utilized emulsifiers. Generally, finer porosity and more
stable particles can be expected from higher concentrations. An improved stabilization is ensured by a
Page 23 of 40
==PAGE:32==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
higher PVA concentration.[53] After the solvent evaporation, the emulsion droplets form the MPs. PVA
is found as a single molecule in suspension at concentrations lower than 2.5% (w/v). At higher concen-
trations, it is in an aggregated form, which exhibits enhanced surfactant activity.[64] Particles created
during emulsification would therefore be more stable. The porosity and the size are highly dependent on
the stability of these droplets.[65] The stirring velocity applied during the formation of particles is a fur-
ther parameter affecting the pores. It primarily affects the particle size of the emulsion. Faster and longer
mixing usually leads to smaller particles, generating finer pores.[66] The porosity can vary according to
the temperature applied during solvent evaporation. Higher temperatures are capable of promoting the
vaporization of solvents.[61] Consequently, the phase separation is fast and results in improved pore
properties. A further parameter impacting pore formation is the method utilized for drying and/or hard-
ening of the MPs. This can be realized using techniques including freeze drying or spray drying. As the
solvent freezes during freeze-drying, the resulting surfaces often exhibit high porosity.[67]
4.2
Stability Tests of Particles
The stability of the particles obtained over a period of one month using different PLGA molecu-
lar weights is presented in the graph (see Figure 4.7). The stability of the particles must be taken into
account while designing a drug delivery system (DDS). To measure the particle sizes, three different
time points are taken: 21 March 2024, 4 April 2024 and 26 April 2024. This shows the stability of three
different PLGA molecular weight ranges: PLGA Mw 7-17, PLGA Mw 28-38, and PLGA Mw 38-51. The
mean particle size from 5 different analyzed MPs at the starting point is 29.45 ± 6.27 µm (PLGA Mw: 7
- 17), 25.72 ± 2.81 µm (PLGA Mw: 28 - 38) and 35.57 ± 5.92 µm (PLGA Mw: 38 - 51). The midpoint
measurement (April 4, 2024) showed the mean average particle size for PLGA Mw 7 - 17 remained
approximately stable with 29 ± 7.47 µm. For PLGA Mw 28-38 there is a minor drop in size to 24.76
± 5.57 µm. For PLGA Mw 38-51 the size indicates as well a slight decrease to 32.82 ± 8.97 µm. At
the final measurement on April 26 PLGA Mw 7 - 17 drops significantly to about a mean size of 16.34 ±
3.32 µm. The PLGA Mw 28 - 38 decreases as well further to 15.48 ± 5.08 µm. This same characteristic
is observed for PLGA Mw 38 - 51, where the average size sinks to 27.07 ± 3.37 µm. The PLGA Mw 7
- 17 particles are initially stable. However, within a month they exhibit a notable size reduction. This
indicates potential degradation or structural changes. The PLGA Mw 28 - 38 particles first display a
minimal decline, yet towards the final part of the period the size reduced considerably, signaling insta-
bility followed by eventual breakdown. While the higher molecular weight ensures a level of stability,
it remains vulnerable to degradation throughout the period of the month. The particles of PLGA Mw 38
- 51 start off with the greatest particle size showing a continuous, slow degradation that culminates in a
significant drop over time. Over the examination time of a month, the sizes of all PLGA Mw types have
decreased. The largest variations are determined for the PLGA Mw 7 - 17 and PLGA Mw 28 - 38. As a
result, it implies longer-term degradation can not be prevented entirely by higher Mw. Nevertheless, it
Page 24 of 40
==PAGE:33==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
shows the potential to postpone it.[68]
Figure 4.7: MPs stability test using different Mw over 35 days. Sample are taken at 0 days, 15days and 35 days.
Blue: PLGA: Mw 7 - 17; Orange: Mw 24 - 38; Green: Mw 38 - 54
4.3
Coating Synthesized Particles with Witepsol H14
The visualized SEM images indicate the Witepsol H14 coating procedure is effective (see Figure
4.8 A). The majority of particles have a spherical appearance, suggesting they are well-formed. The
surfaces appear relatively uniform and in contrast to non-coated a little bit rougher. This shows the
Witepsol H14 is well layered all over the particle surface. Minor impurities or lipid chunks are detected
in the environment (see Figure 4.8 B). There are no indications of deformation or degradation in the MP
structure. This suggests the heating and mechanical agitation involved during the coating steps do not
negatively affect the integrity of the MPs. The presence of visible pores suggests that they are not en-
tirely covered by the Witepsol H14 (see Figure 4.8 C). Additionally, it is possible the lipid accumulates
inside the pores to form a layer. Hence the pores on the surface are visible. This can be advantageous for
preserving functionality. For the coated particles 30 samples are analyzed concerning size. The average
size for the particles are 22.40 ± 5.83 µm. It is crucial to maintain the target size within the 20-30 µm
range to inhibit passage to the lung as well as to maximise nasal deposition. An average size of 22.40 ±
5.83 µm reveals the particle sizes are maintained without noticeable variation in the ideal MPs size range
using the Witepsol H14 coating. While some variation is observed, the majority stays within the intended
range. This is indicated by the standard deviation of 5.83 µm. This additional layer of the MPs’ surface
Page 25 of 40
==PAGE:34==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
will influence the release characteristics of the potential encapsulated drug. Considering the application
and the intricacy of the coating process, this fluctuation is acceptable. As MPs’ size remain close to the
target range, the Witepsol H14 coating shows no additional growth in size for the analysed particles. As
shown during the SEM, the Witepsol H14 coating is successful and the MPs demonstrate the required
surface and morphological properties. This indicates the efficacy of the selected approach to enhance
functionality within the nasal environment.
Figure 4.8: SEM Images of the porous MPs after coating procedure with Witepsol H14
4.4
Uncoating of PLGA Microparticles Post-Witepsol H14 Coating
After removing the Witepsol H14 the MPs still possess the spherical characteristics. This shows
the separation of the Witepsol H14 does not change the integrity of the structure. In comparison to
the original MPs (see Chapter 4.1), the surface seems affected by the temperature (see Figure 4.9).
The melting point of Witepsol H14 is 32 - 35° C.[69] The removal of the lipid is carried out at 37°C.
This ensures effective separation from the coating of the MPs. In comparison to the original MPs, the
uncoating process leads to a specific roughness regarding the surface characteristics. The visibility of the
pores supports the theory that the Witepsol H14 layer is successfully removed. Furthermore, the defined
conditions concerning temperature (37° C) and stirring are suitable. It does not degrade the porosity
of the MPs. Generally, the size of the polymer in combination with the environmental temperature can
affect the PLGA breakdown speed. At 37 °C, the polymer degradation appears quicker than at room
temperature.[70] It appears a small layer of Witepsol H14 residue remains on the particle following de-
coating (see Figure 4.10). It can occur if the removal technique is not fully accurate for each particle.
This can be traced to stirring variations or inadequate removal of the coating. The specimen can attract
charging during the imaging process. This charge can result in the appearance of a layered and distorted
effect on the image (see Figure 4.10). Larger charging effects might result in the particle, which leads to
the formation of the observed thin layer. The specimen can experience damage caused by the beam of
electrons applied by the SEM.[71] In particular if it is directed at a single area for a long duration. As a
result, changes in morphology appear that can give the effect of a thin layer. By decreasing the intensity
of the exposure and the exposure time, the damage can be minimized.[72]
Page 26 of 40
==PAGE:35==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
Figure 4.9: SEM Image of MPs after uncoating
Figure 4.10: SEM Image of MPs after uncoating
To further visualize the successful coating and uncoating the particles are examined concerning
their surface charge using a Malvern Nano ZS Zetasizer. The particles are analyzed after the synthesis,
after the coating and after the uncoating (see Figure 4.11 left). Additionally, the charge of the pure
Witepsol H14 is determined. This is to further assess the uncoating procedure. The PLGA MPs exhibit
a zeta potential of - 11.6 ± 1.6 mV. The zeta potential for PLGA-Witepsol H14 coated is notably lower
at -25.7 ± 4.6 mV. The Witepsol H14 demonstrates the lowest zeta potential at -36.7 ± 1.9 mV. For
the uncoated PLGA MPs, the surface charge is -15.3 ± 1.12 mV. Additionally, the right plot shows the
uncoated sample’s zeta potential peaks in detail (see Figure 4.11 right). The graph differentiates between
the pure lipid (-32.3 mV) and the uncoated PLGA (-13.9 mV).
Figure 4.11: Zeta potential for all four samples: PLGA Microparticles, PLGA-Witepsol H14 Coated, Witepsol H14 and
Uncoated PLGA MPs. The zoom demonstrates the uncoated sample’s zeta potential peaks in detail as the average of the two
peaks between the lipid (-32.3 mV) and the uncoated PLGA (-13.9 mV).
Page 27 of 40
==PAGE:36==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
As expected the surface charge of MPs is slightly negative. This suggests the surface charge might
add to the stability of the MPs in suspension. The use of PVA during the synthesis increases their
colloidal stability because of their hydrophobic character. By lowering the surface tension of MPs at
their interfaces with the non-solvent, PVA helps to stop particle aggregation.[73] Additionally the car-
boxyl end-groups and other intrinsic characteristics of the polymer affect the surface charge.[74] For
the PLGA-Witepsol H14 Coated MPs the charge drops to -25.7 mV. This implies the MPs’ surface is
more negatively charged by the Witepsol H14 coating. Due to the increase in electrostatic repulsion, this
higher negative charge helps to stabilize the coated MPs further. A high negative zeta potential of -36.7
mV is shown by Witepsol H14. As long as the ionic strength is moderate, the negative charge is governed
by repulsive forces keeping the Witepsol H14 rather stable in aqueous environments.[75] The strong neg-
ative charge among the Witepsol H14 particles points to strong colloidal stability in the suspension. As
expected, once the Witepsol H14 is removed, the zeta potential of the uncoated MPs rises to -15.3 mV.
Still, the negative surface charge of the MPs remains higher than that of the coated particles even after
the removal of the lipid. This implies the surface charge of the MPs is influenced by subsequent effects
of the coating process. It’s possible the uncoating cannot fully restore the original surface state of the
MPs or the Witepsol H14 coating is not fully removed. This is shown by the increased negative charge
compared to the original PLGA MPs. Additionally, this demonstrates further by the obtained images
(see Figure 4.9 and Figure 4.10). The uncoated MPs determined two peaks during the analysis (see Fig-
ure 4.11 right). The first (yellow) bar represents the peak for the uncoated MPs (-13.9 mV). The second
(green) significantly more negative peak indicates residual Witepsol H14 in the solution (-32.3 mV).
The two separate peaks suggest some Witepsol H14 residues remain after the uncoating procedure. This
contributes to the total surface charge seen in the primary uncoated MPs. This implies some Witepsol
H14 residues are left after the uncoating process. The zeta potential of the MPs are significantly affected
by the coating/uncoating with Witepsol H14. Their lower surface charge makes them potentially more
resistant to the suspension. Although the coating removal provides a considerable recovery of charge,
residual lipid suggests the coating is not fully separated. Nevertheless, it demonstrates the successful
coating and uncoating technique for MPs.
4.5
Encapsulation efficiency, drug loading capacity and drug release
In order to evaluate the Rhodamine B encapsulation the supernatant analysis (SN) is conducted.
The analysis of the obtained results concerning EE and DLC are conducted with three different samples
(N1, N2, N3). The results are stated as the average of the three samples (Nmean) ± SD. Additionally,
the resulting mean ± SD of the calculated EE and DLC are evaluated. The Nmean EE is 46.29 ± 0.92.
It demonstrates the amount of the initial Rhodamine B successfully encapsulated within the MPs. An
EE of 46.29% suggests nearly half of the Rhodamine B is loaded within the MPs. This shows an effec-
tive rate for MPs. The standard deviation (± 0.92) indicates the consistency of the trial. The amount
Page 28 of 40
==PAGE:37==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
of Rhodamine B loaded per milligram of MPs is shown by the DLC. Rhodamine B is present in 0.36
µg of MPs per mg. Despite the fact the EE is relatively high, it is still optimizable. Depending on the
encapsulation technique, this has several causes and solutions. The MPs should be substantially larger
than the drugs used for encapsulating.[76] Depending on the used concentration for the initial polymer,
the drug can show different behaviors. If a relatively low concentration is utilized, the Rhodamine B is
able to permeate through the particle shell. Hence, it’s beneficial to raise the viscosity of the polymer
solution. This can be obtained by using a higher the Mw[44] The utilized SN is one of the most used
techniques for assessing EE. Smaller encapsulation is observed with the technique.[77] To overcome
this issue the Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis flask is used in the release investigations (see Chapter 3.8). The
Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis flask maintains a regulated release environment. This allows the Rhodamine B to
be gradually released. The MPs’ porosity structure enables more surface area for drug loading.[78] This
explains the resulting DLC value. The 1 mg/ml Rhodamine B ensures a concentrated drug loading. The
drug-polymer interaction is enhanced by strong mixing and sonication, allowing an increase in the DLC.
To further improve the EE and DLC an increased concentration higher than 1 mg/ml can be used. This
comes however with the risk of precipitation and agglomeration in greater quantities. The EE and DLC
can be increased by varying the concentration or the use of emulsifiers.[79] Additionally, optimizing the
duration and intensity of sonication can potentially improve EE and DLC.
The primary factor influencing the use of MPs is their ability to enable a regulated release from the
encapsulated form. Using the Slide-A-Lyzer dialysis flask, samples of Rhodamine B-loaded MPs are
added to PBS with a pH = 6 at 37 °C to measure the release profile (see Chapter 3.8). The graph presents
a comparative analysis of the cumulative release of Rhodamine B from MPs during a 240-minute dura-
tion at two distinct temperatures: room temperature (25°C) and physiological temperature (37°C) (see
Figure 4.12). For the 37 °C the release behavior of Rhodamine B increases steadily. Approximately
15% is released at 5 minutes and over the entire time period of 240 minutes it rises to 91%. Throughout
the duration of 240 minutes, the release at 25 °C is very restrained. It starts at 3% and stays almost as
expected constant. A steady slope is observed in the 37 °C profile. This indicates a steady continuous
release over time. The standard deviation of the release measures is represented by the error bars. First,
it starts very small and gradually expands. This can be observed especially after 120 minutes. It suggests
there is a variability in the later stages of release behavior after the initial consistency. The low release
at room temperature implies significant drug diffusion is prevented. The Witepsol H14 will not melt at
room temperature. Hence the loaded MPs remain stable and will not let the Rhodamine B permeate. The
variation in the release pattern between 25 °C and 37°C emphasizes how temperature affects the release
profile. At higher temperatures, the solid lipid layer covering the MPs will melt. Hence, the loaded MPs
are able to release the drug content. Additionally, the MPs’ matrix is more likely to degrade at 37°C.[70]
This allows Rhodamine B to diffuse further out of the MPs. Their ability to demonstrate a controlled
release of Rhodamine B is shown by the gradual increase of the graph at 37°C. A significant amount of
Page 29 of 40
==PAGE:38==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
the loaded Rhodamine B is released over 240 minutes shown by the peak of the cumulative release (at
91%). This aligns well with the previously determined EE (46.29%) and DLC (0.36 µg · mg).
Figure 4.12: Rhodamine B Release Profile over 240 minutes. Samples are taken at 5, 10, 15, 30, 45, 60, 120, 150, 180, 210,
240 minutes.
The amount of encapsulated drug must be taken into account to fully assess the drug release charac-
teristics. A relatively good EE of 46.29 ± 0.92 was obtained. After 240 minutes it completely released
its content. The drug release is seen to be more consistent, suggesting a process driven by diffusion.
The data supports a temperature-driven response that releases medication from the MPs formulations
because 91% of the Rhodamine B is released compared to the control sample at room temperature. The
remaining amount of Rhodamine might be remaining or entrapped in the residual particles even follow-
ing temperature change over four hours. Rhodamine B can take on specific structural forms depending
on the pH. It has a positively charged cationic structure at low pH levels (pH ≤5). Rhodamine B tends
to form a zwitteric ionic structure at high pH values (pH ≥6).[80] Rhodamine B might get drawn to
the negatively charged surface of the MPs in this low acidic environment facilitated by the PBS. The
absorbed Rhodamine B in the surface of the coated MPs can experience hence the strong electrostatic
attraction at pH 6. This might lead to initially slowing down the release. As the Witepsol H14 coating
melts and MPs disintegrate, the electrostatic bonds among the particles can get weaker. This would re-
sult in Rhodamine B gradually releasing into the PBS. This gradual characteristic also correlates with
the obtained release profile. Furthermore, an important parameter affecting the encapsulated drug’s re-
lease characteristics is the particle size. In comparison to larger particles, the surface-to-volume ratio
of smaller particles is greater.[81] Hence, more interaction between the MPs’ surface and the release
Page 30 of 40
==PAGE:39==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
medium (PBS) is possible. This will influence the release characteristics. Furthermore, depending on
the MP size the degradation can be postponed since bigger particles need longer to break down. This
can lead to a more sustained release, which correlates also with the graph. Moreover, despite a uniform
coating observed within the MPs (see Figure 4.8), some might experience more homogeneous and thin-
ner coating whereas others possess thicker layers of Witepsol H14. Depending on the degree of coating,
it can prolong or accelerate the release of the encapsulated drug. The release rate of Rhodamine B from
MPs coated with Witepsol H14 in PBS (pH 6) is controlled by temperature, surface charge and particle
size. It emphasizes the significance of fine-tuning these parameters in order to obtain the desired drug
release profile.
5
Conclusion
This project examines the fabrication of porous MPs suitable for nasal delivery of vaccines. It
shows parameters like PLGA and PVA Mw have a significant influence on the MPs. Increasing the
PLGA Mw results in bigger MPs. Higher Mw PVA will further enhance the size. This is due to the
higher viscosity and steric stabilization occurring within the emulsification step. There is high variability
concerning MPs’ size prior to filtration. To obtain uniformed MPs within 20 - 30 µm the technique
using Pluriselect©filters is crucial. Post filtration, they are concentrated in the target range of 20-30
µm. It demonstrates the success of minimizing the quantity of bigger MPs. By SEM the PVAs’ impact
concerning porosity is shown. Controlling them within a certain level is possible by adjusting the Mw
of PVA utilized in the synthesis. The MP’s long-term stability concerning size and structure under the
utilized storage conditions is demonstrated. Witepsol H14 is used to enhance the functionality. It’s shown
the coating technique results in a homogeneous level of coating. Besides enhancing functionality and
stability, the Witepsol H14 layer is effective in encapsulating Rhodamine B in the MPs. The uncoating
provides efficient separation of Witepsol H14, whilst preserving structural and functional integrity. The
presence and separation of the Witepsol H14 are further shown via the changes in zeta potential. The
initial surface charge of MPs is -11.6 ± 1.6 mV. After coating it is -25.7 ± 4.6 mV. Following the
uncoating it changes to -15.3 ± 1.12 mV. Lastly, temperature-responsive characteristics are determined
through release studies. The release of Rhodamine B is influenced by temperature. At 37 °C, a sustained
release is observed. Whereas at 25 °C no release is shown. The Witepsol H14 remains solid. Hence,
the Rhodamine B cannot diffuse out of the MPs. This confirms the theory concerning release behavior
being regulated and sustained by the Witepsol H14 coated MPs with temperature as a viable parameter.
6
Future Prospects
A significant progress concerning the design of safe and consistent non-invasive DDS is demon-
strated in this report via the fabrication and characterisation of porous MPs for IN vaccination. To
Page 31 of 40
==PAGE:40==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
maximise the performance and improve the efficiency of the MPs, further studies are required. Using
advanced imaging techniques including Cryo SEM or Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) can
give further details of the MPs. Cryo SEM can be utilized in order to reveal precise data of the internal
structure and morphology. Analysing the Witepsol H14 coating and the surface structure of the MPs
with greater resolution is possible using TEM. Moreover, long-term stability tests under various storage
circumstances (temperature, humidity) may yield information about the MPs’ life. In order to assure the
integrity of the MPs’ while administering, the mechanical stability of the MPs’ should be investigated
using conditions similar to nasal administration (e.g. airflow and pressure). Critical information about
the bio-distribution and therapeutic efficacy of the drug-loaded MPs may be obtained by conducting in
vivo animal studies. Additionally, toxicity studies should be conducted with the MPs in order to evaluate
if the designed DDS is safe to use for IN delivery.
Page 32 of 40
==PAGE:41==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
References
[1] K. Dhama, M. Dhawan, R. Tiwari, T. B. Emran, S. Mitra, A. A. Rabaan, S. Alhumaid, Z. A. Alawi,
and A. Al Mutair, “COVID-19 intranasal vaccines: current progress, advantages, prospects, and
challenges,” Human Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics, vol. 18, no. 5, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2022.2045853
[2] E. Lagreca, V. Onesto, C. Di Natale, S. La Manna, P. A. Netti, and R. Vecchione, “Recent advances
in the formulation of PLGA microparticles for controlled drug delivery,” Progress in Biomaterials,
vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 153–174, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s40204-020-00139-y
[3] D. Ghosh Dastidar, S. Saha, and M. Chowdhury, “Porous microspheres: Synthesis, characterisation
and applications in pharmaceutical & medical fields,” International Journal of Pharmaceutics, vol.
548, no. 1, pp. 34–48, 2018.
[4] D. Elad, M. Wolf, and T. Keck, “Air-conditioning in the human nasal cavity,” Respiratory
Physiology & Neurobiology,
vol. 163,
no. 1,
pp. 121–127,
2008. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1569904808001262
[5] R. Scherließ, “Nasal Administration of Vaccines,” in Subunit Vaccine Delivery, C. Foged, T. Rades,
Y. Perrie, and S. Hook, Eds.
Kiel: Springer Science+Business Media New, 2015, ch. 15, pp.
287–306. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-1-4939-1417-3_15
[6] J. R. Harkema, S. A. Carey, and J. G. Wagner, “The Nose Revisited: A Brief Review of the Compar-
ative Structure, Function, and Toxicologic Pathology of the Nasal Epithelium,” Toxicologic Pathol-
ogy, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 252–269, 2006.
[7] S. Türker, E. Onur, and Y. Ózer, “Nasal route and drug delivery systems,” Pharmacy World and
Science, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 137–142, 2004.
[8] I. Jabbal-Gill, “Nasal vaccine innovation,” Journal of Drug Targeting, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 771–786,
2010.
[9] M. Wolf, S. Naftali, R. C. Schroter, and D. Elad, “Air-conditioning characteristics of the human
nose,” Journal of Laryngology and Otology, vol. 118, no. 2, pp. 87–92, 2004.
[10] R. Kahana-Zweig, M. Geva-Sagiv, A. Weissbrod, L. Secundo, N. Soroker, and N. Sobel, “Measur-
ing and characterizing the human nasal cycle,” PLoS ONE, vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 1–28, 2016.
[11] N. Washington, R. J. Steele, S. J. Jackson, D. Bush, J. Mason, D. A. Gill, K. Pitt, and D. A.
Rawlins, “Determination of baseline human nasal pH and the effect of intranasally administered
buffers,” International Journal of Pharmaceutics, vol. 198, no. 2, pp. 139–146, 2000.
Page 33 of 40
==PAGE:42==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
[12] E. Wong, J. Siu, R. Douglas, and N. Singh, Anatomy and Physiology of the Human Nose.
Springer Singapore, 2021. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-6716-2_2
[13] N. Jones, “The nose and paranasal sinuses physiology and anatomy,” Advanced Drug Delivery
Reviews, vol. 51, no. 1-3, pp. 5–19, 2001.
[14] M. R. Neutra and P. A. Kozlowski, “Mucosal vaccines: The promise and the challenge,” Nature
Reviews Immunology, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 148–158, 2006.
[15] R. G. King, A. Silva-Sanchez, J. N. Peel, D. Botta, A. M. Dickson, A. K. Pinto, S. Meza-Perez, S. R.
Allie, M. D. Schultz, M. Liu, J. E. Bradley, S. Qiu, G. Yang, F. Zhou, E. Zumaquero, T. S. Simpler,
B. Mousseau, J. T. Killian, B. Dean, Q. Shang, J. L. Tipper, C. A. Risley, K. S. Harrod, T. Feng,
Y. Lee, B. Shiberu, V. Krishnan, I. Peguillet, J. Zhang, T. J. Green, T. D. Randall, J. J. Suschak,
B. Georges, J. D. Brien, F. E. Lund, and M. S. Roberts, “Single-dose intranasal administration of
AdCOVID elicits systemic and mucosal immunity against SARS-CoV-2 and fully protects mice
from lethal challenge,” Vaccines, vol. 9, no. 8, 2021.
[16] M. Tiboni, L. Casettari, and L. Illum, “Nasal vaccination against SARS-CoV-2: Synergistic or
alternative to intramuscular vaccines?” International Journal of Pharmaceutics, vol. 603, no. May,
p. 120686, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2021.120686
[17] B. S. Bleier, M. Ramanathan, and A. P. Lane, “COVID-19 Vaccines May Not Prevent Nasal SARS-
CoV-2 Infection and Asymptomatic Transmission,” Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery
(United States), vol. 164, no. 2, pp. 305–307, 2021.
[18] A. Kumar and A. Kumar, “Mucosal and transdermal vaccine delivery strategies against
COVID-19,” Drug Delivery and Translational Research, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 968–972, 2022.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13346-021-01001-9
[19] R. Mudgal, S. Nehul, and S. Tomar, “Prospects for mucosal vaccine: shutting the door on
SARS-CoV-2,” Human Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics, vol. 16, no. 12, pp. 2921–2931, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2020.1805992
[20] C. R. Travis, “As Plain as the Nose on Your Face: The Case for A Nasal (Mucosal) Route of
Vaccine Administration for Covid-19 Disease Prevention,” Frontiers in Immunology, vol. 11, no.
September, pp. 1–5, 2020.
[21] D. Cahn, M. Amosu, K. Maisel, and G. A. Duncan, “Biomaterials for intranasal and inhaled vaccine
delivery,” Nature Reviews Bioengineering, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 83–84, 2023.
Page 34 of 40
==PAGE:43==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
[22] Y. C. Kim, H. T. Hsueh, N. Kim, J. Rodriguez, K. T. Leo, D. Rao, N. E. West, J. Hanes, and
J. S. Suk, “Strategy to Enhance Dendritic Cell-Mediated DNA Vaccination in the Lung,” Advanced
Therapeutics, vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 1–11, 2020.
[23] R. Heida, W. L. Hinrichs, and H. W. Frijlink, “Inhaled vaccine delivery in the combat
against respiratory viruses:
a 2021 overview of recent developments and implications for
COVID-19,” Expert Review of Vaccines, vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 957–974, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/14760584.2021.1903878
[24] K. G. Mohn, I. Smith, H. Sjursen, and R. J. Cox, “Immune responses after live attenuated
influenza vaccination,” Human Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 571–578,
2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2017.1377376
[25] A. Ainai, S. I. Tamura, T. Suzuki, E. Van Riet, R. Ito, T. Odagiri, M. Tashiro, T. Kurata, and
H. Hasegawa, “Intranasal vaccination with an inactivated whole influenza virus vaccine induces
strong antibody responses in serum and nasal mucus of healthy adults,” Human Vaccines and Im-
munotherapeutics, vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 1962–1970, 2013.
[26] S. H. Puah, C. Y. Goh, C. L. Chan, A. K. J. Teoh, H. Zhang, Z. Shen, and L. P. Neo, “Mobile
device: a useful tool to teach inhaler devices to healthcare professionals,” BMC Medical Education,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-022-03302-0
[27] A. Husby, J. V. Hansen, E. Fosbøl, E. M. Thiesson, M. Madsen, R. W. Thomsen, H. T. Sørensen,
M. Andersen, J. Wohlfahrt, G. Gislason, C. Torp-Pedersen, L. Køber, and A. Hviid, “SARS-CoV-2
vaccination and myocarditis or myopericarditis: Population based cohort study,” The BMJ, vol.
375, pp. 1–9, 2021.
[28] J. McLenon and M. A. Rogers, “The fear of needles: A systematic review and meta-analysis,”
Journal of Advanced Nursing, vol. 75, no. 1, pp. 30–42, 2019.
[29] D. Freeman, S. Lambe, L. M. Yu, J. Freeman, A. Chadwick, C. Vaccari, F. Waite, L. Rosebrock,
A. Petit, S. Vanderslott, S. Lewandowsky, M. Larkin, S. Innocenti, H. McShane, A. J. Pollard, and
B. S. Loe, “Injection fears and COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy,” Psychological Medicine, vol. 53,
no. 4, pp. 1185–1195, 2023.
[30] R. Behzadmehr, A. Balouchi, M. Hesaraki, F. Alazmani Noodeh, H. Rafiemanesh, A. J. Nashwan,
F. Behmaneshpour, M. Rahdar, M. Dastres, S. Atharyan, M. Jahantigh, and F. Malekshahi, “Preva-
lence and causes of unreported needle stick injuries among health care workers: A systematic
review and meta-analysis,” Reviews on Environmental Health, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 111–123, 2023.
Page 35 of 40
==PAGE:44==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
[31] V. Hasija, S. Patial, A. Kumar, P. Singh, T. Ahamad, A. A. P. Khan, P. Raizada, and C. M. Hussain,
“Environmental impact of COVID-19 Vaccine waste: A perspective on potential role of natural
and biodegradable materials,” Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, vol. 10, no. 4, p.
107894, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2022.107894
[32] M. R. I. Rayhan, J. M. Liza, and M. M. Rahman, “Assessment of COVID-19 vaccination-related
medical waste management practices in Bangladesh,” PLoS ONE, vol. 17, no. 8 August, pp. 1–20,
2022. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0273053
[33] K. AboulFotouh, Z. Cui, and R. O. Williams, “Next-Generation COVID-19 Vaccines Should Take
Efficiency of Distribution into Consideration,” AAPS PharmSciTech, vol. 22, no. 3, 2021.
[34] Y. Hwa Lee, R. C. Harris, H. Won Oh, Y. Oh, J. C. Vargas-Zambrano, and Y. J. Choe, “Vaccine-
related errors in reconstitution in South Korea: A national physiciansâ and nursesâ survey,” Vac-
cines, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 1–9, 2021.
[35] M. Y.-T. Chow and J. K. W. Lam, “Intranasal and Inhaled Vaccines,” pp. 123–148, 2023.
[36] A. O. Hassan, N. M. Kafai, I. P. Dmitriev, J. M. Fox, B. K. Smith, I. B. Harvey, R. E. Chen, E. S.
Winkler, A. W. Wessel, J. B. Case, E. Kashentseva, B. T. McCune, A. L. Bailey, H. Zhao, L. A.
VanBlargan, Y. N. Dai, M. Ma, L. J. Adams, S. Shrihari, J. E. Danis, L. E. Gralinski, Y. J. Hou,
A. Schäfer, A. S. Kim, S. P. Keeler, D. Weiskopf, R. S. Baric, M. J. Holtzman, D. H. Fremont, D. T.
Curiel, and M. S. Diamond, “A Single-Dose Intranasal ChAd Vaccine Protects Upper and Lower
Respiratory Tracts against SARS-CoV-2,” Cell, vol. 183, no. 1, pp. 169–184, 2020.
[37] R. C. Mettelman, E. K. Allen, and P. G. Thomas, “Mucosal immune responses to infection
and vaccination in the respiratory tract,” Immunity, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 749–780, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.immuni.2022.04.013
[38] R. Danielsson and H. Eriksson, “Aluminium adjuvants in vaccines â A way to modulate the immune
response,” Seminars in Cell and Developmental Biology, vol. 115, no. December 2020, pp. 3–9,
2021.
[39] H. HogenEsch, “Mechanism of immunopotentiation and safety of aluminum adjuvants,” Frontiers
in Immunology, vol. 3, no. JAN, pp. 1–13, 2012.
[40] Y. S. Cheng, “Mechanisms of pharmaceutical aerosol deposition in the respiratory tract,” AAPS
PharmSciTech, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 630–640, 2014.
[41] C. H. Y. Chung, B. Cui, R. Song, X. Liu, X. Xu, and S. Yao, “Scalable production of monodisperse
functional microspheres by multilayer parallelization of high aspect ratio microfluidic channels,”
Micromachines, vol. 10, no. 9, 2019.
Page 36 of 40
==PAGE:45==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
[42] R. H. Ansary, M. B. Awang, and M. M. Rahman, “REVIEW: PROTEIN DELIVERY USING
PLGA MPs,” Tropical Journal of Pharmaceutical Research, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 1179–1190, 2014.
[43] C. Busatto, J. Pesoa, I. Helbling, J. Luna, and D. Estenoz, “Effect of particle size, polydispersity
and polymer degradation on progesterone release from PLGA microparticles: Experimental and
mathematical modeling,” International Journal of Pharmaceutics, vol. 536, no. 1, pp. 360–369,
2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpharm.2017.12.006
[44] C. Wischke and S. P. Schwendeman, “Principles of encapsulating hydrophobic drugs in PLA/PLGA
microparticles,” International Journal of Pharmaceutics, vol. 364, no. 2, pp. 298–327, 2008.
[45] M. Zhou, L. Shen, X. Lin, Y. Hong, and Y. Feng, “Design and pharmaceutical applications of
porous particles,” RSC Advances, vol. 7, no. 63, pp. 39 490–39 501, 2017.
[46] R. U. Agu, M. I. Ugwoke, M. Armand, R. Kinget, and N. Verbeke, “Agu - 2001 - Lung as a route
for peptide adminsteration,” 2001.
[47] N. A. Delche, R. Kheiri, B. G. Nejad, M. Sheikhi, M. S. Razavi, M. Rahimzadegan, and Z. Salmasi,
“Recent progress in the intranasal PLGA-based drug delivery for neurodegenerative diseases treat-
ment,” Iranian Journal of Basic Medical Sciences, vol. 26, pp. 1107–1119, 2023.
[48] A. L. S. A. A. E. Ravi B. Patel, Carlson, “Characterization of formulation parameters affecting low
molecular weight drug release from in situ forming drug delivery systems,” J Biomed Mater Res A,
vol. 94, no. 2, pp. 476–484, 2011.
[49] J. Oliveira, G. S. Brichi, J. M. Marconcini, L. H. C. Mattoso, G. M. Glenn, and E. S. Medeiros,
“Effect of solvent on the physical and morphological properties of poly(lactic acid) nanofibers
obtained by solution blow spinning,” Journal of Engineered Fibers and Fabrics, vol. 9, no. 4, pp.
117–125, 2014.
[50] A. V. Dobrynin, R. Sayko, and R. H. Colby, “Viscosity of Polymer Solutions and Molecular Weight
Characterization,” ACS Macro Letters, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 773–779, 2023.
[51] R. Mangal, S. Srivastava, S. Narayanan, and L. A. Archer, “Size-Dependent Particle Dynamics in
Entangled Polymer Nanocomposites,” Langmuir, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 596–603, 2016.
[52] Y. Hua, Y. Su, H. Zhang, N. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Gao, J. Gao, and A. Zheng, “Poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid) microsphere production based on quality by design: a review,” Drug Delivery, vol. 28, no. 1,
pp. 1342–1355, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/10717544.2021.1943056
Page 37 of 40
==PAGE:46==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
[53] K. Y. Hernández-Giottonini, R. J. Rodríguez-Córdova, C. A. Gutiérrez-Valenzuela, O. Peñuñuri-
Miranda, P. Zavala-Rivera, P. Guerrero-Germán, and A. Lucero-Acuña, “PLGA nanoparticle prepa-
rations by emulsification and nanoprecipitation techniques: Effects of formulation parameters,”
RSC Advances, vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 4218–4231, 2020.
[54] A. Sahin,
G. Esendagli,
F. Yerlikaya,
S. Caban-Toktas,
D. Yoyen-Ermis,
U. Horzum,
Y. Aktas, M. Khan, P. Couvreur, and Y. Capan, “A small variation in average particle
size of PLGA nanoparticles prepared by nanoprecipitation leads to considerable change
in nanoparticlesâ characteristics and efficacy of intracellular delivery,”
Artificial Cells,
Nanomedicine and Biotechnology, vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 1657–1664, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/21691401.2016.1276924
[55] R. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, Y. Wu, Y. Guo, and L. Xu, “Effects of the molecular weight of PLGA on
degradation and drug release in vitro from an mPEG-PLGA nanocarrier,” Chemical Research in
Chinese Universities, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 848–853, 2016.
[56] Y. Choi, H. Y. Yoon, J. Kim, S. Yang, J. Lee, J. W. Choi, Y. Moon, J. Kim, S. Lim, M. K. Shim,
S. Jeon, I. C. Kwon, and K. Kim, “Doxorubicin-loaded plga nanoparticles for cancer therapy:
Molecular weight effect of plga in doxorubicin release for controlling immunogenic cell death,”
Pharmaceutics, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 1–18, 2020.
[57] S. F. Chou and K. A. Woodrow, “Relationships between mechanical properties and drug release
from electrospun fibers of PCL and PLGA blends,” Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of
Biomedical Materials, vol. 65, no. September 2016, pp. 724–733, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2016.09.004
[58] W. Huang and C. Zhang, “Tuning the size of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles
fabricated by nanoprecipitation,” Biological Systems Engineering, pp. 1–25, 2017.
[59] M. Trenkel and R. Scherließ, “Nasal powder formulations: In-vitro characterisation of the impact
of powders on nasal residence time and sensory effects,” Pharmaceutics, vol. 13, no. 3, 2021.
[60] Y. Kitayama, S. Takigawa, and A. Harada, “Effect of Poly(Vinyl Alcohol) Concentration and
Chain Length on Polymer Nanogel Formation in Aqueous Dispersion Polymerization,” Molecules,
vol. 28, no. 8, 2023.
[61] X. Liu, S. G. Baldursdottir, J. Aho, H. Qu, L. P. Christensen, J. Rantanen, and M. Yang, “Elec-
trospinnability of Poly Lactic-co-glycolic Acid (PLGA): the Role of Solvent Type and Solvent
Composition,” Pharmaceutical Research, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 738–749, 2017.
Page 38 of 40
==PAGE:47==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
[62] Y. Gao, Y. Bai, D. Zhao, M. W. Chang, Z. Ahmad, and J. S. Li, “Tuning microparticle porosity
during single needle electrospraying synthesis via a non-solvent-based physicochemical approach,”
Polymers, vol. 7, no. 12, pp. 2701–2710, 2015.
[63] A. Ullah, C. M. Kim, and G. M. Kim, “Solvent effects on the porosity and size of porous PLGA
microspheres using gelatin and PBS as porogens in a microfluidic flow-focusing device,” Journal
of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, vol. 17, no. 10, pp. 7775–7782, 2017.
[64] S. K. Sahoo, J. Panyam, S. Prabha, and V. Labhasetwar, “Residual polyvinyl alcohol associated
with poly (D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles affects their physical properties and cellular up-
take,” Journal of Controlled Release, vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 105–114, 2002.
[65] S. C. Lee, J. T. Oh, M. H. Jang, and S. I. Chung, “Quantitative analysis of polyvinyl alcohol on the
surface of poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) microparticles prepared by solvent evaporation method:
Effect of particle size and PVA concentration,” Journal of Controlled Release, vol. 59, no. 2, pp.
123–132, 1999.
[66] C. Takai, T. Hotta, S. Shiozaki, S. Matsumoto, and T. Fukui, “Key techniques to control
porous microsphere morphology in S/O/W emulsion system,” Colloids and Surfaces A:
Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects, vol. 373, no. 1-3, pp. 152–157, 2011. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfa.2010.10.049
[67] L. Qian and H. Zhang, “Controlled freezing and freeze drying: A versatile route for porous and
micro-/nano-structured materials,” Journal of Chemical Technology and Biotechnology, vol. 86,
no. 2, pp. 172–184, 2011.
[68] H. Keles, A. Naylor, F. Clegg, and C. Sammon, “Investigation of factors influencing the hydrolytic
degradation of single PLGA microparticles,” Polymer Degradation and Stability, vol. 119, pp.
228–241, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2015.04.025
[69] I. O. I. Oleochemical, “Hard fats for suppositories and ovules ® IOI Oleo GmbH 1.”
[70] A. C. Grayson, M. J. Cima, and R. Langer, “Size and temperature effects on poly(lactic-co-glycolic
acid) degradation and microreservoir device performance,” Biomaterials, vol. 26, no. 14, pp. 2137–
2145, 2005.
[71] M. Postek, “Critical issues in scanning electron microscope metrology,” Journal of Research of the
National Institute of Standards and Technology, vol. 99, no. 5, p. 641, 1994.
[72] M. Schmid, A. Liebel, F. Michael, G. Moldovan, and H. Soltau, “Reduce Charging Effects on
Beam Sensitive Material by Optimized Scanning Routines in SEM,” Microscopy and Microanaly-
sis, vol. 25, no. S2, pp. 474–475, 2019.
Page 39 of 40
==PAGE:48==
Microparticles fabrication for intranasal delivery of vaccines
[73] M. M. El-Hammadi and J. L. Arias, “Recent Advances in the Surface Functionalization of PLGA-
Based Nanomedicines,” Nanomaterials, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 1–34, 2022.
[74] H. Sah, L. A. Thoma, H. R. Desu, E. Sah, and G. C. Wood, “Concepts and practices used to develop
functional PLGA-based nanoparticulate systems,” International Journal of Nanomedicine, vol. 8,
pp. 747–765, 2013.
[75] J. S. Suk, Q. Xu, N. Kim, J. Hanes, and L. M. Ensign, “PEGylation as a strategy for improving
nanoparticle-based drug and gene delivery,” Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, vol. 99, pp. 28–51,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2015.09.012
[76] A. Vlachopoulos, G. Karlioti, E. Balla, V. Daniilidis, T. Kalamas, M. Stefanidou, N. D. Bikiaris,
E. Christodoulou, I. Koumentakou, E. Karavas, and D. N. Bikiaris, “Poly(Lactic Acid)-Based Mi-
croparticles for Drug Delivery Applications: An Overview of Recent Advances,” Pharmaceutics,
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–37, 2022.
[77] M. Thesis, “Technical University of Denmark Polymersomes for Oral Delivery of Biopharmaceu-
ticals Oral Delivery of Insulin,” no. January, 2023.
[78] M. Farzan, R. Roth, J. Schoelkopf, J. Huwyler, and M. Puchkov, “The processes behind drug
loading and release in porous drug delivery systems,” European Journal of Pharmaceutics and
Biopharmaceutics, vol. 189, no. March, pp. 133–151, 2023.
[79] H. R. F. Masoumi, M. Basri, W. S. Samiun, Z. Izadiyan, and C. J. Lim, “Enhancement of encapsu-
lation efficiency of nanoemulsion-containing aripiprazole for the treatment of schizophrenia using
mixture experimental design,” International Journal of Nanomedicine, vol. 10, pp. 6469–6471,
2015.
[80] S. Wahyuningsih, V. Anjani, H. Munawaroh, and C. Purnawan, “Optimization of Rhodamine B De-
colorization by Adsorption and Photoelectrodegradation Combination System,” ALCHEMY Jurnal
Penelitian Kimia, vol. 14, no. 2, p. 276, 2018.
[81] A. Sambugaro, M. Donini, E. Chistè, M. Scarpa, S. Dusi, and N. Daldosso, “Porous silicon mi-
croparticles as efficient carriers for immunologic adjuvants,” Journal of Drug Delivery Science and
Technology, vol. 92, no. August 2023, 2024.
Page 40 of 40
