==PAGE:1==
Analysis of devices connected to the Internet with
an interest on digital ghosts
Oliver Rømer Hansen - s194606
June 2024
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
The amount of digitization and IoT devices are increasingly integrated into our
daily life. Because of our increasing dependency on these devices it becomes
apparent that they must run continuously without fault. This thesis specifically
focuses on the building automation protocol BACnet which is used to control
various appliances in homes, offices, and factories. This project aims to anal-
yse the scanning data from a previous study conducted at DTU. The study
extracted device banners using multiple IoT and OT protocols such as MQTT
and MODBUS. This thesis aims to understand the BACnet devices included in
the scanning data and the relationships between the features. This is done by
utilizing methods such as K-modes, K-means, and agglomerative hierarchical
clustering to group the data. These groups are studied and found to be mostly
insignificant. Additionally we extract dates directly from the versions provided
in the data and categorize them based on vendors. From this analysis it is found
that 50% of the versions show to be at least four years old and some outdated
by more than a decade. These ghost devices might fall to the influence of bot-
nets and show how important it is that businesses regularly update and monitor
their devices to deter cyber attacks.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
5
2.1
BACnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2.1
Clustering algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2.2
Choosing the number of clusters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.3
Reducing dimensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Relationships between features
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.5
Edit distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.6
Shannon entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Related work
12
3.1
Analyzing protocol banners . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
Analyzing open ports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
Monitoring network traffic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Methodology
16
4.1
Data overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
No processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Shannon entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.4
Edit distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.5
Extracting dates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Results
23
5.1
No processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.2
Shannon entropy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.3
Edit distance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Extracting dates
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.4.1
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6
Discussion
38
6.1
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
7
Conclusion
40
References
41
==PAGE:4==
1
Introduction
As digital solutions become more widespread a growing number of daily tasks are
automated to save both time and money. Simple tasks can now be executed with
the touch on a smartphone. As of 2023 there exists approximately 15.14 billion
Internet of Things (IoT) devices globally which has been projected to nearly
double to almost 30 billion by 2030 [Sta23]. These devices gradually become
part of everything from everyday activities like starting the coffee machine from
bed to large automated facilities producing microchips.
The term ”smart” has become a defining keyword that brings the new dig-
itization of our lives. Smart homes and smart cities represent a fraction of the
technology that will improve every day life. As we slowly transition to living
side by side with machines and AI our life and therefore our personal informa-
tion are stored in the cloud. IoT devices are connected to networks where they
can either gather data or act upon it, granting them access to higly personal
information. However IoT extends beyond personal life and is predominantly
utilized by companies to improve their operations, systems, and how they are
connected. As IoT devices become widespread it is crucial that their actions are
predictable and that they function correctly. This entails protecting them from
being hijacked, modified, or disabled by malicious assailants. Cybersecurity is
therefore an essential field in our increasingly digitized world. Not only because
the devices impact our lives more but also due to the sensitive data they can
access.
Insecure devices can be used by malicious agents to orchestrate large-scale
attacks on critical services. Botnets, which consists of thousands of devices can
perform Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks on a gigantic scale called Distributed
Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks. In 2016 the Mirai botnet was employed to
DDoS the services of the popular DNS provider DYN, rendering websites such
as Netflix, Twitter, and Reddit inaccessible for a total of three hours until DYN
were able to mitigate the attack[For].
Given the interconnected nature of IoT devices means that each device can
communicate with each other and may possess special access privileges. Mean-
ing a networks security is only as strong as its most vulnerable device. This
occurred for a casino in 2018 where hackers were able to leverage a smart ther-
mometer to infiltrate the casinos database and steal private information about
high-rollers[Bec]. Highlighting the critical importance of ensuring security for
these IoT devices. The most vulnerable device on a network is the weakest link
and therefore becomes the easiest target for hackers to infiltrate the rest of the
network. Several factors can contribute to a devices vulnerability to attacks.
One of the most important factors is the configuration of the device. As a device
becomes older and outdated, the likelihood of hackers discovering vulnerabilities
increase significantly. This trend is seen by the rising number of vulnerabilities
identified every year[Sec].
Through the complexity of an increasing network it becomes challenging to
maintain an understanding of all the individual components which make up the
network. Some devices may therefore be forgotten, this leads to potential ex-
1
==PAGE:5==
ploits which remain undiscovered until they are actively targeted by malicious
actors. Proper configuration and regular updates are essential for maintaining
network security. Devices and systems must be used in accordance with their
intended design. This includes using the newest system updates as these often
address bugs and glitches that could otherwise be abused by hackers to gain
unauthorized access to the device or system. In addition to regular updates
other best practices include correctly configuring the device. Common miscon-
figurations include default passwords and usernames or even no authentication,
unnecessary open ports, and lack encryption of communication. By ensuring a
proper configuration companies’ devices are much safer from potential exploita-
tion and attacks.
To understand the practical performance of this principle it is essential to cre-
ate a comprehensive overview of the devices connected to the internet. This
is typically achieved through a proccess known as device scanning. This scan-
ning consists of sending various types of messages to devices and analyzing the
devices’ response. These responses, commonly referred to as banners, provide
unique insights into each device, how they operate, which software versions
they run, and what configurations they use. Furthermore incorporating the ge-
ographical location of the devices can further enhance the data allowing for the
identication of trends across countries and regions.
This thesis focuses on one such study conducted at the Technical University
of Denmark (DTU). The scanning process, carried out by Lundsgaard et al.
[LL24], was part of a previous project at DTU. This scan encompassed millions
of internet-connected devices.
It utilized the widely-used protocols: AMQP,
BACnet, CoAP, DDS, DNP3, MODBUS, MQTT, OPCUA, TR069, and XMPP.
The scanning was performed in 2023 and included more than 20 million exposed
systems of which approximately 4 million (21%) of them were deemed miscon-
figured or vulnerable. The scanning utilized ZGrab [ZMa24] along with custom
scripts designed to extract protocol-specific banners from the devices. The gath-
ered banners are the focal point of this thesis, serving as the basis for a detailed
analysis of the many devices scanned. By examining these banners we achieve
a snapshot of the current state of internet-connected devices and highlight the
importance of regular updates and monitoring of the devices.
The BACnet protocol has been selected as the focus point of this thesis due to its
critical role in building automation and the consequences that entail. BACnet
devices can in extreme cases be leveraged to overheat buildings, shut off heat
during the winter [Rob16] or overload energy grids. Furthermore a report by
Kaspersky from 2019 shows that 37.8% of computers used to control smart
building automation systems were affected by malicious attacks in the first half
of 2019 [Kas19].
BACnet is a protocol specifically designed for building automation encom-
passing the automation of heating, ventilation, and aircondition (HVAC), ac-
cess control, energy management, and other building and home automation
tasks[com24]. These devices directly control physical features within buildings
2
==PAGE:6==
which can significantly influence the building’s environment. Through the use
of sensors BACnet devices can regulate various appliances and gather detailed
information about the operations of the entire building including the location
of critical areas such as server rooms or data centers. Furthermore the potential
for abuse of BACnet devices extends beyond control of a buildings environment.
Malicious actors can manipulate these device to operate at unsafe voltages which
risks damage to the appliances and overload local energy grids. Exploiting these
vulnerabilities could lead to a complete shutdown of a buildings technological
infrastructure, rendering it uninhabitable.
These functions have a profound
impact on living conditions and essential services. Additionally the vulnerabil-
ity of these devices also present a gateway for accessing other systems within
the network. A notable example occurred in 2013 where the American retailer
and supermarket chain Target’s customer data was breached via compromised
HVAC systems[Ave22].
This incident highlights the broader implications of
insecure building automation systems but also that the weakest link can be ex-
ploited for extensive network intrusion. Given these functions it is important to
ensure that these devices are protected and without vulnerabilities as they can
indirectly impact people.
To gain a comprehensive understanding of the BACnet devices currently in use
today this thesis aims to address the following research questions:
• What are the tendencies in the BACnet device data?
• Which preprocessing methods can be utilized to transform the string data?
• How can the BACnet data be clustered?
• How outdated are the BACnet devices?
This research will employ methods such as pairwise relation graphs and
frequency tables to explore the data.
These techniques will provide insights
into which devices and vendors are represented, helping to identify patterns
and trends which show up across the BACnet devices.
Furthermore various
preprocessing methods will be applied to the data to further explore it. The
clustering of the devices will be the central focus and aims to identify significant
relationships between different data fields and how they relate to vulnerabilities
of the devices. By analyzing these clusters we hope to uncover critical insights
about BACnet devices in use.
3
==PAGE:7==
The outline of this thesis is given by the following sections. Section 2 will
focus on the background regarding classification and BACnet. The next section
3 will review existing literature and studies related to the classification of devices
connected on the internet with a particular focus on IoT and banner grabbing.
Section 4 will then detail the methods employed to identify relationships and
categorize devices. Additionally it covers the preprocessing techniques used to
transform the string data. In Section 5 the findings from applying the methods
will be presented. Specifically this section will focus on the various clusterings
that have been performed. Section 6 will focus on the key insights represented
in the data, the limitations of this thesis, and possible future research. Finally
a conclusion is given in Section 7.
4
==PAGE:8==
2
Background
2.1
BACnet
BACnet (Building Automation and Control Network) is a protocol specifically
designed for the automation and control of building systems. The protocol has
been developed and is maintained by American Society of Heating, Refrigerat-
ing and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc. (ASHRAE)[ASH]. BACnet helps to
facilitate the implementation and use of digital control technology within build-
ings. The protocol achieves this through a structured set of messages which
contain values stored or read on a device [22].
Each BACnet device operates with a collection of data structures called ob-
jects. These objects hold various properties in the form of key value pairs, e.g.
id := value. Each device can contain numerous objects each tailored to spe-
cific control or automation functions. One such is the Device object which is
mandatory for each device and must only exist once. This object holds exter-
nally visible characteristics such as vendor name, firmware revision, location,
and other critical metadata. This Device object serves to help identify the
device and interact with it, which open the device up to operations between de-
vices. This creates an efficient network which can control and automate building
appliances.
Some of the properties of the Device object is given below in more detail
[22]:
• object name: This property represents the user-assigned name of the
object. This property is an identifier of the device that must be unique
across the entire network.
• vendor name: This property identifies the manufacturer of the BACnet
device.
• vendor id: A unique identification code assigned to each vendor by
ASHRAE[ASH].
The specific ID for each company can be found on
ASHRAEs website [BAC24].
• model name: Assigned by the vendor, this property specifies the model
of the BACnet device.
• firmware revision: This property is also assigned by the vendor and
indicates the firmware version installed on the machine.
• application software revision: This property indicates the ver-
sion of the application software installed on the device. This can be rep-
resented in various formats such as date-and-time stamp, a programmer’s
name, a host file version number, etc.
• location: This optional property describes the physical location of the
device.
5
==PAGE:9==
• description: This is another optional property which provides a user-
assigned description of the device. It can contain additional context or
notes about the device.
By default the devices utilizing the BACnet protocol are not intended to be
exposed to the internet[22]. This is a security threat as the BACnet protocol
lacks security features that protect data messages or provide authentication.
Consequently if a BACnet device is exposed to the internet it would be possible
for a malicious user to read and possibly write all values it exposes which pose
significant risks to the system the device is connected to.
Recognizing this cybersecurity vulnerability an additional connection secu-
rity measure was added on the 18th of November, 2019 [22]. This connection
known as BACnet Secure Connect (BACnet/SC) adds a secure, encrypted com-
munication datalink layer to the protocol. This connection enables two Building
Automation Systems (BAS) to connect securely, addressing the critical need for
data protection and system integrity. Furthermore BACnet/SC employs web-
sockets and Transport Layer Security (TLS) 1.3 to establish authentication, and
integrity [Int24]. This safeguards against unauthorized access and communica-
tions being read by malicious agents.
2.2
Machine Learning
Machine learning is a branch of computer science that focuses on developing
statistical models which help to analyze and interpret data in a meaningful way.
These methods solve various problems by utilizing datasets and constructing
statistical models which can learn from and make predictions based on these
datasets [Bur19]. In machine learning datasets of size N consists of elements xi
where 0 < i < N. Each element, xi, in the dataset is referred to as a feature
vector because it consists of multiple features that describe the element. For
instance consider a dataset consisting of information about individuals. Each
individual can have features such as age, job, and a salary.
There are four primary types of machine learning: supervised, semi-supervised,
unsupervised, and reinforcement.
Supervised learning relates to problems where the dataset contains a label for
each element. A model is trained on this dataset to predict labels for new and
unseen data. These labels can be specified classes, a real number or even a com-
plex structure. The model uses the feature vector xi to predict a corresponding
label. Meaning supervised learning includes classification and regression tasks.
For example in our dataset of individuals the model could predict a persons
salary based on their job and age.
Semi-supervised learning involves datasets where only a subset of elements
are labels and the remaining elements are unlabeled. The model utilizes the
extra information from the unlabeled data in conjunction with the labeled data
to improve label prediction. This approach is particularly useful when obtaining
labels is expensive or time consuming.
Unsupervised learning deals with unlabeled data. Rather than predicting
6
==PAGE:10==
labels the goal is to transform each element into another vector or value that re-
veals patterns or structures within the data. This often involves clustering where
elements are grouped based on similarity. Applications other than clustering in-
cludes dimensionality reduction and anomaly detection. For the example given
we might be able to cluster on the salary and find that clusters where individuals
have high salary also are of older age on average.
Reinforcement learning is distinct from the others as it relates to where the
machine interacts with an environment. The machine called an agent observes
the state of the environment and can perform actions to alter it. These actions
lead to different states which can contain rewards or penalties which enhances
that behavior for the machine. By doing this the machine will learn a policy
which is a function that can maximize the reward of any state. As the agent
explores the environment it learns to adapt its behavior to achieve the most
favorable outcomes. Reinforcement learning is generally used for robotics, AI
in games, and autonomous systems.
2.2.1
Clustering algorithms
Within unsupervised learning multiple methods exist that group feature vec-
tors based on various features. These methods are among others agglomerative
hierarchical clustering, K-Means, and HDBSCAN.
Agglomerative hierarchical clustering[JMF99] is a method which organizes
data into a hierarchy of clusters based on the distance between observations.
This approach is particularly effective for small datasets due to the computa-
tionally intensiveness of comparing all values to determine which observations
join the clusters. The process begins with each observation as an individual
cluster. The algorithm then iteratively merges the closest pairs of clusters until
a stopping criteria is met which can either be a maximum distance threshold or
a defined number of clusters. The distance between clusters and values can be
calculated in several ways each of which affect the clustering. Average linkage
calculates the distance as the average pairwise distances between observations
in the respective clusters. Complete linkage calculates the maximum distance
between any two observations in each cluster. Single linkage calculates the dis-
tance by the minimum distance between any two observations in each cluster.
The choice of linkage method is crucial as it can influence how the clusters form.
K-means is one of the most commonly used clustering algorithms.
The k-
means algorithm [Bur19] works by creating k clusters, where k is user-specified.
Initially these clusters are just randomly selected feature vectors (from the fea-
ture space) called centroids. The algorithm calculates the distance between each
feature vector and centroid. This distance can be calculated using metrics such
as the Euclidean distance. Each feature vector is then assigned to the cluster
whose centroid is closest based on the calculated distance. After the feature
vectors have been assigned to clusters the algorithm recalculates the centroids.
The centroid for each cluster is moved to the mean of all feature vectors assigned
to that cluster. This procedure is repeated until convergence which is when the
centroids no longer change or some iteration threshold is met. K-means is a
7
==PAGE:11==
non-deterministic algorithm due to the initial centroids being chosen at ran-
dom. This means that different initializations can lead to different clusters. To
address this flaw K-means is usually run a number of times and the best clus-
tering is selected. Another feature of K-means is that it assumes the clusters
are spherical and equally sized which may not be true for real world data.
K-modes [Hua97] is another clustering method specifically designed to handle
categorical data and can therefore be used when K-Means cannot. The K-modes
algorithm works by clustering based on the frequency or mode of the fields.
Similar to K-means the algorithm starts by selecting k initial centroids from the
dataset. For each feature vector in the data the algorithm then calculates the
distance by the dissimilarity between the centroid and the feature vector. The
feature vector is then assigned to the centroid which has the smallest distance
between them.
Each centroid is then recalculated to the modes of the data
points within the cluster. These steps are then repeated until no significant
change is made or a number of iterations are reached. Clusters will therefore
emerge that describe the most frequent values of the feature vectors.
2.2.2
Choosing the number of clusters
Most clustering algorithms require the specification of the hyperparameter k
as the number of clusters the algorithm should form. Determing the optimal
number of clusters is crucial for accurately grouping the data. While several
methods exist for determining an appropriate number of clusters the decision
ends up being dependent on the analysts experience and interpretation [Bur19].
Plotting the data is the simplest and most intuitive method. However this
method is only possible for datasets which consist of up to three features as they
can be plotted in 1D, 2D, and 3D graphs. By examining these plots analysts can
estimate the number of clusters based on the visible grouping from the graphs.
The elbow method[THO53] involves running the clustering algorithm with a
range of values for k. The cost of the clusters is then plotted as a function of the
amount of clusters k. The cost is clustering algorithm dependant but can be the
average distance of all clusters meaning the distance from clustered elements to
their centroid. As k increases the cost usually decreases as the clusters over-fit
on the values which leads to when k reaches N and each cluster is just a single
data point. The elbow method is therefore to observe the graph and determine
where the cut off point is. This will be where choosing more clusters result in
diminishing returns. Meaning the extra clusters over-fit on the data and would
therefore split the true clusters into sub clusters. This cost curve can form a
hard angle which can be seen as an elbow and this is where the optimal number
of clusters is found. However real data rarely have a clear ”elbow” and can
therefore be hard to distinguish on a graph.
Prediction strength is another method where the idea is to split the dataset
into a training set and test set like it is usually done in training and validation of
models. Called Str and Ste of length Ntr and Nte respectively. Then clustering
C both sets and calling the clustering of Str (the training set) A = C(Str, k).
8
==PAGE:12==
Using A and Ste (the test set) a co-membership matrix is constructed D[A, Ste],
where the coordinate (xi, xi′) is 1 if and only if xi and xi′ belong to the same
cluster in A’s cluster borders. Otherwise it is 0. If k is a good estimate of
the number of clusters then two examples that belong in the same clustering in
C(Ste, k) will belong in the same clustering in A [Bur19].
The Gap Static is a popular method which is very flexible and works on any
clustering algorithm [TWH01]. The flexibility is because the algorithm is based
on the cost of the clusters and any distance metric can therefore be used. This
cost is given by Wk which is the mean of the distance metric within each cluster.
The gap statistic is then calculated as
Gapn(k) = E∗
n{log(Wk)} −log(Wk)
where E∗
n is the expectation under a sample of size n from the reference
distribution. The estimate k will be the value maximizing Gapn(k). However
as the amount of clusters rise the cost of the clustering decreases and the gap
graph can therefore rise until there are n clusters where n is the number of
observations in the dataset. Because of this it is imperative to use a ’1-standard-
error’ rule, sk =
p
(1 + 1/B)sd(k). This standard deviation accounts for the
slow rise that occurs with the rise of clusters. An example gap statistic can be
seen in Figure 1. In the figure the optimal number of clusters is k = 2 as seen
by the maximization of the gap statistic.
Figure 1: Example gap statistic [TWH01]
2.3
Reducing dimensions
Reducing the dimensions of the data is becoming less apparent as computers
become more powerful and GPU’s becoming more widespread. However these
techniques can still be used to visualize data and increase the speed of algorithms
run on the data.
The most commonly used method is the principal component analysis (PCA)
[Jam+23]. The PCA makes a linear transformation of the coordinates from the
9
==PAGE:13==
original coordinate system to a coordinate system of smaller dimensions. The
axes that make up that coordinate system are called principal components. The
first principal component describes the most variance of the data. The second
describes the second most and so on. Each principal component is orthogonal to
each other. The data is then projected onto these principal components which
achieves the lower dimensionality. Apart from using the lower dimensionality
to graph the data projecting each field onto the principal components can also
help to understand how each field contributes to the principal components. Fur-
thermore these also describe how the fields relate to each other by the principal
components. Fields that contribute equally to the principal components will
relate to each other.
The PCA can however not be used in all situations. Instead multiple corre-
spondence analysis (MCA) [KMM16] can be used. MCA works on all data but
is especially useful when the data includes more than one value which cannot be
compared trivially like categorical data. Similar to PCA, MCA also transforms
the data to a lower dimension. It does this through quantification of the values
contained in the data. The method is used to reduce the multiple values in
the data to a smaller set that summarize the data. This works very well for
nominal data with a small amount of different variables like a multiple choice
questionnaire.
2.4
Relationships between features
Different methods can be used to understand the relationships between features
within the data. This is helpful to understand which features depend on each
other and which do not. As mentioned the reduction of dimensions can help
to describe these relationships by understanding the principal components and
how the feature vectors lie in the new coordinate system. The following methods
can also be used to understand the relationships.
To further understand the relationships between the data other methods like
analysis of variance (ANOVA) [Has24] are usually used. ANOVA is a number
of methods that determine whether the features analysed have a significant
difference. The most known one is one-way ANOVA which determine difference
between different groups of data where the groups are chosen from a categorical
feature. A simple example of the analysis is whether a persons age is significant
in a persons salary.
Another method is to use the the Chi-square test[Pea00]. There are different
tests, goodness of fit test, test of independence, test of homogeneity. The most
common is the test of independence which establishes the null hypothesis of
does the observed data follow the expected distribution. This test is applied to
2 features and a frequency table is made. The test works on categorical data and
uses the different values to understand whether or not the null hypothesis holds.
Generally as a rule of thumb the frequencies in the Chi-square test should be
at least 5 if not the test results can be off. A simple example is whether salary
of a person depends on their number of pets.
10
==PAGE:14==
2.5
Edit distance
A method is needed to compare strings as many responses from the devices are
strings which explain properties. One such method is the string edit distance
which calculates a distance between 2 strings and where similar strings will have
a lower distance than dissimilar strings [Nav01]. This distance is how many
steps are used to edit the first string into the second and by definition vice
versa. These techniques are used in natural language processing like spelling
correction but also DNA sequence analysis[WM24].
There exists different versions which allow for various manipulations of the
string. The most commonly used version is the Levenshtein distance which al-
lows for the following steps to be carried out. Inserting a character, deleting a
character and substituting a character for another[Lev66]. The Hamming dis-
tance only allows for substitution and can therefore only work on strings of the
same length[HAM50]. In the Damerau-Levenshtein distance the Levenshtein
distance is expanded with transposition. Meaning two adjacent characters can
be swapped[Lev66][DAM64]. Finally the Jaro distance only allows for transpo-
sitions [Jar89]. These are some of the edit distance algorithms which are based
on characters. The mentioned methods have different strengths and weaknesses
that depend on the data they are used on.
2.6
Shannon entropy
When dealing with strings it can be helpful to convert them to meaningful num-
bers that can still explain the string but also be compared using mathematical
expressions. For this the Shannon entropy[Sha48] can be used.
The Shannon entropy calculates the uncertainty of a probability distribution.
Using the following formula the Shannon entropy of x can be calculated. Where
x can be a string and xi is the character at the ith position in the string.
H(x) = −
n
X
i
P(xi) log P(xi)
Meaning that if the next outcome in the distribution is very likely the un-
certainty of that distribution is low and vice versa.
Therefore entropy of a
distribution becomes how much information needs to be encoded to describe
the distribution. As an example a simple coin toss with two possibilities would
need a single bit (0 or 1) to explain the possible outcomes.
11
==PAGE:15==
3
Related work
This section will explore the different methods that have already been applied to
classifying and identifying IoT devices. The research can be put into 3 groups:
Analyzing protocol banners, analysing open ports, and monitoring network traf-
fic passively to build a fingerprint.
3.1
Analyzing protocol banners
Device communication relies on protocols that can provide various types of
information when pinged. One study by Cheng et al. [Che+21] explores the
use of neural networks to analyze device banners. In this research banners from
nine different protocols including HTTP/S, TELNET, and others were utilized
to extract useful information about the device such as vendor and product
name. Furthermore the data was enhanced with additional features from the
web interfaces that each device exposed. This enriched dataset was then labeled
using the database Recog [Rap24].
A neural network was trained on these
classifications employing the random forest algorithm in conjunction with 10-
fold cross-validation. The study achieved an accuracy of 97.5% to classify the
devices.
Banners are also analysed by Javed et. al. in [Jav+20], which employs the
Acquistional Rule-Based Engine (ARE) to process and interpret the banners in
four structured steps. The initial step involves the removal of irrelevant text
such as dictionary words and stop words. The remaining words which are more
likely to contain relevant information are grouped. The grouped words are used
in a Google Search to determine the device type, vendor, and product name.
Specifically the first 10 search results are analyzed to extract relevant informa-
tion. The extracted values are then examined for local dependency. Meaning
that if two or more values are frequently mentioned together in the same search
result they are grouped in a tuple. Finally the Apriori Algorithm[Agr+96] is
utilized to learn association rules from the values and tuples. The rules are de-
fined as if x then y, meaning if x exists in the data then y might appear together
with x. In their implementation Javed et al. found that their approach yielded
a precision of 62.5% which is significantly lower than the reported 97.5% of the
original study. The datasets used to evaluate this were 4919 unique banners
from Censys 350 and randomly chosen IoT devices from the internet.
Another approach at analyzing protocol banners is presented by Ebbers
[Ebb23] which focuses on examining the source code of the web interfaces of IoT
devices. This method involves several steps combining data from Shodan[Sho]
and Censys[Cen] to identify and analyze the firmware versions of various de-
vices. The first step involves analyzing data from Shodan, a search engine that
indexes information about devices connected to the internet. Based on the in-
formation gathered through Shodan regular expressions (regexp) are created to
describe the format of the versions. These regexp are then utilized to search
Censys, another search engine that scans and indexes devices connected to the
internet. The search for devices identifies their versions using that format. The
12
==PAGE:16==
versions are then dated and compared against the latest available versions for
each manufacturer. The analysis of these versions shows that only 2.45% of the
1.06 million devices were using the latest firmware. Furthermore the average
age of firmware running on the IoT devices was 19.2 months.
3.2
Analyzing open ports
In the study by Sivanathan et al. [SGS18] IoT devices are classified based on
their open TCP ports. This approach is proposed as a portable and lightweight
solution that can be implemented in networks without requiring any special
network infrastructure. The article explores four different methods to classify
devices. The first being based on the Organizationally Unique Identifier (OUI)
which is a prefix of the MAC address and can be used to classify devices how-
ever it is not always accurate and might lack information about the device itself.
The second is based on the DHCP hostname however about half of the stud-
ied devices did not reveal their hostnames. Furthermore the hostnames that
were revealed by the studied devices were not always meaningful or descriptive
enough for accurate classification. The third method given by the article is to
analyse the services advertised by each device which can provide insight into
the functionality of it. However not all devices advertise their services mak-
ing it unreliable. The fourth method is based on the service banners devices
respond with when probed. However manufacturers have reduced the amount
of information disclosed in banners to prevent cyber intruders from extracting
valuable information. Additionally devices might not respond with the expected
banners if they run their services on non-standard ports. Because of the flaws
of the methods presented Sivanathan et al. propose utilizing hierarchical port
scanning. This aims to identify devices based on the open ports they use. The
article present a hierarchical tree which determines the groups of ports that
have to be scanned to determine the device. Meaning based on the first port
scanned the branches of the tree are eliminated and the next port is scanned
until the unique port fingerprint identifies a device. The hierarchical tree pre-
sented is based on their fingerprint inventory presented in [Loi+17]. The tree
has a maximum depth of 42 probes per device however many of the devices in
their fingerprint inventory can be identified with less.
3.3
Monitoring network traffic
Identifying IoT devices can also be accomplished by monitoring the network
traffic they generate.
This is explored by Guo et al. in [GH18] where they track which servers
the IoT devices communicate with. The idea is that each IoT device tends to
interact with a unique set of servers to deliver their services. By identifying these
unique device servers the individual IoT devices can be identified. The article
finds that between the various devices there exists a significant overlap of human
facing and third-party servers. Guo et al. deploy the device detection at the
University of Southern California campus over a 6 day period. The deployment
13
==PAGE:17==
identifies a total of 35 devices across 8 different IP addresses. Additionally they
use partial data from an internet exchange point (IXP) however this yields a
lower success rate. To further validate their approach they test it against 10 of
their own devices where each one is identified correctly.
Observing network traffic can also be leveraged to train a neural network for
identifying IoT devices based on their communication patterns. This approach
is explored by Bezawada et al. in [Bez+18] where they present a model which
identify devices based on both its static and dynamic behavior.
The static
behavioral model captures the protocols the device uses to communicate, HTTP,
Telnet, etc.
and creates a baseline for identifying the device.
The dynamic
behavioral model includes packet data from the devices. It is determined by
Bezawada et al.
that the model needs to capture 6 ± 2 packets per device
which is selected to be 5. Specifically the features header and payload from the
packets are analyzed. 17 features are extracted from the packet headers and 3
from the payload. With 5 packets and 20 features per packet the total number of
features for each vector becomes 100. Several classifiers are utilized to identify
the devices and the best results are given by Gradient boosting[Mas+00] using
five-fold cross-validation. The resulting neural network has an accuracy of 99%
with the given features. The paper also explores using less features and even
though this slightly decreases the accuracy of the model it maintains an accuracy
above 88%.
Analyzing packet features for device identification is also explored by Miet-
tinen et al. in [Mie+17]. Their approach focuses exclusively on using packet
headers to train classifiers which identify the device type. The detection method
is two-fold which combines classification and string similarity measures. First a
classifier is trained on each device type the authors have fingerprints for. The
classifiers are then used to identify a device and each classifier will answer either
true or false. On an unknown device fingerprint which return true for multiple
classifiers the second step will decide the device type. The second step uses the
Damerau-Levenshtein edit distance to compare the fingerprint to that of the
matched classifiers packet header. Finally the device type with least dissimi-
larity identifies the unknown device. This approach was evaluated through a
10-fold cross-validation and identified the device type of devices with an accu-
racy of 81.5%.
Labeling network traffic data is often a labor-intensive task that requires
significant manual effort to ensure accuracy. To address this an unsupervised
learning approach is proposed by Marchal et al. [Mar+19]. They describe an
approach which eliminates the need for manual labeling and instead leverages
machine learning to classify IoT devices based on their network traffic. Specific
periods of the network traffic data are selected using the discrete Fourier trans-
form (DFT) [Win78]. From the periods 33 features are extracted which include
the flow, accuracy, duration and stability of the period of network traffic. Based
on the extracted features a unique fingerprint is then created for each device. If
a match exists for this fingerprint in their IoT cloud service the model can be
improved. If no match is found a new abstract device type label is created and a
new model trained. In the IoT cloud service the fingerprints are clustered using
14
==PAGE:18==
the k-Nearest Neighbors classifier as it works with a large number of classes and
an imbalanced dataset. Finally the method is evaluated using 33 consumer IoT
devices. Both background activity and active datasets were used to achieve a
detection accuracy of 98.2%. Additionally the device type labels which were
created were of the same vendor and of similar purpose.
3.4
Summary
For this thesis we focus on analyzing the protocol banners specifically those
associated with BACnet. Unlike previous studies which have explored banners
from other protocols we analyze BACnet which to the best our knowledge has
not been researched in this way. The research mentioned utilize web interfaces
or source code given in the banner of protocols like HTTP. These approaches
are not possible for BACnet and we will therefore study other properties given
by the banner. Unlike previous research which aim to build predictive models
for device identification [Che+21] our research aims to identify unique patterns
in the device dataset. To achieve this we draw inspiration from methodologies
that utilize string similarity [Mie+17] and try to establish meaningful labels for
the devices. Another aspect of our research is to evaluate how outdated the
BACnet devices are much like Ebbers [Ebb23] did for various IoT devices.
15
==PAGE:19==
4
Methodology
This section focuses on the methods used to explore the data, the specific values
as well as the relationships between fields.
The methods we utilize for our
analysis are MCA, PCA and clustering the data this provides an overview of
the data.
Additionally each section will explain how different preprocessing
methods were used to further analyze the data.
4.1
Data overview
The data utilized in this thesis was gathered in a previous study conducted
at DTU. Each devices’ banner contains a set of standard fields which were
presented in Section 2.
Before starting on the analysis it was essential to clean the data due to the
presence of numerous unicode characters such as \u003e. The data was unre-
liable in this regard as the strings sometimes contained these and other times
contained the symbols or letters the unicode represented. Furthermore there
were instances of empty characters \u0000 which caused inconsistencies in the
data as the values were the same but not categorized properly because of the
”empty” unicode character. Because of these issues the characters were con-
verted to their appropriate representations and empty characters were removed.
This preprocessing step resulted in a dataset with clearer values which were
easier to compare using the methods explained later.
To gain an initial understanding of the data we compiled statistics on the
number of entries, unique entries, mode, and mode percentage of each field as
presented in Table 1. The data shows that the dataset consisted of 8714 feature
vectors which each had a maximum of 10 features because every entry did not
contain all features. The table shows that the dataset included 101 unique ven-
dors with Tridium being the most frequent vendor accounting for 28.52% of the
dataset. The most frequent model was the Niagara4 Station, a controller dis-
tributed by Tridium. The most common application software revision
was ”V3.40” which is the version distributed to all Delta Controls devices. The
description and location fields show significant lack of entries with many
entries being non-descriptive such as ”Local BACnet Device object”, and ”un-
known”. These values make up 36% and 51% of the fields respectively. We also
see that object name consists of the most unique values which aligns with the
description of object name being user-defined and that it has to be unique to
the local network.
Furthermore is bacnet field only contained one value ”true” which renders
the field non-informative for further analysis. Given that this field holds no
variability it was excluded from subsequent analysis.
16
==PAGE:20==
Field name
Entries
Unique entries
Mode
Mode percentage
is bacnet
8714
1
True
100%
instance
number
8714
1962
1
8.23%
vendor id
8714
101
36
28.31%
vendor name
8609
133
Tridium
28.52%
firmware
revision
8678
854
0.0
10.64%
application
software
revision
8674
1181
V3.40
14.24%
object name
8639
5957
i-Vu
Standard
169999
3.54%
model name
8643
542
Niagara4
Station
23.38%
description
6631
1538
Local
BACnet
Device
object
36.24%
location
4634
699
unknown
51.51%
Table 1: This table shows the properties of each field for the BACnet banner
data.
4.2
No processing
To gain a deeper understanding of the relationships between the features in
the BACnet banner dataset we employed a variety of analytical methods. The
restriction of the data being strings will be explained and the methods which
are used instead will be explained.
Initially we remove the is bacnet as explained and vendor name as this
field directly corresponds to the id of the vendor and has more variability than
17
==PAGE:21==
the id as seen by the unique entries in Table 1.
Using the smaller feature set we graphed the relationships between each
field to visualize potential correlations and dependencies. The graph is shown
in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Table of each relevant field and the relation between them.
In the pair plot each scatter plot represents the relationship between two
features in the dataset. A noticeable pattern is the formation of a line in each
plot. This line indicates a unique correspondence between the features meaning
each unique value in field x has a corresponding unique value in field y. To better
illustrate this relationship the data was reordered by sorting alphabetically by
the field on the x-axis. The reordering of the data shown in Figure 3 clarifies
the pattern and reduces noise. Further showing the relationship between fields
were unique and that each unique value in one feature maps to a unique value
in another.
18
==PAGE:22==
Figure 3: Table of each relevant field and the relation between them. The x
axis has been alphabetically sorted.
When examining the different fields it becomes apparent that there is a rela-
tionship between the vendor id and the remaining fields except instance number.
Sorting the data based on vendor id reveals this relationship as the data
points form an almost continuous line. This pattern supports the notion that
each vendor uses their own unique naming conventions for the various at-
tributes such as version and model.
This pattern is also observable in the
fields for firmware revision, application software revision, and
model name however not to the same degree of uniqueness as for vendor id.
This can be attributed to the differing naming conventions as a specific model
probably has a unique format of versions.
To further understand the relationships within the data other methods like
analysis of variance (ANOVA)[Has24] or Chi-square test[Pea00] are usually em-
ployed. However these methods are not suitable for our data because they do
not function for categorical data and specifically for the Chi-square test the
frequency of intersections between fields has to be more than zero. This issue is
19
==PAGE:23==
seen in Figure 3 by the multiple unique pair values. Another popular method for
studying relationships between the fields is PCA which projects feature vectors
onto the principal components to reduce dimensionality and make relationships
clearer. However since the data consists of nominal values PCA cannot be ap-
plied directly without processing the data. Thus this will be explored in the
following sections.
Instead MCA can be employed as it works directly with
nominal fields. The MCA was conducted using the prince1 Python library with
four components.
Given the limited relationships revealed by the initial methods we attempt
to discover patterns by clustering the data.
We cannot utilize K-means for
the same reasons as PCA and therefore use K-modes instead to form clusters.
Different values of k were utilized to make a plot of the cost of clustering the
data. The elbow method was then applied to determine the optimal number of
clusters and to evaluate the effectiveness of the clustering.
4.3
Shannon entropy
To process the dataset we first calculated the Shannon entropy of each string.
The entropy of the data was computed by using the python library SciPy2.
Shannon entropy helps to understand the inherent complexity and variability
of the data. For missing values in the dataset we substituted them with empty
strings resulting in a Shannon entropy of 0.
Next we normalized the columns to reduce data variance. The normaliza-
tion prevents larger values from dominating the analysis which might skew the
results. With the normalized values we applied PCA2 to calculate principal
components and study the data by projecting it onto them. PCA simplifies the
dataset by reducing its dimensions while retaining most of the original variabil-
ity. We then visualize the data on the first 2 principal components and use it
to analyze the data.
To cluster the data the K-means algorithm is employed. We experimented
with various numbers of clusters to obtain the optimal number. The fitness of
the clusters were then evaluated by utilizing the sum of squared distances to the
closest cluster center. This measure helps to identify the best number of clusters
using the elbow method. Additionally we employed the gap statistic3 to validate
the number of clusters.
Both of these methods were used to determine the
number of clusters and the feature vectors within each cluster is then analyzed.
By employing these methods we aim to gather a deeper understanding of the
underlying patterns within the dataset.
4.4
Edit distance
As previously mentioned an important aspect of cybersecurity involves keeping
devices updated with the latest software versions mitigate exploitable glitches
1https://maxhalford.github.io/prince/
2https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/index.html
3https://github.com/Mavengence/GapStatistics
20
==PAGE:24==
and bugs. Therefore we examined the versions of each device and observe any
discernable patterns. Given that the data consists of categorical data it offers a
new perspective to transform these strings into a comparable format to utilize
standard analysis methods.
We compute the string edit distance mentioned
in Section 2.5 to make the strings comparable.
Specifically the Levenshtein
distance algorithm was selected to calculate the edit distance between version
strings.
We analyzed the following four fields one by one using these methods as
there might exist descriptive patterns or a structure within them. The fields were
firmware revision, application software revision, object name,
and model name.
Initially the edit distance was computed between all unique values. This
computation allowed the quantification of similarity between all values in the
field. Using this similarity distance matrix the processed data was clustered.
To cluster the values agglomerative hierarchical clustering was selected which is
well-suited for precalculated distance matrices. To perform the clustering the
scikit-learn4 python library was used. We experimented with both the complete
and average linkage to determine the best approach for clustering. A different
amount of clusters was analysed to understand the various values represented.
These clusters were analysed by plotting the dendrogram which visually shows
the hierarchical relationships between clusters. Examining this diagram helped
to understand the clusters which were formed. To achieve coherent clusters some
manual labeling was needed which is further explained in Section 5.3. Finally we
labeled the clusters based on the values they contained. This involved identifying
patterns among the values within each cluster.
4.5
Extracting dates
One of the identified clusters found using the methods of the previous section
was one with several versions which contained a date of the last software update.
Based on this cluster we looked to extract dates from both the version fields
firmware revision and application software revision. To extract
these dates regular expressions were utilized which described various formats of
dates. The regexp extracted dates of the following formats:
• Month, Day, Year
• Day, Month, Year
• Year, Month, Day
• Month, Day, Time, Year
Where Month was either the number representing that month, the first 3 letters
of the month or the full word. Day was the numbered date and Year was either
2 numbers indicating 20xx or 4 numbers for the full year. An example of the
4https://scikit-learn.org/stable/index.html
21
==PAGE:25==
first format is Feb(ruary) 19 2022. We used these regex expressions to extract
dates which resulted in a subset of the data that included a date. To simplify
the dates only the year was included furthermore the data was split into the
various vendors to further analyze the tendencies.
For each vendor we examined the distribution of devices and when they
were last updated. Furthermore to enrich this date data specific versions were
researched for the most represented vendors, Tridium, Delta Controls, and Car-
rier Corporation.
22
==PAGE:26==
5
Results
This section will focus on the results from the methods explained in the pre-
vious Section 4. This section will continue as the methodology section with
subsections about the different processings of the data.
5.1
No processing
Using the unprocessed data we plotted the relations between each pair of fields
and found that most fields have unique pairs of values showing as a line in each
respective relation chart. To elaborate more on the relationships between fields
MCA was performed. However the MCA does not work well on many unique
values as the analysis creates one-hot encoding for each category. There are
more than a 100 unique variables in each field as seen in Table 1. The results
shown in Table 2 show how little each component summarizes of the data. The
first axis only represents 0.06% of variance in the data. Although there are no
specific rules for how much cumulative variance needs to be explained by the
components it needs to explain the data significantly which means higher than
0.22%. Furthermore analyzing fewer features did not make a significant change
to the percentage of the variance explained by each component.
component
Eigenvalue
% of variance
% of variance (cumulative)
0
0.990
0.06%
0.06%
1
0.985
0.06%
0.11%
2
0.982
0.06%
0.17%
3
0.977
0.06%
0.22%
Table 2:
Multiple Correspondence Analysis of all fields in the data except
is bacnet and vendor name
From the failed attempt to create principal components we try to cluster
the unprocessed data. The method for this was K-modes and the number of
clusters with the cost is given by Figure 4. From the plot it can be seen that the
cost of every clustering is extremely high with values between 34000 and 48000
meaning that the BACnet data is not clustered very accurately. The cost here
is the sum distance of all points to their respective cluster centroids. This leads
to the clusters not capturing anything of significance. As stated Kmodes works
best with few unique values which is seen here by the computed cost.
23
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4: The cost of clustering using Kmodes and 2 to 25 clusters.
5.2
Shannon entropy
To extract further insights from the data we calculate the Shannon entropy of
each string in the data. A data overview of this convertion of the data is shown
in Table 3. The field with the most variance of entropy is description. This
can be because description is a user defined field and any description of
the device can therefore be inputted even really long strings containing lots of
different characters. Anything from the address its installed at, to what purpose
it serves and even username and password for the device.
count
mean
std
min
25%
50%
75%
max
instance number
8714
1.10
0.68
0.00
0.81
1.00
1.50
2.58
vendor id
8714
0.70
0.50
0.00
0.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
firmware revision
8714
2.38
0.89
0.00
1.92
2.25
2.65
4.67
application software revision
8714
2.79
1.02
0.00
2.32
3.12
3.57
4.74
object name
8714
3.27
0.61
0.00
3.02
3.39
3.64
4.57
model name
8714
2.79
0.64
0.00
2.32
2.95
3.25
4.33
description
8714
2.70
1.59
0.00
1.92
3.42
3.87
5.30
location
8714
1.29
1.36
0.00
0.00
1.50
2.13
4.42
Table 3: Data overview of the Shannon entropy of the data values
From the converted data a PCA was performed and the 5 first principals com-
24
==PAGE:28==
ponents and their explained variance are shown in Table 4. The first 2 principal
components explain 48% of the variance in the processed data. As there are 8
original features the reduction of dimensions is not very large however it helps
to visualize the data and potential clusters. The first 2 principal components
are plotted in Figure 5.
component
% of variance
% of variance (cumulative)
0
30%
30%
1
18%
48%
2
16%
64%
3
11%
75%
4
9%
84%
Table 4: The explained variance of the PCA on shannon entropy of the values
Figure 5: The values are plotted using the first 2 principal components
The plotted data on the principal components in Figure 5 is very dense with
many singular observations around it. As there seems to only exist a single large
cluster there seems to be no clear clustering of the data from the visualization
of the 2 first principal components.
Even though no clusters can be seen in the visualization we try to cluster
the data using Kmeans. The sum of squared distances to their closest cluster
center (Inertia) is plotted as a function of number of clusters in Figure 6. As
the Inertia is high the clusters are not very accurate. Furthermore the graph
heavily resembles a 1
x curve meaning no clear elbow is present. We also use the
gap statistics to determine the number of clusters. This shows that the optimal
25
==PAGE:29==
number of clusters is K = 4. The clusters are however very mixed when shown
using the 2 principal components. The statistics are shown in Figure 7.
Figure 6: The sum of squared distances to their closest cluster center as a
function of the number of clusters
Figure 7: Gap statistics of the string entropy data. Kmeans is used to establish
the clusters.
Using the found cluster labels we plot the pairwise relation charts in Figure
8. From the charts it seems that the most unique value in each cluster is the
object name. This is especially clear in the pair relation of object name
26
==PAGE:30==
and vendor id. Most of the other relation charts are mixed especially relations
with instance number. Meaning that one x value have y values in different
clusters, this is seen as overlapping colors in the charts. We therefore conclude
that this clustering show no significant patterns.
Figure 8: Pairwise relation charts of the clustered data K = 4. The data has
been sorted by the cluster label
5.3
Edit distance
Initially the edit distance matrices of all unique values within each of the
four fields was computed.
These fields as mentioned in Section 4.4 include
firmware revision, application software revision, model name,
and object name. The computed matrices were visualized to determine the vi-
ability of clustering on the field. The edit distance matrix for firmware revision
is visualized in Figure 9 and shows large distances between most values which
27
==PAGE:31==
indicate a high level of diversity. In contrast the other three fields showed small
edit distances between many of the values. This led to the formation of clusters
with a significant variance in size. Specifically some clusters were very small and
others disproportionally large. Consequently we focused solely on clustering the
firmware versions.
Figure 9: The distance matrix of firmware revision visualized. Where the
axis are unique values of the field.
Using the edit distance matrix and clustering using different configurations
of the agglomerative hierarchical clustering showed especially 2 clusters. These
were present when using all linkages. Meaning the distance between all these
elements were low and therefore very similar by this metric. This can be seen
in the dendrogram in Figure 10. The purple (2nd from the right), and brown
(rightmost) are clearly isolated groups as the distance to the other groups is
large.
28
==PAGE:32==
Figure 10: Dendrogram of hierarchical clustering of the Levenshtein edit dis-
tance of firmware revision using maximum linkage
The remaining clusters are more entangled and complex as the distance
between the values are larger than the first described clusters. Furthermore
there exists multiple values that are similar but of varying lengths. These values
have multiple versions of ”FW”, ”SBC”, etc.
however some describe more
versions than other. These values are not clustered together because of this size
discrepancy. This might happen when using the edit distance as the characters
that meaningfully describe the string are only a small amount of the string. In
this case FW, SBC, and FLI are describing the string meaningfully but only
makes up some of the string. Because of this the strings with this similarity end
in different clusters.
The distance of which to cut the dendrogram was therefore lowered. This
way the clusters became smaller but also more distinct. This helped to extract
the groups that matched the found values. Cutting the dendrogram where the
distance = 18 captures the desired details while also keeping the first 2 clusters
already represented. This leads to 33 different clusters of varying size. Some of
these clusters were then merged manually by looking at similar characteristics
such as ”FW”, and ”SBC”.
The clusters were then filtered to construct 8
clusters which are presented in Table 5.
29
==PAGE:33==
Cluster
Name
Entries
Example
0
Version numbers
467
4.11.0.142
1
Multiple versions
103
FW=01.45.04.44;SVS-
300.6:SBC=15.00;ISC=01.00;
2
Dates included
97
FRMWARE
REV:KA.13.09
Jun
27
2020
3
Boot and Main
94
BOOT(id=0,ver=0.01:001,crc=0x0000)
MAIN(id=3,ver=6.06:041,crc=0xAFA9)
4
Word + version number
51
Server 5.0.3.2000
5
Version and build
25
VLX-Platinum Loader v2.60 Bld 4
6
13
fw-version=XLWebExe-2-00-17; xlweb-
linux-2-01-06;
bs-version=XLWebExe-
2-00-17
7
Company names
4
Tridium
Table 5: This table shows the clusters found in hierarchical clustering
From the data of the clustering we observe that versions are employed by
specific vendors. The first format of just using numbers separated by punctua-
tions is used by the majority of vendors. The second clustering using multiple
versions are only used by Vendor 7 - Siemens Schweiz AG. The vendors which
include the date the device is updated is discussed in the next section. Cluster
3 called Boot and Main are versions which are only used by vendor 16 - United
Technologies Carrier, and 24 - Automated Logic Corporation. The versions in
the cluster called Word + version number are exclusively used by vendor 10
- Schneider Electric, 204 - Control Applications, Ltd., 113 - Vertiv (Formerly
Emerson Network Power). Furthermore vendor 7 - Simens Schweiz AG. and 18
- Alerton / Honeywell are the only vendors which use the versions in version
and build. The seventh cluster versions are used by vendor 17 - Honeywell Inc.
The versions contained in the final cluster is used by 3 different vendors.
It is important to note that vendors which uses one version format might
also use another. As seen by vendor 7 using versions from 2 clusters.
30
==PAGE:34==
5.4
Extracting dates
Using regex we were able to extract the dates from both version fields. This
expands upon the cluster, dates included, presented in the previous section with
several data points as we included the application software revision.
The following tables 6 and 7 show the vendors which have versions containing
dates and how many of their devices have dates contained in either field.
vendor id
Number of dates
Total number of values
28
59
70
91
138
138
292
7*
7
1020
5
5
Table 6: Table of number of dates found in firmware revision. *2 incom-
plete dates
Vendor id
Number of dates
Total number of values
0
1
86
91
138
138
149
10
12
159
7
7
292
7*
7
676
1
1
Table
7:
Table
of
number
of
dates
found
in
application software revision. *Includes 2 incomplete dates
It is clear that versions containing dates are a very small subset of the 8714
entries. With only 228 observation that contain dates. However it is the case
for all the data points of vendor 91, 292 in both fields and 159, and 676 in
application software revision, and also for 1020 in firmware revision.
Also vendor 28 has dates in most of its firmware revision. The following
sections will describe the distribution of when the versions were last updated
by year. Vendor 0’s version containing a date matches the versions from ven-
dor 28, the values of this feature vector seems to have shifted by a field. This
observation will therefore be included in vendor 28’s observations.
We also wanted to manually classify the versions by searching online for
documents containing the release date. This was done for Tridium, Delta Con-
trols and Carrier Corporation. The specifics are stated in the vendors section
however no information was found for Carrier Corporation devices and their
versions.
Vendor 28
Vendor 28 - KMC Controls, Inc. [BAC24] has 60 devices where the
firmware revision field includes the date as part of the value. Furthermore
31
==PAGE:35==
almost all devices with specified dates share the same application software revision
which is consistently Application Ver 0.1.
This suggests that a stan-
dard software version is used across these devices.
The year distribution of
the firmware versions is shown in Figure 11. The data indicates that the major-
ity of the 60 devices were updated in 2020. The oldest update recorded is from
2013, while the most recent is from 2020. Interestingly no devices were updated
in 2023, the year the scanning took place.
Figure 11: Distribution of firmware revision by year. Vendor 28 - KMC
Controls, Inc.
Vendor 91
Upon closer examination of the 138 devices for vendor 91 - No-
var Corp./Trend Control Systems Ltd., it is observed that the values in the
firmware revision and application software revision fields are iden-
tical across all devices. This allows for straightforward extraction of the update
dates, utilizing this the number of devices updated in each year can be found.
The resulting distribution of these updates is depicted in Figure 12. The data
reveals that some devices have been neglected meaning they went without up-
dates for up to 12 years, with the oldest update being from 2011. Notably more
than 50% of the devices have not been updated since 2018. The lack of updates
is concerning as it suggests that these devices are more vulnerable to exploita-
tion by malicious agents on the internet. Because the outdated software likely
contains security risks or vulnerabilities. Furthermore the absence of updates
suggests that these devices may not be actively monitored which can increase
the risk of undetected malicious activity.
32
==PAGE:36==
Figure 12: Distribution of firmware revision by year. Vendor 91 - Novar
Corp./Trend Control Systems Ltd.
Vendor 149, 159, 292, 676, 1020
This section combines the data of these
vendors due to the relatively small number of devices associated with each.
There are a total of 28 devices across these vendors and their last update years
are illustrated in Figure 13. From the data it is evident that a significant num-
ber of devices were updated within the same year of the scan. These devices
are primarily made up of devices from vendor 159 - SE-Elektronic GmbH where
6 out of 7 devices have been updated in 2023. Overall the data indicates that
more than 75% of the 28 devices have been updated within the past four years.
Furthermore vendor 292 - Advantage Controls contains the device with the old-
est update which occurred in 2012. Even though the device have generally been
updated it still highlights neglect of the devices which makes them vulnerable
to exploitation.
33
==PAGE:37==
Figure 13: Distribution of devices by the year they have been updated. For the
5 vendors, Airtek International Inc., SE-Elektronic GmbH, Advantage Controls,
ICDT, and Taco Comfort Solutions
Vendor 8
Vendor 8, Delta Controls, is the second most represented vendor
in the dataset, compromising 14% of the total data. To understand the release
dates of the device versions we conducted a search for documents which con-
tained the relevant release date information. Despite the efforts in the search
we were unable to obtain release dates for all device versions. When these dates
were unable to be retrieved we assumed that versions with larger numbers were
released later than those with lower numbers. This assumption is supported by
the date information we were able to retrieve. The devices which do not have
a specific version instead have the period in which the version was released.
Of the total 1239 devices 748 devices’ versions were retrieved, furthermore 473
were given a period in which the version was released in and the remaining 18
were unclassifiable as their versions were given by a different format and no
documentation could be found. The distribution of the release years is depicted
in Figure 14.
This figure is quite disturbing as it reveals 38% of Delta Controls’ devices
have not been updated since 2013 or possibly earlier. This results in 470 devices
which have been neglected by users. Furthermore 66% of these devices have not
been updated since 2017 making their software more than six years old. The
lack of updates leaves the devices open to exploitation by malicious agents.
Furthermore we also see that no device have been updated in the same year
as the scan. It is alarming to see these devices which are left without security
updates and monitoring.
34
==PAGE:38==
Figure 14: Distribution of firmware revision by year. Vendor 8 - Delta
controls
Vendor 36
Given that Tridium make up 28.31% of the data it is particularly
important to examine these devices in detail. Tridium provides a timeline of
release dates and versions for Niagara 4 devices on their website[Trib]. However,
a timeline for their other device Niagara AX did not exist which might be due to
the device being officially deprecated in 2021[Tria]. Therefore manual searching
for individual versions were necessary. The distribution of the found release
years is illustrated in Figure 15. Note that for some versions a specific date
could not be determined. These versions are represented as the periods between
the previous known and the next known version.
The data reveals that 51% of Tridium devices have software which have not
been updated in at least 4 years. The oldest version a device is running is from
2008 which means the devices have been neglected for 15 years. Additionally
the data reveals that less than 1% of the devices have been updated the same
year as the scan took place.
35
==PAGE:39==
Figure 15: Distribution of firmware revision by year. Vendor 36 - Tridium
5.4.1
Summary
The version data by years generally show a troubling pattern of devices left
without updates for years. Some devices were last updated in 2008 meaning
they were 15 years outdated as of the recording of the data.
An overview
of the previous sections have been given in Table 8. Less than 1% of all the
devices presented were updated in the same year as the scan. Notably 50% of all
the devices examined were last updated in 2019 meaning they were four years
outdated. This lack of updates is concerning as it increases the vulnerability
of these devices to exploitation by malicious actors as outdated systems are
more susceptible to cyber threats. Furthermore the neglection of the devices
probably means the devices are left without supervision or general monitoring.
Since the devices’ connections and network communication is not monitored the
likelihood of them being part of a botnet is rather large.
Furthermore the date formats found in the versions of the BACnet devices
predominantly follow the month-day-year format. This date format is almost
exclusively used in the United States and we can therefore infer that these
devices are located in the U.S. based on this metric alone.
36
==PAGE:40==
vendor
count
mean
std
min
25%
50%
75%
max
28
60
2018.72
2.16
2013
2018
2019
2020
2022
91
138
2017.63
2.59
2011
2016
2017.5
2020
2023
149
10
2018.7
2.36
2015
2018.25
2019
2019
2022
159
7
2022.43
1.51
2019
2023
2023
2023
2023
292
5
2018.8
4.76
2012
2016
2020
2023
2023
676
1
2022
-
2022
2022
2022
2022
2022
1020
5
2019
0.00
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
8
748
2016.53
3.45
2013
2013
2017
2020
2022
36
2457
2018.98
2.67
2008
2018
2019
2021
2023
Total
3431
2018.39
3.03
2008
2017
2019
2021
2023
Table 8: Data overview of the versions by year of each vendor
37
==PAGE:41==
6
Discussion
The analysis of BACnet device data reveals several key tendencies. Each fea-
ture compromises many unique values leading to unique value pairs because
vendors often use their own naming conventions.
Furthermore we identified
several devices with software versions outdated by more than a decade.
To handle the string data effectively various preprocessing methods were
employed including Shannon entropy, edit distance and feature extraction via
regex. Initially we applied MCA and K-modes clustering to the unprocessed
data. However these methods did not yield significant findings. MCA failed
to explain a sufficient amount of variance, and the cost of clustering the data
was extremely high. For the Shannon entropy data PCA was used to construct
principal components and project the data onto them. The plot of the data
projected on the first 2 principal components showed no clear clusters. Using
K-means to cluster the data and the elbow method and gap statistic to evalu-
ate the clusters, we determined that four was the optimal number of clusters.
Despite this the clustering revealed no clear patterns with the different clusters
displaying a mix of data points. Using the edit distance metric we clustered
firmware versions into 8 distinct groups. These clusters aligned well with spe-
cific vendors reflecting their unique formatting conventions. From these clusters
versions with dates included inspired the use of regular expressions to extract
dates. Specifically we find the distribution of devices and when they were last
updated.
A significant portion of BACnet devices was found to be outdated based
on dates extracted via regex and information gathered from online documents.
This is particularly concerning given the potential security risks associated with
outdated software. Not just the security of the device and the appliances they
control but also the potential botnet that might employ the device in DDoS
attacks. The lack of updates suggests a need for improved maintenance and
upgrade practices to prevent devices from becoming digital ghosts.
6.1
Limitations
Many fields in the dataset had missing or incomplete entries which may have
affected the analysis. Especially description and location fields had sig-
nificant gaps which reduced their usefulness in the analysis.
A significant limitation encountered during this thesis was the lack of com-
prehensive documentation regarding devices and the specific versions they were
running. The absence of this detailed information posed a challenge in accu-
rately determining the age of the devices’ software. Since a primary element of
this thesis has been to determine the age of the devices’ software, access to such
information would have given a more coherent overview.
38
==PAGE:42==
6.2
Future work
Given the operational characteristics of BACnet, obtaining the features requires
multiple queries to the device. This can create a lot of noise on the network
that might be disruptive. To streamline this process and reduce the amount
of required queries, future research could develop a framework which would be
capable of deducing the vendor based on the model name and software versions.
This should be possible as it has been somewhat shown that these are unique
to each vendor. This framework would therefore improve the overall analysis of
BACnet devices.
Additionally, gaining access to the release dates of sofware versions from each
vendor would enhance how each device could be qualified as outdated. This
would offer a deeper insight into the devices’ susceptibility to cyber threats.
Furthermore exploration of the clustered versions particularly with an interest
in the multiple versions cluster could yield valuable information as these versions
contain important information about the software they run. Investigating these
aspects would lead to a better understanding of the devices’ capabilities and
vulnerabilities.
Further research on the topic of BACnet devices could involve utilizing the
same scan data together with a database of devices which have been known to be
involved in cyber attacks. By utilizing this data a neural network model could
be trained. This model would use the device model and version to determine
how robust the device is to cyber attacks. It could therefore be used to predict
the probability of an analyzed device being a part of a botnet or its vulnerability
to be compromised.
Looking at the other data from the other protocols could also be used for
the same purposes as this thesis has been exploring. These protocols do not
give the same data as BACnet but features can still be observed and clusters
formed. This would gather an increased perspective of the IoT devices and the
vulnerabilities involved.
39
==PAGE:43==
7
Conclusion
In this thesis we introduced and analyzed the BACnet dataset which consists of
the mandatory Device object for each BACnet device. Our primary goals were
to identify tendencies within the data, cluster the devices, and asses the security
of devices based on their software version.
We employed several analytical
methods including Shannon entropy and Levenshtein edit distance to uncover
underlying patterns in the data.
Additionally we used clustering techniques
such as K-means and agglomerative hierarchical clustering. Finally we analysed
the software versions of a subset of the data to asses the vulnerability.
Our findings show that both the unprocessed data and the data transformed
using Shannon entropy did not exhibit any significant clusters or relationships.
Despite this we successfully identified 8 clusters using the edit distance of the
firmware versions which we manually labeled. This clustering provided insights
into the naming conventions of different vendors. Another aspect of the analysis
focused on the examination of the software versions. Surprisingly we discovered
that 50% of these devices have not been updated in at least four years. Even
more concerning were that some devices had not been updated in over a decade
with some dating back to 2008. This is a glaring technological and cybersecurity
risk which companies who employ these devices should strive to fix.
40
==PAGE:44==
References
[Pea00]
Karl Pearson. “On the Criterion that a given System of Deviations
from the Probable in the Case of a Correlated System of Variables
is such that it can be reasonably supposed to have arisen from
Random Sampling”. eng. In: Philosophical Magazine 50.302 (1900),
pp. 157–175. issn: 14786435, 19415990, 19415982. doi: 10.1080/
14786440009463897.
[Sha48]
C. E. Shannon. “A Mathematical Theory of Communication”. eng.
In: Bell System Technical Journal 27.4 (1948), pp. 623–656. issn:
23767154, 00058580. doi: 10 . 1002 / j . 1538 - 7305 . 1948 .
tb00917.x.
[HAM50]
RW HAMMING. “ERROR DETECTING AND ERROR CORRECT-
ING CODES”. eng. In: Bell System Technical Journal 29.2 (1950),
pp. 147–160. issn: 23767154, 00058580. doi: 10.1002/j.1538-
7305.1950.tb00463.x.
[THO53]
RL THORNDIKE. “WHO BELONGS IN THE FAMILY”. eng. In:
Psychometrika 18.4 (1953), pp. 267–276. issn: 18600980, 00333123.
doi: 10.1007/BF02289263.
[DAM64]
FJ DAMERAU. “A TECHNIQUE FOR COMPUTER DETEC-
TION AND CORRECTION OF SPELLING ERRORS”. eng. In:
Communications of the Acm 7.3 (1964), pp. 171–176. issn: 15577317,
00010782. doi: 10.1145/363958.363994.
[Lev66]
Vladimir I. Levenshtein. “Binary codes capable of correcting dele-
tions, insertions, and reversals”. rus. In: Soviet Physics Doklady
(1966).
[Win78]
S. Winograd. “On computing the discrete Fourier transform”. eng.
In: Mathematics of Computation 32.141 (1978), pp. 175–199. issn:
10886842, 00255718. doi: 10.1090/S0025-5718-1978-0468306-
4.
[Jar89]
Matthew A. Jaro. “Advances in Record-Linkage Methodology as
Applied to Matching the 1985 Census of Tampa, Florida”. eng.
In: Journal of the American Statistical Association 84.406 (1989),
pp. 414–420. issn: 1537274x, 01621459. doi: 10.1080/01621459.
1989.10478785.
[Agr+96]
Rakesh Agrawal et al. “Fast Discovery of Association Rules”. In:
Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 1996. url:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:36095119.
[Hua97]
Joshua Zhexue Huang. “A Fast Clustering Algorithm to Cluster
Very Large Categorical Data Sets in Data Mining”. In: Workshop
on Research Issues on Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. 1997.
url: https : / / api . semanticscholar . org / CorpusID :
6620859.
41
==PAGE:45==
[JMF99]
A. K. Jain, M. N. Murty, and P. J. Flynn. “Data clustering: A
review”. eng. In: Acm Computing Surveys 31.3 (1999), pp. 316–323.
issn: 15577341, 03600300. doi: 10.1145/331499.331504.
[Mas+00]
Llew Mason et al. “Boosting algorithms as gradient descent”. eng.
In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 12 (2000).
Ed. by SA Solla, pp. 512–518. issn: 10495258.
[Nav01]
Gonzalo Navarro. “A guided tour to approximate string match-
ing”. eng. In: Acm Computing Surveys 33.1 (2001), pp. 31–88. issn:
15577341, 03600300. doi: 10.1145/375360.375365.
[TWH01]
Robert Tibshirani, Guenther Walther, and Trevor Hastie. “Estimat-
ing the number of clusters in a data set via the gap statistic”. eng.
In: Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B: Statistical
Methodology 63.2 (2001), pp. 411–423. issn: 14679868, 13697412.
doi: 10.1111/1467-9868.00293.
[KMM16]
Masahiro Kuroda, Naomichi Makino, and Yuichi Mori. “Multiple
Correspondence Analysis”. eng. In: Nonlinear Principal Component
Analysis and Its Applications (2016), pp. 21–28. doi: 10.1007/
978-981-10-0159-8_3.
[Rob16]
Paul Roberts. “Update: Let’s Get Cyberphysical: Internet Attack
shuts off the Heat in Finland”. In: The security ledger (Aug. 11,
2016). [Online; accessed 14-June-2024]. url: https://securityledger.
com/2016/11/lets-get-cyberphysical-ddos-attack-
halts-heating-in-finland/ (visited on 06/14/2024).
[Loi+17]
Franco Loi et al. “Systematically evaluating security and privacy for
consumer IoT devices”. eng. In: Iot S and P 2017 - Proceedings of
the 2017 Workshop on Internet of Things Security and Privacy, Co-
located With Ccs 2017 (2017), pp. 1–6. doi: 10.1145/3139937.
3139938.
[Mie+17]
Markus Miettinen et al. “IoT SENTINEL: Automated Device-Type
Identification for Security Enforcement in IoT”. eng. In: Proceed-
ings - International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems
(2017), pp. 2177–2184. issn: 25758411, 10636927. doi: 10.1109/
ICDCS.2017.283.
[Bez+18]
Bruhadeshwar Bezawada et al. IoTSense: Behavioral Fingerprinting
of IoT Devices. 2018. arXiv: 1804.03852 [cs.CR].
[GH18]
Hang Guo and John Heidemann. “IP-Based IoT device detection”.
eng. In: Iot S and P 2018 - Proceedings of the 2018 Workshop on
Iot Security and Privacy, Part of Sigcomm 2018 (2018), pp. 36–42.
doi: 10.1145/3229565.3229572.
42
==PAGE:46==
[SGS18]
Arunan Sivanathan, Hassan Habibi Gharakheili, and Vijay Sivara-
man. “Can We Classify an IoT Device using TCP Port Scan?” eng.
In: 2018 Ieee 9th International Conference on Information and Au-
tomation for Sustainability, Iciafs 2018 (2018), p. 8913346. issn:
21511810, 21511802. doi: 10.1109/ICIAFS.2018.8913346.
[Bur19]
Andriy Burkov. The hundred-page machine learning book. English.
OCLC: 1089445188. 2019. isbn: 978-1-9995795-0-0.
[Kas19]
Kaspersky. Nearly Four in Ten Smart Buildings Targeted by Ma-
licious Attacks in H1 2019. https://usa.kaspersky.com/
about/press-releases/2019_smart-buildings-threat-
landscape. [Online; accessed 14-June-2024]. 2019.
[Mar+19]
Samuel Marchal et al. “AuDI: Toward Autonomous IoT Device-
Type Identification Using Periodic Communication”. eng. In: Ieee
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 37.6 (2019), pp. 1402–
1412. issn: 07338716, 15580008. doi: 10 . 1109 / JSAC . 2019 .
2904364.
[Jav+20]
Talha Javed et al. “Using application layer banner data to auto-
matically identify IoT devices”. eng. In: Computer Communication
Review 50.3 (2020), pp. 23–29. issn: 19435819, 01464833. doi: 10.
1145/3411740.3411744.
[Che+21]
Hui Cheng et al. “Identify IoT Devices through Web Interface Char-
acteristics”. eng. In: 2021 Ieee 6th International Conference on Com-
puter and Communication Systems, Icccs 2021 (2021), pp. 405–410.
doi: 10.1109/ICCCS52626.2021.9449258.
[Ave22]
Chester Avey. “The Cybersecurity Threats Facing Smart Build-
ings”. In: Facilities Management Advisor (2022). [Online; accessed
14-June-2024]. url: https://facilitiesmanagementadvisor.
blr.com/building-controls/the-cybersecurity-threats-
facing-smart-buildings/.
[22]
Building automation and control systems (BACS) - Part 5: Data
communication protocol. ISO 16484-5:2022, 2022.
[Ebb23]
Frank Ebbers. “A Large-Scale Analysis of IoT Firmware Version
Distribution in the Wild”. eng. In: Ieee Transactions on Software
Engineering 49.2 (2023), pp. 816–830. issn: 23263881, 00985589,
19393520. doi: 10.1109/TSE.2022.3163969.
[Jam+23]
Gareth James et al. An Introduction to Statistical Learning : with
Applications in Python. eng. Springer International Publishing, 2023,
1 Online–Ressource(XV, 60 p. 600 illus., 575 illus. in color.) (un-
known). isbn: 3031387465, 3031387473, 9783031387463, 9783031387470.
[Sta23]
Statista. Number of Internet of Things (IoT) connected devices world-
wide from 2019 to 2023, with forecasts from 2022 to 2030. https:
//www.statista.com/statistics/1183457/iot-connected-
devices-worldwide/. [Online; accessed 31-May-2024]. 2023.
43
==PAGE:47==
[BAC24]
ASHRAE BACnet. Assigned Vendor IDs. https : / / bacnet .
org/assigned-vendor-ids/. [Online; accessed 27-May-2024].
2024.
[com24]
ASHRAE BACnet committee. About BACnet. https://bacnet.
org/about/. [Online; accessed 14-June-2024]. 2024.
[Has24]
Muhammad Hassan. Analysis of Variance. https://researchmethod.
net/anova/. [Online; accessed 6-June-2024]. 2024.
[Int24]
BACnet International. BACnet Secure Connect. https://bacnetinternational.
org/bacnetsc/. [Online; accessed 27-May-2024]. 2024.
[LL24]
Niels Peter Vinkel Ahle Lundsgaard and Jacob August Indahl Lundin.
“Unmasking digital ghost ships: Comprehensive scanning, statisti-
cal analysis, and ethical disclosure of vulnerable IoT and OT devices
in Denmark and beyond”. und. 2024.
[Rap24]
Rapid7. Recog: A Recognition Framework. https : / / github .
com/rapid7/recog. [Online; accessed 22-May-2024]. 2024.
[WM24]
Gang Wu and Eric Martin. String Similarity Metrics - Edit Dis-
tance. https://www.baeldung.com/cs/string-similarity-
edit-distance. [Online; accessed 15-June-2024]. 2024.
[ZMa24]
ZMap. ZGrab 2.0 - GitHub. https : / / github . com / zmap /
zgrab2. [Online; accessed 31-May-2024]. 2024.
[ASH]
ASHRAE. ASHRAE website. https://www.ashrae.org/. [On-
line; accessed 25-June-2024].
[Bec]
Kellen Beck. Hackers exploit casino’s smart thermometer to steal
database info. https://mashable.com/article/casino-
smart-thermometer-hacked. [Online; accessed 24-June-2024].
[Cen]
Censys. https://search.censys.io/. [Online; accessed 15-
June-2024].
[For]
Conner Forrest. Dyn DDoS attack: 5 takeaways on what we know
and why it matters. https://www.techrepublic.com/article/
dyn-ddos-attack-5-takeaways-on-what-we-know-and-
why-it-matters/. [Online; accessed 24-June-2024].
[Sec]
SecurityScorecard. CVE details. https://www.cvedetails.
com/. [Online; accessed 25-June-2024].
[Sho]
Shodan. https://www.shodan.io/. [Online; accessed 15-June-
2024].
[Tria]
Tridium. Niagara AX End of Life. https://www.tridium.com/
us/en/services- support/events/2020/04/niagara-
ax-end-of-life. [Online; accessed 30-June-2024].
[Trib]
Tridium. What’s new in Niagara 4. https://www.tridium.
com/us/en/Learn/about-us/niagara-timeline. [Online;
accessed 24-June-2024].
44
