==PAGE:1==
Cloud resource cost optimisation
for machine learning model
training using Kubeflow in
Kubernetes Clusters
Mathias Bang Kristensen
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Summary (English)
This thesis addresses the optimisation of cloud resource costs associated with
training machine learning models. While the number of machine learning mod-
els being trained grows at a rapid pace, it is essential that the resources are
effectively allocated and utilised in cloud environments in order to reduce the
training costs. This research utilises Kubernetes for container orchestration and
Kubeflow for managing machine learning workflows, providing base frameworks
for implementing a custom application to optimise training costs.
The thesis discusses the design and implementation of a custom Kubernetes
scheduler and autoscaler system aimed at optimising the allocation and utili-
sation of cloud resources. The key components of the solution include a main
controller, custom scheduler, autoscaler, job scaler, and rescheduler. These com-
ponents all work together to dynamically scale resources and optimise the job
scheduling.
The custom application is tested in a Google Cloud Platform environment and
evaluated against the standard Kubernetes components to measure cost savings
and performance impacts. The results demonstrate that the custom application
can achieve significant cost reductions between 1.7% and 51.65% depending on
the intensity and frequency of the machine learning workloads.
However, it
it noted that there is a certain level of overhead associated with the custom
solution.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis was prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Com-
puter science of the Technical University of Denmark in fulfilment for the re-
quirements of a M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineering. The thesis was
carried out from January 29th, 2024 to June 29th, 2024 under the supervision of
Nicki Skafte Detlefsen. The workload corresponds with 30 ECTS credits. The
thesis was written in collaboration with Molecular Quantum Solutions (MQS).
Kongens Lyngby, 29-June-2024
Mathias Bang Kristensen
==PAGE:5==
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Summary (English)
i
Preface
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Related work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Background
5
2.1
Cloud computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.1
Resource Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.1.2
Server vs. serverless
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1.3
Google Cloud Platform
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.2
Kubernetes and containerization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.2.1
Kubernetes Core Architecture and Concepts . . . . . . . .
9
2.2.2
Persistent Volumes and Claims . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2.3
The Kubernetes Scheduler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.4
The Kubernetes Cluster Autoscaler . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Kubeflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.4
Distributed Machine Learning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.4.1
Data Parallelism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.2
PyTorch Distributed Elastic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
2.4.3
PyTorch Data Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Go Programming Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Concurrency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
==PAGE:7==
CONTENTS
v
3
Implementation
20
3.1
Design of custom application
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
The main controller
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2.1
Informer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2.2
AddFunc
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.3
DeleteFunc
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.2.4
UpdateFunc . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.3
Resource manager
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.4
Scheduler
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.5
Autoscaler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
3.6
Rescheduler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
3.7
Job scaler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.8
Google Cloud connector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.9
PyTorch Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.9.1
Custom data handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.9.2
Checkpointing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
3.10 Kubernetes setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4
Test setup
45
4.1
Shared storage setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.2
Model and dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
PyTorchJob deployment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.4
Evaluation metrics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5
Results and Discussion
49
5.1
Summary of results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
5.2
Summary of findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
6
Conclusion
56
6.1
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
6.2
Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6.3
Future work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
A Appendix
60
A.1 Custom application implementation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
A.1.1
Resource manager implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
A.1.2
Rescheduler . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
A.1.3
Custom PyTorch data handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
A.1.4
Kubernetes definition files . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
A.1.5
Permissions configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.2 Test setup configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
Bibliography
74
==PAGE:8==
Chapter 1
Introduction
This chapter provides a basic overview into the topic of scheduling and train-
ing distributed machine learning models in the cloud, while giving examples of
methods implemented in other related projects. Furthermore, a central struc-
ture regarding the outline of the report will be provided. The main focus of the
project remains on reducing the costs of training models in the cloud.
1.1
Motivation
Cloud computing services can provide virtually unlimited resources, which is
essential when training extremely large models that can require a large quantity
of either CPUs or GPUs. These resources are available on demand and require
no hardware setup, ultimately reducing the entry cost while speeding up the
setup process [17]. With these growing benefits, some companies utilise cloud
resources for training rather than spending the time and money to set up on-
premise servers.
Although unlimited resources at one’s fingertips may seem advantageous, poor
management and improper setup can result in significantly greater financial
consequences than expected. It is worthwhile for companies to spend time and
==PAGE:9==
1.2 Related work
2
resources on planning and setting up proper cloud administration in order to
optimise costs and fully leverage the resources that are being paid for.
Container orchestration plays a necessary role in this context by offering a way
to manage and scale the deployment of applications across machines running in
the cloud. A popular framework for running containerized applications in the
cloud is Kubernetes[41]. This tool can be used to automate processes such as
deploying, scaling, and managing applications in the cloud. When paired with
Kubeflow, both tools together serve to support the deployment and manage-
ment of machine learning models in Kubernetes[40]. The advantages of training
machine learning models with this setup include resource management by Ku-
bernetes, which otherwise would have been a manual task.
However, despite Kubernetes attempting to effectively manage the resources re-
quired for training, further optimisations can be made. One of these problems is
that often resources are overprovisioned to ensure performance and availability,
but this can lead to unnecessary expenses[1]. Meanwhile, organisations might
also underutilise the resources that they are already paying for. With the proper
setup, these additional resources could go towards training at no additional cost.
While Kubernetes has some standard features that can mitigate some of these
problems, efficiently managing machine learning training batch job workloads
within Kubernetes clusters remains a challenge, particularly in terms of optimis-
ing resource costs. Traditional approaches often lack the scheduling and scaling
to proficiently utilise the resources that are paid for in a cloud setup, which can
lead to increased operational expenses.
1.2
Related work
The task of implemented custom scheduling and/or node autoscaling in con-
tainer orchestration tools such as Kubernetes has been widely implemented and
studied with varying outcomes and goals in mind. While most papers focus on
the task of optimising resource utilisation and increasing job throughput, similar
techniques can be utilised to optimise costs. Lin et al. managed to increase re-
source utilisation and reduce job elapsed time with their custom scheduler and
scaling technique known as Dragon by using gang scheduling, locality aware
task placement, and load aware job scaling [32]. The Optimus custom scheduler
succeeded in decreasing job completion time by predicting the model conver-
gence during training in order to dynamically allocated resources [33].
The
Zeus custom scheduler improves CPU utilisation through a dynamic scheduling
algorithm that uses a weighted time sliding window approach [44]. The idea of
improving resource utilisation is relevant for cost optimisation as the resources
==PAGE:10==
1.3 Objective
3
that are being paid for should be fully taken advantage of.
There are also multiple papers that focus on reducing the training cost by util-
ising all available resources and decommissioning those that are not used. Both
Zhiheng et al. [45] and the custom scheduler Stratus [4] employ the method of
migrating tasks to another node when the compute node remains underutilised
in order to shut down the excess resources. Another approach taken by the
custom scheduler Pivot is using a two-level scheduling approach that optimises
data and container locality in order to minimise costs. [21].
Scheduler
Objective
Methods
Dragon [32]
Increase resource util-
isation,
reduce
job
elapsed time
Gang scheduling, locality aware
task placement, load aware job
scaling
Optimus [33]
Decrease
job
comple-
tion time
Predicting model convergence,
dynamic resource allocation
Zeus [44]
Improve
CPU
utilisa-
tion
Dynamic scheduling algorithm,
weighted time sliding window
approach
Zhiheng et al.
[45]
Reduce training cost
Task migration to underutilised
nodes, decommissioning unused
nodes
Stratus [4]
Reduce training cost
Task migration to underutilised
nodes, decommissioning unused
nodes
Pivot [21]
Reduce training cost
Two-level scheduling, optimiz-
ing data and container locality
Table 1.1: Summary of custom scheduling objectives and techniques.
1.3
Objective
The objective of the thesis is to optimise the high-performance CPU and GPU
costs in a Kubernetes cloud setup. To address this challenge, a custom sched-
uler and autoscaler application tailored towards optimising resource costs for
distributed machine learning model training can be developed. The custom so-
lution can leverage custom Kubernetes components to optimally schedule jobs,
dynamically scale resources, and monitor performance. The custom application
will be deployed to a Kubernetes cluster and tested against standard Kubernetes
components to compare cost optimisations as well as any increases or decreases
in performance or efficiency. The objectives of the thesis include:
==PAGE:11==
1.4 Structure
4
1. Reduce the resource costs associated with cloud computing through accu-
rate scheduling and resource allocations for machine learning model train-
ing in Kubernetes.
2. Ensure the solution can scale seamlessly to accommodate varying work-
loads and resource requirements.
3. The custom training operator should adhere to any SLAs specified for a
training job. This includes specified minimum resources.
4. Compare the custom solution to standard Kubernetes/Kubeflow training
costs.
5. Compare the features of the custom solution to those discussed in the
related works section.
1.4
Structure
The thesis walks through the techniques used to reduce the costs associated with
training machine learning models in the cloud, and the chapters are structured
in the following way:
• Chapter 2 provides an overview of the tools that are used for the im-
plementation. These tools include Kubernetes, Kubeflow, and PyTorch
Distributed Elastic. The standard functionalities of these tools are also
covered as they will later be used as the baseline for testing and results.
• Chapter 3 covers both the architectural design and technical implementa-
tion of the application that is built to optimise costs of training models
in Kubernetes. This chapter covers the implementation of the autoscaler,
scheduler, job scaler, and job rescheduler, all of which function together
to make up the custom application.
• Chapter 4 describes the setup of the test environment. More specifically,
this chapter provides the metrics upon which the custom application is
evaluated.
• Chapter 5 evaluates the results from the testing as well as a discussion of
the findings. The objectives of the project are also evaluated to determine
the level of success.
• Chapter 6 wraps up the project by summarising key findings from the
implementation and results. A brief overview of ideas for future work is
also discussed.
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 2
Background
This section describes the frameworks and tools that are used to train machine
learning models in the cloud. An introduction is given to the cloud comput-
ing systems that are used to host Kubernetes running Kubeflow. Finally, an
overview is provided of how models are prepared for distributed training with
specific focus on the Python library PyTorch.
2.1
Cloud computing
Cloud computing provides computing services over the internet that contain
scalable resources. A cloud setup allows companies to eliminate the need to
own and manage their own physical servers and hardware, and it allows for
easier scalability as an unbound number of resources are potentially available
on demand [17].
2.1.1
Resource Management
The benefit of cloud resources over physical servers is the resource elasticity.
Resource elasticity refers to a system that is able to dynamically scale resources
==PAGE:13==
2.1 Cloud computing
6
up and down based on the demand of applications [3]. This can lead to a more
optimal utilisation and cost-efficiency, and can help manage peak loads without
over-provisioning resources.
Provisioning of resources in the cloud can also be done dynamically as they are
needed. The process can either be done manually or automatically by setting up
autoscaling functionality. Cloud platforms provide tools for scheduling, loads
balancing, and prioritising workloads, which are aimed at maximising perfor-
mance and minimising waste [16].
Cloud resource providers often have specific pricing models that serve different
needs and resource commitments. The three most common models are pay-as-
you-go, reserved instances, and spot instances [12]:
• Pay-as-you-go model offers on demand resources that users pay for as they
consume them. This type of setup offers flexibility and avoids upfront
costs. Instances are often priced for the amount of time they are utilised,
and this is ideal for variable and unpredictable workloads [12].
• The reserved instances model requires a user to commit to using a certain
amount of resources for a specified period [12]. This can often be multiple
years, and it is therefore suitable for stable and predictable workloads. The
benefit is that it provides significant cost savings compared to on-demand
resources such as those acquired in the pay-as-you-go model.
• Spot instances are often time commissioned on unused cloud capacity and
are bid on by users. These types of instances offer huge discounts but come
with the risk of termination when the resources are required elsewhere.
These instances are best suited for fault-tolerant and flexible applications.
Google cloud Spot VMs can provide up to a 91% cheaper price than regular
instances [15]. It can therefore be advantageous to try and move as much
of the machine learning model training onto spot instances for substantial
cost savings.
2.1.2
Server vs. serverless
In traditional server based architecture applications are hosted on dedicated
servers that are constantly running and self managed. This approach gives full
control and therefore requires the user to fully manage and maintain the server
infrastructure [2]. The benefits of this include full control and customisation for
specific application requirements. However, this can come with the drawback
==PAGE:14==
2.1 Cloud computing
7
of increased costs as managing and maintaining servers on cloud infrastructure
can be expensive.
The alternative is therefore serverless computing, which abstracts away the un-
derlying server infrastructure. A serverless setup is automatically managed by
cloud providers and only compute resources are paid for [2]. The benefit of this
is the cost efficiency of only paying for resources consumed by the application.
The downside of this is the limited control users have of their cloud environment
and applications running on the cloud.
By optimising the costs and resource utilisation of a server based setup, it should
be possible to leverage cost saving measures that are usually associated with
serverless computing while maintaining the full control that is beneficial with a
server based architecture.
2.1.3
Google Cloud Platform
While there are a range of cloud platforms that offer similar features and func-
tionality, the development and testing of this project are carried out on Google
Cloud Platform (GCP). The project attempts to remain as cloud agnostic as
possible. However, there are a few areas where it is necessary to implement plat-
form specific features, and this is especially true when dealing with the scaling
of compute resources. This is explained in detail in the implementation chapter.
GCP offers a range of cloud services that include functionality such as comput-
ing, storage, data analytics, and machine learning [14]. One of these features
is known as Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE), which includes Kubernetes ser-
vices for managing containerized containerised applications as is explained in
the next section.
The Google Cloud Platform contains a globally distributed infrastructure de-
signed for reliability and scalability [13]. It contains data centers located all
across the world, each region consisting of multiple zones that are isolated from
each other. Regions contain zones that are the deployment areas within those
regions. These zones are all isolated from each other to reduce the risk of failures
spreading across the different zones. This offers the possibility for introducing
redundancy to reduce the chances of downtime or failure. Data and services can
be replicated across zones and regions, so that if one region experiences problems
then the others can continue to operate. This is essential in cloud environments
as downtime is not uncommon, and certain procedures can experience failures.
==PAGE:15==
2.2 Kubernetes and containerization
8
2.2
Kubernetes and containerization
Kubernetes is a container orchestration platform developed to assist the au-
tomation of deploying, scaling, and managing containerized applications [41].
Containerization is the practice of bundling all application and application de-
pendencies into a manageable package that are independent of other containers
and the underlying infrastructure that it is running on [20]. These containers
are often orchestrated by Docker, which is used for creating images that can be
used for running these containerized applications [8]. A Docker image is a file
that should contain all the necessary components to run a specific application.
This includes anything from the code to library dependencies. When training
machine learning models this image usually consists of a Python installation,
dependencies to run the training, and the source code for a machine learning
model. In a machine learning workflow, it will typically be the worker nodes
that are in charge of the training and computation of the models.
Figure 2.1: Overview of the Kubernetes architecture and setup.
A general overview of the Kubernetes architecture is given in Figure 2.1. The
features essential to this project are covered in detail in the following sections.
==PAGE:16==
2.2 Kubernetes and containerization
9
2.2.1
Kubernetes Core Architecture and Concepts
A Kubernetes cluster is a collection of nodes (virtual machines) that run the
containerized applications [41]. Each of these nodes run pods, which are the
smallest deployable unit in Kubernetes.
These pods consist of one or a few
containers that share the same resources.
As seen in Figure 2.1, each Kubernetes configuration consists of a master node,
which contains all the essential pods that allow the cluster to function [29].
The master node contains the API server, which is the centralised control plane
component that exposes the Kubernetes API. The API server is greatly used
later for the implementation of the the custom Kubernetes application as it
allows for updates to the state of the cluster. The API endpoints can be used
to read, update, and delete the nodes and pods within the system [28].
Additional nodes in the system are then known as worker nodes. These nodes
run Kubelet which is an agent that ensures each container is running as expected
with regards to the master node.
Figure 2.2: Example of how Custom Resource Definitions interact with the
Kubernetes environment. [19]
Some of the standard Kubernetes resources include pods, Services, and Deploy-
ments which are all used to deploy containerised applications in the clusters.
In addition to this, it is possible to define Kubernetes Custom Resource Defini-
tions (CRDs) that allow for extension of the Kubernetes API [27]. CRDs allow
for an extension of Kubernetes features and capabilities without modifying any
of the core underlying Kubernetes code. An example of how CRDs fit into a
Kubernetes setup can be seen in Figure 2.2. The user updates a CRD, which is
constantly being monitored by an operator in something known as the control
==PAGE:17==
2.2 Kubernetes and containerization
10
loop. The job of a controller is to continuously watch the state of a custom
resource and take action to make the current state match the desired state of
the system. The operator does this by directly interacting with the Kubernetes
API. As seen later, Kubeflow is dependent on these CRDs in order to deploy
machine learning model workflows.
2.2.2
Persistent Volumes and Claims
In Kubernetes, pods have a volume associated with them that are erased along
with the removal of the pod. It is therefore necessary to set up a persistent
volume if files stored on a volume should extend the lifetime of the pod, and this
can be done in Kubernetes by utilising the storage classes provided [31]. These
storage classes interact with the Kubernetes API just like any other resource
within a cluster.
Persistent Volumes (PVs) can be provisioned by an administrator as a piece
of storage in the cluster [31]. Their lifetime are independent of any pods that
use them, and they therefore remain available until they are deleted. It is also
possible to dynamically provision PVs based on a storage class when a pod issues
a claim that requests storage.
Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs) are requests for storage issued by the user [31].
When a PVC is created, it is bound to a PV based on the amount of space that
is requested by the claim. As these claims are bound to the PV, their lifetime is
bound to the PVs until it is deleted. A PVC can also be unbound from a PV, but
the data that has been stored on the PV remains there even though the claim
is made available again. When a pod is created, the PVC can be specified in
the pod’s volume section. The pod is then able to mount the Persistent Volume
based on the Persistent Volume Claim, and can thereafter read and/or write
data to the volume based on its access rights. The interaction between the PVs
and PVCs allow Kubernetes to manage storage completely independently of the
pods, which is crucial to ensure that data can be stored persistently without
relying on the lifetime of specific pods. It will later be demonstrated how this
is essential for storing checkpoints during distributed elastic model training.
When training machine learning models it is essential to use a persistent volume
to save the model after training. Once the training completes, if the model is
not saved to a persistent volume before the pod is deleted, then the training
progress is lost. At the same time, the persistent volume can also store the
training data for the model, so the pod has access to it.
==PAGE:18==
2.2 Kubernetes and containerization
11
2.2.3
The Kubernetes Scheduler
In Figure 2.1 it can be seen that the master node has a scheduler component,
which has the responsibility of assigning pods to the nodes in the cluster. Each
pod has certain resource requirements and constraints that must be fulfilled
when being scheduled. The scheduler starts by queuing the pods that are newly
created. When scheduling, all ’unfit’ nodes are filtered out if they do not meet
resource requirements or other constraints. Each node is then scored based on
certain criteria before the binding phase selects the node with the best score for
the pod [42].
The standard scoring focuses on scheduling pods on the least requested nodes in
order to balance the loads [42]. This means the standard Kubernetes scheduler
favors nodes that will lead to a balanced resource usage across the cluster.
From a performance point of view, this makes sense as the workload should be
distributed evenly across all nodes. However, from a cost perspective, this can
lead to increased costs as increasing the number of nodes, increases the number
of resources, which leads to unnecessary expenses. It can therefore instead be
advantageous to try and condense the pods onto as few nodes as possible in
order to optimise costs.
Kubernetes also offers scheduling policies that can be implemented to influence
the nodes that pods get scheduled onto. Node affinity allows for constraining
which nodes pods are eligible to be scheduled on based on labels that are given
to the nodes [30]. Additionally, taints and tolerations can be given as labels on
nodes or pods. Taints are applied to nodes to repel certain sets of pods, and
tolerations are applied to pods to allow them to be scheduled on nodes with
matching taints.
While it is possible to somewhat control the scheduling with taints and tolera-
tions, it can sometimes be necessary to implement a custom scheduler that can
schedule pods based on specific business rules. A custom scheduler allows for
full control of how pods are placed on nodes, which can allow for specialised
scheduling for performance optimisation. For this project, a custom scheduler
can be used as a tool to optimise the resource costs as it gives full control of the
pod placements.
2.2.4
The Kubernetes Cluster Autoscaler
Certain cloud providers include autoscalers that automatically adjust the size
of Kubernetes clusters based on the pods that are being scheduled.
Google
==PAGE:19==
2.3 Kubeflow
12
Kubernetes Engine (GKE) allows for dynamic scaling to increase or decrease
the number of nodes in a node pool based on the resource requirements of the
workloads [26]. The GKE autoscaler helps manage costs by scaling down unused
resources, so only used resources are paid for.
When an unschedulable pod is detected, the autoscaler can trigger a scale-up
event, which calculates the number of additional nodes needed to accommodate
the pod [10]. Contrary, a scale-down event can be triggered when the utilisation
of a node goes under a certain level. The GKE autoscaler then identifies these
nodes and removes them from the node pool.
The problem with the GKE
autoscaler is that it is based on certain thresholds rather than being reactive
to incoming or outgoing pods. As seen later, it’s possible to better integrate
node pool scaling with a custom scheduler in order to more efficiently scale node
pools up and down to cut costs.
2.3
Kubeflow
Kubeflow is a platform made to run on Kubernetes, and it is designed for deploy-
ment, orchestration and management of machine learning workflows [24]. The
platform serves to make scaling machine learning workflows easier and more
reliable by using the tools provided by Kubernetes. Together these two tools
work to make ML training and serving more scalable and portable with the use
of Kubernetes’ orchestration capabilities.
One of the benefits of Kubeflow’s architecture is that it is designed with a mod-
ular approach [23]. This means that it is possible to use specific components
of Kubeflow without installing the whole platform. Each of these components
is implemented as a microservice that can run independently from the others.
The Jupyter Notebook microservice provides a notebook for writing and run-
ning code. This can be paired with the pipeline service to create and manage
machine learning workflows by providing a visual interface for designing training
pipelines. Finally, the model can be deployed and served using the KFServing
service.
During the training process, Kubeflow has a training operator service that is
designed to manage the lifecycle of machine learning training jobs [25]. It pro-
vides an operator for different machine learning frameworks, such as PyTorch,
and allows for easy setup of distributed training on Kubernetes clusters. The
training operator comes with a Kubernetes custom resource definition known
as PyTorchJob, which is used for this project. By creating a YAML configura-
tion file for the PyTorchJob, the resources, replicas, parameters, and machine
==PAGE:20==
2.4 Distributed Machine Learning
13
learning model can be specified.
Figure 2.3: Workflow for Kubeflow model training and serving.
Figure 2.3 provides an overview of a typical machine learning workflow per-
formed with the tools available in Kubeflow. This project will focus on opti-
mising the training operator step of the process and more specifically the model
training part. The full workflow is shown to demonstrate the solution proposed
in this paper fits well into the standard frameworks and tools provided by Kube-
flow.
2.4
Distributed Machine Learning
In order for models to be trained using Kubeflow, they must be made distributed.
This will allow the model to be trained across multiple machines or devices,
therefore leveraging the combined resources [9]. Some of the benefits of this
include efficiency, speed, and scalability of the training job.
==PAGE:21==
2.4 Distributed Machine Learning
14
2.4.1
Data Parallelism
Figure 2.4: Example of distributed training using data parallelism.
Data parallelism is the technique of splitting the data across multiple nodes,
and each node then trains on a subset of the data in parallel [5]. This can speed
up the training of machine learning models with large datasets and complex
models. This technique is often used to effectively scale ML training, as it allows
the training load to be split across multiple nodes with an increased number
of resources, which overall can lead to reduced training time and improved
performance.
As seen in Figure 2.4, all workers receive their individual data batch simulta-
neously and compute their separate gradients. Each worker then communicates
their gradient to the group, and the average gradient is then calculated. This
average gradient is then used to update the model for the training of the next
batch, and this process continues until the model has completed training [5].
2.4.2
PyTorch Distributed Elastic
PyTorch is a Python library used for machine learning and AI tasks. A subsec-
tion of this library includes the PyTorch Distributed Elastic (PDE) library [36].
PDE is designed to allow PyTorch model distributed training by providing dy-
namic scaling and management of worker groups. The elastic part of the library
allows the number of workers to be adjusted without interrupting the training.
The distributed part of the library splits the training up into multiple workers
==PAGE:22==
2.4 Distributed Machine Learning
15
that communicate together during the training loop. The PDE library utilises
data parallelism, so each worker is operating on a subset of the data.
The process of setting up and managing these multiple worker nodes requires
a server for communication, and in PyTorch this is done using a Rendezvous
protocol [37]. This protocol is used to initialise the communication between mul-
tiple processes and ensure that all the processes start together while remaining
aware of each other throughout the training of the mode.
When a process joins a session it is assigned a rank [37]. This rank can then
be used to both identify the process and also assign it certain tasks. During
distributed training it can often be the case that only one process needs to carry
out a task, and it is common for rank 0 to carry these out. It will be explained
later how this is relevant when saving model checkpoints. A session also has a
world size, which is the total number of processes involved in the distributed
training. The world size should be able to increase or decrease during training
if the distributed training is also elastic.
Figure 2.5: Collective communication of processes using all reduce.
In Figure 2.5 is an example of how nodes communicate during the distributed
training. This method is known as all reduce and results in all nodes sharing all
information with all other nodes [34]. The all reduce operation is called during
the backward pass to aggregate gradients across all the processes. This step
is necessary to ensure that all the processes share the same gradients before
updating the model parameter. The all reduce operation is therefore called to
sum the gradients from all the processes and distribute the results back to all the
processes. There are also other communication methods such as scatter, gather,
reduce, broadcast, and all gather, but for this project all reduce is focused on
as this is the method that is used for the backward pass.
The backwards pass using the all reduce method also creates a barrier that syn-
==PAGE:23==
2.4 Distributed Machine Learning
16
chronises all processes before continuing to the next step of training the model
[37]. As each of the processes train in parallel but asynchronous of each other,
it is essential that the different processes attain a form of communication. Each
process should have an equal batch of the data and run the same calculations on
this data. In the next section it is explained how this can be ensured. As long
as this is guaranteed, the barrier can successfully maintain a communication
synchronisation between the different processes.
Figure 2.6: Demonstration of the reading and writing of checkpoints to the
shared file system.
During elastic distributed training it is also essential to save checkpoints. This is
because every time a processes leaves or joins the rendezvous server, all processes
restart from the most recent checkpoint. In PyTorch, when saving a checkpoint
it is important to save the model state, optimizer state, epoch, and loss [38]. The
model and optimizer states are saved to ensure the model can continue training
with the same parameters as when the checkpoint was made.
The epoch is
saved to keep track of the progress and ensure that the training resumes at
the correct point when continuing from a checkpoint.
While the loss is not
strictly necessary, it can be useful to save in order to compare the loss across
multiple different checkpoints and to keep track of progress. All of this is stored
in a checkpoint dictionary, and it is therefore possible to add custom values to
checkpointing as well. An example of how checkpointing should be set up can
be seen in 2.6. All of the processes have a mounted shared file system that
they all can read and write to. As seen in the figure, only one process needs to
save the checkpoint to the file system, and this task is most often designated
to rank 0. This is to reduce the number of redundancies of each process saving
the exact same checkpoint to the file system, and they therefore just share the
same checkpoint file. When the training is then interrupted and restarts, each
of the processes individually load the same checkpoint file from the shared file
system. The combination of the barrier created by the rendezvous server and
the identical checkpoint file ensures that the different processes are always in
sync.
==PAGE:24==
2.5 Go Programming Language
17
2.4.3
PyTorch Data Handling
PyTorch uses a class called Dataset to represent a collection of data [35]. It al-
lows for a standardised way to load and manipulate data. The Dataset can then
be paired with a Sampler class, which defines the strategy for how data is drawn
from the dataset. More specifically, the Sampler is used by the DataLoader to
iterate over the dataset in a specific order. The job of the DataLoader is to
provide an iterable over a dataset. The iterable allows for functionality such as
batching, shuffling, and parallel data loading.
The distributed version of the Sampler known as the DistributedSampler is
designed to help split up the dataset among multiple processes for distributed
training [35]. The main tasks of the DistributedSampler are to ensure that
each process gets a unique subset of the dataset, and that each process receives
the same amount of data. This ensures that data is not repeated during training,
which overall reduces the redundant computations.
The reason these data handling classes are essential to understand for this
project is because it is possible to create a custom Sampler in PyTorch. This
is a crucial step for this project to successfully train on distributed models with
split datasets, and it is explained in detail in the implementation chapter.
2.5
Go Programming Language
Custom applications for Kubernetes are often developed in the programming
language Go, which is also what is used in this project [39]. The main objec-
tives of Go are to offer efficiency on modern hardware architecture, especially
regarding multi-core processors.
Go is designed with concurrency program-
ming in mind, which makes it easier to write programs that effectively utilise
multi-core processors. Concurrency and efficiency are extremely beneficial when
running in a cloud environment. When paired with Kubernetes, it allows the
solution to be highly scalable as it can deal with a large number of concurrent
operations at the same time.
2.6
Concurrency
One of the main features of Go is that it is designed to make it easy to write pro-
grams that can handle multiple tasks simultaneously. The concurrency features
==PAGE:25==
2.6 Concurrency
18
of Go are available through goroutines and channels [43].
Methods that run concurrently with other methods are known as goroutines
in Go. In other words, goroutines are lightweight threads, but they are much
cheaper to create and manage compared to traditional OS threads [43]. This
allows for handling of thousand of them within a single application without
significant overhead. This functionality is essential in the custom scheduler that
is detailed in this project as a scheduler can receive multiple pod events at the
same time.
While multiple goroutines can be spawned at the same time, it is sometimes nec-
essary for these different processes to be able to communicate with each other
in order to synchronise their execution. This can be done through the use of
channels, which allow for the passing of data between goroutines. Channels cre-
ate synchronous communication between goroutines, which means the channel
that sends the value is blocked until another goroutine receives the value from
the channel [43].
(a) Mutex
(b) WaitGroup
Figure 2.7: Illustration of concurrency features in Go programming language.
In Go a mutual exclusion, or also known as mutex, is a synchronisation primitive
used to prevent concurrency access to a shared resource [43]. A mutex can lock
a critical section of code before accessing it, and then unlock it again once it has
completed. This ensures that only one process will access this critical block of
code at one time. If another process reaches this block of code it will be blocked
until the mutex is unlocked again. An example of this is shown in Figure 2.7(a).
It is illustrated that thread 1 has the lock for the mutex, and that it can release
the lock once it completes the code block. Thread 2 is waiting to receive the
lock once thread 1 releases it. This plays a crucial role for the custom scheduler
proposed in this project when it is time to calculate which node to place a pod
==PAGE:26==
2.6 Concurrency
19
on. More detail is given to this in the implementation chapter.
Go also include another synchronisation primitive known as a WaitGroup, and
it is used to wait for a collection of goroutines to finished executing [43]. As
illustrated in Figure 2.7(b), these function by calling ’Add’ before starting a
goroutine and then the goroutine calls ’Done’ when it finishes. The main process
can then call ’Wait’ to block until all goroutines in the group have completed.
WaitGroups are useful in this project when pods need to either be rescheduled
or scaled up. All other processes will wait until the reschedule or scale up has
completed before continuing. This is explained more in the implementation.
==PAGE:27==
Chapter 3
Implementation
This section details the implementation of the customer scheduler and autoscaler
for Kubernetes.
The custom scheduler and austoscaler is split into different
implementations that all work together to optimise the cost of training machine
learning models using Kubeflow in a Kubernetes cluster. These steps include
optimally scheduling the pod, rescheduling pods, scaling up model training jobs
when resources are available, and scaling up or down nodes based on demand.
All these processes work together to reduce the cost of training models in a
Kubernetes cluster.
The implementation starts by detailing the application
architecture before diving into each of the implementations within the custom
application. Thereafter, the environment architecture and setup for running the
custom application are explained.
The tech stack used for the implementation is driven by Molecular Quantum
Solutions (MQS) as the project is done in collaboration with them. They already
have a Kubernetes cluster setup and the solution was tailored to fit with their
current setup. These decisions mainly include using Kubernetes, Google Cloud,
and PyTorch.
There are also some constraints that were set for the scope of the project to
allow for sufficient time to complete each part. The custom application is built
to schedule Kubernetes pods on homogeneous resources. Each node within the
Kubernetes cluster that the workers run on should contain the same resources
==PAGE:28==
3.1 Design of custom application
21
in order for the scheduling to properly function. Additionally, the solution was
built to be as cloud agnostic as possible. Unfortunately, it is not possible for
the solution to remain completely independent from the cloud platform when
dealing with scaling nodes up and down. Therefore, the solution takes this into
consideration by building a cloud connector that can be customised for other
cloud platforms without having to change any other parts of the solution. This
is further discussed later in this chapter.
Each of the chapters contain code snippets that explain the main functional-
ity.
However, the full implementation is more complex, and some parts are
referenced in the appendix.
3.1
Design of custom application
The design of the custom application focuses on three main concepts:
1. The pods in a Kubernetes cluster should always be placed in a configu-
ration that allows for the least number of nodes to be used. This way
nodes can be decommissioned in order to save money by not paying for
additional unnecessary resources.
2. All paid for resources in a Kubernetes cluster should be fully utilised.
Virtual machines come with defined resources, and machine learning model
training pods can be scaled up to take full advantage of these resources if
other pods are not currently using them.
3. As much as possible of the training workload should be placed on spot
instances to reduce the cost of renting resources. This involves making
the training job fault tolerant and elastic, so that the removal of a spot
instance will not affect the training progress. Every section in this chapter
takes this into consideration, but the Kubernetes section explains how all
the different parts function together to make the solution fault tolerant.
To achieve these goals the custom application combines a number of techniques
and custom algorithms in an attempt to reduce the cost of training machine
learning models in the cloud.
==PAGE:29==
3.1 Design of custom application
22
Figure 3.1: Workflow from PyTorch ML model to being trained in a Kuber-
netes cluster.
As seen in Figure 3.1, the custom scheduler sits between the Kubeflow training
operator and the Kubernetes API. PyTorch code is referenced in a PyTorchJob
CRD file, and the training operator picks up on creation and updates made to
this custom resource definition type. The training operator reacts by creating
the correct number of pods specified in the PyTorchJob definition file. The cre-
ation of these pods is then picked up the custom scheduler, which then interacts
with the Kubernetes API to figure out the optimal placement of the pod in the
Kubernetes cluster.
The custom scheduler is built as an extra layer that sits between the Kubeflow
training operator and the Kubernetes API. It is therefore its own standalone
application and no configuration is required to standard Kubeflow or Kubernetes
tools and applications.
Figure 3.2: System design of custom application.
==PAGE:30==
3.1 Design of custom application
23
Figure 3.2 gives an overview of the different components of the custom appli-
cation that work together to handle pod events. The green boxes include each
component of the custom application that is implemented. The red components
are all provided by the Google Cloud Platform, and the blue components are
provided by a Kubernetes setup. A general overview is given of how these com-
ponents work together, and then more detail is given about the implementation
of the green boxes in the following sections.
The main controller is the central point of the application that contains all the
logic regarding when to call any of the other components. This contains the
central algorithm that is utilised to call all of the other components. Figure 3.2
also shows that the main controller is connected to Kubernetes API, and this is
because it contains an informer that listens to pod events upon which it reacts.
All actions taken by the main controller are influenced by the pod events that
come from the Kubernetes API.
From the main controller, each of the functionalities of the custom scheduler
are linked.
This includes the scaler, autoscaler, rescheduler, and job scaler.
The scheduler contains methods to handle all the calculations for optimally
scheduling pods on nodes in the cluster. The rescheduler then contains all the
methods to check if pods can be more optimally placed within a node to reduce
the number of active nodes. The autoscaler contains methods to scale up nodes
or to scale down nodes within a cluster. The last component connected to the
main controller is the job scaler, which has all the methods for scaling up or
down the resource usage of current running jobs. Each of these components is
configured to run independently from each other. With that said, while they
can function without each other they are all essential in working together to
reduce the cost of training machine learning models in the cloud.
All these components each rely on the resource manager to complete their indi-
vidual task. The resource manager is set up to be the connector the Kubernetes
API, and it handles all communication about pods and nodes.
It functions
to gather information about specific nodes and pods in the cluster, while also
being able to update the system based on the calculations from each of the
components.
In order to make this project as cloud agnostic as possible, it is necessary to in-
clude a cloud connector in the design. As Google Cloud is used for this project,
the Google Cloud Connector is included. When dealing with scaling up and
down nodes within a cluster, it is necessary to communicate directly with the
cloud platform and not through Kubernetes. This is why the autoscaler relies
on the Google Cloud Connector, which communicates directly with the Google
Cloud API. The idea behind this is that the Google Cloud Connector can be
switched out for another platform connector in order to utilise the custom ap-
==PAGE:31==
3.2 The main controller
24
plication on another platform. This project only focuses on the implementation
on the Google Cloud Platform.
3.2
The main controller
Figure 3.3: Simplified main controller flowchart overview.
A complete overview of the main controller design can be seen in Figure 3.3.
While all of the decisions shown in Figure 3.3 are made in the main controller,
the actions are carried out within their respective component. The diagram is
therefore color coded by the component that is linked to the action. Due to the
==PAGE:32==
3.2 The main controller
25
complexity and size of the main controller, the implementation is better under-
stood through the use of the flow diagram. Part of the code implementation
that the flowchart is based on can be found in the Appendix Listing A.1.
The decisions and resulting actions are covered in this section.
However, a
detailed implementation of the action of each component is detailed within their
respective section.
3.2.1
Informer
Taking a look at Figure 3.3 the beginning of the flowchart, at the top left, shows
a box labeled with ’Informer’. The informer is set up in the custom application
to respond to pod events when they are either created, updated, or deleted.
1
func
createInformer(clientset *kubernetes.Clientset) cache.
SharedIndexInformer {
2
factory := informers. NewSharedInformerFactory (clientset ,
time.Second *10)
3
informer := factory.Core ().V1().Pods ().Informer ()
4
5
informer. AddEventHandler (cache. ResourceEventHandlerFuncs {
6
AddFunc:
handlePodCreated ,
7
UpdateFunc: handlePodUpdated ,
8
DeleteFunc: handlePodDeleted ,
9
})
10
11
return
informer
12
}
Listing 3.1: Implementation of pod event informer in Go.
Listing 3.1 details the creation of the informer within the main controller. The
clientset that is input into the method is used to interact with the Kuber-
netes API. In line 2 is the declaration of factory, which creates shared informers
for Kubernetes resources. The factory ensures that informers can be reused,
which reduces the number of list/watch operations against the API server, im-
proving efficiency. In line 3 the informer is then declared to specifically watch
pod events. Finally, from line 5 to 9, the event handler is declared to define
what actions should be taken when pods are added, updated or deleted. The
handlePodCreated, handlePodUpdated, and handlePodDeleted methods are
then user created functions that are equivalent to the starting blocks in Figure
3.3. All these methods spawn goroutines, so the informer can continue listening
for events. These goroutines carry out the actions detailed in the flowchart.
==PAGE:33==
3.2 The main controller
26
3.2.2
AddFunc
This section details the steps taken from when a pod add event happens. Look-
ing back at Figure 3.3 the first step is to check that the custom scheduler is
defined for the PyTorchJob. It is explained in the Kubernetes setup how this
is defined. From there the pod is added to a queue of pods. The queue is a
custom defined type in Go that contains a list of pods with methods to handle
queue specific jobs. The implementation can be found in the Appendix Listing
A.2.
From here the scheduling loop starts by obtaining the mutex lock. If the pod
fits it is scheduled on the most fit node. If it does not fit, a sequence of checks
are performed with varying actions. First, all training jobs that are scaled up
are scaled down to the amount of workers it originally contained. If the pod
still does not fit on the nodes then the node pool is scaled up if possible, and
the pod can be scheduled. However, if the number of nodes is already at the
maximum then the pod is requeued and the scheduling loop ends.
If the pod is successfully scheduled, then the scheduling loop continues to do
the same with any remaining pods in the queue.
The scheduling loop ends
when either the queue is empty or if there are any pods that are not able to be
scheduled. If all pods are successfully scheduled then the main controller moves
onto the additional functionality. It first checks if scaling down the scaled up
training jobs can reduce the number of nodes. If this is the case then the job
scaler is activated to scale down all the scaled up jobs. Thereafter, it is checked if
it is possible to reschedule the pods in a more optimal setup to reduce the number
of nodes being used. The rescheduler component is then used to rearrange the
pods if this is the case. After completing both the scaling down of jobs and the
rescheduling, then the node scaler is called to remove any nodes that do not
contain pods. The job scaler is then once again utilised, but this time to scale
up training jobs on any remaining resources that are not currently utilised. The
final action is for the main controller to release the scheduling mutex lock, so
any other processes waiting can get started.
3.2.3
DeleteFunc
The following section details the steps taken when a pod delete event is received.
The goroutine must first request the mutex lock before it can take any actions.
Once the lock can successfully be received, the path in the flowchart starts by
checking if there are any unscheduled pods in the queue. If it is empty, then the
whole scheduling loop is skipped, and the controller goes straight to checking
==PAGE:34==
3.3 Resource manager
27
if the number of nodes can be scaled down by scaling down training jobs. The
remainder of the flow is the same as when a pod creation event is received.
3.2.4
UpdateFunc
The pod update event serves as a cleanup service for completed pods. When a
updated pod event is received, it is checked that the custom scheduler is defined
and that the status of the pod is completed. If this is the case the pod is deleted
and the control loop ends.
Kubernetes does not by default delete the completed pods. There are multiple
ways to include pod cleanup in a Kubernetes cluster. For this project, it was
decided to include it within the custom application, so that no additional setup
was required as this is a crucial implementation for the application to function
correctly.
3.3
Resource manager
The implementation of the resource manager is explained first as it is utilised
by the remainder of the components.
1
type
NodeCapacity
struct {
2
Name
string
3
Pods
[]* PodCapacity
4
Capacity
corev1.ResourceList
5
}
6
7
type
PodCapacity
struct {
8
Name
string
9
ResourceRequest
corev1.ResourceList
10
SchedulerName
string
11
JobName
string
12
}
Listing 3.2: Custom types utilised by the resource manager.
As seen in Listing 3.2 the resource manager utilises two custom types called
NodeCapacity and PodCapacity. The resource manager communicates with
the Kubernetes API to get information about the pods and nodes currently in
the system. In order to better handle the information that is received from the
API, these two custom types are used.
==PAGE:35==
3.3 Resource manager
28
Both the NodeCapacity and PodCapacity use a type called ResourceList from
the Kubernetes API. It is a type in Kubernetes used to specify the resource
requirements or limits for containers within a pod [28]. It is a map where the
keys are the names of the resources and the values are the quantities of those
resources. The resource name can be for example the GPU, CPU, memory, and
so on.
The NodeCapacity contains three values. The Name is unique and is therefore
used as the unique identifier for the node. Each NodeCapacity has a list of all the
pods that are currently scheduled on the node. This is in the form of the custom
type PodCapacity. The last value Capacity is of the type ResourceList. In
this case the ResourceList is the total resources the node is initialised with.
For the PodCapacity there are four different values defined. The first is the
unique identifier, which is the Name of the pod.
Each pod then also has a
ResourceRequest to track the resource required. As later demonstrated in the
Kubernetes setup section, this project utilises resource limits for containers. The
ResourceList therefore allows us to access the limits set for each container. The
SchedulerName is also saved, so that the different components are able to check
if the pods are scheduled by the custom scheduler or the default Kubernetes
scheduler.
The JobName is defined to store the PyTorchJob that the pod is
associated with. This is utilised by the job scaler when scaling jobs up or down.
The resource manager contains functions to handle pods and nodes, more specif-
ically the resource lists associated with those resources. An overview of the most
fundamental methods is given, and the implementations are referenced from the
appendix.
First, there are the methods that interact directly with the Kubernetes API.
For nodes these include getNodes (Listing A.3) and deleteNode (Listing A.4).
These serve to get information about the nodes or to delete nodes in the cluster.
When a node is deleted, the waitForNodeDeletion (Listing A.5) method is used
to wait for the node to finish deleting before continuing to the next operation.
Then there is a createBinding (Listing A.6) method, which allows pods to be
bound to a node. Kubernetes operates with bindings, so this is used for the
implementation of the scheduler as the node that is best fit for the pod requires
a binding between the two.
The main method that interacts with the Kubernetes API is the setupNodeCapacities
(Listing A.7).
This method is implemented to get all the information from
the Kubernetes cluster and convert it to the custom types NodeCapacity and
PodCapacity. All calculations in the remainder of the components utilise these
custom types.
==PAGE:36==
3.4 Scheduler
29
Another method that is fundamental to the application is the SortNodeCapacities
(Listing A.8). This method contains all the logic that determines, which nodes
have the most and least capacity based on the pods that are currently scheduled
on it. The important thing to note for this method, is the way resources are
prioritised in this custom application. Since this project focuses on reducing
costs, it was decided that resources should be prioritised from most expensive
to least expensive. Therefore, nodes are sorted first by GPU capacity, then CPU
capacity, and finally by RAM capacity.
The resource manager contains additional methods to perform actions on the
custom types. These are explained in the following sections as they are used in
the other components of the application.
3.4
Scheduler
The main goal of the scheduler is to condense the pods that are created onto as
few nodes as possible. By condensing the pods onto as few nodes as possible, it
allows for the node pool to be scaled down, therefore reducing the operational
costs associated with the training.
1
func
SchedulePod(pod *corev1.Pod) bool {
2
log.Printf("Scheduling␣pod:␣%s\n", pod.Name)
3
selectedNode , err := selectNode(pod)
4
if err != nil {
5
log.Println("Error␣selecting␣node:", err)
6
os.Exit (1)
7
}
8
log.Println("Selected␣node:", selectedNode )
9
if selectedNode == "" {
10
return
false
11
}
12
13
err = createBinding(pod , selectedNode )
14
if err != nil {
15
log.Println("Error␣creating␣binding:", err)
16
return
true
17
}
18
19
return
true
20
}
Listing 3.3: Main scheduler method.
==PAGE:37==
3.4 Scheduler
30
The scheduling of pods on nodes is based on two steps. These two steps can
be seen in Listing 3.3. The first step in line 2 is to select the optimal node to
schedule the pod on, and the second step in line 13 is create a binding between
the pod and the node. The method returns a boolean to indicate whether a
pod was able to be successfully scheduled. This is used in main controller to
indicate what the following action should be.
1
func
selectNode(pod *corev1.Pod) (string , error) {
2
nodes , err :=
setupNodeCapacities ()
3
if err != nil {
4
return "", err
5
}
6
7
sortedNodes := SortNodeCapacities (nodes)
8
selectedNode := fitNode(pod , sortedNodes)
9
10
return
selectedNode , nil
11
}
Listing 3.4: Select the optimal node for a pod.
In Listing 3.4 the implementation for selecting a node is represented. In line 2,
the method setupNodeCapacties from the resource manager is used to initialise
a map of all nodes in the cluster with their respective allocatable resources. Line
7 then shows that the node capacities are sorted by a method from the resource
manager. As mentioned in the resource manager chapter, the available node
resources are sorted by GPU capacity, CPU capacity, and finally RAM capacity.
The nodes need to be sorted by their available resources in order to place the
pod on the node with the least available resources. This is done to condense
the pods onto as few nodes as possible. Finally, the method fitNode on line 8
is used to find the most full pod with enough space for the pod.
1
func
fitNode(pod *corev1.Pod , nodes []* NodeCapacity ) string
{
2
podUsage :=
getPodResourceRequest (pod)
3
for i := len(nodes) - 1; i >= 0; i-- {
4
node := nodes[i]
5
if node.Fits(podUsage) {
6
return
node.Name
7
}
8
}
9
return ""
10
}
Listing 3.5: Implementation of fitNode
==PAGE:38==
3.5 Autoscaler
31
The selectNode method utilises the fitNode method to select the first node
that will fit the pod. The implementation can be seen in Listing 3.5. In line 2,
a method called getPodResourceRequest from the resource manager is used to
check the resources that the pod is requesting. Lines 3 to 8 then loop through
all the nodes and returns the first node that fits the number of resources the pod
is requesting. If no pod fits the pod then a blank string is returned and in the
main method false is returned to indicate that the pod could not be scheduled.
Once the optimal node for the pod has been selected, the binding between the
two is handled by the resource manager, and this process is explained in the
resource manager section.
Figure 3.4: Example of the scheduling logic.
Figure 3.4 shows the scheduling logic that is implemented. Pod 4 is scheduled
onto worker node 1 because it has the least space left, but has enough for the
pod. The standard Kubernetes scheduler would have put pod 4 on worker node
2 to load balance, but this would come with additional resource costs by paying
for 2 nodes instead of 1.
3.5
Autoscaler
The autoscaler serves to either scale up nodes when there is no room for the
pod that is being scheduled or to scale down nodes if there are nodes that do
not contain any pods. The implementation of the autoscaler is quite simple as
it is reactive to the outcome of all the actions performed by other components.
The true cost savings of the application happen because of the autoscaler, since
it is able to remove the resources that are not being used and therefore reduce
operational costs.
==PAGE:39==
3.5 Autoscaler
32
1
func
ScaleUpNodes () bool {
2
nodeList , err := getNodes ()
3
...
4
currentNodeCount := int64(len(nodeList.Items))
5
parseMaxNodes , err := strconv.ParseInt(maxNodes , 10, 64)
6
...
7
if currentNodeCount == parseMaxNodes {
8
return
false
9
}
10
currentNodeCount ++
11
log.Println("Scaling␣up␣to", currentNodeCount , "nodes")
12
err = updateNodeCount ( currentNodeCount )
13
...
14
return
true
15
}
Listing 3.6: Implementation to scale up node count.
The implementation to scale up nodes can be seen in Listing 3.6, and has been
simplified to include the most fundamental parts. The method starts in line 2
by using the resource manager to get a list of all the nodes. Lines 5 to 9 check if
the current number of nodes is already equal to the max number of nodes, and
if this is the case the method returns false without scaling up the nodes. This
indicates that to the main controller that the nodes cannot be scaled up, and
that the pod must be saved for later scheduling when more resources become
available.
The max nodes number is set as an environment variable, and is
covered during the Kubernetes setup. However, if the max number of nodes has
not been reached then the node count is incremented by 1, and the resource
manager is used in line 12 to update the node count.
1
func
ScaleDownNodes () {
2
nodeList , err := getNodes ()
3
...
4
nodeCount := len(nodeList.Items)
5
deletedCount := 0
6
for _, node := range
nodeList.Items {
7
if isNodeEmpty (& node) {
8
deleteNode(node.Name)
9
deletedCount ++
10
}
11
12
}
13
if deletedCount > 0 {
14
updatedNodeCount := int64(nodeCount - deletedCount )
15
updateNodeCount( updatedNodeCount )
16
waitForNodeDeletion (nodeCount , deletedCount )
==PAGE:40==
3.6 Rescheduler
33
17
}
18
}
Listing 3.7: Implementation to scale down node count.
The ScaleDownNodes shown in Listing 3.7 starts at line 2 by getting all the nodes
using a method from the resource manager. The method then loops through
all the nodes in line 6 to 10 and uses a method from the resource manager to
check if the node is empty. If the node is empty, meaning it has no pods on
it, the deleteNode method from the resource manager is used. Once all nodes
have been checked, lines 13 to 17 serve to update the pool node count using the
Google Cloud connector, and wait for the process to finish.
While an autoscaler set up to be reactive like this can be beneficial in limiting the
amount of resources that are paid for and wasted, it can unfortunately also add
some overhead. The pods that are being scheduled must wait for the system to
first scale up the nodes before they are able to be scheduled. There is therefore
a bit of a trade off when implementing this system. The time to spin up a node
can vary, but was seen to be around 2 minutes during development, and if a
job is expected to run for hours or days then those 2 minutes do not have a big
affect on the completion time of the job.
3.6
Rescheduler
Figure 3.5: Example of the rescheduling logic.
Figure 3.5 shows an example of how the rescheduler is built to function. The
main idea is that when possible all pods on one node should be rescheduled onto
other running nodes if possible. This is done in order to condense the number
of nodes the pods are spread onto, and by doing this it is possible to reduce
the number of nodes that are being paid for. In Figure 3.5, it can be seen that
==PAGE:41==
3.6 Rescheduler
34
worker node 1 has room for two more pods. Pod 3 on node 2 and pod 4 on node
3 are therefore moved into node 1, and it is then possible to shut down the two
additional nodes reducing the operational costs.
Algorithm 1 Reschedule pod logic
1: nodesToRemove = []
2: podsToDelete = []
3: for node in sortedNodes do
4:
remainingPods = sortedNodes - node
5:
podsToMove = []
6:
for pod in node.Pods do
7:
for remainingNode in remainingNodes do
8:
if remainingNode.Fits(pod) then
9:
podsToMove.append(pod)
10:
remainingNode.Pods.append(pod)
11:
break
12:
end if
13:
end for
14:
if pod does not fit on any remainingNodes then
15:
break outer loop
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
nodesToRemove.append(node)
19:
podsToDelete.appendAll(podsToMove)
20: end for
21: podsToDelete = getUniqueList(podsToDelete)
The calculation for rescheduling utilises a custom algorithm shown in Algo-
rithm 1, and the code implementation of the algorithm can be seen in the
Appendix Listing A.9. As seen in line 3, the algorithm iterates through a list
of sortedNodes from most resources available to least resources available. For
each node it is checked if all the pods are able to be scheduled onto the remain-
der of the nodes. If this is the case, the pod names and the node name are saved,
and the remaining nodes are updated to contain the new pods. At this step, no
updates are made in Kubernetes before the calculation completes. From here,
the rescheduler continues onto the remaining nodes and carries out the same
calculation as before. This process continues until there is a node where all the
pods cannot be rescheduled, and when this happens the calculation ends.
==PAGE:42==
3.7 Job scaler
35
Figure 3.6: Representation of the reschedule calculation loop.
Figure 3.6 is a simplified visual representation of the algorithm. It does not
include the individual resource capacities. Loop 1 checks node 1 and sees that it
is possible to reschedule pod 1 onto node 2. The algorithm then moves onto loop
2 to check node 2. The calculation then finds that pod 1, pod 2, and pod 3 can
all be moved to node 3. This will render node 1 and 2 empty, which is why they
are highlighted in red as they will be eliminated. The example condenses the
nodes onto 1 node instead of 3, which reduces the price to 33% of the original
price, and this is the justification for including the rescheduler component.
The output from the calculation is both a list of nodes that can be completely
eliminated and the name of all the pods that will be rescheduled. The list of
pods is used to determine the number of pods that need to be rescheduled,
and the custom application utilises a WaitGroup to wait until the number of
rescheduled pods equals the calculated number.
As the scheduler component is already configured to best place the pods, it is
possible to just delete the pods from the system, and they will be placed on
the nodes that were calculated earlier. This means the rescheduler only carries
out the calculations to see if there is a more optimal scheduling available, and
if there is it just deletes those pods. The scheduler component handles the rest.
3.7
Job scaler
The job scaler is built to take advantage of the extra resources available on the
nodes. Resources that are paid for should be fully utilised whenever possible.
It contains two main functions JobScaleUp and JobScaleDown, which are the
==PAGE:43==
3.7 Job scaler
36
methods that are called from the main controller. When there are extra re-
sources the main controller is able to use the JobScaleUp, and when the main
controller is unable to schedule a pod it can use JobScaleDown to scale down
the jobs that are currently scaled up to make space for the new pod.
1
type
ScaledJob
struct {
2
OriginalSize
int64
3
ScaledSize
int64
4
}
5
6
var
scaledJobs = make(map[string]ScaledJob)
Listing 3.8: ScaledJob custom type implementation.
The custom application must keep track of which jobs are currently scaled
up, so a custom type called ScaledJob is used as seen in Listing 3.8.
The
OriginalSize is used to keep track of the number of worker pods the job origi-
nally had. The ScaledSize is the new number of worker pods the job is scaled
up to. A map is created to track this with the key set as the job name and the
value being the ScaledJob.
Algorithm 2 Job Scale Up Logic
1: pod = getRandomPod()
2: resourcesRequirements = getPodResources(pod)
3: replicas = calculateAdditionalReplicas(resourcesRequirements)
4: if replicas > 0 then
5:
job = getJob(pod)
6:
job.replicas = replicas
7:
sendUpdatedJob(job)
8: end if
A simplified approach to the scaling up logic can be seen in Algorithm 2. The
JobScaleUp method starts by choosing a PyTorchJob at random. It gets the
resource limits requested by a worker pod for this job and calculated how many
additional replicas can be made. If the number of additional replicas is greater
than 0 then an entry in the scaledJobs map is made with the new values. The
PyTorchJob CRD specification is then updated with the new increased replicas
count, and the Kubeflow training operator automatically handles the creation of
the new pods. The main controller then picks up on this new pod creation and
the scheduler component takes care of scheduling it on the correct node. During
all of this, a WaitGroup is created and the number of tokens added is equal to
the number of additional replicas created. The WaitGroup then waits until all
of the pods have been rescheduled before continuing in the main controller.
==PAGE:44==
3.7 Job scaler
37
Figure 3.7: Example of the job scaler logic. Green pods are scaled replicas.
Figure 3.7 shows an example of Job 1 being scaled up. The example has been
simplified to not include values for the number of resources requested. To start
with the node only contains 1 pod for the training job 1. There is additional
space for 3 more replicas on the node so the job scaler updated the PyTorchJob
to contain 4 replicas instead of 1. Job 1 is also added to the map of scaled jobs
so that it can be tracked for when it has to be scaled down.
Figure 3.8: Example of the job scaler removing scaled pods to fit new pods.
On the contrary, the job scaler also contains the method JobScaleDown to
scale down jobs to the original size when more space is needed for additional
pods as seen in Figure 3.8.
This method cycles through all the jobs in the
scaledJobs map and updates the PyTorchJob CRD replica to the value of the
OriginalSize. Once again, the Kubeflow training operator picks up on the
change and deletes the additional pods. The job scaler once again utilises a
WaitGroup to wait for all the pods to finish deleting, and from there the main
controller can continue to schedule the additional pods that there was not space
for before scaling down.
==PAGE:45==
3.8 Google Cloud connector
38
3.8
Google Cloud connector
The Google Cloud connector component serves as the connection between the
custom application and the Google Cloud Platform. The custom application
serves to be as cloud agnostic as possible, however, nodes cannot be added and
removed from a cluster without doing it through the cloud provider. There is
therefore only one method for the Google Cloud connector and that is updateNodeCount.
The updateNodeCount takes an integer as input, and it communicates with the
Google Cloud API to set the node count of the cluster. Two things happen after
the node count is updated in the Google Cloud connector. The first is that the
method waits for the number of nodes to update. Thereafter, the method waits
for the operation to have the status ’DONE’ in Google Cloud before it can
continue. The Google Cloud connector is only connected to the autoscaler, so
from here the autoscaler component can take back over.
To expand the solution to a different cloud provider, a new connector component
should be made with an updated implementation of updateNodeCount. This
method should handle communication with the new cloud provider and allow
the number of nodes to be set. Everything else, such as node calculations, are
already handled by the custom application outside of the connector component.
3.9
PyTorch Setup
In order for a model to successfully be deployed using the set up solution, the
DistributedDataParallel library must be used in PyTorch. The library is
used to carry out training using data parallelism as described in the background
chapter.
However, this library only allows for checkpoints to be saved each
epoch, since by default it does not keep track of which data points have already
been trained on. With the custom application, worker pods are often scaled up,
down, or moved to different nodes, which requires a high level of elasticity during
training. Every time one of these actions happens the training will continue
from the latest checkpoint, and therefore saving a checkpoint each epoch is not
frequent enough.
==PAGE:46==
3.9 PyTorch Setup
39
3.9.1
Custom data handling
In order to allow for more often checkpointing, a custom data handling solution is
developed. The solution focuses on implementing custom Dataset and Sampler
classes in Python. The main concept is to add indexing to the dataset, so it is
possible to save the data indices that have already been processed by the model.
1
class
MyDataset(Dataset):
2
...
3
def
__getitem__(self , index):
4
if isinstance(self.datasets , dict):
5
return {k: dataset[index] for k, dataset in self
.datasets.items ()}, index
6
return
tuple(dataset[index] for
dataset in self.
datasets), index
Listing 3.9: Custom Dataset implementation in Python.
In Listing 3.9 the class MyDataset can be seen, and it inherits from the Dataset
class that is part of the PyTorch library. While the full implementation can be
seen in the Appendix Listing A.10, the main change is that the __getitem__
function also returns each data point along with an index as a tuple.
1
class
FilteredSampler (Sampler):
2
def
__init__(self , data_source , indices_to_filter_out ,
num_replicas=None , rank=None , shuffle=True):
3
...
4
self.data_source = data_source
5
self. indices_to_filter_out = set(
indices_to_filter_out )
6
self.valid_indices = [i for i in range(len(
data_source)) if i not in self.
indices_to_filter_out ]
7
...
8
def
__iter__(self):
9
...
10
indices = self.valid_indices [self.rank:self.
total_size:self.num_replicas ]
11
return
iter(indices)
Listing 3.10: Custom Sampler implementation in Python.
With indices assigned to the Dataset, a custom sampler has been created to
filter out certain indices based on the ones that have already been processed.
In Listing 3.10 the custom sampler sets the indices to filter out in line 5, which
it can then use in line 6 to set the valid indices. The sampler then uses the
==PAGE:47==
3.9 PyTorch Setup
40
valid indices when iterating the dataset in the method from line 8 to 11. The
full implementation of the custom sampler is provided in the Appendix Listing
A.11.
3.9.2
Checkpointing
As mentioned in the background chapter, every time changes are made to a
group of working pods, the training resumes from the most recent checkpoint.
The checkpoint is a map that saves certain weights and configurations. With
the changes made to the dataset and sampler, the checkpoint also needs to save
the data points that have already been processed.
1
def
save_checkpoint (model , optimizer , epoch , global_step ,
processed_batches , rng_state , checkpoint_file ):
2
checkpoint_dir = os.path.dirname( checkpoint_file )
3
os.makedirs(checkpoint_dir , exist_ok=True)
4
checkpoint = {
5
’model_state_dict ’: model.state_dict (),
6
’optimizer_state_dict ’: optimizer.state_dict (),
7
’epoch ’: epoch ,
8
’global_step ’: global_step ,
9
’processed_batches ’: list( processed_batches ),
10
}
11
torch.save(checkpoint , checkpoint_file )
Listing 3.11: Checkpoint implementation in Python.
In Listing 3.11 the checkpoint saving implementation is represented. From line
4 to 11 the map that contains all the checkpoint information is constructed.
The model state, optimizer state, and epoch are saved, which are all standard
checkpoint data values. There is also the addition of the global step, which keeps
track of the total number of data points that have been processed. This number
is incremented after every loop of training and then saved to the checkpoint.
The final addition is the processed batches. It contains a list of indices that
have already been trained on. This list of batches can be used when initialising
the custom sampler in order to exclude these points when distributing the data
to each of the parallel processes.
Traditionally, training with data parallelism does not allow for checkpointing
in the middle of epochs.
With this custom solution for data handling, the
checkpoint is able to saved as frequently as desired by the user.
This was
necessary for the project as an epoch can take a long time to fully finish training.
With the elasticity required for this project that would have been a substantial
==PAGE:48==
3.10 Kubernetes setup
41
bottleneck having to load a checkpoint from the beginning of an epoch every
time the state of the system changed.
Saving and loading checkpoints does
add some overhead that must be accounted for. To minimise the amount of
overhead, it is important to find a balance of how often to save a checkpoint,
which is not a trivial task as it is specific to each type of workload.
3.10
Kubernetes setup
The benefit of the custom application along with the PyTorch custom data
handling is that it allows for the solution to be both fault tolerant and elastic.
This means that worker pods can be moved around, scaled up, scaled down,
or evicted without any major consequences. This high level of fault tolerance
becomes extremely beneficial when setting up the Kubernetes environment as
spot instances can be utilised to host most of the pods.
Figure 3.9: Kubernetes environment setup overview.
Taking a look at Figure 3.9 shows the general overview of the system setup. The
system contains one master node, and this node should contain the Kubeflow
training operator, rendezvous server, custom application, and the Kubernetes
API. All the communication that is happening with the Kubernetes API is
represented by the red lines in the diagram.
The master node is set up on
an on-demand instance as it always needs to be available without downtime.
The figure also contains 2 worker instances labeled as worker 1 and worker 2.
The worker pods can be scaled up to a set limit. The high fault tolerance and
elasticity of the model training on the worker pods allows all of the worker
nodes to be spot instances for up to 91% reduction in resource costs [15]. The
==PAGE:49==
3.10 Kubernetes setup
42
standard PyTorch implementation running on a standard Kubernetes cluster
does not allow for running the calculations on spot instances, so this another
benefit achieved by the custom solution.
The figure also shows a persistent volume that all the worker pods can save
their checkpoints to and load checkpoints from. The pod communication with
the persistent volume is represented by the dashed blue lines in Figure 3.9. The
persistent volume can be set up in many different ways, and the project is not
reliant on it being set up in any specific configuration. The worker pods just
require a shared volume to save and load from. A viable solution for setting up
a persistent volume is discussed in the test setup chapter.
The rendezvous server also needs to be deployed as a pod. The configuration
files can be seen in the Appendix Listing A.12.
The pod is set up to run
the client TCP connection on the port 2379, and this port is connected to a
Kubernetes service that all the worker pods can connect to. From here each
worker specifies the name of the rendezvous server service in their configuration
file as is shown later in this section. Once the rendezvous server has been set
up, the worker pods are able to setup communication with each other through
the server. Taking a look at 3.9 it can be seen that the rendezvous server has a
green and a purple line going into it. This represents the two different groups
of worker pods that are communicating with each other. It is essential that it
is specified which group the worker pod should be apart of, and this is done in
the configuration file as shown later in this section.
==PAGE:50==
3.10 Kubernetes setup
43
1
apiVersion :
apps/v1
2
kind :
Deployment
3
metadata :
4
name : my−scheduler
5
spec :
6
r e p l i c a s :
1
7
s e l e c t o r :
8
matchLabels :
9
app : my−scheduler
10
template :
11
metadata :
12
l a b e l s :
13
app : my−scheduler
14
spec :
15
serviceAccountName :
scheduler −
s e r v i c e −account
16
c on ta i ne rs :
17
−name : my−scheduler
18
image :
mathias9395 / cost−
scheduler : 1 . 4
19
imagePullPolicy :
Always
20
env :
21
−name : SCHEDULER_NAME
22
value :
"my−scheduler "
23
−name : NODE_POOL_ID
24
value :
" train −pool "
25
−name : PROJECT_ID
26
value :
"my−p r o j e c t "
27
−name : CLUSTER_ID
28
value :
"my−c l u s t e r "
29
−name : ZONE
30
value :
"europe−west4−b"
31
−name : MAX_NODES
32
value :
"5"
Listing 3.12: Custom Application YAML
1
apiVersion :
" kubeflow . org /v1"
2
kind :
PyTorchJob
3
metadata :
4
name :
example−job
5
spec :
6
e l a s t i c P o l i c y :
7
rdzvBackend :
etcd
8
rdzvHost :
etcd−c l i e n t
9
rdzvPort :
2379
10
. . .
11
rdzvId :
example−job
12
pytorchReplicaSpecs :
13
Worker :
14
r e p l i c a s :
1
15
r e s t a r t P o l i c y :
OnFailure
16
template :
17
spec :
18
schedulerName : my−scheduler
19
c on ta i ne rs :
20
. . .
21
r e s o u r c e s :
22
requests :
23
cpu :
2
24
. . .
Listing 3.13: PyTorchJob YAML
Listing 3.12 is the main configuration file for deploying the custom application
on Kubernetes. The configuration file defines a Kubernetes Deployment. It is
created as a deployment, so that if the pod every goes down, it will be reini-
tialised automatically by Kubernetes. In line 4 the name of the application can
be specified. A service account is also specified on line 15, which is used to assign
both Google Cloud and Kubernetes permissions to the custom application. For
the full extend of the permissions setup and the permissions assigned, Section
A.1.5 in the Appendix can be referenced. Under the containers section on line
18, the custom application has been packed as a Docker image, so that it can
be used in the container. The most fundamental sections are the variables that
are set under the ’env’ tag. These are environment variables that are set within
the container that the custom application uses to set the scheduler name and
to scale nodes up and down. These must be set specifically to the Kubernetes
==PAGE:51==
3.10 Kubernetes setup
44
cluster that the application will run in. Along with that, the application is built
to not scale above the maximum number of nodes specified on line 32. When
the configuration file is used in a Kubernetes cluster, a pod is created where the
custom application will automatically run and start listening for pod events.
With the custom application up and running, a model training job can be sub-
mitted. An example of a PyTorchJob configuration file can be seen in Listing
3.13. In this configuration file, the elasticPolicy has been added to contain
information about the rendezvous server that the training job will be communi-
cating with. It specifies that the back end will be ETCD, which is a distributed
key-value store that serves as the primary data store for the cluster (The ren-
dezvous server)[37]. As mentioned earlier, a service is set up for the rendezvous
server and this should be specified under the host and port. The rendezvous ID
is then set, which is how the training job knows which group it should be com-
municating with. Moving onto the pytorchReplicaSpecs this is where all the
resources and information for the actual worker pod are specified. The number
of worker pods for the training can be specified on line 14 and the resources
that each worker should consume are shown on line 21 to 23. The most crucial
field to fill out in order to use the custom application is represented on line 18.
This is where the scheduler name is specified and the value here must match the
name assigned to the scheduler in the custom application YAML file. Filling
this field out indicates that the PyTorchJob pods should be scheduled by the
custom application.
==PAGE:52==
Chapter 4
Test setup
This chapter explains the setup of the test environment, followed by a detailed
layout of how the tests are conducted. The custom application runs independent
of all the Kubeflow features, and it is therefore possible to set up training with
varying levels of complexity. As the project only focuses on testing the custom
application, a standalone version of the Kubeflow training operator is installed
for testing instead of installing the whole Kubeflow application [6].
4.1
Shared storage setup
All of the steps mentioned in the implementation are set up on the Google
Cloud environment. One additional step that is specific to the test setup is the
setup of a NFS-server for saving and loading checkpoints during training. This
part is not included in the implementation portion as it is specific to different
Kubernetes cluster configurations. The NFS-server that is set up for testing is
basic as it serves all the needs for this specific project. It is therefore seen as
part of the test setup process.
1
apiVersion :
" kubeflow . org /v1"
2
kind :
PyTorchJob
3
metadata :
4
name :
example
==PAGE:53==
4.2 Model and dataset
46
5
. . .
6
volumeMounts :
7
−name :
data
8
mountPath :
/mnt/ nfs / exports
9
. . .
10
volumes :
11
−name :
data
12
persistentVolumeClaim :
13
claimName :
nfs−pvc
Listing 4.1: PyTorchJob volume mount example.
To set up a NFS-server in a Kubernetes cluster a PersistenvVolume and
PersistentVolumeClaim can be set up through a NFS-server container. The
PersistentVolume described the volume of storage that the pods wills share,
and for the tests 10 GBs are provided. The PersistentVolumeClaim is cre-
ated so that a NFS-server deployment can claim the volume amount. Finally,
a Kubernetes Service is created so that the NFS-server is available in the net-
work within the cluster. The service is what all the pods access the NFS-server
through. Listing 4.1 shows the two crucial parts to mounting the volume to
a pod. The PVC that is created must be mounted under volumes as shown
from lines 10 to 13. From there the volume mount can be used in the container
to mount the path as show in lines 6 to 8. The full set up of the PV, PVC,
NFS-server deployment, and service are included in the Appendix Section A.2.
The data that the test model trains on during testing is moved to the NFS-
server, so that all the worker pods have access to it. This eliminates the pods
from each having to download their own copy of the dataset before starting the
training.
4.2
Model and dataset
The specific model that is being trained should not affect the performance of
the custom application as the custom application just runs in the background
scheduling the pods. Therefore, the chosen model used for training is resnet18
[18] using the MNIST dataset [7]. The implementation of the model is based
on the distributed model example provided by Kubeflow with customisations
made to fit the project [22]. These customisations are based on the PyTorch
code discussed in the implementation chapter.
No customisations are made
to the model itself, and the changes only involve the data handling and the
checkpointing.
To simulate a varying size of workloads for the custom application to handle,
==PAGE:54==
4.3 PyTorchJob deployment
47
the same model will be used for every job submitted but with changing number
of epochs.
4.3
PyTorchJob deployment
The PyTorch model training is packaged as a Docker image in order to be
deployable on the Kubernetes cluster as a PyTorchJob.
The base image is
set as the PyTorch Docker image, and the python-etcd library is installed for
communication with the rendezvous server.
With the model packaged as a Docker image, a PyTorchJob YAML file can be
configured for each job that is submitted in the test pipeline. For the tests, each
PyTorchJob has varying resource requirements for the CPU, varying number of
replica worker pods, and varying number of epochs. These differences serve to
simulate the diverse types of jobs that can be received by the custom application
in the training pipeline.
1
kubectl
c r eate −f
test1 −1.yaml
2
s l e e p
500
3
kubectl
c r eate −f
test1 −2.yaml
4
s l e e p
700
5
kubectl
c r eate −f
test1 −3.yaml
6
. . .
Listing 4.2: Bash script for running tests
With the setup of each model training instance as a PyTorchJob file, they can be
submitted to the pipeline with varying frequency to emulate a realistic pipeline
workflow. Taking a look at Listing 4.2, a Bash script is set up to submit the
jobs in the Kubernetes cluster. The frequency of job submission is controlled
by the sleep statements between the job creation.
For each of the tests, 10
PyTorchJobs are submitted in total. The sleep statements are deterministic
and are set in an attempt to simulate what a realistic workload might look like.
4.4
Evaluation metrics
As mentioned in the implementation, the custom application prioritises re-
sources from most expensive to least expensive, meaning GPU, CPU, and then
RAM. However, because of GPU quota limits on Google Cloud and the greater
cost of renting GPUs, the tests are run on CPU instances, and are evaluated
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Evaluation metrics
48
on the cost of these CPU instances. The results are expected to be similar on
GPU instances, but cannot be verified because of the GPU quota limits.
Node Type
Instance Type
vCPUs
Memory
Max Nodes
Master
e2-standard-2
2
8
1
Worker
e2-standard-8
8
32
5
Table 4.1: Overview of test instances.
Each test is run twice, the first time being with the custom application schedul-
ing the pods and the second time being the Kubernetes standard functionality.
This allows for a comparison to be made between the running time of the stan-
dard setup and the custom solution.
Both types of tests are run on the same instances, and an overview of these
can be seen in Table 4.1. The master node just needs to be able to run the
essential containers that are discussed in the implementation in Figure 3.9. As
this instance remains constant between both types of tests, it will be omitted
when comparing the prices. The second instance type is for the worker nodes
that run the worker pods for the model training. For the tests run, this pool of
nodes can contain up to 5 instances at the same time.
As resource costs can change over time, especially with spot instances, the two
types of tests are evaluated on duration hours. The total run time of the nodes
can be compared and this correlates with the cost that would be associated with
running the nodes for that amount of time.
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 5
Results and Discussion
This chapter outlines the tests conducted as well as their results. Four different
tests are conducted on the environment specified in the previous chapter. These
four tests each aim to test an aspect of the custom application. The different
tests have the following characteristics:
• Test 1 aims to simulate a light workload, with a steady input of PyTorchJobs
into the pipeline.
• Test 2 aims to simulate a medium workload. The workload is still steady,
but with increased resource requirements and a higher job input frequency.
• Test 3 aims to test the scalability of the custom application.
This is
done by having a light but steady workflow with each of the training
jobs requiring more resources and time to complete with a greater delay
between the submission of jobs. The justification for this test is that it is
compared to test 1 to see if similar results can be seen when the workload
runs for a longer period of time.
• Test 4 aims to simulate a heavy workload. This includes a workload that
requires all of the resources available in the cluster. The test also has jobs
queued that wait until resources free up.
==PAGE:57==
5.1 Summary of results
50
An important note for this chapter is that the custom scheduler is built to run
on spot instances, while a standard Kubernetes setup would not allow training
to run on spot instances as it is not elastic and fault tolerant. Therefore, the
custom scheduler already has a 60% to 91% price reduction over the standard
Kubernetes setup. This chapter solely focuses on the price optimisation of the
custom application compared to the standard setup regardless of resource costs.
Any of the cost savings discussed in this chapter are on top of the already
achieved 60% to 91% cost savings.
5.1
Summary of results
Tying back to the original goal of optimising costs, the results are summarised
as percent savings of the custom application compared to a standard Kubernetes
setup. Instead of directly analysing an actual price, which is subject to change,
the duration hours are instead compared. The percent savings are calculated
using the following equation:
(1 −Custom duration hours
Standard duration hours) ∗100 = Percent Savings
The equation is the custom duration hours divided by the standard duration
hours subtracted from 1. This is then multiplied by 100 to get the savings as a
percentage.
Test
Custom
Standard
Percent Savings
Workload
Test 1
3.83 hrs
7.68 hrs
50.13%
Light
Test 2
4.86 hrs
7.02 hrs
30.76%
Medium
Test 3
7.63 hrs
15.80 hrs
51.65%
Light
Test 4
4.72 hrs
4.80 hrs
1.67%
Heavy
Table 5.1: Cost savings comparison between custom and standard test.
The results from the four tests are summarised in Table 5.1.
All four tests
resulted in cost savings with the custom application, although with varying
levels of success. It appears from this that the cost savings are proportional
to the workload of the pipeline. This makes sense as with a full pipeline all
available resources are utilised, and there is not much room for optimisations to
be made. Therefore, as less resources in the cluster are required, then there is
more room for optimal scheduling and node scaling, which is why better results
are seen for test 1, 2 and 3 rather than test 4.
==PAGE:58==
5.1 Summary of results
51
Figure 5.1: Comparison of custom and standard durations.
For a comparison of the custom application to the standard Kubernetes setup
Figure 5.1 can be referenced. The blue boxes represent the custom application,
while the orange boxes represent the standard Kubernetes setup. The graph
contains the same information as in Table 5.1 with the duration hours on the
y-axis.
Instance
GPU
Savings
Standard
Custom
Custom & spot
Overall savings
e2-standard-8
N/A
Best
$0.3506
$0.1695
$0.0153
95.64%
e2-standard-8
N/A
Worst
$0.3506
$0.3447
$0.1379
60.67%
n1-standard-8
nvidia-tesla-t4
Best
$0.79
$0.3820
$0.0344
95.64%
n1-standard-8
nvidia-tesla-t4
Worst
$0.79
$0.7768
$0.3107
60.67%
Table 5.2: Example cost comparisons for instances and savings scenarios.
Table 5.2 provides examples of possible cost savings that can be achieved with
the current setup using current Google Cloud prices [11]. It provides both an
overview for a CPU instance and a GPU instance.
It is important to note
that for the example, the assumption is made that the cost savings are similar
for GPU instances as those tested on the CPU instances. For both types of
instances the best test result and worst test result are provided. The standard
price highlights what it would cost to run on a regular Kubernetes cluster with
no custom setup. From there the cost savings achieved during testing are applied
to get the custom price. Thereafter, the spot instance discount is applied, and
then it is possible to calculate on overall savings by comparing the standard cost
to the custom & spot price. For the best scenario a 91% saving is applied for
the spot instance, and for the worst scenario a 60% saving is applied. This is
due to the 60% to 91% price saving spread that can be achieved from running
on spot instances [15]. While the costs provided in the table are only a fraction
of a dollar, running hundreds of nodes over hundreds of hours can rack up
these costs, and the table shows that with this setup there is potential to save
up to 95.64% of that cost. This 95.64% should, however, be seen as the best
==PAGE:59==
5.1 Summary of results
52
case scenario, as it involves both the best test result paired with the best spot
instance discount.
Figure 5.2: Number of nodes over time for all 4 tests.
The Figures in 5.2 show the number of active nodes over the training period
for each of the tests. The blue line represents the standard Kubernetes setup,
which is why it is steady at 5 until all the PyTorchJobs finish training. The
green lines represent the custom application, which is why the number of nodes
scale up and down over time. The red dashed lines represent when a training
job is submitted for training.
Taking a look at all four tests combined, it is interesting to see that the pipeline
for the custom application finished after the standard setup for all of them.
The biggest contributor to this is that the the autoscaler is reactive to the
jobs that are submitted. Therefore, when a job is submitted it might need to
wait for a new node to be spun up before the pod can be scheduled. However,
==PAGE:60==
5.1 Summary of results
53
the standard solution has all five nodes ready at all times, so the pod can be
scheduled instantly saving a bit of time. A solution to fix this is proposed in
the future work of the conclusion chapter.
The second reason the standard
Kubernetes setup is able to finish quicker is due to the load distribution of
the standard scheduler. The even load distribution of worker pods on different
nodes allows the resources to work more efficiently. The resources of each pod
are also not bound by strict constraints when the node is not completely full,
and therefore the pod might sometimes be able to use additional resources than
what was requested in the PyTorchJob definition file. Even load distribution
across nodes is one of the sacrifices made with the custom application, however
this is necessary in order to condense worker pods onto as few resources and
nodes as possible.
Additionally, with the results in Figure 5.2 it becomes apparent that the custom
solution also introduces a certain level of overhead. Naturally, waiting for nodes
to spin up and for pods to be rescheduled on new nodes requires some idle
time where training is not occurring. Likewise, when training is interrupted to
schedule pods, move pods, or scale up jobs the worker pods must restart their
communication through the rendezvous server, which requires some additional
time. Thereafter, each pod must load the latest checkpoint and continue from
there. All of this combined adds to the representation in Figure 5.2 that the
pipeline tends to finish later for the custom solution compared to the standard
Kubernetes setup. As discussed in the conclusion, one of the future work points
should be to analyse the extend of these overheads and find a solution to mitigate
them as much as possible. The custom application reacts to pods being created
and deleted, so these overheads are influenced by the arrival of these pod events.
As seen by the green lines in Figure 5.2, test 1 and 3 are able to scale up
and down their resources continuously over time because of the light workloads
provided. The nodes are scaled down multiple times over the duration of the
test. Contrary, test 2 is only able to scale down nodes towards the end when
the jobs start finishing one by one. This is the reason the cost savings for test
2 are significantly less than test 1 and 2. Finally, test 4 shows that the custom
application follows a similar line to the standard Kubernetes results. Under a
heavy load when all resources are required, the custom scheduler will scale up
to the maximum number of nodes and continue to schedule pods in the queue
until the queue is empty, which is why the lines look similar resulting in only a
1.67% cost saving. The custom scheduler is built to either utilise all resources
or remove those that are not being used, and under full load there will not be
any unused resources to optimise the use of.
==PAGE:61==
5.2 Summary of findings
54
5.2
Summary of findings
In this chapter, the results of four different tests have been presented and eval-
uated based on various aspects of the custom application compared to the per-
formance of the standard Kubernetes setup. This section discusses whether the
initial goals of the project are achieved with the custom application. The goals
are summarised in this chapter, but can also be seen in Section 1.3.
The first goal involves reducing resource costs associated with training models
using cloud computing. This goal is achieved by the built solution because it
is built to run on spot instances. The solution is shown to be fault tolerant
and elastic, which allows the use of spot instances for up to a 90% reduction in
resource costs compared to on-demand instances. It is also backed by all four
tests, which all resulted in cost savings.
The second objective is to ensure the solution is scalable across varying work-
loads and resource requirements. The four tests involved varying workloads in-
cluding light, medium and heavy. Each PyTorchJob submitted to the pipelines
during testing also required different amounts of resources and replicas. The
solution successfully handled the varying workloads.
The third objective is to ensure the solution adheres to any SLAs specified for
the training job. This is specific to the resources specified and the number of
pod replicas. The solution never scales under the number of replicas specified
in the PyTorchJob definition file, and the pod is always assigned at least the
number of resources specified. Therefore, this goal is successfully achieved by
ensuring training job requirements are followed.
The fourth objective is to compare the custom solution to the standard Kuber-
netes training costs. This is executed and summarised in Table 5.1. Additionally,
this goal is successfully achieved as backed up by all four test results. All tests
achieved between a 1.7% and 51.7% cost saving based on the workload.
Custom
Kubernetes
Dragon
Optimus
Zeus
Zhiheng
Stratus
Pivot
Locality/network aware
X
X
Gang scheduling
X
Pod migration/rescheduling
X
X
X
X
Custom scheduling
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Dynamic resource allocation
X
X
X
X
Autoscaling
X
X
X
Custom data handling
X
Heterogeneous resources
X
X
X
X
Table 5.3: Comparison of various scheduling solutions.
The final objective is to compare the custom implementation to the schedulers
==PAGE:62==
5.2 Summary of findings
55
discussed in the related work. Table 5.3 provides an overview of the features of
the different schedulers. The custom column refers to the scheduler proposed
in this project, while the Kubernetes column refers to the standard Kubernetes
scheduler. Each of the schedulers serve their own purpose and objectives, but
from the table it can be seen that similar techniques are used. The custom ap-
plication in this project sought to combine the techniques of the other schedulers
to further improve the price optimisation of training machine learning models
in the cloud.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 6
Conclusion
This chapter wraps up the thesis by summarising the work that is completed
with a reflection of the results. It also discusses and evaluates suggestions for
future work on the custom Kubernetes application.
6.1
Summary
The thesis presents a custom Kubernetes scheduler and autoscaler system that
aims at optimising the placement of machine learning worker pods to minimise
the number of active nodes in a Kubernetes cluster, resulting in reduced cloud
training costs. The introduction and background highlight the standard Ku-
bernetes approaches, and explain why Kubernetes can benefit from improved
resource allocation strategies when it comes to machine learning workloads.
In the implementation, the proposed solution focuses on condensing ML worker
pods onto fewer nodes, effectively lowering the active node count and cutting
costs. The architecture of the custom application integrates a scheduler, au-
toscaler, job scaler, and rescheduler all working together to optimise the train-
ing costs. The implementation leverages Google Cloud and Kubernetes APIs to
dynamically manage resources, utilising spot instances over on-demand ones to
==PAGE:64==
6.2 Contributions
57
cut costs. The implementation also highlighted the setup of the custom applica-
tion on Kubernetes in order to make elastic and fault tolerant training possible
in a cluster.
The system’s cost optimising effectiveness was then evaluated through differ-
ent tests that simulated various workloads, demonstrating cost savings between
1.7% and 51.75%, with the most significant savings seen for the lighter work-
loads. Despite the solution introducing some overhead due to the reactive nature
of the system, the overall results demonstrated cost savings. In summary, the
custom Kubernetes application successfully reduce the resource costs for train-
ing machine learning models in the cloud.
6.2
Contributions
This section outlines the contributions made in the implementation of the cus-
tom application:
• Designed and implemented a main controller that handles events from
pods being created, updated, or deleted in a Kubernetes cluster.
• Implemented a custom scheduler that condenses pods onto as few nodes
as possible to reduce the number of nodes needed.
• Implemented a custom autoscaler to scale nodes up and down when needed.
Scaling up nodes allows new pods to be scheduled, while scaling down
nodes reduces the number of computing resources being paid for.
• Designed and implemented a custom job scaler that is built to take ad-
vantage of unused resources in a Kubernetes cluster. The job scaler can
scale up the number of replicas for a PyTorchJob to use the resources that
are being paid for. This allows the PyTorchJobs to complete quicker with
the additional worker pods.
• Designed and implemented a custom rescheduler that can move pods to
new nodes when they are not optimally placed in order to reduce the num-
ber of nodes required resulting in less money spent on compute resources.
• Built a resource manager that handles communication with the Kuber-
netes API, while performing calculations on Kubernetes resources.
• Built a Google Cloud connector that facilitates communication between
the custom solution and the Google Cloud API.
==PAGE:65==
6.3 Future work
58
• Implemented custom data handling classes in Python to allow for more
frequent checkpointing than at the end of each epoch. The custom data
handling allows for checkpointing at any frequency within the training
loop iterations.
• Built a fault tolerant and elastic solution while detailing the Kubernetes
environment setup to run the solution. This includes all the Kubernetes
YAML definition file configuration.
6.3
Future work
This section presents additional tests and implementations that can be done for
the custom application to further improve the functionality and cost savings.
Some of the future work includes:
The test results highlight that there is a level of overhead with the custom
application. Therefore, the extend of this overhead should be further tested and
analysed. Based on this analysis, updates to the implementation could be made
in an attempt to mitigate the overhead of the custom application as much as
possible.
The solution manages to properly scale and schedule nodes and pods. However,
when the process deviates from what is outlined in this thesis, then there are
certain features and functionality that are not accounted for. In summary, this
means the solution could be made more fault tolerant with better error handling
before being used in a production environment. For example, this could include
adding timeouts when waiting for nodes or pods to scale.
The project focuses on scheduling one pod at a time. While this approach is
simple, it can lead to a lot of additional calculations and moving of pods that
would not be required if all pods are evaluated at the same time.
It could
therefore be beneficial to make the custom scheduling topology aware while im-
plementing gang scheduling. With such a setup, it could be possible to take into
consideration everything in the cluster before making any decisions. Utilising
topology aware scheduling and gang scheduling could also help to mitigate some
of the overhead discussed earlier.
Additional testing should be carried out to test the scalability of the solution.
Due to both Google Cloud quota limits and the cost of cloud resources, the
amount of resources used for testing are rather limited. With a bigger test en-
vironment, larger models, and more data points it should be tested that similar
cost optimisations are achieved.
==PAGE:66==
6.3 Future work
59
The solution focuses on scheduling and scaling on homogeneous resources. If the
solution was extended to have different resource sizes then the adequate node
could be spun up for the pod to further reduce the training costs. Including
heterogeneous resources could make the solution more scalable as well.
==PAGE:67==
Appendix A
Appendix
A.1
Custom application implementation
1
func
handleQueuedPods ( isDeletedEvent
bool) {
2
scheduleLock.Lock ()
3
defer
scheduleLock.Unlock ()
4
for {
5
queueLock.Lock ()
6
pod , ok := queue.Pop()
7
queueLock.Unlock ()
8
if !ok {
9
break
10
}
11
log.Println("Handling␣pod:", pod.Name)
12
successful := SchedulePod(pod)
13
if !successful {
14
log.Println("The␣pod␣could␣not␣be␣scheduled.␣
Attempting␣to␣scale␣down␣jobs.")
15
JobScaleDown ()
16
wgScalingDown.Wait ()
17
scalingDownJobs = [] string {}
18
successful := SchedulePod(pod)
19
if !successful {
20
successful := ScaleUpNodes ()
==PAGE:68==
A.1 Custom application implementation
61
21
if !successful {
22
queueLock.Lock ()
23
log.Println("Pod␣not␣scheduled ,␣requeue:", pod.
Name)
24
queue.RePush(pod)
25
queueLock.Unlock ()
26
break
27
}
28
successful = SchedulePod(pod)
29
if !successful {
30
queueLock.Lock ()
31
log.Println("Pod␣not␣scheduled ,␣requeue:", pod.
Name)
32
queue.RePush(pod)
33
queueLock.Unlock ()
34
break
35
}
36
}
37
}
38
}
39
if ! isDeletedEvent {
40
for i := 0; i < 10; i++ {
41
time.Sleep (1 * time.Second)
42
if len(queue) > 0 {
43
return
44
}
45
}
46
}
47
if isDeletedEvent {
48
ReschedulePods ()
49
wgReschedule.Wait ()
50
reschedulingPods = [] string {}
51
if CheckScaleDownJob () {
52
JobScaleDown ()
53
wgScalingDown.Wait ()
54
scalingDownJobs = [] string {}
55
ReschedulePods ()
56
wgReschedule.Wait ()
57
reschedulingPods = [] string {}
58
}
59
}
60
ScaleDownNodes ()
61
JobScaleUp ()
62
wgScaling.Wait ()
63
scalingJobs = [] string {}
64
}
Listing A.1: The main control loop that handles queued pods.
==PAGE:69==
A.1 Custom application implementation
62
1
package
main
2
3
import (
4
corev1 "k8s.io/api/core/v1"
5
)
6
7
type
Queue []* corev1.Pod
8
9
func (q *Queue) Push(pod *corev1.Pod) {
10
*q = append (*q, pod)
11
}
12
13
func (q *Queue) Pop() (* corev1.Pod , bool) {
14
if len(*q) == 0 {
15
return nil , false
16
}
17
pod := (*q)[0]
18
*q = (*q)[1:]
19
return pod , true
20
}
21
22
func (q *Queue) RePush(pod *corev1.Pod) {
23
*q = append ([]* corev1.Pod{pod}, (*q)...)
24
}
Listing A.2: The type definition for the custom queue used to handle pods
waiting to be scheduled.
A.1.1
Resource manager implementation
1
func
getNodes () (* corev1.NodeList , error) {
2
nodes , err := clientset.CoreV1 ().Nodes ().List(context.TODO
(), metav1.ListOptions{
3
LabelSelector: "scheduler=" + schedulerName ,
4
})
5
6
if err != nil {
7
return nil , err
8
}
9
10
return nodes , nil
11
}
Listing A.3: Method to retrieve nodes using the Kubernetes API
==PAGE:70==
A.1 Custom application implementation
63
1
func
deleteNode(node
string) {
2
deletePolicy := metav1. DeletePropagationForeground
3
if err := clientset.CoreV1 ().Nodes ().Delete(context.TODO ()
, node , metav1.DeleteOptions {
4
PropagationPolicy : &deletePolicy ,
5
}); err != nil {
6
log.Println("Failed␣to␣delete␣node:", err)
7
}
8
}
Listing A.4: Method to delete a node using Kubernetes API
1
func
waitForNodeDeletion (nodeCount int , deleteCount
int) {
2
log.Println("Waiting␣for␣nodes␣to␣scale␣down ...")
3
for {
4
nodeList , err := clientset.CoreV1 ().Nodes ().List(context
.TODO (), metav1.ListOptions{
5
LabelSelector: "scheduler=" + schedulerName ,
6
FieldSelector: "spec.unschedulable =false",
7
})
8
if err != nil {
9
log.Println("Could␣not␣fetch␣nodes␣from␣node␣pool:",
err)
10
}
11
if len(nodeList.Items) == nodeCount -deleteCount {
12
break
13
}
14
time.Sleep (5 * time.Second) // TODO: Consider
changing
this and maybe add a timeout
15
}
16
log.Println("Finished␣scaling␣down␣nodes.")
17
}
Listing A.5: Method to wait for a node to successfully finish being deleted.
1
func
createBinding(pod *corev1.Pod , selectedNode
string)
error {
2
binding := &corev1.Binding{
3
TypeMeta: metav1.TypeMeta{
4
Kind:
"",
5
APIVersion: "",
6
},
7
ObjectMeta: metav1.ObjectMeta{
8
Name:
pod.Name ,
9
GenerateName:
"",
10
Namespace:
"",
11
SelfLink:
"",
==PAGE:71==
A.1 Custom application implementation
64
12
UID:
pod.UID ,
13
ResourceVersion: "",
14
Generation:
0,
15
CreationTimestamp : metav1.Time{
16
Time: time.Time{},
17
},
18
DeletionTimestamp : &metav1.Time{
19
Time: time.Time{},
20
},
21
DeletionGracePeriodSeconds : new(int64),
22
Labels:
map[string]string {},
23
Annotations:
map[string]string {},
24
OwnerReferences:
[] metav1. OwnerReference {},
25
Finalizers:
[] string {},
26
ManagedFields:
[] metav1.
ManagedFieldsEntry {},
27
},
28
Target: corev1. ObjectReference {
29
Kind:
"Node",
30
Namespace:
"",
31
Name:
selectedNode ,
32
UID:
"",
33
APIVersion:
"",
34
ResourceVersion: "",
35
FieldPath:
"",
36
},
37
}
38
39
err := clientset.CoreV1 ().Pods(pod.Namespace).Bind(context
.TODO (), binding , metav1.CreateOptions {})
40
41
return err
42
}
Listing A.6: Method to create a binding between a node and a pod.
1
func
setupNodeCapacities () ([]* NodeCapacity , error) {
2
var
nodeCapacities
[]* NodeCapacity
3
4
nodes , err := getNodes ()
5
if err != nil {
6
log.Println("Could␣not␣fetch␣nodes")
7
return nil , err
8
}
9
10
for _, node := range
nodes.Items {
11
nodeCapacity := &NodeCapacity{
12
Name:
node.Name ,
==PAGE:72==
A.1 Custom application implementation
65
13
Pods:
[]* PodCapacity {},
14
Capacity: node.Status.Capacity ,
15
}
16
nodeCapacities = append(nodeCapacities , nodeCapacity )
17
pods , err := clientset.CoreV1 ().Pods("").List(context.
TODO (), metav1.ListOptions{
18
FieldSelector: fmt.Sprintf("spec.nodeName =%s", node.
Name),
19
})
20
if err != nil {
21
log.Println("Could␣not␣fetch␣pods␣for␣nodes")
22
return nil , err
23
}
24
for _, pod := range
pods.Items {
25
nodeCapacity.AddPod (&pod)
26
}
27
}
28
29
return
nodeCapacities , nil
30
}
Listing A.7: Method to setup the node capacities using the custom types
defined.
1
func
SortNodeCapacities ( nodeCapacities
[]* NodeCapacity ) []*
NodeCapacity {
2
less := func(i, j int) bool {
3
r1 := nodeCapacities[i]. TotalPodResources ()
4
r2 := nodeCapacities[j]. TotalPodResources ()
5
6
gpuI := r1[corev1.ResourceName ("nvidia.com/gpu")]
7
gpuJ := r2[corev1.ResourceName ("nvidia.com/gpu")]
8
if gpuI.Cmp(gpuJ) ==
-1 {
9
return
true
10
} else if gpuI.Cmp(gpuJ) == 1 {
11
return
false
12
}
13
14
cpuI := r1[corev1.ResourceCPU]
15
cpuJ := r2[corev1.ResourceCPU]
16
if cpuI.Cmp(cpuJ) ==
-1 {
17
return
true
18
} else if cpuI.Cmp(cpuJ) == 1 {
19
return
false
20
}
21
22
ramI := r1[corev1. ResourceMemory ]
23
ramJ := r2[corev1. ResourceMemory ]
==PAGE:73==
A.1 Custom application implementation
66
24
return
ramI.Cmp(ramJ) ==
-1
25
}
26
27
sort.Slice(nodeCapacities , less)
28
29
return
nodeCapacities
30
}
Listing A.8: Method to sort the nodes by the amount of resources still
available.
A.1.2
Rescheduler
1
func
calculateNodesToDelete (sortedNodes
[]* NodeCapacity ) ([]
string , [] string) {
2
log.Println("Calculating␣pods␣to␣reschedule.")
3
var
podsToReschedule [] string
4
var
nodesToDelete [] string
5
6
outerLoop:
7
for i, node := range
sortedNodes {
8
if i == len(sortedNodes) -1 {
9
break
10
}
11
tempPods := [] string {}
12
log.Println("Checking␣if␣pods␣on", node.Name , "can␣be␣
rescheduled.")
13
log.Println("This␣node␣contains", len(node.Pods), "pods"
)
14
for _, pod := range
node.Pods {
15
if pod.SchedulerName == schedulerName {
16
for j := len(sortedNodes) - 1; i < j; j-- {
17
if sortedNodes[j]. Fits(pod. ResourceRequest ) {
18
sortedNodes[j]. Pods = append(sortedNodes[j].Pods
, pod)
19
tempPods = append(tempPods , pod.Name)
20
break
21
} else {
22
break
outerLoop
23
}
24
}
25
}
26
}
27
log.Println("Pods␣on", node.Name , "can␣be␣rescheduled.")
28
log.Println("The␣number␣of␣pods␣on␣the␣node␣that␣are␣
being␣rescheduled␣is:", len(tempPods))
==PAGE:74==
A.1 Custom application implementation
67
29
podsToReschedule = append(podsToReschedule , tempPods ...)
30
nodesToDelete = append(nodesToDelete , node.Name)
31
}
32
33
uniquePods := uniqueStrings( podsToReschedule )
34
return
nodesToDelete , uniquePods
35
}
36
37
func
uniqueStrings(strs [] string) [] string {
38
uniqueMap := make(map[string]bool)
39
uniqueList := [] string {}
40
41
for _, str := range
strs {
42
if !uniqueMap[str] {
43
uniqueMap[str] = true
44
uniqueList = append(uniqueList , str)
45
}
46
}
47
48
return
uniqueList
49
}
Listing A.9: Method to calculate the nodes that can be removed from the
cluster by rescehduling the pods on it.
A.1.3
Custom PyTorch data handling
1
class
MyDataset(Dataset):
2
def
__init__(self , datasets):
3
self.datasets = datasets
4
5
def
__len__(self):
6
if isinstance(self.datasets , dict):
7
return len(next(iter(self.datasets.values ())))
8
return len(next(iter(self.datasets)))
9
10
def
__getitem__(self , index):
11
if isinstance(self.datasets , dict):
12
return {k: dataset[index] for k, dataset in self
.datasets.items ()}, index
13
return
tuple(dataset[index] for
dataset in self.
datasets), index
Listing A.10: Full implementation of the custom dataset class.
==PAGE:75==
A.1 Custom application implementation
68
1
class
FilteredSampler (Sampler):
2
def
__init__(self , data_source , indices_to_filter_out ,
num_replicas=None , rank=None , shuffle=True):
3
self.data_source = data_source
4
self. indices_to_filter_out = set(
indices_to_filter_out )
5
self.num_replicas = num_replicas if num_replicas is
not None else dist.get_world_size ()
6
self.rank = rank if rank is not None else dist.
get_rank ()
7
self.shuffle = shuffle
8
self.num_samples = int(np.ceil ((len(self.data_source
) - len(self. indices_to_filter_out )) * 1.0 / self
.num_replicas))
9
self.total_size = self.num_samples * self.
num_replicas
10
self.valid_indices = [i for i in range(len(
data_source)) if i not in self.
indices_to_filter_out ]
11
self.epoch = 0
# Initialize
epoch
12
13
def
__iter__(self):
14
if self.shuffle:
15
np.random.seed(self.epoch)
16
np.random.shuffle(self. valid_indices )
17
18
indices = self.valid_indices [self.rank:self.
total_size:self.num_replicas ]
19
return
iter(indices)
20
21
def
__len__(self):
22
return
self.num_samples
23
24
def
set_epoch(self , epoch):
25
self.epoch = epoch
26
27
def
set_filtered_indices (self , indices_to_filter_out ):
28
self. indices_to_filter_out = set(
indices_to_filter_out )
29
self.valid_indices = [i for i in range(len(self.
data_source)) if i not in self.
indices_to_filter_out ]
30
self.num_samples = int(np.ceil ((len(self.
valid_indices)) * 1.0 / self. num_replicas ))
31
self.total_size = self.num_samples * self.
num_replicas
==PAGE:76==
A.1 Custom application implementation
69
Listing A.11: Full implementation of custom data sampler.
A.1.4
Kubernetes definition files
1
apiVersion :
v1
2
kind :
Service
3
metadata :
4
name :
etcd−c l i e n t
5
spec :
6
ports :
7
−name :
etcd−c l i e n t −port
8
port :
2379
9
protocol : TCP
10
targetPort :
2379
11
s e l e c t o r :
12
app :
etcd
13
14
−−−
15
16
apiVersion :
v1
17
kind :
Pod
18
metadata :
19
l a b e l s :
20
app :
etcd
21
etcd_node :
etcd−s e r v e r
22
name :
etcd−s e r v e r
23
spec :
24
c on ta i ne rs :
25
−command :
26
−/ usr / l o c a l / bin / etcd
27
−−−data−d i r
28
−/ var / l i b / etcd
29
−−−enable−v2
30
−−−name
31
−etcd−s e r v e r
32
−−−i n i t i a l −advertise −peer−u r l s
33
−http :// etcd−s e r v e r :2380
34
−−−l i s t e n −peer−u r l s
35
−http : / / 0 . 0 . 0 . 0 : 2 3 8 0
36
−−−l i s t e n −c l i e n t −u r l s
37
−http : / / 0 . 0 . 0 . 0 : 2 3 7 9
38
−−−advertise −c l i e n t −u r l s
39
−http :// etcd−s e r v e r :2379
40
−−−i n i t i a l −c l u s t e r
41
−etcd−s e r v e r=http :// etcd−s e r v e r :2380
42
−−−i n i t i a l −c l u s t e r −s t a t e
43
−new
44
image :
quay . io / coreos / etcd : l a t e s t
45
name :
etcd−s e r v e r
46
ports :
==PAGE:77==
A.1 Custom application implementation
70
47
−containerPort :
2379
48
name :
c l i e n t
49
protocol : TCP
50
−containerPort :
2380
51
name :
s e r v e r
52
protocol : TCP
53
r e s t a r t P o l i c y :
Always
54
55
−−−
56
57
apiVersion :
v1
58
kind :
Service
59
metadata :
60
l a b e l s :
61
etcd_node :
etcd−s e r v e r
62
name :
etcd−s e r v e r
63
spec :
64
ports :
65
−name :
c l i e n t
66
port :
2379
67
protocol : TCP
68
targetPort :
2379
69
−name :
s e r v e r
70
port :
2380
71
protocol : TCP
72
targetPort :
2380
73
s e l e c t o r :
74
etcd_node :
etcd−s e r v e r
Listing A.12: ETCD definition file for setting up the rendezvous server.
==PAGE:78==
A.1 Custom application implementation
71
A.1.5
Permissions configuration
1
apiVersion :
rbac . authorization .
k8s . io /v1
2
kind :
ClusterRole
3
metadata :
4
name :
pod−watcher
5
r u l e s :
6
−apiGroups :
7
−""
8
r e s o u r c e s :
9
−pods
10
−pods/ binding
11
verbs :
12
−get
13
−
l i s t
14
−watch
15
−update
16
−c r e a t e
17
−d e l e t e
18
−apiGroups :
19
−""
20
r e s o u r c e s :
21
−nodes
22
verbs :
23
−get
24
−
l i s t
25
−watch
26
−update
27
−d e l e t e
28
−apiGroups :
29
−" kubeflow . org "
30
r e s o u r c e s :
31
−" pytorchjobs "
32
verbs :
33
−get
34
−
l i s t
35
−watch
36
−update
37
−d e l e t e
Listing A.13: YAML cluster role
1
apiVersion :
v1
2
kind :
ServiceAccount
3
metadata :
4
name :
scheduler −s e r v i c e −
account
Listing A.14: YAML configuration
for service account
1
apiVersion :
rbac . a uthori zation .
k8s . io /v1
2
kind :
ClusterRoleBinding
3
metadata :
4
name :
pod−watcher−binding
5
s u b j e c t s :
6
−kind :
ServiceAccount
7
name :
scheduler −s e r v i c e −
account
8
namespace :
d e f a u l t
9
roleRef :
10
kind :
ClusterRole
11
name :
resource −watcher
12
apiGroup :
rbac . autho rizatio n .
k8s . io
Listing A.15: YAML
cluster
role
binding
As mentioned for the custom application deployment configuration, a configu-
ration service account is set up in order to assign the correct permissions. The
service account can be seen in Listing A.14, and it serves to provide an identity
to a pod, and that identity can have permissions associated with it.
A cluster role, as seen in Listing A.13 can then be used to create a set of
permissions that defines what actions can be performed on which resources
==PAGE:79==
A.2 Test setup configuration
72
[28].
Generally, the cluster role used in this project allows for the creation,
deletion, and updates of pods, nodes, and PyTorchJobs. With the definition of
the permissions, they can be assigned to the service account that was created
by using a cluster role binding shown in A.15. It takes the name of the cluster
role in line 11, and specifies the service account from line 6 to 8.
A.2
Test setup configuration
1
apiVersion :
v1
2
kind :
PersistentVolume
3
metadata :
4
name :
nfs−pv
5
spec :
6
capacity :
7
storage :
10Gi
8
accessModes :
9
−ReadWriteMany
10
nfs :
11
s e r v e r :
nfs−s e r v e r . d e f a u l t . svc . c l u s t e r . l o c a l
12
path :
"/"
Listing A.16: Definition file for the persistent volume used during training.
1
kind :
PersistentVolumeClaim
2
apiVersion :
v1
3
metadata :
4
name :
nfs−pvc
5
spec :
6
accessModes :
7
−ReadWriteMany
8
storageClassName :
""
9
r e s o u r c e s :
10
requests :
11
storage :
10Gi
Listing A.17: Definition for for persistent volume claim used during training.
1
apiVersion :
apps/v1
2
kind :
Deployment
3
metadata :
4
name :
nfs−s e r v e r
5
spec :
6
r e p l i c a s :
1
7
s e l e c t o r :
8
matchLabels :
9
r o l e :
nfs−s e r v e r
10
template :
11
metadata :
12
l a b e l s :
==PAGE:80==
A.2 Test setup configuration
73
13
r o l e :
nfs−s e r v e r
14
spec :
15
a f f i n i t y :
16
nodeAffinity :
17
requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution :
18
nodeSelectorTerms :
19
−matchExpressions :
20
−key :
topology . kubernetes . i o / zone
21
operator :
In
22
values :
23
−europe−west4−b
24
c on tainers :
25
−name :
nfs−s e r v e r
26
image :
gcr . io / google_containers /volume−nfs : 0 . 8
27
ports :
28
−name :
nfs
29
containerPort :
2049
30
−name :
mountd
31
containerPort :
20048
32
−name :
rpcbind
33
containerPort :
111
34
securityContext :
35
p r i v i l e g e d :
true
36
volumeMounts :
37
−mountPath :
/ exports
38
name :
nfs−pvc
39
volumes :
40
−name :
nfs−pvc
41
gcePersistentDisk :
42
pdName :
storage −nfs
43
fsType :
ext4
Listing A.18: Definition file for nfs-server used for the training.
1
apiVersion :
v1
2
kind :
Service
3
metadata :
4
name :
nfs−s e r v e r
5
spec :
6
ports :
7
−name :
nfs
8
port :
2049
9
−name :
mountd
10
port :
20048
11
−name :
rpcbind
12
port :
111
13
s e l e c t o r :
14
r o l e :
nfs−s e r v e r
Listing A.19: Definition file for the service used for the nfs server during
training.
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1] Jeffrey Burt. Kubernetes clusters have massive overprovisioning of compute
and memory, 2024.
[2] Paul Castro, Vatche Ishakian, Vinod Muthusamy, and Aleksander Slomin-
ski. The server is dead, long live the server: Rise of serverless computing,
overview of current state and future trends in research and industry. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.02888, 2019.
[3] Devanandham Henry Chandrasekaran, Pranay Chaudhary, and Rajkumar
Buyya. The views, measurements and challenges of elasticity in the cloud:
A survey. Computer Communications, 155:251–266, 2020.
[4] Andrew Chung, Jun Woo Park, and Gregory R. Ganger. Stratus: Cost-
aware container scheduling in the public cloud. In Proceedings of the ACM
Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC 2018), page 14 pages. Association
for Computing Machinery (ACM), 2018.
[5] Codex. A comprehensive tutorial to pytorch distributeddataparallel, 2024.
[6] Kubeflow Community. Kubeflow training operator. https://github.com/
kubeflow/training-operator, 2024. Distributed ML Training and Fine-
Tuning on Kubernetes.
[7] Li Deng.
The mnist database of handwritten digit images for machine
learning research. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):141–142, 2012.
[8] Docker, Inc. Docker: Empowering App Development for Developers, 2024.
[9] Andrey Galakatos et al. Distributed machine learning. In Encyclopedia of
Machine Learning and Data Mining, pages 1–7, 2017.
==PAGE:82==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
75
[10] Google Cloud. Cluster Autoscaler, 2024.
[11] Google Cloud.
Compute engine pricing.
https://cloud.google.com/
compute/vm-instance-pricing, 2024.
[12] Google Cloud. Google Cloud Compute Pricing, 2024.
[13] Google Cloud. Google Cloud Geography and Regions Documentation, 2024.
[14] Google Cloud. Google Cloud Products, 2024.
[15] Google Cloud. Google Cloud Spot VMs, 2024.
[16] Google Cloud. Load Balancing and Autoscaling Documentation, 2024.
[17] Mohammad Haris and Dileep Kumar. A systematic review on cloud com-
puting. ResearchGate, 2019.
[18] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual
learning for image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03385, 2015.
[19] Vincent Hou. Kubernetes operator design patterns: How to make complex
custom resources user friendly, 2023.
[20] IBM. What Is Containerization?, 2024.
[21] Fan Jiang, Kyle Ferriter, and Claris Castillo. Pivot: Cost-aware schedul-
ing of data-intensive applications in a cloud-agnostic system. In Proceed-
ings of a Conference on Cloud Computing (specific conference name, if
known), pages specific pages, if known, Location, if known, 2021. Publisher,
if known.
[22] Kubeflow.
Kubeflow Training Operator Example: PyTorch Elastic Ima-
geNet, 2024.
[23] Kubeflow.org. Kubeflow Architecture, 2024.
[24] Kubeflow.org. Kubeflow Introduction, 2024.
[25] Kubeflow.org. Kubeflow Training Overview, 2024.
[26] Kubernetes.io. Cluster Autoscaling, 2024.
[27] Kubernetes.io. Custom Resources, 2024.
[28] Kubernetes.io. The Kubernetes API, 2024.
[29] Kubernetes.io. Kubernetes Components, 2024.
[30] Kubernetes.io. Kubernetes Scheduler, 2024.
==PAGE:83==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
76
[31] Kubernetes.io. Persistent Volumes, 2024.
[32] Chan-Yi Lin, Ting-An Yeh, and Jerry Chou. Dragon: A dynamic schedul-
ing and scaling controller for managing distributed deep learning jobs in
kubernetes cluster. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on
Cloud Computing and Services Science (CLOSER 2019), pages 569–577.
SCITEPRESS – Science and Technology Publications, Lda, 2019.
[33] Yanghua Peng, Yixin Bao, Yangrui Chen, Chuan Wu, and Chuanxiong
Guo. Optimus: An efficient dynamic resource scheduler for deep learning
clusters.
In Proceedings of the 13th EuroSys Conference 2018 (EuroSys
’18), page 14 pages. Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), 2018.
[34] Preferred Networks. Technologies behind distributed deep learning: Allre-
duce, 2024.
[35] PyTorch. Data Loading and Processing in PyTorch, 2024.
[36] PyTorch. PyTorch Distributed Elastic, 2024.
[37] PyTorch. PyTorch Distributed Elastic Rendezvous, 2024.
[38] PyTorch. Saving and Loading a General Checkpoint in PyTorch, 2024.
[39] The Go Authors. The Go Programming Language, 2024.
[40] The Kubeflow Authors. Kubeflow Documentation, 2024. https://www.
kubeflow.org/docs/.
[41] The Kubernetes Authors.
Kubernetes Documentation, 2024.
https://
kubernetes.io/docs/.
[42] Akila Welihinda. A deeper dive of kube-scheduler, 2023.
[43] Brian Woff. The comprehensive guide to concurrency in golang, 2024.
[44] Xiaolong Zhang, Lanqing Li, Yuan Wang, E. Chen, and Lidan Shou. Zeus:
Improving resource efficiency via workload colocation for massive kuber-
netes clusters. IEEE Access, 9:105192–105204, 2021.
[45] Zhiheng Zhong and Rajkumar Buyya.
A cost-efficient container or-
chestration strategy in kubernetes-based cloud computing infrastructures
with heterogeneous resources. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology,
20(2):15:1–15:24, April 2020.
