==PAGE:1==
Machine learning-guided library design and
optimization for protein engineering
Master Thesis
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center For Biosustainability
DTU Bioinformatics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
Master Thesis
April, 2024
By
Laura Machado
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the customary
bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Adapted from image generated by DAll-E 3, a generative model by OpenAI. May
31, 2024
Published by:
DTU, DTU Bioinformatics, Kemitorvet, Building 220, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Den-
mark
www.biosustain.dtu.dk
Supervised by:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared from October 2023 to May 2024 at the Department of Biotechnol-
ogy and Biomedicine (DTU Bioengineering) as well as the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for
Biosustainability (DTU Biosustain) at the Technical University of Denmark. It was undertaken in
partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Engineering, MSc. in
Bioinformatics and Systems Biology. It is the result of a 35 ECTS master’s project conducted in the
Digital Biotechnology Lab under the supervision of Timothy P. Jenkins and Carlos G. Acevedo-
Rocha.
Laura Machado - s212775
Signature
Date
ii
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
May 31st 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The relationship between protein performance (fitness) and protein sequence is a black-box func-
tion that can only be evaluated through time and expensive experimental screenings. Understand-
ing this relationship is crucial for optimizing proteins effectively. Gaussian Processes and Bayesian
methods are useful frameworks to model this relationship, due to their ability to quantify uncer-
tainties and balance exploitation and exploration. The iterative acquisition of data points through
experimentation means that these methods can guide the design of protein libraries, reducing the
number of necessary experiments required to improve protein properties such as binding affinity or
catalytic activity. This thesis investigates the potential of Bayesian methods in Machine Learning-
guided Directed Evolution (MLDE) particularly using models pre-trained on single-mutant data
from DMS or zero-shot scores, within the context of protein engineering.
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude to the entire Computational Protein Engineering group at DTU
Biosustain for their warm welcome, invaluable input, and for creating a fantastic environment for
work and learning.
I am also deeply thankful to my supervisors, Timothy Jenkins and Carlos G. Acevedo-Rocha, for
their guidance and support throughout this thesis. Their insights have been crucial to the success
of this project.
A special thank-you goes to Jonathan Funk, without whom this project would not have been possi-
ble. His excellent mentorship and support through numerous challenges and learning curves have
been invaluable. It has been an honor and a privilege to work alongside such a competent and
wholehearted friend.
Lastly, I would like to give a warm thanks to my friend Simon Kruse. Our endless discussions
on Bayesian methods and language models have been incredibly valuable, as well as his help on
implementing my models. Simon’s insights have profoundly enhanced my understanding of these
complex concepts, and for that, I will be forever grateful.
[Carlos Guillermo Acevedo-Rocha], [Dr., Senior Researcher], [Novo Nordisk Foundation Center
for Biosustainability]
[Discussions, feedback, guidance and support]
[Timothy Patrick Jenkins], [Assistant Professor / Visiting Professor], [Novo Nordisk Foundation
Center for Biosustainability / Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine]
[Discussions, feedback, guidance and support]
[Jonathan Funk], [PhD Student], [Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability]
[Discussions, feedback, guidance and support]
iv
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
The evolving field of protein engineering
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Bayesian Methods in Machine Learning Protein Engineering . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
This project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2
Methods
15
2.1
Python packages, applications and services
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.2
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2.3
Calculation of n-order mutants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.4
Protein embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.5
Gaussian Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.6
Bayesian Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2.7
Model training
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Results
21
3.1
Training GPs on experimental and zero-shot single mutant data . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
Using Bayesian Optimization to inform lab assays of double mutants . . . . . . .
22
3.3
GP integration in ProteusAI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
4
Discussion
33
4.1
The effect of pre-training on zero-shot scores
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
4.2
Value of ML-guided sampling strategies for the identification of high-fitness second-
order variants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3
Ability to find improved variants in fewer lab iterations . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.4
Limitations and future directions for this work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
Bibliography
39
A Appendix
43
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
The evolving field of protein engineering
1.1.1
Protein engineering: relevance, goals and strategies
Proteins play a crucial role in many industries due to their diverse functionalities and catalytic
properties. However, proteins found in nature are not often not optimally suited for industrial
applications. Protein engineering thus carries immense potential to revolutionize a wide array of
fields, including sustainability, food production, therapeutics and diagnostics. The goal of these
engineering efforts is to generate novel variants with improved functionalities, such as catalytic
activity, stability, selectivity, binding affinity, etc. To find improved variants of a target protein,
libraries of mutants are usually created and tested in the lab. Designing these protein libraries
is a complex task, since the search space of all possible amino acid combinations quickly be-
comes too vast to be feasibly explored. Each position can, in theory, be mutated to one of the 20
naturally-occurring amino acids, yielding an enormously high number of combinations even for
short sequences. In this project, we aim to use machine learning and optimal sampling strategies
to streamline protein library design in research, reducing experimental costs and enhancing the
efficiency of protein design.
There are two main strategies widely used in protein engineering: rational design (RD) and directed
evolution (DE). They are chosen depending on the screening capabilities, engineering goal and
prior information about the target protein [1].
RD is typically used when detailed structural and functional knowledge is available to guide the
precise introduction of specific mutations for a desired outcome. In this setup, only a few amino
acids are selected to be mutated, making the search space relatively small. Prior knowledge of
so-called protein “hotspots”, i.e., sites where mutations are likely to be beneficial, are usually
inferred from either Multiple Sequence Alignments of homologous proteins, the 3D crystal protein
structure, or empirical mutational data available [2].
DE is preferred when the aim is to achieve enhanced or novel functions in a target protein through
the accumulation of beneficial mutations at different sites. Through DE, it is generally possible to
explore a greater number of variants and identify superior solutions through iterative application
gene mutagenesis, expression and selection without the need of detailed structural knowledge. In
DE, large DNA libraries of protein variants are usually created through random mutagenesis (diver-
sification), introduced into cells, and then assayed for their function (screening). This workflow
is represented in Fig. 1.1, where the orange arrows show the workflow of traditional DE. The
best-performing variants of a screening round are then selected and further diversified in iterative
cycles until the engineering goal is achieved. The main challenges of DE include library size, se-
lection efficiency (low yield), mutagenesis method, resource consumption, and the risk of ending
up in local maxima (i.e., dead-end), as some mutations are fixed early in the selection process,
constraining the search space and limiting the diversity of final variants. This bottleneck is shown
in Fig. 1.1, where we display an imagined fitness landscape where traditional DE converges to a
local maxima. This can potentially be avoided in Machine Learning-guided DE (MLDE), shown
in blue.
Recently, Deep Mutational Scanning (DMS) has received significant attention within the protein
engineering community. This technique allows for the detailed study of the effects of mutations
on a protein region or even the full protein sequence [4]. It involves systematically mutating each
amino acid residue to all possible substitutions, followed by assessing the functional effects of
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Traditional DE vs. its ML-guided counterpart MLDE. Adapted from Yang et al. [3].
The unaugmented DE workflow is shown in orange; blue arrows show the guided selection cycle
of MLDE. Initially, a set of variants are generated from the wild-type (WT) through mutagenesis.
These variants are then functionally screened. In classical DE (orange), only the most fit variants
are selected for further diversification. In MLDE (blue), all variants are characterized in terms
of performance. This data is used to train ML models that guide the selection of variants to test
next. The topographic maps to the right represent how the different approaches would navigate
the landscape. In these maps, the contour lines represent zones of equal elevation (fitness values)
while specific proteins are drawn as colored circles in this space. Traditional DE is at particular
risk of ending up in a local maxima. By scanning a broader area of the landscape, MLDE is more
suited to identifying the point of highest fitness (global maxima), shown in red.
these mutations. This provides crucial insights into sequence-function relationships that can guide
the engineering process (see Fig. 1.1) [5]. Additionally, the ability of DMS to generate extensive
and detailed datasets has drawn attention for its utility in training ML models, thereby enhancing
the efficiency and effectiveness of subsequent protein engineering efforts [6]. Moreover, DMS
can be used to study multiple mutations at once. This ability to study higher-order mutants makes
DMS suitable for investigating epistasis, that is, the genetic phenomenon where the phenotypic
effect of one mutation is influenced by the presence of one or more other mutations, which results
in non-additive interactions. Capturing these complex relationships between residues is crucial for
optimizing protein performance.
Protein performance can be measured in units of fitness (e.g., activity, selectivity or binding affin-
ity). This term originated in classical population genetics, where it refers to the number of progeny
relative to the wild type per generation [7]. In the same way, it has been used in protein engineering
to describe the performance of a protein variant relative to its wild-type (WT) counterpart [7].
2
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:11==
1.1.2
Computational protein design
Understanding the relationship between sequence and fitness is key to effectively engineer and de-
sign new proteins. The interaction between the genotype and phenotype(s) is usually represented
by the fitness landscape: a theoretical model that maps protein sequences to their functional per-
formance. Figure 1.2, adapted from Packer et al.[8], illustrates this concept. Typically, each point
in the 3D grid landscape represents a different protein variant, and its elevation indicates its fitness
or performance. Mountains in the landscape represent areas of high fitness, while valleys show
variants with low performance. In this figure, one local maxima (yellow) and one global maxima
(red) are shown to illustrate how the library starting point (variants in grey) and the optimization
process (acceptance or rejected steps) influence which maximal fitness is reached. In Protein En-
gineering, the goal is to find the global maxima (highest point in the fitness landscape) of a given
target protein.
Figure 1.2: Conceptual visualization of fitness landscape. Adapted from Packer et al. [8]. Each
point in the 3D grid represents a different protein variant, while its elevation defines its fitness or
performance. Mountains in the landscape represent areas of high fitness, while valleys show areas
of low performance. The global maxima (the best fitted protein variant) is represented in red. One
local maxima is shown in yellow. Variants in grey denote library starting points. Arrows show the
decision-making in the optimization process (accepted steps shown in red, rejected steps shown in
black). The starting points show to influence the maximal fitness reached.
Understanding this sequence-fitness relationship is a rather complex task, given the presence of
epistasis. The space of potential candidates is too vast to test all possible variants of a target protein
in the laboratory see Methods: 2.3). Therefore, we need to make decisions on what variants to test
during the protein optimization process.
Computational tools can aid in reducing the combinatorial space of possible mutations, thus guid-
ing the selection of variants to try in the lab for finding high-fitness mutants [9]. As not all se-
quences are equally informative on high-fitness on guiding the optimization process towards the
global maxima (Fig. 1.2), some mutants will lead to higher improvement than others (Fig. 1.1).
Multiple tools have been recently developed to decrease the protein search space and maximize
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
3
==PAGE:12==
chances of finding enhanced protein variants. DeCOIL is a software to aid protein engineering by
identifying protein variants that are likely to have both high fitness and high diversity [10]. Lib-
Genie is another recently published web tool for identifying hotspots and restricting the sequence
space. They use evolutionary information, stability and flexibility to reduce the sequence space to
the most interesting mutants [1].
In recent years, ML tools have been shown to play a crucial role in understanding the complicated
relationship between function and sequences, given their ability to capture complex patterns in data
such as non-linear functions while exploring high multidimensional spaces [11]. The application
of ML techniques to the design and optimization of proteins has been shown in many directed
evolution studies, leading to a merging between experimental and computational efforts, regarded
as Machine Learning-guided Directed Evolution (MLDE) [12].
In view of this expansion of the field, Notin et al. recently introduced a unifying framework to
classify models on the basis of their use of three core data modalities: sequences, structures and
functional labels [11]. The methods in this work would belong to the sequence-label models,
where algorithms are trained on functional labels in a supervised manner. These predictive models
have proven to outperform traditional DE methods on finding libraries enriched in fitness in cases
involving both enzymes and binding protein domains [9].
Bayesian methods are particularly useful when generating functional labels is costly, such as char-
acterizing protein function. These methods have shown to have the potential to minimize the ex-
perimental burden of DE projects, usually associated with a low success rate [13]. Thus, Bayesian
methods are being used by state-of the art tools for MLDE such as the recently published STAR
(Web Server for Assisting Directed Protein Evolution with Machine Learning) web service, by
Yang et al. [14]. Aiming at exploring this avenue of ML methods applied to protein engineering,
this work focused on using Bayesian methods to effectively guide protein library design.
1.1.3
Protein representations
To use protein sequences as inputs for ML, these need to be converted into numerical structures.
There are different methods for generating mathematical representations of proteins [15]. Recently,
representation-learning based encodings (generated through ML algorithms) have gained popular-
ity over the classical ”fixed” sequence representations, where constant rules are applied to convert
from the sequence to the numerical representation (e.g., One-Hot and BLOSUM encodings)[15].
Protein Language Models (PLMs) are among these representation-learning based encoders. These
methods offer a way to encode one protein into a unique information-dense vector [16]. They
leverage the transformer architecture developed for natural language processing [17] to generate
protein representations in the same way they model natural language: by hiding units of informa-
tion from a sequence (i.e., tokens) and training a model on recovering the masked units. PLMs
are trained to predict hidden amino acids within protein sequences. One of the most widely used
PLMs is the Evolutionary Scale Modeling 2 (ESM-2), developed by the company Meta, formerly
Facebook [18]. In this model, the sequence is passed through multiple layers of the transformer
model, where each layer consists of self-attention mechanisms and feed-forward neural networks
[18]. These layers capture complex patterns and dependencies between amino acids, which can
be aggregated to form a single fixed-length vector that represents the entire protein sequence [15].
This vector is the final protein embedding, capturing structural, functional and evolutionary infor-
mation about the protein [18]. This way, ESM-2 can produce detailed and informative embeddings
that are highly useful for various protein engineering tasks [15].
1.1.4
Zero-shot predictions
Interestingly, PLMs trained to predict missing tokens, such as ESM-2, can also be used to estimate
mutational effects [19]. The ability of a ML model to apply knowledge learned from one domain to
4
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:13==
perform well on a completely new and unseen task without requiring any additional fine-tuning is
referred to as zero-shot transfer. The inference of mutational effects on protein function from the
patterns learned through the masked language model objective is known as zero-shot prediction.
Through this process, scores on mutational effects, named zero-shot scores, are generated. These
scores can serve as a proxy for fitness in cases where no functional data is available for a given
protein sequence. Zero-shot models have demonstrated performances comparable to models ex-
plicitly trained for predicting mutational effects [19]. Their effectiveness in estimating mutational
effects on protein function offers a promising solution to reduce the number of experiments needed
to characterize the relationship between sequence and function. This is particularly advantageous
when considering the high costs associated with functional screenings like DMS (as mentioned
above), which limit their application to a relatively small number of proteins.
1.2
Bayesian Methods in Machine Learning Protein Engineering
In the context of ML, Bayesian methods refer to a set of techniques based on Bayes’ theorem,
which allows for updating the prior belief (or probability) of a hypothesis as more evidence or
information becomes available.
Bayesian methods are highly valuable for navigating the extensive potential landscape of protein
variants. This effectiveness results from their capacity to balance exploitation and exploration, two
complementary strategies essential for searching through a fitness landscape. Exploitation involves
leveraging the best-known regions with high fitness values, maximizing outcomes from already
understood areas. On the other hand, exploration involves searching for unexplored territories
within the landscape, seeking out new ’peaks’ where data is sparse, but potential gains might be
significant (see Fig. 1.2).
In the context of MLDE, these methods can aid protein optimization by strategically guiding the
sampling of the next optimal points (variants) to test experimentally after every laboratory round
of results [20]. Through Bayesian methods, it is possible to tune the degree of exploitation and
exploration depending on the engineering goal and the currently available knowledge on the tar-
get protein. As opposed to a simple random or grid search, this results in a more efficient use
of resources, therefore avoiding the testing of many mutants in the laboratory [13]. This fea-
ture Bayesian methods particularly advantageous in protein engineering campaigns, particularly
in decision-making tasks such as protein library design.
To guide the search process, Bayesian Optimization (BO) makes use of a surrogate probabilistic
regression model, which is typically a Gaussian Process, and applies Bayesian inference to update
the model when new data is added [21]. The section below provides a comprehensive overview of
Bayesian statistical techniques, including their principles, mechanisms, and current applications in
PE.
1.2.1
Fundamentals of Bayesian Statistics
The concept of probability: Bayesian vs. Frequentist statistics
There are two primary philosophical approaches to statistics: Bayesian and frequentist [22]. The
frequentists view probabilities as an inherent property of the physical world, independent of knowl-
edge and beliefs. In this frame, probability is the long-term frequency of a repeated trial. Here,
parameters are fixed unknown values that can be estimated based on sample data, through hypoth-
esis testing where no prior knowledge is incorporated. In frequentist statistics, uncertainty is often
expressed through confidence intervals, which are calculated from the data and intend to bracket
the true parameter values [22].
In contrast, Bayesian statistics sees probability as a subjective degree of belief in the occurrence
of an event, given the available evidence. Parameters in Bayesian analysis are treated as random
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
5
==PAGE:14==
variables. This way, the uncertainty about parameters is explicitly quantified using probability
distributions. Bayesian inference updates the probability distribution of these parameters using
Bayes’ theorem, as new data becomes available. Bayesian inference results in posterior distribu-
tions, which provides a full probabilistic description of parameter uncertainty. This way, Bayesian
methods allow for direct probabilistic interpretations and decision-making under uncertainty [22].
Bayes’ Theorem
Bayes’ Theorem is a fundamental principle in Bayesian statistics that describes how to update the
probabilities of hypotheses when given new data. It is expressed mathematically as follows:
P(θ|D) = P(D|θ) · P(θ)
P(D)
(1.1)
where:
• P(θ|D) is the posterior probability of the hypothesis θ after observing the data D. It
represents our updated belief about the hypothesis after considering the evidence.
• P(D|θ) is the likelihood, which measures the probability of observing the data D under the
assumption that the hypothesis θ is true.
• P(θ) is the prior probability of the hypothesis before observing additional data. This prob-
ability reflects our initial belief about the hypothesis, prior to the new evidence being con-
sidered.
• P(D) is the marginal likelihood or evidence, calculated as the probability of observing
the data under all possible hypotheses. It acts as a normalizing constant in this equation,
ensuring that the posterior probabilities sum to one. For continuous variables:
P(D) =
!
P(D|θ)P(θ)dθ
(1.2)
The application of Bayes’ Theorem allows updating beliefs in light of new data, making it a pow-
erful tool for adjusting predictions and making decisions based on sequentially accumulating evi-
dence.
Bayesian Modelling
As discussed previously, from a Bayesian perspective, probabilities are a measure of certainty on
a statement or hypothesis. A model can be defined as a mathematical formulation of a hypothesis,
which is described by parameters. Bayesian inference is the process of combining data and our
assumptions to update our knowledge about those parameters to reduce uncertainty. This process
is referred to as conditioning the model on our data. [23]
Conditioning is the basis of Bayesian modelling and is usually performed in an iterative fashion.
The goal of using Bayesian inference in modelling is to increase our certainty on the distribution of
the parameters, given the prior knowledge and available evidence regarding them. For clarity, two
examples are present to illustrate this process: Example A offers a detailed explanation of the steps
in the Bayesian inference workflow, while Example B illustrates how the probability distributions
are updated on an iterative basis.
Example A: Enhancing Protein Stability through Bayesian Inference
6
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:15==
1. Define the Prior
Say we have prior data literature suggesting certain amino acids at specific positions con-
tribute to increased stability. We encode this information into our prior distribution P(θ),
where θ represents the effect of each amino acid mutation on protein stability.
2. Establish the Likelihood function
We conduct experiments by introducing mutations in the protein sequence and measure the
resulting stability (e.g. melting temperature, half life). The likelihood function P(D|θ) mod-
els the probability of observing experimental stability data D given our model parameters
θ.
3. Compute the Posterior Distribution
Using Bayes’ theorem, we compute the posterior P(θ|D) to update our beliefs about the
effects of mutations based on the experimental data:
P(θ|D) = P(D|θ) · P(θ)
P(D)
(1.3)
Here, P(D) is calculated by integrating over all possible effects θ, but this often intractable
due to the complexity of the model and the high dimensionality of θ, therefore the calculation
of the posterior often involves computational techniques like Markov chain Monte Carlo
(MCMC).
4. Interpret the Posterior
The posterior P(θ|D) provides a new, updated understanding of how each mutation affects
stability. It offers a probabilistic assessment of which mutations are most likely to increase
stability and by how much.
5. Iterative updating
As new data from further experiments becomes available, the posterior from the previous
step becomes the new prior, and the process repeats. This is illustrated in greater detail in
Figure 1.3.
The posterior P(θ|D) can be used to generate predictions ˆy based on the data, y , and the estimated
parameters, θ. We can compare the observed and predicted data through posterior predictive
checks to check how well the model captures the data.
Example B: Estimating Protein Binding Affinity through Bayesian Inference
The same framework can be used to estimate protein binding affinity to a specific ligand. In Fig-
ure 1.3 we see how the probability distributions are updated according to Bayes’ theorems as new
experimental data is acquired. Here, the parameter θ, the fractional occupancy of the binding sites,
describes the strength of the binding interaction. As more data is available, the posterior proba-
bility distribution about θ is updated and its center moves towards the true value (in this case, 0.35).
In brief, Bayesian methods view probabilities as a measure of uncertainty about parameters. Bayes’
theorem is the mechanism to update those probabilities when new data arises, hopefully reducing
uncertainty, as seen in these examples.
1.2.2
Bayesian linear regression
Regression is a method to model the relationship between a dependent variable y and one or more
independent variables X. One simple way of modelling this relationship is assuming they relate
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
7
==PAGE:16==
Figure 1.3: Illustration of the Bayesian inference process used in estimating the binding affinity of
a protein to a specific ligand. Each plot shows the progression from prior to posterior distribution
based on observed binding events. θ is the fractional occupancy of the binding sites and measures
the strength of the protein-ligand binding. The Y-axis represent probability density function, the
X-axis represents the value of θ.
linearly:
y = Xβ + ϵ
(1.4)
Here, y is the vector of observations, X is the matrix of input variables (also called predictors or
features), β is the vector of coefficients (or parameters) of the model, and ϵ represents the noise
term in the model.
In Bayesian regression, we treat statistical modeling as a Bayesian inference problem. This in-
volves placing priors over the parameters β and updating these beliefs in light of new evidence.
The goal is to infer the most probable parameters β that explain the observed data y.
Random variables
In Bayesian linear regression, the parameters β are treated as random variables, rather than fixed
unknowns. This involves placing priors over β and updating these beliefs in light of observed
data using Bayes’ theorem. A random variable, X, is one that can be described by a probability
distribution. For a continuous random variable, the probability distribution can often be described
by a probability density function, denoted as p(x), where:
P(a ≤X ≤b) =
! b
a
p(x) dx
(1.5)
This integral gives the probability that the random variable X takes a value within the interval
[a, b]. Each element of the model, whether a parameter or a predictive outcome, can be treated as
a random variable with its own distribution reflecting our knowledge and uncertainty.
The use of random variables enables to express uncertainties as probability distributions, which
we can combine using Bayesian inference to estimate posteriors [23].
Gaussian distributions
Gaussian distributions are often used in Bayesian modeling to model the probability distribution
of the prior. This is because they simplify calculations, align with real-world data patterns, and aid
to update beliefs with new information according to the Bayes’ theorem.
8
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:17==
The univariate Gaussian distribution is defined by the probability density function for a continuous
variable, given a mean µ and a variance σ2. This allows to model the relationship between one
feature variable x and the observed output y. We express the p(x) to follow a normal distribution
as:
p(x) = N(µ, σ)
(1.6)
Sometimes, there are many variables contributing to the observed output y. In these cases, mul-
tivariate Gaussian distributions become key: they allow us to capture the relationships between
multiple variables simultaneously. A multivariate Gaussian distribution is a generalization of the
one-dimensional Gaussian distribution to higher dimensions. Here, each random variable is dis-
tributed normally, and their joint distribution is also Gaussian [24]. A random vector is said to be
multivariate Gaussian if any linear combination of its components is normally distributed [24].
f(x) ∼N(µ, Σ)
(1.7)
In this case, x is a vector of input variables and f(x) represents the vector-valued output resulting
from the function evaluated at x. Notice that here µ (in bold) is the mean vector, which specifies
the mean value on each corresponding dimension. Σ denotes the covariance matrix, which spec-
ifies the covariance between each pair of components in the output vector f(x).
A Gaussian distribution, also known as a normal distribution, is a probability distribution that is
widely used for representing real-valued random variables whose distributions are not known. It’s
characterized by its bell-shaped curve, defined by its mean and variance in the univariate case, or
mean vector and covariance matrix in the multivariate case.
Treating parameters as random variables allows for the inclusion of prior knowledge and uncer-
tainty in the posterior, resulting in a model that provides probabilistic interpretations of predictions.
This approach is useful for modelling linear relationships, as it enhances predictive accuracy and
adapts to data variability [22].
—–
1.2.3
Bayesian Optimization: key concepts
In this project, we aim to use ML to efficiently explore the fitness landscape and find the protein
variants that yield the best fitness phenotypes in the least amount of experiments in the wet-lab.
This sequence-fitness objective function f(x) is a black box function because we have no analyti-
cal expression for it. That means that we can only evaluate the function at any query point x in the
domain. This function is not only possible to sample through noisy biased observations, but also
expensive to evaluate since it would imply running experiments in the laboratory.
Bayesian Optimization (BO) offers a framework for dealing with these functions. It is a powerful
sequential strategy for optimizing an expensive-to-evaluate objective function f(x). That is, find-
ing the input values that maximize or minimize the function’s output: in our case, protein fitness.
Mathematically, we are interested in:
x∗= arg max
x∈X f(x)
(1.8)
BO features two essential elements:
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
9
==PAGE:18==
1. A probabilistic regression model: to represent our beliefs and uncertainty about the objec-
tive function we are optimizing.
2. An acquisition function: to guide the optimization process by selecting the next points to
evaluate based on the current probabilistic model.
These components are explored in detail in the upcoming sections.
Gaussian Processes
Having explored Bayesian linear regression, where parameters are treated as random variables
within a linear framework, we now expand our focus to Gaussian Processes where the function
values are directly treated as random variables. These functions make it possible to model com-
plex data relationships that linear regression cannot capture.
A Gaussian Process (GP) generalizes the multivariate Gaussian distribution to functions, defining a
distribution over functions rather than over scalar values. Here, any collection of random variables
has a joint Gaussian distribution. A GP is completely specified by its mean function m(x) and
covariance function k(x, x′):
f(x) ∼GP(m(x), k(x, x′))
(1.9)
where:
• m(x) represents the mean of the function at point x.
• k(x, x′) is the covariance function, expressing the covariance between the function values
at points x and x′.
The distribution of function values at any finite set of points follows a multivariate normal distri-
bution, linking back to the concept of a Gaussian distribution. The mean function m(x) and the
covariance function k(x, x′) play analogous roles to the mean and covariance matrix in the multi-
variate Gaussian distribution, but they do so over an arbitrary number dimensions.
GPs are widely used in Bayesian modeling as priors over functions. This means that we start with
an estimation about the distribution of functions based on the GP prior, which is characterized by a
mean function and a covariance function (kernel). The covariance function encodes prior assump-
tions about the function, such as smoothness, periodicity, or how quickly it varies. The posterior
is computed analytically as another GP with adjusted mean and kernel functions of the GP prior
to fit the data, with some allowed Gaussian observation noise [25]. This noise is assumed to be
Gaussian, in accordance to the Central Limit Theorem, which suggests that the sum of many inde-
pendent random variables (such as measurement errors) tends toward a normal distribution [22].
Mathematically this is y ∼N(f(x), σ2) where σ2 is the variance of the noise. This way likelihood
becomes Gaussian which yields an analytically GP posterior.
In BO, GPs are commonly used as surrogate models, due to their capacity to perform exact in-
ference: The ability to compute the posterior distributions analytically. A surrogate model is an
approximation of a complex objective function that stands in for the true function when this is
costly to assess. This is the case for mapping protein fitness to protein sequences, where the evalu-
ation of the objective (or true) function is expensive due to experimental costs and the complexity
of biological interactions. In such cases, the use of a surrogate model to approximate the objective
function becomes key.
10
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:19==
In short, GPs play a dual role in BO by serving both as a prior and as a surrogate model. As a
prior, GPs provide a probabilistic framework that models the uncertainty in the objective function,
capturing the underlying function’s behavior based on limited data. As a surrogate model, GPs
facilitate efficient prediction and optimization by using this probabilistic representation to guide
the search towards optimal solutions.
A crucial component of GPs that significantly influences their performance is the choice of kernel.
Kernels, also known as covariance functions, define the similarity between different points in the
input space and thereby dictate the shape and smoothness of the function being modeled. The
choice of kernel is essential because it directly affects the GP’s ability to accurately capture the
underlying structure of the data. Different kernels can model various patterns such as periodicity,
linear trends, or complex interactions, making it important to select a kernel that aligns well with
the characteristics of the specific problem at hand. In this work, the Radial Basis Function (RBF)
kernel was chosen for the GP model due to its strength in modeling continuous functions. See
more details on this kernel in Methods: 2.5
Acquisition Functions
BO methods make use of an acquisition function to optimize the sequence-fitness objective func-
tion. This function’s role is to direct the optimization process under uncertainty measures. By
leveraging both the predictions and the uncertainty estimates provided by the surrogate model, the
acquisition function determines the most interesting points in the parameter space to evaluate next
[25]. On every iteration, we use Bayesian inference to update our prior on the new available data,
as described previously in this section. The goal of the acquisition function is to guide the decision
of what points to sample next, to efficiently balance the trade-off between exploring new areas
that might yield better results (exploration) and focusing on regions already known to be effective
(exploitation). Balancing exploitation and exploration is key to avoid falling into local maxima
[22].
1.2.4
GP-BO Training Workflow: Updating the GP with Newly Sampled Points
GPs are powerful tools for modeling and making predictions about unknown functions. They rely
on the mean function and the kernel (or covariance) function to capture the underlying structure and
correlations within the data. Here, the process of updating the mean and kernel functions when
new data is introduced is explained, along with the role of the acquisition function in Bayesian
Optimization (BO).
Mean Function Update
The mean function in a GP represents the expected value of the function being modeled at each
input point. Mathematically, the mean function µ(x) can be defined as:
µ(x) = E[f(x)]
(1.10)
The mean function serves as a prior and can be set to a constant value based on already-existing
knowledge of the function. In this work, the GP mean was fixed to the fitness value of the wild
type: W = 1 (see more details in Methods: 2.5).
When new data points (Xnew, ynew) are observed, the GP is updated to reflect this new information.
The updated mean function, µnew(x), at a test point x is computed as:
µnew(x) = µ(x) + k(x, Xnew)⊤K−1
new(ynew −µ(Xnew))
(1.11)
Here:
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 1.4: Acquisition functions guide the sampling of new points given the current means and
uncertainties of the GP. Top: A Gaussian process is fitted to available data (black dots) and ex-
presses large uncertainty in areas far away from the observations. Middle/bottom: The acquisition
functions EI and UCB are illustrated with different hyperparameters (value given in parentheses).
These hyperparameters control the trade-off between exploitation and exploration of the sampling.
The orange triangles show the maximum of the acquisition function, which is the point predicted
to be most favorable for learning by each sampling strategy.
• µ(x) is the prior mean at x.
• k(x, Xnew) is the covariance vector between the test point x and the new data points Xnew.
• Knew is the covariance matrix of the new data points Xnew.
• ynew are the observed values at the new data points Xnew.
Kernel (Covariance) Function Update
The kernel function, also known as the covariance function, defines the similarity between pairs
of input points. Mathematically, a kernel k can be defined as [24]:
k : Rn × Rn →R,
Σ = Cov(X, X′) = k(t, t′)
(1.12)
Here, k is a function that takes two points from Rn and returns a real number representing their
similarity. The choice of kernel depends on the nature of the data and the specific problem being
addressed. In this work, the Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel was chosen for the Gaussian
Process model due to its strength in modeling continuous functions. More details on the RBF
kernel can be found in Methods: 2.5.
12
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:21==
When new data is added, the kernel function itself does not change, but the covariance matrix
incorporating the new data points is updated. The updated covariance matrix Knew includes the
covariances between all pairs of both the original and new data points, regardless of the specific
kernel used:
Knew =
" K(X, X)
K(X, Xnew)
K(Xnew, X)
K(Xnew, Xnew)
#
(1.13)
Where:
• K(X, X) is the covariance matrix of the original data points.
• K(X, Xnew) is the covariance matrix between the original and new data points.
• K(Xnew, Xnew) is the covariance matrix of the new data points.
Posterior Distribution and Acquisition Function
With the updated mean and covariance matrix, the posterior distribution of the GP at a new test
point x∗is given by:
µpost(x∗) = k(x∗, Xcombined)⊤K−1
combinedycombined
(1.14)
σ2
post(x∗) = k(x∗, x∗) −k(x∗, Xcombined)⊤K−1
combinedk(x∗, Xcombined)
(1.15)
Here:
• Xcombined includes both the original and new data points.
• ycombined includes the observed values at both the original and new data points.
• µpost(x∗) is the updated mean at the test point x∗.
• σ2
post(x∗) is the updated variance at the test point x∗.
The posterior distribution is crucial for making predictions at new test points. The mean µpost(x∗)
provides the predicted value, while the variance σ2
post(x∗) indicates the uncertainty of the predic-
tion. This updated posterior is then used to compute the acquisition function, which is essential
in BO. The acquisition function guides the selection of the next points to evaluate by balancing
exploration (searching new areas) and exploitation (refining known good areas). These functions
utilize the posterior mean and variance to identify points that are likely to yield optimal results.
More details on the acquisition functions used in this work can be found in Section 1.2.3.
By updating the mean and covariance functions with new data, GPs can continuously refine their
predictions. This makes them highly adaptable and powerful tools for modeling complex func-
tions. Regarding their potential in protein engineering, the ability of Gaussian Processes (GPs)
to incorporate new information and model uncertainties makes them particularly useful in hybrid
computational-wet laboratory settings, where new data is continuously being collected as new ex-
periments produce results.
1.3
This project
The primary goal of this thesis is to explore the application of ML, particularly Bayesian methods,
to enhance the design and optimization of protein libraries. This study focuses on using Gaussian
Process (GP)-based Bayesian optimization (BO) to model the complex relationship between pro-
tein sequences and their functional performance. By leveraging these Bayesian models and testing
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
13
==PAGE:22==
different sampling strategies, this project aims at exploring if ML can be useful for guiding ex-
periments on finding high-performance proteins more efficiently, leading to more productive and
sustainable research practices.
The specific aims of this research are as follows:
1. Investigation of Zero-shot Scores: Assess the predictive value of zero-shot scores from
single mutants, as derived from Directed Mutational Scanning (DMS), to forecast the perfor-
mance of double mutants. This aim evaluates how initial, less resource-intensive predictions
can potentially streamline the early stages of protein optimization.
2. Bayesian Optimization of Double Mutants: Examine the efficacy of BO in mapping the
fitness landscape of double mutants, aiming to reduce the experimental burden and resource
costs by focusing efforts on the most promising protein variants.
3. Streamlining MLDE for Experimentalists: Contribute to the development of ProteusAI,
a web application under development in-house designed to facilitate the use of ML-guided
tools by experimentalists.
While this thesis provides a methodological framework that could potentially be applied to various
proteins, it is important to note that this exploratory work has a limited scope, testing the pipeline
solely on one protein domain (GB1). Despite this limitation, the research remains of value in its
potential to point at directions to substantially reduce the time and financial resources required
for optimizing proteins. This is crucial at a time when the demand for optimized biocatalysts and
therapeutic proteins is increasing.
The integration of ML into protein engineering efforts has the potential to transform traditional
methodologies into an AI-driven more efficient process. By exploring BO-MLDE strategies, we
aim to inspire future work that can contribute to an increasingly sustainable and innovative indus-
trial biotechnology.
14
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:23==
2
Methods
2.1
Python packages, applications and services
ProteusAI
ProteusAI was used to generate the ESM-2 protein embeddings (see Methods 2.4) and zero-shot
predictions of fitness values (see Methods 2.2.2). This is a ML package under development in-
house by Jonathan Funk to assist ML-guided protein engineering.
Standard libraries
The standard library GPyTorch was used to generate GP models [26]. SciKit-learn was used to
create train/test splits with an 80/20 ratio [27]. Pandas was used for data wrangling [28]. Visual-
izations were created using open-source libraries Matplotlib [29] and Seaborn [30]. NumPy [31]
was used in multiple applications throughout the package.
Computing services
Microsoft Azure cloud computing services [28] provided by the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center
for Biosustainability were used to run the Bayesian Optimization analysis of this work.
2.2
Datasets
Histograms of the fitness measures from both the experimental and in silico datasets used in this
work can be found in Figs. A.2 and A.3 in the Appendix.
2.2.1
Experimental fitness data
The mutant datasets used in this project were obtained from published manuscripts. Experimental
data from Deep Mutational Scanning (DMS) assays on different-order mutants on the B1 immunoglobulin-
binding domain of Streptococcal protein G (GB1) were used to train different GPs to predict fitness.
The experimental fitness values of all single and double mutants across the full 56-amino-acid-
length domain of GB1 were obtained from the work published by Olson et al. in 2014 [7].
Table 2.1: Summary statistics of the GB1 Datasets.
Mutant Order
Number of Variants
Positions Mutated
1
1,026
all
2
535,917
all, pairwise*
Definition of Fitness
Fitness is an aggregate term to define the functional quality of proteins with different roles, such
as activity, stability, or binding ability. Here, we use the definition of fitness by Olson et al. as the
relative binding affinity of a given mutant to the wild-type GB1 protein [7]. That is, the relative
fraction bound to the mutated protein variant. This can be described as follows, where F denotes
the fraction of protein bound to its target and WN represents the binding affinity of the mutated
variant given that the protein is properly folded to its native state:
WN = F(Bmut)
F(Bwt)
(2.1)
*The number of catalogued double mutants constitutes 95% of the potential pool, as some measurement results below
the confidence threshold were filtered from the experimental dataset
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
15
==PAGE:24==
This distinction between general observed fitness W and WN is needed because the observed
fitness in mutated variants is a function of both the proteins’ folding and binding affinity. De-
composing fitness into its components is crucial to understand how individual mutations and their
combinations affect overall protein performance. Observed fitness can be defined as:
W = fN × WN
(2.2)
where fN is the fraction of the protein that is folded into its native state (correct folding), and WN
is the fitness of the protein when it is in that native state.
To estimate the effect of mutations on the binding affinity (WN) of each protein variant, Olson et
al. isolated the influence of correct protein folding from gross observed fitness using data from
background and test mutations [7].
2.2.2
Zero-shot fitness scores
Computation of zero-shot scores
In addition to experimental y-values from DMS data, in silico generated zero-shot scores were used
as a proxy for fitness to train GPs. These scores are calculated from the ESM-2 model’s output
[18], which generates logits (raw scores) for each possible residue x at a masked position i. These
logits can be used to quantify the mutational effect: the impact of a mutation on the likelihood of a
sequence compared to the wild-type. The computation of zero-shot scores from the ESM-2 logits
was performed using the ProteusAI library. The scores are calculated as follows:
Logits are transformed into probabilities using the softmax function, where M is the set of mu-
tated positions on a sequence x and i is an element within M. Here, p(xi = xmt
i
| x−M) is the
probability of observing a mutant residue xmt
i
at position i given the rest of the non-mutated part
of the sequence:
p(xi = xmt
i
| x−M) =
exp(logitxmt
i )
$
j exp(logitxj)
(2.3)
These probabilities are transformed to log-probabilities, which are used to compute the muta-
tional effect as the difference between mutant and WT residues. The difference between the log-
probabilities of the mutant and WT residues at each position quantifies the mutational effect. Fi-
nally, the zero-shot score for a sequence is then derived by summing the log-probability differences
across all mutation positions:
%
i∈M
&
log p(xi = xmt
i
| x−M) −log p(xi = xwt
i
| x−M)
'
(2.4)
Thus, the zero-shot score of a given sequence provides a proxy for fitness that reflects the cumu-
lative mutational effects at each position.
Transformation of zero-shot scores
Zero-shot scores were linearly transformed to better align with the distribution of DMS exper-
imental values. This transformation (see Equation 2.5) was intended to make pre-training the
model on zero-shot single-mutant values more useful for predicting real experimental fitness for
higher mutants. Here, s represents the non-transformed zero-shot scores and smin is the minimum
non-transformed score value, used as a scaling factor:
stransformed =
1
|smin| · s + 1
(2.5)
16
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:25==
The rationale behind this linear transformation was to: (a) maintain W = 1 as the fitness value
for the wild-type zero-shot scores, consistent with the DMS experimental values, (b) ensure both
in silico and experimental values are in a similar range, avoiding negative values, and (c) utilize
a simple transformation. The data was not highly skewed, so other mappings that might cause
distortions were not deemed necessary. The fact that the transformation diverges when |smin| = 0
is not worrying, since the zero-shot scores are distributed around 0 and always include negative
values for proteins with a lower fitness score than the wild-type.
2.3
Calculation of n-order mutants
When considering the 20 naturally occurring amino acids, there are 20L possible variants of a
protein of length L. The number of possible variants with n mutations on a protein of length L is
described by:
Total number of n-order mutants =
(L
n
)
× 19n
(2.6)
For the GB1 protein domain (L = 56), the number of possible double mutant variants is:
Total number of double mutants =
(56
2
)
× 192 = 1540 × 361 = 556940
(2.7)
2.4
Protein embeddings
The Evolutionary Scale Modeling (ESM-2, specifically the esm2-t33-650M-UR50D model), was
used to derive vector representation sequences [18]. This was performed using the ProteusAI
package. To generate these vector representations of proteins, each sequence is split into discrete
units known as token representations. The final layer of these token representations, which captures
the most abstract and high-level features, is then extracted. To construct a unique vector that
represents the entire protein sequence, the representations of individual tokens were averaged.
Doing this for each sequence yields a list of representative vectors. Each output vector from ESM-
2 (z) captures the core features of one protein sequence x, so that h(x) →z. In this work, one
1280-dimensional vector representation was generated per each protein sequence.
2.5
Gaussian Processes
GP was used as a surrogate model to approximate the objective function f(z) →y, where z are
ESM-2 protein vector representations and y are fitness values. The mean of the GPs was fixed
to the fitness value of the wild-type GB1 domain: W = 1. The noise parameter of the GP σ2
n
was initialized at the default value (0.0) and optimized during training using the built-in gradient
learning methods available in the GPyTorch [26].
Kernel: Radial Basis Function
The Radial Basis Function (RBF) kernel, also known as the squared exponential kernel, was se-
lected for the Gaussian Process model. The choice was driven by its strength in modeling contin-
uous functions and its flexibility with minimal hyperparameters.
The RBF kernel is defined as:
k(x, x′) = σ2 exp
(
−(x −x′)2
2ℓ2
)
(2.8)
where:
• x, x′ are data points in the input space,
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
17
==PAGE:26==
• σ2 is the kernel variance, which determines how much variation the model can accept be-
tween different data points.
• ℓis the length scale, which controls the correlation imposed between points, determining
how quickly similarity between inputs decays with distance.
This kernel assumes a smooth variation in data, with points closer in the input space expected
to have more similar outputs. The kernel parameters kernel variance σ2
k and length scale ℓwere
optimized during training using GPyTorch [26].
2.6
Bayesian Optimization
For the second-order mutants, the GP models were trained using BO to sample points according to
different strategies. In each learning iteration, new points are selected from the training set using
an acquisition function (see section 1.2.3). Once selected, these points are used to train the GP: the
probabilities in the GP are updated in light of the new evidence through Bayesian inference (see
Fig 1.3).
Acquisition functions and hyperparameters
Acquisition functions in BO guide the selection of the next points to evaluate, enabling balancing
exploration and exploration on variants sampling (see Introduction section 1.2.3). Four different
acquisition strategies were used as sampling methods during GP training on double mutants:
1. Random sampling: samples variants randomly from the training set. It simulates the control
condition of selecting arbitrary variants in the lab, without a rational method behind it.
2. Expected Improvement (EI): selects points where the model predicts in expectation (i.e
the weighted average of possible predictions) the largest improvement over the current best
observation. This can mathematically be formulated as:
EI(x) = Ef(x)
&
max(f(x) −(f(x+) + ξ), 0)
'
(2.9)
where Ef(x) is the expectation over the random prediction f(x), f(x+) represents the cur-
rent best observation, and the parameter ξ ≥0 is the exploration-exploitation trade-off pa-
rameter (larger ξ favors exploration)[21]. Using a GP as a probabilistic model (f(x) ∼
GP(µ(x), σ(x))), this is given by:
EI(x) =
*
(µ(x) −f(x+) −ξ)Φ(Z) + σ(x)φ(Z)
if σ(x) > 0
0
if σ(x) = 0
(2.10)
where Z = µ(x)−f(x+)−ξ
σ(x)
and Φ is the cumulative distribution function and φ the probability
density function of the standard Gaussian distribution.
3. Upper Confidence Bound (UCB): selects points where the sum of the model’s prediction
and upper certainty interval, adjusted by the hyperparameter κ, is maximized [21]:
UCB(x) = µ(x) + κσ(x)
(2.11)
4. Greedy sampling: sorts all the predicted mean values by the GP and selects the n points
with the highest fitness predicted score.
18
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:27==
For the EI and UCB acquisition functions, hyperparameters that adjust the balance between ex-
ploitation and exploration can be tuned. Three different values of hyperparameters were used to
simulate various balances of exploitation and exploration for each of these two acquisition strate-
gies. The selection of these hyperparameters values are detailed in Table 2.2. In both cases, lower
values of their hyperparameter prioritize exploitation of known high-fitness areas of the landscape,
while higher values promote more exploratory sampling of areas of higher uncertainty.
Table 2.2: Hyperparameters for UCB and EI acquisition functions
Acquisition function
Hyperparameter
Values
Expected Improvement (EI)
ξ
0.01, 0.5, 1
Upper Confidence Bound (UCB)
κ
0.1, 1.5, 3
The Random and Greedy acquisition strategies were included as extreme control sampling methods
for exploration and exploitation, respectively; to examine how these extreme sampling methods’
influrence the GP learning.
2.7
Model training
Figure 2.1: Flowchart representing the model training procedure, showing the possible paths tra-
versed by using various datasets.
To investigate the value of DMS experiments on single mutants to inform predictions on 2nd-
order mutants, GP models were first trained on single mutants and then used to estimate the double
mutants’ sequence fitness relationship through iterations of BO-guided training on a subset of the
2nd-order mutants dataset. The GP parameter choices can be found in Methods 2.5.
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
19
==PAGE:28==
2.7.1
Training on single mutants
Two GP regressors were trained on GB1 single mutants: one on experimentally derived fitness
y-values and another one on in silico generated zero-shot y-scores (see Methods 2.2.2). In both
cases, an 80/20 data split for training and testing sets was set.
This phase of training the GPs is referred to as pre-training, as it precedes further rounds of training
the same models on 2nd-order mutants data. Two pre-trainings of a GP were performed: one with
DMS experimental data and another with in silico generated zero-shot scores.
2.7.2
Training on double mutants
The GP models initially trained on first-order mutants were subsequently trained on a subset of
double mutants to learn more complex epistatic interactions. The y-values for the double mu-
tants used for training and testing were all experimentally derived from DMS assays (see Methods
2.7) [7]. Three different random seeds (42, 123, and 2024) were used to generate three randomly
sampled subsets of 2.5k double mutants from the 500k dataset by [7]. The decision to train on
smaller subsets was made due to runtime constraints with the current computational implementa-
tion. Statistical analysis showed that the subsets generated with the three seeds were representative
of the larger dataset, maintaining key statistical descriptors such as mean, variance, and distribution
shape. The results were consistent across random seeds, so the results included in this report are
relative to one random seed. Results for the other two random seeds can be found in the appendix.
Additionally, an equivalent 2.5k variants enriched subset of the double mutants was generated to
test the pipeline in a setup where high-fitness mutants were equally represented as low-fitness
variants, in contrast with the natural distribution of fitness landscape where most variants with
fitness values close to zero are overrepresented [32]. This decision was motivated by a recent
work by Witmann et al. who found that informed training improve MLDE effectiveness [32].
This enriched subset was generated through stratified sampling, where 500 protein variants were
randomly selected from each of the following fitness value ranges: 0-1, 1-2, 2-3, 3-4, and 4-5.
2.7.3
Model evaluation
The models were evaluated by computing the Loss (Negative Marginal Log Likelihood) and the
Mean Squared Error (MSE) on the test set. The MSE is a measure of the average squared differ-
ence between the actual values and the predicted values, used to assess the accuracy of a model’s
predictions. Negative Marginal Log Likelihood (NMLL) is a loss function used in probabilistic
models that measures how well the model’s predicted probability distribution fits the observed
data. Lower values of MSE and loss (representing NMLL) indicate better model fit.
20
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:29==
3
Results
This work aims to (a) investigate the value of single mutants zero-shot scores compared to DMS for
informing the prediction of double-mutant fitness; and (b) study whether BO can aid mapping the
fitness landscape of double mutants, if used to guide experiments, reducing the amount of resources
used in the wet-lab to find the best-performing variants of a target protein. Lastly, a third aim (c)
consisted of streamlining the use of MLDE for experimentalists by contributing to the launch of
ProteusAI, a web application under development in-house by Jonathan Funk.
3.1
Training GPs on experimental and zero-shot single mutant data
To assess the value of DMS experiments on single mutants for informing predictions on second-
order mutants, two GP regressors were trained on GB1 single mutants: one on experimentally
derived fitness y-values and another on in silico generated zero-shot y-values (see Methods: 2.2.2).
These training sessions on single mutants are referred to as pre-training, as they take place prior to
further training sessions of the resulting GPs on second-order mutants.
These GPs were trained on 80% of all GB1 single mutants. During training, we fixed the models’
mean value to 1 (the fitness of the WT, see section 2.5) and optimized the other three GP parameters
(kernel variance, length scale and noise) using gradient learning [26]. The parameter optimization
results are shown in Figure 3.1.
(a) Training on DMS fitness values
(b) Training on zero-shot fitness values
Figure 3.1: Optimization of hyperparameters of GP during single-mutant training on different
datasets
The optimization of the GP parameters is done using a loss measure called Negative Marginal Log
Likelihood (NMLL). This indicator measures how well the model explains the training data, given
the values of the parameters, at any given iteration. It rewards a good fit of the model to the data
while penalizing model complexity in order to limit overfitting.
The two models, (a) trained on experimental data (Fig. 3.1a); and (b) trained on zero-shot scores
(Fig. 3.1b) converge, as we see the loss stabilizes for both of them. This is the point where further
updates in the parameters result in minimal to no improvement in the loss function. This happens
around iteration 50 for the model trained on DMS data (3.1a) and around iteration 70 for the one
trained on zero-shot scores (3.1b). We observe that the loss is more stable in the model trained on
zero-shot scores.
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
21
==PAGE:30==
(a) Training on DMS fitness values
(b) Training on zero-shot fitness values
Figure 3.2: Evolution of MSE and Negative Marginal Log Likelihood (NMLL) during single-
mutant training on different datasets.
3.2
Using Bayesian Optimization to inform lab assays of double
mutants
BO is a strategy for optimizing complex and expensive-to-evaluate functions by building a proba-
bilistic model to guide the selection of the most promising points to sample (see section 1.2.3). In
this work, BO was used to minimize the number of variants needed to be tested in the laboratory.
To investigate whether BO can aid in mapping the fitness landscape of double mutants by guiding
experiments, the GP models from each of the pre-training conditions were trained over several
rounds (with b new points per round) on a subset of the double-mutant fitness experimental values.
In each iteration, four different acquisition functions were used to decide which variants to sample
next, given the information on variants already tested and the values of the exploitation-exploration
trade-off hyperparameters. Each of these acquisition functions computes an acquisition value for
the protein variants where it doesn’t have experimental y-values. These acquisition values provide
a way to rank all the unseen variants in terms of which ones are the most favorable to learn from,
given the current state of the GP (as illustrated on Fig 1.4). Each acquisition value is computed
using the information on tested variants and the model’s predictions for those not tested: predicted
mean and uncertainties (kernel). This happens in different ways for different sampling strategies,
as explained in section 2.6. EI ranks points by quantifying the amount of improvement a variant
is likely to show with respect to the current best sample. In contrast, UCB leverages the upper
certainty bound to select those points where the sum of this and the GP mean are the highest. In both
cases, the hyperparameter plays a role in biasing the ranking of these points: lower values of the
hyperparameters favor exploitation behavior, while higher values of φ and κ favor the exploration
of unknown regions. Greedy and random searches do not use hyperparameters, as neither of these
use the uncertainty quantification of the GP (see section 2.6).
Once sorted by acquisition value, the top b variants in the ranking of each sampling strategy are
selected to be tested experimentally for the next iteration. When lab results are generated, the new
data is fed to the model and the GP probability distributions are updated using Bayesian inference
(see Bayesian Methods section 1.2.4). This results in a new posterior GP, with adjusted parameter
values optimized to best model the overall set of data (see section 2.5). The GP can then be used
to guide the BO on generating another set of variants recommended per sampling strategy.
This process is repeated in cycles of screening and modelling, as illustrated in Fig. 1.1 (blue
arrows), where (b) new variants are tested in the lab per iteration and their y-values are used to
refine the model on finding the highest-quality mutant (shown in red). In this work, two different
batch sizes (number of variants evaluated per round) were used to study the effect of this variable
22
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:31==
on the BO training with double mutants: b = 10 and b = 100 variants tested per round.
By performing pre-training of the GPs on single-mutant data, we aimed at assessing whether the
information learned from single-mutant data aids the prediction of double mutants’ fitness values.
We achieved this by taking the final state of each GP pre-trained on single mutants (its parameters)
and use this model to learn from the new unseen second-order data (see Fig. 1.2.4). Technically,
this is equivalent to imposing a prior over the GP of having learned from the single-mutants train
set. This is important because, in the cases where pre-training was performed, the overall set of
data points the models has learned from on every iteration includes the single-mutant train set (as
well as the iteratively-added double mutants). Thus, these models have more data points to fit
when predicting double mutants.
BO was employed to select new points (double mutants) for training based on their potential to en-
hance the model, progressively refining the GP with each batch of newly selected and experimentally-
tested data points (see Fig. 2.1). This training setup simulates a real wet-lab scenario, where there
is no experimental data on double-mutant’s fitness a priori. The rationale behind using the differ-
entially pre-trained GPs as a starting point to predict the fitness of double mutants is to investigate
if there is value in pre-training the models with single-mutant data.
3.2.1
Prediction of double mutants’ real values
One goal of this project was to investigate the effectiveness of ML-guided experiments compared to
non-guided (random sampling) experiments in accurately predicting fitness scores. The ability of
the models to predict fitness was measured in Mean Squared Error (MSE) (see 2.7.3). This metric
is used to measure the model performance for predicting fitness scores. The lower the MSE, the
better the model predicts the fitness values of the test data.
Figure 3.3 shows the MSE of the different GP models per training iteration, when GPs are trained
(in batches of b new points) with a total of 2,000 data points. In each iteration, b new points are
added to the GP training set. The points added to the training set per iteration are those selected
by each sampling strategy, respectively (see Methods 2.6). Two batch sizes were studied to assess
the potential effect of the number of variants tested per round on the model learning: b = 10 and
b = 100.
From the point of view of an experimenter characterizing proteins in the lab, the batch size b
corresponds to the number of new variants tested per round. Consequently, the number of training
iterations indicates the number of wet lab assays (of b proteins each). The GP is initialized from the
pre-training condition and starts without any double-mutant data. As new data is collected about
these new variants and the fitness landscape is explored, the measured fitness values are fed back
into the model to inform future predictions.
From these results (Fig. 3.3), systematic sampling strategies do not exhibit better predictive accu-
racy compared to non-guided (random sampling, shown in gray) experimental testing when com-
paring models under the same pre-training conditions (DMS, zero-shot, and none).
Models pre-trained on single-mutant DMS experimental data showed overall higher predictive
accuracy (lower MSE) than the models trained on zero-shot scores and not pre-trained (Fig. 3.3b).
This was consistent over the entire training process and across different batch sizes (b=100 or 10;
left and right panels, respectively). Finally, there was no notable difference in the predictive ability
of double-mutant fitness between the zero-shot and not pre-trained models.
3.2.2
Prediction of the best-performing double mutant variants
Another goal of the project was to assess whether BO could specifically assist in mapping the
high-fitness areas of the landscape. To achieve this, two lines of studies were conducted. The first
evaluated how quickly the libraries associated with each sampling strategy improved with new data
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
23
==PAGE:32==
from wet-lab experiments. The second investigated the number of experiments required to identify
the best performers in the training set for each sampling strategy. These analyses are detailed in
the following subsections.
Library quality improvement across sampling strategies
To assess whether the quality of the library improves more rapidly when experiments are guided by
ML-methods compared to non-guided approaches, a definition for improved variant was needed.
We defined improved mutants as mutants whose fitness values W exceeded the reference WT
fitness (W = 1) plus one standard deviation of the test set. We adopted this criterion to account for
measurement errors in the DMS fitness values, thereby setting a minimum threshold of superiority
over the WT to label a variant as improved. Figure 3.4 shows the cumulative library improvement
across sampling strategies for models trained on different batch sizes (b = 10 and b = 100) and pre-
trained on different conditions (DMS, Zero-shot, no pre-training). That is the number of improved
variants that have been found by each sampling strategy at every stage of the training on double
mutants.
ML-guided sampling strategies can identify improved variants more quickly than randomly sam-
pling the variants with which the GPs are trained in each round (Fig. 3.4). This finding is consistent
across pre-training conditions, batch sizes of points added per iteration (b = 10 and b = 100).
The greedy sampling strategy stood out as the most effective approach for improving the quality
of the libraries across pre-training conditions and batch sizes (Figure 3.4). Basically, this method
directly samples the points with the highest predicted y-values within the training set, regardless
of their levels of uncertainty (see Methods: 2.6). Furthermore, there is a greater difference in the
efficiency of various (non-random) acquisition functions when the GP was pre-trained on single-
mutant experimental data (DMS), compared to zero-shot scores or no pre-training. For the latter
two models„ all the guided sampling strategies showed similar efficacy in identifying improved
variants, indicating that pre-training on zero-shot scores does not provide added value for this aim.
Experiments needed to identify top double mutants
In protein engineering, the ultimate goal is to identify the best-performing variants of a protein.
In addition to assessing how quickly different strategies find improved variants (shown in sec-
tion 3.2.2), this study also aimed to determine how efficiently these strategies can identify the top
mutants in a set. To achieve this, the number of laboratory iterations required to reach various
thresholds of top performers within a subset of double mutants was analyzed. Figure 3.5 illustrates
these results for testing 10 and 100 variants per laboratory round, as well as for models pre-trained
using different methods.
Guided-sampling strategies showed to be systematically more efficient on finding the top 5 variants
in the 2,000 double mutant subsets across batch sizes and pre-training conditions 3.5.
Models pre-trained on zero-shot scores require more rounds of laboratory experiments to identify
the top 5 performers compared to those pre-trained on DMS data or not pre-trained. Interestingly,
for a batch size of b = 100, there is almost no difference between the DMS pre-trained and non-
pre-trained models (Fig. 3.5). Furthermore, the non-pre-trained model appears to identify the top 5
performers slightly faster than the pre-trained models when trained with 10 data points per iteration
(Fig. 3.5). This suggests that pre-training on single mutants does not enhance the efficiency of
identifying the top-performing variants within a subset.
Regarding the comparison of sampling strategies for this task, unlike the cumulative library im-
provement results (Fig. 3.4f), where the greedy sampling outperformed the other acquisition func-
tion, in this analysis no single sampling strategy consistently ranked as the most efficient across all
conditions. For a batch size of n=20 within the same pre-training conditions, all strategies yielded
similar results; only a difference of one iteration was needed to reach the top 5 performers. How-
ever, training with 10 points per round revealed more differences between sampling strategies. The
24
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:33==
most exploitative Expected Improvement (EI) strategy identified the top 5 performers the fastest in
both DMS and zero-shot pre-trained models. Conversely, the greedy and most exploitative Upper
Confidence Bound (UCB) strategies were the most effective on the non-pre-trained model, per-
forming equally well and requiring the fewest iterations to find all of the top 5 variants among all
pre-training conditions and sampling strategies tested (Fig. 3.5).
(a) DMS pre-trained (b = 100)
(b) DMS pre-trained (b = 10)
(c) Zero-shot pre-trained (b = 100)
(d) Zero-shot pre-trained (b = 10)
(e) Not pre-trained (b = 100)
(f) Not pre-trained (b = 10)
Figure 3.5: Heatmaps showing how many iterations (rounds of experiments) were needed for each
sampling strategy to find all the top X candidate variants in the train dataset. Number of variants
tested per iteration: 10 for (a), (c), and (e); 100 for (b), (d), and (f).
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
25
==PAGE:34==
Agreement on high-fitness positions across sampling strategies
This work also aimed to evaluate the level of agreement among different ML-guided strategies on
the positions they identify as relevant for high-fitness scores in GB1 double mutants. The con-
sensus among the positions selected by each sampling strategy halfway through the training on
the complete subset of double mutants is shown in Fig 3.6. In this analysis, models pre-trained
on single mutants were fine-tuned on 1000 double mutants, with 10 points being added per learn-
ing iteration. The figure illustrates how frequently each position was selected by each sampling
strategy by iteration 100 out of 200 for all three cases.
The heatmap reveals that the different ML-guided sampling strategies (y-axis) systematically select
mutants with the same mutated positions for learning (x-axis). Each row represents a different
sampling strategy, with the first row corresponding to random sampling. Random sampling showed
a relatively homogeneous distribution of all positions, in coherence with the distribution of the
mutants in the train set. On the other hand, all guided sampling strategies consistently identified
the following positions as relevant for finding variants with improved fitness: 15, 19, 22, 24, 36,
40, 46, 47, and 48. These positions were deemed important across various strategies, suggesting a
consensus on their significance for enhancing protein fitness.
GP-BO training on an enriched subset of double mutants
In view of recent findings on the improved performance of training models on subsets of exper-
imental data enriched for high fitness values [32], we decided to test the methods on a stratified
subset. This pool of double mutants was equivalent to the random subsets in size (2.5k variants),
but high-in-fitness variants were overrepresented. It was constructed by sampling 500 protein vari-
ants from each of the defined fitness ranges (see Methods 2.1), which means that 80 percent of the
mutants in this dataset had fitness values higher than the WT (W = 1).
When trained the same models on this subset (see Methods 2.1), we found that position 24 was
dramatically overrepresented in the randomly-sampled positions (see first row on the heatmap, Fig.
3.7). This indicated that this subset was highly enriched for this position. When investigated the
distributions of the different mutated sites in the train set of this enriched subset, position 24 was
present approximately 16 times more often than the other positions, as shown in Figure 3.8a.
3.3
GP integration in ProteusAI
To facilitate the adoption of the methods developed in this thesis by wet-lab scientists, we integrated
the GP Python library into ProteusAI. ProteusAI is a protein design and engineering software de-
veloped by Jonathan Funk as part of a joint research initiative between DTU Bioengineering and
DTU Biosustain (Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability at DTU). This package
provides tools for generating protein representations, training regression and classification mod-
els, structure-based protein design, and protein folding. The GP Regressor functionality was im-
plemented in both the package and the web application, which are currently under development.
Figure 3.9 illustrates the current layout of the app under development.
26
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:35==
(a) DMS pre-trained (b = 100)
(b) DMS pre-trained (b = 10)
(c) Zero-shot pre-trained (b = 100)
(d) Zero-shot pre-trained (b = 10)
(e) Not pre-trained (b = 100)
(f) Not pre-trained (b = 10)
Figure 3.3: Comparison of the MSE of double-mutant fitness predictions between pre-training
strategies. Each row uses a different pre-training dataset: DMS fitness values, transformed zero-
shot scores, or no pre-training. Each column corresponds to a different batch size: 10 variants per
round (left) or 100 variants per round (right). The number of considered variants is 2000.
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
27
==PAGE:36==
(a) DMS pre-trained (b = 100)
(b) DMS pre-trained (b = 10)
(c) Zero-shot pre-trained (b = 100)
(d) Zero-shot pre-trained (b = 10)
(e) Not pre-trained (b = 100)
(f) Not pre-trained (b = 10)
Figure 3.4: Comparison of the cumulative library improvement between pre-training strategies.
The y-axis shows the total number of variants with improved fitness (W > W(wild type) +
Std Dev) suggested for testing by the algorithm. Each row uses a different pre-training dataset:
DMS fitness values, transformed zero-shot scores, or no pre-training respectively. Each column
corresponds to a different batch size: 10 variants per round (left) or 100 variants per round (right).
The number of considered variants is 2000
28
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:37==
(a) DMS pre-trained. 10 points are added per round
(b) Zero-shot pre-trained. 10 points are added per round
(c) Not pre-trained. 10 points are added per round
Figure 3.6: Heatmaps showing how often each mutation site has been picked at the halfway point
of training. Each subfigure represents one of the pre-training conditions.
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
29
==PAGE:38==
Figure 3.7: Heatmaps showing how often each mutation site has been picked at the halfway point
of training for the enriched subset. Position 24 is picked almost exclusively, which is due to it
being overrepresented in the underlying dataset.
30
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:39==
(a) Enriched subset. More details on how this subset is generated can be found in Methods 2.7.2
(b) Randomly sampled subset
Figure 3.8: Distribution of mutated positions in the train set of GB1 double mutants. The top
panel shows the enriched subset and the bottom panel shows the randomly sampled subset. X-axis
displays the amino acid positions in the GB1 protein domain. Y-axis shows the number of times
each position is represented by one mutant in the subset. Number of variants in each subset: 2.5k.
More details on how these subsets are generated can be found in Methods 2.7.2.
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
31
==PAGE:40==
Figure 3.9: Screenshot of the current layout of the ProteusAI web application under develop-
ment by Jonathan Funk. GP is selected to perform regression on zero-shot scores for GB1 single-
mutants. A visualization of true and predicted y-values (fitness) is displayed to the user.
32
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:41==
4
Discussion
The goals of this study were to (a) explore the value of pre-training on single mutant zero-shot
scores to assist the prediction of experimental fitness values of second-order mutants; (b) inves-
tigate whether BO sampling strategies could aid the discovery of second-order variants with high
fitness values using the GB1 benchmark dataset to test our ML methods [7]; and (c) contribute to
the development of ProteusAI, a web application for protein engineering.
4.1
The effect of pre-training on zero-shot scores
DMS has traditionally been used to identify mutational effects on a large scale [5]. However, it
is expensive in terms of both time and resources, i.e. the cost of library is proportional to the
length of the protein. On the other side, recent studies have reported success in predicting single-
mutant zero-shot scores that correlate well with experimental measurements of protein function for
a diverse set of proteins [19]. This observation suggests that zero-shot scores could be effectively
used to predict the functional effects of sequence variations [19]. Given these findings by Meier
et al. [19] and the high costs associated with DMS, it seems worth exploring whether zero-shot
scores can serve as a cost-effective alternative to experimentally derived functional screens.
With the aim of exploring the trade-off between pre-training of GPs on experimental and zero-
shot-inferred single-mutant data, three pre-training conditions were considered (Fig. 2.1). Two of
these conditions (pre-training on zero-shot scores and absence of pre-training) simulate a real-life
scenario where no prior fitness data is available for a target protein’s single mutants. As a third
pre-training condition, GPs were also pre-trained on 80 percent of all experimental single-mutant
fitness data, to assess the observed added value of conducting these time-intensive experiments on
single mutants in terms of gained predictive accuracy for second-order mutants downstream.
When looking at the parameter optimization of the two pre-trained GPs (on DMS and zero-shot
scores), the loss (NMLL) is more stable in the model trained on zero-shot scores (green line on Fig.
3.2). This can be primarily driven by the lower level of noise associated to the zero-shot scores data
- compared to the experimentally generated data. When studying the distribution of these y-values,
the DMS fitness measurements showed more dispersion than the transformed zero-shot values (see
Fig. A.3). This is somewhat expected, as DMS screenings are complex laboratory protocols with
multiple sequential steps where measurement errors unavoidably accumulate [5].
Once checked for the convergence of the differentially pre-trained GP models, each of these GPs
were then fine-tuned with several rounds of training on experimental double mutants’ data (see
Fig. 2.1). The motivation for this was to study the effect of pre-training on the models’ ability to
(a) accurately predict double-mutant fitness, and (b) efficiently find the best variants in the double
mutant training set.
Regarding (a), contrary to Meier et al.’s observations [19], our zero-shot pre-trained models did
not show any advantage in predicting double mutant fitness compared to models in the other pre-
training conditions (DMS and not pre-trained). This led us to look at the correlation between
these variables for this GB1 dataset [7]. When examining the relationship between single-mutant
DMS fitness values and zero-shot scores for the GB1 domain, however, no correlation was found
(Fig. A.1). This result partly explains why pre-training models on zero-shot scores did not aid in
predicting fitness in downstream analysis (see Fig. 3.3).
The observed lack of correlation between the experimental DSM and zero-shots y-values may
be related to the fact that substitutions at position 24 strongly drive the fitness distribution in this
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
33
==PAGE:42==
particular dataset (see Fig. 3.8a). In this work, zero-shot scores are generated from the logits of the
ESM-2 PLM (see Methods 2.2.2). These models learn the context-dependent underlying principles
of amino acid substitutions through an attention mechanism [17] [18]. Nonetheless, it could be
the case that in situations where only one or very few specific sites determinine almost all the
observed fitness values, the principles learned by the PLMs are unsuited to measuring mutational
effects. Consequently, ESM-2 based zero-shot scores would not be a good proxy for fitness in such
scenarios.
When evaluating the differently-trained models’ ability to find improve variants more quickly (b);
the model that was not pre-trained on any single-mutants’ data proved to be the most effective.
It identified the top-performing variants for GB1 in the least number of lab iterations 3.5. Inter-
estingly, this indicates that the pre-training does not benefit the efficiency in which the GP finds
the best double mutants. Altogether, these results point towards the trade-off of conducting DMS
experiments or computing zero-shot scores was not worthwhile in this case.
Regarding the observation that DMS pre-trained models did not outperform non-pre-trained mod-
els in identifying high-fitness double mutants, we hypothesized the data in the random subset may
be too abundant in extremely low fitness variants. Wittmann et al. noted that reducing the inclu-
sion of these holes, or minimally informative data points, can enhance ML-guided navigation of
protein fitness landscapes [32]. Thus, it seems reasonable to consider that pre-training on many
close-to-zero fitness values might slightly impair the model’s ability to predict top-performing
double mutants.
A potential solution to this sparse fitness data issue would be their proposed ”focused library”
approach, where the variants used for training are selected from a likely-functional diversity pool of
mutants, instead of drawn from the full combinatorial landscape [32]. Another alternative suitable
for cases where zero-shot scores and experimental measurements are correlated might involve
using these zero-shot modeling approaches to reduce the presence of holes in the training data [32]
[33].
Following the directions provided by Wittmann et al. [32], the pipeline was tested on an equivalent-
size stratified subset of double mutants (see Methods: 2.7.2). This subset was enriched on high-
fitness mutants, as it contained 2,000 protein variants with observed values over the WT fitness’
(W = 1). Interestingly, by using this factor to filter out close-to-zero fitness variants, the dis-
tribution of positions in the train set was drastically affected. Position 24 was dramatically over-
represented in the train set of this enriched subset, making the models across sampling strategies
and pre-training conditions completely biased towards selecting variants with mutations on this
site. This is clearly shown in Figure 3.8a, which illustrates the distribution of the different GB1
sites (1-56) in the train set of this enriched subset of double mutants.
Not surprisingly, this finding was in accordance with what Olsen et al.’s experimental results:
mutating position 24 was particularly relevant for fitness (A24E is a highly adaptive mutation)
and it is involved in both positive and negative epistatic interactions [7]. This would explain why
this site is hugely over-represented, despite our strategy to stratifying the pool by ranges of fitness
values (see Methods: 2.1)
4.2
Value of ML-guided sampling strategies for the identification of
high-fitness second-order variants
When faced with the task of identifying high-fitness variants of double mutants, models trained on
guided sampling strategies consistently outperformed those trained on randomly selected points
from the subset pool of double mutants (see Section 3.2.2). This finding aligns with recent studies
that combine ML-guided sampling with DE for more efficient protein sequence design. Hawkins
34
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:43==
et al. demonstrated that ranking-based predictive strategies led to empirically improved fitness
prediction performance [20]. In their study, surrogate models were trained on batches of 10 se-
quences, with Thompson sampling outperforming both greedy and Expected Improvement (EI)
sampling. Siivola et al. recommended Thompson sampling for problems with high dimensionality
or large batch sizes [34]. Instead of GPs, Hawkins et al. utilized convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [20].
Similarly, recent work by Zong et al. explored alternative surrogate models to GPs by using CNNs.
They employed Batch Bayesian Optimization to optimize protein design and concluded that scal-
able models such as ensemble CNNs provide a competitive alternative with the added benefit of
faster computation times. This makes them a more suitable choice for large-scale protein sequence
design problems [13]. Zong et al. used the Knowledge Gradient (KG) acquisition function, which
further underscores the potential of advanced ML-guided sampling strategies in identifying high-
fitness variants efficiently.
In this work, the greedy strategy outperformed other sampling strategies in efficiently improving
the library. This suggests that acquisition functions computing rankings around GP uncertainty
quantification may not be necessary. This may be due to fixing the GP mean to W = 1 (see Meth-
ods: 2.5). By imposing this high mean prior, the model’s predictions are biased towards higher
values, reducing the overall spread of the uncertainty bounds around this mean [35]. Consequently,
this would reduce the model’s motivation to explore and the influence of acquisition functions that
rely on uncertainty for exploration [21]. In our case, these are EI and UCB (see Methods 2.6).
A dynamic mean would result in wider uncertainty bounds, encouraging exploration and making
other uncertainty-based sampling strategies, like Expected Improvement (EI) or Upper Confidence
Bound, more flexible. The fixed mean thus biases the model towards exploitation of known high-
value regions, which may explain the observed comparable performance between the greedy strat-
egy and uncertainty-influenced acquisition functions (EI and UCB in our case). As a result of the
imposed bias on the mean, greedy sampling becomes more effective in identifying high-fitness
variants, despite the DMS data containing many low values.
Interestingly, although we don’t see large differences between the predicted performance of guided-
sampling-trained models compared to models trained on random variants in terms of MSE (Fig.
3.3), we do observe notable differences in their abilities to find improved variants more quickly
(Fig. 3.2.2). In short, the models trained with BO strategies are not better at predicting y-values
than their randomly trained counterparts. The similar values of MSE indicate the error associated
with their predictions when regressing to a y-value is around the same. Nonetheless, the BO-guided
models showed to systematically find improved variants more quickly.
When taken together, these results may seem intriguing. Yet, an explanation for this would be that
the BO-guided models are learning specifically the topologies in the landscape with high fitness,
but overlook the valleys (regions of low fitness) (See Fig. 1.2). This would explain why their
general predictive ability is not better than randomly-trained models when assessed on the full
test set. By focusing on learning from the high-fitness areas of the landscape, they are reasonably
able to find improved variants more quickly, although this comes with the cost of a generally high
predictive error.
4.3
Ability to find improved variants in fewer lab iterations
All ML-guided sampling strategies in this study preferably selected the same set of mutated residues
when trained in batches with double mutants’ experimental data. This pointed towards positions
15, 19, 22, 24, 36, 40, 46, 47, and 48 as relevant for highest-fitness. Notably, only one of these
preferentially picked positions (site 40) coincided with the four sites identified by the researchers
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
35
==PAGE:44==
as having the most significant examples of positive epistasis among all pairwise combinations in
GB1 double mutants: V39, D40, G41, and V54 [36].
Olson et al. focused specifically on investigating epistasis, where combined mutations have a
greater positive effect than their independent effects [7]. In contrast, this work tracked the posi-
tions selected by the algorithm during sampling with different strategies, treating positions as in-
dependent of each other. For every double mutant, the mutated positions of each sequence (two for
double mutants) were counted independently to determine which positions were most frequently
selected by each sampling strategy. Thus, our method does not explicitly study epistasis, but in-
stead identifies positions that are repeatedly selected as relevant for high-fitness phenotypes by
the different sampling strategies (see Fig. 3.6). The distribution of the different mutated positions
within each subset train set can be found in the Appendix (Fig. 3.8.
Among the sites identified in the random subsets of this study, positions 22, 24, 36, and 40 coincide
with sites mentioned as important by Olson et al. [7]. Position 40 was highlighted in both studies,
suggesting its critical role in the fitness landscape of GB1. Substitutions at D40 were experimen-
tally found to be highly beneficial. For instance, the highest fitness double mutant including K4P
is in combination with the stabilizing and beneficial mutation D40Y, which increases the observed
fitness approximately fourfold compared to the expected fitness.
Additionally, positions 22 and 36, both located on the surface of the -helix, were significant for
their interactions. Olson et al. highlighted that residues 32 and 36 on the -helix are in positions to
interact (i, i+4) and are adjacent to the binding surface, with dramatic positive epistasis occurring
between Q32D/E and substitutions for Asp36 [7].
The identification of position 24 in this work aligns with the researchers’ findings that A24E is the
most beneficial single mutation, yielding a 5.5-fold better affinity than the WT GB1 [7]. Although
A24 was not highlighted as one of the most significant examples of positive epistasis, it proved
to be crucial for fitness [7]. Furthermore, the participation of A24 in both positive and negative
epistatic interactions underscores the importance of distinguishing epistatic effects from the over-
all impact on functional fitness. Frequently, high fitness is driven by epistatic events mediated
by molecular interactions between residues, but top-fitness variants can exhibit different types of
epistasis between individual residues. Additionally, higher-order epistasis, involving interactions
among three or more mutations, further complicates the fitness landscape [36]. Thus, studying the
dependency between mutational effects is essential for accurately mapping the fitness landscape
of proteins, emphasizing the value of methods for capturing complex interactions on higher-order
mutant experimental data.
4.3.1
Training on variants enriched in fitness
Finally, we opted to create an enriched subset of experimental data, motivated by recent findings
that such subsets can enhance model training performance [32]. This subset consisted of 2,500
double mutants, specifically selected to overrepresent high-fitness variants (see Methods 2.1).
When studied which positions were preferentially picked by each sampling strategy half-way train-
ing, position 24 showed to be massively overrepresented in the randomly-sampled positions (Fig.
3.7). This was odd, since the distribution of positions selected by this sampling condition should
reflect the distribution of the sites in the train set. When looked plotted the number of times each
position was present in the double mutant enriched set (Fig. 3.8a), we confirmed that position 24
was more than fifteen times more represented than other sites. These findings were in coherence
with the experimental observations by Olsen et al.[7]: (a) mutation A24E being highly beneficial,
(b) position 24 participating in many both positive and negative epistatic interactions.
In addition to aligning with wet-lab studies, these findings highlight the significance of position
24 as the primary determinant of fitness in GB1 variants. This observation supports our hypothe-
36
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:45==
sis on why zero-shot scores do not correlate with experimental values for this protein domain, as
previously discussed (see subsection above 4.1). Consequently, while zero-shot scores might not
be suitable for scenarios where a single site predominantly influences mutational effects on func-
tion, they may still be valuable in contexts where mutation effects result from interactions across
multiple positions, as documented in the literature [19].
4.4
Limitations and future directions for this work
4.4.1
Dataset and data usage
Despite the interesting results obtained in this study, several limitations should be acknowledged,
along with potential future directions to enhance the robustness and applicability of our findings.
A noticeable constraint of this work is that the pipeline was only tested with GB1, which is a
56 amino acid long protein binding domain. This dataset was selected because labeled fitness
data on both single and double mutant available, which is uncommon given the high cost of these
systematic functional assays [7]. Nonetheless, this limits the scope of our findings.
To assess the applicability of this methodology, it would be needed to validate it with full-length
proteins, as well as with other types of proteins, such as enzymes. It would be particularly useful
to test it for proteins whose DMS scores are known to correlate with experimental values [19].
Three main facts associated with this dataset limit the applicability of our results: (a) It is a protein
domain in isolation from the rest of the context of the protein; (b) single-mutant zero-shot scores
showed not to correlate with experimental fitness values; and (c) position 24 seems to be driving
the fitness values of mutations in this domain further limit the scope of our results. Expanding the
scope to include a variety of proteins could significantly enhance the generalization and practical
relevance of our findings.
Another worth-mentioning limitation is the reduced size of the double-mutant subsets used to fine-
tune the GPs (see 2.1). The size of these subsets was set to 2,500 variants to (a) be equivalent to
the stratified subset, enriched in high-performing variants (since we wanted to compare them); and
(b), given the running time limitations of our implementation.
(a) Size of subsets Our approach of making a stratified subset constrained the size of this subset
because there were few variants in the highest categories of fitness. The absence of more variants in
the upper ranges was the reason behind sampling only 500 variants per fitness range (see Methods
2.1.).
To improve the reliability and reproducibility of the results, it would be necessary to conduct these
analyses on a much larger subset of the data, incorporating cross-validation to assess and mitigate
over-fitting. This approach would provide a more comprehensive evaluation of the methods and
demonstrate their applicability for broader datasets.
4.4.2
GP and BO
The runtime limitations of this pipeline can be in part addressed by implementing computational
practices to make the code more efficient, such as computational parallelization. One of the main
computational bottlenecks of this analysis is the GP scaling badly with the dimension of the data
(we are using 1280-dimensional vectors). For this reason, CNNs have been used as surrogate
models as an alternative to GPs that provides faster computation [13] [20].
A different computational burden inherent from the BO approach is the step of ranking all unseen
points by their acquisition values on every training iteration. This becomes particularly problematic
for studying larger proteins, since combinatorial space scales drastically with protein length (see
Methods: 2.3) and that the computation of the inverse matrix scales cubic in the number of data
points. To address this, Yang et al. introduced the concept of a ”focused library” [14]. This is
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
37
==PAGE:46==
a specialized subset of protein sequences that has been strategically narrowed down to enhance
the efficiency of Bayesian Optimization (BO) processes. This pool of variants is constructed by
selecting sequences that meet a certain threshold of predicted values, based on regression model
outputs [14]. The focused library is designed to include only those variants that are most likely to
exhibit desirable properties or high fitness, thereby reducing the computational load and focusing
experimental efforts on the most promising candidates. In their web service for recommending
protein libraries, a focused library is generated for queries where more than four positions aimed
to be mutated at once to downscale the combinatorial space over which BO operates [14].
In terms of GP optimization, the current study utilized the one kernel function (RBF). Exploring
different kernel functions could offer improvements, as different kernels are better suited to cap-
turing individual underlying patterns and complexities of the data.[24]. The choice of the kernel
influences modelling of the objective function [21]. Furthermore, it could be advantageous to
combine different kernels such as a kernel representing the protein sequence (i.e. the ESM embed-
dings) similarity and a kernel representing 3D structure similarity, which would enrich the prior
with expert knowledge from different domains.
Furthermore, the parameter optimization of the GPs (kernel variance, length scale and noise) could
be further refined. We optimize the value of each of these GP parameters across all dimensions.
This may be an issue if different dimensions show distinct behaviors between them. In these cases,
one single value of the parameter would not be able to capture the patterns in the data correctly.
Instead, it is possible to optimize the GP parameters per-dimension, which might yield better per-
formance. Introducing this flexibility would come with the disadvantage of having more hyper-
parameters to tune, especially since the protein representations are particularly high-dimensional.
To tackle this, an approach could involve dimensionality reduction techniques like Principal Com-
ponent Analysis (PCA) followed by the optimization of GP parameters per principal component
dimension.
Additionally, experimentally testing whether fixing the mean of the GP in W = 1 is better than
optimizing it during training seems relevant for future decision-making on this matter. Since the
value of the mean influences the acquisition functions’ outputs, it could be relevant to test this new
approach with a wider range of the exploitation-exploration trade-off parameters for EI and UCB.
4.4.3
ProteusAI integration and visualizations
Additionally, visualizing uncertainty as a function of location (residue ID) could offer valuable
insights. For instance, investigating whether this uncertainty correlates with sequence entropy
derived from LLMs could reveal new aspects of the model’s behavior and its relationship with
biological sequence variability.
Finally, integrating BO methods into the software ProteusAI would be valuable for the users of
the app. Additionally, visualizations to represent the uncertainty in relation to residue IDs, could
provide a more intuitive understanding of the model’s predictions and uncertainties. This visual-
ization approach would not only aid in interpreting the results, but also in identifying areas where
the model’s predictions are less certain, guiding further experimental validations.
Altogether, these future directions aim to address the current limitations and enhance the robust-
ness, interpretability, and wider applicability of our ML models, ultimately leading to more reliable
and insightful results in the field of protein engineering and design.
38
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:47==
Bibliography
[1]
David Patsch et al. “LibGENiE – A bioinformatic pipeline for the design of information-
enriched enzyme libraries”. en. In: Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 21
(2023), pp. 4488–4496. ISSN: 20010370. DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2023.09.013. URL: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2001037023003252 (visited on 03/25/2024).
[2]
Jan-Ytzen van der Meer, Lieuwe Biewenga, and Gerrit J. Poelarends. “The Generation and
Exploitation of Protein Mutability Landscapes for Enzyme Engineering”. en. In: Chem-
BioChem 17.19 (2016). _eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/cbic.201600382,
pp. 1792–1799. ISSN: 1439-7633. DOI: 10.1002/cbic.201600382. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cbic.201600382 (visited on 03/25/2024).
[3]
Kevin K. Yang, Zachary Wu, and Frances H. Arnold. “Machine-learning-guided directed
evolution for protein engineering”. en. In: Nature Methods 16.8 (Aug. 2019). Publisher:
Nature Publishing Group, pp. 687–694. ISSN: 1548-7105. DOI: 10.1038/s41592- 019-
0496 - 6. URL: https : / / www . nature . com / articles / s41592 - 019 - 0496 - 6 (visited on
03/25/2024).
[4]
Jacob D. Mehlhoff and Marc Ostermeier. “Chapter Nine - Biological fitness landscapes by
deep mutational scanning”. In: Methods in Enzymology. Ed. by Dan S. Tawfik. Vol. 643.
Enzyme Engineering and Evolution: General Methods. Academic Press, Jan. 2020, pp. 203–
224. DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2020.04.023. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0076687920301518 (visited on 05/30/2024).
[5]
Huijin Wei and Xianghua Li. “Deep mutational scanning: A versatile tool in systematically
mapping genotypes to phenotypes”. In: Frontiers in Genetics 14 (Jan. 2023), p. 1087267.
ISSN: 1664-8021. DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1087267. URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC9878224/ (visited on 05/30/2024).
[6]
Chloe Hsu et al. “Learning protein fitness models from evolutionary and assay-labeled
data”. en. In: Nature Biotechnology 40.7 (July 2022). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group,
pp. 1114–1122. ISSN: 1546-1696. DOI: 10.1038/s41587- 021- 01146- 5. URL: https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41587-021-01146-5 (visited on 03/27/2024).
[7]
C. Anders Olson, Nicholas C. Wu, and Ren Sun. “A comprehensive biophysical description
of pairwise epistasis throughout an entire protein domain”. eng. In: Current biology: CB
24.22 (Nov. 2014), pp. 2643–2651. ISSN: 1879-0445. DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2014.09.072.
[8]
Michael S. Packer and David R. Liu. “Methods for the directed evolution of proteins”. en.
In: Nature Reviews Genetics 16.7 (July 2015). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 379–
394. ISSN: 1471-0064. DOI: 10.1038/nrg3927. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
nrg3927 (visited on 05/30/2024).
[9]
Zachary Wu et al. “Machine learning-assisted directed protein evolution with combinatorial
libraries - Correction”. en. In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116.18 (Apr.
2019), pp. 8852–8858. ISSN: 0027-8424, 1091-6490. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1901979116.
URL: https://pnas.org/doi/full/10.1073/pnas.1901979116 (visited on 03/25/2024).
[10]
Jason Yang et al. “DeCOIL: Optimization of Degenerate Codon Libraries for Machine Learning-
Assisted Protein Engineering”. In: ACS Synthetic Biology 12.8 (Aug. 2023). Publisher: Amer-
ican Chemical Society, pp. 2444–2454. DOI: 10.1021/acssynbio.3c00301. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.3c00301 (visited on 03/25/2024).
[11]
Pascal Notin et al. “Machine learning for functional protein design”. en. In: Nature Biotech-
nology 42.2 (Feb. 2024). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 216–228. ISSN: 1546-
1696. DOI: 10.1038/s41587-024-02127-0. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41587-024-02127-0 (visited on 03/25/2024).
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
39
==PAGE:48==
[12]
Jason Yang, Francesca-Zhoufan Li, and Frances H. Arnold. “Opportunities and Challenges
for Machine Learning-Assisted Enzyme Engineering”. In: ACS Central Science 10.2 (Feb.
2024), pp. 226–241. ISSN: 2374-7943. DOI: 10.1021/acscentsci.3c01275. URL: https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10906252/ (visited on 05/31/2024).
[13]
Chuanjiao Zong. Protein Sequence Design with Batch Bayesian Optimisation. arXiv:2303.10429
[cs]. Mar. 2023. DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.2303.10429. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.
10429 (visited on 05/27/2024).
[14]
Likun Yang et al. “STAR: A Web Server for Assisting Directed Protein Evolution with Ma-
chine Learning”. en. In: ACS Omega 8.47 (Nov. 2023), pp. 44751–44756. ISSN: 2470-1343,
2470-1343. DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.3c04832. URL: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/
acsomega.3c04832 (visited on 03/23/2024).
[15]
David Harding-Larsen et al. Protein Representations: Encoding Biological Information for
Machine Learning in Biocatalysis. en. Apr. 2024. DOI: 10.26434/chemrxiv-2024-7hwf7.
URL: https://chemrxiv.org/engage/chemrxiv/article-details/660bf8839138d23161f4abbe
(visited on 05/28/2024).
[16]
Dan Ofer, Nadav Brandes, and Michal Linial. “The language of proteins: NLP, machine
learning & protein sequences”. In: Computational and Structural Biotechnology Journal 19
(Jan. 2021), pp. 1750–1758. ISSN: 2001-0370. DOI: 10.1016/j.csbj.2021.03.022. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2001037021000945 (visited on
03/25/2024).
[17]
Ashish Vaswani et al. Attention Is All You Need. arXiv:1706.03762 [cs]. Aug. 2023. DOI:
10 .48550 / arXiv . 1706 . 03762. URL: http: / /arxiv .org /abs /1706 .03762 (visited on
05/28/2024).
[18]
Zeming Lin et al. “Language models of protein sequences at the scale of evolution enable
accurate structure prediction”. en. In: (July 2022).
[19]
Joshua Meier et al. Language models enable zero-shot prediction of the effects of mutations
on protein function. en. Pages: 2021.07.09.450648 Section: New Results. Nov. 2021. DOI:
10.1101/2021.07.09.450648. URL: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.07.
09.450648v2 (visited on 03/27/2024).
[20]
Alex Hawkins-Hooker, Paul Duckworth, and Oliver Bent. “Preferential Bayesian Optimi-
sation for Protein Design with Ranking-Based Fitness Predictors”. en. In: ().
[21]
Eric Brochu, Vlad M. Cora, and Nando de Freitas. A Tutorial on Bayesian Optimization
of Expensive Cost Functions, with Application to Active User Modeling and Hierarchical
Reinforcement Learning. en. arXiv:1012.2599 [cs]. Dec. 2010. URL: http://arxiv.org/
abs/1012.2599 (visited on 05/25/2024).
[22]
William M Bolstad and James M Curran. Introduction to Bayesian Statistics. en. Third Edi-
tion. John Wiley & Sons, 2017.
[23]
Rens van de Schoot et al. “Bayesian statistics and modelling”. en. In: Nature Reviews Meth-
ods Primers 1.1 (Jan. 2021). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 1–26. ISSN: 2662-
8449. DOI: 10.1038/s43586-020-00001-2. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s43586-020-00001-2 (visited on 04/22/2024).
[24]
Jochen Görtler, Rebecca Kehlbeck, and Oliver Deussen. “A Visual Exploration of Gaussian
Processes”. en. In: Distill 4.4 (Apr. 2019), e17. ISSN: 2476-0757. DOI: 10.23915/distill.
00017. URL: https://distill.pub/2019/visual-exploration-gaussian-processes (visited on
05/28/2024).
[25]
Marc Peter Deisenroth, A Aldo Faisal, and Cheng Soon Ong. Mathematics for Machine
Learning. en. 2020.
[26]
Jacob Gardner et al. “GPyTorch: Blackbox Matrix-Matrix Gaussian Process Inference with
GPU Acceleration”. en. In: ().
40
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:49==
[27]
Fabian Pedregosa et al. “Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python”. en. In: MACHINE
LEARNING IN PYTHON ().
[28]
Marshall Copeland et al. “Microsoft Azure and Cloud Computing”. en. In: Microsoft Azure:
Planning, Deploying, and Managing Your Data center in the Cloud. Ed. by Marshall Copeland
et al. Berkeley, CA: Apress, 2015, pp. 3–26. ISBN: 978-1-4842-1043-7. DOI: 10.1007/978-
1-4842-1043-7_1. URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-1043-7_1 (visited on
05/24/2024).
[29]
John D. Hunter. “Matplotlib: A 2D Graphics Environment”. In: Computing in Science &
Engineering 9.3 (2007), pp. 90–95. ISSN: 1521-9615. DOI: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55.
URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4160265/ (visited on 05/24/2024).
[30]
Michael L. Waskom. “seaborn: statistical data visualization”. en. In: Journal of Open Source
Software 6.60 (Apr. 2021), p. 3021. ISSN: 2475-9066. DOI: 10.21105/joss.03021. URL:
https://joss.theoj.org/papers/10.21105/joss.03021 (visited on 05/24/2024).
[31]
Charles R. Harris et al. “Array programming with NumPy”. en. In: Nature 585.7825 (Sept.
2020). Publisher: Nature Publishing Group, pp. 357–362. ISSN: 1476-4687. DOI: 10.1038/
s41586- 020- 2649- 2. URL: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586- 020- 2649- 2
(visited on 05/24/2024).
[32]
Bruce J. Wittmann, Yisong Yue, and Frances H. Arnold. “Informed training set design en-
ables efficient machine learning-assisted directed protein evolution”. en. In: Cell Systems
12.11 (Nov. 2021), 1026–1045.e7. ISSN: 24054712. DOI: 10.1016/j.cels.2021.07.008.
URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2405471221002866 (visited on
03/24/2024).
[33]
Neil Thomas and Lucy J. Colwell. “Minding the gaps: The importance of navigating holes
in protein fitness landscapes”. en. In: Cell Systems 12.11 (Nov. 2021), pp. 1019–1020. ISSN:
24054712. DOI: 10.1016/j.cels.2021.10.004. URL: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S2405471221004154 (visited on 05/31/2024).
[34]
Eero Siivola et al. “Preferential Batch Bayesian Optimization”. In: 2021 IEEE 31st Inter-
national Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing (MLSP) (Oct. 2021). Con-
ference Name: 2021 IEEE 31st International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal
Processing (MLSP) ISBN: 9781728163383 Place: Gold Coast, Australia Publisher: IEEE,
pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/MLSP52302.2021.9596494. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/9596494/ (visited on 05/27/2024).
[35]
Seung-gyu Hwang et al. “How to use GP: Effects of the mean function and hyperparameter
selection on Gaussian Process regression”. en. In: Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle
Physics 2023.02 (Feb. 2023). arXiv:2206.15081 [astro-ph], p. 014. ISSN: 1475-7516. DOI:
10.1088/1475-7516/2023/02/014. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2206.15081 (visited on
05/31/2024).
[36]
Nicholas C Wu et al. “Adaptation in protein fitness landscapes is facilitated by indirect
paths”. In: eLife 5 (July 2016). Ed. by Richard A Neher. Publisher: eLife Sciences Publica-
tions, Ltd, e16965. ISSN: 2050-084X. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.16965. URL: https://doi.org/
10.7554/eLife.16965 (visited on 04/03/2024).
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
41
==PAGE:50==
42
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:51==
A
Appendix
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure A.1: Correlation between DMS experimental fitness values and zero-shot scores for GB1
single mutants. Every point in the scatter plot corresponds to one variant (with one mutation each).
X-axis shows zero-shot transformed values. Y-axis represents DMS scores. In both axis, the value
of fitness score equal to one represents the fitness value of the WT. Pearson coefficient correlation
is shown in the top right corner.
Figure A.2: Distributions of DMS fitness experimental values: (a) single and (b) double mutants.
The X-axis displays fitness scores. The y-axis shows the Probability Density Function.
44
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.3: Distributions of zero-shot scores for single mutants: (a) non-transformed, (b) trans-
formed. The X-axis displays fitness scores. The y-axis shows the Probability Density Function.
The linear transformation applied to transform zero-shot values is described in section 2.2.2
Machine learning-guided library design and optimization for protein engineering
45
==PAGE:54==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet, Building 220
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.biosustain.dtu.dk
