==PAGE:1==
Securing the Internet of Things
Data Analysis, Vulnerability Discovery, and Clus­
tering of IoT and OT data
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Securing the Internet of Things
Data Analysis, Vulnerability Discovery, and Clustering of IoT and OT data
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Ioannis Milopoulos
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.byg.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Section for Cybersecurity, De­
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Master of Science in Computer Science
and Engineering.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of Computer Science.
Ioannis Milopoulos ­ s223110
Signature
Date
ii
Securing the Internet of Things
14 - 06 - 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The adoption of Operational Technology (OT) and the Internet of Things (IoT) is becom­
ing broader and broader nowadays, resulting in rapid growth in the number of connected
devices. Devices that had be designed to be operated in isolated environments are now
trying to be a part of a larger ecosystem that has to be connected to the internet. While
businesses see this transition as an opportunity that will unleash a lot of potential pro­
ductivity and efficiency, they overlook the potential new security threads that are being
established. This thesis aims to identify security exploits and vulnerabilities, while deriv­
ing insights, by applying data analysis techniques to the gathered information. To further
enhance the identification of vulnerabilities, we incorporated machine learning techniques,
and more precisely, clustering and classification algorithms, to classify and organize the
data. In addition, we attempted to discover patterns indicating possible vulnerabilities,
using a wide range of data analytics methods, namely predictive and explanatory anal­
ysis in combination with regression and clustering analysis, to provide a comprehensive
knowledge of the security posture of IoT and OT devices. Utilizing all those techniques,
our main contribution is to establish a holistic view of security vulnerabilities in IoT and
OT devices, building vague foundations for preventive security measures and risk reduc­
tion while creating a more robust way to identify vulnerabilities. Our anticipated outcome
of this work is to provide a holistic understanding of the security flaws, and vulnerabilities
within the IoT and OT domain, and create the groundwork that would assist in categorizing
and mitigating potential risks in future works on networks of interconnected devices.
Securing the Internet of Things
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Completing this thesis has been a challenging and rewarding journey, and I would like to
express my sincere gratitude to the following individuals for their invaluable support:
Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Computer Science, for his valuable guidance, expertise and insights that helped form
this thesis.
Ricardo Maria Yaben Lopezosa, PhD Student, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science for his valuable insights, our discussions and encouragement through­
out the making of this thesis.
I would also like to thank my family, especially my parents and my brother, for the daily
support and trust they have shown me over the years, as nothing would have been possi­
ble without them. Finally, special thanks to the one who has been by my side throughout
this time, the moments we shared and the support during this journey.
iv
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
What are IoT and OT?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Protocols
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Internet­Level Scanning Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.4
Machine Learning and Data Analysis Tools
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Related Work
13
3.1
Analysis and Classification on Network Traffic Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Analysis and Classification on Shodan data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4
Methodology
19
4.1
Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3
Classification & Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.4
Ethical Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5
Implementation
31
5.1
BACnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.2
MQTT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
5.3
Modbus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4
OPC UA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.5
DNP3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.6
RTPS & DDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6
Results
41
6.1
BACnet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.2
MQTT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
6.3
Modbus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
6.4
OPC UA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
6.5
DNP3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
6.6
Data Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
7
Discussion
71
7.1
Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
7.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
7.3
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
8
Conclusion
75
Bibliography
77
Securing the Internet of Things
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In recent years, the number of devices requiring internet connectivity to fully function has
increased rapidly. Over the past decade, the total number of IoT devices alone has surged
to over 17 billion [1], marking an almost 1000% increase during that period, with projec­
tions indicating this number could reach 30 billion. Concurrently, the attack rates on IoT
and OT devices have followed a similar trend, as these devices increasingly become tar­
gets for malware and exploits [2]. As the attack surface expands, so do the opportunities
for successful attacks. Devices that were never intended to be publicly connected or
are misconfigured are now exposed, creating easy targets for exploitation. Their nature
positions them in a vulnerable spot, making them relatively easy to exploit while having
a considerable impact, as these are usually limited resource/low­performance devices
used in a wide range of services, from small homes to large industrial plants. Further­
more, their role in critical infrastructure across a broad spectrum of services necessitates
new defence strategies.
While smart devices aim to enhance our daily lives with their unparalleled convenience
and efficiency, they also represent a growing concern regarding their security levels. Many
IoT and OT devices have been designed with specific purposes in mind. The level of pub­
lic exposure of these devices depends on their intended use. OT devices were mostly
designed to operate within an “air­gapped” environment, focusing on efficient communi­
cation within an isolated network. Many of them can operate standalone, while others are
meant to be part of an ecosystem, either shielded from external traffic with firewalls and
authentication mechanisms or completely cut off from it. However, there are numerous
instances of devices deployed in public, misconfigured, or lacking any protection [3].
While smart home appliances and devices are becoming widely available and accessible
to everyone, they are not yet controlling sensitive infrastructure. The digital transformation
of industrial businesses presents a more critical landscape, relying on industrial networks
and remote control of physical equipment. A common characteristic of this transforma­
tion is the exposure of normally isolated networks to the internet. Protocols historically
designed for local use, such as Modbus, BACnet, and DNP3, are often publicly exposed
to the internet. This behavior, while not inherently correct or incorrect, is certainly concern­
ing when it involves factories and plants handling sensitive equipment, such as nuclear
plants or energy grids.
This thesis aims to create a safer, more aware network of connected devices. We will con­
duct thorough data analysis to identify security exploits and vulnerabilities while deriving
insights from the gathered dataset. Additionally, we will perform clustering and classifica­
tion on our data to identify the characteristics that label devices as vulnerable or not. Our
results aim to uncover unique patterns and features that distinguish vulnerable devices
from the rest. This information will be made available to businesses to help raise their
awareness and improve their security measures.
Firstly, it is important to explore ways to identify a log as suspicious, so we can further
analyze it later to confirm the suspicion. A holistic understanding of the security flaws
and vulnerabilities within the IoT and OT domain is necessary. Extensive data analysis
and clustering will help identify vulnerabilities in a systematic and comprehensive way, as
opposed to existing methods that focus either on IoT protocols or individual OT ones. Uti­
lizing these techniques, we aim to establish foundations for preventive security measures
Securing the Internet of Things
1
==PAGE:10==
and risk reduction while creating a more robust way to identify vulnerabilities.
Using data gathered from ZGrab and Shodan scans for exposed or misconfigured devices
on the most popular and widely adopted IoT and OT protocols, namely MQTT, AMQP,
CoAP, XMPP, Modbus, BACnet, TR­069, OPC UA, RTPS, and DNP3, this thesis aims to
answer the research question:
RQ: How can security vulnerabilities in IoT and OT devices be identified, and why
are classification and clustering algorithms the most suitable approach? Identifying
a device as vulnerable is more complex than a simple binary approach where a device
is either classified as vulnerable or not based on a single condition. Characterizing a
device as vulnerable requires advanced pattern recognition techniques that can analyze
and correlate various attributes and features to confidently determine whether a device is
safe or not. This type of analysis demands sophisticated machine­learning approaches
capable of producing complex correlations within a dataset. To better understand the
motivation behind our approach and identify the ideal method for conducting this study,
we have broken down our primary research question into a subset of specific research
questions:
RQ1: What trends or patterns can be observed in the frequency of vulnerabilities detected
by Shodan and ZGrab?
RQ2: How can data analysis techniques be applied to Shodan and ZGrab data to identify
potential security vulnerabilities, misconfigurations, or weaknesses in network devices
and services?
RQ3: What machine learning algorithms are effective for detecting security vulnerabilities
and abnormal behaviour in data collected by Shodan and ZGrab?
RQ4: Can clustering techniques be used to group similar network devices and services
based on their characteristics and security posture?
RQ5: What is the impact of identified vulnerabilities and security issues detected through
Shodan and ZGrab data on organizational networks and internet­connected devices?
2
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:11==
2
Background
As our reliance on digital connectivity increases, the number of internet­connected de­
vices, which form the vast ecosystem known as the Internet of Things (IoT), continues
to rise. Understanding the foundational elements that govern these connected devices is
crucial to further jump into Operational Technology (OT). In this chapter, we will explore the
differences between OT and IoT devices and explain why our focus has shifted towards
OT. We will also establish the knowledge base necessary to gain a deeper understanding
of our chosen protocols and the tools we will incorporate into our methods.
2.1
What are IoT and OT?
The convergence of Operational Technology (OT) and Internet of Things (IoT) is higher
than ever [4]. OT devices traditionally not connected to the internet are now shifting closer
and closer to the interconnected model. This convergence presents both opportunities
and challenges. It requires comprehensive security measures, standards that would be
able to work with each other, and communication across disciplines to ensure the re­
silience and integrity of industrial systems in the digital age.
2.1.1
IoT
The term Internet of Things (IoT) is usually used to describe interconnected devices.
Those devices range from sensors to controllers, programmed for certain application and
data transmission [5]. Nowadays, these devices have network connectivity and comput­
ing capacities, powerful enough to run their own software, that enables sensor monitoring,
and even some mild data preprocessing before information exchange within the network.
By adding functionality each year, those devices help us transform our daily lives, making
it more efficient, and enabling us to do things that were not possible a couple of years
ago. Today, we can find those devices from the smallest and simplest home appliances,
all the way to advanced and complex industry plants.
2.1.2
OT
The term Operational Technology (OT) is used to describe interconnected devices specif­
ically within industrial contexts. OT encompasses any computing system that manages
industrial operations. The third industrial revolution introduced us to automated produc­
tion using information technology and electronics, but these devices were either not con­
nected or connected only within closed networks [6]. OT forms the foundation of the fourth
industrial revolution, characterized by the deployment of more advanced, complex, and
interconnected devices. Devices that handle and monitor critical infrastructure, such as
power plants and water grids, are now frequently exposed to the internet, often without
their owners’ awareness. Originally designed for offline operation, these devices are now
becoming part of a larger, internet­connected ecosystem. This transition holds significant
potential for businesses, but it must be approached with caution due to security threats.
Despite the benefits of increased connectivity, these ecosystems also present critical dis­
advantages, primarily related to privacy and security concerns stemming from improper
adoption, thereby elevating the risk level.
2.1.3
Comparison
As can be observed in the table 2.1, there are numerous similarities between the two,
yet there are also a number of key differences. A comparison of OT and IoT reveals a
Securing the Internet of Things
3
==PAGE:12==
significant distinction in their primary objective and the extent to which OT devices are tai­
lored to industrial applications. OT devices are designed with a greater focus on precision
and data transparency, reflecting their role in industrial settings. In almost every respect,
OT devices are designed to perform with greater precision and to provide more detailed
information regarding the data. In contrast to IoT devices, which are typically designed
for maximum compatibility and ease of use, OT devices tend to prioritize advanced se­
curity and privacy measures. Conversely, OT devices are designed with the objective of
ensuring the highest level of service availability. Security is another major pillar of their
device, as this will safeguard their precision and reliability [7]. Despite those differences,
both of them operate on the same principle of acquiring data and exchanging information
to each other’s.
­
Purpose
Connectivity
Data
Security
IoT
consumer and industrial
applications, smart home
appliances, environmen­
tal monitoring systems.
Wi­Fi,
Blue­
tooth,
or
Zigbee
IoT devices
generated
data
Device dependent,
normally
lack
of
authentication
or
encryption
OT
industrial control and au­
tomation, SCADA, PLC,
DCS
Closed,
isolated
net­
works
(OT
Networks)
Real­time
industrial
data
Focus on reliabil­
ity, availability and
safety.
Table 2.1: Comparison between IoT and OT.
2.2
Protocols
The present thesis has been constructed around the investigation and analysis of ten
industry­leading protocols. The protocols under consideration encompass both those spe­
cific to the Internet of Things (IoT) and those specific to operational technology (OT), as
well as hybrid protocols used in both applications. They are responsible for the manage­
ment of communication and data transmission between devices, whether these devices
are connected locally or via the internet. The IoT protocols that were examined include
MQTT, AMQP, COAP, XMPP, and TR­069, while the OT protocols are Modbus, BACnet,
DNP3, DDS, and OPC UA. This classification is based on the primary areas where these
protocols are most commonly utilised. For example, MQTT is also frequently found in
numerous industrial devices. This thesis will primarily focus on the OT protocols, with the
inclusion of MQTT due to its dual application in both IoT and OT environments.
2.2.1
BACnet
BACnet is an open protocol standardized and maintained by ASHRAE (American Society
of Heating, Refrigerating and Air­Conditioning Engineers), including many of their stan­
dards (ANSI/ASHRAE 135) [8]. Its vendor­neutral design, support for a wide variety of
services, and excellent interconnectivity between devices and systems make it one of the
most popular protocols in its domain [9]. BACnet is a flexible protocol that can be im­
plemented over various communication standards such as Ethernet, Wi­Fi, RS­485, and
Zigbee.
The key features of the BACnet protocol [10] include:
• Interoperability – Equipment from different providers can work together seam­
lessly.
• Scalability – Efficient performance on both small and large scales.
4
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:13==
• Flexibility – Supports a wide range of communication networks: Ethernet, IP, MSTP,
and wireless networks like Wi­Fi and Zigbee.
• Object­Oriented Approach – Facilitates the distinction and control of devices.
• Standardization – Adheres to globally recognized standards such as ASHRAE,
ANSI, and ISO (ISO 16484­5).
However, if not properly configured and implemented, BACnet can be exposed to sev­
eral vulnerabilities [11]. Unauthorized access can occur due to weak authentication and
authorization mechanisms. Denial of Service (DoS) attacks are another common vulner­
ability, with flooding attacks, resource exhaustion, or message injection attempts being
the main causes. Misconfigurations, such as leaving default settings unchanged (e.g.,
enabling debugging interfaces or using weak cryptographic algorithms), can introduce
security vulnerabilities or expose sensitive information. Similar exploits can also affect
legacy or unpatched systems.
2.2.2
MQTT
MQTT, which stands for Message Queuing Telemetry Transport, is a lightweight messag­
ing protocol designed for low­power and low­bandwidth networks. It is commonly used in
applications such as the Internet of Things (IoT) and Machine­to­Machine (M2M) commu­
nication [12] [13]. MQTT is designed with efficiency in mind, operating in a binary message
format with minimal header information, making it ideal for these applications. It follows
the publish­subscribe model and supports asynchronous communication, facilitating in­
teraction between clients and servers [14]. While MQTT appears suitable for industrial
applications, it has limitations in terms of security and functionality, which are important
to consider.
The MQTT architecture comprises three main elements:
• Publishers – Devices such as PCs, phones, sensors, etc., that connect to a Broker
to publish messages before going back to sleep.
• Broker – The intermediary that manages message distribution.
• Subscribers – Applications or devices that register with a Broker to receive mes­
sages.
• Topics – Channels through which messages are routed to the appropriate sub­
scribers.
Despite its efficiency, MQTT is vulnerable to several security threats. Denial of Service
(DoS) attacks are common, particularly flooding attacks. MQTT devices are also sus­
ceptible to spoofing and replay attacks, with notable incidents such as the Mirai botnet
exploiting default credentials [15]. Additionally, the lack of proper message validation and
an insecure topic structure make MQTT an attractive target for attacks aimed at infor­
mation extraction and leakage [16]. Misconfigurations, such as leaving default settings
unchanged or using weak cryptographic algorithms, can further expose vulnerabilities and
sensitive information.
2.2.3
Modbus
Modbus is a communication protocol developed by the former Modicon, now Schneider
Electric, specifically for industrial devices. It is commonly utilized in automation and con­
trol systems within various industries, facilitating communication between controllers, ter­
minals, and supervisory units such as PLCs, RTUs, and SCADAs [17]. Known for its
Securing the Internet of Things
5
==PAGE:14==
robustness, simple implementation, and flexibility, Modbus supports both serial and Eth­
ernet communications, making it a popular choice for real­time monitoring and control.
It operates on a Master­Slave architecture, where a master device can remotely access
and control slave devices.
Despite its widespread use, Modbus can be susceptible to several vulnerabilities if not
properly configured and implemented [18]. The lack of authentication and encryption
mechanisms makes unauthorized access a significant risk. Misconfigurations, such as
leaving default settings unaltered or using weak cryptographic algorithms, can introduce
security vulnerabilities or expose sensitive information [18]. These issues are exacerbated
in legacy or unpatched systems. The protocol’s design inherently allows for various at­
tacks, including replay attacks, command injection, and man­in­the­middle attacks, which
can be particularly damaging in industrial applications.
2.2.4
DNP3
DNP3 stands for Distributed Network Protocol 3, developed by the former Westronic Inc.
(now part of Siemens) for industrial use. It is widely utilized in automation and control sys­
tems within the industry, facilitating communication between controllers, terminals, and
supervisory units such as PLCs, RTUs, and SCADAs [19]. This protocol is highly suit­
able for supervisory control, supporting both time synchronization and data prioritization
mechanisms, making it ideal for applications where precise data delivery is crucial. DNP3
is renowned for its robustness and reliability, operating efficiently in harsh environments.
Some notable features of DNP3 include [20]:
• Addressing for over 65,000 devices on a single link ­ Supports large­scale net­
work deployment.
• Time synchronization and time­stamped events ­ Ensures coordinated network
timing.
• Broadcast messages ­ Allows messages to be sent to multiple recipients simulta­
neously.
• Data link and application layer confirmation ­ Provides acknowledgment of suc­
cessful transmission.
However, DNP3 also has several vulnerabilities, some of which can be mitigated through
proper configuration and implementation [21]. Unauthorized access can occur due to
weak authentication and encryption mechanisms. Denial of Service (DoS) attacks are
another common vulnerability associated with this protocol. Misconfigurations, such as
leaving default settings unaltered (e.g., enabled debugging interfaces, use of weak crypto­
graphic algorithms), can introduce security vulnerabilities or expose sensitive information
publicly. Similar exploits can also be found in legacy or unpatched systems.
2.2.5
OPC UA
OPC UA (Unified Architecture) is an industrial protocol used extensively in automation
and control systems within the industry. It facilitates communication between controllers,
terminals, and supervisory units such as PLCs, RTUs, and SCADAs [22]. Its key feature
is its flexibility, supporting scalable architectures while being platform­independent. This
allows for interoperability between diverse industrial devices, sensors, controllers, and
software applications from various vendors. OPC UA is also highly reliable and robust,
boasting improved security features like authentication, encryption, and access control
mechanisms to protect data confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
6
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:15==
Key Features of OPC UA include [23]:
• Cross­Platform – Utilizes the standard TCP/IP universal protocol.
• High Security – Employs certificates for authentication and encryption to ensure
confidentiality and integrity.
• High Reliability – Configurable timeout settings and error­checking mechanisms,
with the ability to recover from failures.
• Tag Structure – Utilizes a public tag system for easier address browsing.
• Subscribe Mechanism – Clients can subscribe to tag addresses to stay updated.
Regarding security, OPC UA uses the x.509 certificate standard for three main functions.
Firstly, it employs this public key infrastructure for message signing, generating hashes
to ensure message integrity. Secondly, it uses the key for message encryption to protect
information from eavesdropping. Lastly, it facilitates authentication, enhancing application
trustworthiness.
Despite its robustness and enhanced security, OPC UA has some vulnerabilities that can
be mitigated with proper configuration and implementation [24]. Denial of Service (DoS)
attacks are a common vulnerability, often caused by flooding attacks. Misconfigurations,
such as unaltered default settings (e.g., debugging interfaces left enabled, use of weak
cryptographic algorithms), can introduce security vulnerabilities or expose sensitive infor­
mation publicly.
2.2.6
RTPS & DDS
The Data Distribution Service (DDS) is an open middleware standard for real­time systems
developed by the Object Management Group (OMG) [25]. It enables seamless informa­
tion sharing through the reading and writing of data objects, establishing a virtual global
data space for publish­subscribe communications that are organized by topics and keys.
DDS allows applications to define their own local data structures while engaging with data
distributed across the DDS network [26]. Additionally, it provides Quality of Service (QoS)
metrics to assess reliability, bandwidth, and delivery deadlines.
Key features of DDS include [25]:
• Dynamic discovery – Automatic application discovery without extra configuration.
• Global data space – Remote storage of information that appears as local storage.
• Data centrality – Messages include contextual information needed by applications.
RTPS (Real­Time Publish­Subscribe) has been designed for both industrial and embed­
ded systems, with the objective of providing flexible and reliable real­time communication
[25]. Even though DDS offers a comprehensive range of functionalities, it is dependent on
RTPS as the underlying mechanism for reliable data transport. RTPS serves as the fun­
damental engine, guaranteeing efficient and dependable data exchange over unreliable
networks, such as UDP/IP, as evidenced by the cited work on DDS and RTPS [27].
The broad design goals for RTPS include [28]:
• ”Plug and play” connectivity – New applications and services can join or leave
the network without needing reconfiguration.
• Performance and QoS – Efficient and reliable publish/subscribe communications.
Securing the Internet of Things
7
==PAGE:16==
• Modularity – The ability to have network subsets without changing the overall struc­
ture.
• Scalability – Efficient operation on both small and large scales.
• Extensibility – The ability to be extended and enhanced with new services.
• Fault tolerance – The ability to create networks without a single point of failure.
Despite these robust features, RTPS is designed to run over unreliable transports such
as UDP/IP, which introduces vulnerabilities that can be mitigated with proper configura­
tion and implementation [29]. Unauthorised access may occur due to the presence of
inadequate authentication mechanisms [27]. Denial of Service (DoS) attacks, in particu­
lar flooding attacks, are a common vulnerability. Incorrect configuration, including the use
of default settings without alteration (e.g., debugging interfaces left enabled, the use of
weak cryptographic algorithms), can result in the introduction of security vulnerabilities or
the exposure of sensitive information to the public domain. Given that DDS makes use of
RTPS, it follows that the aforementioned vulnerability concerns extend to both protocols.
In the future, the terms DDS and RTPS will be used interchangeably.
2.2.7
Unused Protocols
We will now present the remaining available protocols. Following a meticulous examina­
tion of the datasets and their intended applications, it was determined that those protocols
were not beneficial for the purposes of this study.
AMQP
Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) is an open­standard application
layer protocol designed to enable communication between distributed systems by man­
aging message queuing, routing, and delivery [30]. Its message queuing mechanism
supports asynchronous communication between devices, while its flexible routing mech­
anism handles complex messages efficiently. AMQP is highly reliable, offering message
acknowledgements to ensure successful deliveries and supporting message queuing to
mitigate potential system failures.
CoAP
The Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) is a web transfer protocol tailored
for low­power and low­bandwidth networks, commonly used in applications like the In­
ternet of Things (IoT) and Machine­to­Machine (M2M) communication [31].
CoAP is
designed for efficiency, typically operating over UDP (User Datagram Protocol) with an
efficient encoding mechanism. Its architecture is based on RESTful principles similar
to HTTP, enabling clients to use familiar HTTP commands and subscribe to resources
for real­time updates. CoAP also supports asynchronous communication, allowing one­
way communication from clients to servers, making it ideal for high­congestion and low­
bandwidth environments where other protocols like MQTT might struggle.
TR­069
TR­069, also known as CWMP (CPE WAN Management Protocol), is a protocol
typically employed by Internet Service Providers (ISPs) and telecommunication compa­
nies for the management of Customer Premises Equipment (CPE) [32]. It enables remote
management, monitoring, and troubleshooting. In addition, it provides enhanced security
and authentication mechanisms to prevent the confidentiality and integrity of the data from
being compromised.
XMPP
Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol, XMPP, is an open­standard com­
munication protocol designed for the real­time transmission of messages and communica­
tion [33]. The primary objective of this protocol is to facilitate the transfer of XML­formatted
8
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:17==
data between servers and clients. Its flexibility is a significant factor in its widespread
adoption along with its support for instant messaging capabilities. Finally, it is platform
independent, meaning it can work between different vendors and device types.
2.2.8
Conclusion
To conclude, each protocol is tailored to meet the specific needs of its application. IoT
protocols prioritize lightweight and scalable communication, focusing on efficiency and
ease of adoption within IoT networks. In contrast, OT protocols are designed for real­time
control and monitoring applications within closed industrial networks. Regardless of their
categorization, each protocol possesses unique attributes and characteristics that cater
to particular use cases and requirements within their respective domains.
2.3
Internet­Level Scanning Tools
In this section, we will present the two powerful tools that assisted in gathering our datasets:
Shodan and ZGrab. They are both tools to gather information through internet­wide scan­
ning, but their approach differs. Shodan acts as a database, that stores data obtained
from periodically internet­wide scans [34]. ZGrab aims to provide additional information,
on devices that are already discovered by Shodan, or other similar tools.
2.3.1
Shodan
Shodan is a search engine that functions similarly to Google, but instead of websites, it
searches for internet­connected devices, including webcams, routers, and even indus­
trial control systems [35]. Data is collected by utilising Shodan crawlers, which scan the
entire Internet continuously, thereby ensuring that the database is updated in real­time
with the findings. The crawler functions randomly to ensure uniform coverage of the In­
ternet and to prevent any bias in the data. To further enhance the reliability of the data,
Shodan deploys crawlers across a multitude of countries, including the USA, China, Ice­
land, France, Taiwan, Vietnam, Romania, and the Czech Republic. This strategy serves
to mitigate potential biases in the data. Concurrently, this affords Shodan the capacity
to circumvent IP address ranges that have been subjected to blocking measures, thus
ensuring unimpeded data collection across national boundaries.
2.3.2
ZGrab
ZGrab is also a network scanning tool, but in contrast to Shodan, it is a fast and exten­
sible application scanner. Consequently, these tools can be considered to complement
each other, with Shodan assisting in the identification of devices and ZGrab2 in the ac­
quisition of data from the services running on those devices [36]. The software has been
designed to enable the rapid scanning and retrieval of data from a variety of network
services and supports numerous application handshakes. Furthermore, it is capable of
carrying out checks for Heartbleed, SSLv3, and specific cipher suites. ZGrab is capable
of completing a protocol­specific handshake with the entirety of the IPv4 address space
in approximately six hours, contingent on the protocol in question. It is capable of func­
tioning independently, although it is most commonly employed in conjunction with ZMap.
Furthermore, ZGrab is able to handle concurrent connections and generate a JSON file
that delineates them.
2.4
Machine Learning and Data Analysis Tools
Machine learning has become a well­established field within artificial intelligence, growing
in popularity in recent years. These algorithms are designed to make predictions, classify
data, and cluster information based on historical data. To achieve this, machine learning
algorithms are trained to identify relationships and patterns within the provided dataset
Securing the Internet of Things
9
==PAGE:18==
[37]. These algorithms are typically categorized into two types: supervised learning and
unsupervised learning.
2.4.1
Supervised Machine Learning
Classification
Classification algorithms are a key component of supervised machine
learning, involving two main types of predictions [38]: classifiers and regression mod­
els. In supervised machine learning, the goal is to predict a specific target variable for
each observation in the dataset [37]. For example, we might predict whether a device
is vulnerable based on features such as timestamp, model, protocol, and vendor details.
These features represent the independent variables used to train the machine learning
algorithm, while the prediction of vulnerability serves as the dependent or target variable.
Once the features are prepared, they must be correctly labelled with the target feature
identifying vulnerabilities. This labelled data is then used to train a machine learning
classifier model. After training and validating the model with additional data, it can be
deployed on a new dataset to predict vulnerable devices.
In cases where the target variable has only two categories, such as ”Vulnerable” or ”Non­
Vulnerable,” a classifier model is appropriate. However, if the goal is to assess the like­
lihood of vulnerability, a regression model, such as neural networks, can be used. In
regression, the predicted output is a decimal value between 0 and 1, indicating the prob­
ability of an observation being true or not. For instance, a prediction of 0.55 suggests a
55% chance of being vulnerable.
In our study, while our initial goal was to determine whether a device is vulnerable (best
suited for a classifier), we also explored regression to obtain a more nuanced representa­
tion of a device’s vulnerability. For these purposes, we selected three popular classifiers
and the most widely used regression algorithm [38]:
• Decision Tree: A Decision Tree Classifier uses a tree­like structure for decision­
making, predicting outcomes based on input data. It consists of nodes representing
tests on features, branches representing the outcomes of the tests, and leaf nodes
representing class labels or regression values [39]. The data is split into subsets
based on feature values, starting from the root node and progressing to leaf nodes
until a prediction is made [40]. This efficient algorithm handles both numerical and
categorical data with minimal preprocessing but often overfits the training data.
• SVC (Support Vector Classification): Support Vector Classification (SVC) is a
variant of Support Vector Machine (SVM) that leverages the principle of linear sep­
arability for classification tasks [41]. It constructs one or more hyperplanes in a
high­dimensional space to perform classification, regression, or other tasks. The
dataset is divided by a plane or line that separates it into two distinct classes. This
algorithm is highly effective for datasets that are clearly separable, making it partic­
ularly suitable for our application.
• Logistic Regression: Logistic Regression is a statistical method for analyzing a
dataset with one or more independent variables that determine an outcome. Un­
like SVM, the output is a value ranging from 0 to 1, indicating the probability of an
event occurring [42]. The calculation is based on the data point’s distance from the
hyperplane.
• K­Nearest Neighbors (KNN): KNN is a simple, instance­based learning algorithm
used for both classification and regression [43]. KNN is a non­parametric learn­
ing algorithm that makes predictions based on the entire dataset, not a predefined
10
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:19==
model. It calculates the distance from the data point to the nearest neighbours. KNN
performs well on limited­sized datasets and non­linear results but is computationally
intensive for large datasets.
2.4.2
Unsupervised Learning
Clustering
Clustering algorithms fall under unsupervised machine learning, which en­
compasses algorithms that extract hidden patterns from data without predefined labels
[38]. For instance, when identifying vulnerable devices, we input features (timestamp,
model, protocol, and vendor details) into a clustering algorithm without specifying the tar­
geted output.
Unlike supervised learning, unsupervised learning does not require dividing the dataset
into training and test sets. The clustering algorithm calculates the Euclidean distance
between features to create clusters based on the similarity of data points. The number of
clusters can vary based on our needs, with various methods, including calculating optimal
cluster sizes, being employed.
Once clusters are formed, they are analyzed alongside corresponding features to gain
insights. For example, Cluster 1 might represent devices with a specific software version,
while Cluster 2 could consist of other devices. By examining past instances of vulnerabil­
ities and comparing them with cluster characteristics, we can identify potentially vulner­
able devices. Even without previous records, analyzing cluster characteristics known to
increase vulnerability likelihood helps identify suspicious patterns.
Unsupervised learning, particularly clustering, allows for discovering hidden insights and
patterns without predefined labels. This approach was chosen for our study, hypothesiz­
ing that clustering devices based on their characteristics would be more beneficial than
classification, as it does not require manual input. However, clustering results can be less
predictable since the algorithm determines the target state, necessitating careful selection
and limitation of inputs. We employed three popular clustering algorithms for analysis:
• K­Means: K­Means is a method that partitions the dataset into a predefined num­
ber of clusters, K, by minimizing the variance within each cluster [44]. According
to their distance from the cluster centroids, Data points are assigned to clusters,
with no overlapping. While K­Means is fast and efficient, it is sensitive to the initial
position of the centroids, which occurs randomly. Smaller cluster numbers increase
the likelihood of unstable results.
• Agglomerative Clustering (Hierarchical Clustering): This algorithm performs hi­
erarchical clustering by building clusters through successive merging or splitting
[45]. It operates bottom­up, assigning a random cluster to each data point and then
recalculating the best fit for each. While it does not require user fine­tuning, it is
sensitive to noise and computationally intensive for large datasets.
• DBSCAN (Density­Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise): This
algorithm groups closely packed points, marking low­density region points as out­
liers [46]. Unlike other methods, DBSCAN does not require specifying the number
of clusters but allows setting the minimum number of data points needed to form a
cluster and the cluster radius. This approach excels with arbitrarily shaped clusters
and noisy datasets but relies heavily on training parameters.
At the end of the clustering process, we evaluated the results by comparing them to the
true values of the initial dataset and the predictions from the classification algorithms. This
comparison enabled us to identify the strengths and limitations of each model, helping us
Securing the Internet of Things
11
==PAGE:20==
select the most appropriate approach for our needs. A more detailed discussion of the
evaluation procedure will be presented in the following chapters.
12
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:21==
3
Related Work
As the world becomes more reliant on interconnected devices within the Internet of Things
(IoT) and Operational Technology (OT) realms, the pressing concern of insecure devices
emerges as a critical challenge. The persistent online connectivity and insufficient security
measures of Internet of Things (IoT) devices make them prime targets for adversaries and
potential intermediaries in larger attacks like distributed denial­of­service (DDoS) cam­
paigns. Efficient vulnerability scanning and detection technologies are crucial for address­
ing the numerous security challenges faced by Internet of Things (IoT) devices. Among
the various tools available, Shodan has proven particularly effective for network admin­
istrators and security personnel in identifying and analyzing vulnerable ports and traffic
within organizational networks.
We identified a pattern in how studies with similar domains approach their solution, thus
we split our literature review into two parts. The first part consists of the researchers who
used network traffic data to perform their analysis and results, while in the second part,
their approaches to the data were similar to ours.
3.1
Analysis and Classification on Network Traffic Data
Machine learning has been incorporated, to classify network traffic data from IoT and
OT devices. Even though the domain of this thesis is not analyzing network traffic, and
the dataset has different format and content, we wanted to study similar works on network
traffic analysis. While the purpose of the classification always swifts to match the research
goal (from vulnerability assessment to device clustering), the machine learning approach
remains similar. We wanted to have a universal understanding of the key points that
other researchers emphasize, including the elements that they incorporate in a successful
training and classification.
Meidan et al. [47] applied the random forest (a machine learning approach) to extract
features from network traffic data using feature extraction techniques to identify an unau­
thorized device from many devices based on a single TCP flow in intelligent environments.
This multiclass classifier used approximately 300 features (packet level and flow level).
The essential attributes among them are time­to­live (TTL), median and average pack­
ets, the ratio of total bytes transferred and received, the total number of packets with
reloading tag settings (RST), and Alexa server rank. This experiment’s limitations were
that researchers classified devices with specific device types, preventing it from being
generalized. To conclude, this approach leads to inadequate results in real­life traffic.
Sivanathan et al. [48] incorporated network traffic data, gathered for a period of over 3
weeks, to classify IoT and non­IoT devices. Random forest multiclass classifier applied
to 12 attributes which the authors extracted from network traffic including protocol, packet
length, and port number resulting in a good accuracy for classification. This method has
the drawback that it must be trained for each device using network traces, and this is not
a practical approach for a large number of IoT devices in the commercial market.
Pêgo and Nunes [49] developed an application to discover the properties of a new device
that can be used to decide the class of a device. This paper’s key concern was to identify
the devices interacting within a network using the data exchanged by IoT devices. The
authors collected communication data by listening to smart environment traffic. This com­
munication data (communication files with XML format) was converted to a database with
Securing the Internet of Things
13
==PAGE:22==
information about each device in a smart environment using an application developed in
the iPhone operating system (iOS) which applied different machine learning algorithms
like the Levenshtein distance algorithm [50], synonyms match, TF­IDF tables [51], and
finally and multiproperty, matching to discover the device that communicated in the IoT
network correctly.
Suárez and Salcedo [52] applied a variety of classification techniques including K­means
and ID3 [53] on the dataset consisting of data from twelve different devices such as cam­
eras, lights, sensors, and fridges. Twelve features were utilized from network communica­
tion data that was gathered including device characteristics, internet bandwidth required,
gateway, Bluetooth enabled, etc. and four classes of devices using ML algorithms with
the help of similar features of these devices. K­mean was tested on three, four, and five
clusters and grouped the devices into four categories such as mobile orchestrators, fixed
orchestrators, fixed followers, and dummy followers.
Hegde, Mandira and Kepnang [54] investigate botnet detection using supervised ma­
chine learning and deep learning classifiers, focusing on their performance with unbal­
anced datasets containing mostly benign data mixed with small amounts of malicious data.
It demonstrates that these classifiers effectively distinguish between malicious and benign
activities within both small and large IoT network datasets. The experiments show incre­
mental improvements in accuracy, detection probability, and false alarm rates, achieving
up to 99.9% accuracy, 99.8% detection probability, and 0% false alarm probability. Ad­
ditionally, the study highlights how classifier performance is enhanced as IoT training
datasets increase in size.
T. Bujlow [55] attempts to address the limitations of existing network traffic classification
methods on IoT, by proposing the use of the C5.0 Machine Learning Algorithm (MLA)[56].
Using statistical traffic data from volunteers a boosted classifier was constructed, capable
of distinguishing between seven different applications with an average accuracy of 99.3–
99.9% across test sets of 76,632–1,622,710 unknown cases. Applications like Skype,
FTP, torrent, web browser traffic, web radio, interactive gaming, and SSH were classified.
This work details how accurate traffic data were collected, discusses the classification ar­
guments used, introduces the C5.0 classifier and its options, and evaluates and compares
the obtained results.
Traffic classification based on generation applications is essential for network security
and management. Traditional methods such as port­based prediction and payload­based
deep inspection face significant challenges in the current network environment, including
privacy issues, dynamic ports, and encrypted applications. Recent research has shifted
towards using flow statistical options and Machine Learning (ML) techniques for traffic
classification. T. Nguyen [57] surveys various ML techniques for IP traffic classification,
highlighting the trend towards leveraging ML for more effective classification in modern
networks.
3.2
Analysis and Classification on Shodan data
Many different perspectives, can be found among studies on similar domains. Some of
them might use the dataset to identify botnets, or devices susceptible to DoS attacks, but
all of them including us, will work on similar structured datasets, with the same attributes.
Studying these different focus areas would really help to enrich our horizons and broaden
the scope of our work.
Tundis et al. [58] investigates the role of Shodan (an online public scanning tool ) on
network attacks. The identification of new system vulnerabilities represents important
14
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:23==
Author(s)
Approach
Key Features
Limitations
Meidan
et
al. [47]
Applied random for­
est to extract features
from
network
traffic
data for device identi­
fication
identify
an
unautho­
rized device on a sin­
gle TCP flow
Limited to specific de­
vice types/ not ap­
plicable
to
complex
mixed real­time traffic
Sivanathan
et al. [48]
Classified
IoT
and
non­IoT devices us­
ing
network
traffic
data collected over 3
weeks
Multiclass
Random
Forest Classifier
Requires training for
each device; imprac­
tical
for
large­scale
IoT
device
classifi­
cation in commercial
markets
Pêgo
and
Nunes [49]
Developed an appli­
cation to discover de­
vice
properties
and
identify devices within
a network using ML
algorithms
Levenshtein distance,
TF­IDF
tables,
syn­
onyms match, multi­
property matching
focuses
on
smart
environment
traffic/
not tested on larger
or
more
diverse
networks
Suárez and
Salcedo
[52]
Applied K­means and
ID3 on dataset from
various
devices
for
classification
Use of ML algorithms
to classify
Limited classes might
not be enough
Hegde
et
al. [54]
Investigated
botnet
detection
using
su­
pervised
and
deep
learning classifiers
High performance with
unbalanced datasets,
low false alarm rate
Limited to botnet de­
tection
Bujlow [55]
Used C5.0 MLA for
network traffic classi­
fication
High accuracy, even
on unknown dataset
Focus on seven spe­
cific applications
Nguyen
[57]
Surveyed various ML
techniques for IP traf­
fic classification
Focus on leveraging
ML for traffic classifi­
cation
General survey/ does
not
provide
spe­
cific
implementation
details or test results
Table 3.1: Summary of Related Work on Analysis and Classification of Network Traffic
Data
Securing the Internet of Things
15
==PAGE:24==
information for malicious parties. Shodan helps gather information on services and IoT
devices connected to the internet. This study analyzes the provided information, trying to
identify and understand vulnerabilities and their origin, so they can be effectively mitigated
later.
Mulero­Palencia et al. [59] utilizes the Shodan tool, aiming on exposing and evaluating
vulnerabilities in smart buildings. It combines Shodan gathered information along with the
Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) list, to further analyze network traffic and
identify common vulnerabilities. The result is a comprehensive evaluation of the integrity,
availability and scope of vulnerabilities in smart buildings, targeting the framework’s uti­
lization towards the identification of critical vulnerabilities and their effective mitigation.
Srinivasa et al. [60] explores the security state of IoT devices, putting particular focus
on misconfigurations and vulnerabilities, with the utilization of Mirai [61]. It incorporates
internet­wide scans along with attack data analysis to effectively identify large­scale, mis­
configured devices that are susceptible to attacks. By uncovering those data, the research
is focusing on enhancing security in IoT devices.
This investigation of Karl et al. [62] focuses on exposing vulnerabilities in web devices that
are caused by weak authentication mechanisms. After performing internet­wide scans the
study reveals an alarming prevalence of attacks and malicious vectors targeting those
devices. By highlighting the risks that can be awaited due to the lack of adequate au­
thentication, this research focuses on the importance of addressing those vulnerabilities
in web applications.
Duta et al. [63] exploring the integration of a Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) framework
combined with machine learning, targeting to enhance security on IoT devices. A ma­
chine learning model, based on TinyML for predictive analysis incorporation of the CTI
framework, aims to predict and identify potential threats in IoT devices. The outcome of
this research proposes a solution combining advanced security protocols with machine
learning for proactive threat detection and prevention.
Lundsgaard and August [64] aim to perform internet­wide scans on various protocols
used from IoT and OT devices, to further analyze and identify vulnerabilities. Tools like
Shodan, ZMap and ZGrab, were utilized by the authors to gather information and perform
some analytics to expose widespread misconfigurations and security exposures of those
devices. This work contributes to a better understanding of the security vulnerabilities
and risks that IoT and OT devices are getting exposed to and paves the way for further
analysis and exploration of mitigation strategies.
J. S. Rae [65] discusses Shodan’s role in IoT security assessment, including its impact,
methods for vulnerability analysis, applications, and recent tools for device hardening,
concluding with suggestions for further research. More specifically, this work explores
well­known methods for IoT security assessment and infrastructure hardening, examining
the impact of Shodan in identifying and probing internet­connected devices, including
Internet Connection Sharing and Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition systems. It
includes example attacks and a detailed analysis of device hardening techniques, aiming
to assess available tools and empower security professionals.
M. Bada [66] presents an analysis of potentially cybercriminal discussions related to the
Internet of Things (IoT), specifically focusing on forum threads about the search engine
Shodan. Using the CrimeBB dataset from the Cambridge Cybercrime Centre, the study
analyzes 1,051 thread discussions from 19 forums spanning 2009 to 2020. The objective
is to explore the primary use cases of Shodan and highlight the targets and motivations
16
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:25==
of hackers. His findings confirm the versatility of Shodan as a tool for passive information
gathering used by hackers, providing easier access to vulnerable targets. Key use cases
identified include remote control of devices, building botnets, launching Distributed Denial
of Service attacks, and identifying exposed databases.
C. Nkoro [67] conducts a simulated network scanning activity and manual vulnerability
analysis of internet­connected industrial equipment within two selected industrial networks
(Industry A and Industry B). The analysis is performed using Shodan Eye on a Linux­
based operating system (Kali Linux) hosted virtually on Oracle VirtualBox. The results
demonstrate that Shodan Eye is a promising tool for enhancing network security and
conducting efficient vulnerability research.
While many works have worked on discovering devices that are part of botnets. This
study aims to discover and analyze the characteristics of those compromised devices.
Data from several passive detection techniques were utilised from researchers includ­
ing honeypots, VirusTotal, and Shodan to gain insights into these devices. Ryan Chinn
[68] resulted in discovering common characteristics that would likely classify a device as
compromised.
Chalvatzis et al. [69] considered the use of Nmap as a vulnerability scanner, compar­
ing it with actual vulnerability scanners like Nessus and OpenVAS. Those authors soon
discovered that Nmap’s scripting engine, while highly capable and customizable, did not
have built­in scripts to detect as many vulnerabilities as a bona ide vulnerability scanner.
3.3
Summary
All studies revolve around cybersecurity and vulnerability analysis, they vary in their spe­
cific focuses, including network attacks, smart building vulnerabilities, IoT device miscon­
figurations, web application authentication vulnerabilities, cybercriminal activities related
to Shodan, and the integration of threat intelligence with IoT security. Each study employs
distinct methodologies, ranging from exploratory analysis and vulnerability assessments
to Internet­wide scans and machine learning­based predictive analytics but all of them
are being carried out using one protocol at a time. Each protocol needs to be dealt with
in a very specific way as different vulnerabilities and exploits are being discovered for
every protocol. So, for each case, a unique set of warnings is being compiled. Shodan
emerges as a common tool used across several studies for information gathering and
vulnerability identification, often accompanied by ZGrab, showcasing improved versatility
in cybersecurity research. The studies offer unique insights and contributions to the field
of cybersecurity, ranging from novel assessment frameworks and methodologies while
collectively highlighting emerging attack trends and cybercriminal activities.
While existing studies focus on individual protocols within cybersecurity, our approach
tries to take a unique angle, and specifically apply a combination of those to the most
popular industrial/ OT protocols. We delved into the specific realm of OT (Operational
Technology) protocols, analyzing data to uncover vulnerabilities and misconfigurations.
We chose this domain, as OT protocols manage critical infrastructure, and their security
weaknesses can have serious real­world consequences. By clustering and classifying
these vulnerabilities, we try to identify broader patterns on vulnerable/ misconfigured de­
vices and develop knowledge for designing defence mechanisms. This study’s findings
could significantly improve our ability to safeguard OT systems from emerging threats.
Securing the Internet of Things
17
==PAGE:26==
Author(s)
Approach
Key Features
Limitations
Tundis
et
al. [58]
Investigates the role
of Shodan in network
attacks and vulnera­
bility identification
Analysis of vulnerabili­
ties in services and IoT
devices
Only uses Shodan as
OPST
Mulero­
Palencia et
al. [59]
Utilizes
Shodan
to
expose
and
evalu­
ate vulnerabilities in
smart buildings
Combines
Shodan
data with CVE list to
identify vulnerabilities
Focused
only
on
smart buildings
Srinivasa et
al. [60]
Explores
security
state of IoT devices
using Mirai, focusing
on misconfigurations
and vulnerabilities
Internet­wide
scans
and data analysis to
identify misconfigured
devices
Limited protocol sup­
port
Karl et al.
[62]
Exposes
vulnerabil­
ities in web devices
due to weak authenti­
cation mechanisms
Internet­wide scans to
reveal attacks target­
ing weak authentica­
tion
Focuses on Web ap­
plications
Duta et al.
[63]
Integrates CTI frame­
work
with
machine
learning
for
IoT
security
Uses TinyML for pre­
dictive
analysis
and
CTI for threat predic­
tion and identification
LImited to IoT proto­
cols
Lundsgaard
and August
[3]
Performs
internet­
wide
scans
on
IoT
and OT protocols to
analyze and identify
vulnerabilities
Utilizes
tools
like
Shodan,
ZMap,
and
ZGrab
to
gather
information
on
mis­
configurations
and
security exposures
Generic analysis, fo­
cuses on the scan­
ning
Rae [65]
Surveys
Shodan.io’s
role in IoT security as­
sessment and device
hardening
Discusses
methods
for vulnerability anal­
ysis,
applications,
and device hardening
techniques
Focus on the harden­
ing part not the analy­
sis
Bada [66]
Analyzes
cyber­
criminal
discussions
related to Shodan and
IoT
using
CrimeBB
dataset
Examines
forum
threads to explore use
cases of Shodan by
hackers
Using old pre­made
dataset
Nkoro [67]
Conducts
simulated
network scanning and
vulnerability analysis
using Shodan Eye
Analysis performed on
internet­connected in­
dustrial equipment us­
ing Kali Linux on Ora­
cle VirtualBox
Limited to simulated
and
not
real­world
data
Ryan Chinn
[68]
Discovers
and
ana­
lyzes
characteristics
of devices in botnets
using
honeypots,
VirusTotal,
and
Shodan
Passive
detection
techniques
to
gain
insights into compro­
mised devices
Limited to botnet de­
tection
Chalvatzis
et al. [69]
Compares Nmap as
a vulnerability scan­
ner with Nessus and
OpenVAS
Highlights capabilities
and customizability of
Nmap’s scripting en­
gine
Lacks built­in scripts
to
detect
as
many
vulnerabilities as ded­
icated
vulnerability
scanners
Table 3.2: Summary of Related Work on Analysis and Classification of Shodan Data
18
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:27==
4
Methodology
In this section, we will initially create an outline of our approach to conducting this analysis.
We will focus on key areas of our investigation’s structure, aiming to address our research
questions and the objectives of this study. We want to provide a clear and comprehensive
framework for our method, data analysis and evaluation. In addition, we have to point out
that in this thesis there is no universal methodology that we will follow. Each protocol
has some unique characteristics and attributes that we need to understand and modify
our approach before we apply it to them. So, for every protocol we will present some
initial analysis, about the data structure and what information they can provide us. We
will observe their limitations but also their vulnerabilities and we will try to identify some
patterns with the use of classification and clustering algorithms. Simultaneously we will
discuss our bias, heuristics, and ethical considerations to create a clear understanding
of our approaches and decisions. Furthermore, we have established a dedicated GitHub
repository [70] to serve as a hosting platform for all the Python notebooks utilized through­
out the course of this thesis.
4.1
Dataset
Our initial dataset, which originated from Lundsgaard and Lundin’s thesis [71], was divided
into two subsets, ZGrab data and Shodan data. Those data were the result of their scan
to the internet aiming to discover ”digital ghost ships” (insecure devices), using tools like
Shodan, ZMap and ZGrab. They found over 20 million exposed devices, mostly due
to outdated software and weak security settings. They conducted their scans targeting
specific ports per protocol, hence every port has a distinct file too. All the protocols are
utilizing just one port, except one, XMPP which uses both 5222 and 5269 (5222 for clients
and 5269 for servers). To conclude, the dataset consists of a JSON file retrieved from
Shodan scan for each of those protocols: AMQP, BACnet, CoAP, DNP3, Modbus, MQTT,
OPC UA, RTPS, TR069 XMPP, and a ZGrab retrieved one (two for XMPP) per protocol,
for the same protocols, but instead of RTPS we have DDS (DDS utilizes RTPS protocol
[71]). DDS is the only protocol that consists of four different ports and comes in a CSV
format.
We decided that we needed to convert all the files into a universal format that would help
us with our analysis later. The format of our choice was JSON [72], firstly because most
of our data was already in this format, and secondly because it is efficient and compatible
with many platforms. Once we had converted all our data to JSON, we proceeded to
analyse it.
4.1.1
Shodan
The Shodan data format follows some specific structure across all protocols. While some
protocols might have more attributes available with more information included, there are
some basic ones, available. Here is an overview 4.1 of the structure of the Shodan data,
breaking down the keys and their meanings [35].
While this dataset contains a lot of information there are some limitations. Those lim­
itations mostly originate from the technique that was used to gather the data. As we
mentioned, the initial scan was conducted based on the open port, to specifically target
protocols, while this provided all available data per protocol, it was limiting us to further
discover additional open services per device. To address this, we performed an additional
scan to obtain the missing information, more detailed in the Data Enrichment section.
Securing the Internet of Things
19
==PAGE:28==
Property
Data Type
Example
Description
info
String
”CCS BBMD”
Additional information about the de­
vice
hash
String
”1A2B3C4D5E”
Unique identifier for the device
os
String
”Windows”
Operating system of the device
asn
String
”AS45090”
Autonomous System Number asso­
ciated with the IP address
tags
String
”ics”
Descriptive keywords about the de­
vice function
timestamp
String
”2024­06­
04T14:57:00Z”
Date and time the data was col­
lected
isp
String
”TGGO
COM­
PANY”
Internet Service Provider of the de­
vice
transport
String
”tcp”
Transport protocol used (e.g., tcp,
udp)
shodan
Subgroup
Region,
module
etc
Contains
Shodan­specific
meta­
data
hostnames
String
”63­46­
238.myvzw.com”
Associated hostnames for the de­
vice
location
Subgroup
Country, City, Co­
ordinates
Contains geographical information
version
String
”1.4.8”
Software or firmware version
ip
Integer
1199392938
Encoded representation of the IP
address
domains
String
”tggo.com.hk”
Associated domains for the device
org
String
”ALICLOUD­HK”
Organization associated with the
device
data
Subgroup
Protocol
Depen­
dant
Contains protocol­specific data
port
Integer
80
Port number used by the device
opts
String
”raw=810a00170”
Additional options or settings
ip_str
String
”42.193.20.16”
IP address in human­readable for­
mat
Table 4.1: Structure of Shodan Data
20
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:29==
4.1.2
ZGrab
ZGrab data format only contains two attributes and all the information is embedded in
those. While the root structure is simpler and unified, it can get much more complex
once we start to unfold the data. Here is an overview of the structure of the ZGrab data,
breaking down the keys and their meanings [73]:
• ip: Represents the IP address, but it is encoded as an integer.
• data: (Header of a subgroup of attributes) Contains additional data about our device,
that are specific to each protocol.
Similarly to Shodan, we will get more details regarding the specific attributes of each
protocol in their respective section.
4.1.3
Data Enrichment
To further investigate the open ports of these devices and explore potential correlations,
we needed more comprehensive data. The initial dataset, which focused solely on each
protocol’s port, provided only one port per device (in most cases), which was insufficient
for our purpose. Knowing that most of these devices operate using multiple ports, we con­
ducted an additional Shodan scan, this time targeting each IP address in our dataset to
get the missing information. By targeting specifically the IP addresses, we are targeting all
the available open ports and services under the device on this IP. This approach yielded
a new dataset with significantly more attributes. Unfortunately, not all of the IPs from our
original dataset were still available for parsing information, a trade­off we deemed ac­
ceptable. This percentage decreased further after we cross­referenced the IPs to ensure
that the same IP referred to the same device, that we originally had information about,
avoiding the inclusion of new devices.
4.2
Data Preparation
As mentioned above, each entry in our dataset contains extensive information. Given the
volume of data, a more efficient storage method than lists with embedded dictionaries is
necessary. We chose to use a Pandas DataFrame [74], a two­dimensional data structure
with rows and columns that resembles a table. Pandas is a library designed for analyzing
large datasets and applying statistical theories. Its built­in functions help clean the dataset,
making it suitable for training and clustering.
The first step involves flattening the data by creating consistent columns across all entries.
This process eliminates any dimensions beyond two, ensuring each column contains spe­
cific values in string or integer format without sub­columns. Under these conditions, we
can convert the data into a DataFrame.
While flattening ensures a consistent format, it also significantly increases the data size.
Therefore, we needed to explore and evaluate the contents of all columns. There were
many columns, unique in each protocol, that had many missing or inconsistent values
that had to be removed. Similarly, columns that do not contribute additional value to our
research were also removed, resulting in a more usable and efficient DataFrame. We
will specify those columns in each protocol’s section separately. Once the initial data
preparation is complete, we can proceed with further analysis.
4.2.1
Port Analysis
The data from our recent Shodan scan provided a comprehensive view of the open ports
on each device. Analyzing these open ports helps us understand each device’s purpose
and functionality, as certain ports are commonly associated with specific services (e.g.,
Securing the Internet of Things
21
==PAGE:30==
port 22 with SSH and port 80 with HTTP). We performed an initial analysis to observe the
frequency of open ports and their correlations, identifying the most common port combi­
nations, either as port pairs or broader combinations (all open ports on a device).
A basic graph visualization proved insufficient for meaningful results, so we built a network
model using ports as nodes and incorporating NetworkX [75] library. These nodes were
linked based on the open ports of each device. For instance, if a device had ports 502,
23, and 80 open, these ports were represented as three interconnected nodes. Once the
network was designed, we conducted network analysis to identify communities within the
network.
In order to achieve this, we employed community detection algorithms with the objective
of clustering the network into communities with the highest correlation between nodes
(ports). In particular, we employed the Louvain community algorithm [76], a widely utilized
approach for modularity optimization. The algorithm calculates communities by maximiz­
ing the modularity score through network partitioning. The algorithm is both efficient and
suitable for large­scale networks. However, it is not capable of producing overlapping
partitions, which is somewhat unrealistic in real­world scenarios. In this context, it was
deemed preferable to identify distinct communities for comparison purposes, despite the
fact that port combinations typically overlap in real life.
Each iteration of the community algorithm yielded a different set of combinations, yet
consistently resulted in the nodes being divided into groups with greater interconnectivity
with each other than with the remainder of the network. The aforementioned variations are
a consequence of the algorithm’s approach to community creation, in conjunction with the
overlapping connections present in our dataset. This method enabled the identification
and analysis of distinct clusters of open ports, thereby providing insights into the typical
configurations and potential vulnerabilities of the devices in our dataset.
4.2.2
Honeypot Detection
We can also classify some devices as honeypots based on the number of open ports
they have. While a honeypot does not necessarily need to have a large number of open
ports, it is reasonable to consider a device with more than 10 open ports as likely being a
honeypot [77]. Our initial assumption was that a device wouldn’t have more than 10 open
ports at a time. However, for the purpose of identifying outliers within our dataset, we
considered raising this limit to 15 ports. Ultimately, we opted for a more flexible approach
as these values won’t be used for scientific analysis of the honeypots.
A honeypot is a decoy system designed to lure and capture attackers by mimicking a real
production system within a controlled environment. Security professionals analyze at­
tacker interactions with the honeypot to gather intelligence on cybercriminal tactics, tech­
niques, and procedures (TTPs).
Honeypots vary in type based on their intended purpose. Our technique is capable of
identifying generic honeypots, which have a broader target range and consequently a
larger number of open ports. However, it is not effective in identifying highly specialized
honeypots designed to closely mimic actual devices, including their open ports.
We combined our findings with Shodan’s integrated honeypot identifier to define our initial
outliers. We classified every identified honeypot as an outlier because their behaviour is
not representative of a real device. Including honeypots in our analysis could potentially
lead to erroneous assumptions and skew our results. Therefore, identifying and excluding
honeypots was a crucial step in ensuring the accuracy of our analysis.
22
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:31==
4.3
Classification & Clustering
In this segment, we will outline the comprehensive methodology we intend to employ
for the classification and clustering of our devices. Our approach will commence with
data preparation, progress through model training, and culminate in the evaluation of our
techniques.
4.3.1
Creation of the Training Dataset
With the completion of our initial data analysis, we gained a solid understanding of our
dataset, which allowed us to proceed with the creation of our training dataset. Textual and
categorical values are not suitable for clustering and classification algorithms. Therefore,
our first step was to transform any non­numerical columns into numerical ones. After
our analysis and manipulation of our ”data” column, we decided to keep only the most
complete columns specifically, the numerical ones or the categorical ones that can be
transformed to numerical ones.
Categorical Data: On categorical data (e.g., colours like ”red”, ”green”, ”blue”), there are
two ways to convert them to a numerical representation before using them for training.
Those techniques include:
• One­Hot Encoding: This creates new binary features for each category [78]. For
example, a ”color” feature with red, green, and blue might be converted to three new
features (”is_red”, ”is_green”, ”is_blue”) with values of 1 or 0. While this technique
has no impact on accuracy results, it can create enormous datasets, that would
require big amounts of computing power to process.
• Label Encoding: This assigns a unique integer to each category. For this to suc­
ceed it requires data, that can be divided into groups, where their members need
to have a correlation with each other [79]. While simpler, it can also introduce un­
intended ordering (e.g., 1 for red, might be interpreted as worse than 2 for green,
etc).
Then we merged these newly created columns with the original dataset and transformed
the rest of the necessary columns. We also wanted to utilize the ZGrab data to perform
this, we had to join our two datasets on the common column, the IPs. We decided to
leave join ZGrab data on to the Shodan’s ones, even though this would mean that we had
to sacrifice some ZGrab entries. Our target was to make as many features available for
our training report and as Shodan has more attributes we based our training datasets on
it. Furthermore, we followed a similar approach to ZGrab’s data column as we did with
Shodan’s to retain a unified format across our data.
For training purposes, we decided to utilize Shodan’s built­in CVE identification function in
conjunction with our custom CVE identification mechanism. This option became available
after conducting our enrichment scan, which revealed identified CVEs and CVSS scores
4.3.2. While we explored additional and more unique methods for labelling our devices,
we ultimately decided to use Shodan’s mechanism for a more consistent approach. Our
final step was to incorporate them in a balanced training set, consisting of both vulnerable
and non­vulnerable devices. In real life, the majority of devices are not vulnerable, so we
decided on a 2:1 ratio: for every vulnerable device, we included two non­vulnerable de­
vices. The remaining dataset was used as a testing dataset to evaluate the performance
of our trained model.
4.3.2
Classification
Our initial goal was to develop a classification model capable of identifying vulnerable de­
vices within our dataset. To achieve this, we employed several popular classification algo­
Securing the Internet of Things
23
==PAGE:32==
rithms, including Decision Trees, Random Forest, SVC, and Logistic Regression, to eval­
uate their performance on our training data. As previously mentioned, these algorithms
require a labelled training set, which can be labelled manually or through an automated
script. Given the size of our dataset, manual labelling was impractical, so we focused
on automating this process. We meticulously analyzed each attribute of the dataset to
uncover patterns and correlations that could indicate device vulnerabilities.
For each attribute in the dataset, we analyzed the content type, the frequency of each
value, and their distribution. Since many Shodan attributes depend on the information
configured on each device, we examined the consistency and interpreted the meaning of
each one. For instance, the location attribute was used to describe the actual address
for some devices but indicated a general location for others. Our frequency analysis
aimed to uncover outliers in the dataset and identify trends that could provide insights
for our training process. Columns with mostly empty values or those that had the same
or unique value across all devices were removed. We conducted further research on the
most common values in each column to gain a deeper understanding of their significance.
Our final step involved using a correlation matrix to understand how the attributes correlate
with each other, enabling us to remove overlapping attributes and retain only the most
useful ones.
Incorporation of CVEs
CVE (Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures) and CPE (Com­
mon Platform Enumeration) are critical in cybersecurity for managing an organization’s
risk posture. CVEs are standardized identifiers assigned by the CVE Numbering Authority
(CNA) to discover software vulnerabilities or weaknesses, aiding researchers in tracking
and identifying vulnerabilities across various software products and versions [80]. CPEs,
on the other hand, are standardized identifiers for products and their versions, designed
to link software products with their vulnerabilities and exposures. Typically, CVEs are
associated with specific CPEs, as they report vulnerabilities in particular software prod­
ucts or versions. By integrating CVEs with corresponding CPEs, security professionals
can determine which products are affected by a given vulnerability. This combination
facilitates the tracking and identification of common vulnerabilities and threats across nu­
merous products, enabling the development of effective mitigation plans. Consequently,
this process helps to reduce the overall risk posture of an organization and enhances its
security posture.
Drawing from the literature on identifying vulnerabilities in IoT/OT devices, which often be­
gins by scanning for known vulnerabilities, we adopted a similar strategy. We integrated
the CVE dataset to identify vulnerabilities. This involved compiling a list of all discovered
products along with their software/firmware versions and comparing them to the com­
prehensive CVE list. Any device with a version identified as potentially vulnerable was
flagged as such. This provided a foundation for determining the vulnerability status of
each device.
Our approach involved three main steps. First, we scanned our data to extract unique
product names that could be compared with CPE names. Second, we obtained a local
copy of the entire CVE library, consisting of over 200,000 files, and consolidated the nec­
essary information into a single JSON file for reference. The final step was to develop a
script that scanned our dataset and compared each product and its version against our
local CVE library copy. We assumed that a local copy would suffice, as both our dataset
and the CVE data were outdated. The script output classified devices as vulnerable, non­
vulnerable, or N/A (if the product or version was non­existent or unclassified).
24
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:33==
A significant challenge in this comparison was accurately identifying products and their
versions due to inconsistencies in their formats. We incorporated the regular expression
python library [81], to perform our natural language processing [82] and consistently ex­
tract the true product names. Extracting version information was more complex, as each
vendor might use different version formats, ranging from a single number to a quadru­
ple number (x.x.x.x). Despite our efforts, the results were not as promising as expected,
which we will discuss further in each protocol’s section.
The solution emerged with the introduction of a second Shodan scan. Unlike our initial
dataset, the newly acquired data contained more detailed information, particularly the
”vuln” attribute, which included discovered CVEs and calculated a CVSS score [83]. We
initially planned to use this column as a binary indicator (vulnerable/non­vulnerable) and,
based on its success, further utilize the exact security scores. We assigned a value of 1
to vulnerable and 0 to non­vulnerable devices for our initial classification testing. Later,
we replaced these values with the exact CVSS scores for regression testing.
Our ultimate objective was to apply our trained model to the rest of the dataset to identify
additional vulnerable devices. This approach enabled us to efficiently group vulnerabilities
with similar characteristics, facilitating a more streamlined approach to risk assessment
and defence strategies. Effectively classifying vulnerabilities enhances our understanding
of the security landscape and supports the development of targeted defence mechanisms.
4.3.3
Clustering
In addition to classification, we aimed to explore how clustering algorithms could handle
our data and what insights could be derived from them. By grouping data points with
similar characteristics, clustering techniques can uncover previously unknown patterns
that may indicate security weaknesses.
Our data preparation process for clustering was nearly identical to that for classification,
with one significant difference: the target column has to be removed. Clustering algo­
rithms do not require a labelled dataset, and we wanted our algorithms to generate clus­
tering predictions as if this column did not exist. The absence of a target feature in cluster­
ing algorithms means their results depend solely on the input dataset and its features. To
ensure our results correlated with our vulnerability assessments and not random device
features, we selected the columns most correlated with the ”vuln” column (our hypotheti­
cal target). Achieving this required using correlation matrices and extensive trial and error
to identify the optimal feature combination for each protocol.
This approach allowed us to get a deeper look into the data, potentially revealing hidden
vulnerabilities or emerging threats within the complex ecosystem of IoT and OT devices.
Our goal in incorporating clustering techniques was to determine whether specific patterns
in our data could be utilized to identify vulnerabilities. Regardless of the success of the
results, this experiment provided us with valuable insights into our dataset, which could
be leveraged for future work.
4.3.4
Evaluation
To select the most effective model for our task, we implemented a comprehensive eval­
uation methodology. This section details the tools and metrics used to assess the per­
formance of both our classification and clustering models. We will discuss the specific
metrics used for each type of model evaluation.
Classification
Unlike clustering, classification tasks benefit from a straightforward eval­
uation process. The inherent presence of a target variable allows for quantifiable assess­
Securing the Internet of Things
25
==PAGE:34==
ment based on a validation reference [84]. To translate model performance into real­world
terms, we employed advanced metrics that not only evaluated performance but also aided
in refining our model’s predictive power before deployment on unseen data [85]. Solely
relying on accuracy, without a comprehensive evaluation using various metrics, can lead
to inconsistencies and poor predictions when encountering unseen data. We will present
below the specific metrics used to measure and compare the performance of our classi­
fication models.
Confusion Matrix
Before we proceed into specific evaluation metrics, it’s crucial to un­
derstand the underlying concepts. These four fundamental elements, often visualized in
a confusion matrix, serve as the building blocks for calculating various evaluation metrics
discussed later [84].
• True Positive (TP): A device that is genuinely vulnerable and is accurately classified
as such by the model.
• True Negative (TN): A device that is genuinely non­vulnerable and is accurately
classified as such by the model.
• False Positive (FP): A device that is actually not vulnerable but is mistakenly clas­
sified as vulnerable by the model (a ”false alarm”).
• False Negative (FN): A device that is actually vulnerable but is incorrectly classified
as non­vulnerable by the model.
Accuracy
Accuracy, a fundamental metric [84], simply informs us about the frequency of
correct classifications by the classifier. While it doesn’t provide insights into the reasons
behind misclassifications, it serves as a valuable starting point for model development.
The Accuracy is defined as
TP+TN
TP+TN+FP+FN.
The utility of accuracy is contingent on a balanced dataset. In situations where one class
dominates the other, its value becomes misleading. To address this, we introduce two
more insightful concepts: balanced accuracy and the predicted positive condition rate.
Balanced Accuracy
Balanced accuracy [86], the arithmetic mean of sensitivity and
specificity, is particularly useful for imbalanced datasets like ours, where one target class
appears significantly more frequently, as it is the mean of sensitivity and specificity. The
Balanced Accuracy is defined as Sensitivity+Specificity
2
.
Sensitivity and Specificity
Sensitivity (Recall) [84]: Also known as the true positive
rate, sensitivity quantifies the proportion of correctly identified positive cases from all ac­
tual positive cases the model could have predicted. The Sensitivity (also known as Recall)
is defined as
TP
TP+FN.
Specificity: Also known as the true negative rate, specificity quantifies the proportion of
correctly identified negative cases from all actual negative cases the model could have
predicted. The Specificity is defined as
TN
TN+FP.
Precision
Precision [86], another metric derived from the confusion matrix, measures
the effectiveness of the model in correctly predicting the positive class. It represents the
ratio of true positive predictions to the total number of instances classified as positive (both
true and false positives). The Precision is defined as
TP
TP+FP.
26
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:35==
Precision vs Recall
A thorough evaluation necessitates examining both precision and
recall. However, these metrics often exhibit an inherent trade­off. Improving precision
typically comes at the cost of reduced recall, and vice versa. This concept is illustrated
in the figure below, where the classification threshold determines whether a data point
is classified as vulnerable or non­vulnerable. Shifting the threshold towards the centre
significantly improves recall, but precision plummets. Our challenge was to fine­tune this
threshold to achieve a balance[86].
Figure 4.1: Classification model output [87]
F1 Score: A Unified Measure
To aid in this process, we employed the F1 score, which
combines precision and recall into a single metric by calculating their harmonic mean. The
F1 score is particularly valuable for maintaining balance when dealing with uneven class
distributions. Additionally, it can be interpreted as a general measure of test accuracy.
F1­Score = 2 · Precision · Recall
Precision + Recall
Having established the evaluation metrics employed in our analysis, let’s delve deeper
into their practical applications and limitations. We’ll explore the underlying mechanisms
of these metrics and how to leverage them effectively for model selection. Furthermore,
we’ll discuss potential pitfalls to avoid when interpreting metric scores.
Accuracy, a widely used metric, presents a compelling initial assessment. However, it
can be misleading in certain situations like our imbalanced dataset. For instance, sim­
ply classifying all instances as ”non­vulnerable” would yield a deceptively high accuracy
score. This outcome, however, reflects a model that fails to achieve its core objective of
identifying vulnerable devices. In such a scenario, the accuracy score might reach 90%,
yet the precision score (discussed below) would be 0%, exposing the inadequacy of this
naive approach.
Precision serves to complement accuracy by addressing its inherent limitations. It specif­
ically quantifies the ratio of correctly identified positive cases (in this context, vulnerable
devices) out of all instances predicted as positive. In the hypothetical scenario mentioned
earlier, even though the non­existent model boasted a high accuracy score, its precision
would be 0%. This starkly illustrates the model’s ineffectiveness in correctly identifying
vulnerable devices.
Recall, another crucial metric, focuses on the completeness of our classifications. It quan­
tifies the percentage of actual vulnerable devices that were correctly identified by the
model. By incorporating recall, we gain insights into potential missed vulnerabilities.
Securing the Internet of Things
27
==PAGE:36==
The analysis of accuracy, precision, and recall highlights the importance of using a combi­
nation of metrics. Each metric provides a unique perspective on the model’s performance,
allowing us to gain a comprehensive understanding of its strengths and weaknesses.
Clustering
Regarding clustering, we divided the evaluation into two parts. In the first
part, we performed a basic clustering evaluation using metrics and procedures specifi­
cally designed to measure the coherence of clusters. However, this was not sufficient
for our purposes. We wanted to test whether our clustering algorithms produced mean­
ingful models for our dataset, such as identifying clusters that represent vulnerable or
non­vulnerable devices. This testing was conducted in the second part of our evaluation.
There are limited metrics available for evaluating clustering algorithms due to their un­
predictable nature. The list of available metrics and techniques narrows further when
comparing the three different algorithms we chose [88]. Each algorithm has strengths
based on data format, necessitating different methods to quantify performance. K­means
is effective for numerical data, DBSCAN works well with both numerical and categorical
data, and hierarchical clustering (using the Agglomerative algorithm) is quite versatile.
One metric that provides meaningful results across all three algorithms is the Silhouette
analysis. This technique calculates the Silhouette Coefficient for each data point and plots
it against its cluster label, assessing the quality of our clusters. It considers two attributes:
cohesion and separation. Cohesion measures how close a data point is to the rest of its
cluster, with high cohesion indicating high similarity among data points within a cluster.
Separation captures the distance between a data point and points in different clusters,
with a high separation score indicating well­defined clusters with no confusion between
them.
The Silhouette Coefficient ranges from ­1 to 1. A score close to 1 indicates well­clustered
data, with clear definitions and no overlap between clusters [88]. A score close to 0
suggests potential overlap, with data points closer to the cluster border than the centroid.
A score close to ­1 indicates misclassified data points, with no coherence within the cluster.
A higher Silhouette Coefficient signifies a more successful clustering outcome, with dis­
tinct clusters and well­placed data points. A lower score suggests areas for improvement,
potentially requiring adjustments to the clustering algorithm or its parameters. While this
and other metrics help create strong and successful clusters in our dataset, they do not
necessarily ensure the clustering will serve our purpose. These metrics measure cluster­
ing quality but do not provide insights into our specific goal.
Another metric for evaluating algorithm effectiveness is the Davies­Bouldin Index [89],
which measures compactness and separation within clusters. A lower value indicates
better segmentation between clusters. The calculation compares each cluster’s average
similarity­to­dissimilarity ratio to its closest neighbour, with the lowest index score indicat­
ing the shortest distance within clusters and the largest distance between clusters.
The Calinski­Harabasz Index (Variance Ratio Criterion) [90] is another statistic for mea­
suring compactness and separation. It calculates the ratio of within­cluster variance to
between­cluster variance, assisting in determining the ideal number of clusters. A higher
score indicates better clustering quality.
Two evaluation metrics more suited to our purpose are the Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) and
Mutual Information (MI) [88]. Both compare the success of our clusters with a target value,
in this case, vulnerability. ARI evaluates this comparison by checking if data points are
clustered together or apart in both the true and predicted clusterings, with a scale from ­1
28
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:37==
to 1 (1 indicating high correlation, 0 no correlation, and ­1 high correlation in the opposite
direction). MI quantifies how dependent two variables are on each other, measuring the
degree of agreement between the expected and actual cluster destinations. A higher
score indicates higher agreement, while a score of 0 indicates no agreement. These
two metrics conclude the statistical evaluation of our clusters. While they largely fulfil our
needs, we also plan a final manual evaluation step comparing clustering and classification
results.
As initially stated, our final evaluation step involves comparing classification and clustering
algorithms. Our approach is straightforward: we first perform classification training and
apply the trained model to the test dataset. Then, we remove the target column and
feed the data to our desired clustering algorithm. The first step of this comparison will be
assisted by the last two clustering assessment metrics, providing an initial starting point
to validate our clustering efforts.
A successful outcome of these metrics will enable us to proceed to the final step, our
manual assessment. While not scientifically proven, we believe that a trained human eye
can evaluate results in greater depth than a machine simply looking for patterns.
4.4
Ethical Considerations
In this thesis, great care was taken in the handling of the dataset due to the sensitive na­
ture of the information, which, if exposed, could be used for malicious purposes. Although
this information may already be accessible online, our objective was to avoid any accu­
sations of mishandling it. The objective was to assist the owners of vulnerable devices in
strengthening their security. In order to ensure the appropriate handling of sensitive infor­
mation, we adhered to the guidelines set out in the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) [91], which are widely recognised for data protection. Following a comprehensive
investigation, we identified a number of key considerations.
• It is important to retain only the necessary data. Only the data deemed essential for
the research was retained, with any unnecessary information being excluded.
• It is recommended that data be stored for the duration of the research project only.
The data was retained for only as long as it was necessary for the purposes of the
research.
In accordance with these principles, we retained only the data pertinent to the protocols
we used and plan to retain it until the thesis is completed. For storage purposes, the
files were kept locally and backed up on the University’s OneDrive, in order to provide
redundancy.
Securing the Internet of Things
29
==PAGE:38==
30
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:39==
5
Implementation
In the previous sections, we described our universal data preparation and classification
methodology. We will focus now on the specifics of each protocol. He would further ana­
lyze how we dealt with their unique attributes and how each one of them can be labelled
as misconfigured and vulnerable based on its protocol design.
5.1
BACnet
BACnet protocol originally does not have any security measures in place [92]. It is a
protocol that has been designed to work on closed networks that are not exposed to the
Internet. A properly configured firewall or VPN service has to be in place to create a shield
around BACnet devices.
In more detail, BACnet devices lack native authentication or ID validation mechanisms,
allowing any device to impersonate a legitimate user and gain access. Additionally, there
is no support for encrypted communication, making these devices vulnerable to eaves­
dropping by attackers on the same network. Messages are transferred in plain text, and
there is no inherent protection mechanism to ensure the integrity of the messages.
5.1.1
Dataset
For the BACnet protocol our initial dataset consisted of approximately 30,000 entries from
ZGrab and 12,758 entries from Shodan. These data entries were provided in a raw JSON
format, comprising a root dictionary for each entry and additional embedded dictionaries
to detail specific attributes. While we are already aware of the generic format that those
two files should have, we will present more details regarding the specialized attributes
that this protocol provides.
Shodan has a more universal structure as we mentioned in the section 4.1. We will only
focus on the unique attributes that Shodan can discover on the BACnet protocol.
• product: Specifies the product or software being used. While this is not unique to
BACnet, it is not universal either.
• bacnet: (Header of a subgroup of attributes) Contains some BACnet protocol­
specifics, including object, name, firmware version, instance ID, and BBMD(will fur­
ther analyze it in its specific section).
• data: (Header of a subgroup of attributes) Contains additional data about the BAC­
net device, including instance ID, object name, vendor name, application software,
firmware, model name and description. We will focus further in these attributes on
the data preparation section.
A common pattern that we can observe is that many of the sub­attributes of bacnet and
data preserve identical content and information. While that is not a Shodan’s feature, it is
quite often that some information is repeated under different columns. In the table 5.1 it
is displayed each attribute in our ZGrab dataset:
We can observe that all the available information contained under the result category
matches exactly the information provided from the Shodan scan.
Securing the Internet of Things
31
==PAGE:40==
Attribute
Description
ip
Represents the IP address in string format.
data
Inside the data column, these attributes can be found:
status
This indicates the connection status. Possible values are:
”unknownerror”,”iotimeout”, ”success”
protocol
This reveals that the BACnet protocol is detected on the
device.
timestamp
This denotes the timestamp of when the scan was
conducted on the device.
error
This represents the error the device returned in case of an
unsuccessful connection.
is_bacnet
Confirms whether the scanned device responded using the
BACnet protocol.
result
This column is only available in the case of a successful
connection and contains all the attributes below.
instance_number
Unique identification number for the device.
vendor_id
This identifies the vendor who manufactured the BACnet
device.
vendor_name
Provides the vendor name in human­readable format,
corresponding to the vendor ID.
firmware_rev
Contains the firmware version of the BACnet device.
software_rev
Specifies the application software version running on the
device, if available.
object_name
Contains a name assigned to the BACnet object on the
device (user configurable).
model_name
Reveals the model name of the BACnet device, if provided.
description
Contains a textual description of the BACnet device.
location
Provides information about the physical location of the
BACnet device, either relative or exact (user configurable).
Table 5.1: BACnet ZGrab attributes and their descriptions found in the dataset.
5.1.2
BACnet Broadcast Distribution Management Device (BBMD)
This attribute in BACnet devices stores information about neighbouring devices [93]. Act­
ing as intermediaries, BBMDs maintain a directory of all BACnet devices on the network,
enabling device discovery. This means each BACnet device can access a complete list
of IPs for all open devices on the network. We decided to apply a similar network analysis
as we did with the ports, but this time using IPs/devices as nodes. This approach allowed
us to discover and visualize actual device networks. We identified devices with the high­
est and lowest number of connections, pinpointed network/community controllers, and
uncovered patterns in device connections. This analysis provided valuable insights into
network structures, and device visibility, and facilitated device clustering for further com­
parisons. The neighbouring devices’ network analysis mirrored our port analysis method.
Each device visible to another created an edge between them. After fully connecting the
network, we applied the Louvain community algorithm to divide the structure into smaller
clusters based on interconnectivity.
5.1.3
Data Preparation
After our analysis and manipulation of the rest of our dataset, we had to select which
information should be exported from our ’data’ column. Initially is was formatted as a
32
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:41==
string that could further identify the following sub­columns to be contained: ”Instance
ID”, ”Object Name”, ”Vendor Name”, ”Model Name”, ”Description”, ”Location”.
The ”Instance ID” column was already in the desired format, so we simply cleaned it
by removing NaN values ”Vendor Name”, and ”Model Name”) all describe the device
type/model. ”Model Name” and ”Object Name” were not configured in a specific format,
making categorization difficult. Therefore, we focused on the ”Vendor Name”. Our dataset
contained 155 distinct vendor names, and by using the 40 most common ones, we were
able to cover 90% of our dataset. We assigned a unique ID to each of these vendors and
created a new column with these vendor IDs.
We applied a similar approach to the ”Location” column, using keywords to classify the
majority of this column into 18 distinct location categories. Since this column is user­
configurable, anyone setting up the device could interpret it differently, leading to a highly
inconsistent setup. This made it challenging to classify every single location into a specific
category, so we created an ’unknown’ category for the remaining data. While this might
not be ideal for our algorithms, we managed to classify the majority of the locations.
5.2
MQTT
The MQTT protocol is robust and efficient, but it has a few vulnerabilities that can be
mitigated with proper configuration and implementation. However, inherent limitations
remain. By design, this protocol prioritizes efficiency and operability on low­power devices
over strong security.
5.2.1
Dataset
For the MQTT protocol, our initial dataset comprised approximately 2.8 million entries
from ZGrab and around 500,000 entries from Shodan. These entries were provided in
raw JSON format, with each entry consisting of a root dictionary and additional embedded
dictionaries detailing specific attributes. Interestingly, both the ZGrab and the Shodan files
were corrupted and could not be fully read. We identified that this issue occurred due to
an error in file saving. To mitigate this issue, we manually completed the last entry and
added the file footer. While we are already familiar with the general format of these files,
we will get into the specific attributes provided by this protocol.
Shodan has a more universal structure, as discussed in the previous section. Here, we
focus on the unique attributes Shodan can discover in the MQTT protocol.
• product: Specifies the product or software being used. While this is not unique to
MQTT, it is not universal either.
• mqtt_code: Contains the MQTT connection code, indicating the connection status
of the device.
• data: (Header of a subgroup of attributes) Contains additional data about the MQTT
device, including connection code, topics, and HTTP header. We will focus further
on these attributes in the data preparation section.
In the table 5.2 it is displayed each attribute in our ZGrab dataset:
5.2.2
Data Preparation
After analyzing and manipulating the rest of our dataset, we needed to select the infor­
mation to be exported from our ”data” column. Initially, it was formatted as a string that
could further identify sub­columns contained. Our data can be split into two parts: those
with HTTP information and those with MQTT codes and topics. The HTTP entries contain
Securing the Internet of Things
33
==PAGE:42==
Attribute
Description
ip
Represents the IP address in string format.
data
Inside the data column, these attributes can be found:
status
Indicates the connection status ( ”connection­refused”,
”application­error”, ”success” )
protocol
Indicates that the MQTT protocol is detected on the device.
timestamp
Denotes the timestamp of when the scan was conducted on
the device.
error
Represents the error returned by the device in case of an
unsuccessful connection.
connection_code
Contains the MQTT connection code, indicating the connec­
tion status of the device.
broker_version
Contains the version number of the MQTT broker.
result_topics
Contains the available topics on the device.
Table 5.2: MQTT ZGrab attributes and their descriptions found in the dataset.
no useful information to us, other than the HTTP return code. However, the MQTT codes
and topics provide significant information.
One attribute available in every entry is a return code: MQTT connection codes for the
majority and HTTP return codes for the rest. We decided to create a column containing
all these codes. MQTT codes range from 0 to 255, with only those from 0 to 5 being
preconfigured for every MQTT device, clearly depicted in the table 5.3. The rest are user­
dependent, based on each system’s configuration. HTTP codes are in the hundreds,
so there would be a conflict between 100 and 255 if we put them in a column without
processing them. To avoid this conflict, we added an extra step of preprocessing the
codes before adding them. Our procedure consists of two parts: the first part extracts the
code from the data string using natural language processing in Python, similarly to 4.3.2,
and the second part transforms the output to a unique number based on our formula (our
approach was to select a prefix for each code based on their origin).
Decimal
Hexadecimal
Name
0
0x00
Success.
1
0x01
Connection rejected for unsupported protocol version.
2
0x02
Connection rejected for rejected client ID.
3
0x03
Connection rejected for unavailable server.
4
0x04
Connection rejected for damaged username or password.
5
0x05
Connection rejected for unauthorized.
Table 5.3: MQTT Connection Return Codes
5.2.3
Utilization of Topics
To utilize topics, we conducted further research on how they are used and how we can
incorporate them into our study. Given the large amount of data, analyzing entries in­
dividually was impractical. We identified all unique topic names and values to limit the
research scope and discover patterns in our data. Once we had all the unique names, we
performed a reverse search on those we found interesting enough for additional research.
Here are some interesting results:
• $RTU/DATA/PENDING/231/1/ACK: The RTU part likely indicates data from a Remote
34
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:43==
Terminal Unit (RTU) ­ a device that collects data from sensors or other field de­
vices. The numbering points to unique package identifiers while ACK indicates an
acknowledgment signal.
• $SYS/brokers/emqx@127.0.0.1/metrics/authorization/superuser: This string
appears to be a topic used in a messaging protocol, likely for the EMQX message
broker. ”emqx” suggests it is related to the EMQX message broker software while
”127.0.0.1” is the loopback address, often used to refer to the local machine where
the broker is running.
These examples illustrate the structure and interpretation of MQTT topics. Before getting
into the most unique cases, we present how our dataset is structured around topics. We
have 500,000 MQTT data entries. Most have empty topics but do have connection codes.
60,159 entries have at least one topic, with 7,287 topic variations. MQTT topics typically
start with ’SYS’ and are followed by the device identifier, which can be a broker (referring to
the MQTT server handling communication), a plain name, or a UUID. Only 1,215 devices
out of 60,159 are non­broker devices, with the majority having a UUID (a 36­character
identifier used for identifying information and devices).
Here are some broker­related topics that are interesting and unique and also depict how
UUID is being utilized:
• $SYS/mqttinfo: Used to gather all available information about the device/broker.
• $SYS/NOTICE/STATUS/ONLINE (or OFFLINE): Used to notify subscribers about the
broker’s status.
• $SYS/UUID/new/subscribes: Used to track new subscriptions for the current device
(UUID). Most non­broker topics follow this structure, with the UUID being the only
variable.
To make the information usable for our algorithms, we manipulated the data. Initially, the
structure was a single string lacking formatting, making it nearly unusable. Our first step
was to transform this string into three columns: one with the connection code, one with
the topic names, and one with the topic values. Most devices had more than one topic,
making these new columns unusable for training purposes. Observing that the same
topic combinations appeared across multiple devices, we created a topic combination
dictionary and assigned a unique ID to each entry.
5.3
Modbus
Modbus­based systems were originally designed to be deployed in industrial isolated en­
vironments [94]. Since those systems were made to be operated in closed networks,
security was never a concern, of the system itself, rather than a broader network one.
Similarly to BACnet, proper configuration and a controlled environment are needed to
ensure data integrity and security. In greater detail, Modbus has [18]:
• Lack of Authentication – Allow unauthorized access to devices and systems.
• Lack of Encryption – Data vulnerable to eavesdropping.
• Lack of Authorization – Difficult to restrict access to data and resources.
• Lack of Integrity Checks – Data can be modified or corrupted.
• Weak default configuration – Devices left open to the network by default.
Securing the Internet of Things
35
==PAGE:44==
5.3.1
Dataset
For the Modbus protocol, our initial dataset consisted of approximately 3.4 million entries
from ZGrab and 32,200 entries from Shodan. Of these, only 21,500 entries were common
to both datasets. These data entries were provided in a raw JSON format, comprising
a root dictionary for each entry and additional embedded dictionaries to detail specific
attributes. While we are already familiar with the generic format of these files, we will
present the specific attributes that this protocol provides.
Shodan’s structure is more universal, as we noted in previous sections. We will focus on
the unique attributes that Shodan can discover for the Modbus protocol.
• opts_modbus : Contains additional information regarding the device response.
• data: (Header of a subgroup of attributes) Contains additional data about the Mod­
bus device, including Unit ID and Slave ID. We will focus further on these attributes
in the data preparation section.
A common pattern observed is that many sub­attributes of Modbus and the sub­attributes
of the data column preserve identical content and information. This repetition of informa­
tion across different columns is not unique to Shodan but occurs frequently.
In the table 5.4 it is displayed each attribute in our ZGrab dataset:
Attribute
Description
ip
Represents the IP address in string format.
data
Inside the data column, these attributes can be found:
status
This indicates the connection status. Possible values are:
”connection­refused”,”application­error”, ”success”
protocol
This reveals that the Modbus protocol is detected on the
device.
timestamp
This denotes the timestamp of when the scan was
conducted on the device.
error
This represents the error the device returned in case of an
unsuccessful connection.
Table 5.4: Modbus ZGrab attributes and their descriptions found in the dataset.
5.3.2
Data preparation
After analyzing and processing the rest of our dataset, we needed to determine which
information to extract from the ’data’ column. Initially, this column was formatted as a
string that included details such as Device IDs and Error information. To transform this
information into usable dataset columns, we developed specific scripts for each feature.
The ”Device_ID” column was straightforward, containing only integers. However, the
”Error_Details” column required further manipulation since the information was in string
format, making it inefficient for algorithmic use. We categorized the error details and
assigned a unique ID to each category, resulting in 15 unique categories for error details.
This approach ensured that the data was properly formatted and structured for subsequent
analysis and machine learning applications.
5.4
OPC UA
The OPC UA protocol is robust and efficient but has certain vulnerabilities that can be
mitigated with proper configuration and implementation. However, it still has its limitations.
36
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:45==
By design, this protocol prioritizes efficiency and operability on low­power devices over
strong security, which can lead to vulnerability concerns.
5.4.1
Dataset
For the OPC UA protocol, our initial dataset consisted of approximately 3.5 million entries
from ZGrab and 625 entries from Shodan. These data entries were provided in a raw
JSON format, comprising a root dictionary for each entry and additional embedded dictio­
naries detailing specific attributes. Interestingly, the ZGrab file was corrupted and could
not be fully read. We identified that this issue occurred due to an error in file saving. To
mitigate this issue, we manually completed the last entry and added the file footer. While
we were aware of the generic format that these files should have, we will get a look into
the unique attributes provided by this protocol.
Shodan has a more universal structure, as discussed in the previous section. We will fo­
cus only on the unique attributes that Shodan can discover in the OPC UA protocol. In this
protocol, the only unique attribute was the data column, which contains additional data
about the OPC UA device. A common pattern we observed is that many sub­attributes of
OPC UA and the sub­attributes of the data column contain identical content and informa­
tion. While this is not a feature of Shodan, it is quite common for some information to be
repeated under different columns. Additionally, it is worth noting that this protocol’s data
column had a very irregular structure, with many attributes being repeated multiple times.
In the table 5.5 it is displayed each attribute in our ZGrab dataset:
Attribute
Description
ip
Represents the IP address in string format.
status
This indicates the connection status. Possible values are:
connection­refused, success
protocol
This reveals that the OPC UA protocol is detected on the
device.
timestamp
This denotes the timestamp of when the scan was
conducted on the device.
error
This represents the error the device returned in case of an
unsuccessful connection.
unit_ID
It contains the OPC UA device ID.
function_Code
It contains the OPC UA function code.
raw_response
It contains the raw data returned from the device.
product_Code
It contains the identified product.
revision
It contains the Version of the identified product.
vendor
It contains the Vendor of the identified device.
Table 5.5: OPC UA ZGrab attributes and their descriptions found in the dataset.
5.4.2
Data Preparation
For this dataset, we decided not to export any data from the data column. The lack of
structure and consistency throughout this dataset would introduce more confusion to our
algorithms rather than provide any meaningful insights. Data that is unique for every entry
is likely useless for this kind of machine learning training, as it is impossible to create
correlations between attributes.
Securing the Internet of Things
37
==PAGE:46==
5.5
DNP3
The DNP3 protocol is robust and efficient but has certain vulnerabilities that can be mit­
igated with proper configuration and implementation. However, it still has its limitations.
By design, this protocol prioritizes efficiency and operability on low­power devices over
strong security, which can lead to vulnerability concerns.
5.5.1
Dataset
For the DNP3 protocol, our initial dataset consisted of approximately 4.2 million entries
from ZGrab and around 803 entries from Shodan. These data entries were provided in a
raw JSON format, comprising a root dictionary for each entry and additional embedded
dictionaries detailing specific attributes. It is noteworthy that in the last few protocols, the
Shodan datasets are just a fraction of the ZGrab data. While we were aware of the generic
format that these files should have, we will present the unique attributes provided by this
protocol.
Shodan has a more universal structure, as discussed in the previous section. We will
focus only on the unique attributes that Shodan can discover in the DNP3 protocol. In this
protocol, the only unique attribute was the data column, which contains additional data
about the DNP3 device. A common pattern we observed is that many sub­attributes of
DNP3 and the sub­attributes of the data column contain identical content and informa­
tion. While this is not a feature of Shodan, it is quite common for some information to be
repeated under different columns. Additionally, it is worth noting that this protocol’s data
column had a very irregular structure, with many attributes being repeated multiple times.
In the table 5.6 it is displayed each attribute in our ZGrab dataset:
Attribute
Description
ip
Represents the IP address in string format.
data
Inside the data column, these attributes can be found:
status
This indicates the connection status. Possible values are:
connection­refused, application­error , success
protocol
This reveals that the DNP3 protocol is detected on the
device.
timestamp
This denotes the timestamp of when the scan was
conducted on the device.
error
This represents the error the device returned in case of an
unsuccessful connection.
is_DNP3
It contains the DNP3 connection code (Gives the
connection status of this device).
raw_response
It contains the DNP3 connection code (Gives the
connection status of this device).
Table 5.6: DNP3 ZGrab attributes and their descriptions found in the dataset.
5.5.2
Data Preparation
The data structure of the DNP3 protocol is well organized, displaying consistency across
all entries. Each entry consists of three columns: Source Address, Destination Address,
and Control Code. These columns are formatted as integers. The first two columns refer
to the origin of the source and destination devices, while the Control Code describes the
action taken.
Data preparation for this protocol was straightforward. We extracted the data into three
separate columns and ensured that there were no missing rows or data in our dataset.
38
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:47==
5.6
RTPS & DDS
The RTPS/ DDS protocol is robust and efficient, but it has a few vulnerabilities that can
be mitigated with proper configuration and implementation. However, inherent limitations
remain. By design, this protocol prioritizes efficiency and operability on low­power devices
over strong security.
5.6.1
Dataset
For this protocol, our initial dataset comprised approximately 712 entries from ZGrab and
around 213 entries from Shodan, making it the smallest of all. These entries were provided
in raw JSON format for the ZGrab dataset, while the Shodan data were divided into 4 CSV
files. For the sake of consistency, we merged and converted those 4 files into a single
JSON one. While we are already familiar with the general format of these files, we will
get into the specific attributes provided by this protocol.
Shodan has a more universal structure, as discussed in the previous section. We will
focus only on the unique attributes that Shodan can discover in the RTPS protocol. In this
protocol, the only unique attribute was the data column, which contains additional data
about the RTPS device. In the table 5.7 it is displayed each attribute in our ZGrab dataset:
Attribute
Description
ip
Represents the IP address in string format.
data
Inside the data column, it contains information in hexadeci­
mal code.
port
Contains the port of the device.
Table 5.7: DDS ZGrab attributes and their descriptions found in the dataset.
5.6.2
Limitation
Unfortunately, we were unable to adhere to the standard procedure for this protocol due to
the lack of sufficient information for analysis. In addition to the limited dataset, the enrich­
ment scans proved ineffective as well, as they failed to provide any additional information.
It appears that all the devices were unavailable for subsequent discovery.
Securing the Internet of Things
39
==PAGE:48==
40
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:49==
6
Results
In this chapter, we present our findings and evaluation results on both classification and
clustering approaches. We will display model comparisons along with performance met­
rics to explain our outcomes. Initially, we analyze the results per protocol to identify the
best algorithm for each. The final section focuses on cross­protocol comparisons among
the best algorithms to interpret our findings and identify patterns in attributes that lead to
successful classification or clustering. In addition, to the aforementioned results, as our
analysis is concluded, we have created a dedicated section in which we will present our
findings in greater detail.
6.1
BACnet
For BACnet, we had sufficient information to train our model and generate results. Gener­
ally, the more information available, the more successful the model. Out of 9600 devices,
Shodan identified 500 vulnerable devices. We created a training dataset consisting of
500 vulnerable and 1500 non­vulnerable devices to identify similar patterns in the rest of
our dataset.
6.1.1
Classification
As mentioned in the previous chapter 4.3, our four chosen algorithms are Decision Tree
Classifier, K Neighbors, SVC, and Logistic Regression. While theoretical performance
and actual results can differ, it’s useful to start with a correlation matrix to understand
attribute relationships. This matrix 6.1 works only with numeric data, so some attributes
are excluded. None of the attributes showed a strong correlation with the vulnerability
status, suggesting potential poor training results. The most correlated attribute was the
vendor ID, indicating certain vendors are more prone to vulnerabilities. Hidden correla­
tions among attribute combinations may be more insightful.
Figure 6.1: BACnet correlation matrix
Securing the Internet of Things
41
==PAGE:50==
The performance metrics for each algorithm are detailed in the tables 6.1 and 6.2. While
initial impressions might seem promising, a deeper look reveals poor performance. The
Decision Tree classifier, for instance, gave unrealistically high accuracy (100%) on the
test dataset, likely due to overfitting, making it unreliable. Thus, we excluded this model
from our analysis.
Table 6.1: Performance metrics of Decision Tree Classifier (Left) and Logistic Regression
(Right)
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
1.00
0.95
0.98
Class 1
0.00
0.00
0.00
Accuracy
­
­
0.95
Macro Avg
0.50
0.48
0.49
Weight Avg
1.00
0.95
0.98
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.82
0.99
0.90
Class 1
0.77
0.10
0.18
Accuracy
­
­
0.81
Macro Avg
0.79
0.55
0.54
Weight Avg
0.81
0.81
0.75
Table 6.2: Performance metrics of K Neighbors (Left) and SVC (Right)
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.94
0.59
0.73
Class 1
0.36
0.86
0.49
Accuracy
­
­
0.65
Macro Avg
0.65
0.73
0.61
Weight Avg
0.82
0.65
0.68
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.82
1.00
0.90
Class 1
1.00
0.11
0.20
Accuracy
­
­
0.82
Macro Avg
0.91
0.56
0.55
Weight Avg
0.85
0.82
0.76
Table 6.3: Model Performance Comparison
Model
Balanced Accuracy
F1­Score
Logistic Regression
0.54
0.75
Decision Tree
0.96
0.97
K Neighbors
0.72
0.68
SVC
0.55
0.76
The remaining classifiers performed poorly. Although their scores were acceptable, given
the limited dataset and straightforward correlations, their models did not provide meaning­
ful results. SVC and Logistic Regression performed almost identically, but their balanced
accuracy scores were low compared to K Neighbors. The confusion matrix 6.2 of our
final choice summarizes the classification results, showing true negatives, false positives,
false negatives, and true positives. These values help calculate other metrics.
6.1.2
Clustering
Similarly, we applied three clustering algorithms to our dataset, excluding the vulnerability
column from the training set and using it only for evaluation. DBSCAN behaved differently
to the other two algorithms. It does not allow the number of clusters to be specified, but re­
lies on two parameters: Epsilon (maximum distance between two points to be considered
42
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:51==
Figure 6.2: BACnet confusion matrix
neighbours) and min_samples (minimum number of points to form a cluster). Fine­tuning
DBSCAN to achieve two clusters is challenging and not always feasible. Nevertheless,
we have included DBSCAN’s results for observation.
Table 6.4: Clustering Models Performance Comparison
Metric
DBSCAN
K Means
Agglomerative
Silhouette Score
­0.10
0.43
0.44
Davies­Bouldin Index
4.03
1.56
1.53
Calinski­Harabasz Index
189
608
655
Adjusted Rand Index
0.09
0.89
0.83
Mutual Information (MI)
0.47
0.42
0.35
The table 6.4 summarises the metric scores for each algorithm. DBSCAN’s scores are
unique and less comparable, while KMeans and Agglomerative Clustering show many
similarities. Both had respectable Silhouette scores, as shown in the graph 6.3. This
graph shows the clusters and their Silhouette coefficient, with segments on the Y­axis
representing clusters and points plotted in ascending order. The red dashed line shows
the average Silhouette Coefficient. Our dataset is well clustered, with no negative or
near­zero values and a consistent range, maintaining a high overall Silhouette score.
The Davies­Bouldin index and the Calinski­Harabasz index provide further insights. Al­
though they measure similar characteristics, they give conflicting results. Based on the
Davies­Bouldin index, DBSCAN appears to be inferior, but the Calinski­Harabasz index
suggests that DBSCAN produces more compact and better­separated clusters.
While these results indicate good clustering performance, our primary goal was to produce
meaningful clusters for vulnerability assessment. We used Mutual Information (MI) and
Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) to evaluate this 6.4, with the vulnerability column as the target
state. Surprisingly, DBSCAN had the highest agreement with the target state, despite
having more than two clusters.
To conclude our findings on BACnet, none of the clustering algorithms delivered useful
results. The agreement of the results was so low that it did not provide a starting point for
Securing the Internet of Things
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 6.3: K Means Silhouette Graph on BACnet
Figure 6.4: AMI and ARI comparison across algorithms on BACnet
44
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:53==
improvements.
6.2
MQTT
For MQTT, we had sufficient information to train our model and generate results. Gen­
erally, the more data available, the more successful the model. Out of 42,230 devices,
Shodan identified 7,320 as vulnerable. We created a training dataset consisting of these
7,320 vulnerable devices and 15,000 non­vulnerable devices to identify similar patterns
in the rest of our dataset.
6.2.1
Classification
As mentioned in the previous chapter 4.3, our four chosen algorithms are Decision Tree
Classifier, K Neighbours, SVC and Logistic Regression. Although theoretical performance
and actual results can differ, it’s useful to start with a correlation matrix 6.5 to understand
the relationships between attributes. This matrix only works with numerical data, so some
attributes are excluded. None of the attributes showed a strong correlation with vulner­
ability status, with the exception of the ASN number. The correlation coefficient was not
very high, at 0.4, but it was one of the highest we have seen so far, suggesting that certain
ASNs are more likely to host vulnerable devices.
Figure 6.5: MQTT correlation matrix
The performance metrics for each algorithm are detailed in the tables 6.5 and 6.6. While
initial impressions might seem promising, a deeper look reveals poor performance. The
Decision Tree classifier, for instance, again gave unrealistically high accuracy (100%) on
the test dataset, likely due to overfitting, making it unreliable. Thus, we excluded this
model from our analysis.
The remaining classifiers performed very well, almost to the point where we had to check
further for overfitting. SVC and K­Neighbours performed almost identically, with respectable
scores, but Linear Regression performed better in every metric. These results are also
summarised in the confusion matrix, showing true negatives, false positives, false nega­
tives and true positives.
Securing the Internet of Things
45
==PAGE:54==
Table 6.5: Performance metrics of Decision Tree Classifier (Left) and Logistic Regression
(Right)
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
1.00
0.89
0.94
Class 1
0.00
0.00
0.00
Accuracy
­
­
0.89
Macro Avg
0.50
0.45
0.47
Weight Avg
1.00
0.89
0.94
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.99
0.91
0.95
Class 1
0.85
0.99
0.91
Accuracy
­
­
0.81
Macro Avg
0.92
0.95
0.93
Weight Avg
0.94
0.94
0.94
Table 6.6: Performance metrics of K Neighbors (Left) and SVC (Right)
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.97
0.87
0.91
Class 1
0.78
0.94
0.85
Accuracy
­
­
0.89
Macro Avg
0.87
0.90
0.88
Weight Avg
0.90
0.89
0.89
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.97
0.87
0.91
Class 1
0.78
0.94
0.85
Accuracy
­
­
0.89
Macro Avg
0.87
0.90
0.88
Weight Avg
0.90
0.89
0.89
Table 6.7: Model Performance Comparison
Model
Balanced Accuracy
F1­Score
Logistic Regression
0.95
0.94
Decision Tree
0.89
0.94
K Neighbors
0.90
0.89
SVC
0.90
0.88
Figure 6.6: MQTT Linear Regression confusion matrix
46
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:55==
6.2.2
Clustering
We applied our three clustering algorithms to our dataset, excluding the vulnerability col­
umn from the training set and using it for evaluation only. Similar to the BACnet results,
DBSCAN behaved differently to the other two algorithms. Fine­tuning DBSCAN is chal­
lenging and success is not guaranteed, but in the end the results were still disappointing
in every metric except ARI and MI, where the scores were respectable.
Table 6.8: Clustering Models Performance Comparison
Metric
DBSCAN
K Means
Agglomerative
Silhouette Score
­0.07
0.42
0.39
Davies­Bouldin Index
50.33
1.16
1.12
Calinski­Harabasz Index
1642
4034
3934
Adjusted Rand Index
0.73
0.94
0.79
Mutual Information (MI)
0.62
0.57
0.47
The table 6.8 summarizes the metric scores for each algorithm. K Means and Agglom­
erative performed similarly, posting almost identical numbers in most metrics. Both had
respectable Silhouette scores, depicted in the following graph. This graph 6.7 shows the
clusters and their Silhouette Coefficient, with segments on the Y­axis representing clus­
ters and points plotted in ascending order. The red dashed line indicates the average Sil­
houette coefficient. Our dataset is well­clustered, but mainly in the case of non­vulnerable
devices. Conversely, in clustering vulnerable ones, it performs relatively poorly, as shown
by the green surface on our graph.
Figure 6.7: K Means Silhouette Graph on MQTT
The Davies­Bouldin index and the Calinski­Harabasz index provide further insights. Al­
though both measures measure similar characteristics, they give conflicting results. On
the basis of the Davies­Bouldin Index and the Calinski­Harabasz Index, DBSCAN ap­
pears to be inferior to the other two algorithms, which produce more compact and better­
separated clusters.
While these results indicate good clustering performance, our primary goal was to produce
meaningful clusters for vulnerability assessment. We used Mutual Information (MI) and
Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) to evaluate this, with the vulnerability column as the target
state. While all of them had fairly high scores, DBSCAN had the highest agreement with
Securing the Internet of Things
47
==PAGE:56==
the target state, as shown in the graph below 6.8.
Figure 6.8: AMI and ARI comparison across algorithms on MQTT
To summarise our findings for MQTT, although some clustering algorithms performed very
well in our tests, none of them provided useful results. Similar to BACnet, the agreement
of the results was so low that it did not provide a starting point for improvement.
6.3
Modbus
For the Modbus protocol, we had sufficient information to train our model and generate
results. Generally, the more information available, the more successful the model. Out of
42,000 devices, Shodan identified 7,320 vulnerable ones. We created a training dataset
consisting of these 7,320 vulnerable devices and 15,000 non­vulnerable devices to iden­
tify similar patterns in the rest of our dataset.
6.3.1
Classification
As mentioned in the previous chapter 4.3, our four chosen algorithms are Decision Tree
Classifier, K Neighbours, SVC and Logistic Regression. Although theoretical performance
and actual results can differ, it’s useful to start with a correlation matrix to understand the
relationships between the attributes. None of the attributes showed a strong correlation
with vulnerability status. In fact, the Modbus dataset had the lowest correlation values
of all the attributes. No attribute managed to exceed a correlation level of 0.1, indicating
poor training results, which we later had to confirm.
The performance metrics for each algorithm are detailed in the tables 6.9 and 6.10. Al­
though the correlation matrix raised doubts about their performance, our initial impres­
sions seemed promising. The decision tree classifier, for example, again produced un­
realistically high accuracies on the test dataset, probably due to overfitting, making it
unreliable. We therefore excluded this model from our analysis.
The remaining classifiers performed acceptably. SVC and K Neighbors produced almost
identical results, achieving respectable scores. Although these scores weren’t particularly
high, the overall performance was balanced across all metrics. Logistic Regression out­
performed the other classifiers in every metric, indicating a well­balanced model suitable
for predicting vulnerabilities. These results are also summarized in the confusion matrix
6.10, which shows true negatives, false positives, false negatives, and true positives.
48
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:57==
Figure 6.9: Modbus correlation matrix
Table 6.9: Performance metrics of Decision Tree Classifier (Left) and Logistic Regression
(Right)
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
1.00
0.81
0.90
Class 1
0.00
0.00
0.00
Accuracy
­
­
0.81
Macro Avg
0.50
0.41
0.45
Weight Avg
1.00
0.81
0.90
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.86
0.93
0.89
Class 1
0.86
0.73
0.79
Accuracy
­
­
0.86
Macro Avg
0.86
0.83
0.84
Weight Avg
0.86
0.86
0.86
Table 6.10: Performance metrics of K Neighbors (Left) and SVC (Right)
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.90
0.77
0.83
Class 1
0.68
0.85
0.76
Accuracy
­
­
0.80
Macro Avg
0.79
0.81
0.79
Weight Avg
0.82
0.80
0.80
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.82
0.92
0.87
Class 1
0.83
0.64
0.72
Accuracy
­
­
0.82
Macro Avg
0.82
0.78
0.80
Weight Avg
0.82
0.82
0.81
Table 6.11: Model Performance Comparison
Model
Balanced Accuracy
F1­Score
Logistic Regression
0.83
0.85
Decision Tree
0.81
0.89
K Neighbors
0.81
0.80
SVC
0.78
0.81
Securing the Internet of Things
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 6.10: Modbus Confusion matrix
6.3.2
Clustering
We applied our three clustering algorithms to our dataset, excluding the vulnerability col­
umn from the training set and using it for evaluation only. Similar to the previous results,
DBSCAN behaved differently from the other two algorithms. Fine­tuning DBSCAN is chal­
lenging, but in the end the scores were still low on all metrics except ARI and MI, where
the scores were above average.
Table 6.12: Clustering Models Performance Comparison
Metric
K Means
DBSCAN
Agglomerative
Silhouette Score
­0.07
­0.12
0.31
Davies­Bouldin Index
50.33
73.26
2.12
Calinski­Harabasz Index
1642
3898
33.1
Adjusted Rand Index
0.73
0.87
­0.01
Mutual Information (MI)
0.62
0.65
0.0
The table 6.12 summarizes the metric scores for each algorithm. K Means and Agglom­
erative performed similarly but poorly, with almost identical scores in most metrics. Both
had low Silhouette scores, as shown in the graph below. This graph shows the clusters
and their Silhouette coefficient, with segments on the Y­axis representing clusters and
points plotted in ascending order. The red dashed line shows the average Silhouette Co­
efficient 6.11. Our dataset is poorly clustered, especially in the case of vulnerable devices.
In contrast, it performs relatively well in clustering non­vulnerable devices, but due to the
nature of our dataset this result is not meaningful.
The Davies­Bouldin index and the Calinski­Harabasz index provide further insight. Al­
though both metrics measure similar characteristics, they give conflicting results. Based
on the Davies­Bouldin Index and the Calinski­Harabasz Index, DBSCAN and Agglomera­
tive perform quite differently. On the former, DBSCAN performed well and Agglomerative
poorly, while on the latter, the results were reversed.
These scores indicate poor clustering performance, meaning that these algorithms cannot
serve our main goal for vulnerability assessment. Finally, we used Mutual Information
(MI) and Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), with the vulnerability column as the target state,
50
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:59==
Figure 6.11: K Means Silhouette Graph on Modbus
to evaluate this. While all of them maintained poor scores, DBSCAN had the highest
agreement score with the target state. By now, we can observe a trend where DBSCAN
performs poorly in every clustering metric but always delivers respectable scores in the
ARI and MI metrics, which we can further observe in the graph 6.12.
Figure 6.12: AMI and ARI comparison across algorithms on Modbus
To conclude our findings on Modbus, while some clustering algorithms performed very well
in our tests, none of them delivered useful results. The inaccuracy was so significant that
it did not provide a starting point for improvements but it made us think for the possibility
of utilizing DBSCAN for our purpose.
6.4
OPC UA
Due to the lack of sufficient data for the robust training of a model, an exploratory analysis
was conducted on OPC UA for the purposes of scientific inquiry. While the inclusion of
more data typically leads to enhanced model performance, the objective was to identify
potential patterns within the available data. Of the 433 devices identified, Shodan iden­
tified 47 as vulnerable. A training dataset was created, comprising from 47 vulnerable
devices and 200 non­vulnerable devices, with the aim of identifying similar patterns in the
remainder of the dataset.
Securing the Internet of Things
51
==PAGE:60==
6.4.1
Classification
As with the previous sections, four classification algorithms were employed. While theo­
retical performance and real­world results can differ, a correlation matrix 6.13 was initially
examined to understand relationships between attributes. No attribute displayed a strong
correlation with vulnerability, with the number of open ports per device having the high­
est correlation coefficient (0.24). Interestingly, a high correlation existed between ASNs
and the number of open ports. Although no direct link was observed between ASNs and
vulnerability, this correlation could potentially benefit the algorithms’ performance.
Figure 6.13: OPC UA correlation matrix
The tables 6.13 and 6.14 present detailed performance metrics for each algorithm. While
the initial results appear promising, a closer examination reveals poor overall perfor­
mance. For instance, the decision tree classifier once again demonstrated an unrealisti­
cally high level of accuracy on the test set, which is likely due to overfitting. This renders
the classifier unreliable. Consequently, this model was excluded from further analysis.
Table 6.13: Performance metrics of Decision Tree Classifier (Left) and Logistic Regres­
sion (Right)
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
1.00
0.85
0.92
Class 1
0.00
0.00
0.00
Accuracy
­
­
0.85
Macro Avg
0.50
0.43
0.46
Weight Avg
1.00
0.85
0.92
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.90
1.00
0.95
Class 1
1.00
0.82
0.90
Accuracy
­
­
0.93
Macro Avg
0.95
0.91
0.93
Weight Avg
0.94
0.93
0.93
The remaining classifiers (logistic regression, SVC, and K­nearest neighbours) demon­
strated a variable performance. The highest scores were achieved by Logistic Regres­
sion, prompting us to investigate the potential for overfitting due to the exceptionally high
values. The results yielded by SVC and K­Nearest Neighbors were comparable, with
52
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:61==
Table 6.14: Performance metrics of K Neighbors (Left) and SVC (Right)
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.80
0.84
0.82
Class 1
0.70
0.64
0.67
Accuracy
­
­
0.77
Macro Avg
0.75
0.74
0.74
Weight Avg
0.76
0.77
0.76
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.76
1.00
0.86
Class 1
1.00
0.45
0.62
Accuracy
­
­
0.80
Macro Avg
0.88
0.73
0.74
Weight Avg
0.85
0.80
0.78
Table 6.15: Model Performance Comparison
Model
Balanced Accuracy
F1­Score
Logistic Regression
0.90
0.93
Decision Tree
0.85
0.92
K Neighbors
0.74
0.76
SVC
0.72
0.77
metrics that were moderate but ultimately insufficient for real­world deployment.
A confusion matrix can be employed to illustrate these findings in greater detail. The ma­
trix 6.14 provides details of the number of true negatives, false positives, false negatives,
and true positives. Although Logistic Regression achieved a 100% precision score in the
test set, indicating an exceptional ability to identify vulnerable devices in this specific data
set, further evaluation on unseen datasets is necessary to confirm generalizability.
Figure 6.14: OPC UA Confusion matrix
6.4.2
Clustering
We applied our three clustering algorithms to our dataset, excluding the vulnerability col­
umn from the training set and using it only for evaluation. Similarly to BACnet results,
DBSCAN behaved differently from the other two algorithms. Fine­tuning DBSCAN is chal­
lenging and success is not guaranteed but in the end, the results were still poor, in every
metric, but also in both ARI and MI where it previously was respectable.
Securing the Internet of Things
53
==PAGE:62==
Table 6.16: Clustering Models Performance Comparison
Metric
DBSCAN
K Means
Agglomerative
Silhouette Score
­0.17
0. 63
0.63
Davies­Bouldin Index
10.41
1.11
1.11
Calinski­Harabasz Index
69.74
18.5
18.5
Adjusted Rand Index
0.74
0.01
0.01
Mutual Information (MI)
0.55
0.0
0.0
The table 6.16 summarizes the metrics scores for each algorithm. The results of the
K­Means and Agglomerative algorithms were identical, prompting questions about the
extent to which these two algorithms are similar in their functioning. Both algorithms ex­
hibited poor silhouette scores, as illustrated in the subsequent graph. The graph depicts
the clusters and their respective Silhouette Coefficients 6.15. The segments on the Y­axis
represent the clusters, with the points plotted in ascending order. The dataset exhibits a
lack of clustering, particularly in the case of vulnerable devices, as evidenced by the green
surface. The clustering of non­vulnerable devices was satisfactory, yet it is not possible
to draw any conclusions due to the nature of the data.
Figure 6.15: K Means Silhouette Graph on OPC UA
The Davies­Bouldin Index and Calinski­Harabasz Index offer further insights. Although
both metrics measure similar characteristics, they yield contradictory results. The Calinski­
Harabasz Index indicates that DBSCAN is superior to the other algorithms, whereas the
Davies­Bouldin Index indicates the opposite. This creates confusion as to which is the
optimal choice.
In conclusion, the results of the OPCUA tests indicate that clustering algorithms performed
poorly and did not yield useful results. The degree of inaccuracy was so pronounced that
it did not provide a foundation for further improvement.
6.5
DNP3
For DNP3, we had also limited information to train our model and generate results. Gen­
erally, the more information available, the more successful the model. Out of 572 devices,
Shodan identified 161 vulnerable ones. We created a training dataset consisting of 161
54
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:63==
vulnerable and 250 non­vulnerable devices to identify similar patterns in the rest of our
dataset.
6.5.1
Classification
Once more, the dataset will be trained with the four classification algorithms that have
been selected. While theoretical performance and actual results may diverge, it is benefi­
cial to commence with a correlation matrix 6.16 to comprehend the relationships between
attributes. A number of attributes demonstrated a strong correlation with the vulnerability
status, including the ASN number, control code, location longitude and number of open
ports per device. The correlation coefficients ranged from 0.21 to 0.65. All of the afore­
mentioned attributes exhibited high levels of correlation with one another. Additionally,
the source and destination address exhibited a high degree of correlation, as did the con­
trol code and destination. The outcomes of this analysis instilled a sense of confidence in
the training process, yet simultaneously prompted a degree of skepticism regarding the
limited size of the dataset, which could potentially lead to overfitting.
Figure 6.16: DNP3 Correlation matrix
The performance metrics for each algorithm are detailed in the tables 6.17 6.18. Initial
impressions might seem promising, but we had to further explore those results. The De­
cision Tree classifier, for instance, gave again unrealistically high accuracy on predicting
non­vulnerable devices, likely due to overfitting, making it unreliable. Its scores were also
the lowest among the algorithms. Thus, we excluded this model from our analysis.
The remaining classifiers performed very well, close to the point that we had to further
check for overfitting. SVC had the second lowest scores, while Linear Regression even
though it had similar scores, it was much more balanced. The K­Neighbors classifier
demonstrated exceptional performance, achieving impressive and balanced scores. The
algorithm was selected as the optimal choice for this dataset due to its performance in
nearly all metrics, with scores approaching 90%. The aforementioned results can be
summarised in a confusion matrix 6.17, which displays the number of true negatives,
false positives, false negatives, and true positives.
Securing the Internet of Things
55
==PAGE:64==
Table 6.17: Performance metrics of Decision Tree Classifier (Left) and Logistic Regres­
sion (Right)
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
1.00
0.84
0.91
Class 1
0.00
0.00
0.00
Accuracy
­
­
0.84
Macro Avg
0.50
0.42
0.46
Weight Avg
1.00
0.84
0.91
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.71
0.94
0.81
Class 1
0.92
0.67
0.77
Accuracy
­
­
0.79
Macro Avg
0.82
0.80
0.79
Weight Avg
0.82
0.79
0.79
Table 6.18: Performance metrics of K Neighbors (Left) and SVC (Right)
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.88
0.91
0.89
Class 1
0.91
0.89
0.90
Accuracy
­
­
0.90
Macro Avg
0.90
0.90
0.90
Weight Avg
0.90
0.90
0.90
Metric
Score
Precision
Recall
F1
Class 0
0.86
0.94
0.90
Class 1
0.94
0.86
0.90
Accuracy
­
­
0.90
Macro Avg
0.90
0.90
0.90
Weight Avg
0.90
0.90
0.90
Table 6.19: Model Performance Comparison
Model
Balanced Accuracy
F1­Score
Logistic Regression
0.80
0.79
Decision Tree
0.83
0.91
K Neighbors
0.89
0.89
SVC
0.72
0.89
Figure 6.17: DNP3 Confusion matrix
56
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:65==
6.5.2
Clustering
The three clustering algorithms were applied to the dataset, with the vulnerability column
excluded from the training set and used solely for evaluation purposes. Similarly to the
results obtained with BACnet, the behaviour of DBSCAN differed from that of the other
two algorithms. Fine­tuning DBSCAN is a challenging process, and the results were ulti­
mately disappointing, with poor performance across all metrics and in ARI and MI, where
it performed relatively well throughout this work.
Table 6.20: Clustering Models Performance Comparison
Metric
DBSCAN
K Means
Agglomerative
Silhouette Score
­0.45
0.68
0.17
Davies­Bouldin Index
2.77
0.39
1.73
Calinski­Harabasz Index
17
1264
80.5
Adjusted Rand Index
0.09
0.02
0.39
Mutual Information (MI)
0.30
0.01
0.24
The table 6.20 summarizes the metrics scores for each algorithm. K Means and Agglom­
erative, performed really similar, posting almost identical numbers in most of the metrics.
Both had respectable Silhouette scores, depicted in the following graph. The graph 6.18
shows the clusters and their Silhouette Coefficient, with segments on the Y­axis repre­
senting clusters and points plotted in ascending order. The red dashed line indicates the
average Silhouette coefficient. Our dataset is well­clustered, but mainly in the case of
non­vulnerable devices. On the contrary, in clustering vulnerable ones, it performs rela­
tively poorly as it can be shown by the green surface on our graph.
Figure 6.18: K Means Silhouette Graph on DNP3
The Davies­Bouldin Index and Calinski­Harabasz Index offer further insights. Although
both metrics are designed to measure similar characteristics, they yield contradictory re­
sults. The results of the Davies­Bouldin Index and Calinski­Harabasz Index indicate that
DBSCAN is less effective than the other two algorithms, which produce more compact
and better­separated clusters.
While these scores indicate satisfactory clustering performance, our primary objective
was to achieve meaningful clustering for vulnerability assessment. To assess this, we
Securing the Internet of Things
57
==PAGE:66==
employed Mutual Information (MI) and Adjusted Rand Index (ARI) 6.19, with the vulner­
ability column serving as the target state. While all of the algorithms achieved relatively
high scores, K­Means demonstrated the highest level of agreement with the target state.
Figure 6.19: AMI and ARI comparison across algorithms on DNP3
To conclude our findings on DNP3, while some clustering algorithms performed very well
in our tests, none of them delivered useful results. The inaccuracy was so significant that
it did not provide a starting point for improvements.
6.6
Data Analysis
This section presents a summary of the findings from our data examination, which con­
cludes our analysis. A comprehensive overview of the datasets will be provided, along
with relevant analytics and notable observations. The structure of this chapter will be
consistent with that of previous chapters, with an initial focus on individual sections be­
fore broader conclusions are drawn.
6.6.1
BACnet
Despite the smaller size of the BACnet dataset, it yielded several findings that were both
unique and noteworthy. A significant amount of publicly accessible information was un­
covered, including sensitive data such as addresses. For each protocol, we identified all
open ports on each device and utilised this information to group devices effectively. It
is noteworthy that the BACnet protocol includes a distinctive attribute that facilitated the
creation of realistic device networks. Furthermore, the dataset will be evaluated in terms
of its utility in achieving the research objectives.
Port Analysis
A crucial element of our analysis entailed an examination of the open
ports on each device. As previously stated, open ports can serve as a useful starting
point for identifying outliers. The presence of more than 15 open ports on a device is
often indicative of the existence of a honeypot or an anomaly. Given the significance of
honeypots in our study, we conducted a separate port analysis for non­honeypot devices
and honeypots. This enabled us to compare and draw meaningful conclusions about the
differing functionalities of the two groups.
The analysis was conducted in four stages. The initial stage of the analysis involved
the identification of the most frequently used ports across all devices, providing a basic
statistical overview. However, this statistic provides only limited insight into the structure of
58
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:67==
the devices and their services. Consequently, we proceeded to analyse the most common
port combinations and port pairs. Finally, we conducted a network structure analysis and
applied network analytics to gain a deeper understanding of the interconnections between
devices and configurations of services.
(a) Non­Honeypot
(b) Honeypot
Figure 6.20: Port distribution for BACnet
On the figure 6.20 are depicted the most frequent ports used by our BACnet devices.
Nearly all devices utilize port 47808, which is the designated BACnet port essential for
communication between BACnet devices over a network. The next most common ports
are 80 and 443, which are associated with HTTP and HTTPS services, respectively. The
presence of these ports suggests that these devices are likely to host a web interface for
remote monitoring and management. The primary distinction between the two is that port
443 ensures encrypted data transmission, thereby providing enhanced security.
Ports 1911 and 4911 are both related to the Tridium Niagara Framework. Port 4911 offers
enhanced security. This framework serves to facilitate communication between our de­
vices and buildings that support Niagara devices and applications. Port 8080 is primarily
employed for the purpose of HTTP proxy, frequently associated with administrative op­
erations on these devices. Finally, port 22 is well­known for enabling remote access to
devices via the SSH protocol. While numerous other open ports exist on our devices,
each of which refers to a specific service, we have chosen to focus on those that are of
the greatest significance.
Conversely, we examined the distinctive ports on devices designated as honeypots, ex­
cluding those matching the common ports on non­honeypot devices. The identified ports
are 135, 3389, and 445. Ports 135 and 3389 are associated with remote access proto­
cols. Port 135 handles the Remote Procedure Call (RPC) service, while port 3389 refers
to the Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP). Both ports can be exploited for unauthorised ac­
cess if not properly configured. Port 445 is employed for Service Message Block (SMB)
services, which are typically utilized for file and resource sharing.
Regarding open port combinations, shown on the figure 6.21, we observed no unusual
patterns. Predictably, the most frequent open ports also form the most common combi­
nations. An interesting finding was that some devices had only port 80 open, suggesting
they either serve a specific role (such as a configuration server) or are not part of a BACnet
network (indicating no communication with other BACnet devices). The grouping of these
port combinations is more clearly depicted in the network graph 6.22. Each color repre­
sents a port combination, with each node representing a port. For clarity, we selected
only an interconnected part of the network.
Securing the Internet of Things
59
==PAGE:68==
(a) Duo
(b) Combination
Figure 6.21: Port Combinations distribution for BACnet
Figure 6.22: Port Network
BACnet Broadcast Distribution Management Device (BBMD) Network
In the sec­
tion 5.1.2, we provided an overview of our approach. Next, we deploy the network and
analyze our findings. The BACnet attribute is unique across our datasets and is crucial
for forming and recreating real­life networks. Despite its potential, we faced limitations
as most devices had this attribute unconfigured (11,839 out of 12,758). Nevertheless, we
managed to create interconnected networks to analyze device behaviour.
Following the procedure outlined in the methodology, we used IPs as nodes and inter­
connected them based on the IPs each device could identify. Initially, the network did not
offer useful insights beyond confirming that it was properly connected and functional.
To gain deeper insights, we categorized each connection and attempted to export the
largest connected component 6.23.
However, the results were disappointing, as the
largest interconnected part was small and we could not export any insights of it. This
outcome was expected since each device can only see its local network, likely depicted
as communities in our graph 6.24.
To validate this hypothesis, we applied the Louvain Community algorithm, which struc­
tures communities by combining the most correlated/connected clusters. This resulted in
21 communities. Before accepting these results, we ensured that all nodes within each
community were interconnected, verifying that there was a path between any two random
nodes. Further analysis of community content confirmed that most communities consisted
of devices from the same vendor and often the same model.
Finally, we examined the two most connected IPs in the network. The most connected
IP was linked to Delta Controls enteliWEB, a platform for managing and monitoring
60
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:69==
Figure 6.23: Largest Connected Component
Figure 6.24: BBMD Network
Securing the Internet of Things
61
==PAGE:70==
devices. The second most connected device was the Delta Controls DSC­1616E, a
building controller. These findings align with our results, reinforcing the validity of our
community­based approach and supporting its use in further research.
Findings
While examining our dataset, we identified several noteworthy findings. We
discovered a few devices with exposed information, and four of these had particularly
sensitive data available. As shown in the figures 6.25a 6.25, these four devices had pub­
licly exposed credentials, posing a significant security risk. Additionally, extra information
about the device location was available, with one instance revealing the actual street ad­
dress. Upon further investigation, we found that this building and equipment belonged to
a government building in Canada.
(a) Exposed credentials
(b) Exposed device information
Figure 6.25: Exposed device information broken into half.
Another interesting observation is that all these devices were from the same vendor, Delta
Controls. This could be understandable if they had the largest market share, but that is
not the case. While this might be a coincidence, it raises a concern that there could be a
connection between device vendors and vulnerabilities.
6.6.2
MQTT
Although the MQTT dataset was the largest, it yielded only a few unique and noteworthy
findings. We primarily discovered exposed information in the available HTTP data, but
these entries were limited. Additionally, while there were significantly more entries con­
taining topic information, the insights derived from these were also limited. As with other
protocols, we conducted an extensive analysis of the open ports.
Port Analysis
Similar to the BACnet analysis, devices with more than 15 open ports
often indicate the presence of a honeypot or an anomaly. Given the importance of hon­
eypots in our study, we conducted our port analysis separately for non­honeypot devices
and honeypots. This approach allowed us to compare their functionalities and derive
meaningful conclusions.
Our analysis comprised four stages. First, we identified the most frequently used ports
across all devices, providing a basic statistical overview. While this statistic alone offers
62
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:71==
limited insight into the devices’ structures and services, it sets the foundation for further
analysis. Next, we examined the most common port combinations and port pairs. We
concluded with a network structure analysis and the application of network analytics to
gain a deeper understanding of device interconnections and service configurations.
(a) Non­Honeypot
(b) Honeypot
Figure 6.26: Port distribution for MQTT
In Figure 6.26 the most frequently used ports by our MQTT devices are depicted. Nearly
all devices utilize port 1883, the designated MQTT port essential for communication be­
tween MQTT devices over a network. The next most common ports are 8008 and 8009,
which are not officially assigned by the IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority) [95]
to any service. Unofficially, they could be associated with HTTP services, but this is not
guaranteed [96]. Port 9000 is commonly used for server applications, suggesting the
presence of a web interface for managing and monitoring the devices. Finally, port 8443
is well­known for HTTPS connections on web server applications. While there are many
other open ports on our devices, each referring to specific services, we focused on the
most significant ones.
Conversely, we examined the unique ports on devices labelled as honeypots, excluding
those matching the common ports on non­honeypot devices 6.27. The identified ports are
21, 22, 80, 443, and 3306. Ports 80 and 443 are associated with HTTP and HTTPS ser­
vices, respectively. Port 22 is commonly known for Secure Shell (SSH), allowing remote
access to the devices. Port 21 is used for File Transfer Protocol (FTP) communications,
enabling file transfers between devices. Finally, port 3306 is commonly associated with
MySQL servers, which is unusual for an MQTT device.
(a) Duo
(b) Combination
Figure 6.27: Port Combinations distribution for MQTT
Regarding open port combinations, shown in Figure 6.27, we observed no unusual pat­
Securing the Internet of Things
63
==PAGE:72==
terns. Predictably, the most frequently open ports also form the most common combi­
nations. An interesting finding was that the combination of ports 8008 and 8009 is more
common than any combination involving port 1883.
Exposed Credentials
While examining our dataset, we identified several noteworthy
findings. We discovered a few devices with exposed information, and four of these had
particularly sensitive data available. As shown in Figures 6.28, these nine devices had
publicly exposed credentials, posing a significant security risk. As we mentioned earlier
this information was found in the HTTP part of our data.
Figure 6.28: Exposed Credentials
Topics
While topics helped us understand how the protocol works and how information
can be exposed, it is crucial to note that 85% of the devices labelled as vulnerable have no
topics available. Interestingly, some of these devices return successful connection codes.
A successful connection code does not necessarily mean full access to the device; the
connection might still be limited, focusing on specific functionalities like subscribing to
topics or receiving information from the broker. Additionally, brokers might have rules
preventing public topic availability to clients.
Conversely, devices with connection codes indicating failure or blocked connections can
still discover some topics. This is not uncommon, as specific error messages might es­
tablish limited connections and discover some information. There is also the possibility
of partially successful connections, experiencing issues but still retrieving some informa­
tion and topics. In the graph, we can identify the most common connection codes among
MQTT devices, for both Vulnerable and Non – Vulnerable devices. Interestingly, the dis­
tribution is following the same trends among the two types of devices, meaning that no
valuable assumptions can be made. It is also worth noting that connection code 0, is less
common among vulnerable devices, rather that the non­vulnerable ones, indicating that
a successful connection does not result in device exploitation.
As mentioned in the results section, there was a high correlation between ASN numbers
and vulnerabilities. An ASN (Autonomous System Number) represents a collection of
networks managed by the same entity, usually an internet service provider (ISP). Upon
analyzing our data, we found that more than 63% of our vulnerable devices were asso­
ciated with just 10 ASNs. These results are more clearly depicted in the accompanying
graph 6.29.
We further researched the most popular ASNs to determine which providers they corre­
spond to. Notably, 8 out of the top 10 ASNs originate either in China or the US. Specifi­
cally, Alibaba and Amazon each appear twice in the list. The most prevalent entry, how­
ever, is Tencent—a multibillion­dollar Chinese internet and technology company offering
services such as messaging apps, video gaming, and cloud computing. The sectors in
64
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:73==
Table 6.21: Most frequent ASNs among vulnerable devices.
ASN
COUNT/%
Name
45090
2034 / 28%
TENCENT ­ Shenzhen Tencent Computer Systems Ltd., CN
37963
1208 / 16%
ALIBABA ­ Hangzhou Alibaba Advertising Co.,Ltd., CN
16509
435 / 6.0%
AMAZON­02, US
14061
264 / 3.5%
DIGITALOCEAN­ASN, US
45102
182 / 2.5%
ALIBABA­CN­NET Alibaba US Technology Co., Ltd., CN
4134
147 / 2.0%
CHINANET­BACKBONE No.31, Jin­rong Street, CN
16276
135 / 1.9%
OVH, FR
24940
130 / 1.7%
HETZNER­AS, DE
8075
117 / 1.6%
MICROSOFT­CORP­MSN­AS­BLOCK, US
14618
117 / 1.6%
AMAZON­AES, US
which Tencent operates align with MQTT use cases, raising concerns about the security
of their services.
Figure 6.29: ASN distribution on Vulnerable devices
6.6.3
Modbus
Despite the respectable size of the Modbus dataset, there was no noteworthy information
exposed in the data. For this reason, we will solely focus on the port analysis, to draw our
final conclusions.
Port Analysis
Similarly, with the rest of the protocols, devices with more than 15 open
ports often indicate the presence of a honeypot or an anomaly. This allowed us to compare
and derive meaningful conclusions about their differing functionalities.
Similarly to the previous protocols, we followed the same four stages. On the figure 6.30
are depicted the most frequent ports used by our Modbus devices. By a big margin, the
most frequent port was the 502, which is the designated Modbus port. Surprisingly less
than half of the discovered devices used that port, and while that is not a bad thing, it is
a noteworthy statistic for the type of services Modbus devices use. The next two most
common ports were 80 and 443, associated with HTTP and HTTPS services respectively.
Port 22 is commonly known for secure shell (SSH), allowing remote access to the devices.
Port 21 is used for File Transfer Protocol (FTP) communications, enabling file transfer
Securing the Internet of Things
65
==PAGE:74==
between devices. Finally, port 123, is known for the Network Time Protocol (NTP), a
protocol that allows devices on the same network to synchronize their clocks.
(a) Non­Honeypot
(b) Honeypot
Figure 6.30: Port distribution for Modbus
Conversely, we examined the unique ports on devices labelled as honeypots, excluding
those matching the common ports on non­honeypot devices. Except those ports, the rest
were very balanced distributed, so we chose to the ports 3306, 25, and 50000 to further
explore. The port 3306 is commonly associated with MySQL server which is odd for a
Modbus device to use. Port 25 is commonly known for communication by the Simple Mail
Transfer Protocol (SMTP). A protocol, that builds the foundation for mail delivery services,
by establishing communication between a server and a client. Finally, port 50000, while it
is a common port, does not have an assigned service by the Internet Assigned Numbers
Authority (IANA).
(a) Duo
(b) Combination
Figure 6.31: Port combinations distribution for Modbus
Regarding open port combinations, shown in figure 6.31, we observed no unusual pat­
terns. Predictably, the most frequent open ports also form the most common combina­
tions. An interesting finding was that port 3306 is part of the most common combination
on both graphs. Finally, we are depicting how those port combinations form communities
interconnected with each other 6.32.
6.6.4
OPC UA
Due to the limited size of the OPC UA dataset, there was no noteworthy information ex­
posed in the data. For this reason, we will solely focus on the port analysis, to draw our
final conclusions.
66
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:75==
Figure 6.32: Port Network
Port Analysis
Similarly, with the rest of the protocols, devices with more than 15 open
ports often indicate the presence of a honeypot or an anomaly. This allowed us to compare
and derive meaningful conclusions about their differing functionalities.
Similarly to the previous protocols, we followed the same four stages. Figure 6.33 depicts
the most frequent ports used by our OPC UA devices. By a big margin, the most frequent
port was the 4840, which is the designated OPC UA port. It is noteworthy that less than
half of the discovered devices used that port. This is not a bad thing in itself, but it is an
interesting statistic in the context of the types of services OPC UA devices use. The next
two most prevalent ports were 80 and 443, which are associated with HTTP and HTTPS
services, respectively. Port 22 is commonly associated with Secure Shell (SSH), which
enables remote access to the devices. Port 21 is utilized for File Transfer Protocol (FTP)
communications, which facilitates the transfer of files between devices. A noteworthy
finding is that the most common open ports on this protocol, after its designated one, are
the same as those identified in the Mobus protocol. Finally, port 1883, which is associated
with the MQTT protocol, was a notable finding as it represents the first instance of a port
belonging to one of our protocols being accessible on another.
(a) Non­Honeypot
(b) Honeypot
Figure 6.33: Port distribution for OPC UA
In contrast, we specifically focused on ports identified on devices classified as honeypots.
We excluded ports that also appeared frequently on non­honeypot devices, considering
them common communication channels. The remaining ports on honeypots exhibited a
relatively even distribution of usage frequencies. This is due to the limited size of our
dataset, hindering further exploration based solely on port usage.
Regarding open port combinations, shown in figure 6.34, we observed no unusual pat­
Securing the Internet of Things
67
==PAGE:76==
(a) Duo
(b) Combination
Figure 6.34: Port combinations distribution for OPC UA
terns. Predictably, the most frequent open ports also form the most common combina­
tions. An interesting finding was that the most common duo did not include the designated
OPC UA port, without it being particularly important. Finally, we are depicting how those
port combinations form communities interconnected with each other 6.35.
Figure 6.35: Port Network
6.6.5
DNP3
Despite DNP3 dataset being among the smallest ones, there were some unique and note­
worthy findings, mainly relying on the Control Codes in its data. We will present those
findings to a greater extent in their designated area. Finally, as we did with the rest of the
protocols, we analyzed its open ports in extent.
Port Analysis
Similarly, with the rest of the protocols, devices with more than 15 open
ports often indicate the presence of a honeypot or an anomaly. This allowed us to compare
and derive meaningful conclusions about their differing functionalities.
Our analysis of DNP3 devices involved examining the most frequently used ports 6.36.
As expected, port 20000, the designated DNP3 port, was the most common. It is note­
worthy that less than half of the discovered devices utilised this port. While this is not
necessarily a negative finding, it is nevertheless a noteworthy statistic in the context of
the specific purpose of DNP3 devices. The next two most prevalent ports were 80 and
443, which correspond to the HTTP and HTTPS services, respectively. These ports indi­
cate the potential presence of web interfaces on some DNP3 devices. Furthermore, port
22, which is commonly associated with Secure Shell (SSH), suggests the potential for
remote access functionalities. A noteworthy finding is that the most commonly open ports
on DNP3 devices, in addition to the designated port 20000, closely resemble those used
68
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:77==
by Modbus and OPC UA protocols. This indicates a potential overlap in functionalities
or communication channels. Finally, we observed the presence of open ports 9443 and
9191. As neither of these ports have been allocated a specific IANA (Internet Assigned
Numbers Authority) designation, it is likely that they serve custom purposes specific to
certain devices or software. Furthermore, port 502, which is associated with the Modbus
protocol, was also present on some devices.
(a) Non­Honeypot
(b) Honeypot
Figure 6.36: Port distribution for DNP3
Conversely, we examined the unique ports on devices labelled as honeypots, excluding
those matching the common ports on non­honeypot devices. Interestingly, there were not
any of the common ports in the Honeypot distribution, possibly indicating either that our
dataset is too small to conclude, or that those honeypots were wrongfully deployed. The
identified ports are 8200, 2404, 9000, 3333, 37777, and 9999. None of these ports were
assigned to any specific service by IANA (Internet Assigned Numbers Authority). More
specifically, ports 8200, 9000 and 9999, are all unknown, meaning that most likely are
user­defined for custom purposes.
(a) Duo
(b) Combination
Figure 6.37: Port combinations distribution for DNP3
Regarding open port combinations, shown in figure 6.37, we observed no unusual pat­
terns. Predictably, the most frequent open ports also form the most common combina­
tions. Finally, we are depicting how those port combinations form communities intercon­
nected with each other 6.38.
Control Code
As previously discussed, the DNP3 dataset contains data source, desti­
nation, and Control Code fields. While source and destination addresses are likely local
Securing the Internet of Things
69
==PAGE:78==
Figure 6.38: Port Network
and difficult to interpret definitively within our network, the Control Codes provide valuable
insights into communication behaviour.
The analysis revealed that codes 11, 63, 68, 73, 201, and 239 were the most frequently
used. According to the DNP3 specification, codes 68, 11, 63, 239, and 73 are user­
configurable and don’t correspond to standardized commands. This indicates a level
of customization within the communication on this network. The most prevalent code,
201, was the only one that also corresponded to a specific operation, Unconfirmed Write.
This means devices are transmitting data without necessarily expecting confirmation of
delivery from the recipient. This approach can improve efficiency but also introduces a
potential lack of reliability in message delivery.
In addition, we will further re into the DNP3 correlation matrix, which yielded the most
intriguing findings compared to the other datasets we analyzed. By examining these cor­
relations, we can extract meaningful insights about network behaviour.
A particularly striking observation is the absence of correlation between longitude and
latitude. This suggests that a significant portion of the devices are not geographically
clustered, potentially indicating a diverse distribution across different regions.
One of the strongest correlations exists between longitude and ASN (Autonomous Sys­
tem Number). This finding aligns with our expectations, as changing longitude often cor­
responds to a shift in the region, and we previously established that ASNs are associated
with IP addresses managed by specific domains.
Another noteworthy correlation is the strong link between source address and device IP.
This implies that we can potentially map source addresses to specific IP addresses within
our network. However, the lack of correlation between the destination address and other
variables suggests that the corresponding destination devices might not be included in
our dataset.
70
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:79==
7
Discussion
In this chapter, we will present the findings obtained throughout this thesis. Our goal is to
interpret and present our final results comprehensively. The discussion is divided into two
parts: the first part explores the insights we have gained, while the second part addresses
the limitations we encountered in our research.
7.1
Key Findings
After the finale of our data analysis chapter, we have derived numerous insights regard­
ing our Internet of Things (IoT) and Operational Technology (OT) protocols, particularly
in terms of their behaviour in various scenarios. While some of these insights may not
directly serve our immediate purpose, they are instrumental in building foundational knowl­
edge for proper manipulation of these protocols.
One immediate observation was the significant differences between the datasets. Al­
though our tools provided mostly consistent attributes per protocol, the information in­
cluded was not always relevant. Upon further investigation, we concluded that these dis­
crepancies were due to incorrect data input on the devices, rather than errors in our data
acquisition tools. While inconsistent data between different protocols is not necessarily
problematic, inconsistency within the same dataset significantly impacts the success of
our work. We will discuss these limitations further in the following section.
Before we get into specific details, two contradictory findings stood out. Firstly, our clas­
sification was quite successful across protocols, whereas our clustering results were less
favourable.
The classification results were mixed. We focused on six protocols and tested four dif­
ferent classification models. While many combinations worked, others did not perform as
well. A notable trend was the behaviour of the Decision Tree Classifier, which consistently
scored high but prioritized accuracy over precision. This was particularly evident due to
our unbalanced dataset, where predicting all entries as non­vulnerable resulted in high
accuracy but low precision. Additionally, the Decision Tree algorithm is prone to overfit­
ting, combining that with the special nature of our data, and the results of this algorithm
are meaningless to us.
For the SVC, K­Neighbors and Logistic Regression, the results were more balanced but
also more puzzling in terms of determining the superior model. Logistic regression was
a strong performer across all datasets, maintaining stability and reliability. It balanced
precision and recall effectively, making it suitable for most cases. Interestingly, it per­
formed well even on limited datasets. In fact, it performed better on limited data than on
the DNP3 protocol, which had many attributes and high correlation scores between them.
This suggests that logistic regression handles unique dataset combinations effectively,
though consistent testing is challenging.
K Neighbors and SVC were stable and consistent but generally underperformed com­
pared to logistic regression. Notably, these two algorithms performed identically in all
tests, raising questions about how to choose between them. They also excelled with the
DNP3 dataset, the most feature­rich one, displaying their preference for well­correlated
attributes. Overall, our classification approach yielded mixed results, highlighting areas
for improvement.
Securing the Internet of Things
71
==PAGE:80==
Our clustering approach produced more varied results. Evaluating clustering performance
requires more than just metrics; it also involves assessing whether the clusters serve
their intended purpose. In most cases, our clusters were well­shaped and compact, a
necessary prerequisite for further evaluation. However, none of the clusters showed high
agreement with the vulnerability column. Interestingly, the highest agreement scores were
associated with the clustering results that had the poorest performance on other metrics.
This was particularly evident with the DBSCAN algorithm, which, despite relatively high
agreement scores, failed to create meaningful clusters.
In summary, our findings highlight the complexities and challenges in both the classifica­
tion and clustering of IoT and OT protocols. While our classification models demonstrated
varied success, our clustering approach requires further refinement to achieve meaningful
results.
In our pursuit of achieving our objectives, we also uncovered numerous insights within the
dataset. We obtained general protocol information, such as open ports, as well as spe­
cialized protocol attributes. We gathered data on how these protocols handle open ports
and attempted to recreate a network of potential connections between them. Addition­
ally, we selected certain attributes for further analysis based on correlation matrices. We
examined the most frequent vendors, products, and ASNs to identify trends and patterns
among the vulnerable devices. Beyond these intriguing insights, we also encountered
sensitive information, including exposed credentials and addresses. The fact that our lim­
ited dataset contained so much exposed information prompted us to consider the vast
number of devices worldwide that might also have exposed credentials and addresses,
accessible to anyone. These findings heightened our awareness of the security risks
facing critical equipment.
7.2
Limitations
While we derived many insights from our dataset and successfully trained our models,
several limitations hindered our progress. Addressing these limitations could further en­
hance our approach and augment our findings. Here, we outline the key limitations we
encountered:
Shodan API
One significant source of delays was the additional Shodan scan we had
to conduct. Shodan provides limited access to users; even our academic license had
a cap of 10,000 entries per month for bulk operations. This limitation forced us to use
a custom script to gather information per IP. While this approach met our needs without
data limits, it was slow. Parsing information for a specific IP took about 1.5 seconds, which
seems reasonable initially but resulted in significant delays when multiplied by thousands
of entries. Consequently, our enriched dataset had fewer entries and did not match the
size of the initial dataset.
Outdated Dataset
We found that many initially detected devices were no longer avail­
able. Our initial dataset, gathered in December 2023, saw about 20% of the devices
either become unavailable or change IPs. Although the age of the dataset did not affect
our analysis and classification, having more current data would have provided additional
information for training.
Inconsistent Data within an atttribute
Device attributes are provided and configured
by their owners or vendors. Unfortunately, even devices using the same protocol had
72
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:81==
different approaches to providing information. For instance, device locations varied, with
some providing actual addresses and others indicating relative locations within a room.
Inconsistent Data Between Protocols
One of our biggest challenges in generalizing
our model was the inconsistent data across protocols. We could not successfully merge
cross­protocol models to create an inclusive one as initially targeted. This was primarily
because our algorithms relied on protocol­specific attributes to make predictions.
7.3
Future Work
As this thesis concludes, a significant milestone in OT device classification has been
achieved. This field is at a pivotal point, and our work represents only a small beginning.
New opportunities are now available to explore, not only by addressing our limitations but
also by further developing our framework. In this section, we present several directions
for possible future work that could enhance and expand our research.
Acquire More Data
Our datasets, particularly for the last few protocols, were very un­
balanced and limited. To address this, we need to gather more data. As discussed in the
methodology section, larger training datasets yield more accurate results. Additional data
can be obtained either by conducting further scans or by sourcing prepared datasets,
though the latter is not recommended due to integration difficulties.
Thus, additional
scanning—requiring time or a business license from Shodan—will significantly enhance
our findings and improve generalizability.
Broaden the Domain
We focused on OT protocols due to time constraints, but there
are many more OT and IoT protocols that could be included. The ultimate goal would be to
develop a comprehensive framework capable of identifying vulnerabilities in any publicly
exposed device. While this is ambitious, a practical starting point would be to incorporate
the remaining IoT protocols we initially excluded.
Develop Cross­Protocol Models
We were unable to create a model that generalizes
across different protocols. With more balanced and larger datasets, developing a generic
model is still feasible. This would allow for broader applicability and greater flexibility in
identifying vulnerabilities.
Incorporate AI
Incorporating AI, although challenging, represents the best option for
advancing this workflow. While conventional machine learning algorithms performed well
in our tests, they sometimes failed to identify patterns that were easily recognizable by hu­
mans. To support this proposal, we tested our data with popular public models like Gemini
[97] and ChatGPT [98]. The results, while not perfect, were more promising than those
from traditional machine learning algorithms. However, initial integration and model cre­
ation would need to be developed from the ground up, as there is no existing framework.
Additionally, ensuring data privacy is crucial, as we are handling sensitive information.
Integrate Network Traffic Data
Several studies have utilized internet traffic to perform
similar vulnerability assessments. While our research took a different approach, combin­
ing these methods could provide more advanced and realistic vulnerability predictions.
Integrating network traffic data could enhance our models’ accuracy and relevance in
real­world scenarios.
Securing the Internet of Things
73
==PAGE:82==
74
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:83==
8
Conclusion
In this thesis, we presented a comprehensive framework of the security posture of OT
devices by introducing novel methods for classifying and clustering OT devices exposed
on the internet. We focused on OT protocols due to the severe consequences of their po­
tential exploitation. Specifically, we examined Modbus, BACnet, MQTT, OPC UA, DNP3,
and RTPS protocols. We employed machine learning approaches for our analysis, as
they are uniquely capable of handling complex data and identifying patterns within them.
Initially, we applied data analysis techniques to our datasets to extract insights that would
inform our algorithm training. Using state­of­the­art analysis and machine learning tools,
we developed a holistic view of each dataset and identified vulnerability patterns. We eval­
uated both our classification and clustering results, finding that our classification models
were highly reliable, whereas our clustering performance was less satisfactory. While
clustering would be a more futuristic and easy­to­deploy approach, the results were not
promising enough to be useful. Conversely, the classification approach required more
preliminary data work but yielded consistent and highly confident results. Additionally,
our general analysis of the datasets revealed alarming findings. We discovered a sub­
stantial amount of sensitive information publicly exposed, which could be exploited for
malicious purposes. In conclusion, our work highlights the valuable insights that can be
derived from these datasets. By analyzing and utilizing this information, we created reli­
able classification models for each protocol, capable of confidently identifying vulnerable
devices within a similar dataset.
Securing the Internet of Things
75
==PAGE:84==
76
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:85==
Bibliography
[1]
State of IoT 2023: Number of connected IoT devices growing. https://iot-analytics.
com/number-connected-iot-devices/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[2]
Zscaler ThreatLabz Finds a 400 Increase in IoT and OT Malware Attacks Year­over­
Year, Underscoring Need for Better Zero Trust Security to Protect Critical Infrastruc­
tures. https://www.zscaler.com/press/zscaler-threatlabz-finds-400-increase-iot-and-
ot-malware-attacks-year-over-year-underscoring. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[3]
R. Yaben et al. “Towards identifying neglected, obsolete, and abandoned IoT and
OT devices”. In: Proceedings of the 8th Network Traffic Measurement and Analysis
Conference (TMA Conference 2024) IFIP. 2024.
[4]
Everything You Must Know About IT/OT Convergence. https://opswatacademy.
com/blog/everything-you-must-know-about-it-ot-convergence. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[5]
IoT Devices. https://www.arm.com/glossary/iot-devices. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[6]
Maris Sekar. Machine learning for auditors: Automating fraud investigations through
artificial intelligence. Cited by: 7; All Open Access, Green Open Access. 2022,
pp. 131–134. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4842-8051-5. URL: https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85144786141&doi=10.1007%2f978-1-4842-8051-
5&partnerID=40&md5=885a4732c7ab7af6ab7e3717d2b52fd1.
[7]
“On Preventing and Detecting Cyber Attacks in Industrial Control System Networks”.
In: (June 2019), pp. 21–28. DOI: 10.26636/jtit.2019.131219. URL: https://jtit.pl/
jtit/article/view/552.
[8]
What is BACnet. Everything you need to know. https://www.cim.io/blog/what-is-
bacnet-everything-you-need-to-know. Accessed: 22­05­2024.
[9]
BACnet. Research Study Indicates BACnet Global Market Share. Available: https:
//bacnet.org/pressreleases/research-study-indicates-bacnet-global-market-share-over-
60. Accessed: 2024­05­23.
[10]
What is BACnet? Everything you need to know. Available: https://www.cim.io/
blog/what-is-bacnet-everything-you-need-to-know. Accessed: 2024­05­23.
[11]
How to Solve Three BACnet Security Issues. Available: https://www.linkedin.com/
pulse/how-solve-threebacnet-security-issues-dr-alina-matyukhina. Accessed: 2024­
05­23.
[12]
MQTT: The Standard for IoT Messaging. https://mqtt.org/. Accessed: 31­05­2024.
[13]
Joseph Anthraper and Jaidip Kotak. “Security, Privacy and Forensic Concern of
MQTT Protocol”. In: SSRN Electronic Journal (Jan. 2019). DOI: 10 . 2139 / ssrn .
3355193.
[14]
Syaiful Andy, Budi Rahardjo, and Bagus Hanindhito. “Attack scenarios and security
analysis of MQTT communication protocol in IoT system”. In: 2017 4th International
Conference on Electrical Engineering, Computer Science and Informatics (EECSI).
2017, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/EECSI.2017.8239179.
[15]
MQTT Vulnerabilities. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8779830/.
Accessed: 31­05­2024.
[16]
Muhammad Husnain et al. “Preventing MQTT Vulnerabilities Using IoT­Enabled In­
trusion Detection System”. In: Sensors 22.2 (2022). ISSN: 1424­8220. DOI: 10 .
3390/s22020567. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/22/2/567.
[17]
MODBUS APPLICATION PROTOCOL SPECIFICATION. https://www.modbus.org/
docs/ModbusApplicationProtocolV11b.pdf. Accessed: 31­05­2024.
Securing the Internet of Things
77
==PAGE:86==
[18]
Modbus Security Issues and How to Mitigate Cyber Risks. https://www.veridify.
com/modbus-security-issues-and-how-to-mitigate-cyber-risks/. Accessed: 31­05­
2024.
[19]
DNP3 Protocol. https://www.dnp.org/About/Overview- of- DNP3- Protocol. Ac­
cessed: 31­05­2024.
[20]
DNP3 Features. https://www.dnp.org/About/Features-of-DNP3. Accessed: 31­05­
2024.
[21]
Qais Saif Qassim, Musab A. M. Ali, and Nooritawati Md Tahir. “Security Analysis of
DNP3 Protocol in SCADA System”. In: 2023 IEEE 13th International Conference on
Control System, Computing and Engineering (ICCSCE). 2023, pp. 314–319. DOI:
10.1109/ICCSCE58721.2023.10237142.
[22]
Unified Architecture. https://opcfoundation.org/about/opc-technologies/opc-ua/.
Accessed: 31­05­2024.
[23]
What are the key features of OPC UA? https://www.maplesystems.com/supportcenter/
faq. Accessed: 31­05­2024.
[24]
Exploring OPC UA Security Concepts. https://opcconnect.opcfoundation.org/2020/
06/exploring-opc-ua-security-concepts/. Accessed: 31­05­2024.
[25]
What is DDS? https://www.dds-foundation.org/what-is-dds-3/. Accessed: 31­05­
2024.
[26]
DATA DISTRIBUTION SERVICE (DDS). https://www.omg.org/omg-dds-portal/.
Accessed: 31­05­2024.
[27]
The Real­time Publish­Subscribe Protocol (RTPS) DDS Interoperability Wire Pro­
tocol Specificatio. https://www.omg.org/spec/DDSI-RTPS/2.2/PDF. Accessed:
31­05­2024.
[28]
RTPS Introduction. https://www.eprosima.com/index.php/resources-all/whitepapers/
rtps. Accessed: 31­05­2024.
[29]
Multiple Data Distribution Service (DDS) Implementations (Update A). https://www.
cisa.gov/news-events/ics-advisories/icsa-21-315-02. Accessed: 31­05­2024.
[30]
IN McAteer et al. “Security vulnerabilities and cyber threat analysis of the AMQP
protocol for the internet of things”. In: Deakin University. 2017. URL: https://hdl.
handle.net/10536/DRO/DU:30138758.
[31]
CoAP Protocol: Key Features, Use Cases, and Pros/Cons. https://www.emqx.com/
en/blog/coap-protocol. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[32]
TR­069 CPE WAN Management Protocol (CWMP Protocol). https://www.axiros.
com/knowledge-base/tr-069. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[33]
Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP Protocol). https : / / www .
wallarm.com/what/extensible-messaging-presence-protocol. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[34]
Shodan. https://www.shodan.io/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[35]
Maris Sekar. Complete Guide to Shodan. 2016. URL: https://ia800705.us.archive.
org/17/items/shodan-book-extras/shodan/shodan.pdf.
[36]
Zakir Durumeric et al. “A Search Engine Backed by Internet­Wide Scanning”. In:
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Commu­
nications Security. CCS ’15. Denver, Colorado, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2015, pp. 542–553. ISBN: 9781450338325. DOI: 10 . 1145 / 2810103 .
2813703. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2810103.2813703.
[37]
What is machine learning and how does it work? In­depth guide. https://www.
techtarget.com/searchenterpriseai/definition/machine-learning-ML. Accessed: 22­05­
2024.
[38]
Maris Sekar. Machine learning for auditors: Automating fraud investigations through
artificial intelligence. Cited by: 7; All Open Access, Green Open Access. 2022,
78
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:87==
pp. 99–124. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4842-8051-5. URL: https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-85144786141&doi=10.1007%2f978-1-4842-8051-
5&partnerID=40&md5=885a4732c7ab7af6ab7e3717d2b52fd1.
[39]
Decision Tree Classifier explained in real­life: picking a vacation destination. https:
//towardsdatascience.com/decision-tree-classifier-explained-in-real-life-picking-a-
vacation-destination-6226b2b60575. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[40]
Decision Tree Classifier explained in real­life: picking a vacation destination. https:
//towardsdatascience.com/decision-tree-classifier-explained-in-real-life-picking-a-
vacation-destination-6226b2b60575. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[41]
SVC Model in Python. https://randomresearchai.medium.com/svc-model-in-python-
2d7b6d9434b4. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[42]
Linear Regression Tutorial with an Example Classifier for Apples and Oranges.
https://medium.com/@glennlenormand/linear-regression-tutorial-with-an-example-
classifier-for-apples-and-oranges-9b00ebfd7c89. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[43]
KNN (K Nearest Neighbors) and KNeighborsClassifier — What it is, how it works,
and a practical example. https://luis- miguel- code.medium.com/knn- k- nearest-
neighbors - and - kneighborsclassifier - what - it - is - how - it - works - and - a - practical -
914ec089e467. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[44]
K­Means. https://stanford.edu/~cpiech/cs221/handouts/kmeans.html. Accessed:
1­06­2024.
[45]
AGGLOMERATIVE HIERARCHICAL CLUSTERING (AHC). https://www.xlstat.
com/en/solutions/features/agglomerative-hierarchical-clustering-ahc. Accessed: 1­
06­2024.
[46]
Unveiling the Power of DBSCAN: A Comprehensive Guide. https://medium.com/
@ajayverma23/unveiling-the-power-of-dbscan-a-comprehensive-guide-bc954d742611.
Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[47]
A. Shabtai et al Y. Meidan M. Bohadana. “Detection of Unauthorized IoT Devices
Using Machine Learning Techniques”. In: 2017. DOI: http://arxiv.org/abs/1709.
04647.
[48]
Arunan Sivanathan et al. “Characterizing and classifying IoT traffic in smart cities
and campuses”. In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Work­
shops (INFOCOM WKSHPS). 2017, pp. 559–564. DOI: 10.1109/INFCOMW.2017.
8116438.
[49]
Pedro R. J. Pêgo and Luís Nunes. “Automatic discovery and classifications of IoT
devices”. In: 2017 12th Iberian Conference on Information Systems and Technolo­
gies (CISTI). 2017, pp. 1–10. DOI: 10.23919/CISTI.2017.7975691.
[50]
Understanding the Levenshtein Distance Equation for Beginners. https://medium.
com/@ethannam/understanding- the- levenshtein- distance- equation- for- beginners-
c4285a5604f0. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[51]
Understanding TF­IDF (Term Frequency­Inverse Document Frequency). https://
www . geeksforgeeks . org / understanding - tf - idf - term - frequency - inverse - document -
frequency/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[52]
Joan Nolla Suárez and Ante Salcedo. “ID3 and k­means Based Methodology for In­
ternet of Things Device Classification”. In: 2017 International Conference on Mecha­
tronics, Electronics and Automotive Engineering (ICMEAE). 2017, pp. 129–133.
DOI: 10.1109/ICMEAE.2017.10.
[53]
Decision Tree ID3 Algorithm |Machine Learning. https://medium.com/@ashirbadpradhan8115/
decision-tree-id3-algorithm-machine-learning-4120d8ba013b. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[54]
Mandira Hegde et al. “Identification of Botnet Activity in IoT Network Traffic Us­
ing Machine Learning”. In: 2020 International Conference on Intelligent Data Sci­
Securing the Internet of Things
79
==PAGE:88==
ence Technologies and Applications (IDSTA). 2020, pp. 21–27. DOI: 10 . 1109 /
IDSTA50958.2020.9264143.
[55]
Tomasz Bujlow, Tahir Riaz, and Jens Myrup Pedersen. “A method for classification
of network traffic based on C5.0 Machine Learning Algorithm”. In: 2012 Interna­
tional Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC). 2012,
pp. 237–241. DOI: 10.1109/ICCNC.2012.6167418.
[56]
C5.0 Algorithm of Decision Tree. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/c5-0-algorithm-of-
decision-tree/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[57]
Thuy T.T. Nguyen and Grenville Armitage. “A survey of techniques for internet traffic
classification using machine learning”. In: IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials
10.4 (2008), pp. 56–76. DOI: 10.1109/SURV.2008.080406.
[58]
Andrea Tundis, Eric Marc Modo Nga, and Max Mühlhäuser. “An exploratory analysis
on the impact of Shodan scanning tool on the network attacks”. In: Proceedings of
the 16th International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security. ARES ’21.
Vienna, Austria: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021. ISBN: 9781450390514.
DOI: 10.1145/3465481.3469197. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3465481.3469197.
[59]
Sofía Mulero­Palencia and Victor Monzon Baeza. “Detection of Vulnerabilities in
Smart Buildings Using the Shodan Tool”. In: Electronics 12.23 (2023). ISSN: 2079­
9292. DOI: 10.3390/electronics12234815. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/
12/23/4815.
[60]
Shreyas Srinivasa, Jens Myrup Pedersen, and Emmanouil Vasilomanolakis. “Open
for hire: attack trends and misconfiguration pitfalls of IoT devices”. In: Proceedings
of the 21st ACM Internet Measurement Conference. IMC ’21. Virtual Event: Asso­
ciation for Computing Machinery, 2021, pp. 195–215. ISBN: 9781450391290. DOI:
10.1145/3487552.3487833. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3487552.3487833.
[61]
What is the Mirai Botnet? https://www.radware.com/security/ddos- knowledge-
center/ddospedia/mirai/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[62]
Manuel Karl et al. “No keys to the kingdom required: a comprehensive investigation
of missing authentication vulnerabilities in the wild”. In: Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM Internet Measurement Conference. IMC ’22. Nice, France: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2022, pp. 619–632. ISBN: 9781450392594. DOI: 10.1145/
3517745.3561446. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/3517745.3561446.
[63]
Abir Dutta and Shri Kant. “Implementation of Cyber Threat Intelligence Platform
on Internet of Things (IoT) using TinyML Approach for Deceiving Cyber Invasion”.
In: 2021 International Conference on Electrical, Computer, Communications and
Mechatronics Engineering (ICECCME). 2021, pp. 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/ICECCME52200.
2021.9590959.
[64]
Ricardo Yaben et al. “Towards identifying neglected, obsolete, and abandoned IoT
and OT devices”. English. In: Proceedings of the 8th Network Traffic Measurement
and Analysis Conference (TMA Conference 2024). 8<sup>th</sup> Network Traf­
fic Measurement and Analysis Conference, TMA ; Conference date: 21­05­2024
Through 24­05­2024. IFIP, 2024.
[65]
Jacob S. Rae, MD Minhaz Chowdhury, and Mike Jochen. “Internet of Things Device
Hardening Using Shodan.io and ShoVAT: A Survey”. In: 2019 IEEE International
Conference on Electro Information Technology (EIT). 2019, pp. 379–385. DOI: 10.
1109/EIT.2019.8834072.
[66]
Maria Bada and Ildiko Pete. “An exploration of the cybercrime ecosystem around
Shodan”. In: 2020 7th International Conference on Internet of Things: Systems,
Management and Security (IOTSMS). 2020, pp. 1–8. DOI: 10.1109/IOTSMS52051.
2020.9340224.
80
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:89==
[67]
Ebuka Chinaechetam Nkoro et al. “Industrial Network Attack Vulnerability Detection
and Analysis using Shodan Eye Scanning Technology”. In: 2022 13th International
Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC).
2022, pp. 886–889. DOI: 10.1109/ICTC55196.2022.9952825.
[68]
Ryan Chinn. “Botnet Detection: Honeypots and the Internet of Things”. In: 2015.
[69]
Ilias Chalvatzis, Dimitrios A. Karras, and Rallis C. Papademetriou. “Evaluation of
Security Vulnerability Scanners for Small and Medium Enterprises Business Net­
works Resilience towards Risk Assessment”. In: 2019 IEEE International Confer­
ence on Artificial Intelligence and Computer Applications (ICAICA). 2019, pp. 52–
58. DOI: 10.1109/ICAICA.2019.8873438.
[70]
Securing the Internet of Things ­ Github Repository. https://github.com/DrMilo21/
Securing-the-Internet-of-Things-. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[71]
Lundsgaard N. P. Lundin J. A. “Unmasking digital ghost ships: Comprehensive
scanning, statistical analysis, and ethical disclosure of vulnerable IoT and OT de­
vices in Denmark and beyond”. In: DTU Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science., 2024.
[72]
Felipe Pezoa et al. “Foundations of JSON schema”. In: Proceedings of the 25th
International Conference on World Wide Web. International World Wide Web Con­
ferences Steering Committee. 2016, pp. 263–273.
[73]
ZGrab. https://github.com/zmap/zgrab/tree/master. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[74]
Pandas documentation. https://tex.stackexchange.com/questions/3587/how-can-i-
use-bibtex-to-cite-a-web-page. Accessed: 22­05­2024.
[75]
NetworkX. https://networkx.org/. Accessed: 22­05­2024.
[76]
NetworkX Louvain Community. https://networkx.org/documentation/stable/reference/
algorithms/generated/networkx.algorithms.community.louvain.louvain_communities.
html. Accessed: 22­05­2024.
[77]
Building a Honeypot. https://www.hackerfactor.com/blog/index.php?/archives/841-
Building-a-Basic-Honeypot.html. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[78]
Scikit­learn library. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/. Accessed: 22­05­2024.
[79]
Label Encoding in Python. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ml-label-encoding-of-
datasets-in-python/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[80]
CVE. https://cve.mitre.org/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[81]
re — Regular expression operations. https://docs.python.org/3/library/re.html.
Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[82]
The Role of Regular Expressions in Text Processing for NLP. https://machinehack.
com/story/the- role- of- regular- expressions- in- text- processing- for- nlp. Accessed:
1­06­2024.
[83]
Vulnerability Metrics. https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln-metrics. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[84]
Metrics to evaluate your classification model. https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/
blog/2021/07/metrics- to- evaluate- your- classification- model- to- take- the- right-
decisions/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[85]
Model evaluation. https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/model_evaluation.html.
Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[86]
Evaluation metrics for classification. https://medium.com/impythonprogrammer/
evaluation-metrics-for-classification-fc770511052d. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[87]
Classification: Precision and Recall. https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/
crash-course/classification/precision-and-recall. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[88]
Clustering Metrics. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/clustering-metrics/. Accessed:
1­06­2024.
Securing the Internet of Things
81
==PAGE:90==
[89]
Davies Bouldin Index. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/davies-bouldin-index/. Ac­
cessed: 1­06­2024.
[90]
Calinski Harabasz Index. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/calinski-harabasz-index-
cluster-validity-indices-set-3/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[91]
Everything you need to know about the “Right to be forgotten”. https://gdpr.eu/right-
to-be-forgotten/?cn-reloaded=1. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[92]
Open Protocols and Cybersecurity: Are BACnet systems a Cybersecurity Risk?
Available: https://www.prescriptivedata.io/content/guides/open- protocols- and-
cybersecurity-are-bacnet-systems-a-cybersecurity-risk. Accessed: 2024­05­23.
[93]
What is a BACnet Broadcast Management Device (BBMD)? https://www.optigo.
net/what-bacnet-broadcast-management-device-bbmd/. Accessed: 23­05­2024.
[94]
Roberto Nardone, Ricardo J. Rodríguez, and Stefano Marrone. “Formal security
assessment of Modbus protocol”. In: 2016 11th International Conference for Internet
Technology and Secured Transactions (ICITST). 2016, pp. 142–147. DOI: 10.1109/
ICITST.2016.7856685.
[95]
IANA. https://www.iana.org/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[96]
Port 8008. https://www.speedguide.net/port.php?port=8008. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[97]
Gemini. https://gemini.google.com/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
[98]
ChatGPT. https://chatgpt.com/. Accessed: 1­06­2024.
82
Securing the Internet of Things
==PAGE:91==
Securing the Internet of Things
83
==PAGE:92==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.byg.dtu.dk
