==PAGE:1==
Construction and instrumentation of an upper
limb exoskeleton for neuromotor rehabilitation
By:
Asbjørn Skjernaa Faltum
A thesis presented for the degree of
Master of science in Biomedical engineering
DTU management
Technical university of Denmark (DTU)
Denmark
Supervisor: John Paulin Hansen
Co-supervisors: Silvia Tolu, Martin Wolfgang Lauer-Schmaltz and Atiyeh Nezhadebrahim
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This project investigates how a robotic upper limb exoskeleton can be designed and instrumented for
use in digital twin based neuromotor rehabilitation using affordable equipment and easily accessible
production methods. An exoskeleton for assisting elbow flexion has been designed and 3D printed
in PLA on a Prusa I3 MK3, which is both small and affordable. The instrumentation is based
on open source software and uses relatively inexpensive equipment such as a HomeBit Bitalino for
surface electromyography (sEMG) measurements.
The designed exoskeleton is actively actuated using a Dynamixel MX-106 servomotor. Two ac-
tuation strategies are implemented using either velocity or torque control. Actuation is triggered
using the sEMG signal. Variance, averaged rectified value (ARV), and zero crossing rate has been
evaluated as features suitable for determining onset and end of actuation in conditions of rapidly
induced fatigue. Under these conditions, both ARV and variance suffers from low robustness and
high time-lag, while zero crossing rate found to be of no use. Further research is needed to determine
features with lower time-lag and better robustness.
A framework for a digital twin simulating the patients neuromotor capabilities has been adapted
from a paper by Chen et al. [5] using particle filter (PF) and particle search optimization (PSO)
to solve the model of impairment. The computational performance of the framework is promising,
but the impairment model was found to be infeasible for the considered use case.
1
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
4
1.1
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
Reading guide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
State of the art
8
2.1
Review of a performance focused model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2
Review of an affordability focused model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3
Theory
14
3.1
Neuromotor rehabilitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.1.1
Use of exoskeletons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Surface electromyography
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.1
On signals in general . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.2.2
Noise and distortion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
3.2.3
Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.3
Human digital Twin
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.3.1
Particle search optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.3.2
Particle filter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Implementation
31
4.1
Exoskeleton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1
Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1.1.1
Pre-dimensioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.1.1.2
3D printing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.1.2
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.2.1
Control signal
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.1.2.2
EMG processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.2
Digital Twin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.1
DigitalTwin class . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
2
==PAGE:4==
5
Validation and data collection
55
5.1
Simulation of control schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
5.2
Movement detection
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Discussion
63
7
Conclusion
66
8
Appendix
70
8.1
Classes code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
8.2
Motor communication code
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
8.3
Validation code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
8.4
pre-dimensioning code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
3
==PAGE:5==
1
Introduction
1.1
Problem statement
Stroke is the leading cause of neuromuscular long-term impairment [3]. In the UK 110.000 people
suffer a stroke every year and the population of stroke survivors is 900.000 [3]. In the US 610,000
patients suffer from a 1st time stroke annually and 185,000 are periodically affected [22]. Meanwhile
China has the most stroke patients in the world [22], which highlights the scale and global nature
of the problem.
As the life expectancy of the population in many countries increases the incidence of stroke is ex-
pected to increase, in the US it is expected that by 2030 the incidence of strokes will be increased
by 25% [3].
Meanwhile, the mortality of stroke is rapidly declining due to specialized treatments units in many
hospitals, having decreased the mortality rate by 40% in developed countries over the course of the
last decades [3].
80% of stroke survivors suffer from some degree of residual motor impairment [3], which means that
healthcare systems can expect to face a marked global increase of patients in need of neuromotor
rehabilitation in the future.
Kwakkel et al. has summarized national guidelines of English and Dutch speaking countries on
stroke rehabilitation. Most countries included, highlight that more therapy hours generally lead
to better outcomes and recommend the use of intensive and repetitive movement tasks that are
meaningful to the patient [19].
Considering these guidelines on neuromotor rehabilitation, it is clear that the ideal treatment is
generally quite labour intensive. It requires trained health care professionals to oversee frequent
sessions of relatively few patients at a time, since the treatment must usually be tailored to the
patients level of ability, and needs. It is thus both demanding on the patients, who will often be
treated ambulant, and the healthcare system.
Since rehabilitation is mostly a training-based intervention, active participation is required from
the patient, and they must therefore be motivated to participate in the treatment.
Serious games have shown promising results in this regard using incitements known from video
games and applying them for purposes beyond mere entertainment, including stroke-rehabilitation
4
==PAGE:6==
[21]. These games can also provide feedback on the patients performance which, apart from increas-
ing motivation, can guide the patient in their efforts.
Robotic devices, such as exoskeletons, can be used in combination with such games or regular
therapy to increase the patients ability to participate in the rehabilitation activities [3]. Either by
increasing the range of tasks in which the patient is able to participate or by increasing the duration
of the session by boosting the patients endurance. Additionally, such devices can be used to guide
the trajectory of movement and thus help the patient establish normal motor patterns [24] [30] [4].
The combination of serious games and robotic devices, such as exoskeletons, can thus both facilitate
and guide rehabilitation tasks. They might therefore be able to increase the viability of at home
rehabilitation, and reduce the need for in-person supervision by healthcare professionals. Instead
the data obtained from the game and exoskeleton can be stored and send to the healthcare profes-
sional responsible for the treatment plan, so that they can get a better understanding of the patients
progress and adjust the treatment plan accordingly.
One option for storing the data collected could be a human digital twin (HDT) representing the
patients motor-ability. This would be an intuitive way for both the healthcare professionals and
patient to view the rehabilitation progress. Additionally the data from the digital twin can be
incorporated directly into the game enabling the patient to directly compare their progress against
their previous ability level [21].
The goal of this project is to develop an exoskeleton intended for use in Digital Twin based neuro-
motor rehabilitation of the upper limb. The research question is formally stated as:
How may an upper-limb exoskeleton be designed and instrumented in order to support digital twin
based neuromotor rehabilitation?.
To this end, the project intends to complete or advance a functional prototype of such a sys-
tem.
The system is intended for use with a badminton rehabilitation video game developed by the Re-
Hyp research group, which is described in a publication by the group [21]. In this game, the user
is tasked with returning a virtual ball across the net by flexing the elbow. The degree of elbow
5
==PAGE:7==
flexion will determine the ball’s trajectory with a minimal degree of flexion required to clear the
net. If the elbow flexion markedly exceeds the minimal requirement, the ball will go to the corner
of the opponent’s court earning the user an immediate point. The opposing player is based on a
HDT of the user. The game is intended for use by impaired users and healthy users in conditions of
simulated impairment. In the latter case impairment is simulated by resisting the movement with
strong elastic bands.
Considering the use case, the exoskeleton should be designed to aid with flexion of the elbow.
Additionally, the exoskeleton should supply kinematic data to the game, which can be obtained
from the motor.
In terms of production and material choice, the project will be limited to the facilities available
at DTU Skylab. This includes various models of 3D printers and principally PLA or ABS for the
material. DTU Skylab also has some facilities for metal working, but it is not expected that these
will be put to use in the project.
Additionally, it will be explored how data acquired from the exoskeleton system can be used to
inform a digital twin tracking the rehabilitation outcome/trajectory based on framework published
in an article by Chen et al. [5].
1.2
Reading guide
A few notes should be made regarding the notation, structure and use of terms in this thesis. The
term "the author" always refers to the author of the present thesis, unless it is explicitly stated that
it is the author of another work in the format "the author of xxx". Secondly, in the mathematical
notation symbols with no accent will refer to the actual value of the represented quantity, to the
extent that this is determinable. Symbols with a hat accent will refer to the values of the quantity
that are perceived by the patient. Finally, symbols with a tilde accent will refer to simulated values
of the quantity.
6
==PAGE:8==
The intended reader is, in addition to supervisors and other people involved in the evaluation
of the project, mainly intended to be future students who might conduct projects that build upon
the work presented. Since the intended readers are expected to cover a wide range of educational
and professional backgrounds, the more technically demanding sections are generally prefaced by
an attempt at a more intuitive explanation of the concepts used. These explanations and examples
are meant to help the reader maintain a general understanding of every branch of the project, even
if it falls outside their usual area of work. It should however be understood, that these intuitive
explanations do not necessarily convey all details of the concept they pertain to. This structure does
cause a bit of repetition of information, but it is believed that the overall readability is improved
by it.
The thesis is divided into 7 main sections.
The introduction will introduce the reader to the structure and context of the project, it aims to
answer the question "what is this about?".
The state of the art section will give an overview of the research field in upper limb exoskeletons
for neuromotor rehabilitation, it aims to answer the question "what has previously been achieved
in this field?".
The theory section is intended to provide the reader with an understanding of the theory used in
the project at a more general level, it aims to answer the question "what is used in the project?".
The implementation will describe how the theory is applied in the project and how solutions are
implemented. Notably this section will also include discussions on why certain choices were made,
both in terms of implementation and some of the alternative approaches that were tried or consid-
ered. It aims to answer the question "how and why was it used in the project?".
The "Validation and data collection" presents how data used for the development of the imple-
mentation section was collected. It aims to answer the question "How was the implementation
developed?".
The discussion will evaluate the system as a whole, reflect on what could have been done differently
and the possible directions for future development. It aims to answer the question "where to go
from here?".
Finally, the conclusion will summarize what has been achieved and what has been learned through-
7
==PAGE:9==
out the project and thus answer the question "what did we learn about the design and implemen-
tation of an upper limb exoskeleton?".
Finally the appendix will contain all code used for the
project.
2
State of the art
The difference between an exoskeleton and similar devices such as braces and robotic manipulators
can be blurry in some cases. In the scope of this project an exoskeleton is considered to meet two
requirements:
• The device must be attached externally and reversibly to the user’s body by non-invasive
means.
• The device must supply extra force for the actuation of at least one of the users joints in at
least one direction.
The second requirement leads to the distinction between active, passive and hybrid exoskeletons.
An active exoskeleton provides force by using a motor which is usually driven by electric motors,
pneumatics or hydraulics [22]. In some sources series elastic actuators are considered an independent
actuation method. Series elastic actuators consist of an elastic element such as a spring placed in
series between the actuator and the actuated segment. It offers decreased joint stiffness and better
control. Additional means of transferring the force from the actuation device to the exoskeleton
vary from soft robotics, Bowden cables and direct coupling. [16]
Passive exoskeletons are actuated by potential energy stored in the frame of the exoskeleton or
elastic elements such as springs. Usually the spring mechanism is loaded by the gravity of the users
body or limbs in addition to any external loads that may be applied to the user.
The hybrid category combines active and passive mechanisms. In most cases the passive mecha-
nism is intended to compensate for gravity while the active mechanism supplies the extra force for
accelerating movement and overcoming external resistance.
Exoskeletons are employed for both medical and non-medical purposes. For medical purposes they
are used for both treatment and alleviation of symptoms. For non-medical use they are utilized
by healthy individuals for tasks such as heavy manual labour [22]. Within medical use, stroke is a
8
==PAGE:10==
major field of interest, as it is the leading cause of long-term neuromotor disability in the world [22].
The concept of exoskeletons is not new with General Electric and the US military being regarded
as the first to attempt the development of exoskeleton technology in the 1960s [22]. Regardless, the
technology is still in its infancy at the commercial level. Especially passive exoskeletons are avail-
able commercially from a limited number of suppliers for both medical [24] and non-medical use.
Examples of commercially available non-medical exoskeletons include the suitX brand developed
by Ottobock which features several models such as the IX BACK series, intended to reduce spinal
compression, and the IX SHOULDER AIR, which supports elbow movement.
The technological maturity of upper limb exoskeletons was investigated by Huamanchachua et al.
who compared 26 models described in academic papers published between 2016-2021. Out of the
26 investigated models, they found that none had reached any stage of market deployment.
14 had reached the development stage of which only 1 had been technologically demonstrated in a
relevant environment, 8 had been technologically validated in a relevant environment and 5 had been
technologically validated in a lab. The remaining 12 models were still considered at the research
state with 6 having experimental proof of concept, 3 had the technological concept formulated and
the remaining 3 had only analysed the basic principles of the technology. [16]
The Materials used for upper limb exoskeletons are relatively diverse. The most commonly used is
aluminium, which is used for just above 30% according to the review article by Huamanchachua et
al. About 15% use carbon fibre and the remaining models reviewed were generally designed using
various thermoplastic polymers. [16].
In terms of controlling the exoskeletons, the interface between robot and human is one the great-
est challenges and perhaps the one most pertinent for a solution [22]. The most common control
schemes used for upper limb exoskeletons are variations of PID control and impedance control. A
PID control is based on the assumption that a target value, such as desired trajectory, is known.
The system then evaluates the difference between the actual values and the desired values and
calculates a compensatory action of the system. The compensatory action is, in the full version,
calculated based on the proportional (P) deviation, the integral (I) over the recent deviation and
9
==PAGE:11==
the 1st order derivative (D) of the deviation. All three terms are however not necessarily used. PID
regulations need to be tuned to adjust how the different factors affect the compensatory action,
which is usually done manually unless the system is markedly deterministic and well modelled.
Impedance control is based around the concept of mechanical impedance, which relates a movement
to a force or vice versa. A common example of mechanical impedance is a spring which exerts an
increasing force as it is moved further and further away from it resting length, with the direction
of force being opposite to the movement. In this way a trajectory can be defined as a path of least
resistance.
Notably, none of these methods of control offer any immediate solution to how the intention to
move is interpreted. Some models use the movement of the patient to sense an intention [24].
A meta review investigated how primarily bio signals such as sEMG, EEG and functional near
infrared spectroscopy could be used to determine the intention of movement. They highlight the
difficulty in creating robust algorithms even for simple on-off control schemes citing both response
time and interpretation of the received signals as obstacles, which often lead to the use of no-linear
models of high complexity. Similarly, they highlight the need for high fidelity equipment in order to
produce reliable performance [22]. They distinguish between two different controls for active skele-
tons: Impedance (as discussed) and triggered, where sEMG and EEG are the principal signals used
as triggers. They do also mention admittance, but admittance is simply the inverse of impedance
and thus not markedly different.
The accuracy of detecting the patients intention to move when using sEMG data is observed to be
somewhere in the range of 60-90 % according to a review by Masengo et al. of 7 papers [22].
Looking into specific models of upper limb exoskeletons, they range from quite simple to very
elaborate in both the mechanical design and in terms of control. Presented below are two models
which should give an impression of the range. Both of these models are significantly more advanced
than what is currently available at the DTU ReHyp research group. The best currently available
exoskeleton at the DTU ReHyp research group was designed by a master student and is described
in his thesis [13]. The CAD model of this exoskeleton is shown on figure 1
The Exoskeleton developed in this project aims to create an improved exoskeleton for the DTU
10
==PAGE:12==
Rehyp research group, but does not expect to reach the level of the any of the models described
below.
Figure 1: The exoskeleton previously developed for the ReHyp research group. Image taken from
[13]
2.1
Review of a performance focused model
One of the most sophisticated models found is the NEUROExos which is developed specifically for
rehabilitation of stroke patients [30]. Mechanically their design features a double shelled frame to
avoid friction between skin and exoskeleton, and shell elements to better distribute the pressure on
the patient’s limb. Another benefit of the shell links, is the fact that the centre of mass of these
links are better aligned with the centre of mass of the arm, which reduces torque on the skin further.
Additionally, a novel 4 degrees of freedom mechanism embedded in the elbow joint ensures that the
axis of rotation of the elbow joint and exoskeleton are always aligned to reduce unnecessary forces
on the patient’s skin and joint [30]. An image of the exoskeleton is shown in figure 2.
In terms of control, they have implemented two schemes which they term patient-in-charge and
robot-in-charge. Both are based on impedance control which relates an input movement amplitude
to a force. The patient-in-charge systems is a near zero impedance system. This means that the
patient is able to move unrestricted by external loads, such as gravity, since these are compensated
11
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2: The NEUROexos exoskeleton. Image taken from [30]
by the exoskeleton. The robot-in-charge conversely uses a high joint impedance and lets the robot
move the patient’s limb in predefined trajectories, which is intended for early stage rehabilitation
[30].
In terms of actuation the NEUROExos uses hydraulic actuation transferred by Bowden cables.
Additionally it has some non-linear elastic springs attached to ensure the safety of the user, by
matching the passive joint stiffness of the elbow to prevent the user from jamming against an
uncomfortably stiff system during involuntary movements such as spasticity. [30]
2.2
Review of an affordability focused model
The NEUROExos are obviously a model that pushes for performance. At the other end of the
research field are those who try to develop systems with good performance, while maintaining or
improving affordability.
One such model was developed by Palazzi et al. [24]. Their design is a hybrid actuation model
intended for supporting pick-and-place tasks. To this end, it support flexion and extension of the
shoulder and elbow. Their design falls into the group of exoskeletons which are not entirely sup-
ported by the user’s body, but instead is attached to a solid frame outside the patient’s such as a
wheelchair or wall.
The exoskeleton is also attached to the patients arm to provide actuation, and thus it still meets
the requirements listed for considering it an exoskeleton in the scope of this project.
Their exoskeleton is principally 3D printed using a carbon fibre reinforced nylon, but parts requir-
12
==PAGE:14==
ing isotropic properties were CNC-machined from aluminium [24]. The production requirements
is a good example of how their exoskeleton, while being affordable, is still a product that requires
professional production facilities, while failing to employ production methods with good scalability
such as injection moulding or die casting.
The passive actuation mechanism is realised using two springs, which are intended to compensate
for the load induced by gravity on the arm and exoskeleton plus a 0.5 kg payload at the distal end
of the system [24].
The idea of passively compensating gravity in addition to an active actuator is quite clever. The
main drawback from using passive exoskeletons for rehabilitation purposes, is because they usu-
ally enhance movement in one direction by resisting it in the opposite direction. Most neuromotor
impaired patients will need to move both ways and are usually impaired in both directions. This
means that the passive mechanism can at a maximum be intended for pure gravitational loading,
which is not a lot on the upper limb and might be too little to really enhance their movement
capability. Additionally, it is worth noting that the joint torque due to gravity on the upper limb
is not easily matched by a passive mechanism over large ranges of motion.
By using the passive actuation to its fullest, the active actuator need only generate the torque used
for accelerating movement. This can be accomplished by a very low torque once the deceleration
from gravity is removed. Thus, they are able to accomplish a lot with a low torque motor, which is
one of the main drivers of the material price of the system [24].
To simplify the task of compensating gravity they have designed a parallelogram linkage at the
forearm used to decouple the angular dependence of the gravitational pull on the forearm. Using
this design the gravitational pull on the forearm is only dependent on the elbow angle, rather than
depending on both the elbow and shoulder angle. The attachment of both springs has additionally
been optimized using a parametric design study to minimize motor requirements.
According to their parametric design study, the motor requirements are reduced by 95% for the
shoulder and 57% for the elbow [24]. The spring configuration is shown in figure 3.
13
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3: The spring configuration used by Palazzi et al to compensate gravity, Image taken from
[24]
To further reduce the cost, they use cheap sensors such as strain gauges, but increase the fidelity by
oversampling the signals so they can average across multiple samples (here 128). To ensure real time
execution, they run the control process as their main process while communication and acquisition
of data is run as direct memory access processes on a microcontroller using parallel computing. As
a result, they have an actuator control process running at a frequency of 3kHz and a communication
process running at 0.5 kHz when they oversample using a sampling rate of 1500 kHz. [24]
Similarly to the NEUROExos they use an impedance control which aids the patient in articu-
lating predetermined trajectories. This is realized by providing low impedance in the trajectory
while increasing the impedance when the patient tries to move outside the trajectory [24].
3
Theory
3.1
Neuromotor rehabilitation
Neuromotor rehabilitation in regard to stroke patients has been defined as "a process that engages
people with stroke in order to benefit their motor function, activity capacity and performance in
daily life" [19]. According to Kwakkel et al. the core element of this process is teaching the patient
14
==PAGE:16==
to "optimize and adapt their motor, sensory and cognitive function through appropriately dosed,
repetitive, goal oriented, and progressive task- and context specific training" [19]. Furthermore,
they emphasize that the intervention should be guided by regular assessment of motor function.
They also state that rehabilitation is necessary for people with motor disability in order to improve
their level of function and independence in daily life. [19]
According to Kwakkel et al. the rehabilitation process can be divided into two components: be-
havioural restitution and compensation. Behavioural restitution is also termed "true recovery", since
it denotes a return to the neuromotor behaviour pre-stroke. This process is poorly understood, but
is believed to result mainly from biological processes that create recovery at the neurological level.
This process is considered "spontaneous" in the regard that it is a direct effect of the cascade of
pathophysiological processes triggered by the ischaemic brain damage. Importantly, this process
plateaus around 10 weeks after the stroke. They claim that there is insufficient evidence of interac-
tion between rehabilitation interventions and these biological processes. [19]
The second component is compensatory strategies. This part of the rehabilitation is achieved by an
altercation of behaviour in the patient compared to pre-stroke, which is aimed at optimizing their
performance under the limitations that are imposed upon them by residual motor disability after
the 10 week mark [19].
Another paper on post-stroke rehabilitation by Brewer et al. uses equivalent components of re-
habilitation to Kwakkel et al., but introduces a complimentary component which is termed "sub-
stitution". Substitution is defined as a neuroplastic process where fully or partially intact neural
pathways are repurposed to fulfil the function of the neural pathways that were lost to the tissue
damage from the stroke [3]. This relies on the presence of neuroplasticity in adults which is debated
but seems to be mostly supported in literature, even if the specifics of its nature are not entirely
known or understood [17].
Neuromotor impairment manifests in many ways, but in accordance with the work by Chen et
al. [5] this project only considers two aspects of neuromotor impairment namely spasticity and
weakness.
15
==PAGE:17==
Unfortunately, the interpretation of spasticity used by Chen et al. [5] is not defined. One definition
of spasticity found in literature is a "velocity dependent increase in tonic stretch reflex" and the
scientific consensus seems to be that spasticity is delineated from other hypertonic conditions such
as rigidity by the velocity dependence [2].
In the validation of their neural impairment model, Chen et al. provides an external electric stimuli
to the patients muscle to invoke an exogenous muscle contraction in order to simulate "spasticity"
[5]. There is however no mention of any velocity dependence of the current and the experiment
therefore more closely mimics rigidity or hypertonia as a general phenomena. It is thus plausible
to think that the term "spasticity", when used in the context of the paper by Chen et al., is more
accurately interpreted as "hypertonia". In order to increase alignment with the medical consensus,
hypertonia will therefore be used henceforth in place of what Chen et al. denotes as spasticity.
Weakness is generally considered a lack of ability to generate tension in the muscle fibres according
to the MSD manual [11]. It can manifest as an inability to produce the required force or having
to exert an inordinate amount of effort to create the desired tension. There is again no explicit
interpretation of the term in the paper by Chen et al., nor is there any experimental protocol to
elucidate the use of the term. There is however no reason to believe that the term should be used
in any sense which differ significantly from the one stated above.
The quantification of neuromuscular impairment using only hypertonia and weakness may not be
compliant with any of the clinical frameworks for assessing post-stroke impairment nor reflect the
underlying pathophysiology [3]. It does however, provide a very straightforward way of evaluating
impairment. Notably it also reflects the two sides of involuntary control of muscle tension, which
is at the heart of impairment of neuromotor control. Additional aspects of neuromotor impairment
would be the sensory and cognitive aspects, but this will not be addressed in this project as the
exoskeleton would have little to offer in this regard. To reiterate, the author will in this paper
distinguish between only hypertonia and weakness as symptoms of neuromotor impairment.
Hypertonia is interpreted as: An involuntary increase in muscle tone and/or inability to voluntarily
decrease muscle tone.
Weakness is interpreted as: An inability to voluntarily increase muscle tone or involuntary decrease
in muscle tone.
16
==PAGE:18==
3.1.1
Use of exoskeletons
The use of robotic assisted therapy is mentioned in several articles as a promising avenue for devel-
oping rehabilitation treatment [3].
The combination of exoskeletons and rehabilitation games has the potential to support several
trends in neuromotor rehabilitation. Brewer et al. highlights that if possible, the rehabilitation
should take place in the patient’s own environment and start as early as possible [3]. Additionally
it should be both task- and context-oriented with goals that are relevant to the patient [3].
The combination of exoskeletons and gamification allows for creating a motivational environment
in the patients own home, where they can be supported and guided in their efforts by the game
and exoskeleton. The game allows for creating scenarios that are contextual and can be tailored to
include tasks that are relevant to the patient.
Compared to doing regular tasks in the patient’s environment, such as household chores, this ap-
proach is advantageous because the difficulty can be adjusted, motivational incitements can be
included and data can be collected and shared with healthcare professionals responsible for plan-
ning the rehabilitation.
The evidence on the effect of this kind of treatment is mixed. Brewer et al. [3] summarizes the
results of 8 studies using robotic systems for rehabilitation, some of which included gamification.
One of these studies compared robot assisted therapy with usual care and intensive comparison
therapy. After 12 weeks robotic assisted therapy showed no significant improvement compared to
the other modalities, but after 36 weeks there was an improved outcome compares to usual care.
Another of the studies was a Cochrane review, which found that patients receiving robot-assisted
training were more likely to to improve their arm motor function and in generic activities of daily
life. The studies on virtual reality games found, that it improved the outcome of robot assisted gait
training, but did not improve outcome relative to usual care when used on its own. Finally, they
report a study which concludes that it is uncertain whether robot assisted therapy is cost effective
compared to conventional therapy. [3]
These results are, however, all more than 10 years old and especially the concerns on cost effec-
tiveness may be outdated considering the general trend of decreasing technology costs over time.
Newer studies have found an improved outcome when using robotic exoskeletons on the upper limb,
and they conclude that the metrics obtained from the robotic device are useful for predicting reha-
17
==PAGE:19==
bilitation outcome [12]. Another recent study confirms the comparable outcome between manual
physiotherapy and robotic assisted therapy, but found that robotic assisted therapy was better for
developing control strategies that could be generalized to untrained movements [4].
3.2
Surface electromyography
sEMG is a common method used for measuring muscle activity non-invasively. The sEMG signal is
an electrical time signal which carries information encoded in its amplitude, frequency, and phase.
The sEMG signal is associated with the ionic currents that are caused by the action potentials
triggering muscular contraction and therefore the circumstances of force production in the muscle
is related to the sEMG signal. The electric signal arises from the ionic currents inside the body
such as sodium and calcium displacement, but the voltages detected are in the extracellular space
and not membrane potentials [23].
3.2.1
On signals in general
Before diving deeper into the theory of sEMG signals, a brief explanation of signals will be provided.
A signal is defined as an oscillation of energy, whether that is mechanically, electrically etc. A signal
can be fully described by its amplitude, frequency and phase. Most real-world signals are composed
of a large number of oscillations, which are added together due to interference.
While signals have so far been used as a collective term for these oscillations it is common to dis-
tinguish between "signals" and "noise" with the difference being that a signal carries information
while noise is regarded as carrying no information.
The process of removing noise and extracting information from the signal is done by signal process-
ing. The signal can be processed directly on the hardware or using software. The latter is generally
referred to as digital signal processing (DSP). In this report ’signal processing’ will usually refer to
DSP. Filtering is the most important concept in this regard.
Signals are usually viewed in two domains, the time- and frequency domain. In the time domain,
amplitude is observed as a function of time, while in the frequency domain amplitude is observed as
a function of frequency. The conversion between the two domains is done freely using the Fourier
transform and its inverse. The general idea of filtering, is to multiply a window onto the signal in
either domain to reduce the amplitude of certain parts of the signal. Filtering is usually done based
18
==PAGE:20==
on frequency rather than time, but can still be done directly in the time domain, which is usually
done for real time processing.
The relationship between the time and frequency domain is of such a nature that when you com-
press in one domain you expand in the other, the extreme case being the impulse and constant who
are Fourier transform pairs. For this reason, the window multiplied onto the signal is a balancing
act between taking precise action in one domain, while minimising blurring in the other domain
(commonly known as leakage). This balancing act creates what is called a transition band where
the amplitude is altered somewhere between preservation and removal.
Filters are often referred to as high- low- or band-pass. High-pass filters remove frequencies below
the cut-off frequency, low-pass filters remove frequencies above the cut-off frequency, while band-
pass remove frequencies outside the cut-off frequencies. Additionally, notch filters are common and
remove frequencies in a narrow band around or between the cut-off frequency/frequencies
In order to record a signal, it is usually transduced one or several times.
Transduction is the
act of converting a signal from one form of energy to another, or from one medium to another. This
process will inadvertently alter the signal and in many cases unintentional filtering will occur.
In most cases the signal will be continuous, but in order to process it on a computer it must be
sampled in regular time steps. The sampling frequency must be at least twice the highest frequency
of the signal to avoid aliasing where higher frequencies alter the lower frequency signals in the sam-
pled signal.
For readers who are interested but unfamiliar with signals and signals processing the Open source
book "Applied signal processing" By Sadasivan Puthusserypady is highly recommended as it ex-
plains these concepts in greater detail along with the theory of signal processing.
3.2.2
Noise and distortion
The fidelity of the signal is mainly compromised by the signal to noise ratio and distortion of the
signal.
The signal to noise ratio is a measure of the energy of the signal relative to the energy of the noise
present in the recording.
Common sources of noise can be inherent noise of electrical equipment, ambient electromagnetic
19
==PAGE:21==
radiation, motion artefacts, and inherent instability of the signal.
The motion artefacts arise when either the electrode moves relative to the surface of recording or
when the cable is moved relative to the electrode and are thus only indirectly related to the bodily
movement of the patient.
Random fluctuations in the amplitude of the signal can be alleviated by using a rectified average of
the signal. The window length should be chosen relative to the sampling frequency and duration of
the phenomena of interest.
Distortion of the signal is when amplitude, frequency, and/or phase the signal of interest is somehow
altered between the source and the recording. These factors can be grouped in various ways, one
of which is causative, intermediate and deterministic factors.
The causative factors are factors that are inherent in the system and are causal for the observed
distortion. They are either extrinsic (factors inherent in the equipment used) or intrinsic (factors
inherent in the patient). The extrinsic factors include aspects such as electrode placement, material
and shape. The intrinsic factors include everything from the properties of the tissue conducting the
signal, blood perfusion, muscle fibre characteristics etc.
The intermediate factors are phenomena which result from the causative factors and influence the
deterministic factors. This includes filtering of the signal due to the tissue it travels through, in-
terference between various signals, and delay based interactions due to differences in conduction
velocity. An example of this is cross talk, where the signal from other muscles influence the signal
from the recorded muscle.
The deterministic factors include the motor firing rate, number of engaged units and the mechanical
interaction between muscle fibres in the muscle. The properties of the action potential of the motor
unit can also influence the recorded signal as deterministic factor. [26]
As mentioned, the unintentional filtering of the signal happens both through the tissue and in
the electrode. In the tissue, the filtering happens due to impedance differences of the different
tissues which is frequency dependent, most of the filtering happens in the stratum corneum (the
most superficial part of the epidermis) which acts as a capacitor due to its high impedance and its
interface to the electrode. For this reason preconditioning of the skin using abrasive measures such
20
==PAGE:22==
as shaving or abrasive pastes can be used to reduce the electrode skin noise and reduced electrode
skin impedance [23].
The size of the electrode also contributes with a filtering effect as the detected voltage is averaged
over the electrodes surface area creating a low pass filter for large electrodes, meanwhile the use of
small electrodes increases the power line interference [23].
3.2.3
Filtering
Apart from physical interventions such as skin abrasion and reduction of movement artefacts through
attachment of cables and electrodes, filtering is the primary method for improving the signal to noise
ratio. Usually, filtering is done in the frequency domain and is aimed at attenuating or amplifying
certain frequencies. Filtering can both occur in the physical system or post recording as DSP.
The physical filtering is determined by the device and will thus not be directly controlled by the
author, and will therefore not be described in detail here, A detailed description of these measures
can be found in [23].
The design of filters is based on a trade-off between removing undesired frequencies from the signal
while minimizing the effect on the signal of interest. In order for a filter to be useful for real time
signal processing it must be stable and causal. Stability is required for any filter and means that
when the filter receives a bound input it returns a bound output.
This is similar to the behaviour of physical systems such as a swing, which will only stay in motion
for a limited time unless it is perpetually pushed, thus receiving an unbound input. Causality means
that the filter only uses prior information, i.e. it needs only previous samples to calculate the value
of the current sample. To continue the swing analogy, it means that the swing does not move before
it is pushed.
The ideal filter would have an amplification of 1 in the pass-band (range of frequencies that one
wish to preserve) and 0 outside of the pass band with a vertical transition. This is however not
possible for a real time filter, since that filter would be non-causal.
Secondly, the behaviour is undesirable since a distinct cut-off in the spectral of temporal domain will
result in a blurry cut-off in the other domain. This happens due to the nature of Fourier transform
21
==PAGE:23==
pairs, where the compression of one leads to the expansion of the other, such as the impulse and
constant which are Fourier transform pairs. In the example above of the box window, the Fourier
transform pair would be a sinc function with very high side-lobes and as the sides of the box are
increasingly sloped so will the sinc function become narrower and with smaller side lobes.
This trade-off has led to a variety of windowing functions used with different slopes in the transition
band. One of these functions is the Butterworth filter which will be used for this project based on
its extensive use in the literature for filtering sEMG signal. The Butterworth filter is optimised
for maximal flatness in the pass-band, which means that all frequencies within the pass-band are
equally amplified and thus their balance is preserved. Conversely the filter generally has a rather
wide transition band which is influenced by the order of the filter. The Frequency response of a 4th
order band pass Butterworth filter with cut-off frequency at 20 Hz and 450 Hz is shown on figure 4
as an example.
The filter can be implemented in a variety of ways. The usual way of representing a filter is the
transfer function, which is a polynomial fraction. The order of the polynomials depend on the order
of the filter. Another method is second order sections which are a more numerically stable way of
doing it in Python [25]. The implementation used for second order sectioning is shown in figure 5.
According to Merletti et al. [23] a high-pass filter with a cut-off frequency in the range 10-30 Hz
is appropriate for removing low frequency noise from the sEMG signal while a low-pass filter with
a cut-off frequency in the range 350-400 Hz is appropriate for removing high frequency noise from
the signal. The firing rate of the motor neurons can be removed from the signal with a high-pass
filter with a cut-off frequency of 20 Hz [26].
A notable undesirable feature to be considered is that the impulse response of the filter will show
up strongly in the first samples of the processed signal as a spike, therefore these samples should
generally be disregarded [10].
22
==PAGE:24==
Figure 4: The frequency response of a 4th order band-pass Butterworth filter with cut-off frequency
at 20 Hz and 450 Hz which are marked by the vertical red lines. Note that the X-axis is logarith-
mically scaled to match the logarithmically scaling unit of the Y-axis.
23
==PAGE:25==
Figure 5: Block diagram of the biquad used for second order sectioning. Image taken from [25]
24
==PAGE:26==
3.3
Human digital Twin
The use of the term HDT in this report follows the definition established by the DTU ReHyp re-
search group, which states that a HDT is a digital representation of a human or certain aspects of a
human, which has a bidirectional data transfer. This allows for continuous synchronization between
the HDT and the human state and for the data from the HDT is to influence the behaviour or
environment of the human [20]. The delineation of a digital twin and similar concepts is illustrated
in figure 6.
Figure 6: An illustration of the delineation of a digital twin from similar entities such as simulations
and digital shadows as per the framework established by the DTU ReHyp research group. Image
taken from [20]
In this case, the HDT will be a representation of the patient’s impairment, and indirectly their
motor capability. The HDT is updated continuously using performance data collected from a reha-
bilitation game, such as the previously mentioned badminton game [21]. The data from the digital
twin could eventually be used for tracking the patient’s rehabilitation trajectory and potentially for
adjusting the tasks presented to the patient by the game. An example could be that it is observed
25
==PAGE:27==
that the patient is relatively good at repeating similar movements and relatively bad at changing
between dissimilar movement. In this case the game could either present the patient with a series of
similar movement to boost motivation and expand on the patient’s strengths or present the patient
with highly variable tasks so the patient may improve in their lacking area. The rehabilitation
trajectory established by the HDT may also help in choosing between these strategies.
For the simple task used in the badminton game, this information is relatively easily accessible
directly from the game performance, but for more complex activities (i.e. multi-joint tasks) the
HDT is expected to deliver insights that are not readily accessible.
The framework of the HDT follows the work by Chen et al.
[5] in the sense that their model
for relating task performance to recovery from impairment is used and their approach to solving
this model is used. The impairment model used by Chen et al. is when rearranged given as:
u = (ˆu −sspas) · 1 −ˆsweak −ˆsspas
1 −sweak −sspas
+ ˆsspas
(1)
Where u is the muscle activation and s is the impairment divided into spasticity and weakness.
To avoid either the nominator or denominator of the fraction to become zero, it is suggested that
the use of the model is restricted to cases where the sum og the weakness and spasticity is strictly
less than 1 for both perceived and actual impairment.
In the article by Chen et al.
it is not
explicitly stated how muscle activation is quantified, but it can be observed that in the case where
intended/perceived muscle activation is equal to the actual spasticity, the model evaluates to
u = ˆsspas
By the author, this is to be considered an undesirable feature of the model i.e. a bug rather than a
feature.
The interpretation of rehabilitation used by Chen et al. [5] is somewhat similar to the one used by
Kwakkel et al. [19] (see section 3.1) yet distinct. The interpretations are similar in the regard that
they both perceive rehabilitation as the patient discovering the limitations imposed upon them by
the impairment and developing strategies to circumvent these limitations. It should be noted that
Chen et al. only deals with rehabilitation after the 10 week mark, and thus would be considered
26
==PAGE:28==
compensatory rehabilitation in the framework of Kwakkel et al. The distinction between the inter-
pretations comes from the fact, that while Kwakkel et al. perceives the compensatory action to stem
from the altercations of muscle synergies, Chen et al perceives the compensation to stem from the
activation of the individual motor units, which would be more akin to what Kwakkel et al. denotes
as "true recovery" [19]. The substitution process described by Brewer et al. [3] could be considered
similar to the recovery that Chen et al. [5] are modelling if the understanding of the impairment is
understood at a neurological level. This would be the brain developing a subconscious understand-
ing of the neural pathways that are still available, and how it can reroute signals to accomplish
tasks in these new circumstances. This is perhaps also the more sensible interpretation since the
conscious understanding of the impairment would probably develop rather quickly, similarly to how
compensatory movement patterns are quickly implemented when the musculoskeletal system is in-
jured.
A Notable challenge for the HDT is that it must be able to learn on its own while adhering to
the rehabilitation trajectory of the patient. In other words, the HDT must be able to independently
update the values of the perceived impairment, while ensuring that the updated values at any given
time are similar to the patients perceived impairment. If this is not accomplished, the HDT will
lose its twin-like quality and become a simulation that is disconnected from the actual patient and
lose its ability to inform the rehab process in any meaningful way.
Chen et al. have chosen to address this problem using a PF with a PSO algorithm which is made
according to a paper by Wang et al. [31]. The general idea is that the solution space is populated
by a population of particles, which will distribute in the solution space according to the probability
of the position being a solution to the model. Then a single particle is chosen as the estimated
solution at the moment. The model is thus iterative at two different levels, firstly the particles are
distributed iteratively by the PSO and secondly the hypothesis is chosen iteratively by the PF.
As mentioned, the PSO algorithm is used for distributing the particles in the solution space. The
particles are initially distributed randomly, while possibly taking some prior knowledge of the sys-
tem into account.
27
==PAGE:29==
An intuitive way of understanding the PSO is to envision each particle as a magnetic ball on a
pitted surface of varying depths (the solution space).
The depth of the pits is proportional to the probability of the position being a solution. The parti-
cles will initially move around having a lot of energy, but as they fall into pits they will lose energy
and become less moveable. This is due to the difficulty of ascending back out of the pit in which
they are positioned.
The magnetic pull of the other particles may allow the particles sitting in shallower pits to escape
the pit and move towards balls positioned in deeper pits (who are unlikely to leave their pit due to
the depth). The balls will possibly fall into new deeper pits along the way, and thus discover new
potential solutions.
This continues until the balls are distributed in a way where no particles are able to pull any other
particle out of their pits. At this point the balls hardly move and no longer move between pits and
the model is converged.
The PF algorithm would then be akin to placing a level sheet on top of the pitted surface with a
single magnetic ball on top representing the hypothesis. Having no obstacles in its way, the ball
will freely move according to the magnetic pull of the balls in the pits and generally position itself
on top of the centre of the pit with most particles in it. In some cases, the magnetic pull of 2 or
more pits may create a tug of war on the hypothesis if they are situated close to each other and the
hypothesis will be somewhere between them.
As new observations of the patient are collected, the pits in the solution space will change and
the particles will reconverge and a new hypothesis is subsequently determined. The hypothesis is
influenced by its previous positions, this can be envisioned as placing a gluing a smaller magnetic
ball to the level surface in the place of the previous hypothesis which will exert some pull on the
hypothesis ball. In this way the process is repeated.
3.3.1
Particle search optimization
The movement of particles is done according to the model established by Wang et al. [31] and is
given as
˜st = rand(1, n) · (ibest −˜st−1) + rand(1, n) · (gbest −˜st−1)
(2)
28
==PAGE:30==
Where ibest is the best previously assumed position of the particle, gbest is the best previously
assumed position of any particle in the group and ˜s are the particle values. The t indices indicate
the time point with t being the current point in time. n is the dimensionality of the particles.
Each term moves the particle a random distance. The direction of the first term is known as the
"cognitive term" and moves the particle towards its best previously discovered position. The second
term, which is known as the "social term", moves it towards the best previously discovered position
across all particles.
Some implementations apply a weighting factor to the cognitive and social term, which is either
symmetric or asymmetric, but this has been omitted by Chen et al. By adjusting the standard
deviation of the random magnitude, it is possible to tweak the particles preferences towards either
exploration or exploitation and this can be adjusted separately for the cognitive and social term.
The "best position" of a particle is determined from the fitness function, which evaluates how fit a
particle is for representing the patient and it is this step that ensures that the HDT does not diverge
from the real patient. The fitness function works by evaluating the difference between the observed
performance and the predicted performance, if there is no difference the particle has a perfect fit,
if not the fitness value will tend to lower values. The fitness function used by Chen et al. can be
written in a generalized form as
fit =
1
q
2 · π · δ2
V
· exp{ −1
2 · δ2
V
· (goal −obs))2}
(3)
Where δ2
V is the variance of the distribution from which the magnitude of the movement in eq. 2
are drawn. goal is the expected or desired value for the particles to attain, which for Chen et al.
[5] is the observed real world performance loss on the movement which they term Jtask. obs is the
observed performance resulting from the values of the particles, in the paper by Chen et al. [5] they
call this h(˜s) and it is the simulated performance loss based on the perceived impairment of the
HDT i.e. the particle values.
The PSO algorithm is derived from observing swarm behaviour in animals such as birds or in-
sects and when searching an area for resources such as food. It thus lacks any rigorous theoretical
foundation regarding its effectiveness and range of application. The algorithm is generally recog-
29
==PAGE:31==
nized for being simple to implement and having a fast rate of convergence. It notably allows for
optimizing without the differential and derivatives of the optimized function and is thus applicable
to non-continuous functions. [31]
The major limitation of the algorithm, is that it is not guaranteed to converge toward the global
optima of the function and is likely to converge to one or several local optima instead. This is
partly due to the particles converging quickly, and partly due to the fact that the algorithm only
tracks fitness of previous position, without utilizing information obtained from the calculation of
these positions [31].
This is in contrast to other numeric methods, which will usually quantify the error and its devel-
opment from iteration to iteration. For some methods it is also possible to quantify the maximal
possible error. The author hypothesizes that the problem of local optima convergence can be miti-
gated by adjusting the population density of the search space, which in this case is finite. Normal
population size is in the range of 20-50 particles [31], which would populate the search space quite
densely if evenly distributed during initialization.
3.3.2
Particle filter
A PF is a subcategory of Bayes filters and is a method for simulating probability distributions. It is
similar to Monte Carlo methods and is indeed also termed as a "sequential Monte Carlo simulation"
[15]. The probability distribution is simulated by a set of particles, which are vectors of dimensions
1xn where n is the number of dimensions involved in the problem. For Chen et al. n=4, which is
spasticity and weakness for both the flexor and extensor of the studied motor unit. In this work
it has been reduced to n=2, since only the flexor muscle is considered. By using a combination of
Bayes rule and the Markov assumption, a single particle is sampled from the probability distribution
and constitutes the current hypothesis. The particles are then moved based on incoming data and
the hypothesis is iteratively updated as the distribution changes.
The benefit of using a PF, is the fact that you do not need to assume or know the distribution
of the variable. This is due to the iterative nature which is here mediated by the PSO, which will
move the particle towards the most likely distribution. This would be true for any Bayesian model,
but another benefit of the PF is that it is quite easy for the model to recover from choosing a wrong
30
==PAGE:32==
hypothesis. While other methods always have 1 hypothesis, which is maintained until rejected, PF
operate with 1 hypothesis for each particle and these hypotheses are continuously tracked even if
they are not currently the leading hypothesis. This makes it much easier to recover from a wrong
choice of hypothesis. [15]
Additionally the PF does not need to follow a Gaussian distribution such as a Kalman filter would
[15]. In the case of estimating the perceived impairment, it is possible that a Gaussian distribution
would be a suitable choice, but it is not known and it is construable that it might not be uniform
across patients. Notably there is no ground for applying the central limit theorem in this case.
The challenge of using a PF is that the it can converge without yielding the correct results. These
problems are outlined in detail by Elfring et al. [8]. The main problems are particle fusion and
divergence. The solution to these problems will be discussed in section 4.
4
Implementation
4.1
Exoskeleton
The exoskeleton consists of the mechanical design and the software. In addition to the elements
created during this project, it consists of the Dynamixel MX-106-R motor, a Dynamixel starter
kit for power supply and computer communication, and the Homebit Bitalino device for recording
the sEMG signal. To run the exoskeleton, a computer with the OpenSignal software and python 3
installed is needed. Currently the software is set to run on windows 10, but other operating systems
such as linux or IOS is possible.
4.1.1
Design
The exoskeleton is principally designed for being 3D printed in PLA on a Prusa I3 MK3 printer,
since this is the most available printer and material in DTU Skylab. The specific filament used is
Prusa Galaxy Black with a diameter of 1.75 mm (+/- 0.01 mm). The tensile yield strength is given
as 57 MPa (+/- 1) and the layer adhesion is given as 17 MPa (+/- 3) according to the supplier’s
data sheet. Additional material parameters and how they relate to 3D printed PLA was found from
a paper by Travieso-Rodriquez et al. [28].
31
==PAGE:33==
The Exoskeleton is designed in SolidWorks 2023 and exported as .3mf files to the slicer software.
The slicer used is the PrusaSlicer 2.7.4 for windows, which is the appropriate software to use with
the printer. The assembled exoskeleton as a CAD file is shown on figure 7
Figure 7: The assembled exoskeleton shown as a CAD file
32
==PAGE:34==
The Exoskeleton consists of 6 unique 3D printed parts as listed below
• Upper arm cuff
• Motor beam
• Upper arm beam
• Motor arm
• Forearm beam
• Forearm cuff
The cuffs are shown in figure 8 and the beams are shown in figure 9.
(a)
(b)
Figure 8: The cuffs used to attach the exoskeleton to the user arm. The upper arm cuffs is shown
in a and the forearm cuff is shown in b. Both cuffs have a 50 mm slot cut for inserting elastic bands
to firmly secure the cuffs to the patient’s arm. The cuffs are secured to the exoskeleton beams with
M4 bolts through the flanges on the sides. The upper arm cuff features a mount on the back for
attaching the sEMG sensor.
33
==PAGE:35==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 9: The connecting beams of the exoskeleton
34
==PAGE:36==
The 2 cuffs sit around the posterior half of the patients arm (upper and fore respectively) and is
secured by 50 mm wide elastic bands over the anterior part of the arm. They connect the exoskele-
ton to the patient’s arm. The upper arm cuff connects to the motor beam, which holds the MX-106
servomotor (placed laterally) and the upper arm beam (placed medially) using four M4 bolts.
The Upper arm beam connects to the forearm beam using a 3D printed revolute joint with a worm
shape based on recommendations in the literature [32]. The motor arm is bolted directly to the
motor shaft. The forearm beam and motor arm are connected to the forearm cuff using four M4
bolts. This connection is adjustable, so the cuff can be placed at the best fit on the patient’s fore-
arm. This option is only included at the forearm due to concerns about whether friction between
the PLA parts could hold the weight of the exoskeleton and due to the fact that the width of the
upper arm is fairly constant across the length, while the forearm has a significant tapering.
The upper arm cuff features a mount for the HomeBIT sEMG to reduce movement relative to the
recording site.
The print can be completed in one run if two printers are used, and the print time is somewhere in
the range of 10-14 hours depending on how the parts are distributed between the printers.
All parts are made to work on both the left and right arm except for the upper arm beam. The
upper arm beam has a shelf on its bottom half which is used for calibrating the exoskeleton to 0
degrees at the start of the session. Therefore, there is a right and left of this part, both have been
modelled in SolidWorks and printed.
It can be noted that the cuffs are relatively bulky in their design. This is due to the fact that
neither of the cuffs sit at the widest point of the arm, which is the elbow joint, and the extra width
is added at the cuffs. The alternative solution would be to make a sway in the connecting beams,
which would be difficult for the motor beam since it has to be straight for most of its length.
It would also mean that every part of the exoskeleton had to be fitted to each user. With this
solution, only the cuffs need to be modified to fit the user, which is at any rate considered inevitable
by the author. Therefore, this solution is considered preferable.
The drawback is, that the width of the upper arm cuff slightly limits the user’s ability to adduct
35
==PAGE:37==
the arm, and the exoskeleton will rest against the user’s ribcage. The comfort has been slightly
increased by rounding the involved corners and edges and it is considered acceptable considering
the relatively short duration of use ( <10 min). Additionally, padding can be added to the design
to further decrease any discomfort.
A solution to this could be to remove the beams on the medial side of the arm. These beams are
however considered necessary to the design. The purpose of the beams is to protect the drive shaft
of the motor against bending moments. This is achieved by having the revolute joint which can
help to soak up any bending moments that may occur. As a minor benefit, the more symmetrical
design also reduces torque on the arm caused by the asymmetrical distribution of weight around
the arm due to the motor placement.
The motor has been chosen based on a pre-project done by the author [9] and is an MX-106 R
from Dynamixel. This is a servomotor and is thus able to return its position as kinematic data
for use in the game. Other data such as velocity or acceleration is also available depending on
the control mode of the motor. While the motor was originally intended for an exoskeleton to
be used for the propulsion of a manual wheelchair, it is considered suitable for this task as well.
The performance chart for the motor is shown in figure 10. The preferred choice for controlling
the exoskeleton will be sEMG using a Biosignals plux HomeBIT device. This intended to create a
direct link between the patient’s neuromotor capabilities and the control of the exoskeleton, which
is expected to improve the rehabilitation outcome by having the exoskeleton work as a natural
extension of the patients normal neuromotor control.
36
==PAGE:38==
Figure 10: performance chart for the MX-106 servomotor, found from the data sheet [7]
37
==PAGE:39==
4.1.1.1
Pre-dimensioning
The code used for pre-dimensioning the exoskeleton is written in matlab and is included in section
8.4. The beams were pre-dimensioned based on the filament’s strength and the stall torque of the
motor. The cuffs were noted to be quite bulky anyway (due to design considerations mentioned
above) and thus any concern about their strength seemed unwarranted, except for the flanges that
connect the cuffs to the beam, which are quite thin. The results of the pre-dimensioning are given
in table 1 and an explanation on how these results were found is given below.
As can be seen, all values are way below the yield strength of the filament.
Even though the
3D printing might decrease the yield strength, there should be no concern for the structural in-
tegrity of the design. Similarly, the pressure in the cuffs are miniscule and thus there is no concern
about comfort in terms of pressure on the skin either. The limit for shear stress is found using a rule
of thumb that when shear forces are considered the yield strength should be scaled by a factor of 0.7.
Table 1: Key values from pre-dimensioning
Property
Value [MPa]
Limit [MPa]
Upper arm beam normal stress
8.30
57
Forearm beam normal stress
19.98
57
upper arm cuff pressure
0.0063
N/A
Forearm cuff pressure
0.0089
N/A
Cuff flange shear stress
0.12
39.9
In terms of geometry, the beams are considered as rectangular beams with holes cut in them for the
M4 bolts, this is true for the forearm beam. For the upper arm beam it is a conservative assumption
since the holes are filled with the bolts, which actually increases the strength. The fact that the
motor has a slot in the upper arm beam is not considered, since the motor will fill this gap, and it
must be assumed that the motor’s casing can handle the stall torque of the motor.
These assumptions are used for calculating the moment of inertia, which is the geometric factor
contributing to the stiffness of an object. A high moment of inertia corresponds to a stiff geometry,
the effect can easily be experienced by trying to bend a sheet of paper along different axes.
38
==PAGE:40==
Using the formula for rectangular profiles it is calculated as
I = 1
12 · (W −4mm) · H3[mm4]
(4)
For both the forearm and upper arm W is the width of the beam (along the torque axis) and H
is the height of the beam (perpendicular to the torque axis). It can be noted that this moment of
inertia is the lowest across the length of the beam, but not necessarily the moment of inertia at the
site of the greatest stress.
From this, the maximal normal stress due to bending of the beams is calculated as
σbeam = Tstall · H
I
[MPa]
(5)
Where T is the torque, here the stall torque of 8.4 Nm, H is the height of the beam in mm and I is
the moment of inertia. The strain is calculated as
ϵ = σbeam
E
(6)
Where E is the Young’s modulus of PLA which is assumed to be 3.6 GPa. The Young’s modulus
is the material factor of an objects stiffness and is experimentally determined as the slope of the
stress-strain curve in the linear region and thus a high Young’s modulus corresponds to a stiff ma-
terial.
In order to assess the comfort it is of interest to calculate the pressure of the cuffs on the arms, for
this purpose the shadow area of the cuff is calculated as
Ashadow = 2 · r · l[mm2]
(7)
Where r is the radius of the cuff and l is the length of the cuff. The normal force exerted by the
cuffs due to the torque is calculated as
39
==PAGE:41==
Fcontact = Tstall · L[N]
(8)
Where T is the torque (stall torque) and L is the length of the beam.
The pressure on the arm is then calculated as
parm = Fcontact
Ashadow
[MPa]
(9)
The shear stress at the flange of the cuffs is calculated as
τcuff =
3 · Fcontact
2 · Lcuff ∗Hflange
· 1
4[MPa]
(10)
Where L is the length (here cuff length) and H is the height (here the thickness of the flange which
is 2 mm). The shear stress is divided by four due to the fact that the stress is distributed over the
4 flanges in total on each cuff.
The actual loads experienced by the patient during use of the exoskeleton are expected to sig-
nificantly exceed the stall torque of the motor in some cases.
However, the stall torque indicates the maximal level of torque that the motor can resist, and thus
once it is exceeded, the motor is no longer able to resist the torque and will instead yield to the
torque. Therefore, the stall torque is also the maximal level of torque that the exoskeleton can be
subject to. Any additional torque will instead be put on the users musculoskeletal system.
The slots where the elastic bands connect to the cuffs could be a potential point of fracture, how-
ever these are dimensioned similar to the previous exoskeleton [13], which has not been reported to
experience any such problems, and their loading is decoupled from both the motor torque and joint
torque and is thus similar to the previous model.
40
==PAGE:42==
4.1.1.2
3D printing
The pre-dimensioning generally considers the 3D printed PLA as an isotropic, solid material, which
is not the case. To get an impression on the impact this would have on the dimensioning a paper
by Travieso-Rodrieguez [28] was consulted. This source was also used as a guideline for choosing
the 3D printer settings. It should however be noted that they used a different filament and printer
and their results might therefore not be entirely applicable. Notably their filament is significantly
thicker.
The layer height was set to 0.2 mm, which was also the default height on the printer. The infill was
15% which is lower than what is used in the article. The infill patterns were the default since no
significant effect of this was found in the paper [28].
They found that the yield strength varies from 0.1 to 1.5 times the value for the filament. Especially
the layer orientation was found to have large impact. The strongest orientation was found to be
when the torque axis is normal to the layers, and therefore this was prioritized in the placement
of the parts on the print plate. Fortunately, this orientation also ensured the lowest print height
for this design, which generally reduces print time. It was, however, not the optimal direction in
terms of reducing the amount of support material, since the holes for the M4 bolts would have to
be filled with support material in this configuration, but this was considered a minor trade off. The
placement of the parts on the print plate is shown in figure 11. It can be noted that both the right-
and left-handed version of the upper arm beam was printed.
For supports the option "supports everywhere" was chosen, which prints support material anywhere
the slicer deems necessary. In this case this was beneath any surface that was not resting on the
print plate and in a brim around the tongs on the motor arm as well as the cuff flanges. The support
material was also PLA, but for future use it is recommended to use the option "organic supports"
which is easier to remove.
Two features are printed at an orientation where their strength is dependent on the layer adhesion,
which is quite weak compared to the tensile yield strength. The features affected are the male part
of the revolute joint on the forearm beam and the calibration shelves on the upper arm beams. This
is considered acceptable as neither are intended to support significant load.
The revolute joint is expected to receive some radial loading due to misalignments between the
elbow axis of rotation and the axis of rotation for the exoskeleton, but this is expected to be minor
41
==PAGE:43==
(a)
(b)
Figure 11: Print plate usage and orientation for printing the exoskeleton on the Prusa I3 MK3.
Screenshots from Prusaslicer 2.7.4
forces. The calibration shelf could be loaded if either the patient or the motor tries to overextend the
elbow. The motor is set to have maximum angle of 0 degrees so unless the motors own control fail,
it will not exert torque beyond the position. The patients are not expected to forcefully overextend
the elbow at a level where the structural integrity should be compromised. It may also be noted
that these parts are loaded in shear stress which for the flanges were noted to be quite low.
Regarding the infill percentage, it was set at the default value of the slicer.
While Travieso-Rodriguez et al. [28] indicates that the degree of infill has an effect on the strength
it is not major and the P-value is relatively high at 0.135 which would generally not be considered
significant. Should the exoskeleton be found to lack strength, then this could be a parameter to
adjust easily in later versions. It is also the author’s recommendation to adjust it as the first choice
for improving strength, since the infill will increase the moment of inertia of the elements. While
it was not found to be significant by Travieso-Rodirguez et al. [28] it should theoretically have a
significant effect.
The layer height at 0.2 is the middle level investigated by Travieso-Rodirguez et al. [28] and is
also showing a medium level of yield strength with 0.1 being stronger. however, since their filament
42
==PAGE:44==
is also thicker it might not be directly applicable.
The filament width and printing velocity was not considered and simply set to the default value
of the slicer, since both were barely found to be significant by Travieso-Rodrieguez et al. [28] and
especially printing velocity can sometimes lead to a bad print if set incorrectly.
4.1.2
Software
4.1.2.1
Control signal
The Exoskeleton is controlled using a combination of self-programmed software and code that has
been supplied by the manufacturer of the motor (Robotis), these code files are available from their
homepage as "Dynamixel SDK". The Implementation of the code from Robotis is implemented
based on the examples, which are included in the Dynamixel SDK download. The code for motor
communication is found in section 8.2.
The original idea for controlling the exoskeleton was to control the input current to the motor
based on sEMG and thus relate activation levels to torque levels, which would be similar to how
the patient’s own muscles work. Additionally, the torque level would be influenced by the patients
impairment, as assessed at the start of the session, and the fatigue level which would be dynamically
determined from the sEMG readings. This idea was intended to be implemented using equation 11.
The function given was found from stackexchange [27] and the value of x was defined to increase
dimensionality.
Texo = 2 · S · lim ·
1
1 + (x
log(2)
log(t) −1)k
(11)
Where
x = F · wf + U · wu|wf + wu = 1
(12)
S is the level of impairment, U is the level of activation and F is the level of fatigue, all of these are
in the range of 0 to 1. "lim" is the maximal current that is allowed to the motor. t is a constant
43
==PAGE:45==
which determines at what values of x the steepest slope of the surface occurs, it is initially set to
0.5. k is a constant which determines the overall steepness of the surface. wf and wu are weighting
factors of fatigue relative to muscle activation they are initially both set to 0.5. The fraction alone
creates a sigmoid function that runs from 0 to 1 as x goes from 0 to 1, thus the sigmoid runs from
0 to the maximally allowed level of torque for a patient with an impairment of 0.5 and no torque
assistance is provided to a patient without any impairment i.e. a healthy subject.
By splitting x into a sum of the muscle activation and the fatigue level the sigmoid becomes a
surface, and the weighting factors allows for tuning the function to adjust the importance of fatigue
relative to muscle activation when determining the torque level.
This idea was scrapped due to the high inter- and intra-subject variability on sEMG readings, which
would make it difficult to fit the control settings to the patient [13] [29].
Two alternative solutions to the control problem were devised, which only estimate the onset and
end of movement, rather than try to quantify the amplitude of the movement. This was based on
the control schemes of other exoskeletons [33] [29].
The first solution, is to still control the torque of the motor directly via the input current, but
with the torque level being solely determined from impairment and fatigue levels. This solution is
similar to the original idea, but x would be equal to the fatigue level in equation 11. Additionally,
a position dependency might be necessary to compensate for the fact that the torque introduced
by gravity will differ throughout the movement. In the original algorithm this could be accounted
for by the patient modifying the activity level, but this is no longer possible. This solution will be
referred to as the torque based control scheme (TBCS). The block diagram representing the TBCS
is shown on figure 12.
The other solution takes advantage of the velocity control mode of the Dynamixel MX-106. In this
control scheme, there is no estimation of any patient-related parameters. Instead a goal velocity is
sent to the motor and the motor will assist at the level of torque that ensures this velocity using its
own PID regulation. This solution will be referred to as the velocity based control scheme (VBCS).
The block diagram representing the VBCS is shown on figure 13. The block diagram illustrates a
scoring system where the torque exerted by the exoskeleton is used for calculating the patients score
44
==PAGE:46==
Figure 12: Block digram illustrating the torque based control scheme
in the game along with the position, this method is not implemented in the current version of the
game, but will be discussed in the following section. The block diagram thus represents a preferred
implementation rather than the actual implementation with regards to the scoring system. The rest
of the block diagram match the actual implementation.
In both of these control schemes there is the issue of determining when to initiate and cease ac-
tuation of the exoskeleton, since the exoskeleton should follow the patient’s intention of initiating
and terminating movement. One option is to use the motor’s own capability of sensing whether
45
==PAGE:47==
Figure 13: Block diagram illustrating the velocity based control scheme
the driving shaft is rotating or not, thus detecting movement. This solution is good for initiating
movement, but poor for terminating it, since that would require the patient to forcefully resist the
motor to the point of stalling. This might be difficult for an impaired patient, especially for the
VBCS. At any rate, it is expected to be an unpleasant user experience.
The better option is to determine the intention to move from the sEMG signal, which according to
Merletti et al. [23], is visually discernible from the sEMG signal. While the amplitude may have
a large variability the detection of elevated levels of electrical activity from a session determined
baseline is much more robust and has been done in other studies [33]. This approach is also be-
lieved to give a much better experience of the exoskeleton acting as an extension of the patients
own musculoskeletal system.
The goal of making the exoskeleton seem like a natural extension/enhancement of the users ex-
isting movement capabilities is also at the heart of whether to choose one approach over the other.
The patient should be actively engaged in the rehab and have a strong feeling of agency in their
actions. This would have been achieved by the original algorithm, but is somewhat lost in the
alternative solutions. The TBCS preserves it best since it only supplies an assisting level of torque,
and the patient is therefore still in control of the movement by modifying their own muscle torque.
This is opposed to the VBCS where the patient will move at the specified velocity regardless of
46
==PAGE:48==
their own contribution. The benefit, however, is the elimination of uncertain estimates.
In the end, both schemes are implemented as they are believed to be suited for different scenarios.
In the current form of the rehabilitation game and for more able patients, the TBCS is believed to
be preferable, since it gives the user increased agency, which more able users are able to leverage,
and it maintains the difficulty of the game. For less able patients and for activities of daily life, the
VBCS might be preferred, because it creates more easily predictable movements and reduces most
tasks to a binary question of initiating and terminating movement. The VBCS might also see use
in future versions of rehabilitation games, where the user is scored based on how much effort they
manage to contribute to the movement, this would be in line with the general recommendation of
effort-based reward systems as opposed to result-based reward systems.
4.1.2.2
EMG processing
As mentioned in section 4.1.1 The exoskeleton relies on sEMG to determine intentional muscle ac-
tivation and fatigue. The sEMG equipment used is a Bitalino HomeBIT kit. The electrodes used
are pre-gelled Ag/AgCl electrodes with a diameter of 24 mm and a thickness of 1 mm. The gel is
pre-applied and is a conductive and adhesive hydrogel.
In order to use the signal it must be processed in real time.
This is done with a class called
"LiveFilter", which is coded according to [25]. The code for the filter class is given in section 8.1
line 149-180. The class has a constructor, which receives the order of the filter cut-off frequencies,
the sampling frequency and the type of filter (notch, low-, high-, band-pass). It has a single method
called "process", which receives a signal sample by sample and returns the filtered samples.
The Butterworth filter is implemented from the filter provided by the scipy package and the transfer
function is expressed using second order sectioning, which is stated in the scipy documentation as
being more resistant to numerical error [25]. This works by breaking down higher order filters to
second order sections or biquads, which in the scipy package, is implemented as a transposed direct
form II. This implementation has 2 unit delays, 5 multiplications and 3 summations. For readability,
the difference equation is written explicitly by extracting the multiplications factors from the ’sos’
47
==PAGE:49==
output of the scipy filter.
The filter is a Butterworth filter, since it is extensively used in literature to process sEMG signals.
The task of detecting the onset and termination of movement is also a matter of processing the
sEMG signal. The code for detecting movement and setting the input to the motor is given in
section 8.1 line 183-281. As initial preparation the signal was band-pass filtered in to bandwidth of
20-350 Hz and notch filtered at 48-52 Hz to remove power line interference. The detection is indeed
possible, since it has been done by others [29] [33], but they used machine learning and Trigili et
al. did not test their algorithm in real time, though they express confidence in its applicability
[29]. They considered 14 features for their model which has been used for inspiration, however the
uniqueness of these features is debatable [29].
The initial features considered were the ARV and the Zero crossing rate of the signal. But only the
ARV was found to be useful for the purpose of detecting movement. However, as noted in literature,
there tends to be a time-lag on these peaks [22]. The time-lag is also found to be dependent on
contraction type according to a pilot study [1]. The ARV is theoretically an indicator of the level of
muscle activity, since the activation of bigger motor units elicit greater values. In this case, the ARV
itself is not indicative of movement since it was found to generally be ever increasing during the
course of a session. This is expected, since the onset of fatigue is rapid, which would elicit a rapidly
increase in the recruitment of bigger motor units as smaller muscle units fatigue and metabolites
are accumulated. The peaks that occur, are believed to be related and therefore the derivatives of
the ARV are considered useful.
The variance calculated over a trailing window was also attempted and found to be a decent indi-
cator of movement, but the performance was quite unstable as will be discussed in the validation
section.
The best performance was achieved by finding peaks and valley of the 1st order derivative of the
ARV after low-pass filtering it at a very low cut-off frequency (between 0.08 - 0.15 Hz). This will
be discussed in more detail in the validation section. The low-pass filter smoothens the signal by
using the prior knowledge that movements are spaced at intervals of at least 5 seconds + movement
duration. Finding the peaks and valleys of the ARV was found to be robust at detecting movement,
48
==PAGE:50==
especially when fatigued, but had a time lag of around 5-6 seconds. It was believed that by going
to the 1st order derivative the time lag could be reduced. It did reduce the time-lag to around
2-3 seconds, which is still not considered satisfactory. One could also worry that this relationship
only exists for regularly spaced movements. The performance is better, but less stable, before the
estimated onset of fatigue. Before onset of fatigue using a low-pass filter on the Raw sEMG signal
and using the 1st order derivative of to find peaks and valleys of the ARV was found to produce
better results and even predict the onset of movement by small time step. Using the logarithm of
the ARV signal was also attempted but did not change performance significantly nor reliably.
Peaks and valleys of the variance were very good at detecting movement after the onset of fatigue
and even predicting it at a sub-second margin, it was however not very robust across trials.
Others have used machine learning for the task [29] [22] and it is therefore an obvious strategy
to consider.
While the author is by no means an expert or even skilled in the use of machine
learning, it is still considered relevant to share my considerations of this approach.
The advantage of machine learning, such as artificial neural networks, is their ability to create and
tune complex models using many features based on labelled empirical data. The features can either
be predefined (supervised machine learning) or discovered by the model (unsupervised machine
learning). This allows it to create models based on trends and relations in the data, which could
otherwise be obscured or at least difficult to identify. Tools such as multi-variate statistics can be
an analytical alternative to supervised machine learning and can be very useful for interrogating
the data prior to training a model.
What can be fixed with machine learning is data that has high variability or opaque dependencies.
In this case, not a single feature has been found that reliably signifies the onset or end of movement
without a considerable time-lag in conditions of rapidly developing fatigue. There is thus no reason
to believe that a supervised model could create a model functional for real time application, unless
novel features are discovered.
The easiest way to discover/apply novel features would be unsupervised machine learning. The
author cannot reject the possibility that an unsupervised machine learning model could be used
for solving the problem. It should however be cautioned that one must be careful when creating
the training data and validating the model to ensure that the model does not learn unintentional
49
==PAGE:51==
features with low or no generalized validity.
An example of this would be that in the data recorded for this project, where the subject is asked to
pause for 5 seconds between movements. An unsupervised model would likely just identify the in-
terval between movements and the duration of movement and achieve decent results on the training
data. The model would, however, show poor performance in a real scenario where this regularity of
movement does not exist.
The author can only hypothesize but believes that the reason why movement detection is func-
tional in the literature is due to the use of equipment with higher fidelity and performance.
4.2
Digital Twin
Unfortunately, the digital twin has not become functional in real life within the duration of the
project, mainly due to the fact that the sEMG signal has significant inter- and intra-subject vari-
ability, which was realized quite late in the project. This flaw could have been predicted, however,
the variability was not mentioned in any of the consulted sources on sEMG. The fact that the ap-
proach was adapted from a published article, lead the author to not question whether the intended
activation level could be predicted from the task reliably. However, sources found later confirm this
problem [29]. The following section will start with a short description of the problems currently
faced by the digital twin, and possible avenues for solving these problems followed by a detailed
description of how the HDT software is currently implemented and how it works. The description
will be a digested version of the work by Chen et al. [5] along with how their approach is modified
to suit the use case of this project and the work of the DTU ReHyp research group.
The main goal of the HDT is to estimate the patient’s ability to compensate for their impair-
ment (referred to as perceived impairment by Chen et al. [5]) based on their observed performance
on a given motor task. This means that a model relating the performance error to the ability to
compensate the impairment is needed. Chen et al provides this in equation 1 which is described in
section 3.3 [5]. For the sake of this argument, it is only necessary to realize that the heart of their
model is to relate trajectories to activation levels using a model. If this is achieved, the planned
activation level can be found from the task trajectory. The observed trajectory can be compared
50
==PAGE:52==
to a simulated trajectory obtained from the modified activation levels caused by the particle values
as obtained from equation 1 to validate the particle values.
When performing a rehabilitation task, the planned activation level is not inherently known. In-
stead the trajectory is known, and specifically for Chen et al. the torque associated with the goal
position is known [5]. Therefore, it is necessary to uniquely relate these quantities.
The amplitude of the sEMG signal, when rectified, is indicative of the number and size of motor
units recruited for a movement and is thus related to the torque, however as noted earlier and
demonstrated in the validation section, this does not really apply under fatigue. Torque and po-
sition are uniquely related in the set-up used by Chen et al. since the patient is turning a spring
loaded handle to a goal position. In this project, position and torque is somewhat related by gravity,
but since the gravitational pull follows a sine the relation it is generally not unique and it is also
dependent on patient anatomy. This does not mean that it is impossible to make the relation, but
it is less trivial than the case of the spring loaded task.
This should illustrate that the relation between activation level and trajectory/position does indeed
exist, but it is obscured by both the intra and inter-subject variability. Additionally, the estimation
of the planned activation is heavily affected by the steady increase in the sEMG signal mentioned
in section 4.1.2.2. The intra-subject variability seems to be neglected or remedied in an unspecified
way by Chen et al. who even goes as far as to say that subjects with similar metadata have similar
sEMG profiles, thus reducing the inter-subject variability to a matter of grouping patients appro-
priately [5]. Additionally, the sEMG signal will also change based on the joint angle and mechanical
properties that change during the contraction [6] which add to the attractiveness of doing away
with relating trajectories and activation by force output.
This concludes the description of why the twin does not work and possible avenues for remedy-
ing this, which may be worth exploring in the future. Now follows the description of how the HDT
is implemented.
4.2.1
DigitalTwin class
The digital twin is implemented in Python using an object based programming (OBP) approach.
A class named "DigitalTwin" is created, and each user will then be represented by an instance of
51
==PAGE:53==
this class. The class has 3 methods apart from the constructor. The code is included in section 8.1
line 7-146.
The constructor receives two optional inputs.
The first is the number of particles which is set
to 20 as a default, according to Wang et al. 20-50 is usually a good number of particles [31]. The
second input is the assessed impairment of the patient, its default value is 0 for both weakness and
hypertonia. In addition to these parameters, the variable structure of some variables are assigned
and the particles population is created as an array of dimension number of particles x 2. Initially
the particle values are sampled from the absolute values of a normal distribution centred around 0
with a standard deviation of 0.25.
The first method is called "_upd_Obs" and takes a single input, which is the planned muscle
activation. It predicts the actual muscle activation given the values of the particles, which is done
using equation 1.
The second method is called "_PSO" and is the PSO algorithm used. It is a fusion of the PSO and
PF algorithm used by Chen et al [5]. The main part of the algorithm is a while loop, which runs
until the mean fitness of the particles exceeds 0.995 (the maximal fitness value for each particle is
1).
Inside the loop, the particles are first moved according to equation 2. The magnitude of the move-
ments are sampled from a Gaussian distribution with a mean value of zero and a variance of 0.25.
Convergence was found to improve when a 0.8 factor was multiplied onto the cognitive term. Neg-
ative values are subsequently corrected by taking the absolute value of the particles. This is similar
to what is called a reflecting wall by Wang et al. [31].
Once the particles have been moved, the simulated observed muscle activation is updated by calling
the "_upd_Obs" method and the fitness of each particle is calculated using equation 3.
The implemented fitness function becomes
fit = η ·
1
q
2 · π · δ2
V
· exp{ −1
2 · δ2
V
· (U −˜U)2}
(13)
52
==PAGE:54==
Where η is the normalization constant which normalizes the fitness to be in the range 0-1 for easier
interpretation. It is calculated as
η =
1
1
√
2·π·δ2
V
· exp{ −1
2·δ2
V · (0)2}
(14)
U denotes the observed activation of the patient while ˜U is the simulated activation values of each
particle as based on equation 1. Delta squared is the standard deviation of the movement equation
(equation 2).
The individual best and group best of the particles are then updated in case a better fit has been
found and the mean fitness is calculated.
As opposed to Chen et al. the problem of particle fusion is handled in the PSO algorithm in-
stead of the PF algorithm. Particles are considered to be fused, if their standard deviation is below
1/10000 and are repopulated in the same way as the constructor does it.
Finally, the fitness of the particles are assigned as the weight of the particles.
The final method is called "upd_P" and updates the particle values and is the PF algorithm
of the HDT. This is the only method intended to be called during use apart from the constructor.
The algorithm consists primarily of a while loop which runs until the deviation between the observed
muscle activation and the mean value of the simulated observed muscle activations are below a set
threshold.
Firstly, the loop calls the "_PSO" method to optimize the positioning of the particles. Secon-
darily the loop assess the number of effective particles in the same way as done by Chen et al.
and resamples the particles if the number of effective particles is deemed too low. Resampling is
done by selecting a number of particles from the population equal to the number of particles in the
population. The chance of a particle being sampled is equal to its normalized weight/fitness. The
same particle can be sampled multiple times. Afterwards the weight is distributed equally across
particles.
At the end of the loop the "_upd_Obs" method is called. The initial and converged particle dis-
tributions is shown on figure 14.
53
==PAGE:55==
(a)
(b)
Figure 14: Particle distribution in the solution space before and after running the "upd_P" method
Once the while loop exits, a hypothesis is chosen. The hypothesis is the particle value that is be-
lieved to most accurately reflect the patient.
The hypothesis is found as the average of all particle values. The initial idea was to weight the
average based on particle weight, but a simple average was found to be more accurate, probably
due to local optima. After the first run, the hypothesis is found as a weighted average between the
newest hypothesis and the previous hypothesis to increase stability of the hypothesis trajectory. All
hypothesis are appended to a list so that the trajectory can be evaluated after the session.
Generally the hypothesis is found to be fairly accurate, even when no single particle finds the correct
value. Sometimes the particle converge around a significantly different solution, but when consid-
ering the whole signal, this is acceptable outliers. The performance of the HDT was assessed using
the code included in section 8.3 line 106-146
54
==PAGE:56==
5
Validation and data collection
5.1
Simulation of control schemes
In order to explore the differences between the TBCS and VBCS a simulation was set up. The
simulation code is included in section 8.3 line 8-103. The simulation was designed to emulate the
playing of the badminton games, where the simulation would receive a goal position and be required
to reach the goal position after 2.5 seconds. To do this, the simulation would have to generate a
signal of 1000 samples, which corresponds to a sampling frequency of 400 Hz. This generated signal
will be referred to as the control signal. The sampling frequency is significantly below what the
actual sEMG uses, but was found to be decent trade-off between temporal resolution and compu-
tational cost.
Since the control schemes differ radically, they cannot use the same control signal. Furthermore if
the algorithms are simply fed a control signal that makes it accomplish the task, then the simu-
lation will not yield any meaningful result. Therefore, it was decided that the simulation should
determine the signal itself and the control schemes can then be compared by the time it takes for
the simulation to create a solution. This will be seen as an early indication of how easy it will be
for the patients to get used to working with the exoskeleton.
Spending a lot of time building the simulation was not feasible, within the time limits of the project,
so instead of creating or adapting a novel framework for generating the control signal it was decided
to use the PF and PSO framework, which is also used in the digital twin. The theory behind it is
described in section 3.3. As an alternative solution Q-learning was researched, and while it might
be better suited for accomplishing the simulation task, it was decided that the time it would take
to implemented this, to the author novel, technique would be too great. Especially considering the
risk of spending a long time debugging due to the lack of familiarity with the algorithm. Secondly
the value of the simulation results was expected to be quite low apart from tuning the control
parameters. This is due to the fact, that the algorithms are expected to mainly differ in usability,
which the simulation can only give a vague indication of, since it is not human and will likely have
a distinctly non-human approach for adapting to any control scheme.
55
==PAGE:57==
The simulation is built with two tracks, one for each controls scheme, but both tracks make the
same calculations to ensure fairness when comparing the computation time. The particle filter is
initialized with random values around 0.5, which is also set as the threshold for the algorithms i.e.
the amplitude of the signal where the "patient" is deemed to have an intention of moving their arm,
and therefore actuation is provided when it is exceeded.
The VBCS is very straight forward, an array of velocities is created from the initial random control
signal. For any index of the control signal where the 0.5 threshold is exceeded, the values of the
velocity array is set to the goal velocity. In the simulations the goal velocity was set as 40 deg/s.
The positions are then calculated by getting the cumulative sum of the velocity array, and dividing
all values by the sampling frequency, thus integrating the velocities with respect to time.
The TBCS is an iterative process since the torque induced by gravity, which is dependent on
position, must be subtracted from the motor torque to get the net torque. This is not necessary for
the VBCS since it is velocity based and the PID regulation of the motor will account for gravity.
The motor torque is created as an array which is populated similarly to the velocity array used for
VBCS. The gravitational torque is calculated as
Tg(t) = sin(p(t −1)) · l
2 · m · g
(15)
Where p is the position given as joint angel, l is the length of the forearm, m is the mass of the
forearm and g is the gravitational constant. The centre of mass of the forearm is assumed to be
positioned midway.
From this the net torque is given and can be calculated by dividing with the moment of inertia as
given in equation 16
αnet(t) = Tmotor(t) + Tg(t)
( l
2)2 · m
(16)
Where T motor is the motor torque and using the same notation as in equation 15.
The velocity and position are then found in turn by cumulatively summing the acceleration array
and dividing by the sampling frequency to get the velocity array and repeating this process to get
56
==PAGE:58==
the position array.
Depending on which track the simulation runs, either of the position arrays are parsed as the
actual position array. The final value of the array is compared to the goal position to evaluate the
fitness of the particle using the fitness function given in equation 3. The PSO algorithm runs until
the mean value of the particle fitness exceeds 0.8 (max fitness is 1). In the event where the particles
fuse at a singular value, as determined by the standard deviation of the particles, the particles are
repopulated around the best particle value of the group. This is done due to an observed behaviour,
where the particle would slowly move towards the goal as group. Considering this behaviour it
would be detrimental to reset the particles back to their initial condition. Therefore, it was consid-
ered a better solution to the particle fusion problem to scatter them around the current position so
they can explore a bigger area without losing progress.
The result of the simulation is somewhat ambiguous. The VBCS scheme has quite realistic be-
haviour creating a smooth trajectory to reach the target position at the end of the signal, conver-
gence time was however significant. The TBCS turned out to be quite difficult for PSO algorithm
to control as it would fluctuate wildly, even when low values of torque were used. This problem is
not expected to occur in real life, since the human brain is quite adept at handling torque controlled
entities.
The simulation could likely be improved by using a learning algorithm, which understands that
the control scheme is binary rather than continuous. The PSO algorithm likely spends lot of time
making adjustments that does not translate to actual changes in the signal, and it can drift very
far from the threshold value making corrections slow.
For future use it is recommended to use an actual reinforcement learning method.
5.2
Movement detection
The signals used for testing the movement detection were recorded from the biceps brachii of either
left or right arm of a male subject. The recordings were made using the Bitalino home bit with
a single 2 electrode channel. The sensors were placed according to the SENIAM guidelines [14]
for sEMG recording on the biceps brachii. Recordings were done at intervals, that were deemed
57
==PAGE:59==
sufficiently long for any peripheral fatigue to subside. Fatigue of the central nervous system was
not taken into account.
The subject was asked to perform biceps curls with a 5 second rest period between repetitions until
fatigued. The movement was resisted by a strong elastic band to ensure a rapid onset of fatigue.
The elastic band had tension at the resting position of the arm. The tension of the band was not
regulated and can differ somewhat from trial to trial due to differences in how tightly it was strung.
A pipeline for collecting synchronous data from the sEMG and video data from the computer’s
webcam was developed by a previous student [18]. The pipeline synchronizes the data and post-
processes the video data with a movement tracking model that can identify kinematic features such
as joint angles and angular velocity of segments [18]. The kinematic data was used to establish a
ground truth for the onset and end of movement. In order for a movement to be considered, the
range of motion had to be greater than 40 degrees between onset and end. This was found to be a
reliable way of detecting the correct number of repetitions.
The sEMG signal was recorded and streamed to the pipeline using the OpenSignals software, which
connects to the device using a Bluetooth connection. The Bitalino HomeBIT can record at a sam-
pling frequency of 4000 Hz, and this has indeed been done by previous students. However, of the
three computers that has been tested during this project, none were able to reliably record at more
than 1000 Hz. At higher sampling frequencies the Bluetooth connection would fail, causing the sys-
tem to lose a significant amount of samples. Due to the need for starting the trial in a non-fatigued
state, it was necessary to use the reliable sampling frequency since the number of trials that could be
recorded in a given time frame was quite limited. The software suggested that a Bluetooth dongle
could fix this problem, but it was not deemed possible to procure such a device within the available
time frame.
The 1000 Hz sampling frequency is enough to satisfy the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem, which
states that the sampling frequency must be at least twice the highest frequency in the signal to avoid
aliasing. While the sampling theorem was satisfied, a higher sampling rate would have improved
the fidelity of the signal by allowing to average over a higher number of samples.
The code used for validating detection of movement is included in section 8.3 line 223-447. The
58
==PAGE:60==
pre-recorded signal was filtered to a bandwidth of 20-350 Hz and notch filtered in the range 48-52
Hz using the LiveFilter class described in section 4.1.2.2, both filters were 4th order. Before use the
LiveFilter was tested to produce identical results on an unfiltered signal from a previous student
[18] compared to filtering the signal as a pre-recorded signal using the scipy package. The code for
validating the filter performance is included in section 8.3 line 148-221.
Real time application was simulated by passing the signal sample by sample in a for-loop.
After filtering the signal, promising features for detecting movement were calculated. The ARV and
variance was calculated over a trailing window of length 1000. The zero crossing rate was calculated
over a trailing window of 500 samples.
To smoothen out fluctuations that were deemed insignificant, the feature arrays were low-pass fil-
tered using the LiveFilter class. A separate low-pass filter was made for each feature, but they were
all of 4th order.
For all features, the idea was that increases and decreases would signify the onset or end of move-
ment, i.e. peaks and valleys of the feature arrays. Therefore, the derivative of the feature arrays
were calculated and the peaks and valleys of the feature arrays were found as the zero-crossings in
the derivative. These were found as a change in sign, distinguishing between the direction of zero
crossing to differentiate onset and end of movement.
The most successful features were peaks and valleys of the ARV, variance, and the 1st order deriva-
tive of the ARV. Zero crossing rate was found to be of no use.
ARV was found to be the most consistent feature with a time-lag of 5-6 seconds once fatigue had
set in. This time-lag could be reduced to 2-3 seconds by using the 1st order derivative instead, but
this might be a feature of the regularity of movement rather than a reliable feature.
The variance produced good results on trial 1 with sub-second time-lag, but on other trials it had
a more random nature.
A major challenge for creating a robust model, is the fact that the low-pass filters used to discrimi-
nate between significant and insignificant peaks is not applicable across trials, even though all trials
were conducted in a similar manner. This indicates that even if a decent performance could be
achieved on a training signal, it would not generalize to new signals.
An interesting observation, was the fact that the variance could be filtered at a higher low-pass
59
==PAGE:61==
frequency (generally in the range 0.15-0.2 Hz), compared to the ARV based features (generally
in the range 0.08-0.1 Hz). The cut-off frequency for variance seems reasonable for a movement
with 5 second intervals between repetitions, while the one needed for the ARV based features seem
excessively low. The low cut-off frequency used for ARV based features might also explain the
improved performance as fatigue accumulated since it likely increases the time to complete a repe-
tition. Another explanation could be the use of bigger motor units as fatigue accumulates creating
more distinct peaks.
The choice of promising features were based on a paper by Trigili et al. [29] who identified 14
features. However, due to the fatigue, which makes the amplitude of the ARV and rectified value
rise rapidly regardless of movement, all features using the these attributes directly was disregarded
immediately. This left only Waveform length, variance, zero crossing rate, Willison amplitude, slope
sign change, skewness and kurtosis.
Skewness and kurtosis were found to hardly hold any information on the onset and end of movement
and have almost no prediction value and was thus not investigated [29] .
Slope sign change is similar to peaks and valleys of the ARV. Willison amplitude is similar to find-
ing areas of certain steepness making it very similar to finding peaks and valleys of the 1st order
derivative of the ARV. wave form length was not tested due to its similarity to zero crossing rate,
which was found to be of no value.
The ARV of each trial is shown in figure 15 with the onset ground truth and on figure 16 with
the end ground truth. It can be seen that the onset of movement occurs in the valleys of the signal,
indicating that using the 1st order derivatives sign change from negative to positive should be a
good indicator of movement onset. The time-lag is also observable and it can be seen that some
onsets will never be found using this approach.
The increasing trend in the baseline of the signal is clearly visible with trial 3 being less conclusive.
However, trial 3 did not show clear trends of fatigue either, the hypothesis is that the subject was
not un-fatigued at the start of trial or that the sensor placement was done incorrectly.
60
==PAGE:62==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 15: ARV of the signal in cyan line and the ground truth of movement onset in magenta stars
61
==PAGE:63==
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 16: ARV of the signal in cyan with the end of movement ground truth in magenta stars
62
==PAGE:64==
6
Discussion
The research question of the thesis is as previously stated: "How may an upper-limb exoskeleton be
designed and instrumented in order to support digital twin based neuromotor rehabilitation?".
To address this question a mechanical design of such a device has been made, which is 3D printable
in PLA.
Creating a control algorithm using sEMG signal was attempted. The nature of the sEMG signal
recorded using the Bitalino homeBIT has been explored, and the author is confident that no sin-
gular feature of the signal is useful for determining onset and end of movement. Variance, zero
crossing rate, and derivatives of the ARV was tested, but none of these were successful due to lack
of robustness and unacceptable time-lag. It is, however, possible that a model developed by means
of machine learning using several factors would able to determine useful features or combinations
thereof. Alternatively, the fidelity achievable with the equipment may be improved by recording
from several muscles or using multi-channel recording from one muscle.
The best results have been achieved by band-pass filtering the signal to a bandwidth of 20-350 Hz
before calculating the ARV and then low-pass filter the ARV with a cut-off frequency matching the
intended interval between movements. The 1st order derivative of the low-pass filtered ARV was
found to be the feature that best estimated the correct number of repetitions with the lowest time
lag. The time lag was however never reliably below 2-3 seconds.
A framework for a HDT tracking the ongoing rehabilitation trajectory using PSO and PF to solve
the impairment model was adapted from an article by Chen et al. [5] to fit the use case of this
project. Since the model provided was ultimately dependent on the sEMG signal it did not become
functional. In order for the model to work it will be necessary to either solve the fidelity problem
between the sEMG signal and the muscle activation, or establish a new model where impairment
and degree of rehabilitation is related to movement performance directly or at least independently
of sEMG. When quantifying impairment as a 2 dimensional quantity the HDT is found to converge
rapidly to correct values although some convergence to local optima are observed. Based on this it
is believed that the set-up could be made to function in a real time application.
63
==PAGE:65==
Considering how this project was conducted, it was probably a mistake to go directly for a use case
involving rapid onset of fatigue, rather than develop the sEMG control schemes in non-fatiguing
conditions first and then try to expand the use to fatiguing conditions. It would have been wise to
make an initial proof-of-concept, especially since the use of sEMG based control was a novel strategy
in the DTU ReHyp research group, which had previously been abandoned at an early stage [13].
As mentioned, the principle is demonstrated by several other research groups but the accuracy
on detecting onset of movement ranges from decent to lacklustre [22]. The HomeBIT system is a
notably low-cost model compared to what is generally used, which does not make the task easier.
Measures should be taken to ensure that the system can at least be used to its full capacity, which is
currently not the case in terms of sampling rate. For reference, one group used an 8 channel sEMG
with dry copper electrodes and a sampling rate of 1000Hz for a lower limb exoskeletons [33] and
another group used a telemyo 2400 R, which appears to be a 4-32 channel system for an upper-limb
exoskeleton [29].
In hindsight, it was never realistic to integrate the digital twin into the exoskeleton system within
the time frame of the project and should probably have been left out entirely. It was included due to
an interest in the concept, and because it seemed relatively straight forward to adapt the approach
described by Chen et al. [5]. However, the method described in the paper turned out to be far
less transparent than anticipated, and it eventually drained a lot of time out of the project, which
would have been better spent on working with the sEMG. It is ultimately included in this report
due to the time expenditure, and due to a sincere belief that the work accomplished may provide a
good foundation for future projects were it is made the main focus.
Since neither the exoskeleton nor the digital twin is functional due to problems with the sEMG
signal, remedying this would be the first goal of any future projects. Either by making the sEMG
signal functional or by finding alternative means of achieving its purpose.
For the exoskeleton, this would be the detection of the user’s intention to move, and for the digital
twin it would be to relate movement performance on task to impairment.
For the exoskeleton, the robustness of detection may be improved by applying a more advanced
model, possibly via machine learning and/or by acquiring more channels for the sEMG sensor. The
64
==PAGE:66==
time-lag issue seems unsolvable using the current equipment except for a small chance that an in-
creased sampling rate could improve it somewhat. More realistically the issue may be more readily
solved by changing the use condition to not include fatigue, or at least only slowly accumulating
fatigue. This would make it feasible to use some of the features that were found to be good for
determining onset of movement by Trigili et al. [29]. At any rate slow or non-fatiguing conditions
are expected to provide a signal with a much more stable baseline, which is expected to improve
performance.
The use of different technologies for detecting the onset of movement is considered beyond the scope
of this report, but it can be noted that a significant improvement in accuracy has been found by
combining sEMG and EEG data [22].
The digital twin mainly suffers from the inter- and intra-subject variability and the prospects of
overcoming this problem using machine learning seems promising. However, a solid understanding
of neuromuscular impairment and its various manifestations will be important for this work. In
this regard, one should be aware that the impairment will add a significant amount of inter-subject
variability to the signal.
Disregarding the possibility that the variability could possibly be reduced, the author recognizes
two viable options for making the digital twin work.
The first option is to create a new model relating performance error to the patient’s ability to com-
pensate for their impairment, which operates directly of kinetic or kinematic features rather than
sEMG signals.
The second option is to develop a new model based on the sEMG signal by using machine learning.
The reason for believing in this solution is the fact that the sEMG signal is somewhat related to
torque and thus trajectory. A machine learning algorithm might be able to develop a solution that is
robust to the variability if provided with sufficient training data, and possibly some session specific
prior knowledge. An example of prior knowledge could be the maximal voluntary contraction of
the patient along with the baseline activation level. This could help calibrating the function to the
possible range of activations achievable by the patient during that specific session.
65
==PAGE:67==
While the mechanical design of the exoskeleton is considered satisfactory, it could be improved
in terms of weight, and size.
by transitioning to a design based on sheet metal aluminium or
similar. It would also be easier to disinfect an aluminium frame between use.
7
Conclusion
The goal of the project was to investigate the possibility of creating an upper limb exoskeleton
intended for rehabilitation of stroke patients in integration with a HDT. The project has advanced
the realization of such a system in several areas. A mechanical design of an exoskeleton compatible
with a MX-106 R servomotor has been completed, and is believed to be functional for the time be-
ing. The MX-106 has sufficient torque output to provide meaningful assistance on both resisted and
unresisted flexion of the elbow. The Exoskeleton design is printable on a Prusa I3 MK3 printer using
Prusa Galaxy black PLA with a filament diameter of 1.75 mm as material. Printer settings and
part orientation are described in the report. The Communication set-up for this motor in python
3 has also been established using the software "Dynamixel SDK" provided by the manufacturer of
the motor.
Creating a control algorithm for the exoskeleton using sEMG obtained from a Homebit Bitalino
device has been attempted has been attempted based on variance, zero crossing rate, and ARV.
Neither of these features were found to be sufficiently robust and the time-lag was considered un-
acceptable at 2-3 seconds at best.
A framework for a digital twin using PF and PSO has been adapted. The framework is promising
in terms of computation time and convergence of results, but a model for relating trajectory and
impairment will require further research.
References
[1] Nizam Uddin Ahamed, Nasim Ahmed, Mahdi Alqahtani, Omar Altwijri, R. Badlishah Ahmad,
and Kenneth Sundaraj. Investigation of the emg-time relationship of the biceps brachii muscle
during contractions. Journal of Physical Therapy Science, 27:39, 1 2015.
66
==PAGE:68==
[2] Rozina Bhimani and Lisa Anderson.
Clinical understanding of spasticity: Implications for
practice. Rehabilitation Research and Practice, 2014:1–10, 2014.
[3] L. Brewer, F. Horgan, A. Hickey, and D. Williams. Stroke rehabilitation: recent advances and
future therapies. QJM: An International Journal of Medicine, 106:11–25, 1 2013.
[4] Ilaria Carpinella, Tiziana Lencioni, Thomas Bowman, Rita Bertoni, Andrea Turolla, Maurizio
Ferrarin, and Johanna Jonsdottir. Effects of robot therapy on upper body kinematics and arm
function in persons post stroke: a pilot randomized controlled trial. Journal of neuroengineering
and rehabilitation, 17, 1 2020.
[5] Yilun Chen, Wentao Wang, Junyu Diao, Daoyu Wang, Zhuo Jian, Yixi Wang, and Zhihao
Jiang. Digital-twin-based patient evaluation during stroke rehabilitation. ICCPS 2023 - Pro-
ceedings of the 2023 ACM/IEEE 14th International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems with
CPS-IoT Week 2023, pages 22–33, 5 2023.
[6] Emer P Doheny, Madeleine M Lowery, David P Fitzpatrick, and Mark J O’malley.
Effect
of elbow joint angle on force-emg relationships in human elbow flexor and extensor muscles.
Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology, 2024.
[7] Dynamixel. Mx-106t/r. https://emanual.robotis.com/docs/en/dxl/mx/mx-106/.
[8] Jos Elfring, Elena Torta, and René van de Molengraft. Particle filters: A hands-on tutorial.
Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), 21:1–28, 1 2021.
[9] Asbjørn Faltum. Exoskeleton preproject, 2024.
[10] Fat32. matlab - large spike at beginning of signal after applying bandpass filter - signal process-
ing stack exchange. https://dsp.stackexchange.com/questions/62149/large-spike-at-beginning-
of-signal-after-applying-bandpass-filter.
[11] Mark Freedman.
Weakness - neurologic disorders - msd manual professional edition.
https://www.msdmanuals.com/professional/neurologic-disorders/symptoms-of-neurologic-
disorders/weakness.
[12] Antonio Frisoli, Michele Barsotti, Edoardo Sotgiu, Giuseppe Lamola, Caterina Procopio, and
Carmelo Chisari.
A randomized clinical control study on the efficacy of three-dimensional
67
==PAGE:69==
upper limb robotic exoskeleton training in chronic stroke. Journal of neuroengineering and
rehabilitation, 19, 12 2022.
[13] Hans Kristian Bech Hansen. User adaptable upper-limp exoskeleton for stroke victim rehabil-
itation. 2023.
[14] H. J. Hermens and B. Freriks. Seniam. http://seniam.org/.
[15] Kaijen Hsiao, Henry De Plinval-Salgues, Jason Miller, and Cognitive Robotics. Particle filters
and their applications. 2005.
[16] Deyby Huamanchahua, Claudia Castaneda-Vasquez, Alexandra Vasquez-Espinoza, and Ale-
jandro Munoz-Zevallos. Robotic devices types exoskeletons for elbow rehabilitation: A techno-
logical review. 2021 IEEE 12th Annual Ubiquitous Computing, Electronics and Mobile Com-
munication Conference, UEMCON 2021, pages 791–796, 2021.
[17] Gerd Kempermann, Fred H. Gage, Ludwig Aigner, Hongjun Song, Maurice A. Curtis, San-
drine Thuret, H. Georg Kuhn, Sebastian Jessberger, Paul W. Frankland, Heather A. Cameron,
Elizabeth Gould, Rene Hen, D. Nora Abrous, Nicolas Toni, Alejandro F. Schinder, Xinyu
Zhao, Paul J. Lucassen, and Jonas Frisén. Human adult neurogenesis: Evidence and remaining
questions. Cell Stem Cell, 23:25–30, 7 2018.
[18] Anders C. Ketelsen. Fatigue prediction in robotic rehabilitation. 2022.
[19] Gert Kwakkel, Cathy Stinear, Bea Essers, Maria Munoz-Novoa, Meret Branscheidt, Rosa
Cabanas-Valdés, Sandra Lakičević, Sofia Lampropoulou, Andreas R. Luft, Philippe Mar-
que, Sarah A. Moore, John M. Solomon, Eva Swinnen, Andrea Turolla, Margit Alt Murphy,
and Geert Verheyden. Motor rehabilitation after stroke: European stroke organisation (eso)
consensus-based definition and guiding framework. European Stroke Journal, 8:880–894, 12
2023.
[20] Martin Wolfgang Lauer-Schmaltz, Philip Cash, John Paulin Hansen, and Anja Maier. Towards
the human digital twin: Definition and design-a survey. ACM, 2024.
68
==PAGE:70==
[21] Martin Wolfgang Lauer-Schmaltz, John Paulin Hansen, Kathrin Kirchner, Martin Wolfgang
Lauer-Schmaltz, and John Paulin Hansen. "beat me if i can!"-a case study on human digital
twin-based opponents in rehabilitation gaming. ACM, 1, 2023.
[22] Gilbert Masengo, Xiaodong Zhang, Runlin Dong, Ahmad B. Alhassan, Khaled Hamza, and
Emmanuel Mudaheranwa. Lower limb exoskeleton robot and its cooperative control: A review,
trends, and challenges for future research. Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 16:913748, 1 2023.
[23] R Merletti and G L Cerone. Tutorial. surface emg detection, conditioning and pre-processing:
Best practices. Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology, 2020.
[24] Emanuele Palazzi, Luca Luzi, Eldison Dimo, Matteo Meneghetti, Rudy Vicario, Rafael Ferro
Luzia, Rocco Vertechy, and Andrea Calanca. An affordable upper-limb exoskeleton concept for
rehabilitation applications. Technologies 2022, Vol. 10, Page 22, 10:22, 1 2022.
[25] Samuel Pröell. Digital filters for live signal processing in python - samuel pröll - homepage.
https://www.samproell.io/posts/yarppg/yarppg-live-digital-filter/.
[26] M. B.I. Reaz, M. S. Hussain, and F. Mohd-Yasin. Techniques of emg signal analysis: detection,
processing, classification and applications. Biological Procedures Online, 8:11, 3 2006.
[27] Ron. calculus - sigmoid function with fixed bounds and variable steepness [partially solved]
- mathematics stack exchange. https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/1832177/sigmoid-
function-with-fixed-bounds-and-variable-steepness-partially-solved.
[28] J. Antonio Travieso-Rodriguez, Ramon Jerez-Mesa, Jordi Llumà, Oriol Traver-Ramos, Gio-
vanni Gomez-Gras, and Joan Josep Roa Rovira. Mechanical properties of 3d-printing polylactic
acid parts subjected to bending stress and fatigue testing. Materials, 12:3859, 11 2019.
[29] Emilio Trigili, Lorenzo Grazi, Simona Crea, Alessandro Accogli, Jacopo Carpaneto, Silvestro
Micera, Nicola Vitiello, and Alessandro Panarese. Detection of movement onset using emg
signals for upper-limb exoskeletons in reaching tasks. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Reha-
bilitation, 16:1–16, 3 2019.
[30] Nicola Vitiello, Tommaso Lenzi, Stefano Roccella, Stefano Marco Maria De Rossi, Emanuele
Cattin, Francesco Giovacchini, Fabrizio Vecchi, and Maria Chiara Carrozza. Neuroexos: A
69
==PAGE:71==
powered elbow exoskeleton for physical rehabilitation. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 29:220–
235, 2013.
[31] Dongshu Wang, Dapei Tan, and Lei Liu. Particle swarm optimization algorithm: an overview.
Soft Computing, 22:387–408, 1 2018.
[32] Xiangzhi Wei, Yaobin Tian, and Ajay Joneja. A study on revolute joints in 3d-printed non-
assembly mechanisms. Rapid Prototyping Journal, 2016.
[33] Gui Yin, Xiaodong Zhang, Dawei Chen, Hanzhe Li, Jiangcheng Chen, Chaoyang Chen, and
Stephen Lemos. Processing surface emg signals for exoskeleton motion control. Frontiers in
Neurorobotics, 14, 7 2020.
8
Appendix
8.1
Classes code
1 # −∗−coding :
utf −8 −∗−
2
"""
3
Created on Wed Mar
6 11:27:21
2024
4
5
@author :
asbjo
6
"""
7
import numpy as np
8
from
scipy . s t a t s
import norm
9
from
scipy
import odr
10
from
scipy
import
s i g n a l
as
s i g
11
from
c o l l e c t i o n s
import deque
12
13
14
c l a s s
DigitalTwin :
15
16
# constructor
70
==PAGE:72==
17
def __init__( s e l f , N_p=20, S = [ 0 , 0 ] ) :
18
# N_p ( type = int ) number of
p a r t i c l e s
19
# S = ( type = l i s t (2))
actual
impairment
20
21
# actual
impairment
[ s p a s t i c i t y ,
weakness ]
range 0 to 1
22
s e l f . S = np . array (S)
23
24
s e l f . Obs = np . zeros ((N_p, 1 ) ) # Observed value
25
s e l f . ID = 0 # ID number of
instance ( patient )
26
27
# generate
p a r t i c l e s
28
m = N_p # number of
p a r t i c l e s
29
n = 2 # dimensionality
of s_hat
30
31
# assign
i n i t a l
random value
to
p a r t i c l e s
32
s e l f .P = abs (np . random . normal (0 ,0.25 ,(m, n ) ) )
33
s e l f .W = np . ones ((m, 1 ) ) /m #i n i t i a l
equal
weigting
34
s e l f . hyp = [ ] # hypothesis
35
36
# methods
37
38
def _upd_Obs( s e l f , Task ) :
39
# Algorithm
f o r
c a l c u l a t i n g
actual
muscle
activation
40
#
based on planned muscle
activation and impairment
41
# Task ( type = f l o a t )
desired
muscle
activation
42
43
s e l f . Obs = ( Task −s e l f . S [ 0 ] ) / ( 1 −s e l f . S [ 1 ] −s e l f . S [ 0 ] )
∗\
44
(1 −s e l f .P [ : , 1 ] −s e l f .P [ : , 0 ] ) + s e l f .P [ : , 0 ]
45
46
def _PSO( s e l f , Task , Obs ) :
71
==PAGE:73==
47
# P a r t i c l e swarm uptimizaion
algorithm
48
# Task ( type = f l o a t )
desired
muscle
activation
49
# Obs ( type = f l o a t )
observed muscle
activation
50
51
m = len ( s e l f .P)
52
n = np . s i z e ( s e l f .P,
axis =1)
53
P_best = np . zeros ((m, n )) # i n t i t i a l i z e
p a r t i c l e
best
54
G_best = np . zeros ((1 , n )) # i n i t i a l i z e
group
best
55
old_fit = np . zeros ((m)) # old
f i t
values
56
best_fit = 0 # best
f i t
found
57
58
c r i t = 0.995 # c r i t e r i a
fo r
stopping
the
search
59
M_fit = 0 #i n i t a l i z e
mean f i t n e s s
value
60
61
delta_V = 0.25 #0.25 # p a r t i c l e
v e l o c i t y
variance
62
p er f _f i t = (2∗np . pi ∗delta_V ∗∗2)∗∗−0.5 ∗np . exp(−(2∗delta_V)∗∗−1 ∗0)
63
64
# move p a r t i c l e s
to new position
65
while M_fit < c r i t :
66
67
# move p a r t i c l e s
toward
better
position
68
s e l f .P += 0.8∗abs (np . random . normal (0 , delta_V , (m, n ) ) )
∗\
69
( P_best −s e l f .P) + abs (np . random . normal (0 , delta_V , (m, n ) ) )
\
70
∗(G_best −s e l f .P)
71
s e l f .P = abs ( s e l f .P) # correct
negative
p a r t i c l e s
72
73
#estimating Obs given P
74
s e l f ._upd_Obs( Task )
75
76
# c a l c u l a t e
f i t n e s s
of
p a r t i c l e s
72
==PAGE:74==
77
f i t = 1/ p er f _f i t ∗(2∗np . pi ∗delta_V ∗∗2)∗∗−0.5 ∗\
78
np . exp(−(2∗delta_V)∗∗−1 ∗( s e l f . Obs −Obs)∗∗2) # range 0 to 1
79
80
# update
p a r t i c l e
best
81
check = f i t > old_fit
82
#check = check [ : , 0 ]
83
P_best [ check , : ] = s e l f .P[ check , : ]
84
old_fit [ check ] = f i t [ check ]
85
86
# update group
best
87
i f
np .max( f i t ) > best_fit :
88
G_best = s e l f .P[ np . argmax ( f i t ) , : ]
89
best_fit = np .max( f i t )
90
91
M_fit = np . mean( f i t )
92
93
#repopulating
i f
fused
94
i f
np . mean(np . std ( s e l f .P,
axis =0)) < 1e −5: #or
t > 1e5 :
95
s e l f .P = abs (np . random . normal (0 ,
0.25 ,
(m, n ) ) )
96
97
# update weights
98
s e l f .W = f i t
99
100
def upd_P( s e l f , Task , Obs ) :
101
# Partcle
f i l t e r
algorithm
102
# Task ( type = f l o a t )
desired
muscle
activation
103
# Obs ( type = f l o a t )
observed muscle
activation
104
105
m = len ( s e l f .P) # number of
p a r t i c l e s
106
73
==PAGE:75==
107
Neff = 15 # minimum e f f e c t i v e
number of
p a r t i c l e s
108
W_eq = np . ones ((m, 1 ) ) /m # neutral
weigthing
a f t e r
resampling
109
idx = np . l inspace (0 ,m−1,m,
dtype=int ) #Index
array
of
p a r t i c l e s
110
111
s e l f ._upd_Obs( Task )
112
113
114
# while
state
tracking
not converged
115
while
abs (np . mean( s e l f . Obs) −Obs) > 0.00001:
116
117
#move p a r t i c l e s
due to
state
tracking
not converged
118
s e l f ._PSO(Task , Obs)
119
120
# normalize
p a r i t c l e
weights
121
s e l f .W = s e l f .W/np . sum( s e l f .W)
122
123
#c a l c u l a t e
Neff_hat
124
Neff_hat = (np . sum( s e l f .W∗∗2))∗∗−1
125
126
# resample
p a r t i c l e s
due to
depletion
127
i f
Neff_hat < Neff : # invoke PSO algorithm
128
129
# resample
130
# s e l e c t i n g
samples
131
P_sel = np . random . choice ( idx ,
s i z e =(m, 1 ) , p=s e l f .W)
132
133
s e l f .P = s e l f .P[ P_sel [ : , 0 ] ] # resampled
p a r t i c l e s
134
135
s e l f .W = W_eq # equalize
weigthing
136
74
==PAGE:76==
137
# estimate
state
at time t
138
s e l f ._upd_Obs( Task )
139
140
# Choose hypothesis
141
P_hyp = np . sum( s e l f .P,
axis =0)/m
142
143
i f
len ( s e l f . hyp) > 1:
144
s e l f . hyp . append ((P_hyp + 0.8 ∗
s e l f . hyp [ −1])/1.8)
145
e l s e :
146
s e l f . hyp . append (P_hyp) # f i r s t
hyputhesis
147
148
149
c l a s s
L i v e F i l t e r :
150
def __init__( s e l f ,
order , fc , fs , type ) :
151
# Live
butterworth
f i l t e r i n g
object .
152
# order
( type = int )
i s
the
order
of
the
butterworth
f i l t e r .
153
# fc
( type = l i s t ,
2 elements
or
f l o a t )
cut
o f f
f re qu enc ie s . . .
154
# in
the format
[ high−pass ,
low−pass ]
or a
s c a l a r
depending on
f i l t e r
typ
155
# f s
[ type = f l o a t )
sampling
frequency
of
s i g n a l
156
# type
[ type = s t r i n g ]
’ lowpass ’ ,
’ highpass ’
or
’ bandpass ’
’ bandstop ’
157
158
s e l f . sos = s i g . butter ( order , fc , btype=type , analog=False , output=’ sos ’ ,\
159
f s=f s )
160
s e l f . n_sections = s e l f . sos . shape [ 0 ]
161
s e l f . state = np . zeros (( s e l f . n_sections , 2 ) )
162
163
def
process ( s e l f , x ) :
164
# f i l t e r i n g
of
l i v e
s i g n a l
165
# x ( type = f l o a t )
the incoming samples
of
the
recorded
s i g n a l
166
75
==PAGE:77==
167
i f
np . isnan (x ) :
168
return x
169
170
# apply
f i l t e r
s e c t i o n s
in
sequence
171
fo r
s
in
range ( s e l f . n_sections ) :
172
b0 , b1 , b2 ,
a0 ,
a1 ,
a2 = s e l f . sos [ s , : ]
173
174
#compute
d i f f e r e n c e
equation
175
y = b0∗x + s e l f . state [ s , 0 ]
176
s e l f . state [ s , 0 ] = b1∗x −a1∗y + s e l f . state [ s , 1 ]
177
s e l f . state [ s , 1 ] = b2∗x −a2∗y
178
x = y # set
output as
input
f or
next
section
179
180
return y
181
182
183
c l a s s
ExoSkeleton :
184
185
# a t t r i b u t e s
of
instance
( constructor )
186
def __init__( s e l f ) :
187
s e l f . l f = L i v e F i l t e r (4 ,[20 ,350] ,1000 , ’ bandpass ’ )
188
s e l f . p f f = L i v e F i l t e r (4 ,0.1 ,1000 , ’ lowpass ’ )
189
s e l f . EMG_filt = [ ]
190
s e l f .ARV = [ ]
191
s e l f . ARV_dif = [ ]
192
s e l f . Var_dif = [ ]
193
s e l f . Var = [ ]
194
195
# methods
196
76
==PAGE:78==
197
def
set_output ( s e l f , u , G_velo=45,
f a t i g u e =0, impair =0):
198
# function
f o r
determining
output
of motor
199
# u ( type = f l o a t ) Raw EMG sample
200
# G_velo ( type = f l o a t )
angular
goal
v e l o c i t y
in deg/ s
201
# f a t i g u e
( type = f l o a t )
degree
of
f a t i g u e
(0−1)
202
# impair
( type = f l o a t )
degree
of
impairment (0−1)
203
204
max_lim = 4/(3.36 e−3) # max l i m i t
on torque
~5.4 Nm
205
k = 2# slope
of
function
206
t = 0.5 # value
of
highest
steepness
207
208
x = 2∗0.8∗impair + 0.2∗f a t i g u e
209
210
# convert from deg/ s
to motor ’ s
unit
211
G_velo = G_velo ∗60/(360∗0.229) # [0.229 RPM]
212
213
A_window = 1000 # length
of
t r a i l i n g
window fo r ARV
214
215
# f i l t e r i n g EMG sample
216
s e l f . EMG_filt . append ( s e l f . l f . process (u ))
217
L = len ( s e l f . EMG_filt)
218
219
# ARV of
s i g n a l
220
s e l f .RV. append ( abs ( s e l f . EMG_filt [ −1]))
221
222
i f L > A_window :
223
s e l f .ARV. append (np . mean( s e l f .RV[−A_window: −1]))
224
e l s e :
225
s e l f .ARV. append (np . mean( s e l f .RV))
226
77
==PAGE:79==
227
# Detecting movement from variance
228
i f L >= 1000:
229
s e l f . Var . append (np . var ( s e l f . EMG_filt [ −1000:]))
230
e l s e :
231
s e l f . Var . append (np . var ( s e l f . EMG_filt ))
232
233
234
i f L > 1:
235
# 1 st
order
d e r i v at i ve
of
the
variance
array
236
s e l f . Var_dif . append (( np . d i f f ( s e l f . Var [ −2 : ] ) ) [ 0 ] )
237
238
# low pass
f i l t e r i n g
239
s e l f . Var_dif [ −1] = s e l f . p f f . process ( s e l f . Var_dif [ −1])
240
241
# i d e n t i f y i n g
peaks and
v e l l e y s
of
the
variance
array
242
i f L > 2:
243
i f
np . d i f f (np . sign ( s e l f . Var_dif [ −2:])) > 0:
244
act_var = False
245
246
e l i f
np . d i f f (np . sign ( s e l f . Var_dif [ −2:])) < 0:
247
act_var = True
248
249
#using
d e r v i a t i v e
of ARV f or movement detection
250
i f L > 2:
251
252
# finding 2nd order
de r iv at iv e
of ARV
253
i f
len ( s e l f . EMG_filt) > 3:
254
#move . append (( np . d i f f (ARV[−M_window : ] ) ) [ 0 ] )
255
s e l f . ARV_dif . append (( np . d i f f (np . d i f f ( s e l f .ARV[ −3 : ] ) ) ) [ 0 ] )
256
e l s e :
78
==PAGE:80==
257
#move . append (( np . d i f f (ARV) ) [ 0 ] )
258
s e l f . ARV_dif . append (( np . d i f f (np . d i f f ( s e l f .ARV) ) ) [ 0 ] )
259
260
s e l f . ARV_dif[ −1] = s e l f . p f f . processs ( s e l f . ARV_dif[ −1])
261
262
# find
zero
c r o s s i n g s
of movement (movement onset and end )
263
i f L > 3:
264
i f
np . d i f f (np . sign ( s e l f . ARV_dif[ −2:])) > 0:
265
act_ARV = True
266
267
e l i f
np . d i f f (np . sign (( s e l f . ARV_dif [ −2 : ] ) ) ) < 0:
268
act_ARV = False
269
270
# Setting
output
271
i f act_ARV:
272
# Goal
v e l o c i t y
273
V_exo = G_velo
274
275
# goal
torque
276
T_exo = max_lim ∗(1 + (x∗∗(np . log (2)/ np . log ( t )) −1)∗∗k)∗∗−1
277
e l s e :
278
V_exo = 0
279
T_exo = 0
280
281
return V_exo , T_exo
79
==PAGE:81==
8.2
Motor communication code
1 # −∗−coding :
utf −8 −∗−
2
"""
3
Created on Wed Feb 28
11:37:44
2024
4
5
@author :
asbjorn
6
"""
7
import numpy as np
8
import
matplotlib . pyplot
as
plt
9
import
sys
10 #sys . path . append ("C:/ Users / asbjo /OneDrive −Danmarks Tekniske
Universitet /Dokume
11
sys . path . append ( "" )
12
import twin_model as TM
13
14
15 # from dynamixel_sdk import ∗
# Uses Dynamixel SDK l i b r a r y
16
import DXLsdk . protocol2_packet_handler
as PaHa
17
import
DXLsdk . port_handler as PoHa
18
import msvcrt # getch and getche module
19
20
import os
21
22 # choose
operating mode
23
opr_mode = 0 # 0=torque 1=v e l o c i t y
24
max_pos = 140
25
min_pos = 0
26
27 # i n i t a l i z e
motor
s e t t i n g s
and connection
28
29
i f
os . name == ’ nt ’ :
80
==PAGE:82==
30
import msvcrt
31
def
getch ( ) :
32
return
msvcrt . getch ( ) . decode ()
33
e l s e :
34
import sys ,
tty ,
termios
35
fd = sys . stdin . f i l e n o ()
36
old_settings = termios . t c g e t a t t r ( fd )
37
def
getch ( ) :
38
try :
39
tty . setraw ( sys . stdin . f i l e n o ( ) )
40
ch = sys . stdin . read (1)
41
f i n a l l y :
42
termios . t c s e t a t t r ( fd ,
termios .TCSADRAIN,
old_settings )
43
return ch
44
45
46
47
PaHa = PaHa . Protocol2PacketHandler () #i n s t a n t i a t i n g
the
packet
handler
object
48
49 # EEPROM Control
table
addresses
50
_addr_operating_mode = 11 # 1B
51
_addr_max_position = 48 # 4B
52
_addr_min_position = 52 # 4B
53
54 # RAM control
table
adresses
55
_addr_torque_enable =
64 # 1B
56
_addr_present_position = 132 # 4B
57
_addr_goal_current = 102 # 2B
58
_addr_goal_velocity = 104 # 4B
59
81
==PAGE:83==
60 # Protocol
version
61 #PROTOCOL_VERSION = 2.0 # See which
protocol
version
i s
used
in
the Dynamixel
62
63 # Default
s e t t i n g
64
DXL_ID
= 1
# Dynamixel ID :
1
65 BAUDRATE
= 57600
# Dynamixel
default
baudrate
:
57600
66
DEVICENAME
= ’COM1’
67
68
DXL_MOVING_STATUS_THRESHOLD = 20
# Dynamixel moving status
threshold
69
70
COMM_SUCCESS = 0
71
72
73 # I n i t i a l i z e
PortHandler
instance
74 # Set
the
port path
75 # Get methods and members of
PortHandlerLinux or PortHandlerWindows
76
portHandler = PoHa . PortHandler (DEVICENAME)
77
78 # I n i t i a l i z e
PacketHandler
instance
79 # Set
the
protocol
version
80 # Get methods and members of
Protocol1PacketHandler
or
Protocol2PacketHandler
81 #packetHandler = PacketHandler . PacketHandler (_PROTOCOL_VERSION)
82
83 # Open port
84
i f
portHandler . openPort ( ) :
85
print ( "Succeeded␣to ␣open␣the ␣port " )
86
e l s e :
87
print ( " Failed ␣to ␣open␣the ␣port " )
88
print ( " Press ␣any␣key␣to ␣terminate . . . " )
89
getch ()
82
==PAGE:84==
90
quit ()
91
92
93 # Set
port
baudrate
94
i f
portHandler . setBaudRate (BAUDRATE) :
95
print ( "Succeeded␣to ␣change␣the ␣baudrate" )
96
e l s e :
97
print ( " Failed ␣to ␣change␣the ␣baudrate" )
98
print ( " Press ␣any␣key␣to ␣terminate . . . " )
99
getch ()
100
quit ()
101
102 # set
operating mode
103
dxl_comm_result ,
dxl_error = \
104
PaHa . write1ByteTxRx ( portHandler , DXL_ID,
_addr_operating_mode , opr_mode)
105
i f
dxl_comm_result != COMM_SUCCESS:
106
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getTxRxResult ( dxl_comm_result ))
107
e l i f
dxl_error != 0:
108
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getRxPacketError ( dxl_error ))
109
e l s e :
110
print ( "Dynamixel␣opeating ␣mode␣set ␣to : ␣Torque␣control " )
111
112 # set
positon
l i m i t s
113
unit_pos = (360/4095)∗∗−1 # conversion from degrees
to motor
position
unit
114
115 # set max positi on
116
dxl_comm_result ,
dxl_error = \
117
PaHa . write4ByteTxRx ( portHandler , DXL_ID,
_addr_max_position , max_pos∗unit_pos
118
i f
dxl_comm_result != COMM_SUCCESS:
119
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getTxRxResult ( dxl_comm_result ))
83
==PAGE:85==
120
e l i f
dxl_error != 0:
121
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getRxPacketError ( dxl_error ))
122
e l s e :
123
print ( "Dynamixel␣max␣p osition ␣set " )
124
125 # set minimum posit ion
126
dxl_comm_result ,
dxl_error = PaHa . write4ByteTxRx \
127
( portHandler , DXL_ID,
_addr_min_position , min_pos∗unit_pos )
128
i f
dxl_comm_result != COMM_SUCCESS:
129
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getTxRxResult ( dxl_comm_result ))
130
e l i f
dxl_error != 0:
131
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getRxPacketError ( dxl_error ))
132
e l s e :
133
print ( "Dynamixel␣min␣position ␣set " )
134
135
136 # Enable Dynamixel Torque
137
dxl_comm_result ,
dxl_error = \
138
PaHa . write1ByteTxRx ( portHandler , DXL_ID,
_addr_torque_enable ,
1)
139
i f
dxl_comm_result != COMM_SUCCESS:
140
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getTxRxResult ( dxl_comm_result ))
141
e l i f
dxl_error != 0:
142
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getRxPacketError ( dxl_error ))
143
e l s e :
144
print ( "Dynamixel␣has␣been␣s u c c e s s f u l l y ␣connected " )
145
146
147
148 # running
loop
f o r
c o n t r o l l i n g
exoskeleton
149
84
==PAGE:86==
150
print ( ’ press ␣e␣to ␣quit ’ )
151
while
1:
152
153
# Escape option
to
e x i t
loop
154
i f
msvcrt . kbhit ( ) :
155
i f
msvcrt . getch () == b ’ e ’ :
156
break
157
158
159
dxl_goal = 16 #update
goal
v e l o c i t y
160
161
i f
opr_mode == 0:
162
163
# Write goal
torque
164
dxl_comm_result ,
dxl_error = PaHa . write2ByteTxRx\
165
( portHandler , DXL_ID,
_addr_goal_current ,
dxl_goal )
166
i f
dxl_comm_result != COMM_SUCCESS:
167
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getTxRxResult ( dxl_comm_result ))
168
e l i f
dxl_error != 0:
169
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getRxPacketError ( dxl_error ))
170
171
e l i f
opr_mode == 1:
172
# Write goal
v e l o c i t y
173
dxl_comm_result ,
dxl_error = PaHa . write4ByteTxRx \
174
( portHandler , DXL_ID,
_addr_goal_velocity ,
dxl_goal )
175
i f
dxl_comm_result != COMM_SUCCESS:
176
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getTxRxResult ( dxl_comm_result ))
177
e l i f
dxl_error != 0:
178
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getRxPacketError ( dxl_error ))
179
85
==PAGE:87==
180
# Read present
position
181
dxl_present_position ,
dxl_comm_result ,
dxl_error = \
182
PaHa . read4ByteTxRx ( portHandler , DXL_ID,
_addr_present_position )
183
i f
dxl_comm_result != COMM_SUCCESS:
184
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getTxRxResult ( dxl_comm_result ))
185
e l i f
dxl_error != 0:
186
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getRxPacketError ( dxl_error ))
187
188
# convert
position
to
degrees
189
dxl_present_position = dxl_present_position /unit_pos
190
191
print ( " [ ID:%03d ] ␣PresPos:%03d" % (DXL_ID,
dxl_present_position ))
192
193
194 # Disable Dynamixel Torque
195
dxl_comm_result ,
dxl_error = \
196
PaHa . write1ByteTxRx ( portHandler , DXL_ID,
_addr_torque_enable ,
0)
197
i f
dxl_comm_result != COMM_SUCCESS:
198
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getTxRxResult ( dxl_comm_result ))
199
e l i f
dxl_error != 0:
200
print ( "%s " % PaHa . getRxPacketError ( dxl_error ))
201
202 # Close
port
203
portHandler . closePort ()
86
==PAGE:88==
8.3
Validation code
1
import numpy as np
2
from
scipy
import
s i g n a l
as
s i g
3
import twin_model as TM
4
from
s q l i t e d i c t
import
S qli teDict
5
from
scipy
import
f f t
6
import
matplotlib . pyplot
as
plt
7
8 # Simulating
control
schemes
9
10 # i n i t i a l i z i n g
v a r i a b l e s
11 m = 50 # number of
p a r t i c l e s
12
n = 1000 # number of
samples
in
s i g n a l
13
f s = 400 # [ Hz ]
14
m_arm = 2 #[ kg ]
mass of
forearm
15
l_arm = 0.28 #[m]
length
of
forearm
16
17
t = np . linsp ace (0 ,n−1,n) /
f s # [ s ]
time
array
fo r
s i g n a l
18
im = (( l_arm/2)∗∗2 ∗m_arm) # moment of
i n e r t i a
f or arm
19
v_torq = np . zeros ((m, n )) # v e l o c i t y
with
torque
control
20
p_torq = np . zeros ((m, n )) # position
with
torque
control
21
a_net = np . zeros ((m, n )) # net
a c c e l e r a t i o n
of arm
22
23 # s i g n a l
generation
24
emg_sig = np . random . normal (0 .5 ,
0.25 ,
(m, n )) #random
p a r t i c l e s
25
tq
= np . zeros (n) # torque
values
f or
s i g n a l
26
v_velo = np . zeros ((m, n )) # v e l o c i t y
values
fo r
s i g n a l
27
28
I_best = np . zeros ((m, n )) # individual
best
position
29
G_best = np . zeros ((1 , n )) # group
best
position
87
==PAGE:89==
30
old_fit = np . zeros ((m)) # old
values
of
best
individual
f i t n e s s
31
best_fit = 0 # best
f i t n e s s
value
fo r
the group
32
33
c r i t = 0.8 # c r i t e r i a
f o r
stopping
the
search
34
M_fit = 0 #i n i t a l i z e
mean f i t n e s s
value
35
36
delta_V = 1 # p a r t i c l e
v e l o c i t y
variance
37 # f i t n e s s
value
f o r
p e r f e c t
performance
38
p er f _f i t = (2∗np . pi ∗delta_V ∗∗2)∗∗−0.5 ∗np . exp(−(2∗delta_V)∗∗−1 ∗0)
39
40 # s e l e c t mode 0=v e l o c i t y
control , 1=torque
control
41
mode = 0
42
43 # s e l e c t
control
parameters
44
Goal = 60 #goal
position
in
degress
45
tq_exo = 0.0035 # [Nm]
torque
control
output
46
v_exo = 40 # [ deg/ s ]
v e l o c i t y
control
output
47
48 # move p a r t i c l e s
to new position
49
while M_fit < c r i t :
50
51
# estimating
position
due to
v e l o c i t y
control
given
s i g n a l
p a r t i c l e s
52
v_velo [ emg_sig > 0 . 5 ] = v_exo # [ deg/ s ]
v e l o c i t y
53
p_velo = np . cumsum( v_velo ,
1)/ f s # [ deg ]
position
54
55
#estimating
posiion due to
torque
control
given
s i g n a l
p a r t i c l e s
56
f o r
i
in
range (m) :
57
tq [ emg_sig [ i , : ] > 0 . 5 ] = tq_exo
58
59
fo r
j
in
range (n ) :
88
==PAGE:90==
60
# torque from
gravity
61
tq_g = (np . sin ( p_torq [ i , j −1]) ∗(l_arm/2) ∗m_arm ∗
−9.81)
62
a_net [ i , j ] = ( tq [ j ] −tq_g)/im # net
a c c e l e a r a t i o n
63
64
v_torq [ i , j ] = np . sum( a_net [ i , 0 : j ]∗t [ 0 : j ] ) # v e l o c i t y
65
p_torq [ i , j ] = np . sum( v_torq [ i , 0 : j ]∗t [ 0 : j ] )
∗180/np . pi # position
66
i f
p_torq [ i , j ] > 140:
67
p_torq [ i , j ] = 140
68
e l i f
p_torq [ i , j ] < 0:
69
p_torq [ i , j ] = 0
70
71
i f
mode == 0:
72
p = p_velo
73
e l i f
mode == 1:
74
p = p_torq
75
76
# c a l c u l a t e
f i t n e s s
of
p a r t i c l e s
77
f i t = 1/ p er f _ fi t ∗(2∗np . pi ∗delta_V ∗∗2)∗∗−0.5 ∗\
78
np . exp(−(2∗delta_V)∗∗−1 ∗(p [: , −1] −Goal )∗∗2) # range 0 to 1
79
80
# update
p a r t i c l e
best
81
check = f i t > old_fit
82
#check = check [ : , 0 ]
83
I_best [ check , : ] = s i g [ check , : ]
84
old_fit [ check ] = f i t [ check ]
85
86
# update group
best
87
i f
np .max( f i t ) > best_fit :
88
G_best = s i g [ np . argmax ( f i t ) , : ]
89
best_fit = np .max( f i t )
89
==PAGE:91==
90
91
M_fit = np . mean( f i t )
92
93
# move p a r t i c l e s
toward
better
position
94
emg_sig += abs (np . random . normal (0 , delta_V , (m, n ) ) )
∗( I_best −emg_sig ) + \
95
abs (np . random . normal (0 , delta_V , (m, n ) ) )
∗(G_best −emg_sig )
96
emg_sig = abs ( emg_sig ) # correct
negative
p a r t i c l e s
97
98
#repopulating
i f
fused
99
i f
np . mean(np . std ( emg_sig ,
axis =0)) < 1e −5: #or
t > 1e5 :
100
emg_sig = abs (np . random . normal (G_best ,
0.25 ,
(m, n ) ) )
101
102 # update weights
103
W = f i t
104
105
106 # twin
t e s t i n g
107
108
S = [ 0 . 3 , 0 . 4 ] # impairment
109
S_hat = [ 0 . 1 , 0 . 2 ] # perceived
impairment
110
twin = TM. DigitalTwin (S=S) # i n s t a n t i a t e
object
111
P_init = twin .P # i n i t i a l
p a r t i c l e
values
112
113
U_task = np . array ( [ 0 . 3 ,
0.9 ,
0 . 6 ] ) # array
of
desired
muscle
activation
114
U_obs = np . zeros (3) # i n i t i a l i z e
array
fo r
observed
a c t i v a t i n
l e v e l s
115 # find
observed
activation
l e v e l s
116
f o r
i
in
range ( len (U_task ) ) :
117
U_obs [ i ]
= (U_task [ i ] −S [ 0 ] ) / ( 1 −S [ 1 ] −S [ 0 ] )
∗\
118
(1 −S_hat [ 1 ] −S_hat [ 0 ] ) + S_hat [ 0 ]
119
90
==PAGE:92==
120 # find
p a r t i c l e
values
based on observed
activation
l e v e l s
121
f o r
i
in
range ( len (U_task ) ) :
122
twin .upd_P(U_task [ i ] , U_obs [ i ] )
123
hyp = np . array ( twin . hyp) # hypothesis
of
perceived
impariment
124
P_conv = twin .P # converged
p a r t i l e
values
125
126
plt . f i g u r e ()
127
plt . t i t l e ( ’ i n i t a l ␣p a r t i c l e ␣p o s i t i o n s ’ )
128
plt . xlabel ( ’ weakness ’ )
129
plt . ylabel ( ’ hypertonia ’ )
130
plt . xlim ( [ 0 , 1 ] )
131
plt . ylim ( [ 0 , 1 ] )
132
plt . plot ( P_init [ : , 0 ] , P_init [ : , 1 ] ,
’ o ’ ,
color=’ c ’ ,
alpha =0.5)
133
plt . plot (S_hat [ 0 ] , S_hat [ 1 ] , ’ o ’ , color=’m’ )
134
plt . show ()
135
136
plt . f i g u r e ()
137
plt . t i t l e ( ’ converged ␣p a r t i c l e ␣p o s i t i o n s ’ )
138
plt . xlabel ( ’ weakness ’ )
139
plt . ylabel ( ’ hypertonia ’ )
140
plt . xlim ( [ 0 , 1 ] )
141
plt . ylim ( [ 0 , 1 ] )
142
plt . plot (P_conv [ : , 0 ] , P_conv [ : , 1 ] ,
’ o ’ ,
color=’ c ’ ,
alpha =0.5)
143
plt . plot (S_hat [ 0 ] , S_hat [ 1 ] , ’ o ’ , color=’m’ )
144
plt . show ()
145
146
test_mean = abs (np . mean( twin . Obs) −U_obs[ −1])
147
148 # f i l t e r
t e s t i n g
149
91
==PAGE:93==
150 # loading
data base
151
_db_path = r ’C:\ Users \ asbjo \Danmarks␣Tekniske␣Universitet \Martin␣Wolfgang␣Lauer−S
152
db = Sq lit eDi ct (_db_path) #create
database
object
153
154 # i n i t i a l i z e
v a r i a b l e s
155
data = [ ]
156
time = [ ]
157
t = [ ]
158
f s = 1000
159
window = 2000
160
161 # load
data
162
163
f o r
key in db . keys ( ) :
164
record = db [ key ]
165
duration = len ( record [ 2 ] ) / ( f s ∗60) # duration
of
s e s s i o n
166
data . append ( record [ 2 ] ) # EMG s i g n a l
from
s e s s i o n
167
time . append ( duration )
168
t . append (np . l inspace (0 , duration , len ( record [ 2 ] ) ) ) # time
arrays
fo r
s e s s i o n
169
170
s e l = 0 # s e l e c t i n g
a recording
171
172 # f i l t e r
parameters
173
n_filt = 4 #f i l t e r
order
174
fc = [20 ,450] #cut−o f f
f r e q u en ci es
175
176 # i n t a n t i a t i n g
f i l t e r
177
LF = TM. L i v e F i l t e r ( n_filt , fc , f s )
178
179 # f i l t e r i n g
" l i v e "
s i g n a l
92
==PAGE:94==
180
s i g n a l = data [ s e l ]
181
s i g _ f i l t = [ ]
182
ARV = [ ]
183
184
f o r
i
in
range ( len ( s i g n a l ) ) :
185
# f i l t e r i n g
s i g n a l
186
s i g _ f i l t . append ( abs (LF. process ( s i g n a l [ i ] ) ) )
187
188
# c a l c u a l a t i n g ARV
189
i f
len ( s i g _ f i l t ) > window :
190
ARV. append (np . mean( s i g _ f i l t [−window : −1]))
191
e l s e :
192
ARV. append (np . mean( s i g _ f i l t ))
193
194 # f i l t e r i n g
recorded
s i g n a l
195
196 #second
order
s e c t i o n s
of
f i l t e r
197
sos = s i g . butter ( n_filt , fc , btype=’ bandpass ’ , analog=False , output=’ sos ’ , f s=f s )
198
199
w, h = s i g . s o s f r e q z ( sos , whole=0, f s=f s ) #frequency
response
of
f i l t e r
200
201
data_filt = s i g . s o s f i l t ( sos , data [ s e l ] ) #f i l t e r e d EMG data
202
203
f = np . linspace (−f s /2 , f s /2 , len ( data_filt )) #frequency
array
204
205
raw_spec = f f t . f f t ( data [ s e l ] ) #spectrum
of raw EMG data
206
f i l t _ s p e c = f f t . f f t ( data_filt ) #spectrum
of
f i l t e r e d EMG data
207
208
data_rect = abs ( data_filt ) #r e c t i f i e d
f i l t e r e d EMG data
209
data_ARV = [ ]
93
==PAGE:95==
210
f o r
i
in
range (0 , len ( data_rect ) ) :
211
i f
i > window :
212
data_ARV. append (np . mean( data_rect [ i−window : i ] ) )
213
e l s e :
214
data_ARV. append (np . mean( data_rect [ : i ] ) )
215
216 # comparing
s i g n a l s
217
t e s t = data_rect −s i g _ f i l t
218
t e s t _ f i l t = np . sum( t e s t )
219
data_ARV = np . array (data_ARV)
220
ARV = np . array (ARV)
221
test_ARV = np . sum(data_ARV −ARV)
222
223 # Testing
f e a t u r e s
f o r
detection
of
onset and end of movement
224
225 # loading
data base
226
db_path = r "C:/ Users / asbjo /OneDrive␣−␣Danmarks␣Tekniske␣Universitet /Dokumenter/ Ex
227
db = Sq lit eDi ct (db_path) #create
database
object
228
229 # i n i t i a l i z e
v a r i a b l e s
230
data = [ ]
231
time = [ ]
232
t = [ ]
233
234
numel = np . s i z e ( l i s t (db . keys ( ) ) )
235
expDict = [ ]
236
angleAvg= [ ]
237
angleVel = [ ]
238
239 # load
data from data base
94
==PAGE:96==
240
f o r
experiment
in db . keys ( ) :
241
expDict . append ( l i s t (( db [ experiment ] ) [ ’ a ’ ] ) )
242
angleAvg . append ( l i s t (( db [ experiment ] ) [ ’ angleAvg ’ ] ) )
243
angleVel . append ( l i s t (( db [ experiment ] ) [ ’ angleVel ’ ] ) )
244
245 # s e l c t i n g
t r i a l
from the
loaded data
246
s e l = 0
247 EMG = np . array ( expDict [ s e l ] )
248
angles = np . array ( angleAvg [ s e l ] )
249
velo = np . array ( angleVel [ s e l ] )
250
251
f s = 1000 # [ Hz ]
sampling
frequency
252
t = np . linsp ace (0 , len (EMG)/ fs , len (EMG)) # [ s ]
time
array
f or
s i g n a l
253
254
fc = [20 ,350] # [ Hz ]
cut−o f f
fre qu en ci es
fo r
bandpass
f i l t e r
255
n = 4 # order
of
f i l t e r
256
257
l f = TM. L i v e F i l t e r (n , fc , fs , ’ bandpass ’ ) # l i v e
bandpass
f i l t e r
258
259 # notch
f i l t e r
f o r
powerline
i n t e r f e r e n c e
260
notch = TM. L i v e F i l t e r (n , [ 4 8 , 5 2 ] , fs , ’ bandstop ’ )
261
262
f_ARV = TM. L i v e F i l t e r (n , 0 . 1 , fs , ’ lowpass ’ ) # F i l t e r
fo r ARV
263
f_Var = TM. L i v e F i l t e r (n , 0 . 1 , fs , ’ lowpass ’ ) # f i l t e r
fo r
variance
264
f_ZCR = TM. L i v e F i l t e r (n , 0 . 1 5 , fs , ’ lowpass ’ ) # f i l t e r
fo r
zero
crossing
rate
265
266
267
EMG_filt = [ ]
268
ARV = [ ]
269
RV = [ ]
95
==PAGE:97==
270
ZCR = [ ]
271
ARV_dif = [ ]
272
onset = [ ]
273
end = [ ]
274
var_dif = [ ]
275
onset_v = [ ]
276
end_v = [ ]
277
var = [ ]
278
279
idx = 0
280
A_window = 1000
281
Z_window = 500
282
M_window = 3
283
284
f o r
i
in EMG:
285
EMG_filt . append ( l f . process ( i )) # [mV]
bandpass
f i l t e r t e d EMG s i g n a l
286
EMG_filt[ −1] = notch . process (EMG_filt [ −1]) # [mV]
notch
f i l t e r e d EMG s i g n a l
287
RV. append ( abs (EMG_filt [ −1])) # [mV]
r e c t i f i e d
value
of EMG s i g n a l
288
289
# ARV of
s i g n a l
in
t r a i l i n g
window
290
i f
len (RV) > A_window :
291
ARV. append (np . mean(RV[−A_window: −1]))
292
e l s e :
293
ARV. append (np . mean(RV))
294
295
# ZCR of
s i g n a l
in
t r a i l i n g
window
296
i f
len (EMG_filt) > Z_window :
297
#ZCR. append (( np . where (np . d i f f (np . sign (move[−Z_window : −1 ] ) ) ) [ 0 ] ) [ −1 ] )
298
ZCR. append (np . sum(np . d i f f (np . sign (EMG_filt[−Z_window: −1])) \
299
!= 0)/Z_window)
96
==PAGE:98==
300
e l s e :
301
ZCR. append (np . sum(np . d i f f (np . sign (EMG_filt [: −1])) != 0)/Z_window)
302
303
ZCR[ −1] = f_ZCR. process (ZCR[ −1])
304
305
306
# ariance
of
s i g n a l
in
t r a i l i n g
window
307
i f
len (EMG_filt) >= 1000:
308
var . append (np . var (EMG_filt [ −1000:]))
309
e l s e :
310
var . append (np . var (EMG_filt ))
311
312
var [ −1] = f_Var . process ( var [ −1])
313
# finding
peaks and v a l l e y s
of
variance
314
i f
idx > 0:
315
# 1 st
order
d e r i v a t i v e
of
the
variance
array
316
var_dif . append (( np . d i f f ( var [ −2 : ] ) ) [ 0 ] )
317
318
# i d e n t i f y i n g
peaks and
v e l l e y s
of
the
variance
array
319
i f
idx > 1:
320
i f
np . d i f f (np . sign ( var_dif [ −2:])) > 0:
321
end_v . append ( idx )
322
323
e l i f
np . d i f f (np . sign ( var_dif [ −2:])) < 0:
324
onset_v . append ( idx )
325
326
#using
d e r i v a t i v e
of ARV f or movement detection
327
328
ARV[ −1] = f_ARV. process (ARV[ −1])
329
97
==PAGE:99==
330
i f
idx > 1:
331
332
# finding 2nd order
de r iv at iv e
of ARV
333
i f
len (EMG_filt) > M_window:
334
#move . append (( np . d i f f (ARV[−M_window : ] ) ) [ 0 ] )
335
ARV_dif . append (( np . d i f f (np . d i f f (ARV[−M_window : ] ) ) ) [ 0 ] )
336
e l s e :
337
#move . append (( np . d i f f (ARV) ) [ 0 ] )
338
ARV_dif . append (( np . d i f f (np . d i f f (ARV) ) ) [ 0 ] )
339
340
#ARV_dif[ −1] = f_ARV. process (ARV_dif[ −1])
341
342
# find
zero
c r o s s i n g s
of movement (movement onset and end )
343
i f
idx > 2:
344
i f
np . d i f f (np . sign (ARV_dif [ −2:])) > 0:
345
onset . append ( idx )
346
347
e l i f
np . d i f f (np . sign ((ARV_dif [ −2 : ] ) ) ) < 0:
348
end . append ( idx )
349
350
idx += 1
351
352 # e s t a l i s h i n g
ground truth
f o r
concentric
phase timing
( code adapted from Martin )
353
active_indices = np . where ( velo > 0 ) [ 0 ]
354
segments = [ ]
355
segment_start = active_indices [ 0 ]
356
f o r
i
in
range (1 ,
len ( active_indices ) ) :
357
i f
active_indices [ i ]
!= active_indices [ i −1] + 1:
358
segments . append (( segment_start ,
active_indices [ i −1] + 1))
359
segment_start = active_indices [ i ]
98
==PAGE:100==
360
segments . append (( segment_start ,
active_indices [ −1] + 1))
# add the
l a s t
segment
361
362
conc_GT = ( [ segment
f o r
segment in
segments
i f
\
363
(np .max( angles [ segment [ 0 ] : segment [ 1 ] ] )
\
364
−np . min( angles [ segment [ 0 ] : segment [ 1 ] ] ) ) >= 40])
365 # end of
code adapted from Martin
366
367 # s p l i t t i n g
ground truth
into
separate
l i s t s
f or
onset and end
368
onset_GT = [ ]
369
end_GT = [ ]
370
371
f o r
i
in
range ( len (conc_GT ) ) :
372
onset_GT . append ((conc_GT [ i ] ) [ 0 ] )
373
end_GT. append ((conc_GT [ i ] ) [ 1 ] )
374
375 # converting from
l i s t s
to
arrays
376
ARV = np . array (ARV)
377
ZCR = np . array (ZCR)
378
var = np . array ( var )
379
var_dif = np . array ( var_dif )
380
onset = np . array ( onset )
381
end = np . array ( end )
382
end_v = np . array (end_v)
383
onset_v = np . array ( onset_v )
384
onset_GT = np . array (onset_GT)
385
end_GT = np . array (end_GT)
386
387 #peaks = s i g . find_peaks (ARV,
distance =5000)[0]
388
peaks = s i g . find_peaks (ARV_dif ,
distance =6500)[0]
389
bgn = 0
99
==PAGE:101==
390
391 #plot ARV with movement onset GT
392
plt . f i g u r e ()
393
plt . t i t l e ( ’ onset ␣GT␣with␣ARV␣of ␣t r i a l ␣’ + s t r ( s e l +1))
394
plt . xlabel ( ’ time␣[ s ] ’ )
395
plt . ylabel ( ’ARV␣[mV] ’ )
396
plt . plot ( t [ bgn : ] ,ARV[ bgn : ] , color=’ c ’ )
397
plt . plot (onset_GT/1000 ,ARV[ onset_GT ] , ’ ∗’ , color=’m’ )
398
plt . show ()
399
400 # plot ARV with movement end GT
401
plt . f i g u r e ()
402
plt . t i t l e ( ’ end␣GT␣with␣ARV␣of ␣t r i a l ␣’ + s t r ( s e l +1))
403
plt . xlabel ( ’ time␣[ s ] ’ )
404
plt . ylabel ( ’ARV␣[mV] ’ )
405
plt . plot ( t [ bgn : ] ,ARV[ bgn : ] ,
color=’ c ’ )
406
plt . plot (end_GT/ fs ,ARV[end_GT] , ’ ∗’ , color=’m’ )
407
plt . show ()
408
409 # plot ZCR with
onset GT
410
plt . f i g u r e ()
411
plt . t i t l e ( ’ onset ␣GT␣with␣ZCR␣of ␣t r i a l ␣’ + s t r ( s e l +1))
412
plt . xlabel ( ’ time␣[ s ] ’ )
413
plt . ylabel ( ’ zero ␣crossing ␣rate ’ )
414
plt . plot ( t ,ZCR, color=’ c ’ )
415
plt . plot (onset_GT/ fs , ZCR[ onset_GT ] , ’ ∗’ , color=’m’ )
416
plt . show ()
417
418
plt . f i g u r e ()
419
plt . t i t l e ( ’ end␣GT␣with␣ZCR␣of ␣t r i a l ␣’ + s t r ( s e l +1))
100
==PAGE:102==
420
plt . xlabel ( ’ time␣[ s ] ’ )
421
plt . ylabel ( ’ zero ␣crossing ␣rate ’ )
422
plt . plot ( t ,ZCR,
color=’ c ’ )
423
plt . plot (end_GT/ fs , ZCR[end_GT] ,
’ ∗’ , color=’m’ )
424
plt . show ()
425
426
plt . f i g u r e ()
427
plt . t i t l e ( ’ onset ␣GT␣with␣variance ␣of ␣t r i a l ␣’ + s t r ( s e l +1))
428
plt . xlabel ( ’ time␣[ s ] ’ )
429
plt . ylabel ( ’ variance ␣over ␣l a s t ␣1000␣samples ’ )
430
plt . plot ( t , var ,
color=’ c ’ )
431
plt . plot (onset_GT/ fs ,
var [ onset_GT ] ,
’ ∗’ , color=’m’ )
432
plt . show ()
433
434
plt . f i g u r e ()
435
plt . t i t l e ( ’ end␣GT␣with␣variance ␣of ␣t r i a l ␣’ + s t r ( s e l +1))
436
plt . xlabel ( ’ time␣[ s ] ’ )
437
plt . ylabel ( ’ variance ’ )
438
plt . plot ( t , var ,
color=’ c ’ )
439
plt . plot (end_GT/ fs ,
var [end_GT] , ’ ∗’ , color=’m’ )
440
plt . show ()
441
442
plt . f i g u r e ()
443
plt . t i t l e ( ’Movement␣detection ␣f or ’ )
444
plt . xlabel ( ’ time␣[ s ] ’ )
445
plt . ylabel ( ’sum␣of ␣d i f f e r e n t i a l ␣sign ’ )
446
plt . plot ( t [ 2 : ] , ARV_dif)
447
plt . show ()
101
==PAGE:103==
8.4
pre-dimensioning code
1 %% propeperties
2
3 % material
4
Ys_base = 57; %[MPa]
5
U_strain = 0 . 0 6 ; % ultimate
s t r a i n
6
E = 3600; % [MPa] Young ’ s modulus
7
8 %system
9
T = 8.4 e3 ; %[Nmm]
motor
s t a l l
torque
at 12 V,
5.2 A
10
R_fa = 50; %[mm]
radius
of
forearm
11
R_ua = 45; %[mm]
radius
of
upper arm
12 %% dimensioning
13
14
L_fa = 190; %[mm]
length
of
forearm beam
15
H_fa = 29; %[mm]
height
of
forearm beam (same as horn )
16
W_fa = 10; %[mm]
width
of
forearm beam
17
18
L_ua = 150; %[mm]
length
of
upper arm beam
19
H_ua = 45; %[mm]
height
of
upper arm beam
20
W_ua = 10; %[mm]
width
of
upper arm beam
21
22
L_cfa = 70; %[mm]
length
of
c u f f
on lower arm
23
H_cfa = 5; %[mm]
height
of
c u f f
forearm
24
25
L_cua = 70; %[mm]
length
of
c u f f
on upper arm
26
H_cua = 5; %[mm]
height
of
c u f f
on upper arm
27
28
H_catt = 2; %[mm]
height
of
c u f f
attachment
piece
29
102
==PAGE:104==
30 %% derived
p r o p e r t i e s
31
I_hole = (1/12)∗4; %[mm]
part
fo r
hole moment of
i n e r t i a M4 bolt
32
33
I_fa = ((1/12)∗W_fa −I_hole )∗H_fa^3; %[mm^4] moment of
i n e r t i a
34
I_ua = ((1/12)∗W_ua −I_hole )∗H_ua^3; %[mm^4] moment of
i n e r t i a
35
36
I_cfa = (1/12)∗L_cfa∗H_cfa^3; %[mm^4] moment of
i n e r t i a
37
I_cua = (1/12)∗L_cua∗H_cua^3; %[mm^4] moment of
i n e r t i a
38
39
A_cfa = 2∗R_fa∗L_cfa ; %[mm^2]
c u f f
area
forearm
40
A_cua = 2∗R_ua∗L_cua ; %[mm^2]
c u f f
area upper arm
41 %% user
loading
42
Fc_fa = T/L_fa ; %[N]
contact
f o r c e
to
lower arm
43
Fc_ua = T/L_ua; %[N]
contact
f o r c e
to upper arm
44
45
Pc_fa = Fc_fa/A_cfa ; %[MPa]
pressure
in
c u f f
forearm
46
Pc_ua = Fc_ua/A_cua ; %[MPa]
pressure
in
c u f f
upper arm
47
48 %% s t r e s s
and s t r a i n
49
50 %X i s
proximal
to
d i s t a l
and length
51 %Y i s
p o s t e r i r
to
a n te r io r and heigth
52 %Z i s
medial
to
l a t e r i a l
and width
53
54 %beam
55
sigma_fa = ((T∗H_fa)/( I_fa ) ) ; %[MPa]
t e n s i l e
s t r e s s
in
forearm beam from bending
56
sigma_ua = ((−T∗H_ua)/( I_ua ) ) ; %[MPa]
t e n s i l e
s t r e s s
in
upper arm beam from bendi
57
eps_fa = sigma_fa/E;
58
eps_ua = sigma_ua/E;
59
103
==PAGE:105==
60 %c u f f
61
tau_cfa = ((3∗Fc_fa )/(2∗L_cfa∗H_catt ) ) / 4 ; %[MPa]
shear
s t r e s s
in
c u f f
attachment
62
sigma_cfa = ( Fc_fa /( L_cfa∗H_cfa) + ( Fc_fa ∗(R_fa/2)∗H_cfa )/( I_cfa ) ) / 4 ; %[MPa]
t e n s
104
