==PAGE:1==
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
Master Thesis
Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
William Taul Madsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, , Diplomvej, Building 371 & 372, 2nd floor, DK 2800 Kgs. Lyn­
gby Denmark
www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Center for Technology Entrepreneur­
ship, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree Mas­
ter of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
William Taul Madsen ­ s184956
Signature
Date
ii
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
July 1st 2024, Copenhagen
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores the valuation methods and drivers employed by business angels in
assessing early­stage startup valuations. The study is based on semi­structured inter­
views with 14 Danish business angels, using an inductive and qualitative approach. The
study finds that business angels rely on gut feel and intuition when valuing startups, uti­
lizing the founders’ valuation estimates to guide their own. They also use valuations from
other deals as a reference and pay close attention to not excessively diluting founders.
The valuation is influenced by similar factors as those identified in previous literature for
VCs, namely founders, market potential, and technology. Contrary to previous studies,
this research found that intellectual property negatively impacts the valuation of SaaS
startups. Additionally, the personal motivation and interest of the investor were found to
positively influence valuation, sometimes influencing by more than 50%. Moreover, there
were discrepancies among investors regarding whether the value added by an experi­
enced investor should be borne by the founders or the investor. The study contributes to
the literature by bridging gaps in understanding early­stage startup valuations from a busi­
ness angel perspective and suggests areas for further research to enhance the efficacy
of valuation methods in entrepreneurial finance.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
William Taul Madsen, MSc Industrial Engineering and Management, DTU
Author of this Master thesis report.
Euiju Jeon, Assistant Professor, Centre for Technology Entrepreneurship
I would like to express my gratitude to my supervisor Euiji Jeon for guiding, supervising
and assisting me throughout the five month thesis period.
All business angels who participated in interviews
My biggest thanks goes to all the kind and helpful business angels who were willing to
spend an hour of their time being interviewed for this master thesis. It goes without saying
that there would not have been any thesis without your participation ­ thank you! I sincerely
hope the findings of the study can provide you with marginal more knowledge on the topic,
and aid any future valuation determinations.
ChatGPT 4o
Throughout the writing process of this Master’s Thesis, ChatGPT 4o was utilized. The
application of ChatGPT 4o included the translation of quotes, grammatical checking of
sentences, advice and proposals for sentence structures, and the substitution of single
words in sentences to sharpen the key­message of the sentence. No full sentences or
paragraphs of this report were authored by ChatGPT 4o. Examples of prompts used in
ChatGPT4o are:
• Please translate the following to English, keeping the full integrity of the quote
• Please provide advice on how the following sentence can be structured in a better
way to provide a clearer message
• Is the following sentence grammatically correct? If not, which part is incorrect?
iv
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:7==
Abbreviations, Terms, and Acronyms
The following overview provides explanations to both the abbreviations, common terms
and acronyms used in the report.
BPM: The Bill Payne Scorecard Method
Business Angel (BA): Business angels are high net­worth individuals who invests in
startup companies.
CVC: Corporate Venture Capital
DCF: Discounted Cash Flow
Founder Ask: The founder ask is the amount of money that founders ask from investors
in an investment round. Occasionally, this is also just referred to as ”Ask”.
IPO: Initial Public Offering
Limited Partners: A limited partner is a passive investor who provides money to active
investors, such as venture capital funds.
M&A: Mergers and Acquisition
Ticket Size: The investment amount provided by the investor
VCM: The Venture Capital Method
Venture Capital (VC): Venture Capital is the terminology for later stage investors, who
mostly invest money on behalf of a series of limited partners (see explained further above).
The abbreviation VC will both be used for Venture Capital and Venture Capitalists.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Question and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Methodology
5
2.1
Research Design and Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Literature Review
13
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2
Theoretical Background and Key Terminologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3
Valuation Methods in a Venture Capital Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.4
Valuation Methods in a Business Angel Context . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.5
Drivers of Valuation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.6
Investment Decision Making and Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.7
Interim Conclusion on Literature Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4
Analysis and Findings
33
4.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.2
Valuation Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.3
Valuation Drivers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.4
General Approach to Valuation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.5
Interim Conclusion on Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
5
Conclusion and Discussion
59
5.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5.2
Final Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
6
Bibliography
67
A Appendix ­ Interview Guide
75
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
In 1989, Waldron and Hubbard (1991) conducted an experiment asking 31 different valu­
ation experts (e.g., venture capitalists) to determine the valuation of a small firm acquired
by the company Goodyear. The experts had identical information available, but the final
valuations provided by the experts varied between $6M to $17.5M. This led Waldron and
Hubbard (1991) to conclude that valuation is similar to alchemy ­ there is no exact science
to it.
While valuation is difficult to determine accurately, it is still an important topic in en­
trepreneurial finance. Startups, particularly in their early stages, present unique chal­
lenges for valuation. Unlike established companies, startups often lack historical financial
data, stable cash flows, and tangible assets. Instead, their value is typically derived from
intangible assets such as the strength of the founding team, the novelty of their technol­
ogy, and the potential size of the market (Köhn, 2018). Several methods exist to value
startups, including early­stage valuation methods, but little is known on their practical use.
This thesis explores the valuation of early­stage startups by business angels, focusing
on both the methodologies and the driving factors behind their valuation decisions. It ex­
amines the specific methods and approaches employed by business angels, providing a
rationale for each method used. The study also identifies and analyzes the elements influ­
encing valuations from a business angel’s perspective, explaining the reasons and extent
of their impact. Furthermore, it discusses the key findings and their practical implications
for both startup founders and early­stage investors. The study is based on interviews
with 14 Danish business angels conducted in the spring of 2024. The thesis consists of
five chapters: Introduction, Methodology, Literature Review, Analysis and Findings, and
Discussion and Conclusion.
The introduction chapter provides an overview of the report and presents the research
questions behind the thesis. The reasoning why the topic is relevant to study is described,
and the motivation for the study is outlined.
In the methodology chapter, the inductive and qualitative approach used in the study is
presented, and the method used for the literature review is elaborated. Moreover, a de­
scription of the informants is provided, and the approach to the data collection and data
analysis is detailed.
The literature review presents the current valuation literature, focusing on the valuation
methods used by venture capitalists (VC) and business angels (BA), and the drivers that
influence their valuation decision. Further, a brief overview of the factors influencing their
investment decision making is given.
In the analysis and findings section, the key findings from the interviews conducted with
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
1
==PAGE:12==
the business angels are presented and elaborated. These are categorized in Valuation
Methods, Valuation Drivers, and General Approach to Valuation.
Lastly, the discussion and conclusion synthesise the literature review and the analysis and
findings, proposing future avenues for research, discussing the key findings and drawing
a final conclusion on the study.
The motivation behind the thesis and the research questions answered by the study are
outlined below.
1.1
Research Question and Motivation
The study answers two primary research questions:
• Research Question 1: How do business angels determine the valuation of early
stage startup companies?
• Research Question 2: What are the drivers behind early stage startup valuations
from a business angel perspective?
As it will also be illustrated in the literature review later, no academic papers have yet
exclusively studied startup valuation from a business angel perspective. However, this is
an important topic to investigate further due to several reasons.
In 2018, 100.000 jobs in Denmark were partly financed by Danish business angels, with
10.000 companies having a business angel among their owners (Louring, 2018). Freear
et al (1992) estimated that business angels in the US made ten times the amount of
deals in comparison to VCs, and the US Angel Capital Association projected that angel
investors invests $25 billions yearly in the US (About ACA Home | ACA, n.d.). Thus,
business angels are a significant resource to both jobs and startup funding.
Understanding how business angels value startups serves multiple purposes. Firstly, from
an academic standpoint, it fills a significant gap in the literature, as this subject has not
been extensively studied before. Secondly, it provides valuable insights into a relatively
closed industry, which can benefit both business angels and startup founders.
For business angels, this knowledge allows them to refine their valuation methods by
aligning with industry best practices. This can lead to more accurate and consistent val­
uations, enhancing their investment strategies and decision­making processes.
For startup founders, understanding the valuation methods of investors helps them align
their expectations and valuation approaches with those of potential investors. This align­
ment can reduce friction during negotiations, as founders can present valuations that are
more in line with investor expectations. Consequently, this can lead to smoother deal­
making processes and an increased likelihood of more deals being made.
2
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:13==
Ultimately, these insights will provide a more efficient and transparent investment envi­
ronment, facilitating more deals and supporting the growth and success of startups.
How this study finds answers two the before mentioned research questions are detailed
in the following methodology chapter.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
3
==PAGE:14==
4
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:15==
2
Methodology
As outlined in the introduction, this study employs an inductive and qualitative research
approach to address the research questions. This chapter details the specific methods
used in this process.
Firstly, the rationale for using a qualitative approach is provided, and the overall process
of the research is presented. Secondly, the process used to conduct the literature review
is elaborated, including the search approach and screening of papers, and the final out­
come of the valuation literature search. Third, the data collection process is described,
including a description and overview of the interviewed business angels, the details of
the interview process, and the methods used to transcribe the interviews. Lastly, the ap­
proach to the analysis of the empirical data is presented, and the validity and reliability of
the study is discussed.
2.1
Research Design and Methods
2.1.1
Qualitative method
This study is based on an inductive qualitative approach which is particularly good for ana­
lyzing complex topics, such as business angels’ approach to startup valuation. According
to Sofaer (1999), qualitative research methods are valuable because they:
• Provide a rich description of complex phenomena
• Illuminate the experience and interpretation of events by actors with widely differing
stakes and roles
• Give voice to those whose views are rarely heard
• Facilitate initial exploration to develop theories
• Progress towards explanations
Furthermore, a qualitative approach allows the researcher to closely interact with infor­
mants, uncovering relevant topics from their perspectives (Strauss & Corbin, 2015). This
method was considered suitable for obtaining authentic data and approaching the topic
from a different angle than what previous research has done. An inductive approach was
utilized, employing grounded theory to analyze the data. This included open­ended ques­
tions in the interviews, a narrative approach to analysis, a focus on individual behavior,
and a ”bottom­up” approach where meaning was derived from the collected data. The
theory was grounded in the collected data through an iterative process, continuously ad­
justing and refining the theory (Birks & Mills, 2011). The iterative process of grounded
theory is illustrated in figure 2.1 below:
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
5
==PAGE:16==
Figure 2.1: Process of Grounded Theory
As seen, data collection and data analysis are an ongoing and iterative process. Based
on preliminary analysis of the collected data, a temporary set of findings (i.e., a provisional
grounded theory) is defined. This theory is continuously updated with new data until sat­
uration is achieved, at which point a final grounded theory is established (Birks & Mills,
2011). A further elaboration on the data analysis and data collection steps can be found
in the Data Analysis and Data Collection section of the report, respectively.
2.1.2
Literature Review
To understand the current approach to early­stage startup valuation and clarify the re­
search question for this study, a literature review was conducted. This is important to
avoid redundant research and to establish a base of knowledge on the topic (Snyder,
2019; Grant & Booth, 2009). Initially, five of the most influential and cited papers on
startup valuation were reviewed to gain a foundational understanding of the topic, as well
as to identify relevant themes which could aid the process of scoping down the review.
Subsequently, a systematic approach was employed to identify pertinent literature. The
top 50 journals listed in the Financial Times research rank were searched using a string
of specific keywords (“50 Journals Used in FT Research Rank,” 2016) as seen below:
(“Venture*” OR “Startup*” OR “Start­up*” OR “Entrepreneurship”) AND (“Value*” OR “Val­
uation*” OR “Evaluation*”) AND (“Early” OR “Early stage”)
The initial search included instances of the string in the full text of the articles, yielding
3294 papers, with the Journal of Business Venturing alone contributing 1,416 papers.
Upon reviewing the titles, it was evident that many papers were irrelevant. Therefore, the
search was refined to focus only titles, abstracts, and keywords, reducing the results to
324 papers. The same string of keywords was used for the second search as well.
After reviewing the abstract of the papers, it became apparent that terms like “early stage”
and “startup” were sometimes used for companies in a later stage than what was relevant
to this study, e.g. companies in the IPO process. Consequently, the search strategy
was adjusted. Instead of relying solely on systematic database searches, a snowballing
method was employed using known, relevant papers identified through the initial search
6
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:17==
(Wohlin, 2014). This approach included papers from journals not listed in the FT top 50,
as preliminary research indicated that highly relevant early­stage startup valuation studies
were published in less prominent journals.
A narrative review approach was adopted, selecting papers based on the ABS rating of
the journal, the relevance of the paper to this study, and the paper’s contribution to the
literature, primarily measured by citation count. Titles, abstracts, and keywords were re­
viewed, and full papers were read when necessary. This method reached saturation after
identifying a total of 46 relevant papers. Additional papers were included during the writ­
ing process to strengthen arguments, although they did not substantially alter the overall
literature review. Thus, a total final of 66 papers was included in the review.
2.1.3
Data Collection
Empirical data for the study was collected through interviews with business angels. A
total of 14 interviews were conducted. The business angels were reached through two
methods. Firstly, business angels within the author’s network were contacted, as their
likelihood of participating was deemed higher than of those that were unknown. Business
angels personally known to the author were excluded to prevent potential bias in the
outcome of the study.
The network outreach resulted in the participation of two business angels. An additional
12 business angels were reached through LinkedIn, by reaching out to investors with rel­
evant investment profiles. Profiles were deemed relevant if they had several investments,
many connections and followers which indicated high activity, or if they invested in differ­
ent industries than those already included in the research. With a total of 55 business
angels contacted, excluding the ones within the network, a participation rate of 22% was
obtained.
Interviewee Description
Prior to conducting the interviews, all interviewees were informed that their anonymity
would be maintained throughout the study and that any confidential information provided
would be kept confidential. This included ensuring that quotes could not be traced back to
individual investors. Due to the small population of business angels in Denmark, many of
whom know each other, presenting a table with descriptive information on each investor
could risk identifying the participants. Therefore, details such as ticket size and number of
investments are provided in aggregate below to preserve anonymity. However, to ensure
transparency in the study, each investor has been given an acronym, and the primary
industry and experience level of the investor are presented in table 2.1 below. The ex­
perience level has been determined relatively to the amount of investments made by the
interviewees.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
7
==PAGE:18==
Investor
Primary Industry
Experience Level
Alfa
SaaS
High
Beta
SaaS
Medium
Gamma
Mix
Low
Delta
Med/bio­tech
Low
Epsilon
Food­tech
Low
Zeta
Mix
High
Eta
Deep­tech
Medium
Theta
Tech
Low
Iota
eCommerece
Medium
Kappa
Green­tech
Medium
Lambda
SaaS
High
My
Mix
High
Ny
Mix
Medium
Ksi
Bio­tech
High
Table 2.1: Interviewee overview
As mentioned, a total of 14 Danish business angels were interviewed, with the majority
being male and located in the Zealand­region. Half of the informants primarily dedicated
their time to business angel activities, while the other half were engaged in other projects
such as founding or co­founding ventures, board­related work, other types of investments,
or taking on other activities. None of the investors had a traditional full­time job, aside from
roles as founders or co­founders.
Consistent with the nature of business angels, the investment stage of the informants was
predominantly pre­seed (and stages earlier than that), with most angels participating in
the initial funding round of the startup. The primary motivation for becoming a business
angel was a desire to give back to the entrepreneurial ecosystem. Many investors had ac­
cumulated their capital from previous exits as founders, while others had acquired wealth
from corporate careers.
The investment sectors varied among the interviewed business angels and included SaaS
(B2B and B2C), Medtech, Healthtech, Biotech, Consumer Products, Deeptech, Green­
tech, Foodtech, Education, eCommerce, Fintech, and others. The most represented sec­
tors were SaaS B2B and Tech sectors developing physical products. Most interviewees
were or had recently been part of investment networks such as DanBan or Keystone,
with around 60% typically investing through these networks. Commonly, investments
were made as part of a syndicate or in a group with other business angels, rather than
individually.
The ticket size of investments varied significantly, even for individual investors. As an
example, a single investor had investments sizes ranging from 37,500 DKK to 3 million
DKK. While many investors did not have a lower bound for their investments, most did
not exceed 1 million DKK per investment, with the mean investment amount falling be­
tween 250,000 DKK and 500,000 DKK. The average pre­money valuation was between
8
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:19==
7.5 million DKK and 20 million DKK. The number of investments per business angel also
showed considerable variation. The minimum number of investments was four, while the
maximum was significantly higher. Providing the exact number would allow identification
of the investor, why this has been omitted. Excluding the two investors with the highest
number of total investments (inclusion would cause severe skewness of the data), the
mean number of investments was 8.4. Two investors did not disclose their total number
of investments.
Interview Process
For the empirical data collection, a semi­structured interview approach was employed.
This method was selected because it allowed business angels to discuss topics related
to valuation and valuation drivers that they found pertinent, rather than constraining them
to predefined subjects that might not be relevant to their experiences.
An interview guide was developed to steer the conversation and ensure relevance to
the study. The guide served as a support tool during the interviews, ensuring key top­
ics were addressed in all interviews, while still allowing flexibility to explore interesting
comments and themes that emerged, as suggested by Portigal (2013). The guide was
divided into three main sections: 1) Introduction, 2) Valuation Methods, and 3) Valuation
Drivers. It was continuously updated throughout the data­gathering phase based on pre­
liminary insights obtained from the interviews. The complete interview guide can be found
in Appendix A.
All interviews were conducted online via Microsoft Teams, each lasting between 45 to 60
minutes, except for one interview which was limited to 30 minutes. The choice to conduct
interviews online was made for the convenience of the investors, and to facilitate auto­
matic recording and transcription, as described below.
Transcription
As the interviews were conducted online via Microsoft Teams, the platform’s automatic
transcription function was utilized to generate initial draft transcripts. Each transcript was
subsequently reviewed and revised based on the video recordings to ensure accuracy.
This process was completed within a few days of each interview to enhance the quality
of the transcripts.
The transcriptions were produced in the same language as the interviews, Danish. Conse­
quently, any quotes used in this study were translated into English. During the translation
process, care was taken to maintain the integrity of the quotes and ensure that the key
messages conveyed by the informants were not compromised. This was done by using
ChatGPT 4o to make the translations, as this kept the translation process objective. Each
translation was reviewed and adjusted when necessary.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
9
==PAGE:20==
2.1.4
Data Analysis
Approach to Data Analysis
As mentioned previously, grounded theory was used for the analysis of data. The iterative
process of grounded theory was described earlier, however, in the following section, the
data analysis step will be described in detail.
Data Analysis by Grounded Theory
Based on the transcripts created from the interviews, a coding process was conducted
on each transcript. This was based on the process of the Grounded Theory as shown
in figure 2.2. The process reflects the specific approach used in this study, inspired from
Birks and Mills (2011):
Figure 2.2: Detailed process of grounded theory
Notes were taken during the interview to immediately capture interesting thoughts and
comments. After the interview, a coding process would take place.
Firstly, the transcript were revised and re­written to correct errors made by the automatic
transcription tool. Afterwards, the transcript was read thoroughly and thoughts, themes,
and codes were noted using the tool Miro. Thereafter, the open coding of the transcript
was initiated.
This was done by reading through the transcript while assigning codes to excerpts. Codes
were then grouped into categories, from which overall themes were generated. This part
constituted the axial coding.
More excerpts were analyzed and compared with other
codes, facilitating an iterative process going back and fourth between coding, catego­
rizing, and thematizing. If theoretical saturation was not reached, new interviews were
scheduled, and the process would reiterate until saturation was obtained. Once theo­
retical saturation had been obtained, the selective coding took place, defining the core
findings and central ideas from the data. These are presented in the analysis and con­
clusion chapter later in the report.
Validity and Reliability
Reliability
The reliability of the collected data is considered to be high. All informants participated
voluntarily, ensuring that their responses were genuine and uninfluenced by external pres­
sure. The use of semi­structured interviews allowed informants to freely express their
thoughts and opinions, providing nuanced data, while still ensuring core topics and ques­
10
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:21==
tions were addressed. Additionally, the data collection process was not sponsored by
any organization, and the informants did not receive any incentives for their participation,
except for insights into the study’s outcomes.
Many of the findings from this study align with those reported in existing literature on
startup valuation, especially regarding the drivers of valuation. The congruence of these
findings with well­established studies indicates that the results of this research are reliable.
The replication of known patterns and themes suggests that the data and subsequent
analyses are dependable and reflect broader trends within the industry.
However, new themes and findings were also identified during the study, which were not
previously shown in other studies. The reliability of these findings are difficult to gener­
alize, as it is based on a few informants. Thus, to increase the validity and reliability of
these, it would be interesting to investigate these further as also explained in the future
research section in the Discussion and Conclusion chapter of the report.
Internal Validity
In the study, internal validity was strengthened by the careful design and execution of
the research methodology. The use of grounded theory allowed for themes to emerge
organically from the data, minimizing researcher bias and ensuring that the findings were
grounded in the actual experiences and perspectives of the business angels.
External Validity
The external validity concerns the generalizability of the findings to other settings. While
the study focuses on Danish business angels, the findings may have broader applicability.
The alignment with existing literature from various regions suggests that similar patterns
may be present in other contexts. Cultural, economic, and regulatory differences between
regions should be considered when applying these findings more broadly. Especially tax
rules can highly affect the drivers of valuation, which differs significantly from region to
region. Thus, further research in diverse geographic and economic settings would be
beneficial to confirm the generalizability of the results.
Authors Position and Potential Bias
While the author’s position within a venture capital firm provides valuable insider knowl­
edge, it also poses a potential source of bias. This dual role could influence the interpre­
tation of data and the framing of questions. To mitigate this, a reflective approach was
taken, with the author maintaining awareness of personal biases and actively seeking to
minimize their impact. Additionally, the voluntary nature of participation helped ensure
that responses were genuine and not influenced by the author’s professional position.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
11
==PAGE:22==
12
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:23==
3
Literature Review
3.1
Introduction
Valuation plays a crucial role in the success and growth of early­stage startups (Miloud
et al., 2012). Determining the value of a startup is essential for attracting investment,
making strategic decisions, and eventually exiting the business (Kam & Witherow, 1999),
and correct valuations are of high importance to both investors and founders (Hsu, 2004;
Garkavenko et al., 2022; Köhn, 2017). However, often there is not much if any financial
information to base the valuation on, and other available data is generally scarce due to
the limited history of the company (e.g. Montani et al., 2020; Damodaran, 2009; Sievers
et al., 2013; Berre & Pendeven, 2022; Festel et al., 2013). In startup valuation literature,
there is an unambiguous consensus that the practice of startup valuation, especially early­
stage, is as much art as it is a scientific approach (Köhn, 2017). Albeit early­stage startup
valuation is known to be difficult, it is a critical aspect of entrepreneurial finance.
This literature review explores how business angels and venture capitalist determine the
valuation of the companies they invest in. It focuses on the criteria and methods they use
and the factors influencing the valuation. The review will synthesize existing research by
taking a thematic approach, eventually leading to identification of gaps which can provide
suggestions for future studies and research avenues.
The literature review has been split into three key sections, namely an introductory and
theoretical section, a core section outlining the identified valuation literature, and a con­
clusion and discussion section synthesising the findings at last.
Firstly, in the introductory and theoretical section, the most common early­stage valuation
methods are briefly presented. These are not at the core of the review, but are rather a
requirement to understand the different valuation approaches that can be taken. This is
both relevant to understand what has been found by the literature, but also relevant to
better understand the analysis and findings section related to the outcome of this study.
Furthermore, some of the more commonly used terms such as “early­stage” and “startup”
will be defined to establish a common understanding for what they entitle, as these can
highly differentiate from study to study.
Secondly, once the theoretical background has been established, the core section of the
literature will be presented. This has been structured using a thematic approach, as this
is advantageous for presenting literature with multiple related themes (Randolph, 2009)
such as valuation drivers, valuation methods, and influences on investment decision mak­
ing. The core part includes several sub­sections as described below.
The first part concerns the valuation methods used by business angels and venture capi­
talists, where each part are presented separately. This part of the review is mostly based
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
13
==PAGE:24==
on empirical studies, both from surveys, interviews, and a combination of both. The sec­
ond part regards the drivers of valuation, which has been separated into the sub­themes:
Entrepreneur Specific Drivers, Investor Specific Drivers, Market Specific Drivers, and Firm
Specific Drivers. Moreover, closely related to the drivers of valuation, the investment cri­
teria used by VC’s and business angels are also be presented.
Lastly, the findings from the review will be synthesized in a conclusion and discussion
section, highlighting the gaps in the current literature. Additionally, the study’s fit within
the current literature and its relevance will be discussed.
3.2
Theoretical Background and Key Terminologies
3.2.1
Key Terminologies
As mentioned, it is necessary to define the key terminologies used in the literature and,
more importantly, what these entitle specifically in this study. The key terminologies in­
clude startup, early stage, and valuation.
Definition of Startup
The word “startup” and “early­stage” are often closely related. Dávila and Foster (2005)
mention the following characteristics for a startup: I) Minimum 50 and maximum 150 em­
ployees, II) is less than ten years old, III) independent, and IV) operates in a limited geo­
graphical area, while Kolvereid and Isaksen (2006) simply define startups as “new busi­
nesses which are started from scratch”. The literature has many different definitions for
a startup, but common for most of them is that it regards a new venture with limited re­
sources trying to introduce a new product or service, operating under market conditions
of great uncertainty (Ries, 2011). As illustrated by the definition of a startup by Dávila and
Foster (2005), not all definitions fit within the scope of this study. Thus, in this paper, the
definition proposed by Ries (2011) will be used.
Definition of Early Stage
In extension to the terminology startup, the term “early stage” is also often used. Garkavenko
et al. (2022) emphasizes that early stage startups are typically more based on qualita­
tive characteristics rather than quantitative performance. Moreover, early stage startups
are intrinsically different from more established startups due to high risk and often having
little to no revenue. As proposed by Sohl (2009) and in combination with Garkavenko’s
et al. (2022) definition of early stage, this study will in the following define an early stage
startup as a company possessing one or more of the following two characteristics: I) in
pre­revenue stage, or II) in pre­seed or seed financing stage, while still carrying the overall
characteristics of a startup as presented by Ries (2011).
Definition of Valuation
It is important to highlight that valuation can either be given as a pre­money or a post­
money valuation. The pre­money valuation provides the value of the company pre in­
14
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:25==
vestment, while the post­money valuation is the value of the company post investment.
Unless else is stated, “valuation” will in the following refer to the pre­money valuation.
3.2.2
Traditional Early Stage Valuation Methods
Many different methods exist to determine the value of an early­stage startup. Common
for most is their qualitative approach, which partly is due to an early­stage startup’s lack of
quantitative data (Montani et al., 2020; Miloud et al., 2012). As different valuation meth­
ods are discussed in the literature and mentioned in the following literature review, it is
necessary to understand the most frequently used valuation methods as presented in the
literature. Thus, the purpose of the following section is to briefly introduce the most pop­
ular early­stage valuation methods. It is important to note that this is not an exhaustive
review of all existing methods, but rather an overview to provide a foundational under­
standing for the reader.
The Scorecard Method (Bill Payne Method)
The scorecard valuation method is one of the most well­known early­stage valuation meth­
ods (Payne, 2006). The method is also commonly referred to as the Bill Payne Method,
invented by the American business angel Bill Payne. The scorecard method is firstly
based on the average pre­money valuation of startup companies within the same region,
vertical and lifecycle as the valuation target. The pre­money valuation of comparable
companies is typically calculated as the average valuation of several companies (Payne,
2006). Secondly, the target company is compared to the companies that has been per­
ceived as comparable. The comparison is based on seven different factors, each allo­
cated a relative weight as seen in table 3.1.
Factor
Relative Weight
Target Company
Factor
Strength of the Management Team
30% max
125%
0.375
Size of the Opportunity
25% max
100%
0.25
Product/Technology
15% max
150%
0.225
Competitive Environment
10% max
75%
0.075
Marketing/Sales Channels/Partnerships
10% max
80%
0.08
Need for Additional Investment
5% max
110%
0.055
Other
5% max
100%
0.05
Sum
1.11
Table 3.1: The Bill Payne Scorecard Method
The Target Company is then evaluated in comparison to the comparable companies, and
the result is multiplied with the relative weight. The pre­money valuation of the target com­
pany is then determined by multiplying the average industry pre­money valuation with the
sum of the factors (Payne, 2006).
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
15
==PAGE:26==
The Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) Method and Modified Models
While the scorecard method is well known for it applicability in an early­stage valuation, the
Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) method is one of the most well­known valuation techniques
for general asset valuation, and is considered essential for determining the value of a
company (Damodaran, 2009). The model calculates the net present value (NPV) of a
company by discounting its future free cash flows. This is expressed by the following
formula:
Present V alue of Asset =
t=N
!
t=1
(FCFt)
(1 + r)t
(3.1)
Where N is the lifetime of the asset, r is the discount rate, and FCF are the future free
cash flows generated by the asset (Damodaran, 1999).
Various modifications of the DCF method exist, including adjustments to the discount rate
using a beta coefficient. This adjustment allows the method to account for the specific
risks associated with the startup, thereby providing a more accurate valuation (Festel et
al., 2013).
The Venture Capital Method (VCM)
The Venture Capital Method is closely related to the DCF method (Keeley et al., 1996).
The essence of the method is to determine the value of the company based on a required
rate of return, an expected time of exit, expected cash flows of the company at the time of
exit and a comparable valuation multiple. Albeit a simple model is presented below, the
method can become more complex and include aspects as dilution, management fees,
and carried interest (Köseoğlu, 2023). Using the VCM, the post­money valuation of the
company is determined by:
V aluepost = FCFtimeofexit · P/E
(1 + rreturn)Ttimeofexit
(3.2)
Where FCF is the free cash flow (i.e. net income) of the company on the time of exit, P/E
is a valuation multiple determined by market prices of comparable companies, r is the ex­
pected rate of return on the investment, and T is the time to exit (Köseoğlu, 2023). Based
on this, the pre­money valuation can then be determined from the investment amount and
number of outstanding shares (Köseoğlu, 2023).
The First Chicago Method (FCM)
The first Chicago Method is a development of the VCM method. Rather than using the
terminal value of the company (i.e. the cash flows multiplied with the valuation multiple),
the FCM uses an average exit value based on different weighted scenarios, as well as a
lower discount rate (Majercakova & Mittelman, 2018). The idea of the FCM can be seen
in table 3.2 below.
16
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:27==
Scenario
Probability
Weighted Valuation
$10M (Pessimistic)
20% max
$2M
$30M (Most Likely)
75% max
$22.5M
$200M (Best Case)
5% max
$10M
Total Valuation
$34.5M
Table 3.2: The First Chicago Method
The scenarios are the net present value of different exits, while the probabilities are sub­
jectively assigned by the investor (Steffens & Douglas, 2007). The post­money valuation
is then determined by substituting the terminal value of the company in the VCM method
with the valuation found through the FCM method. The pre­money valuation can lastly be
determined from the investment amount and number of outstanding shares.
The Berkus Method (BM)
Like the Bill Payne scorecard method, the Berkus Method (BM) has similarly been cre­
ated by a business angel, Dave Berkus. The BM is based on five common risks and
corresponding values. Thus, a startup would be rated on each risk, being able to obtain
a maximum valuation of $0.5M in each category, yielding a maximum total valuation of
$2.5M (Berkus, 2016). The different risks can be seen in table 3.3:
If Exists:
Add to Company Value Up To:
Sound Idea (Basic value)
$0.5M
Prototype (Reducing technology risk)
$0.5M
Quality Management Team (Reducing execution risk)
$0.5M
Strategic Relationships (Reducing market risk)
$0.5M
Product Rollout or Sales (Reducing production risk)
$0.5M
Table 3.3: The Berkus Method
Berkus further propose that risks and maximum company value can be adjusted to each
specific scenario, as valuation can vary across verticals, regions, and time (Berkus, 2016).
The Risk Factor Summation Method (RFSM)
The Risk Factor Summation Method (RFSM) is similar to the scorecard method in the way
that the valuation outcome is based on an average valuation from comparable companies.
The RFSM is based on 12 different risks, which can each influence the valuation with ­
$500.000 to +$500.000, based on the rationales seen in table 3.4:
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
17
==PAGE:28==
Rating
Risk Rationale
$ Adjustment to Pre­money Valuation
+2
Extremely Positive Mitigation
Add $500.000
+1
Positive Mitigation
Add $250.000
0
Neutral
Add/subtract nothing
­1
Negative Mitigation
Minus $250.000
­2
Extremely Negative Mitigation
Minus $500.000
Table 3.4: The Risk Factor Summation Method ­ Rating scheme
The rating is then assigned to the risk factors as seen in table 3.5, adjusting the compa­
rable industry valuation to a specific valuation for the target company.
Risk Factor
Management Risk
Stage of the Business
Legislation/Political Risk
Manufacturing Risk (or Supply Chain Risk)
Sales and Marketing Risk
Funding/Capital Raising Risk
Competition Risk
Technology Risk
Litigation Risk
International Risk
Reputation Risk
Exit Value Risk
Table 3.5: The Risk Factor Summation Method ­ Risk Factor scheme
Thus the, pre­money valuation is essentially determined from:
V aluepre = average comparable value ± risk adjustments
(3.3)
Valuation by Multiples and Comparables
Valuation by multiples is based on financial metrics from comparable companies. The val­
uation process consists of four steps: 1) Selection of value measuring multiple, 2) Identi­
fication of comparables, 3) definition of final multiple, and 4) actual valuation (Schreiner,
2009).
The value measuring multiple can vary, but in early stages, preferred measures include
enterprise value divided by EBIT, Price/Earnings, or other less conventional metrics (Wessendorf
et al., 2018). Comparable firms are identified by locating companies within the same
or similar industries that have similar financial and operational characteristics. The final
multiple is determined by averaging the multiples of these comparable firms (Schreiner,
2009). Finally, the valuation is calculated by multiplying the selected multiple by the cor­
responding value driver from the firm.
A second valuation technique is looking at comparable transactions from comparable
firms, identified in a similar way as described above. This can give an indication of exit
value, and provide evidence for what the industry is willing to pay for the firm.
18
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:29==
Alternative Valuation Methods
The previous presented methods are not an exhaustive list of early­stage startup valu­
ation methods. Different modifications exist to several of the methods, and many other
methods exists as well. Some of these methods include the Rule of Thirds, the Real Op­
tion Method, the Replacement Method, and the Book Value method. Further, although
it is not an exact method, the option of using external valuations tools is also possible,
either by using free automatic website valuators or by paying for external consultancies
(Montani et al., 2020).
3.3
Valuation Methods in a Venture Capital Context
Several of the evaluated valuation methods can be applied in an early­stage startup con­
text. Many of these methods rely on qualitative factors such as the quality of the founders
and management team, the perception of the idea and product, and the overall belief in
success. However, other methods like the Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) and the Venture
Capital Method (VCM) are used as well. These rely more on quantitative factors, including
cash flows and discount rates. Models like the DCF and VCM are more commonly used
by VC’s, as they typically invest at a later stage than business angels, which allows for
more available data to inform these methods (e.g., Van Osnabrugge, 2000; Miloud et al.,
2012; Wessendorf & Hammes, 2018). The valuation methods used by VCs, as presented
in the literature, will be reviewed in the following section.
3.3.1
Valuation by Discounted Cash Flow
It is well known that the value of any asset (e.g., an enterprise) is determined by the cash
flows generated by the asset, the asset’s lifetime, the expected growth rate of the cash
flows, and a risk rate related to the cash flows (Damodaran, 2009). This is also known
as the present value of expected cash flows or, more commonly, as the Discounted Cash
Flow (DCF) method, as also presented in the Traditional Early Stage Valuation Methods
section. The DCF method is well­suited for established businesses with available data
and is often used in the valuation process of later­stage investments (Dittmann et al.,
2004; Miloud et al., 2012).
When a firm has negative earnings, no performance history, and few comparable firms,
applying the DCF method becomes challenging. Therefore, alternative approaches or
methods to handle such information gaps are necessary. Damodaran (1999) suggests
that if a company has negative earnings, analysts must consider approaches that allow
the cash flow to become positive. This can be achieved by normalizing earnings or adjust­
ing margins to sustainable levels over time. Lacking historical performance data can be
supplemented by looking at information from comparable firms, allowing analysts to esti­
mate the required valuation inputs. If there are few or no comparable firms, Damodaran
proposes using a different framework for valuation, although this is only applicable for
high revenue growth companies (Damodaran, 1999).
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
19
==PAGE:30==
For startups that do not generate revenue, the DCF become impractical as it relies on
unreasonable assumptions about future cash flows. Even the alternative framework pro­
posed by Damodaran is inapplicable in the absence of revenue generation. However,
for revenue generating companies the DCF is highly applicable, as also illustrated in the
section on VC Valuation Methods below.
3.3.2
Empirical Insights on Venture Capital Valuation Methods
VC’s frequently use the DCF method when determining the value of startup companies
(e.g., Dittmann et al., 2004; Miloud et al., 2012; Wessendorf & Hammes, 2018). They
utilize available financial information from the company as well as comparable data from
similar companies, which can be used in a valuation by multiples method or by directly
comparing performance.
Dittmann et al. (2004) studied the valuation methods used by German VC funds and how
these methods affect investment performance. They found that the three primary valua­
tion methods used by German VCs were multipliers and financial ratios (60%), discounted
cash flow (58%), and experience (34%). The researchers concluded that employing mul­
tiple valuation methods significantly lowers the rate of failed investments, as measured by
successful IPO’s and write­off rates. Additionally, the use of the DCF method was corre­
lated with a greater likelihood of success, although this correlation might partly be due to
DCF being applied more frequently to mature investment options, which inherently carry
lower risks of failure (Dittmann et al., 2004).
Similar findings were reported in a more recent study, also focusing on German VC’s.
Although business angels were part of the study, Wessendorf and Hammes (2018) found
that 37% of respondents used the DCF method for valuation, making it the third most used
method. Considering the inclusion of BAs in the study, it is likely that the proportion would
have been higher if the study had only focused on VCs. While the DCF was only the
third most popular method, valuation by multiples was found to be the most commonly
used method (74%), followed by the Venture Capital Method (43%). Interestingly, the
study revealed that 28% of respondents relied on gut feeling and personal experience
as their primary approach to valuation. Moreover, only 61% of the informants reported
using a structured investment approach, while the remaining followed a subjective and
opportunistic approach (Wessendorf & Hammes, 2018).
The revelation that some venture capitalists rely on gut feeling and previous experience is
noteworthy, as it indicates an opportunistic approach. As the study includes both VCs and
business angels without distinguishing their answers, it is difficult to ascertain whether the
opportunistic approach is also adopted by VCs. However, the results found by Dittmann
et al. (2004) may support this hypothesis, as they too found that one­third of German VCs
used experience as a valuation method.
Considering the presence of business angels in the Wessendorf and Hammes (2018)
20
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:31==
study, the valuation approaches appear consistent with those identified by Dittmann et
al. (2004) in the German VC landscape. The findings partly support the notion that while
early­stage valuations tend to be more subjective, later­stage valuations rely mostly on
objective and sophisticated methods such as multiples and DCF. However, altough late­
stage investment are more quantitative based, they might also rely on experience and gut
feeling.
3.3.3
Comparative Analysis of VC Valuation Methods Across Countries
While the DCF method has been shown to be important among German VCs, it is relatively
less important compared to VCs from Italy, France, and the UK (Reverte et al., 2016).
Each country finds the DCF method more important than German VCs, although it was
still the second most important valuation method reported by all four countries. Confirming
the findings by Wessendorf and Hammes (2018) and Dittmann et al. (2004), the most
important valuation method for all four countries was found to be the valuation by multiples
method (Reverte et al., 2016). Almost all VCs (98%) reported using the valuation by
multiples method, mostly in combination with other methods such as the DCF.
Reverte et al. (2016) argues and finds statistical evidence that the DCF method is typically
used by VC investors who preferably invest in earlier stages, while valuation by multiples
are more applied by later­stage VC investors. The researchers argue that this is the case
as early stage startups are mostly highly innovative companies with significant growth
expectations, but little data to base decisions on. Thus, DCF is more preferred as this
is beneficial in high growth scenarios, while valuation by multiples require information to
compare with.
Focusing on a different region than Europe, Lockett et al. (2002) analyzed the use of
valuation methods by venture capitalists in the USA, Hong Kong, Singapore, and India.
They found that the DCF method and the comparator/rule of thumb method were widely
used across all four countries, similar to the German VC landscape. The authors con­
cluded that there is a commonality in the valuation methods used by VCs across different
countries, despite variations in the sources of information used to inform these methods.
This suggests a structured and professional approach to valuations conducted by ven­
ture capitalists internationally, independent of cultural and economic differences (Lockett
et al., 2002).
While the majority of studies find that venture capitalists primarily use output­based val­
uation methods, such as DCF models and valuation by multiples (e.g., Lockett et al.,
2002; Dittmann et al., 2004; Reverte et al., 2006; Wessendorf Hammes, 2018), incor­
porating input­based valuation methods can provide a valuable complementary approach
as well (Dingkun Ge, 2005). In situations where financial data is scarce or unavailable,
input­based models offer a more reliable alternative than speculative estimates based on
expected financials (Dingkun Ge, 2005).
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
21
==PAGE:32==
In conclusion, evidence from several studies show that VC firms use valuation methods
that rely on financial data, for example by using the DCF method, the VCM method or
the valuation by multiples method. However, there is also evidence that subjective as­
pects are included in the valuation process, by relying on experience and gutfeel. As also
discussed later in the decision making section, subjective matters as the quality of the
entrepreneur and founder team carries a high weight for VC’s valuation approach.
3.4
Valuation Methods in a Business Angel Context
Even though business angel investments are one of the most common funding methods
for startups, it is yet one of the least studied methods (Wong, 2002; Maxwell et al., 2009;
Bell, 2014). Business angels typically invest smaller amounts than VC’s, in earlier stages
and mostly in sectors which they have knowledge within (Wong, 2002; Sudek, 2006). Due
to their earlier investment stages compared to VC’s, the valuation methods they use are
also different. Historical and financial data that can be found in revenue generating com­
panies is none existing, why the VCM and DCF methods are tricky to apply. The following
section examines the empirical evidence in the literature regarding the valuation methods
employed by business angels.
3.4.1
Lack of Empirical Evidence
Albeit there is a relatively limited number of empirical studies investigating valuation meth­
ods used by venture capitalists, even fewer studies focus specifically on business angels.
Bell (2014), Zachary and Mishra (2013) and Johnson and Sohl (2012) confirmed this and
concluded in agreement that virtually no studies or reviews have focused on business
angel valuation. These findings still hold, and to the author’s knowledge, no empirical
studies have exclusively researched the valuation methods employed by business angels
yet. Consequently, the specific valuation techniques used by business angels remain rel­
atively unexplored.
However, some studies touch upon valuation methods within broader research topics,
such as the investment process of business angels or the criteria they use in their decision­
making. For instance, Paul et al. (2007) found that business angels often approach val­
uation intuitively, unable to give a clear rationale for their methods. Based on interviews,
some informants reported:
”I got a feel for what was right (i.e., valuation­wise) as the process went along” (Paul et
al., 2007)
”There are no real guidelines – you’ve just got to use your judgement” (Paul et al., 2007)
These responses indicate that business angel valuations are largely based on experience
and gut feeling, with no standardized methods commonly applied.
In a literature review on early­stage valuation methods, Montani et al. (2020) reported
22
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:33==
that business angels often use the ”rule of thirds” method to quickly assess a valuation.
However, as this claim is not supported by empirical evidence, its validity remains uncer­
tain. Similarly, valuation methods developed by business angels, such as the Bill Payne
Scorecard Method and the Berkus Method, are presumed to be used by business angels
themselves. Yet, no empirical studies have confirmed this usage.
Moreover, a study by Wessendorf et al. (2018) included a sample where 24% of respon­
dents were BAs, with the remainder being VC funds investing in various stages. But as the
study did not differentiate between the responses of business angels and VCs, it provides
no specific insights into the valuation methods used by business angels.
Bell (2014) further states that recent work has shown that business angels apply valuation
methods that are similar to those of VCs. However, evidence for this statement is found in
the sources of Bill Payne’s online blog, and in the study conducted by Wong (2009). Scru­
tinizing the study by Wong (2009) however shows that no findings occur on the similarity
of valuation methods between VCs and business angels.
In summary, while some qualitative insights and assumptions about business angel valu­
ation methods exist, there is a significant gap in empirical research specifically focused on
understanding and validating the methods employed by business angels in their valuation
processes.
3.5
Drivers of Valuation
While the previous section focused on the methods used to come up with a valuation, the
following section focus on the factors that influence this valuation.
Drivers of valuation refer to the factors that can influence the valuation of a startup either
positively or negatively. While research on valuation methods often concentrate on a lim­
ited number of techniques, the literature identifies a broader array of valuation drivers. To
maintain a structured and manageable review, these drivers will be presented collectively
for both VCs and business angels. However, some specific drivers that uniquely affect
either VC or business angels valuations will be highlighted accordingly.
Inspired by the framework proposed by Berre and Pendeven (2022), the review will be cat­
egorized into four sub­categories: Entrepreneur­specific Drivers, Investor­specific Drivers,
Market­specific Drivers, and Firm­specific Drivers.
3.5.1
Entrepreneur­Specific Drivers
Some of the most prominent drivers of valuation in the literature are the entrepreneur
specific drivers (Berre & Pendeven, 2022; Colombo et al., 2022). These regard the en­
trepreneurs experience, educational background, the gender, social skills, as well as sev­
eral other characteristics.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
23
==PAGE:34==
Previous Experience
Having previous relevant experience as an entrepreneur has a positive impact on val­
uation. Especially management experience from previous startups has been shown to
affect valuation significantly, being the primary valuation driver when financial data was
excluded (Sievers et al., 2013; Miloud et al., 2012), followed secondly by previous stratup
experience. Hsu (2007) argues that experience affects valuation positively, as experi­
enced entrepreneurs can negotiate higher valuations. He further finds that especially
previous experience with fund raising affects valuation positively.
However, some studies have contrary opinions, showing that entrepreneurs with previ­
ous startup experience do not receive higher valuations in comparison to entrepreneurs
without previous startup experience (Gompers et al., 2010).
Educational Background
The educational background of entrepreneurs positively affects the valuation of a startup
(Hsu, 2007; Franke et al., 2008). In emerging markets, founders with doctoral degrees
have a strong signalling effect, resulting in higher valuations (Hsu, 2007), and educations
within management, economics, or the field related to where the venture operates has
also been found to increase the success of venture equity crowdfunding (Piva and Rossi­
Lamastra, 2018).
Pollock et al. (2010) argues that the valuation increase is caused by the prestige­signalling
effect provided by elite educations. However, as this was studied in the IPO valuation
phase, its applicability for early­stage ventures is not certain.
Gender
From economic literature, it is known that women generally earn less in comparison to
men. This is also the case for startup valuations, where startup teams consisting domi­
nantly of female entrepreneurs generally give away more equity in trade for less capital
(Poczter & Shapsis 2018). Contradicting this finding is Murnieks et al. (2016), who found
no substantial impact on valuation based on gender.
Other
While the beforementioned drivers are some of the more prominent ones, less prominent
drivers also exist. Some of these include the entrepreneur’s motivation and willingness
to take risk, while others are related or reflected in other drivers, such as the age of the
entrepreneur (Berre & Pendeven, 2022).
The entrepreneur’s social and networking skills have also been found to influence valu­
ation positively. More specifically, the positive influence comes from the entrepreneur’s
capability to hire executives through personal network rather than relying on VC’s (Hsu,
2007). In relation to the interaction between the VC and the entrepreneur, it has also
been found that cultural similarities between investor and founder positively affect valua­
24
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:35==
tion (Bengtsson & Hsu, 2015).
Lastly, in close relation to the firm specific drivers described later, the team­combination
and its completeness has also been shown to affect valuation positively (Berre & Pende­
ven, 2022).
In essence, entrepreneur related factors are important in relation to valuation and can
significantly affect valuation positively.
3.5.2
Investor Specific Drivers
This section explores the investor related factors that influence the valuation. These in­
clude Profile of the Investor, Investor Experience and Reputation, Investor Liquidity, and
Investor Syndication.
Profile of the Investor
The profile of the investor can largely affect the valuation, as for example illustrated by
VCs negotiating lower valuations due to their bargaining power (Heughebaert et al., 2012).
This is especially the case for VC firms with high bargaining power, such as university VC’s
and government VCs, while independent VC’s and corporate venture capital (CVC) firms
interestingly show no difference (Heughebaert et al., 2012). Increased bargaining power
can stem from targeting low competition niche markets, or alternatively be a consequence
of the VC firm’s strategy. The fund size of the VC also influences valuations, as larger
funds yield lower valuations (Cumming & Dai, 2011), although this will also be reflected
in the bargaining power of the VC.
In contrast, BAs with a high level of human capital have been found to invest at higher
valuations. This is due to the BAs perceiving a higher value­creating potential, thereby
being willing to pay more for the opportunity (Collewaert et. al., 2016). BAs have also
been found to add strategic advice and network to the startup, which act positively on
valuation as it can further aid the facilitation of future funding rounds (Sørheim, 2005).
While CVC’s do not have increased bargaining power, they do on the other hand positively
affect valuation in cases where there are complementarity benefits between the CVC and
the acquired firm (Park & Steensma, 2011). They see a higher value­creating potential
similarly to what BAs do, why they are willing to accept a higher valuation.
Investor Experience and Reputation
The reputation of VC investors has also been found to influence valuation positively, as
Hsu (2004) finds that VCs with high reputations receive discounts on the valuations of
10% to 14%. The startups thus pay a premium to ”borrow” the VC’s reputation to gain
access to external resources. This is mostly important in the early stages and diminishes
over time (Cumming & Dai, 2011).
While Heughebaert et al. (2012) found that VC’s negotiate lower valuations due to their
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
25
==PAGE:36==
bargaining power, experienced VC’s tend to assign higher valuations (Gompers et al.,
2010). An explanation for this can be that experienced VC’s add value by coaching the
entrepreneurs.
In relation to BAs, Collewaert et. al. (2016) argues that VCs with a background as BAs or
with years of entrepreneurial experience also drive­up valuations, being the largest driver
of valuation.
Investor Liqudity
Increased fund inflows positively influence VC valuations (Gompers & Lerner, 2000). The
increase in valuation has also been found not to be related to better deals being present,
but rather due to high demand for deals in peak inflow periods (Gompers & Lerner, 2000).
Importantly, it is not the size of the fund that yields higher valuations (quite the opposite
is the case (Cumming and Dai, 2011)), but rather periods with high fund inflows.
Consequently, the investor liquidity driver is closely related to macroeconomic factors as
described in the Market Specific Drivers section.
Investor Syndication
Commonly, investments are done in investor syndications where several investors invest
at once. According to Cumming (2005), this offers several benefits regarding valuation.
Risk can be managed better, as the investment is shared among several stakeholders who
can mitigate risks, and more monitoring and knowledge­sharing is available, both posi­
tively affecting valuation. Also, there is a synergy between the number of investors and
growth opportunities, eventually leading to increase in startup value (Cumming, 2005).
In summary, based on the investor type and available capital, the valuation can be af­
fected both positively and negatively, largely dependent on the specific characteristics of
the investor.
3.5.3
Market Specific Drivers
As mentioned earlier, fund inflows affect valuation positively. However, other macroe­
conomic factors influence valuation also, and so do the specific market situation of the
investment sector, the business cycle and the online presence of the company.
Macroeconomic Factors
The macroeconomic factors can influence valuation both positively and negatively. While
low interest rates and risk­free rates tend to yield higher valuations, the opposite is the
case for high interest rates and risk­free rates (Hsu, 2007; Gornall & Strebulaev, 2020).
Valuation on public traded companies also impact startup valuation positively, where high
index numbers on NASDAQ are correlated with higher valuations on private equity invest­
ments (Armstrong et al., 2006).
26
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:37==
Market Situation of Investment Sector
The growth rate of the specific market in which an investment is made is a crucial deter­
minant of valuation. A high potential for market growth is positively correlated with higher
valuations (Dittmann et al., 2004). The mergers and acquisition as well as the IPO activ­
ity in the specific industry is also relevant, as these are used in valuation methods such
as comparable transactions, why it subsequently influences valuations of other startups
(Sievers et al., 2013). Thus, it can both affect valuations positively or negatively. Miloud
et. al. (2012) also found that ventures in highly differentiated industries received higher
valuations than other ventures.
Lastly, the product competition in the market is also a factor. The IP­landscape and the
rate the IP becomes obsolete is something that is considered by the investors when de­
termining the valuation (Hellmann & Thiele, 2015). Thus, high competition increases the
likelihood of failure, why investors are not willing to pay as much as they would in less
competitive markets.
Business Cycle
The business cycle regards the maturity of emergent markets. As an example, the topic
of Artificial Intelligence has recently received high attention, while the dotcom era did the
same in the late 1990’s. During boom­periods like these, larger amounts of capital are
being channelled towards VC firms, affecting startup valuations, and more investments
are being done as well, affecting the competitive landscape (Gompers et al., 2008). As
argued earlier, fund inflows and competitive landscape can affect valuation both positively
and negatively.
Online Presence of the Company
Aggarwal et al. (2012) found that receiving positive recognition online by well­known
bloggers caused an increase in valuations for startups. Analysing further, the reason was
found in VC firms being more attracted to the startups with positive online reputation, why
the bargaining power of the startups would increase, eventually yielding higher valuations
(Aggarwal et al., 2012). Valuation being driven by online presence was also found relevant
by Garkavenko et. al. (2022), who through statistical analysis concluded that Twitter
activity (now called X) measured by likes and comments on posts was a good predictor
for startup valuation, and positively related to venture valuation. However, due to the rapid
change in popularity of different social medias, this driver must be assumed to fluctuate
over time.
To recap, both macroeconomic factors, the market situation of the specific investment
sector, and the business cycle can all influence valuation both positively and negatively,
however mostly influencing positively. The online presence of the company has only been
found to affect valuation in a positive manner.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
27
==PAGE:38==
3.5.4
Firm Specific Drivers
The firm specific drivers regard elements that are directly related to the startup. These
include intellectual property rights, financial information and stage of funding, synergies
and alliances,and country and sector.
Intellectual Property Rights
The number of patents and patent applications related to a startup has been shown to
positively influence valuation by several studies (e.g. Hsu & Ziedonis, 2013; Colombo
et al., 2022). Part of the value added can be explained from a reduction in information
asymmetry (Block et al., 2014). However, the effect on valuation is highly based on in­
dustries. Patent applications and patents significantly and positively influence the valu­
ation in the bio­tech and life­science sectors, followed secondly by the communications
and semiconductor sector, while no influence has been found in the software industry
(Greenberg, 2013). Patents have also been shown to have less influence on valuation
over time as startups mature (Greenberg, 2013), while they carry more relevance in the
early funding rounds, especially in cases where the entrepreneur is inexperienced (Hsu
& Ziedonis, 2013). This is likely due to the fact that part of the missing experience from
the entrepreneur can be “covered” by having a patent, which evidently reduces risk.
Financial Information and Previous Funding
Having cash, the ability to generate revenue, and research and development expenses
have been found to positively affect valuation, while general­ and administrative expenses
affect valuation negatively (Sievers et al., 2013). Interestingly, the same study also found
that financial and non­finanical information carries an equal share in the explanation of
valuations. Also, financial information can be used to inform later­stage valuation methods
such as DCF or EBIT multiples, eventually also affecting the valuation outcome (Manigart
et al., 2000).
The amount of successful past funding rounds and the total funding raised has also been
shown to directly affect valuation positively, while previous crowdfunding was found to
have no effect (Garkavenko et. al., 2022). Most importantly ranked the total funding,
which had a higher effect on valuation in comparison to number of funding rounds, indi­
cating that fewer but larger funding rounds in the end yields a higher valuation.
Synergies and Alliances
Having a strong network and strategic alliances in a startup is important for many rea­
sons, one being its effect on valuation. Strategic alliances can have a strong signalling
effect, showcasing investee quality, and thereby position the startup better in a negotia­
tion situation (Miloud et al., 2012; Sievers et al., 2013), while also reducing information
asymmetries.
Network is important also as it positively affect valuation, especially in the early stages,
while its importance decreases over time (Zheng et al., 2010). Interestingly, Zheng et al.
28
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:39==
(2010) also found that there is complementary effect between the innovative capability of
the firm and its network heterogeneity, acting positively on valuation.
Country and Sector
The country and sector in which the firm operates in can affect the valuation, as valuation
approaches can differ from country to country, and in some cases even on a region­to­
region basis. As also described earlier in the VC valuation method section, Lockett et
al. (2002), Manigart et al. (2000), and Dittmann et al. (2004) found differences in the
preferred valuation methods based on countries, as well as the information informing
these methods. Thus, these differences can eventually also affect the outcome of the
valuation, as each method will provide different valuation outcomes.
Legal and tax regimes can furthermore influence valuation, as high tax levels will force
VCs to demand lower valuations for them to be able to meet the expected return on the
fund (Keuschnigg & Nielsen, 2004).
Summarizing all categories, both Entrepreneur Specific Drivers, Investor Specific Drivers,
Market Specific Drivers, and Firm Specific Drivers have the ability to drive valuation in both
a positively and negatively direction. The categories with the largest positive impact on
valuation is however the entrepreneur related drivers, the firm specific drivers and the
external market conditions (Berre & Pendeven, 2022).
3.6
Investment Decision Making and Criteria
The previous two sections examined the valuation methods used by VCs and business
angels, as well as the factors influencing these valuations. The following section outlines
the investment decision­making processes employed by both business angels and VCs,
and details the criteria and factors that influence their investment decisions.
Venture Capital Investment Decision Making
Macmillan et al. (1985) conducted a study based on 102 responses from a question­
naire and found that VC’s ultimately base their funding decisions on the quality of the
entrepreneur. Five of the top ten most important criteria in the evaluation of new venture
proposals were related to either the professional experience or personality of the founders.
This finding prompted Macmillan et al. to question why so much emphasis is placed on
the business plan, which typically contains limited information about the entrepreneur’s
characteristics. The researchers thus proposed including more detailed information about
founders in the business plan to make it more informative for investors.
This emphasis on founder quality is further echoed in the approach of business angels,
who similarly prioritize founders when making investment decisions (e.g. Sudek, 2006;
Van Osnabrugge & Robinson, 2000; Skalicka et al., 2022). This is explored further below.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
29
==PAGE:40==
Business Angel Investment Decision Making
Sudek (2006) conducted a study on the investment criteria of business angels, analyzing
72 survey responses. The study found that the most important investment criteria were
related to the founders and the management team. Specifically, all of the top three criteria
focused on the entrepreneurs themselves, with potential exit routes and revenue potential
ranking fourth and fifth, respectively. This underscores the centrality of the founding team
in early­stage investment decisions, which is similar to what is seen in investments by
VCs.
Similarly, Van Osnabrugge and Robinson (2000) corroborate these findings, albeit with
slight variations. They identified the enthusiasm and commitment of the entrepreneurs
as the top criteria, whereas Sudek highlighted the trustworthiness and honesty of the en­
trepreneurs. The significance of trustworthiness and honesty is further supported by a
recent study by Skalicka et al. (2022), who found that more than 80% of the interviewed
business angels would reject funding an early­stage startup if they did not trust the en­
trepreneur. Interestingly, this trust was closely linked to the entrepreneur’s personality,
and mistrust was often compounded if the entrepreneur also lacked experience. A sec­
ond reason for rejection can be found when the business angel have concerns with the
entrepreneurs management capabilities (Feeney et al., 1999), while fatal flaws will also
generally lead to rejection (Maxwell et al., 2009; Skalicka et al., 2022).
Despite these differences, all four studies emphasize the important role of the founders
and the entrepreneurial team in influencing early­stage investment decisions by business
angels. These findings suggest that for business angels, the personal attributes and ca­
pabilities of the startup team are paramount. Even though the business opportunity might
be good, business angels are not willing to invest unless they trust the founders and get
along well. This focus on the team likely stems from the high uncertainty and risk asso­
ciated with early­stage ventures, where a capable and trustworthy team can significantly
mitigate perceived risks.
3.7
Interim Conclusion on Literature Review
To recapitulate the literature review, the theoretical background and key terminologies
were established, and the valuation methods used by venture capitalists was presented,
while few studies regarded business angel valuation methods. The valuation drivers of
both business angels and VCs were also presented in a combined section, and the in­
vestment decision making and criteria were briefly presented for both business angels
and VCs.
As shown, there is evidently several studies focusing on valuation in startup companies.
These include highly cited papers such as Hsu (2007), Hsu (2004) and Van Osnabrugge
(2000). The studies indicate that VC’s tend to use quantitative methods in their valuation
of startups, where valuation by multiples is dominating, followed secondly by DCF.
The majority of studies seem to focus on the investment process and the investment deci­
30
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:41==
sion making of the investors, while valuation drivers are also a relatively well studied area.
However, valuation methods seems to be under researched, and while some empirical
studies exists on the valuation approach by VC’s, very few studies do so on business
angels, and none with a sole focus on the valuation approach taken by business angels.
Similarly, few papers focus on the valuation drivers from a business angel perspective.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
31
==PAGE:42==
32
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:43==
4
Analysis and Findings
4.1
Introduction
As concluded in the literature review, research and studies on the area of early stage (i.e.
pre­seed/pre­revenue) startup valuation is scarce. Focusing on business angels and their
approach to valuation limits this field even further and as seen, no studies have yet taken
an empirical approach with interviews as data source to analyse this topic.
The following analysis and findings section explores the world of early stage startup valu­
ation based on the interview data as presented in the methodology chapter. Derived from
the decoding conducted on the interviews, the chapter has been split into three primary
themes: Valuation Methods, Drivers of Valuation, and General Approach to Valuation.
Valuation Methods and Drivers of Valuation are furthermore split into sub­themes, where
each sub­theme consists of specific methods and drivers. A visualisation of the content
is provided in figure 4.1:
Figure 4.1: Visualisation of the Analysis and Findings content
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
33
==PAGE:44==
Each category within the sub­themes will be presented using quotes from the interviews
to support arguments, while also drawing lines to the literature to highlight similarities and
discrepancies. Moreover, in the end of the chapter, an interim conclusion will be done to
give the reader a holistic picture of the valuation methods and drivers used.
The reasoning for using above structure is that early­stage startup valuation has shown
to be fragmented. No exact models or methods are being used, and the valuations are
constituted by several different factors. Presenting each valuation method used by the
investors as well as the drivers behind these valuations should give the reader an overview
of how valuations are performed in the industry. The synthesis in the end will summarize
all findings into one providing a holistic picture of the early stage valuation landscape.
It is important to comment that valuation drivers and valuation methods are highly inter­
related. A subject that is used as a method to define the valuation, will often also affect,
and thereby drive, the valuation. However, the two sections are kept split by using the
following definitions:
• Valuation methods consist of the elements that are used to establish a concrete
valuation. They act as a way of calculating or indicating the valuation of the startup,
and will therefore also partly drive the valuation, as they are the actual foundation
for the valuation.
• Valuation drivers are on the other hand constituted by elements that, on their own,
cannot be used to calculate or establish a number for the valuation. Rather, the
drivers will influence the magnitude of the number, either positively or negatively.
Elements presented in the methods section might therefore also be relevant in the drivers
section, but to keep the sections manageable for the reader, each element will only be
included in one of the sections, and comments will be made for those that could act as
both valuation methods and drivers. A schematic overview of the findings can be found
in table 4.1 and table 4.2 below. The tables provide an overview of the findings related to
each investor, and whether the specific driver or method was relevant to the investor.
34
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:45==
Valuation Methods
Investor
Founder
Ask
Founder
Dilution
Company
Need
Comparable
Deals
Potential
Exit
and Value
Gut Feel
and
Intuition
Table
Discussion
Co­investors
Network
Scoring
Market
Tiers
Alfa
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Nc
N
Y
Y
N
Beta
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Nc
Y
Y
Y
Y
Gamma
Y
Nc
Nc
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Delta
Y
Y
Nc
Y
Y
Y
Y
Nc
Nc
Y
Y
Epsilon
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Zeta
Y
Y
Nc
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Eta
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Nc
Y
N
Y
Nc
Theta
Y
Y
Nc
Y
Y
Y
Nc
Y
N
Y
Y
Iota
Y
Y
Nc
Y
Nc
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Nc
Kappa
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Y
N
Nc
Y
N
Y
Lambda
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
N
N
My
Y
Y
Nc
Y
N
Y
Nc
N
Y
Y
Nc
Ny
Y
Nc
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Nc
Nc
N
Ksi
Y
Y
Nc
Y
Y
Y
Y
Nc
N
Y
Y
Table 4.1: Valuation Methods Findings: Y=Yes, N=No, YP=Yes Positive, YN=Yes Negative, Nc=Not clear
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
35
==PAGE:46==
Valuation Drivers
Investor
IP
Rights
Founder
Coach.
Team
and
Founders
Available
Data and
Info
Product
and
Tech
Market
Size
and
Potential
Exit Size
and
Options
Macro
Factors
Industry
Lemming
Effect
and
Signaling
Value
Investor
Motivation
and
Interest
Investor
Domain
Area
Alfa
YN
Nc
YP
YP
YP
YP
Nc
Y
Nc
N
Y
Nc
Beta
Nc
Nc
YP
YP
YP
YP
Nc
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Gamma
YP
Y
YP
YP
YP
YP
Y
Y
Nc
Y
Y
N
Delta
YP
Nc
YP
YP
YP
YP
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Epsilon
YP
Y
YP
YP
YP
YP
N
Nc
Y
Nc
Y
Y
Zeta
YP
Y
YP
YP
YP
YP
Nc
Nc
Nc
Y
N
Y
Eta
YP YN
Y
YP
YP
YP
YP
Y
Y
Y
Y
Nc
YN
Theta
YP YN
Nc
YP
YP
YP
YP
Y
Y
Nc
Y
Y
Y
Iota
YP
Y
YP
YP
YP
YP
Y
Y
Y
N
Nc
YN
Kappa
YP
Nc
YP
YP
YP
YP
Nc
Y
Y
Nc
N
Y
Lambda
YP YN
Nc
YP
YP
YP
YP
Y
Nc
Nc
Y
Y
N
My
YP YN
Y
YP
YP
YP
YP
Y
Y
Nc
N
Y
N
Ny
YP YN
Nc
YP
YP
YP
YP
Y
Y
Nc
Y
Y
Nc
Ksi
YP YN
N
YP
YP
YP
YP
Y
Y
N
N
Y
YN
Table 4.2: Valuation Drivers Findings: Y=Yes, N=No, YP=Yes Positive, YN=Yes Negative, Nc=Not clear
36
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:47==
4.2
Valuation Methods
The first primary theme concerns the valuation methodologies used by the interviewed
angel investors to value young ventures. The theme consists of the categories Founder
and Company Based Valuation, Investor Based Valuation, and Industry Based Valuation.
Each category further consists of different valuation methods which will be elaborated
separately.
4.2.1
Founder and Company Based Valuation
The founder based valuation is an approach where the value of the startup is based either
partly on the founders by scoring them, by the investment ask presented by the founders
or by protecting the founders from being diluted in equity.
Risk of Dilution
When a startup is founded, all the equity will initially belong to the founders. At some point,
the venture will typically require more capital to continue growth and secure its operations,
which is why the founders will sell part of their ownership to investors in exchange for
capital, experience, and guidance. In doing so, the trade of equity for capital will result in
a dilution of the shareholders ownership, and as the founders are the only stakeholders
possessing ownership prior to investment, the ownership dilution only affect the founders.
Thus, this first investment will significantly affect the ownership percentages, as all equity
to the investors will be taken from the founder’s pool of ownership.
In the conducted interviews, ten (71%) of the business angels mentioned dilution as a
consideration when approaching valuation. They protect founders from becoming too
diluted, as this will affect the company’s ability to raise further capital in future rounds,
which will eventually also affect the long term interest of the investor. If the company is
not capable of raising more funding rounds, the growth might stagnate or even decrease,
the exit option of a VC­round will disappear and eventually, the company could go bankrupt
due to lack of capital. This is not in the interest of any of the parties, and although it is
important for the investor to get a good deal, it is similarly important to make a fair deal.
One investor expressed:
”You must also think about the entrepreneurs here, so that we don’t go in and make a
valuation that is too low. It may sound strange as an investor, but you just have to think
about the potential exit on the other end, and there are many instances when exiting or
in a later financing round, second, third round, where the investors will simply not go in if
the founders do not have 50%.” (Delta, med/bio­tech Industry, medium experience)
The question of dilution was closely related to the founder’s investment ask, as this would
act as the starting point for the valuation estimate. Based on the ask, the investors would
calculate backwards and look at how much dilution the founders could handle under dif­
ferent scenarios if the company were to raise another round in a seed or series A stage.
The scenarios were different from investor to investor, but it was generally done under
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
37
==PAGE:48==
the assumption that the founders should have a minimum of 50% ownership before the
first VC round, while some investors stated it should be closer to 70%. Just as dilution
can be used to back­calculate a valuation based on certain assumptions, it can also serve
as a driver for the valuation. This could as an example be relevant in a case where the
business angels are not the first investors, but where a cap table with a large ownership
share to the founders could drive up the value of the startup, as it would make room for
more investors to join on a later stage, increasing the chances of success.
It was also mentioned by some of the investors that shielding founders from extensive
dilution was done to withhold the founders motivation. If founders are left with only 2%
equity, they may struggle to raise capital in future rounds. Later­stage investors might
fear that the founders will have too little incentive to drive the business forward, as the
potential upside does not outweigh the substantial workload required.
An investor gave a direct example of how they were protecting founders in a present case
by increasing the valuation, which highlights the importance of the matter.
”I had a case at DTU yesterday where we will probably end up collecting more funding
than what was asked by the founders. But to make sure they will not get diluted too
quickly, we will most likely increase the valuation with a million or two.” (Epsilon,
food­tech Industry, low experience)
Thus, increasing the valuation of the startup is also an option, even though it will result in
a higher price per share for the investors. This was further confirmed by another investor,
who similarly had participated in funding rounds where the valuation had been increased
to keep the dilution of the founders acceptable. This action indicates that the valuation is
not a zero­sum negotiation, but rather an integrative negotiation.
In conclusion, the business angels pay high consideration to the founders equity share.
This is done to secure the long term game of the investor by ensuring that later­stage
investor are willing to invest, and that founders stay highly motivated.
Founder Ask and Company Need
When investing in a company, valuation is something that is typically not brought up during
the first pitch where founders present their ask, i.e. the amount of money they are raising
in the funding round. However, the ask will give an indication to the investors of what tier
the valuation lies within. Sometimes, the investor will ask the founder directly for their
valuation or the amount of equity they are looking to sell, which will provide an exact
valuation to work from. Nevertheless, the founder ask and company need was one of the
methods which was used by all (100%) informants, as it would act as the starting point for
the valuation discussion. According to several of the investors, they will not pursue the
conversation if the initial valuation is too high:
”The valuation topic is brought up fairly quickly… And that is primarily because you
should not continue conversations if it gets too ridiculous. You would basically just be
38
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:49==
wasting each other’s time.” (Beta, SaaS industry, medium experience)
This indicates that the initial valuation proposed by the founders is important, as it can
cause reluctance from the investors to continue the conversation if the gap is too signifi­
cant. A high valuation will thus scare investors, while a low valuation will be more likely to
attract investors. A low valuation will however cause a high dilution of the founders, which
could cause cap table and motivational issues, and potentially do harm to the long­term
game of the angel investors. Thus, it is important as a founder to have the right initial
valuation as it will dictate the bargaining zone in which negotiations will take place.
This is further highlighted by one of the investors, as the person’s approach to valuation
is what the founders present, plus/minus a few millions, given that the other requirements
for an investment have been fulfilled.
”There are no concrete methods. It is very much based on what the founders present,
and then you either subtract or add a bit.” (Epsilon, food­tech industry, low experience)
Moreover, beside basing the valuation on the initial proposal given by the founders, the
valuation is also based on the economic need of the company. It is important to the
investors that the startup gets the money they need to grow their business. As a result,
the initial ask is typically not a discussion topic.
”...it kind of becomes a binary thing where I see alright, you need x amount of money,
then valuation also needs to be y, because we cannot own 40% of the company..” (Alfa,
SaaS industry, high experience)
In essence, the valuation proposed by the founders is key. In the first place, it dictates
whether investors are willing to continue conversations or not, and in the second place,
it acts as the initial valuation point for the investors which eventually lays ground for the
valuation negotiation.
Scoring
Determining the value of the startup based on a scoring is widely used, with 11 (79%) of
investors indicating they would use such method. However, the impact of the scoring on
the valuation and the variety of scoring methods used differentiated significantly.
A few investors would conduct scoring by using Høker Kalkulen to either make a sanity
check on their own valuation, or to objectify the valuation and make it less biased. Scoring
was also done in the way of assigning the team, the market and the product a score from
1­10, which could guide the valuation, but not directly determine it. This method was not
done on paper, but rather as a non formalised method. Although the scoring approach
was not always used to come up with a number for the valuation, it would often be used in
a combination with other valuation methods to narrow down the fair valuation­range. The
scoring would thus also act as a driver for the valuation. No investors indicated that they
used other formalised scoring methods, such as the Bill Payne Scorecard method or the
Berkus Method.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
39
==PAGE:50==
The scoring had little impact on the valuation, and was used as a tool for self reflection
on the assigned valuation, as further illustrated by the following quote:
”I make a scoring of the team and the market. I make a scoring of the value proposition,
the technology. Is the product nice to have or need to have? I score a lot of different
parameters to think through the case. Then I get a sense for how the case is looking,
and then I’ll go back to the tier­model” (Beta, SaaS industry, medium experience)
In summary, scoring without using established frameworks was widely used at different
levels, but ultimately not being the primary or most influential method for valuation.
4.2.2
Investor Based Valuation
The theme of investor­based valuation addresses the approach where the valuation is de­
termined based on the investor’s own knowledge, know­how, intuition, and gut feel. This
section includes the categories gut­feel and intuition based valuation, co­investor based
valuation, and table discussion based valuation. Each will be described further below.
Gut feel and Intuition
As one of two methods, the gut feel and intuition approach was the second method which
was used by all (100%) the interviewed investors.
The approach is mainly constituted by previous experience and intuition, which consists
of many elements. Intuition can be described as common sense, based on associations
with previous experience (Epstein, 2010). This indicates that more experience informs
the intuition better, giving a better decision basis. Thus, while gut feel and intuition were
used by all investors, experienced investors would be more likely to take more informed
decisions on the valuation.
”It is very much based on gut feel and experience from the people that are involved. And
you could say it is completely unscientific. Yes. It is. But I think it works.” (Delta,
med/bio­tech industry, low experience)
”I heavily rely on my intuition. If the valuation does not feel right, I am simply not joining
(the investment).” (Kappa, green­tech industry, medium experience)
Defining the method formally is difficult, as it is constituted by many unknown factors.
Some of the common specific elements that constituted the method were:
• Exposure to startups and valuations
• Perception of the team behind the startup
• Risk­level of investment
• Exit expectations
In general, the gut­feel and intuition approach can be considered an informal aggregation
40
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:51==
of various valuation drivers and methods. This approach yields different outcomes by
assigning varying weights to each element, depending on the specifics of each case.
Interestingly, the number of investments and years of experience in the industry seemed
to have a positive effect on how much the investor relied on his/her gut feel and intuition.
While more inexperienced investors relied on network and supporting valuation methods,
experienced investors would rely heavily on their gut feel and experience. This could
moreover indicate that the approach is well functioning, as experienced and successful
investors use it repeatedly.
All things considered, the gut feel and intuition valuation approach is the most widespread
and relied on method of all. Although it cannot be formally defined, its reliability is con­
firmed from its extensive use by experienced investors. Notably, the reliability on the
method also increased with investor experience.
Co­investor and Network
The co­investor and networking valuation method are two closely related but different
valuation methods.
The networking valuation method was utilized by nine (64%) investors. They would lever­
age their network to either establish or verify a valuation when they had access to some­
one with substantial expertise in the relevant field. This approach was enforced in sce­
narios where the investor had little knowledge on the sector in which the investment took
place. Vice versa, in investment cases within the investors domain area, the investor
would rely on own inputs.
The networking valuation approach serves not only as a valuation method but also as a
valuation driver. The signaling value of whether an investor with domain knowledge on
the specific industry of the investment case was interested in joining could influence the
investor’s decision­making and valuation outcome.
”If I know someone who knows something on the topic, then I would ask him to quickly
give the case a look and ask like hey, have you seen this one? What do you think? Is it
something you could be interested in yourself? Or is it completely off?” (Zeta, mixed
industries, high experience)
The co­investor valuation method was used directly by seven (50%) investors. In this
approach, the investor would rely on co­investor’s valuation estimate. Thus, the investor
would not initiate in debt analysis of the valuation personally, but tag along on the already
established valuation.
To conclude, networking is both used to establish a valuation, but also as a signaling value
which can affect the outcome of the valuation and investment decision. Co­investors are
only used as a valuation method, while both approaches are used by about half of the
investors.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
41
==PAGE:52==
Table Discussion
The table discussion based valuation is related to the co­investor and networking val­
uation. However, it differentiates in the way that the final valuation is determined in a
discussion between all investors, rather than relying on individual opinions. Six (43%) of
the investors expressed that they used the table discussion as a valuation approach.
”It is a round­table discussion. Always” (Epsilon, food­tech industry, low experience)
Although the networking approach is used as a valuation method, it can simultaneously
act as a valuation driver. Once the lead investor has agreed on the valuation with co­
investors through table discussions, discussions also take place with the founders. During
these discussions, various arguments can influence the valuation, leading to either a final
agreed valuation and subsequent investment or a failure to reach an agreement, resulting
in no investment.
Thus, table discussions are used by some investors to gather inputs from all investors in
the investment case, establishing a final valuation that can be presented in the valuation
discussion with the founders.
4.2.3
Industry Based Valuation
The industry based valuation consists of valuations that are done based on present mar­
ket measures. This includes ongoing investment activities and the investment amount,
M&A and IPO activity, the general price of money based on the global interest rate and
the overall activity and development in the entrepreneurial landscape. In essence, this
becomes three valuation methods which partly overlap: Valuation based on expected exit
value, valuation based on market tiers, and valuation based on comparables. The find­
ings from each category are presented below.
Comparable Based Valuation
Basing the valuation on comparables was the second most used method by the investors,
with 12 (86%) using the approach. The comparables method consists of two variations:
• Comparable based on valuations from similar startups
• Comparable based on similar industry transactions or funding rounds
The first and most used variation is the direct valuation comparison to other valuations
seen in comparable cases. The investors would have knowledge on typical valuation­
ranges from other deals, and thereby be able to indicate what tier the valuation would lie
within. This was further used as an accept/rejection criterion, as no sense was made from
pursuing deals that had higher valuations than other similar firms, but as an example had
worse value proposition, a weaker team, and operating in an earlier stage.
The second approach involves using transaction data from similar companies within the
relevant industry. This method can provide estimates of the exit potential, which can
42
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:53==
further be used to calculate the valuation based on the projected exit value, or by simply
using the valuation the comparable firm was assigned in the identical funding round.
However, although comparable based valuation was the second most used method, it
was also a method that received critique. The investors commented that comparisons
are only done up against the very best deals, as lower quality deals would not continue
into the conversation phase. Similarly, the same statement holds for startups that receive
VC funding or are sold to another company.
Moreover, utilizing this method requires comparable companies. The very raison d’être
of startups lies in their uniqueness and innovativeness, why few direct comparable com­
panies are present. To address this issue, the investors rely on network and previous
deal exposure to source sufficient comparables, but it was still highlighted as one of the
major limitations of the method. These limitations could hold back investors from using
the method, while the majority used and saw it as the primary method.
”Comparables, no. I have not used it no, I find it to difficult to find companies to compare
with. Obviously if you have a huge portfolio with companies offering the same product,
then yes, it might make sense” (Zeta, mixed industries, high experience)
”You do it (i.e. valuations) based on comparables with other deals... If one of them
wants three times the valuation compared to the other two deals I have just seen, then I
have to believe that there is a three times greater likelihood that they will actually
succeed.” (Alfa, SaaS industry, high experience)
To summarize, the comparable valuation method is widely used by business angels,
mostly by comparing similar deal valuations sourced through experience or network. The
raison d’être of startups does however provide scarcity of similar firms.
Exit­value Based Valuation
Calculating valuation based on the expected exit value was done, either directly or in­
directly, by nine (64%) of the interviewed investors. This was done by estimating the
exit value, and from this backward calculate dilution, investment amount and valuation.
Thus, the method can be seen similar to the Venture Capital Method as presented in the
theoretical background section.
”I make backwards calculations myself where I say OK, I believe that in an additional
two investment rounds, then we will have an exit. And then I can make calculations on,
and there is also a lot of belief and guessing, but on how much money the company
need to raise during those funding rounds, and then you can make the dilution­effect
and calculate what my share of the company will be at that point... And you estimate
that I believe in an exit that is so and so big, and that I want my money back with a 10X”
(Delta, Med/bio­tech industry, low experience)
Fundamentally, the exit value was used a method to backwards calculate the valuation in
a similar but less structured way than the VCM.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
43
==PAGE:54==
Market Tier Based Valuation
Valuation based on market tiers operates on the premise that similar pre­seed and seed­
stage startup companies have standardized valuations. This method is similar to the
comparables method, as it requires investors to have continuous exposure to startup
valuations to stay informed about current market tiers. The tier method was used by
eight (57%) investors.
”... I invest in pre­seed SaaS. So I know what a pre­seed or seed valuation is.” (Alfa,
SaaS industry, high experience)
“So it is (i.e. the tier­levels) 0 ­ 5 millions. That is typically early, early stage. And then
5­15 millions, that is typically at the accelerator or incubator level, and then 15 and
above is preseed funds, and then seed funds come after that, which is typically 50
millions or above.” (Beta, SaaS industry, medium experience)
As indicated from the quotes, all startups in early stage are valued collectively under
the tier­model approach. The approach would rarely be used alone, but instead as an
indication of the valuation­level. Gutfeel, intuition and other methods would then be used
to decide the final valuation.
A limitation of this approach is that highly innovative and promising companies might be
undervalued when compared to firms of lesser perceived value. An investor also noted
that the valuation tier model is a weak argument during negotiations, as founders often
claim, ”We are better and more valuable than the average startup; otherwise, why would
you invest in us?”
In short, the tier­model approach is used to define an initial valuation from which the final
valuation can be defined, rarely significantly deviating. The model was used by roughly
half of the investors, and tier­levels would be both stage and industry specific.
4.3
Valuation Drivers
As illustrated in the literature review, valuation drivers are one of the more researched
and described topics in startup valuation literature. The topic has recently been thoroughly
researched in systematic literature reviews, among others by Berre and Pendeven (2022)
and Colombo et al. (2022). Many of the findings from previous studies are similar to the
findings of this study. Therefore, drivers that are similar to those found in previous studies
will only be presented briefly, while drivers that differentiate from previous literature will
be highlighted and explored further.
The section has been split into three main themes: Internal Company Valuation Drivers,
External Valuation Drivers, and Personal Investor Valuation Drivers. Each section con­
sists of valuation drivers that will be described individually.
44
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:55==
4.3.1
Internal Company Valuation Drivers
The first theme concerns the drivers that originate from the startup, thus being the inter­
nal valuation drivers. The drivers consist of: Intellectual Property (IP) and Trademarks,
Team and Founder Attributes, Founder Coachability, Value Proposition and Technology
Uniqueness, and Data Availability.
Team and Founder Attributes
The entrepreneurial team and founders are essential drivers of valuation. Many of the
findings in this study on team and founders are similar to what have been found for both
late and early stage VC investors (e.g. Massimo et al., 2022; Berre & Pendeven, 2022).
Team and founders were without exception the largest and most significant driver of val­
uation, with positive influence reported by all (100%) investors. Many aspects affected its
influence, but the most prominent and differentiating aspects were found to be:
• Founder and team quality: ”The team and founders mean everything. A great
founder team will turn a horrible product into a fantastic business” (Kappa, Green­
tech industry, medium experience)
• Team diversity and composition: ”There needs to be a builder, and there needs
to be a seller” (Alfa, SaaS industry, high experience)
• Uniqueness of founder and team: ”I have to believe in or see some indefinable
x­factor from the founders” (Alfa, SaaS Industry, high experience)
• Previous experience of founders, especially entrepreneurial experience: ”It is
those who have entrepreneurial experience that gets the money” (Lambda, SaaS
industry, high experience)
• Chemistry between founder and investor: ”It is important that founders also pass
the red­wine test” (Gamma, mixed industries, low experience)
• Human capital of founders, especially educational background and social skills:
”Educational background is important. I would almost say that it is more a criterion
than a driver” (Ksi, bio­tech industry, high experience)
The chemistry between founder and investor is interesting, as it goes beyond what have
been found in the studies included in the literature review. As one of the investors put it,
they need to be able to drink a glass of wine together and get along well. This enhances
collaboration and trust, provides a stronger commitment from both parties and increases
the overall chances of success. In cases where this is present, investors are willing to
pay a premium:
“If I had two completely identical startups, but with different founder teams, then I would
pick the startup with the team I get along with better, even if their valuation was higher.
Simply because I want to have fun and work with great people, and I also believe it gives
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
45
==PAGE:56==
greater likelihood of success. At least that is my experience so far” (Eta, Deep­tech
industry, medium experience)
Investors experience founders as colleagues, and the valuation is therefore not only driven
by financial upsides, but also human factors such as personal relationships. Further, a
strong founder­investor relationship can lead to funding, even in cases where the business
is not within the investors core area:
“But sometimes, I think the team. And in this case the founder, the individuals, are so
strong that I fall for it... Basically, it’s the founder I’ve fallen in love with. As a
professional.” (Beta, SaaS industry, medium experience)
Interestingly, one investor also mentioned that previous founder experience could be seen
as a negative driver:
“I will always be wary of what I call ”fat cats.” Those who have, you know, made a lot of
money. Done really well once, so I would be afraid that they lack the drive. I would be
more interested in a different profile.” (Theta, Tech industry, low experience)
Albeit one investor expressed concerns, the majority saw previous experience as a sig­
nificant valuation driver. Contrary to the worry of investing in a ”fat cat”, other investors
argued that successful entrepreneurs who have had an exit before are motivated to start
a new business not due to a monetary aspect, but because of their drive and passion.
In brief, the team and especially the founders are highly and positively influencing the
valuation. Findings from previous literature are found to be true for business angels also,
while a new aspect is that the founder­investor relationship can directly influence valua­
tion.
Intellectual Property and Trademarks
As also illustrated in the literature review, (IP) and trademarks are one of the key drivers
of valuation. Similar findings have been found in this study, however with interesting
variations in the valuation influence.
While the literature has described IP as a positive driver for valuation, this study found that
six (43%) investors saw IP as a positive driver, while six (43%) investors saw IP as both
a positive and negative valuation driver. This was highly dependant on the specific case,
and IP was primarily seen as a positive driver. One investor saw IP as only a negative
driver.
IP as a positive driver was seen in cases related to hardware, bio­tech, med­tech and other
technology sectors where patents are more often than not a requirement for the startups
existence. IP as a negative driver was primarily seen in SaaS businesses. Arguments for
IP acting as a negative driver included:
• It can remove focus from the founders and lead them to believe ”they have found the
door to paradise”. Investors are scared that it will provide a false safety and reduce
46
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:57==
the necessary grind required from the founders to succeed with the business.
• It can signal that wrong priorities have been made, as the IP application process is
time consuming and expensive.
• In relation to above, obtaining approval and defending an IP is expensive, why it in
some cases strategically does not makes sense to spend scarce financial resources
on IP when they could have been spend on progressing the business instead.
• If only a few number of patent claims stated in the IP application has been rewarded,
it signals a weak patent and thereby potential competitive issues.
This indicates that IP can remove focus from what investors believe is important in the
startup, which leads to non­value creating activities and thereby a reduction in valuation.
Some of the investors commented the following in regards to trademarks and IP:
“Trademarks does not mean a lot... But it is a strength to have patent applications and
patents on the way, but then you have to look into them and judge the strength of the
patent. How broad or narrow are they?” (Ny, mixed industries, high experience)
“If the founder has applied for a patent and stated 15 patent claims, and only got one
approved, then it is not positive (in regards to valuation)” (Ny, mixed industries, high
experience)
“... and then they do not understand that patents are only 2% of what they have going,
and that the patent application more likely than not will fail. Even if it succeeds, it is likely
not a patent they will defend” (Alfa, SaaS industry, high experience)
To sum up, while patents are highly influential on valuation, its positive or negative influ­
ence is related to the industry. The SaaS sector perceives low or negative value­adding
trades from IP, while deep­tech and other tech­sectors perceive IP as positively influenc­
ing valuation.
Founder Coachability
The coachability of the founders was found to influence valuation by six (43%) of the in­
vestors. Coachability is related to the founders openness to receive advice and coaching
from the investor, rather than having an ”I know better”­attitude. When discussing valua­
tion drivers, one investor expressed:
“...are they coachable, because that’s also important... When you’ve said, ”that path
might not be wise to take because this and that will happen,” and then when this and
that happens, you get a bit frustrated... So coachability is really important.” (Epsilon,
Food­tech industry, low experience)
Investors who believed that coachability could influence valuation were often ex­entrepreneurs
themselves. They found its positive impact rooted in knowledge­sharing, as these in­
vestors had previously been through similar processes and could thus provide valuable
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
47
==PAGE:58==
guidance to the founders.
Although coachability was not found to be highly influential, it remained important as the
combined expertise of both founders and investors could lead to increased value­add.
Value Proposition
A value proposition is the unique element offered by a product, and the value proposition
driver is therefore constituted by the product and technology. All investors (100%) saw the
product and technology as positive drivers for valuation, which is not unique compared to
VC investors (e.g. Massimo et al., 2022; Berre & Pendeven, 2022). However, the value
proposition was not as important as the founder team:
“Well, that (product and technology) aligns with the team and founders. Poor founders
can ruin the world’s best products, and skilled founders can achieve a lot with very little.
So it is significant, but not the most significant, that’s still founders.” (Epsilon, Food­tech
industry, low experience)
Overall, the value proposition carries a high weight for the valuation as it is the entity that
eventually brings income and thereby monetary value to the firm. Nevertheless, investors
still see founders and team as more important and with a larger influence on valuation.
This is likely because founders are the builders of the product, and while the product and
technology can change and pivot several times during a startups lifetime, founders will
usually stay.
To encapsulate, the product and technology is essential for the valuation, but not as es­
sential as the founder and team, as they in the end are the creators of the product and
technology.
Data and Information Availability
Data availability is a broadly defined driver that can include several elements. The core
idea of this driver is that while most startups may lack extensive data, any available data
will influence their valuation. Data availability was found to be a valuation driver for all
investors (100%), predominantly positive.
The most influential data (if available) is financial data, specifically in terms of revenue.
Revenue showcases to the investor that people are willing to pay money for the product,
which reduces the risk of the investment. This is not a new finding as previous studies
have found similar (Massimo et al., 2022; Berre & Pendeven, 2022).
However, three investors expressed that revenue could also act as a negative driver in
certain scenarios. One investor stated:
“Sometimes, it can be a bad signal if budgets are not realized, and therefore, the
business is obviously worth less than expected.” (Iota, eCommerce industry, medium
experience)
48
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:59==
To clarify, revenue as a negative driver would be the case when actual revenue was sig­
nificantly lower than budgeted. In such cases, the investors would have initially invested
in the startup based partly on promising sales projections. While investors are well aware
that budgets are often not met, significantly lower­than­expected revenue signals that the
product may be inadequate or that the market might not exist. Consequently, the ”intan­
gible” valuation, based on potential and projections, is higher than the ”tangible” valuation
derived from the actual performance. Thus, from a valuation perspective, the startup
would be better off not providing any realized revenues if they are significantly under bud­
get, as this would result in a lower valuation than what could be achieved by selling a ’high
potential business’ instead.
Beside financial information, other data and information availability included signs or proof
of that customers were interested in the product and saw a value­add, as well as a thought
through business model­ and plan.
In conclusion, investors do let data and information drive the valuation whenever it is
present, although it is rarely not in the early stages of a startup. Any available information
would however be utilized, and especially realised financial data would have a positive
effect on the valuation.
4.3.2
External Valuation Drivers
The external drivers of valuation are the drivers that are not represented or influenced by
the company. These are drivers that are largely controlled by macro­economic factors, by
the industry and sector, the market the startup operates in, and by the economic activity in
that market. The drivers include: Exit Size and Option, Market Size, Sector and Potential,
and Macro Economic Factors.
Market Size, Sector and Potential
The size of the market, the sector and the overall potential of the industry was stated as
an important valuation driver by all investors (100%). Similar aspects as reported in the
literature review were important to the investors, including:
• Total market size and addressable market
• Compound annual growth rate (CARG)
• Sector, hereunder general investor activity in the sector and promising outlook (e.g.,
AI was seen as a promising sector)
However, one of the more experienced investors expressed that the market­specific num­
bers were not always important:
“It’s actually rare that I focus so much on the market. I’ve been involved in many
education cases, and the market is so enormously large everywhere. There are no
dominant players, so almost everyone can grow as much as they want, especially if
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
49
==PAGE:60==
we’re talking globally. If it’s pharma, biotech, or medicine for a rare disease, then it
obviously matters that only 100,000 people have that disease” (My, mixed industries,
high experience)
Experienced investors will likely have had exit(s) before, why they know what it takes for
a startup to succeed. Thus, they might rely more on the previous discussed intuition and
gut­feel, rather than requiring specific market growth rates and a certain market size.
Overall, the market is an important factor in the valuation of startups. In aggregate, the
most important driver is that there is a fairly sized market that is willing to pay for the prod­
uct.
Macroeconomic Factors
Similar to the market size and potential discussed above, macroeconomic factors were
also drivers of valuation for all investors (100%). One investor commented on the recent
increase in interest rates:
“There were some movements in the market where the mental boundaries in the startup
environment have not at all grasped how volatile the pricing is. They have just seen
some curves that are exponentially growing.” (Gamma, mixed industries, low
experience)
According to the investors, the startup environment would often not consider macro eco­
nomical changes in their valuation, which during certain periods (e.g., the increase in inter­
est rate in 2022) would lead to significant gaps between what the investors and founders
saw as a fair valuation. Periods would then occur where the startup environment would
have to normalise their valuation before investors would be willing to invest.
Fundamentally, macroeconomic factors are highly influential on valuation, although they
cannot be controlled by either the investor or the startup.
Exit Size and Options
When determining the valuation of the startup, it is an important factor to the investors
that there is the option of a large exit in the future. This is first and foremost decided
by the exit options, which can be limited down to four options: an initial public offering
(IPO), an acquisition by another company, a later investment round, typically a VC­round,
where investors are willing to buy the shares, or a bankruptcy. However, as one of the
investors put it: “an IPO is kind of off the charts here in Denmark” (Theta, Tech industry,
low experience), and as bankruptcy is not worth considering either, the primary exit options
become an acquisition by another company, or by selling shares to a later­stage investor.
Exit size and options was a valuation driver for nine (64%) of the investors.
These options are initially considered by the investors, and acts as a driver for the valu­
ation. If the target company operates in a sector where there historically or recently has
been much M&A activity, this will act as a positive driver for the valuation. Similarly, it can
50
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:61==
act as a negative driver if the company operates in a sector where the prospects of being
bought are slim.
Moreover, the value can also be driven by other players in the industry, and whether there
are any obvious buyers to the business or not. A red ocean market can therefore be
seen as an advantage to certain investors, and potentially act as a positive driver for the
valuation, as this can increase the exit options, and de­risk the case:
“It might sound counter intuitive, but being in a market with a lot of competition can
actually make it easier to exit, as there are many potential buyers. This is something I
consider when determining what I am willing to pay for the investment. It may not affect
the valuation by millions, but signs that can de­risk my investment make me willing to pay
more because there is less risk involved.” (Eta, Deep­tech industry, medium experience)
This is interesting as it contradicts the findings of Hellmann and Thiele (2015), who argued
that VCs were willing to accept higher valuations in low competition markets.
To recapitulate, exit options and size are important to more than half of the investors,
influencing valuation positively. Competition can further be seen as a benefit to certain
investors, as this provides promising exit options.
4.3.3
Investor­unique Valuation Drivers
Investor­unique valuation drivers encapsulates the elements that can influence valuation
based on the profile, personal preferences, and background of the investor. These in­
clude: Personal Interest and Motivation, Lemming Effect, and Investor Domain Area. As
business angels are unique individuals, the drivers mentioned in this section deviates sig­
nificantly from the drivers found in the VC literature.
Personal Interest and Motivation
The first and most reoccurring valuation driver in the investor­unique category is the per­
sonal interest and motivation of the investor. The driver could influence valuation for ten
(71%) of the investors.
The business angels expressed that cases they invested in had to be something they
found motivating and interesting to work with. Few investors would enter a case based
only on monetary value. The personal interest would provide motivation to work with the
case, and one investor commented that his personal interest and motivation could affect
the valuation with more than 50%:
“It’s really this exciting learning journey I embark on. And if that’s there, I often think
more about my ticket size and less about valuation, and say, okay, I can join for 30,000
euros, but I will get to engage with this field and these people, and that is super exciting.
So, it’s not so important to me whether I get 3%, 5%, or 7%. In other words, valuation is
less important than the journey we are going on. I would almost consider it a bit like a
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
51
==PAGE:62==
concert ticket... I believe it affects more than 50% (of valuation) in my case.” (My, mixed
industries, high experience)
While a valuation driven by more than 50% of motivation and interest was not common for
other investors, is was a topic that was unique for all angels. The personal interest and
motivation seemed to be one of the key areas where business angels distinguish from
VC funds. Business angels can allow themselves to invest in companies based on own
preferences, while VC funds must return economic value to their limited partners.
A priority for the investors was therefore to invest in something that made sense for them
in the bigger picture:
“It’s also not just financial. It’s also purely human values. What do I want to spend my
life on?” (Alfa, SaaS industry, high experience)
In essence, the personal interest and motivation of the investor are important in regards
to valuation and investment decision, and can in certain cases constitute more than 50%
of the total valuation, placing it as a signifcant driver.
Lemming Effect and Signaling Value
The Lemming Effect is a phenonema where people take decision or behave in a similar
manner to what a larger group of people do. In a startup valuation context, some investors
allow their valuations to be influenced by the opinions of investor groups, exposing the
individual investor to the lemming effect.
“I think there is a certain tendency towards the lemming effect, where people just invest
based on what others are investing in, and don’t focus too much on it.” (Theta, Tech
industry, low experience)
Eight investors (57%) experienced the lemming effect. Generally, less­experienced in­
vestors were more influenced by this effect on valuations compared to the more experi­
enced investors. This is likely due to experienced investors having more self­confidence
and prior experience in their valuations, while less­experienced investors may tend to fol­
low their peers and be guided by what others are doing. This was backed by some of
the experienced investors, who supported the statement that they saw lemming effects in
valuations, although they did not let it guide their own valuations.
Related to the lemming effect is the signaling value of co­investors. While the lemming
effect influences valuation based on what a big group of people think, the signaling value
affects valuation based on single investors. This was the case when investors with expe­
rience and knowledge within the specific industry of the target company also co­invested
in the case. This not only had a strong signaling value towards other investors, but also
a direct value­add as the competencies of the experienced investor could contribute to
risk­reduction, eventually affecting the valuation positively:
“There are cases where you see a major investor joining an investment within their exact
52
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:63==
niche area. This has a hugely positive effect because you think, ”Okay, this must really
have potential.” And with the network and experience they bring in, the chances of
success are just significantly higher.” (Ksi, Bio­tech industry, high experience)
In summary, both the lemming effect and signaling value of co­investors can influence val­
uation positively. Lemming effect is primarily seen for low­experienced investors, while
signaling value of co­investors is relevant to all levels of experience.
Investor Domain Area
The last driver concerns the specific knowledge and experience domain of the investor,
highly related to the signaling value described above. Nine (64%) of the investors ex­
pressed that their own knowledge could lead to valuation influence.
Interestingly, in­
vestors had two different perspectives on the matter: Some saw domain knowledge as a
positive driver, while others believed it was a negative driver.
The majority of investors (six investors, 43%) viewed having relevant knowledge and ex­
perience as a positive driver of valuation. This was typically the case in sectors where the
investors had prior successful experience as entrepreneurs. An argument for an increase
in valuation was given by one of the investors:
”Well, I think it’s fair that the valuation is a bit higher when I know I can create a
significant increase in value. It’s also in my interest for the business to do well. So, if I
contribute with more money, along with knowledge and a network within the field, it only
means that I’ll hopefully get a larger return in the end also.” (Iota, eCommerce industry,
medium experience)
This argument signifies that the investor directly adds value to the startup, which the
investor is willing to pay for himself. In contrary, other investors had identical opinion on
the value­adding to the startup, but did not believe they should pay for that themselves:
”I bring my money, my network, my skills, and know­how. So, you could almost say I’m
bringing a huge gift, but I shouldn’t be penalized for that. On the contrary, I actually think
it’s fair that there is a discount in the valuation.” (Eta, Deep­tech industry, medium
experience)
To conclude, there is consensus among investors that their domain knowledge will add
value to the startup. However, discrepancies exist to whether it should be seen as a pos­
itive or negative driver for valuation, with the majority believing it should be positive.
4.4
General Approach to Valuation
Valuation methods and drivers are the elements that constitute the actual valuation of
the company. The methods are used to estimate the valuation, while the drivers are the
variables affecting the valuation in either a positively or negatively way. However, as
early­stage valuation is difficult to put on a formula, there seems to be an unambiguous
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
53
==PAGE:64==
agreement by investors that valuation is more than anything a holistic approach to each
individual investment case. The approach cannot be mapped down to a single process
that can be applied to all companies, as the approach will differ based on industry, maturity
of the company, founders and their team, market, cap table, overall potential and much
more.
Thus, the following section provides a broader picture of the overall approach taken by
business angels on valuation. This includes the general attitude towards the precision
of the valuation, the knowledge of present valuation methods and the reasoning for not
using them, and what valuation implies for the investors.
Attitude Towards Valuation Precision
All investors had a clear opinion on the precision of the valuation. They all agreed (100%)
that the precision of the valuation was not of high importance. Instead, it was crucial that
the investment case had high potential and was interesting. Thus, accommodating the
exact valuation proposed by the investors was not a high priority.
“My approach is basically that I need to believe there is a market for it... If it costs 10, 12
or 15 million at that point of time is not important. You are looking at a company that
might be worth 300M, 400M or 500 million in 5 years, so it is not the specific valuation
that makes the impact. It is more whether they will be there or not for that long, tough
grind that is needed, and then the valuation is more if I think it sounds reasonable, how
long time have they used on it, how thorough have they been and so forth.” (Zeta, mixed
industries, high experience)
“A difference of plus or minus 5 million in the valuation is not what separates the
parties.” (Gamma, mixed industries, low experience)
Consequently, the valuation is regarded more as an estimate than an exact value, and the
importance lies in the potential, not the specific number. It was furthermore of high value
to the investors that the founders did not feel cheated when accepting an investment. One
of the investors expressed that it was more important that the founders felt favored in the
deal than herself, as it was critical to maintain the energy and integrity of the collaboration,
especially regarding the founders who will be allocating significantly more resources to the
project.
However, the valuation still needed to be reasonable for both parties, as a valuation that
did not lie within a fair range would withhold investors from initiating negotiations with the
venture, even if the startup had a large potential.
In relation to valuation precision, the business angels also typically experienced a pre­
mium in the valuation proposed by the founders.
This premium was added to allow
founders to provide a ”discount” to the investors, and to have a bargaining zone for the
negotiation. One investor noted:
”Skilled investors add a bit to what they perceive as a fair valuation. Then they have
54
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:65==
something to negotiate with.” (Kappa, Green­tech industry, medium experience)
In short, the valuation precision was not important and could deviate with several millions.
Further, skilled investors add a premium to the valuation, allowing for larger bargaining
zone during the negotiation.
Exposure to Valuation Models and Reasoning for Opt­out
As presented in the literature review, there is no lack of models to determine the value
of companies that have measurable data. Most models are based on financial data, but
even for startups where data is absent, several models exist which take a more qualitative
approach. These models include the Bill Payne Scorecard method, The Chicago method,
The Berkus Method and others.
The majority of investors had been exposed to and knew of valuation models that could be
used to determine the value of startups, but almost no investors used any of the models.
The only model that was broadly used was Høker Kalkulen, which is a valuation model
created by the business angel network Keystones similar to the Berkus Method.
Albeit the model can be used to determine the value of a startup based on five different
categories, Keystones recommend using the model to “test your valuation” (Rosenbom,
2024). This was also the case for the investors who used the model to confirm their
valuation, and to discipline themselves and their approach to valuation. However, none
of the investors used the model to dictate a valuation, and the general comments were
that it often did not fit their specific investment case. As an example, this was generally
the case when the investment was characterized by uncertainties and long go­to­market
timelines, as experienced in the med­tech and bio­tech sectors.
Overall, the rationale for not using any of the formalised and well­defined models was
it applicability and questionable output. The investor did not believe the outcome of the
models they had used added up with the valuations they saw in reality, and further critized
the models for not including macroeconmic factors.
To summarize, the business angel were well aware of different existing models, but ac­
tively chose not to use them as the applicability and outcome was not found useful.
Investors Perception of the Terminology ”Valuation”
The approach to valuation taken by all the investors was generally a mixture of several
different elements. No identical common approach was taken by the investors, but the
elements were reoccurring from interview to interview. As early­stage startup valuation
does not have any measured data or metrics to base arguments on, the valuation should
more be seen as a combination of different elements, whereof one of the elements is the
actual value of the company. As put by one of the investors:
“Valuation is kind of in the cross section of what the company is actually worth, how
much worth they can become, and what is appropriate for the cap table” (Beta, SaaS
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
55
==PAGE:66==
industry, medium experience)
4.5
Interim Conclusion on Findings
Summarizing the findings and analysis section, both valuation methods, valuation drivers,
and the general approach to valuation was researched.
The valuation methods consist of the sub­elements Founder Based Valuation, Investor
Based Valuation, and Industry Based Valuation. All categories were found to be used in
methods applied by the business angels to determine startup valuation.
Founder based valuation was applied through ensuring a non­extensive dilution of founders,
by basing the valuation on the founder ask and their valuation of the company, and by
making an informal scoring of founders, market, and product.
The investor based valuation was applied by trusting gut feel and intuition, by getting in­
puts from network and relying on co­investor valuation, and by actively discussing the
valuation with both investors and founders.
The industry based valuation was applied through comparisons to similar deal valuations
and company transactions, by estimating and calculating valuation based on exit­value,
and by a market tier model where valuations within an industry would be seen as nor­
malised across different startups.
The valuation drivers consists of the sub­elements Internal Company Valuation Drivers,
External Valuation Drivers, and Investor­unique Valuation Drivers.
Influencing valuation from an internal company perspective were the team and the founders,
their overall quality and likeability from the investors, the IP rights and trademarks, the
coachability of the founders and their willingness to act on advice, the unique product,
technology and value proposition offered by the company, and any available data and
information to inform decisions, hereunder especially financial data.
External valuation drivers included the specific market and its size and potential, the
macroeconomic factors, and the exit options and potential exit size.
Investor­unique valuation drivers included the investors personal interest and motivation,
the lemming affect and signaling value of co­investors, and the knowledge base of the
investor related to each unique investment.
The general approach to valuation consists of the elements Attitude Towards Valuation
Precision and Exposure to Valuation Model and Reasoning for Opt­out. These concerned
why business angels to not believe the precision of valuation is important, and why expo­
sure to valuation models have not influenced their preferred valuation approach.
Summarizing the findings and analysis section, a fragmented picture of business angel
valuation is drawn. While the valuation drivers identified in the literature are relevant to
business angels also, they further consider additional drivers that are not typically ac­
counted for by VCs. Moreover, their approaches and methods differ significantly from
56
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:67==
those used by VCs. However, a comprehensive overview of the findings are provided in
the following Dicussion and Conclusion sections.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
57
==PAGE:68==
58
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:69==
5
Conclusion and Discussion
This last chapter contains the discussion and final conclusion on the study. The discussion
is separated into the elements Motivation, Findings, Contributions to Literature, Practical
Implications, Limitations of Study, and Future Research Directions.
The conclusion summarizes all key points from the study, and provides an answer to the
two research questions.
5.1
Discussion
5.1.1
Motivation
As described at the beginning of the study, the motivation of the thesis was to shed light
on how business angels approach valuation. This has shown to be highly relevant as no
previous studies have done so, why any findings from the study provides new information
to the literature.
The study took an empirical approach, and succeeded in collecting data from a variety
of Danish business angels. This data is unique and provides insights into a private and
closed industry. Albeit finding business angels for the interviews showed challenging,
all participating investors expressed a high interest in the topic and highlighted its impor­
tance. 12 (86%) investors independently asked for insights into the study’s findings, which
further underscores the importance and interest of the topic. Findings from the study are
discussed below.
5.1.2
Findings
The following section will discuss the most interesting and relevant findings found in the
study. These are related to the intellectual property, the motivation and interest of the
investor, the founder valuation and ask, the education of business angels, gut feel and
intuition, the precision of the valuation, and the business angel valuation drivers in relation
to those of VC’s.
IP as Positive and Negative Valuation Driver
The study interestingly revealed that intellectual property (IP) can influence valuation both
positively and negatively, depending on the industry. This finding challenges the common
perception that IP is inherently beneficial. Startups in the SaaS industry, in particular,
should carefully consider the signaling value and actual contribution of their IP. To navi­
gate this complexity, founders can seek guidance from experienced investors within their
industry and thoroughly research the potential impacts of patent applications on their val­
uation. This strategic approach can help mitigate potential drawbacks associated with IP.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
59
==PAGE:70==
Investors Personal Motivation and Interest can Influence Valuation
As business angels are individuals investing their own money, it is not significant that they
invest in startups they find interesting and are motivated to work with. However, motiva­
tion and personal interest as a driver for valuation has not been shown before, and the fact
that for some investors, more than 50% of the valuation is driven by their motivation and
personal interest is particularly noteworthy. This is something that should be considered
by startups when raising funding, as both the success rate of the funding and the valua­
tion can be optimized by targeting investors who have a particular interest or motivation
to work with the specific startup.
Valuation Provided by the Founders Facilitates the Valuation Negotiation
All investors used the founder’s initial ask or valuation as a starting point for their own
assessments and subsequent negotiations. However, if the founder’s valuation signifi­
cantly diverges from what the investor deems fair, the investor may choose not to pursue
further discussions. Thus, founders should exercise caution when setting their valuation,
as it sets the tone for discussions with potential investors. Similarly, investors should
be mindful not to be overly influenced by the founder’s valuation. Instead, they should
independently evaluate the startup to arrive at the most objective and precise valuation
possible.
Development in Investor Knowledge has Resulted in Better Understanding of
Valuation
During the interviews, a highly experienced investor highlighted an important aspect not
covered in the analysis and findings section: the recent education of business angels.
The investor noted a significant increase in business angel education facilitated by in­
vestment networks like DanBan and Keystones. This education has equipped investors
with knowledge leading to more informed valuations. The investor expressed that this
trend has influenced the valuations of Danish startups, indicating that investor education
indeed impacts valuation practices, even though investors may claim they do not utilize
the methods they have been previously exposed to.
This study, therefore, contributes to the ongoing education of investors by providing spe­
cific valuation approaches and drivers. It aims to aid investors in reflecting on and improv­
ing their valuation processes.
Gut Feel and Intuition as Primary Valuation Method
As indicated by previous studies (e.g., Paul et al., 2007), gut feel and intuition play a
significant role in the valuation process used by business angels. This study confirmed
the consensus among investors regarding the use of these methods, highlighting that the
network of business angels is less professionalized compared to the VC landscape, where
investors rely more on structured methods and collective data.
While formalizing the information that informs intuition and gut feel may seem challenging,
60
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:71==
it could benefit business angels. By grouping individual knowledge into a common knowl­
edge base, business angels could enhance their valuation processes. This study has
partly achieved this goal by collecting and analyzing data on valuation approaches and
drivers, but further development of this knowledge into more applicable methods would
be advantageous. The business angels expressed interest in utilizing trustworthy and
applicable methods, but such methods were not found in the existing literature.
Precision of Valuation is Unimportant
Intuitively, it makes sense that business angels do not have strong opinions on the pre­
cision of the valuation. Early­stage investments carries risk, and business angels are
looking for high returns on their investments in all of their deals. Thus, being part of the
high­reward deals are more important than the exact valuation.
Providing more caution to the precision of the valuation could however positively affect
the financial return of the investor. As the investors are looking for high­reward cases
with investment returns on a 10X, 50X or even 100X scale, small changes in the equity
ownership significantly affects the output.
Valuation Drivers are Similar to Those of Venture Capitalists
The valuation drivers for business angels are largely the same as they are for VCs. Es­
pecially emphasis on the founders and the team are important drivers, with a tendency to
being most important for the business angels, while market size and potential, and prod­
uct and technology are also important. As mentioned in the analysis and findings section,
the founders need to posses a large array of qualities for investors to find them interesting.
They are required to have a strong educational background, preferably previous experi­
ence from startups, a positive attitude and a good personal connection to the business
angel. This suggests that business angels are demanding and selective in their invest­
ment decision process, with founders carrying a lot of the decision criteria. Consequently,
the product and technology are a second priority, which can lead to promising technolo­
gies not receiving business angel funding in cases where the founder profile does not fit
with any of the investor profiles. Therefore, in the fund­seeking process of startups, it is
worth not only considering the expertise of the investor, but also investigate the personal
profile of the investor to mitigate rejections and mismatches.
5.1.3
Contributions to Literature
As mentioned, no previous studies have exclusively explored the valuation approach of
business angels. The contribution of this study to the literature is therefore relevant, as all
findings are in essence adding new knowledge, and filling a research gap in the current
literature.
Firstly, the study adds to the knowledge of how startups are valuated. Specifically, it
provides insights into how Danish business angels approach the valuation of startups,
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
61
==PAGE:72==
and the core elements that drive the valuation. This has relevance in the literature as it
can facilitate future studies within the topic, and provide information that can be used in
understanding the decision making of business angels, and why funding is a challenging
topic for startups.
Secondly, the study provides empirical evidence to the early stage startup valuation liter­
ature, which is generally an under researched space. This evidence can be used in com­
parison to other studies, and provide foundation of theoretical application to strengthen
the findings.
In essence, the study significantly contributes to the literature by not only reinforcing exist­
ing knowledge but also introducing a previously unexplored aspect. This comprehensive
addition enhances the understanding and broadens the scope of research in the field.
5.1.4
Practical Implications
Elaborating on the implications mentioned in the Motivation part of the Introduction chap­
ter, the findings from this study can be utilized by both startup founders, business angels,
and other early stage investors.
This study provides startup founders with valuable insights into the valuation processes
employed by business angels. By understanding the factors that drive these valuations,
founders can better comprehend the decision­making rationale of investors. This knowl­
edge enables founders to refine their own valuation strategies, thereby enhancing the
likelihood of securing funding. Additionally, by aligning their valuations more closely with
industry standards, founders can mitigate the risk of rejections based on valuation dis­
crepancies.
Early­stage investors can leverage this study to gain insights into industry best practices
for valuation approaches and drivers. The findings can be used to refine their valuation
methods and enhance the general education of business angels. This study is partic­
ularly beneficial for inexperienced business angels, as it provides practical insights into
valuation processes, thereby providing confidence in their approaches and offering an
understanding of the methodologies employed by more experienced investors
Combined, this study offers comprehensive insights into the valuation processes of star­
tups, highlighting the underlying reasons and methods. Such knowledge can bridge the
gaps between founders and investors, fostering improved communication and facilitating
smoother valuation negotiations
5.1.5
Limitations of Study
As the study was conducted in Denmark and based on Danish business angels, the gen­
eralizability of the study is unknown. It is likely that the study replicates the approach
of Nordic (Swedish, Danish, Norwegian) business angels, as cultural differences are not
significant, and as some of the interviewed business angels are active investors in Nor­
way and Sweden. However, future studies in other regions are required to establish if the
62
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:73==
findings are applicable to other countries as well.
A second and major limitation of the study is the sample size of only 14 business angels.
Doing research in the venture investment sector, being VC, business angels, or even pri­
vate equity, is challenging due to the difficulties of getting access to data. The details of
many investments are often kept confidential, and the relatively limited amount of corpora­
tions working in the sector provides a small population to draw data from, meaning a high
success rate on out­reaches is required. The online VC platform Gilion reported 40 Dan­
ish VC firms in 2024, and if accelerator programs, Coorporate Venture Capitals, Business
Angel networks (e.g. Keystones and DanBan) and other investment corporations are in­
cluded, the number constitutes a total of 67 investor platforms (Venture Capital Firms in
Denmark: 30+ VC’s Listed in 2024, n.d.). Under the assumption that one from each plat­
form is targeted, and all investment platforms are relevant, a success rate of around 25%
is required for the study to include 17 stakeholders. Thus, initiating a study in the field is
challenging as only relatively few gatekeepers will control if a sufficient sample size can
be obtained.
In this particular study, business angels were targeted instead of VC’s which opened up
to a broader informant group. However, due to the nature of business angels, it is simi­
lary challenging to convince private and often discrete, wealthy individuals to participate
in an interview. To be able to conclude anything on a more general note, more informants
need to be interviewed. However, conducting interviews is challenging as it requires infor­
mants to allocate time to participate in an interview. Thus, using a quantitative research
approach could prove to be beneficial, as this will further provide statistical evidence for
the findings. The outcome of this study could be used to facilitate such future studies, as
further elaborated in the Future Research Directions section below.
The restricted time period in which the thesis was developed has also caused a limitation
to the study. With 14 interviews and 603 pages of transcriptions, many interesting findings
can be drawn from the data. However, doing so with one author only over a period of five
months restricts this data analysis, as time is not available to do an exhaustive analysis
of all interviews. Having more authors as part of the study could have improved this and
made the contribution to the literature even more significant.
5.1.6
Future Research Directions
As this study is the first of its kind, conducting similar research in other countries could be
highly beneficial. Such studies would extend the knowledge on early­stage valuation and
provide evidence for the approaches taken by business angels from different nationalities.
Further, it could be interesting to study if there are correlations between the preferred
valuation approach and the valuation outcome, i.e., do certain methods or approaches
yield higher valuations in comparison to other methods and approaches?
Moreover, the definition of ”early stage” seems to be only vaguely defined in the liter­
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
63
==PAGE:74==
ature. Many studies apply the term, but there is generally no consensus in what early
stage entitles. The literature could therefore benefit from a formalization and, potentially,
a categorization of early stage, listing what specific stage of the ”early stage” the paper
addresses. This will aid future research, and provide transparency on the applicability of
the literature.
Although this study focused exclusively on business angels, incorporating early­stage VC
investors could provide valuable insights. Specifically, it would be interesting to investi­
gate when frameworks and formalized methods are utilized by these investors and which
factors influence their adoption.
5.2
Final Conclusion
Motivated by the lack of research on how business angels practically determine the val­
uation of the startups they invest in, this study has explored the valuation methods used
by business angels in Denmark and the drivers that affect their valuation. The study used
an inductive and qualitative research approach, interviewing 14 Danish business angels.
In doing so, the study found that the valuation approaches used are highly fragmented,
and that business angels to a large degree do not use any formalised and defined mod­
els. Instead, they rely heavily on intuition and gut feel, use previous deal exposure (i.e.
comparables) to guide their valuation, and take the founders valuation as their starting
point to determine their own valuation. Moreover, the business angels take high caution
in securing non­extensive dilution of the founders, as this prevents future funding rounds
and thereby potential exit routes for the investor, and can cause motivational issues for
the founders. The reasoning for not using any of the existing methods such as the Bill
Payne Scorecard method or the Berkus Method was found in its applicability and unreli­
able output. The business angels did not believe such methods were applicable in various
industries and settings, and did not find the output of the methods reliable. Thus, the valu­
ation approach applied by business angels is opposite to what is applied by venture capital
funds, namely discounted cash flows and multiples, although both type of investors rely
on previous experience.
The primary factors influencing and driving the valuation was found to be similar to those of
venture capital firms, namely the founders and the team, the market size and growth, and
the unique value proposition, with founders and the team being the primary driver. While
venture capitalists heavily rely on historical financial data, business angels would also
utilize such data if it were available. Interestingly, and deviating from previous studies,
intellectual property was found to impact valuation both positively and negatively, depend­
ing on the specific industry. It tends to have a negative effect on valuations in the SaaS
industry, whereas it positively influences valuations in the bio­tech, med­tech, deep­tech,
and green­tech sectors. Furthermore, the personal interest and motivation of the investor
to engage with the investment case positively influenced the valuation. However, there
was disagreements among investors regarding the effect of domain knowledge and net­
64
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:75==
work. Some business angels believed they should receive a discount in the valuation due
to the direct value they add through their knowledge and network. Conversely, others
argued that this added expertise and network increased the likelihood of success and
thereby de­risked the investment, leading to a higher valuation.
The topic of valuation was important to all investors, however, the precision of the valu­
ation was not. Instead, it was important for the investors to be part of deals with large
potentials and that founders perceived the valuation as being fair.
It is recommended that future studies are done on the valuation approach and valuation
drivers of business angels in other regions, to extent the knowledge and research within
the area, and to understand the decision making done by business angels. Business
angels are an important factor in the entrepreneurial economy and play an important role
in the success of startups, which is why more research should take place to fill in gaps in
the under researched area of business angel valuation literature.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
65
==PAGE:76==
66
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:77==
6
Bibliography
50 Journals used in FT Research Rank. (2016, September 12). Financial Times. https:
//www.ft.com/content/3405a512-5cbb-11e1-8f1f-00144feabdc0
About ACA Home | ACA. (n.d.). https://www.angelcapitalassociation.org/about-aca/
Achleitner, A., & Lutz, E. (2008). First Chicago Method: Alternative Approach to Valuing
Innovative Start­Ups in the Context of Venture Capital Financing Rounds (First­Chicago­
Methode ­ Alternativer Ansatz zur Bewertung von innovativen Unternehmensgründungen
bei Venture­Capital­Finanzierungen). Social Science Research Network. https://papers.
ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1133004
Aggarwal, R., Gopal, R., Gupta, A., & Singh, H. (2012). Putting money where the mouths
are: The relation between venture financing and electronic Word­of­Mouth. Information
Systems Research, 23(3­part­2), 976–992. https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1110.0402
Armstrong, C., Davila, A., & Foster, G. (2006). Venture­backed private equity valuation
and financial statement information. Review of Accounting Studies, 11(1), 119–154. https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11142-006-6398-8
Bell, J. R. (2014). Angel Investor sophistication: Increasing application of Pre­Revenue
venture valuation methodologies. The Journal of Private Equity, 17(4), 59–64. https:
//doi.org/10.3905/jpe.2014.17.4.059
Bengtsson, O., & Hsu, D. H. (2015). Ethnic matching in the U.S. venture capital market.
Journal of Business Venturing, 30(2), 338–354. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2014.
09.001
Berkus, D., & Berkus, D. (2016, November 4). After 20 years: Updating the Berkus
Method of valuation | BERKONOMICS. BERKONOMICS | Dave Berkus’s Business In­
sights https://berkonomics.com/?p=2752
Berre, M., & Pendeven, B. L. (2022). What do we know about startup­valuation drivers?
A systematic literature review. Venture Capital, 25(4), 385–429. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13691066.2022.2086502
Birks, M., & Mills, J. (2011). Grounded theory: A Practical Guide. SAGE.
Blank, S., & Dorf, B. (2020). The startup Owner’s manual: The Step­By­Step Guide for
Building a Great Company. John Wiley & Sons.
Block, J. H., De Vries, G., Schumann, J. H., & Sandner, P. (2014). Trademarks and ven­
ture capital valuation. Journal of Business Venturing, 29(4), 525–542. https://doi.org/10.
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
67
==PAGE:78==
1016/j.jbusvent.2013.07.006
Bryan, R. R. (2011). Grounded Theory: a Practical guide. Adapted Physical Activity
Quarterly, 28(3), 277–278. https://doi.org/10.1123/apaq.28.3.277
Collewaert, V., & Manigart, S. (2015). Valuation of Angel­Backed Companies: The role of
Investor Human capital. Journal of Small Business Management, 54(1), 356–372. https:
//doi.org/10.1111/jsbm.12150
Collewaert, V., & Sapienza, H. J. (2016). How does angel Investor–Entrepreneur conflict
affect venture innovation? It depends. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 40(3),
573–597. https://doi.org/10.1111/etap.12131
Constructing Grounded Theory. A practical guide through qualitative analysis. (2006).
QMiP Bulletin, 1(2), 36–38. https://doi.org/10.53841/bpsqmip.2006.1.2.36
Cumming, D., & Dai, N. (2011). Fund size, limited attention and valuation of venture
capital backed firms. Journal of Empirical Finance, 18(1), 2–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jempfin.2010.09.002
Cumming, D. J. (2005). Agency costs, institutions, learning, and taxation in venture capital
contracting. Journal of Business Venturing, 20(5), 573–622. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbusvent.2003.07.001
Damodaran, A. (1999). The Dark Side of Valuation: Firms with no Earnings, no History
and no Comparables. Social Science Research Network. Retrieved from https://archive.
nyu.edu/bitstream/2451/26920/2/wpa99022.pdf
Damodaran, A. (2009). Valuing Young, Start­Up and Growth Companies: Estimation
issues and valuation challenges. Social Science Research Network. https://doi.org/10.
2139/ssrn.1418687
Davila, A., & Foster, G. (2005). Management Accounting Systems Adoption Decisions:
Evidence and Performance Implications from Early­Stage/Startup Companies. The Ac­
counting Review, 80(4), 1039–1068. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr.2005.80.4.1039
Dhochak, M., & Doliya, P. (2019). Valuation of a startup: Moving towards strategic ap­
proaches. Journal of Multi­criteria Decision Analysis, 27(1–2), 39–49. https://doi.org/10.
1002/mcda.1703
Dingkun Ge. (2005). New venture valuation by venture Capitalists: An Integrative ap­
proach.
Dittmann, I., Maug, E., & Kemper, J. (2004). How Fundamental are Fundamental Values?
Valuation Methods and their Impact on the Performance of German Venture Capitalists.
European Financial Management, 10(4), 609–638. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1354-7798.
2004.00268.x
68
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:79==
Epstein, S. (2010). Demystifying intuition: what it is, what it does, and how it does it.
Psychological Inquiry, 21(4), 295–312. https://doi.org/10.1080/1047840x.2010.523875
Feeney, L., Haines, G. H., & Riding, A. L. (1999). Private investors’ investment criteria:
Insights from qualitative data. Venture Capital, 1(2), 121–145. https://doi.org/10.1080/
136910699295938
Festel, G., Wuermseher, M., & Cattaneo, G. (2013). Valuation of Early Stage High­tech
Start­up Companies. International Journal of Business, 18(3), 216–231.
Franke, N., Gruber, M., Harhoff, D., & Henkel, J. (2008). Venture capitalists’ evaluations
of Start–Up teams: Trade–Offs, Knock–Out criteria, and the impact of VC experience.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 32(3), 459–483. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
6520.2008.00236.x
Garkavenko, M., Beliaeva, T., Gaussier, E., Mirisaee, H., Lagnier, C., & Guerraz, A.
(2022). Assessing the factors related to a Start­Up’s valuation using prediction and causal
discovery. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 47(5), 2017–2044. https://doi.org/10.
1177/10422587221121291
Gompers, P., Kovner, A., Lerner, J., & Scharfstein, D. (2008). Venture capital investment
cycles: The impact of public markets. Journal of Financial Economics, 87(1), 1–23. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2006.12.002
Gompers, P., Kovner, A., Lerner, J., & Scharfstein, D. (2010). Performance persistence
in entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics, 96(1), 18–32. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jfineco.2009.11.001
Gompers, P., & Lerner, J. (2000). Money chasing deals? The impact of fund inflows
on private equity valuations. Journal of Financial Economics, 55(2), 281–325. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/s0304-405x(99)00052-5
Gornall, W., & Strebulaev, I. A. (2020). Squaring venture capital valuations with reality.
Journal of Financial Economics, 135(1), 120–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2018.
04.015
Grant, M. J., & Booth, A. (2009). A typology of reviews: an analysis of 14 review types
and associated methodologies. Health Information and Libraries Journal, 26(2), 91–108.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1471-1842.2009.00848.x
Greenberg, G. (2013). Small firms, big patents? Estimating patent value using data
on Israeli start­ups’ financing rounds. European Management Review, 10(4), 183–196.
https://doi.org/10.1111/emre.12015
Hellmann, T., & Thiele, V. (2015). Friends or foes? The interrelationship between angel
and venture capital markets. Journal of Financial Economics, 115(3), 639–653. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2014.10.009
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
69
==PAGE:80==
Heughebaert, A., & Manigart, S. (2012). Firm valuation in venture capital financing rounds:
The role of investor bargaining power. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting, 39(3–
4), 500–530. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5957.2012.02284.x
Hsu, D. H. (2004). What do entrepreneurs pay for venture capital affiliation? The Journal
of Finance, 59(4), 1805–1844. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-6261.2004.00680.x
Hsu, D. H. (2007). Experienced entrepreneurial founders, organizational capital, and ven­
ture capital funding. Research Policy, 36(5), 722–741. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.
2007.02.022
Hsu, D. H., & Ziedonis, R. H. (2013). Resources as dual sources of advantage: Impli­
cations for valuing entrepreneurial­firm patents. Strategic Management Journal, 34(7),
761–781. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2037
Johnson, W. C., & Sohl, J. (2012). Angels and venture capitalists in the initial public
offering market. Venture Capital, 14(1), 27–42. https://doi.org/10.1080/13691066.2012.
660743
Kam, S., & Witherow, D. (1999). The pricing of successful venture capital­backed high
technology and life sciences companies. The Journal of Private Equity, 2(3), 15–28. https:
//doi.org/10.3905/jpe.1999.319950
Keeley, R. H., Punjabi, S., & Turki, L. (1996). Valuation of Early­Stage Ventures: Option
Valuation Models vs. Traditional Approaches. Deleted Journal, 5(2), 115–138. https:
//doi.org/10.57229/2373-1761.1186
Keuschnigg, C., & Nielsen, S. B. (2004). Taxation and venture capital backed entrepreneur­
ship. International Tax and Public Finance, 11(4), 369–390. https://doi.org/10.1023/b:
itax.0000033984.29301.9e
Köhn, A. (2017). The determinants of startup valuation in the venture capital context:
a systematic review and avenues for future research. Management Review Quarterly,
68(1), 3–36. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11301-017-0131-5
Kolvereid, L., & Isaksen, E. (2006). New business start­up and subsequent entry into self­
employment. Journal of Business Venturing, 21(6), 866–885. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbusvent.2005.06.008
Köseoğlu, S. D. (2023). A practical guide for startup valuation: An Analytic Approach.
Springer Nature.
Lockett, A., Wright, M., Sapienza, H., & Pruthi, S. (2002). Venture capital investors, valu­
ation and information: A comparative study of the US, Hong Kong, India and Singapore.
Venture Capital, 4(3), 237–252. https://doi.org/10.1080/13691060213715
Louring. (2018, January 26). Business angels finansierer 100.000 danske arbejdspladser
­ DanBAN. DanBAN. https://danban.org/en/business-angels-finansierer-100-000-danske-arbejdspladser/
70
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:81==
Macmillan, I. C., Siegel, R., & Narasimha, P. (1985). Criteria used by venture capitalists
to evaluate new venture proposals. Journal of Business Venturing, 1(1), 119–128. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/0883-9026(85)90011-4
Majercakova, D., & Mittelman, A. (2018). The analysis of the chosen methods of the
evaluation of start­ups on the specific case. Economic and Social Development: Book of
Proceeding.
Manigart, S., De Waele, K., Wright, M., Robbie, K., Desbrières, P., Sapienza, H., & Beek­
man, A. (2000). Venture capitalists, investment appraisal and accounting information: a
comparative study of the USA, UK, France, Belgium and Holland. European Financial
Management, 6(3), 389–403. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-036x.00130
Maxwell, A. L., Jeffrey, S. A., & Lévesque, M. (2011). Business angel early stage deci­
sion making. Journal of Business Venturing, 26(2), 212–225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbusvent.2009.09.002
Miloud, T., Aspelund, A., & Cabrol, M. (2012). Startup valuation by venture capitalists: an
empirical study. Venture Capital, 14(2–3), 151–174. https://doi.org/10.1080/13691066.
2012.667907
Montani, D., Gervasio, D., & Pulcini, A. (2020). Startup company valuation: The state
of art and future trends. International Business Research, 13(9), 31. https://doi.org/10.
5539/ibr.v13n9p31
Park, H. D., & Steensma, H. K. (2011). When does corporate venture capital add value
for new ventures? Strategic Management Journal, 33(1), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1002/
smj.937
Paul, S., Whittam, G., & Wyper, J. (2007). Towards a model of the business angel invest­
ment process. Venture Capital, 9(2), 107–125. https://doi.org/10.1080/13691060601185425
Payne, B. (2006). Definitive guide to raising money from Angels.
Piva, E., & Rossi­Lamastra, C. (2017). Human capital signals and entrepreneurs’ success
in equity crowdfunding. Small Business Economics, 51(3), 667–686. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s11187-017-9950-y
Poczter, S., & Shapsis, M. (2017). Gender disparity in angel financing. Small Business
Economics, 51(1), 31–55. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-017-9922-2
Politis, D. (2008). Business angels and value added: what do we know and where do we
go? Venture Capital, 10(2), 127–147. https://doi.org/10.1080/13691060801946147
Pollock, T. G., Chen, G., Jackson, E. M., & Hambrick, D. C. (2010). How much prestige
is enough? Assessing the value of multiple types of high­status affiliates for young firms.
Journal of Business Venturing, 25(1), 6–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009.01.
003
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
71
==PAGE:82==
Portigal, S. (2013). Interviewing users: How to Uncover Compelling Insights. Rosenfeld
Media.
Randolph, J. J. (2009). A guide to writing the dissertation Literature Review. Practical
Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 14(13), 13. https://doi.org/10.7275/b0az-8t74
Reverte, C., Del Mar Sánchez Hernández, M., & Ramírez, A. R. (2016). The profile of
venture capital investments: the European context. International Journal of Business and
Globalisation, 17(1), 83. https://doi.org/10.1504/ijbg.2016.077568
Ries, E. (2011). The lean startup: The Million Copy Bestseller Driving Entrepreneurs to
Success. Penguin UK.
Rosenbom, J. (2024, March 25). Værdiansættelse af virksomhed » Beregn din værdian­
sættelse. Keystones. https://keystones.dk/valuation/
Schreiner, A. (2009). Equity valuation using multiples: An Empirical Investigation. Springer
Science & Business Media.
Sievers, S., Mokwa, C. F., & Keienburg, G. (2011). The Relevance of Financial versus
Non­Financial Information for the Valuation of Venture Capital­Backed Firms. Social Sci­
ence Research Network. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1449740
Sivicka, J. O. (2018). Features of valuation of startup companies. Ekonomìčnij Prostìr,
0(132), 163–174. https://doi.org/10.30838/p.es.2224.240418.163.60
Skalicka, M., Zinecker, M., Balcerzak, A. P., & Pietrzak, M. B. (2022). Business angels
and early stage decision making criteria: empirical evidence from an emerging market.
Ekonomska Istraživanja/Ekonomska IstražIvanja, 36(1), 25–50. https://doi.org/10.1080/
1331677x.2022.2063920
Snyder, H. (2019). Literature review as a research methodology: An overview and guide­
lines. Journal of Business Research, 104, 333–339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.
2019.07.039
Sofaer, S. (1999). Qualitative methods: what are they and why use them? PubMed, 34(5
Pt 2), 1101–1118. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10591275
Sohl, J. (2009). The Angel Investor Market In Q1Q2 2008: A Down Year In Investment
Dollars But Not In Deals. Center for Venture Research. https://scholars.unh.edu/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=1006&context=cvr
Sørheim, R. (2005). Business angels as facilitators for further finance: an exploratory
study. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development, 12(2), 178–191. https:
//doi.org/10.1108/14626000510594593
Steffens, P. R., & Douglas, E. J. (2007). Valuing technology investments: use real options
thinking but forget real options valuation. International Journal of Technoentrepreneur­
ship, 1(1), 58. https://doi.org/10.1504/ijte.2007.013270
72
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:83==
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. M. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and
procedures for developing grounded theory (Issue 1). http://lib.tums.ac.ir/site/catalogue/
61151
Sudek, R. (2006). Angel Investment Criteria. Journal of Small Business Strategy, 17(2),
89–104. https://libjournals.mtsu.edu/index.php/jsbs/article/download/68/60
Van Osnabrugge, M. (2000). A comparison of business angel and venture capitalist in­
vestment procedures: An agency theory­based analysis. Venture Capital, 2(2), 91–109.
https://doi.org/10.1080/136910600295729
Van Osnabrugge, M., & Robinson, R. J. (2000). Angel Investing: Matching Startup Funds
with Startup Companies–The Guide for Entrepreneurs and Individual Investors. John
Wiley & Sons.
Venture Capital Firms in Denmark: 30+ VC’s listed in 2024. (n.d.). Retrieved from https:
//vc-mapping.gilion.com/venture-capital-firms/denmark?d24eb5bd_page=1
Waldron, D., & Hubbard, C. M. (1991). Valuation Methods and Estimates in Relationship
to Investing versus Consulting. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 16(1), 43–52.
https://doi.org/10.1177/104225879101600104
Warnick, B. J., Murnieks, C. Y., McMullen, J. S., & Brooks, W. T. (2018). Passion for en­
trepreneurship or passion for the product? A conjoint analysis of angel and VC decision­
making. Journal of Business Venturing, 33(3), 315–332. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.
2018.01.002
Wessendorf, C. P., & Hammes, C. (2018). Methods and Criteria affecting Early­Stage
Venture Valuation. EnTechnon, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT). https://doi.org/
10.5445/ir/1000079690
White, B. A., & Dumay, J. (2017). Business angels: a research review and new agenda.
Venture Capital, 19(3), 183–216. https://doi.org/10.1080/13691066.2017.1290889
Wohlin, C. (2014a). Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a repli­
cation in software engineering. Blekinge Institute of Technology. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2601248.2601268
Wohlin, C. (2014b). Guidelines for snowballing in systematic literature studies and a repli­
cation in software engineering. Blekinge Institute of Technology. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2601248.2601268
Wong, A., Bhatia, M., & Freeman, Z. (2009). Angel finance: the other venture capital.
Strategic Change, 18(7–8), 221–230. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsc.849
Zachary, R., & Mishra, C. S. (2013). Research on Angel Investments: The intersection
of equity investments and entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Research Journal, 3(2).
https://doi.org/10.1515/erj-2013-0044
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
73
==PAGE:84==
Zahra, S. A., Neubaum, D. O., & Huse, M. (2000). Entrepreneurship in Medium­Size
Companies: Exploring the effects of ownership and governance systems. Journal of Man­
agement, 26(5), 947–976. https://doi.org/10.1177/014920630002600509
Zheng, Y., Liu, J., & George, G. (2010). The dynamic impact of innovative capability
and inter­firm network on firm valuation: A longitudinal study of biotechnology start­ups.
Journal of Business Venturing, 25(6), 593–609. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusvent.2009.
02.001
74
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:85==
A
Appendix ­ Interview Guide
Først og fremmest, er det OK jeg optager interviewet?
A.0.1
Introduktion
­ Hurtig intro af mig selv
­ Generel intro til projekt
A.0.2
Basis Data
­ Investeringsfilosofi – hvad investerer du i? Hvad er din motivation?
­ Hvis penge investerer du? Og hvordan investerer du (alene, syndikater?)
­ Hvad er din typiske ticket size?
­ Hvor mange virksomheder har du til dags dato investeret i?
­ Forhenværende professionelle karriere – hvad lavede du før du blev business angel?
A.0.3
Værdiansættelse
­ Kan du ikke tage mig igennem en vanlig proces for hvordan du når frem til en værdian­
sættelse af en virksomhed?
­ Benytter du nogle specifikke metoder til værdiansættelse?
­ Hvad baserer du værdiansættelsen på?
­ Hvor vigtig er præcisionen af værdiansættelsen for dig?
­ Hvornår starter processen med værdiansættelse?
­ Oplever du der er et tillæg til værdiansættelsen, så der er plads til lidt forhandling?
­ Benytter du nogle specifikke metoder til værdiansættelsen?
o Scorecard Method
o Multiples/Comparable Transactions method
o Discounted Cashflow Method (modified)
o Berkus Method
o Risk Factor Summation Method
o First Chicago Method
o Venture Capital Method
o Kombination
­ Hvad er rationalet bag de valgte metoder? Hvorfor gør du det på den måde du gør det?
­ Hvad er vigtigt for dig i metoden du benytter til værdiansættelse?
­ Tror du virksomhederne er deres værdiansættelse værd? Tror du de kunne sælges til
de beløb de værdiansættet til, eller er beløbet udelukkende styrende for at de skal have
nogle penge ind, uden at give for mange procenter væk?
­ Varierer du metoden på tværs af dine investeringer?
­ Hvordan fastlægger du hvilken metode du vil benytte?
­ Er værdiansættelsen noget du gør selvstændigt, eller får du assistance fra andre?
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
75
==PAGE:86==
­ Er metoden branchespecifik, eller bruger du ens metoder uanset branche (og modenhed
af virksomheden)?
­ Hvordan har din metode til værdiansættelse ændret sig over tid? Bruger du eksempelvis
mere teknologi end førhen (AI)?
­ Hvor vigtig er værdiansættelsen for dig?
­ Hvordan håndterer du usikkerhed og risici, når du fastlægger værdien af early stage
startup?
­ Bruger du network?
A.0.4
Drivers for Værdiansættelse
­ Hvilke elementer påvirker din værdiansættelse af virksomheden?
­ Hvordan vil du rangere de forskellige elementer i forhold til hinanden?
­ Hvad er den vigtigste faktor?
­ Kan din motivation for at arbejde med casen, drive værdiansættelsen?
­ Hvad er rationalet bag de valgte drivers?
­ Hvorfor er hver af de her drivers vigtige at have til stede?
­ Skifter drivers fra case til case, eller er de fundamentale?
­ Potentielle drivers:
o Founders (human capital, social capital, gender, affective characteristics)
o IP
o Finansiel information
o Vækst muligheder
o Market conditions
o Financing round
o Tidligere erfaring
o Interesserede investorer
A.0.5
Afsluttende
­ Vil du have indsigt i resultaterne?
­ Kender du evt nogle andre der ville være gode at inkludere i min research?
76
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
==PAGE:87==
Exploring Valuation in Early Stage Startups
77
==PAGE:88==
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will look like
at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there no information? Is
there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest gefburn”? Kjift – not at all!
A blind text like this gives you information about the selected font, how the letters are written and an
impression of the look. This text should contain all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in
of the original language. There is no need for special content, but the length of words should match
the language.
Technical
University of
Denmark
Diplomvej, Building 371 & 372, 2nd floor
DK 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.entrepreneurship.dtu.dk
