==PAGE:1==
Optimized single axis solar tracking algo-
rithms for diffuse light conditions
Master Thesis
DTU Electro
Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
Master Thesis
June 8th, 2024
By
Mathis Pasquier
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Solar Park Harre, European Energy A/S, 2021
Published by:
DTU, Department of Electrical and Photonics Engineering, Ørsteds
Plads, Building 343, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.electro.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Electrical and Pho-
tonics Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for
the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Mathis Pasquier - s222857
Signature
Date
ii
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:5==
Preface
As I conclude my Master of Science in Sustainable Energy at the Technical University of
Denmark (DTU), with a focus on the study line ”Solar Energy” I reflect on the extensive
learning journey I have undertaken. This program has significantly expanded my under-
standing of renewable energies, encompassing both technical aspects and the broader
context in which they evolve. I have gained a comprehensive understanding of solar en-
ergy technologies and explored diverse subjects such as the theory behind energy mar-
kets and the economics of energy. This multifaceted learning experience has enriched my
academic and professional perspective on sustainable energy solutions. Looking back, I
have no regrets about choosing this field of study and work, an interest I first discovered
in the option ”Production and Management of Energy” at Centrale Nantes. I am more
convinced than ever that renewable energy technologies are essential and will play a key
role in the energy transition.
This thesis has been conducted in collaboration with European Energy A/S, where I have
worked as a student assistant for the past year and a half. The report is intended for
individuals interested in utility-scale PV tracker parks, offering an in-depth exploration of
solar tracking technology and the possible improvements within this field.
I am deeply grateful to my supervisors, Sergiu Viorel Spataru from DTU and Nicholas
Riedel-Lyngskær from European Energy, for their invaluable support and guidance through-
out the five months of this project. Their strong interest in the thesis topic was evident,
and our regular meetings were consistently insightful and productive. I appreciate the time
they dedicated to reviewing this report and providing constructive feedback. Additionally,
I would like to extend my gratitude to European Energy for facilitating this collaboration,
allowing me to integrate practical industry insights into my academic work.
Finally, I would like to thank my friends who have been a source of motivation and cama-
raderie during the Master Thesis period. Collaborating in the library, sharing lunches and
taking breaks together made the process more manageable and enjoyable. I am also
deeply grateful to my family for their unwavering support throughout my studies. Their
help, care, and encouragement over the years have been essential in helping me reach
this milestone.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
This thesis investigates the development and optimization of single-axis solar tracking
algorithms that consider diffuse light, addressing the limitations of conventional astro-
nomical tracking which primarily targets the beam component of irradiance. The primary
objective is to enhance the efficiency of photovoltaic systems by optimizing the rotation
angles of solar trackers to maximize plane-of-array irradiance. This study employs vari-
ous modeling techniques to determine the optimal rotation angles, accounting for practical
constraints such as tracker rotation speed and mechanical limitations.
In addition, the research involves the implementation of real-time and forecast algorithms.
The study examines the variability of irradiance to assess the reliability of moving the
tracker to the calculated optimal position. The findings indicate improvements in energy
capture and efficiency. The ideal model, termed the brute force search model, achieved a
gain of 0.96% compared to conventional sun tracking. Furthermore, a real-time algorithm
that integrates tracker mechanical limitations and irradiance variability demonstrated an
annual energy yield increase of 0.60% over astronomical tracking.
iv
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:7==
Nomenclature
Acronyms
DC
Direct current
DHI
Diffuse horizontal irradiance
DNI
Direct normal irradiance
GCR
Ground coverage ratio
GHI
Global horizontal irradiance
HSAT
Horizontal single-axis tracker
IEA
International energy agency
KPI
Key performance index
POA
Plane-of-array
PV
Photovoltaic
SAT
Single-axis tracker
Geometric notations
β
Array tilt angle from horizontal
βa
Axis tilt
βd
Astronomical tracker rotation angle
βs
Solar elevation
βmax
Maximum rotation angle
βopt
Optimal tracker rotation angle
γa
Axis azimuth
γs
Solar azimuth
λ
Longitude
ϕ
Latitude
θs
Solar zenith
AOI
Angle of incidence
R
Row pitch
W
Array width
Model notations
∆
Sky brightness
ϵ
Sky clearness
ρ
Ground albedo
AMa
Absolute air mass
DNIextraterrestrial
Extraterrestrial irradiance
Ed
Sky diffuse component of the solar radiation on a tilted surface
GTI, GPOA
Global tilted irradiance, Global plane-of-array irradiance
Idif(β)
Diffuse component of irradiance reaching the tilted module
Idir(β)
Direct component of irradiance reaching the tilted module
Ignd(β)
Ground reflected component of irradiance reaching the tilted module
kd
Diffuse fraction
kt
Clearness index
T
Optimization resolution
V I
Irradiance variability index
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
v
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Approval
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Nomenclature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Optimizing the tracker rotation angle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Problem analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.4
Thesis outline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2
Theory
9
2.1
Irradiance from the sun
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Tracking algorithms
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3
Methodology
19
3.1
Simulation parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Irradiance data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.3
Implementation of astronomical tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.4
Optimal angle models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.5
Model implementation algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.6
Key performance indexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4
Results
35
4.1
Benchmarking of algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2
Annual simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.3
Implementation in a real tracker system at DTU Risø . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5
Conclusion
67
5.1
Project limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
List of Figures
69
List of Tables
72
Bibliography
73
A Flow diagram of the brute force search model with a decomposition model
77
B Tracking curves for the real-time algorithm with a 5-minute resolution
78
C Tracking curves for the forecast algorithm with 5-minute and 15-minute res-
olutions
80
C.1 5-minute resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
C.2 15-minute resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
vi
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
The European Union (EU) is striving to become the first climate neutral continent by 2050
by reducing greenhouse gas emissions by at least 55% by 2030 and 90% by 2040, com-
pared to 1990 levels [1]. This ambition is translated in the European Green Deal, that was
first outlined in 2019. It consists of a package of incentives and laws to ensure a clear
path towards the green energy transition, including the Fit for 55 package, the European
climate law, and measures for clean, affordable and secure energy [2]. The aim is to
reach at least 40% of renewable energies in the EU’s energy market by 2030.
Solar energy will play a key role in reaching those targets. The installed solar capacity
increased from 164 GW in 2021 to 207 GW in 2022, before reaching 263 GW in 2023 ac-
cording to SolarPower Europe [3]. Worldwide, the International Energy Agency estimated
that solar PV accounted for three quarters of renewable capacity in 2023. Although crys-
talline silicon remains the dominant PV technology with 97% of the market shares, new
designs are expanding [4]. Other technologies contribute to the increase in the efficiency
and profitability of solar PV, such as bi-facial modules that can typically supply between
5% and 10% more energy compared with standard modules [5].
1.1
Background
The technological development that has been implemented in a growing proportion of
utility scale plants is solar tracking, and in particular one-axis trackers [6]. In 2022, track-
ing systemS represented 93.5% of the new installed capacity in the United States, the
remaining 6.5% being fixed-tilt systems [7]. Trackers are devices that can orient the solar
panels to point towards the optimal position of the sun in order to maximize the energy
production. There are two main types of solar trackerS in the PV market. Single-axis solar
trackers (SAT) have one degree of freedom and are generally aligned on a North-South
axis, enabling a rotation of the modules from east to west, following the sun from sunrise
to sunset. Figure 1.1 illustrates a Horizontal Single-Axis Solar Tracker (HSAT).
Figure 1.1: Horizontal Single-Axis Solar Tracker (HSAT) [8] [9]
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
1
==PAGE:10==
Dual-axis solar trackers have two degrees of freedom, which allows them to track the sun
more precisely: they can adjust their position according to the sun’s azimuth and eleva-
tion. In spite of the estimated 31% yield increase in comparison with SAT, dual-axis solar
trackers do not represent a significant share of the installed tracking capacity in the world,
as they are still expensive and more difficult to operate than SAT [10]. The same study
showed that SAT would produce a global average extra energy of 26% in comparison
to fixed-tilt systems. Rosma et al. assessed the increase to be around 22% for tropical
climates [11] while Huld et al. estimate that a north/south-oriented horizontal tracking sys-
tem performs better everywhere in Europe, normally giving 10%-20% more energy than a
fixed system [12]. Figure 1.2 compares the energy output from different system mountings
for five locations in Europe. The comparison is made for a fixed system at optimum angle,
for horizontal single-axis systems with axis pointing east/west or north/south, for vertical
and inclined axis systems with optimum angle and for a two-axis tracking system [12].
Figure 1.2: Comparison of the energy output from different system mountings for five
locations in Europe [12]
The current algorithm implemented, called astronomical tracking, sun tracking or true
tracking, calculates the angle of rotation of the tracker by minimizing the angle of incidence
between the PV modules and the Sun’s direct beam component, and therefore maximizing
this component of irradiance [13]. Figure 1.3 illustrates a tracker in astronomical tracking
mode.
2
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.3: Astronomical tracking: the modules are oriented towards the sun to maximize
the beam component of irradiance (adapted from TrinaTracker [14])
However, even though tracker algorithms already consider many variables and compo-
nents, such as the tracker axis slope, the conventional algorithms presently used do not
take into account irradiance measurements. As seen in Figure 1.3, the modules are ori-
ented towards the sun with no consideration for diffuse irradiance.
1.2
Optimizing the tracker rotation angle
Many studies have investigated an optimal tilt for SAT, i.e. the tracker angle that max-
imizes the Plane-Of-Array (POA) irradiance. McIntosh et al. described how the opti-
mal angle decreases as the conditions change from clear sky to overcast, accounting for
many complicated effects like row-to-row shading, diffuse light, ground reflection, struc-
tural shading, cell-to-cell mismatch and angular and spectral dependencies [15]. When
diffuse irradiance is significant, βopt is necessarily different from βd because indirect light
originates from different angles than direct light. They compare two different ways of
calculating βopt:
• The first one is analytical equations obtained from the derivation of the isotropic
model, with negligible ground reflection and monofacial modules. Although it is a
fairly simple model, it has the advantage to account for diffuse light and row-to-row
shading of that diffuse light.
• The other one is performed with SunSolve, a software which uses ray tracing simu-
lations to solve the optics of the modules and system. These simulations include the
effects of wavelength dependencies, thin-film optics, textured surfaces, polarization
and scattering, thereby avoiding many assumptions required by view-factor or math-
ematical models [15]. βopt is calculated via brute force search, with a resolution of
10° from -60° to 60°.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.4: Average irradiance at the front plane of the module relative to a horizontal
module. In this example the isotropic diffuse light constitutes half the GHI, the inputs are
θs = 45°, γs = 119°, R = 5.5 m and L = 2.064 m [15]
Their results for one specific condition are presented in Figure 1.4. The lines show solu-
tions to the idealised equations (Eq 6 and Eq 9), solid dots show ray-tracing (RT) results
for the same idealised case, and large unfilled circles show the optimal tilt for direct light
βd and for direct plus diffuse light βopt. It appears that when accounting for diffuse light,
which represents a significant share of GHI in this example, the optimal angle tends to
be closer to horizontal compared to the astronomical angle that only optimizes the direct
irradiance.
From these two models (analytical equations and ray tracing simulations), McIntosh et al.
investigated two different control strategies:
• Strategy 1: tilting at 0 or βd, whatever yield the most.
• Strategy 2: tilting at βopt instead of βd.
The increase in annual yield when accounting for indirect light at three example sites with
different climates was estimated in the range of 0.71% to 1.56% by using ray-tracing sim-
ulations with Strategy 1 and in the range of 1.11%-2.10% with Strategy 2. With analytical
equations, the yield increase is estimated to be between 1.12% and 2.34% for Strategy 1
and between 1.71% and 3.11% for Strategy 2.
The results show that the analytical equations provide higher results for the same strategy
than ray-tracing simulations. Since the latter is assumed to provide more accurate results
as it accounts for secondary effects, the results suggest that the analytical equations—
based on the isotropic model of irradiance—overestimate the possible energy gain that
can be achieved from diffuse tracking. Strategy 2 reaches higher yield values as it always
rotates the tracker to the optimal position, while Strategy 1 is limited to the horizontal
position or the astronomical position.
4
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:13==
Maximizing total in-plane irradiance, and not only direct irradiance, was investigated in a
paper from Anderson and Aneja [16]. They implementeded and assess two alternative
control algorithms optimized for improved total irradiance collection:
• In the ”all times” strategy, the rotation that maximizes incident irradiance (including
all DNI, DHI and ground reflection components) is identified via brute force search,
considering all times of day.
• The ”between-backtracking strategy” is similar to the ”all times” strategy except that
only non-backtracking times are investigated (i.e. the portion of the day between the
morning and the evening periods) are considered.
• Both strategies are compared against an astronomical tracking strategy
The calculations use pvfactors, a transposition and view factor model. It takes into account
row-to-row sky diffuse shading, ground shadows and module-module reflections. The
simulations were conducted at the center row of a PV array. The analysis was performed
in the U.S. and includes 660 utility-scale SAT systems. The ground albedo was set to 0.2
and the GCR to 0.3.
Their results show that the insolation gains of an optimization strategy, in comparison to
the standard astronomical strategy, highly depend on the diffuse fraction at the location of
the SAT. They assess that typical annual gains for locations with recently installed tracking
systems range from 0.2%–0.4%. For specific locations, the gains could reach 2.4% for
winter months.
Rodríguez-Gallegos et al. also compare a so-called Tracking the Best Orientation strat-
egy (TBO) to a sun tracking strategy (TS) [17]. The TBO strategy is based on a brute
force search to find what rotation angle (with a 1° resolution) maximizes the total in-plane
irradiance. In their paper, they provide analytical equations to calculate the GTI. It is com-
posed of a front and a back irradiance, each of them being sub-decomposed between the
direct, the diffuse and the ground irradiance components. The calculations of the diffuse
and ground reflected components use the Perez diffuse [18] and ground reflected [19]
models respectively.
Their results show that that for locations with latitudes above 60°, TBO can reach a 3.3%
higher insolation in comparison to sun tracking for HSAT. For locations with latitudes below
60°, the improvement is less than 1.8% for all 61 ground weather stations investigated.
Antonanzas et al. investigated a corrected diffuse irradiance algorithm for different weather
stations in Europe [20]. They found out that there is a correlation between the yield in-
crease resulting from this diffuse algorithm with the climate at the weather station. The
principle of the algorithm is to move the tracker to the horizontal position (0°) when it
enables a higher POA irradiance in comparison to astronomical tracking (with a back-
tracking strategy). This model does not consider limitations in the tracker rotation (that is
18.3°/minute), therefore the study also investigated a real-time algorithm, based on the
persistance of irradiance, and another algorithm using forecast data. In all cases, a diffuse
anisotropic transposition model (the Muneer moel [21]) is used to calculate GTI(βd).
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
5
==PAGE:14==
• The real-time algorithm (reactionary) sets a condition for moving the tracker to the
horizontal position wherein GHI > GTI(βd) must be fulfilled for 5 minutes before
rotating the tracker. Real time GHI and DHI measurements are used for this algo-
rithm.
• The other algorithm uses hourly predictions for the GHI and sets the requirement of
GHI > GTI(βd) for 1 hour in order to move the tracker. DHI was estimated using
a decomposition model.
They estimated that the ideal algorithm could reach a yield increase between 0.16% for
Izaña (Spain, Tenerife) and 3.01% for the northern-most location, Lerwick (United King-
dom, Shetland Island). The latter could achieve a 2.51% yield increase when the reac-
tionary algorithm is implemented, while the 5 other sites investigated could only reach
around 1.1%. Finally, their results showed that the forecast algorithm was underperform-
ing and was providing a yield increase even lower (-1.25%) in comparison to astronomical
tracking. This is mostly due to the high number of false positives.
Table 1.1 presents an overview from the results of the different studies.
Study
Methodology to calculate βopt
Strategy/algorithm
Gain
McIntosh et al. [15]
Analytical equations
from the isotropic model
0 or βd
1.12%-2.34%
McIntosh et al. [15]
Analytical equations
from the isotropic model
Always βopt
1.71%-3.11%
McIntosh et al. [15]
Brute force search using
ray-tracing simulations
0 or βd
0.71%-1.56%
McIntosh et al. [15]
Brute force search using
ray-tracing simulations
Always βopt
1.11%-2.10%
Anderson et al. [16]
Brute force search using
pvfactors
Always βopt
0.2%-0.8%
Rodríguez-Gallegos
et al. [17]
Brute force search using the
Perez transposition model
Always βopt
<1.8%-3.3%
Antonanzas et al. [20]
Muneer diffuse model
0 or βd, no condition
0.16%-3.01%
Antonanzas et al. [20]
Muneer diffuse model
0 or βd, real-time
1.1%-2.51%
Antonanzas et al. [20]
Muneer diffuse model
0 or βd, forecast
-1.25%
Table 1.1: Overview of the gains from different studies for several models and algorithms,
in comparison to astronomical tracking
1.3
Problem analysis
Current Single-Axis Trackers (SATs) predominantly follow an astronomical tracking strat-
egy. This method calculates the optimal tilt angle by using the site’s geographical coordi-
nates (latitude, longitude) and altitude to determine the solar zenith angle (θs) at any given
time of the day [22]. The trackers are then adjusted to minimize the Angle Of Incidence
(AOI) between the solar panels and the Sun’s direct beam, thereby maximizing the direct
component of irradiance. When implementing a backtracking strategy, a correction angle
is applied to account for shading effects [13] [23].
While this approach is effective in clear sky conditions, it does not fully account for sce-
narios where the diffuse component of irradiance is significant, such as under overcast
skies. In such conditions, maximizing direct irradiance is not sufficient, and an optimal tilt
angle closer to horizontal might be more advantageous. Studies indicate that under high
diffuse fraction conditions, the ideal tracker orientation may differ substantially from the
astronomical position.
6
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:15==
The literature suggests potential insolation gains ranging from 0.2% to 3.3% by optimizing
for total in-plane irradiance, with typical gains in the vicinity of 1% depending on location
and climate [15] [16] [20]. However, these studies often focus on ideal conditions with-
out considering practical limitations such as tracker rotation speed and mechanical con-
straints. This gap highlights the need for a more comprehensive analysis that incorporates
real-world operational constraints.
To address this, an investigation into a model that involves real-time irradiance measure-
ments as data inputs is required. Such a model should be designed to meet the technical
specifications of utility-scale PV trackers, ensuring feasibility and practical implementa-
tion. This includes considering the energy consumption of moving the tracker, as well as
the mechanical limitations on rotation speed and angle.
Furthermore, a more precise evaluation method is needed, converting plane-of-array
(POA) irradiance into actual energy production while accounting for the energy cost of
tracker movements. The following sections will delve into the components of irradiance,
measurement techniques, transposition models, and the geometry behind astronomical
tracking.
By developing and validating an improved tracking algorithm, this study aims to provide a
more accurate and efficient method for maximizing energy yield in diverse weather con-
ditions, potentially leading to significant improvements in the performance of solar PV
systems.
The objectives of this project include:
• Benchmarking different methods to measure and calculate irradiance (both horizon-
tal and in the plane-of-array)
• Identifying and evaluating various diffuse tracking methods for HSAT
• Determining key performance indicators (KPIs) for solar trackers
• Comparing performance against baseline and ideal tracking scenarios
• Implementing and validating the most promising method on the Risø SAT with a
European Energy controller
The research questions guiding this investigation are:
• What is the potential energy gain from utilizing diffuse tracking?
• What are the monthly and annual gains or losses associated with this approach?
• How does the risk of energy loss compare when using a simple ”horizontal position”
operation?
• How can real-time irradiance measurements be integrated into a diffuse tracking
algorithm?
• What is the impact of solar condition variability on tracking performance?
• How does the performance of real-time operation compare with forecast-based al-
gorithms?
• How can tracker technical specifications (e.g., maximum angle, rotation speed) be
factored into the algorithm?
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
7
==PAGE:16==
1.4
Thesis outline
Having defined the background in which this thesis takes place, the following chapter will
describe the theory needed to measure and calculate irradiance and to understand how
the current trackers operate.
The methodology section will present the different optimal angle models and model im-
plementation algorithms developed to address the problem.
In the results chapter, the tracking curves corresponding to the different models and al-
gorithms will be presented and discussed for three reference days. This section will also
present the KPIs obtained from the simulations, as well as the implementation of the best
candidate on the Risø SAT.
8
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:17==
2
Theory
2.1
Irradiance from the sun
2.1.1
Irradiance components
The Global Horizontal Irradiance (GHI) is composed of two elements: the Diffuse Hori-
zontal Irradiance (DHI) and the Direct Normal Irradiance (DNI). DNI, or beam radiation is
measured at the surface of the Earth at a given location with a surface element perpendic-
ular to the sun direction [24]. It excludes diffuse solar radiation (radiation that is scattered
or reflected by atmospheric components). Direct irradiance is equal to the extraterres-
trial irradiance above the atmosphere minus the atmospheric losses due to absorption
and scattering. DHI represents solar radiation that does not arrive on a direct path from
the sun, but has been scattered by clouds and particles in the atmosphere. The DHI it-
self consists of three components: horizon brightening, circumsolar (brightening/forward
scattering around the sun) and isotropic. The first two are driven by the amount of direct
beam light. On completely cloudy days, only the isotropic component contributes to DHI.
Finally, GHI represents the total amount of shortwave radiation received from above by a
surface which is horizontal (parallel) to the ground. GHI can be calculated as following:
GHI = DNI ∗cos(θs) + DHI
(2.1)
where the solar zenith θs can be calculated from the coordinates (longitude λ, latitude ϕ)
and the altitude (z) of the location using analytical equations from [22].
2.1.2
Measuring irradiance
Various methods and types of sensors are used to measure solar irradiance. Pyranome-
ters are sensors that measure global irradiance using a glass dome that has a 180° field
of view (typically quartz or BK7). There are two main types of pyranometers: thermopiles
and silicon photodiode pyranometers.
Thermopiles use the thermoelectric effect: a black absorber is heated up, and the temper-
ature is converted into electrical energy through a series of thermocouples. The thermal
gradients are measured across hot and cold areas: the hot side of the thermopile is con-
nected to a black absorber and the cold side to the sensor body. The radiation intensity
is proportional to the temperature differences between the two sensing areas. These de-
vices are slow as they have response times on the order of 5-30 seconds, even though
some recent Class A pyranometer models have response times as low as 1 second. How-
ever, they respond to a wide range of wavelengths (300-3000nm), making them accurate
to measure irradiance. Depending on the tilt configuration, they can measure GHI, POA
irradiance or they can be used as an albedo meter. Figure 2.1a shows a thermopile from
ProfEC Ventus [25].
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
9
==PAGE:18==
Silicon photodiode pyranometers (Figure 2.1b) use the photovoltaic principle to measure
irradiance: electric current is generated by a photo-sensitive diode in proportion to solar
intensity. There is only a certain portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that can be
measured by silicon photodiode pyranometers (usually around 300-1100nm). Outdoors
they are mounted in the same POA as the PV module, meaning that they measure the
actual irradiance that the PV modules receive. Such devices have very fast response
times (<1µs).
(a) Thermopile LP02 from ProfEC Ventus
[25]
(b) Silicon photodiode from EKO Instru-
ments [26]
Figure 2.1: Sensors used to measure irradiance
Pyrheliometers use the same principle of operation as pyranometers (the thermoelectric
principle) to measure DNI. The main difference is that they have a 5° field of view colli-
mation tube mounted on them and they point directly at the sun. The light outside this 5°
field of view is not measured, which results in a measurement of the direct beam light.
For diffuse irradiance, the main measurement devices are shadow balls, shadow disks
and shadow bands. The working principle is always the same: an obstacle is blocking
the DNI component of the irradiance which allows the measurement of diffuse irradiance.
Historically, shadow bands were used for such measurements. The shadowing band is a
strip of metal that can rotate around the polar axis [27]. The device is first calibrated, i.e.
adjusted to the latitude, and the azimuth is aligned to the Earth’s pole. A micro-processor
is integrated and measures the solar position at any time. Each sequence of measure-
ments is approximately 10 seconds. The first measurement occurs when the band is at
nadir, which is where GHI is measured. The band is then rotated and three other mea-
surements are made. The measurement in the middle blocks the sun while the other two
block strips of sky at 9° to either side. This allows for a first order correction of the excess
sky blocked by the band when the sun-blocking measurement is made, as this measure-
ment removes the DNI but also the DHI from the band of sky blocked. The measurement
is precise as there are long integration times for each measurement, and the first order
correction (using the 2 side measurements) provides a high accuracy, particularly when
there is fractional cloud coverage. However, the main disadvantage is that the instru-
ment must be correctly aligned. Modern approaches use a shadow ball or a shadow disc
mounted on a 2-axis tracker to shade the pyranometer with a 5° field of view.
There are many options for measuring diffuse irradiance therefore the way of measuring
it requires many considerations.
10
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:19==
2.1.3
Estimating the horizontal irradiance components using
decomposition models
In utility-scale PV parks, GHI and GPOA are usually the only irradiances measured. Dif-
fuse irradiance sensors are not implemented as measuring GHI only is much cheaper
compared to measuring each individual components of irradiance. In that case diffuse
irradiance and direct irradiance can be estimated using a decomposition model. Most
decomposition models use empirical correlations between GHI, DHI and DNI to estimate
the last two components. Relations are established between the clearness index kt and
the diffuse fraction kd.
One of the most often used solar decomposition model is the Erbs decomposition model
[28]. This model was developed from data collected at five stations in the USA at lati-
tudes between 31° and 42° N. It has the advantage of being simple as it only needs the
clearness index kt as an input. It is also the default decomposition model in several sim-
ulation softwares (e.g. PVSyst). Lave et al. measured the relative (to GHI) Root Mean
Square Difference (rRMSD) of 12 decomposition models at five weather stations [29].
Their results are presented Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Relative (to GHI) root mean squared (rRMSD) difference (modeled minus
measured) for each of the 12 decomposition models (x-axis) at each of the five stations
with DHI measurements [29])
The twelve models investigated are (from left to right on the x-axis of Figure 2.2): Orgill
and Hollands, Erbs, Boland, Reindl 1, Reindl 1 adjusted, DISC, DIRINT, Reindl 2, Reindl
2 adjusted, Reindl 3, Reindl 3 adjusted and Posadillo.
The Erbs decomposition model shows a rRMSD between 11% and 17% depending on
the weather station. Lave et al. found that during partly cloudy periods, the Erbs model
underestimates the DHI but conversely, during clear periods, it overestimates DHI. Nearly
identical bias trends were observed in all simple decomposition models, and the perfor-
mance of the simple models was not significantly worse in comparison to more compli-
cated ones [29].
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
11
==PAGE:20==





kd = 1 −0.09kt
if kt < 0.22
kd = 0.9511 −0.1604kt + 4.388k2
t −16.638k3
t + 12.336k4
t
if 0.22 < kt ≤0.8
kd = 0.165
if kt > 0.8
(2.2)
with:
kt =
GHI
DNIextraterrestrial ∗cos(θs)
(2.3)
Finally:
DHI = GHI × kd
(2.4)
2.1.4
Plane-of-array irradiance
Global Tilted Irradiance (GTI), or Global Plane-Of-Array (GPOA) irradiance, can be mea-
sured by placing a sensor such as a pyranometer or silicon reference cell directly in the
plane-of-array of the PV modules. This is often the case in utility-scale PV parks to get a
precise measure of the total irradiance at the same angle of rotation as the PV modules.
While a horizontal surface is parallel to the ground, an inclined surface also receives a
small amount of ground-reflected radiation that is important to account for. For monofacial
modules, GTI is dependent on β, the tilt of the tracker/module and can be calculated as:
GTI(β) = Idir(β) + Idif(β) + Ignd(β)
(2.5)
where Idir(β), Idif(β), Ignd(β) represent the direct, diffuse and ground-reflected compo-
nents of the irradiance reaching the surface of the tilted module. The direct component is
evaluated as:
Idir(β) = DNI × cos(AOI(β))
(2.6)
where the angle of incidence AOI(β) is a function of the tracker tilt β:
AOI(β) = cos(θs) · cos(β) + sin(θs) · cos(β) · cos(γs −γa)
(2.7)
Diffuse irradiance from the sky Idif(β) is complex to define but, as stated previously, it is
usually separated in three components: isotropic, circumsolar and horizon (coming from
a belt near the horizon).
Ground-reflected irradiance Ignd(β) corresponds to the irradiance reflected by a terrain,
and depends therefore on the two other components. It is also correlated with the ground
albedo ρ that represents the fraction of the incident sunlight that the surface reflects (with
0 < ρ < 1). It is often referred as the ”whiteness” of this surface, and a value of 0.2 is
commonly accepted and used in modelling of PV systems [30].
12
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:21==
Estimating GTI irradiance from solar components using transposition models
While an in-plane sensor provides an irradiance measure specific to the exact rotation of
the tracker and the PV modules, it does not allow to have a complete overview of the GTI
for different angles of rotation. In that case, it is possible to use a transposition model.
Such models estimate the incident irradiance on a tilted plane, from the component irradi-
ance data. Depending on the level of detail of the inputs, they provide results with different
accuracy: the Perez diffuse model is one of the models that was found to be with consis-
tently best performance for all slopes [31]. It is recommended to use it for calculations of
tilted irradiance as it has widespread applicability and maintains its superiority through a
wide range of surface orientations and climatic conditions, despite the use of empirical,
location-specific coefficients. Table 2.1 shows the Root Mean Square Difference (RMSD)
for the 4 models that had the highest ranking for an individual slope, in comparison to
measured data. Among the 21 models investigated by Hay et al. [31], only these ones
were retained for further assessment.
Model
Slope
Gueymard
(1983)
Hay and
Davies (1980)
Perez 1 (1983)
Perez 2 (1985)
All
97
103
92
91
Equatorward
99
101
94
93
Poleward
94
106
89
87
Table 2.1: Root Mean Square Difference (RMSD) of the 4 highest ranked transposition
models in comparison to measured irradiance data for the 27 locations investigated [31]
The basic form of the Perez (1990) model, which is an enhancement and refinement of
the 1983 model, is [18]:
Idif = DHI ×
[
(1 −F1)
(1 + cos(β)
2
)
+ F1
(a
b
)
+ F2 · sin(β)
]
(2.8)
F1 and F2 are empirically fitted functions that describe circumsolar and horizon brightness,
respectively.
a = max(0, cos(AOI))
(2.9)
b = max(cos(85°), cos(θs))
(2.10)
F1 = max
[
0,
(
f11 + f12∆+ πθs
180°f13
)]
(2.11)
F2 = f21 + f22∆+ πθs
180°f23
(2.12)
The f coefficients are defined for specific bins of clearness (ϵ), which is defined as:
ϵ =
DHI+DNI
DHI
+ κθ3
s
1 + κθ3s
(2.13)
κ is a constant equals to 1.041 when the angles are in radians. Finally:
∆=
DHI · AMa
DNIextraterrestrial
(2.14)
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
13
==PAGE:22==
All the coefficients f are published in [18] for different bins of clearness ϵ.
For the calculation of the ground reflected irradiance, the Perez and Stewart model [19]
provides an analytical equation detailed in [32] that is also used in the isotropic model:
Ignd = GHI × ρ × 1 −cos(β)
2
(2.15)
2.2
Tracking algorithms
2.2.1
Solar trackers
Active trackers use motors and gear trains to perform solar tracking. To control and man-
age the movement of these massive structures, special slewing drives are commonly
used. The target angle is calculated and the command is sent from a Network Controller
Unit (NCU) to each Tracker Controller Unit (TCU) at a specific time resolution, e.g. every
1 minute or every 2 degrees. A TCU is an electronic device that applies a voltage to the
motor and provides diagnostics and data to central NCU. Figure 2.3 shows how the NCUs
and TCUs are connected in a utility-scale PV park as well as where a diffuse sensor could
be connected on the NCU.
Figure 2.3: Diagram of the NCU and TCU connections in a utility-scale PV park (from
Nicholas Riedel-Lyngskær, European Energy)
Rotating the tracker to capture the sun irradiance is only one of the elements of the con-
trol algorithms, as safety considerations have a higher priority than sun tracking. For
instance, the trackers could be sent to stow position (e.g. horizontal tilt for many tracker
designs) when the NCU-TCU communication is lost for some time or during high wind
speed periods.
14
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:23==
2.2.2
Astronomical tracking
Astronomical tracking (or true tracking or sun tracking) is the SAT control strategy for
which the AOI of the PV module should always be minimized so the POA irradiance is
maximized. Marion and Dobos provide a method for calculating the astronomical angle of
rotation for the tracker using analytical equations [33]. Kevin Anderson and Mark Mikofski
provide a different approach using rotation matrices to calculate this angle [13]. As they
explain, minimization of the AOI is achieved by matching tracker rotation to the projection
of the sun’s position onto the tracking plane of rotation, as illustrated in Figure 2.4.
(a) Solar position angles and the corre-
sponding Cartesian coordinates
(b) Projecting solar position onto the tracker
rotation plane
Figure 2.4: Transformation from the global coordinates to the tracker coordinates [13]
First, the solar azimuth and elevation are converted from spherical coordinates to Carte-
sian coordinates with:


sx
sy
sz

=


cos(βs) · sin(γs)
cos(βs) · cos(γs)
sin(βs)


(2.16)
Then, rotation matrices enable transformation from the global coordinates (⃗s) to the tracker
coordinates (⃗s′) by first rotating around the z axis by the axis azimuth and then around the
x axis by the axis tilt:
⃗s′ = RxRz⃗s
(2.17)
with:
Rx =


1
0
0
0
cos(βa)
−sin(βa)
0
sin(βa)
cos(βa)


(2.18)
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
15
==PAGE:24==
and:
Rz =


cos(γa)
−sin(γa)
0
sin(γa)
cos(γa)
0
0
0
1


(2.19)
This leads to:


s′
x
s′
y
s′
z

=


sx · cos(γa) −sy · sin(γa)
sx · sin(γa) · cos(βa) + sy · cos(βa) · cos(γa) −sz · sin(βa)
sx · sin(γa) · sin(βa) + sy · sin(βa) · cos(γa) −sz · cos(βa)


(2.20)
Finally, the tracker astronomical angle of rotation can be calculated as:
βd = atan2(s′
x, s′
z)
(2.21)
The astronomical angle may however be limited by a maximum angle βmax. In that case:
−βmax <= βd <= βmax
(2.22)
2.22 must be verified at all times.
2.2.3
Backtracking
As explained before, astronomical tracking corresponds to the minimization of the tracker
AOI. However, in utility-scale PV, self-shade may occur between neighbouring rows of
panels. This self-shading, also called row-to-row shading, reduces the electrical output of
the shaded row, and therefore the energy production period. The power loss due to shade
is non-linear with respect to the area of the shadow. In many cases, module power will
drop by 30%-50% immediately upon being shaded by the row in front of it. Furthermore,
shaded cells operate in reverse-bias and increase the risk of permanent damage from
hotspots. The occurrence and severity of row-to-row shading depend on how close the
rows of the PV plant are installed, which is characterized by the ground-cover ratio (GCR).
The GCR is defined as the ratio of module area to land area, or the ratio of the array width
W to row pitch (or row width) R, as seen in Figure 2.5. For tracker systems, the width
of the array is calculated at 0° tilt. Row pitch refers to the distance from the axis of one
tracker to the next.
16
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:25==
Figure 2.5: GCR is the ratio of the array width W to the row pitch R [34]
A backtracking strategy consists of decreasing the surface tilt angles away from the ideal
values, just enough to get the shadow borderline to pass outside the border of the adjacent
tracker. In doing so, shade is fully avoided and irradiance loss due to increasing the angle
of incidence is minimized [23].
Anderson and Mikofski define the backtracking correction angle βc as the angle between
the backtracking rotation βb and the astronomical tracking rotation βd [13].
βb = βd + βc
(2.23)
They calculate the absolute backtracking correction angle βc as a function of the astro-
nomical angle and the GCR:
{
|βc| = cos−1 (
| cos(βd)|
GCR
)
if | cos(βd)| < GCR
|βc| = 0
if | cos(βd)| > GCR
(2.24)
For the backtracking correction angle to tend to cancel the true-tracking angle, the sign of
the tracking adjustment βc must be opposite that of the astronomical tracking angle βd.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
17
==PAGE:26==
18
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:27==
3
Methodology
3.1
Simulation parameters
3.1.1
Simulation software
All the simulations presented in this report were carried out using Python 3.11.5 and a com-
munity developed toolbox called pvlib [35]. This toolbox provides functions and classes
for simulating the performance of photovoltaic energy systems and accomplishing related
tasks.
3.1.2
Simulation parameters
The simulations were performed for a specific site located at the DTU Risø campus. The
site parameters are detailed in Table 3.1.
Parameter
Notation
Value
Longitude
λ
12.105°
Latitude
Φ
55.696°
Altitude
z
14.5m
GCR
GCR
0.28
Albedo
ρ
0.25
Table 3.1: Site parameters for DTU Risø
The tracker parameters are presented in Table 3.2.
Parameter
Notation
Value
Axis tilt
βa
0°
Axis azimuth
γa
180°
Maximum angle1
βmax
55°
Nominal rotation speed
ω
9°/min
Nominal voltage
U
24V
Nominal current
I
2A
Maximum current
Imax
9A
1 The tracker’s full range is ±60° but the movement was
voluntarily limited to prevent stress on the motors and
TCU electronics due to overcurrents.
Table 3.2: Tracker parameters
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
19
==PAGE:28==
The module specifications used for the simulations are detailed in Table 3.3.
Parameter
Notation
Value
Module type
-
Open rack glass-glass
Modules in series
nmodules
26
Nominal module power
Pnom
650W
Short-circuit current temperature coefficient of the module
αsc
0.0004A/°C
Diode ideality factor
γref
1.020
Temperature coefficient for the diode ideality factor
µγ
-0.0002K-1
Light-generated current (or photocurrent) at reference conditions
IL,ref
17.27A
Dark or diode reverse saturation current at reference conditions
I0,ref
2.5e-10A
Shunt resistance at reference conditions
Rsh,ref
20000 Ω
Shunt resistance at zero irradiance conditions
Rsh,0
80000 Ω
Series resistance at reference conditions
Rs
0.168Ω
Cells in series
ncells
66
Exponent in the equation for shunt resistance, unitless
Rsh,exp
5.5
Energy bandgap at reference temperature
Eg,ref
1.12eV
Table 3.3: Module specifications
3.2
Irradiance data
3.2.1
Risø tower
The irradiance data used for this project is measured by the Risø weather station. The
sensors used for each irradiance component are as following:
• GHI: MS802-F, a pyranometer with a fast response time (95% < 5s) and a ventilation
system to prevent any possible influence of frost, snow and dust.
• DHI: MS802-F (on a dual-axis tracker with shadow ball).
• DNI: MS-56 (on a dual-axis tracker), a pyrheliometer with a fast (< 1s) response and
a window heater to prevent dew and frost.
(a) Pyranometer MS-802F from EKO Instru-
ments [36]
(b) Pyrheliometer mounted on a dual axis
tracker (STR-22) from EKO Instruments [36]
Figure 3.1: Sensors installed in DTU Risø
All equipment are from EKO Instruments [36], routinely calibrated every 2 years. The
irradiance data is measured at 10 seconds and aggregated to 1 minute.
20
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:29==
3.2.2
Data used for the simulations
The on-site irradiance data was filtered using 15 quality controls that investigate limits for
the irradiance measurements as well as missing values and coincidence between GHI,
DHI and DNI measurements [37]. Raw irradiance data that does not pass the quality con-
trol is simply removed from the dataset. The overall data availability can thus be measured
monthly and yearly, and is defined as the ratio between the number of timestamps with
irradiance data and the total number of timestamps for the period. The data availability
for 2023 is presented in Table 3.4
Month
Data availability
January
100,0%
February
97,7%
March
100,0%
April
100,0%
May
100,0%
June
100,0%
July
100,0%
August
100,0%
September
100,0%
November
100,0%
October
100,0%
December
100,0%
YEAR
99,8%
Table 3.4: Data availability for 2023
3.3
Implementation of astronomical tracking
The first step of the simulation process consisted in re-creating the astronomical tracking
algorithm. The pvlib library contains a function called tracking.singleaxis that calcu-
lates the astronomical tracker rotation angle using the equations from [13]. The inputs of
this function are the sun apparent zenith, the sun apparent azimuth, the axis tilt βa, the
axis azimuth γa, the maximum angle of rotation βmax, the GCR and the cross-axis tilt, if
relevant. It is also possible to decide on the implementation of a backtracking strategy
via the boolean backtrack: in that case, the GCR will be relevant in the calculations. The
axis parameters are the ones presented in section 3.1.
The sun apparent zenith and apparent azimuth are first calculated using a function called
solarposition.get_solar_position. When times and site coordinates are provided,
this function calculates the solar apparent zenith, zenith, apparent elevation, elevation,
azimuth as well as the equation of time at any time.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
21
==PAGE:30==
A flow chart of the astronomical tracking model is presented Figure 3.2
Tracker astronomical rotation angle βd
AOI
Tracker/axis azimuth γa
Tracker/axis tilt βa
Maximum rotation angle βmax
GCR
solarposition.get_solarposition
tracking.singleaxis
Solar zenith θz
Solar azimuth γs
Timeseries
Longitude λ
Latitude Φ
Altitude z
Inputs
Outputs
Figure 3.2: Flow diagram of the astronomical tracking
As explained previously, the tracker tilt is limited by a maximum rotation angle of βmax =
55°. In the morning, the tracker moves towards the eastern position (-55°) and stays there
for some time. When the sun has risen high enough in the sky, the tracker begins rotating
towards the western position (55°), where the sun sets. At solar noon, the tracker is in a
horizontal position (0°), minimizing the angle of incidence (AOI) between the sun and the
plane of array (POA) at this time.
22
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:31==
Figure 3.3 shows the astronomical tracking curve (with and without a backtracking strategy
implemented) at a resolution of 1 minute. Different GCR (0.28, 0.4, 0.6) are investigated,
0.28 being the actual value for the HSAT simulated.
Figure 3.3: Astronomical tracking curve with and without a backtracking strategy for dif-
ferent GCR on June, 1st 2023
It can be observed that when the GCR is higher, the tracker rotation is more limited in the
morning and in the evening. This is due to the row-to-row shadings increasing when the
GCR is increasing.
3.4
Optimal angle models
Having implemented astronomical tracking as a reference, optimization models were then
developed and implemented as well. These models aim to define a tracker tilt that max-
imizes the POA irradiance. Three different models were investigated: the brute force
search model, the ”CENER” model developed by the Spanish center for renewable ener-
gies [38] and a model called ”binary model” that rotates the tracker either to a horizontal
tilt or to the astronomical position.
3.4.1
Brute force search
Brute force search was investigated as a model to calculate a tracker optimal angle of
rotation at any time. A brute force algorithm is a simple search strategy that explores all
the possible options to find the optimal solution. Although it is quite comprehensive, it is
computationally demanding.
In the model developed for this report, the brute force search was implemented on the
angle of rotation of the tracker β. For every timestamp, the algorithm will sweep through
all the possible angles of rotation and estimate the associated POA irradiance. The angle
that maximizes the in-plane irradiance is chosen as the optimal angle. Depending on
the time resolution used, and the tracker speed, the range of possible rotation angles
investigated by brute force search can vary.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
23
==PAGE:32==
To calculate the POA irradiance for all the possible angles of rotation, the pvlib function
called irradiance.get_total_irradiance was used. This function can use different
irradiance transposition models to calculate GPOA(β), the in-plane irradiance reaching
the surface of the modules when the tracker rotation angle is β.
For this optimal angle model, the Perez irradiance transposition model [19] [18] was se-
lected to estimate GPOA(β).
Figure 3.4 shows the flow diagram of the brute force search model. Figure A.1, in ap-
pendix, shows the same flow diagram where a decomposition model is implemented.
Timeseries
Longitude λ
Latitude Φ
Altitude z
Solar zenith θz
Solar azimuth γs
solarposition.get_solarposition
Tracker/axis azimuth γa
Tracker/axis tilt βa
Real weather data
GHI
β tracker rotation angle
- βmax <= β <= βmax
Resolution of 1°
Initialization: β = - βmax
POA irradiance (global, direct, diffuse, sky diffuse,
ground reflected) GPOA(β)
(Perez irradiance transposition model)
Optimal rotation angle βopt
POA irradiance GPOA,opt
Maximum rotation angle βmax
β = β + 1
irradiance.get_total_irradiance
Inputs
Calculation step
Outputs
Iteration
Figure 3.4: Flow diagram of the brute force search model
24
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:33==
3.4.2
CENER model
The Spanish center for renewable energies (CENER) has presented different tracking
strategies that consider diffuse irradiance [38].
• The first algorithm is called the ”Diffuse Radiation Algorithm”. It compares GPOA,d,
the POA irradiance that the tracker would receive if it was following an astronomical
tracking strategy, with the GHI (measured or estimated). When GHI > GPOA,d, the
tracker is positioned horizontally to reach a higher yield than if the tracker had stayed
in astronomical tracking. Otherwise the tracker remains in astronomical position.
• The second strategy is called ”Diffuse + Nowcasting Algorithm”. As the irradiance
variability may be high for some locations, the relation between GHI and GPOA,d may
change drastically during the day, causing the tracker to oscillate a lot between the
horizontal and the astronomical position during the day. Subsequently, a threshold
was implemented to decide whether or not to move the tracker from its position.
The difference of irradiance between the GHI and GPOA,d must be higher than this
threshold to rotate the tracker to the other position.
• The last algorithm is called ”Analytical Algorithm” and provides an equation for calcu-
lating an optimal angle of rotation based on GHI, DHI and DNI measurements. This
equation was obtained from a derivation of the equations of the isotropic model. The
logic behind this algorithm comes from the observation that the ”Diffuse Algorithm”
and ”Diffuse + Nowcasting Algorithm” are more relevant when the diffuse fraction is
meaning. For similar values of diffuse and direct (beam) fractions, the optimum an-
gle could be an intermediate between the horizontal and astronomical positions [38].
Using Equation 2.5, the irradiance on a tilted surface GPOA can be defined as a function
of the tracker rotation angle β:
GPOA(β) = Idir(β) + Idif(β) + Ignd(β)
(2.5)
Equation 2.6 already provides a formula for Idir(β):
Idir(β) = DNI × cos(AOI(β))
(2.6)
The equation for the calculation of the angle of incidence is detailed in Equation 2.7.
The equations from Hottel and Woertz’s model (also called isotropic model) [39] provide
the following relation:
Idif(β) = DHI × 1 + cos(β)
2
(3.1)
In their model, sky is considered as a uniform source of diffuse irradiance [39]. Thus the
diffuse irradiance from the sky on a tilted surface can be found from the DHI and the tilt
angle of the surface β.
The ground-reflected irradiance is calculated as:
Ignd(β) = GHI × ρ × 1 −cos(β)
2
(3.2)
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
25
==PAGE:34==
The optimal tilt angle βopt is defined as the angle that maximizes the POA irradiance (here
defined as GPOA). Therefore, the irradiance is maximal when the derivative of 2.5 equals
0, i.e.:
∂GPOA
∂β
= ∂Idir
∂β
+ ∂Idif
∂β
+ ∂Ignd
∂β
= 0 =⇒β = βopt
(3.3)
This leads to the following equation for βopt:
βopt = arctan
(
DNI · sin(θs) · cos(γs −γ)
DHI−GHI·ρ
2
+ DNI · cos(θs)
)
(3.4)
3.4.3
Binary model
The final model examined in this study is the ”Binary model,” which is analogous to the
”Diffuse” model described in the CENER article [38]. In this approach, the tracker alter-
nates between a horizontal position and the astronomical position, based on whichever
value is higher between the Global Horizontal Irradiance (GHI) and the Plane of Array
irradiance at the astronomical position (GPOA,d). GPOA,d is derived using the Perez trans-
position model, similar to the method employed in the brute force search model. Notably,
this model does not incorporate a threshold, meaning the optimal angle is consistently
determined by the maximum irradiance received.
A flow diagram of this model is presented Figure 3.5.
26
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:35==
Timeseries
Longitude λ
Latitude Φ
Altitude z
Solar zenith θz
Solar azimuth γs
solarposition.get_solarposition
Real weather data
GHI
POA irradiance (global, direct, diffuse, sky diffuse,
ground reflected) GPOA,d
(Perez irradiance transposition model)
irradiance.get_total_irradiance
Inputs
Calculation step
Outputs
Tracker astronomical rotation angle βd
AOI
Tracker/axis azimuth γa
Tracker/axis tilt βa
Maximum rotation angle βmax
GCR
tracking.singleaxis
Yes
No
GPOA,d > GHI
βopt = βd
GPOA,opt = GPOA,d
βopt = 0
GPOA,opt = GHI
Figure 3.5: Flow diagram of the binary model
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
27
==PAGE:36==
3.5
Model implementation algorithms
With the models for calculating the optimal tracker rotation angle now defined, different
implementation algorithms can be investigated. In practice, the rotation speed of most
commercial trackers is limited to between 10° and 20° per minute. Consequently, im-
plementing the optimal angle models with a resolution of 1 minute is often impractical.
Moreover, such frequent adjustments could lead to excessive tracker movement, which
may negatively impact electricity consumption and the lifespan of the trackers.
The different algorithms designed to implement the models are as follows:
• Ideal Algorithm: This represents the best achievable outcome for each Key Perfor-
mance Index (KPI), disregarding technical limitations of the tracker. It serves as a
best-case scenario, reflecting the upper bound of each model’s potential.
• Real-Time Algorithm: This algorithm simulates the implementation of the models in
a utility-scale PV park, where the tracker receives irradiance data and subsequently
calculates the optimal rotation angle, taking into account the rotation speed limit.
• TeraBase Algorithm: Developed by TeraBase [40], this algorithm aims to balance
insolation gains with the consumption losses and mechanical fatigue associated
with frequent tracker movements. It enhances the real-time algorithm by mitigating
excessive rotations.
• Forecast Algorithm: This algorithm assumes the availability of forecast irradiance
data, allowing the tracker to adjust its position preemptively.
Table 3.5 offers an overview of the different optimal angle models and their implementation
algorithms.
Model implementation algorithm
Optimal angle model
Ideal
Real time
Real time & TeraBase
Forecast
Astronomical tracking
1 min.
-
-
-
Brute force search
1 min.
5 or 15 min.
5 or 15 min.
5 or 15 min.
CENER model
1 min.
15 min. only
-
15 min. only
Binary model
1 min.
15 min. only
-
15 min. only
Table 3.5: Overview of the models and algorithms investigated and their optimization
resolutions T
3.5.1
Ideal case
This section examines the algorithm for an ideal case across different models. The algo-
rithm operates with a high optimization resolution of one minute (T = 1 min) and imposes
no limitations on tracker speed, thereby representing the maximum potential yield for each
model. However, implementing such a model may be impractical due to the lack of con-
straints on tracker rotation. For instance, the rotation between two timestamps, which
equates to one minute, could exceed the permissible limit ω. The specific details of the
ideal algorithm for each optimal angle model are discussed in the following sections.
Astronomical tracking
For astronomical tracking, the ideal case corresponds to the tracker being rotated to the
astronomical position every minute. With backtracking implemented, and a site GCR of
0.28, the resulting tracking curve is presented Figure 3.6. This curve is neither influenced
by the weather nor the irradiance measured.
28
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:37==
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
60
40
20
0
20
40
60
Tracker Tilt (°)
Figure 3.6: Astronomical tracking implemented with a backtracking strategy for the ideal
algorithm on June 1st, 2023
Brute force search
For the brute force search, the implementation of the ideal case is also conducted with a
1-minute resolution. However, unlike astronomical tracking, this leads to a technically un-
feasible model, meaning that it could not be implemented in a PV park. The reason is that
the model sometime results in a tracker movement that exceeds the possible movement,
in particular during high variability weather.
Decomposition model
A simulation was also performed assuming that only GHI was
measured, as it is often the case in utility-scale PV parks.
The Erbs decomposition
model [28] was used to estimate the DHI (the DNI could then be calculated). The function
pvlib.irradiance.erbs was employed to perform this calculation.
CENER model
As for the brute force search, the CENER model implemented for the ideal case aims to
represent the highest yield this model could achieve, with no constraints regarding the
tracker movement, resulting in unreachable rotation speeds for some times. This optimal
model is obtained from a derivation of the isotropic transposition model.
Binary model
The binary model is also unconstrained. When diffuse irradiance is significant, and GHI
exceeds the in-plane irradiance achieved through astronomical tracking, the ideal case
assumes that the tracker will instantly move to the horizontal position, resulting in alter-
nating between horizontal and astronomical positions.
3.5.2
Real-time algorithm
In this section, the algorithm for a real-time implementation is explored for the different
models. This algorithm aims to increase the optimization time resolution T to avoid the
substantial tracker movement. Instead, two different time resolutions, 5 minutes and 15
minutes, were investigated. Therefore, for each model, the tracker rotation angle opti-
mized for diffuse irradiance is calculated every 5 or 15 minutes.
For the 15-minute resolution, this algorithm solves the issue of the significant tracker
movement encountered for the ideal algorithm as the tracker could possibly move ω ×
15 min = 135°, which is more than the rotation from one extremity to the other: 2×βmax =
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
29
==PAGE:38==
2 × 55° = 110°. Therefore, all models can be implemented with a real-time algorithm at
this optimization resolution.
The 5-minute resolution is investigated for the brute force search only, as it is the only
optimal angle model that can enforce movement constraints: the CENER model and the
binary model cannot integrate constraints in the tracker movement. This is due to the fact
that the CENER model is based on analytical equations for the calculation of the optimized
angle of rotation and the binary model explores only two different positions for the tracker.
In 5 minutes, the tracker could possible move ω × 5 = 45° which is less than the range
of 110° between the two edge positions. Consequently, for the brute force search model,
a constraint was implemented directly in the optimization process: if the position of the
tracker at t = t1 is β(t1) = β1 then, for the next optimal angle calculated at t2 = t1+5 min,
the brute force search will only sweep through the angles in the range β1 ± 45° (with the
constraint βmax <= β2 <= βmax still being enforced).
Once the optimal angle has been calculated every 5 or 15 minutes, the resolution is ex-
tended to a timestep of 1 minute by assuming that the tracker will move from one position
to the next position—5 or 15 minutes later—at its nominal speed ω. This is done to ensure
that the plane of array irradiance and the energy produced can be calculated accurately
using the 1-minute irradiance data available, instead of assuming that the tracker would
remain at the same position for 5 or 15 minutes.
3.5.3
Real-time & TeraBase algorithm
The real-time algorithm provides a way to implement the optimal angle models in a techni-
cally feasible way. However, it does not mitigate the tracker movement to avoid potential
unnecessary rotations during fast-changing weather conditions. In such a case, the real-
time algorithm could drive the tracker far from its current position even though it will not
stay there for a long time. In this section, the calculation of an irradiance variability index
and its implementation in a formula to adjust the optimal angle are presented.
TeraBase model
The TeraBase model was developed based on the observation that
irradiance optimization algorithms tend to over-predict the gains achieved by trackers in
the field due to idealized assumptions about tracker mechanics [40]. This overestimation
occurs for several reasons, including the non-instantaneous movement of trackers to their
next position and the risk of incorrect positioning. Additionally, the gain from irradiance
optimization is asymmetrically low compared to the gain from baseline tracking during
clear sky conditions.
The formula requires the optimal angle calculated with a model βopt and the astronomical
angle βd. The model calculates a corrected angle βc that should always be between the
optimal angle and the astronomical angle:
βc = [(1 −µ −η) · βopt] + [µ · 0.5 · (βopt + βd) + η · βd]
(3.5)
30
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:39==
Two parameters are introduced in this formula:
• The movement penalty represents the amount of time a tracker must spend in transit
from the previous rotation angle to the current rotation angle and is a percentage of
the total time encompassed by that timestamp [40]. It is calculated using:
µ = |βopt −βd| · 1
ω
T
(3.6)
ω is the tracker nominal rotation speed (in °/minute) and T is the number of minute
in a timestep (which corresponds to the optimization resolution). The movement
penalty factor is always between 0 and 1.
• The hesitation factor η is an empirical term, tuneable and user-defined, which repre-
sents controls hesitancy to go to the idealized tracker angle [40]. This term is always
in the range [0; 1 −µ]
Variability index
Measuring the irradiance variability consistently is crucial in the pro-
cess of mitigating the tracker movement. In their paper, Stein et al. present a way to
calculate such a metric for irradiance data [41]. This metrics is aimed to be used to de-
termine the value η in real-time.
In particular, they provide the following formula for the irradiance variability index V I:
V I =
∑n
k=2
√
(GHIk −GHIk−1)2 + ∆2
t
∑n
k=2
√
(CSIk −CSIk−1)2 + ∆2
t
(3.7)
where GHI is a vector of length n of global horizontal irradiance values averaged at
some time interval in minutes, ∆t, and CSI is a vector of calculated clear sky irradiance
(horizontal) values for the same times as the GHI data. A clear-sky model is used to de-
termine CSI. The Ineichen/Perez model [42] [43] is said to have excellent performance
with a minimal input data set [44], consequently it was used for this simulation. In pvlib,
the function pvlib.clearsky.ineichen uses this model to estimate the clear-sky irradi-
ance from the apparent zenith, the air mass, the linke turbidity and the altitude. The DNI
extraterrestrial has a default value of DNIextraterrestrial = 1364W/m2, and the linke tur-
bidity is found from data tables for the specific time, latitude and longitude by calling the
function pvlib.clearsky.lookup_linke_turbidity.
The variability index can be thought of as the ratio of the ”length” of the measured irradi-
ance plotted against time divided by the ”length” of the clear sky irradiance plotted against
time [41], as seen in Figure 3.7.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
31
==PAGE:40==
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
200
400
600
800
Irradiance (W/m2)
Global Horizontal Irradiance
Clear Sky Irradiance
Figure 3.7: Measured Global Horizontal Irradiance vs. (horizontal) Clear Sky Irradiance
on June 1st, 2023
Brute force search
The real-time algorithm coupled to the TeraBase formula was in-
vestigated for the brute force search model for both the 5-minute and the 15-minute res-
olutions.
The VI is always calculated with 1-minute irradiance data. The GHI and CSI vector length
n used in the calculation of the VI is taken equal to T. This means that when the optimal
position is calculated e.g. every 15 minutes, the irradiance data used in the calculation of
the VI consists of 15 GHI measurements and 15 CSI calculated values.
To include the VI in the TeraBase model, it can be correlated to the hesitation factor η.
Thus, a linear regression was defined to calculate the hesitation factor based on the VI
calculated in the first place, using an empirical threshold called αV I:
{
η = min
(
V I
αV I , 1 −µ
)
if V I <= αV I
η = 1 −µ
if V I > αV I
(3.8)
The simulation parameters are summarized in Table 3.6.
Parameter
Value
∆t
1 minute
ω
9°/minute
T
5 or 15 minutes
Table 3.6: Simulation parameters for the real-time & TeraBase algorithm
32
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:41==
3.5.4
Forecast algorithm
In this section, the algorithm for a real-time implementation is presented for the different
models. As for the real-time algorithm, two optimization resolutions are investigated: T
= 5 minutes and T = 15 minutes. The forecast algorithm is applied to the three different
models for the 15-minute resolution but it is only applied to the brute force search model
for the 5-minute resolution, like the real-time algorithm.
The optimal angle is calculated every 5 or 15 minutes, with the assumption that irradiance
values (GHI, DHI, and DNI) are known 5 or 15 minutes in advance. The historical irradi-
ance measurements presented in Section 3.2 are used for these tests, thus implying that
the forecast is 100% accurate. This allows the tracker to preemptively move to the correct
position. This approach contrasts with the real-time algorithm, which initiates rotation only
upon receiving 5 or 15-minute averaged irradiance data with no foresight. Consequently,
the tracker reaches this optimal position with a short delay due to its limited rotation speed,
preventing it from being perfectly aligned with the actual irradiance conditions. Using fore-
cast data can mitigate this issue by enabling more timely adjustments.
3.6
Key performance indexes
To measure the performance of the different models and algorithms, Key Performance
Indexes (KPIs) were established. They include:
• Total degrees moved by the tracker ∆β (°)
• Total duration of tracker movement ∆t (h)
• Total tracker DC energy consumption Econs (kWh)
• Total POA insolation IPOA (kWh/m2)
• Total DC energy produced Ep (kWh)
These KPIs are defined by the following equations:
∆β =
n
∑
k=2
(βk −βk−1)
(3.9)
n corresponds to the number of 1-minute timestamps investigated.
∆t =
∆β
ω · 60 min
h
(3.10)
Econs = U · I · ∆t
1000
(3.11)
IPOA =
∑n
k=2 GPOA,k
1000 · 60 min
h
(3.12)
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
33
==PAGE:42==
To calculate the DC energy produced for a timestamp, the pvlib python library is used.
First, the cell temperature per the Sandia Array Performance Model (SAPM) is calculated
using the function pvlib.temperature.sapm_cell and the equations from a paper by
King et al. [45]. The inputs for this function are GPOA, the ambient dry bulb temperature,
the wind speed at a height of 10 meters and the parameters a, b, ∆T and E0 from [45]. It
returns the cell temperature in °C.
The temperature coefficients per the SAPM model for the module type (open rack glass-
glass) are specified in Table 3.7.
Parameter
Value
a
-3.47
b
-0.0594
∆T
3°C
E0
1000 W/m2
Table 3.7: Temperature coefficients per the SAPM model
Once the cell temperature is estimated, the function pvlib.pvsystem.calcparams_pvsyst
is called to calculate five parameter values for the single diode equation at effective irra-
diance and cell temperature using the PVsyst v6 model. The parameters are:
• The light-generated current (A)
• The diode saturation current (A)
• The series resistance (Ω)
• The shunt resistance (Ω)
• The product of the usual diode ideality factor, number of cells in series and cell
thermal voltage at specified effective irradiance and cell temperature
The input parameters of this function are, aside from the cell temperature calculated pre-
viously, the POA irradiance GPOA and the module parameters specified in Table 3.3. The
PVsyst v6 model is described in [46], [47] and [48].
Finally, these single diode equation coefficients are used in the function pvlib.pvsystem.max_power_point
to calculate the module power at the maximum power point PMPP .
The DC energy produced (in kWh) is calculated using:
Ep = PMPP ∗nmodules
1000 · 60min
h
(3.13)
34
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:43==
4
Results
4.1
Benchmarking of algorithms
4.1.1
Reference days
For the purpose of this report, three reference days are used to compare the optimal angle
models and their implementation algorithms:
• June 7th, 2023: a clear sky day characterized by a low diffuse fraction (kd = 0.16),
indicating that direct irradiance from the sun was the predominant component of the
Global Horizontal Irradiance (GHI), as illustrated in Figure 4.1.
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
200
400
600
800
Irradiance (W/m2)
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.1: Irradiance measured on June 7th, 2023
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
35
==PAGE:44==
• May 23rd, 2023: A cloudy day with a very high diffuse fraction (kd = 0.99), meaning
the Direct Normal Irradiance (DNI) was significantly lower than the Diffuse Horizontal
Irradiance (DHI), as shown in Figure 4.2.
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
Irradiance (W/m2)
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.2: Irradiance measured on May 23rd, 2023
• June 1st, 2023: A day with high irradiance variability and a diffuse fraction of kd =
0.32. Notably, the diffuse irradiance varied throughout the day, with a high diffuse
fraction (kd = 0.86) observed from the beginning of the day until 10 a.m., and a lower
diffuse fraction (kd = 0.24) for the remainder of the day, as depicted in Figure 4.3.
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
200
400
600
800
Irradiance (W/m2)
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.3: Irradiance measured on June 1st, 2023
36
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:45==
4.1.2
Ideal case
Figures 4.4, 4.5 and 4.6 show the tracking curves of the models implemented with the
ideal algorithm.
Figure 4.4 illustrates that under clear-sky conditions, the optimal angles calculated by all
models closely align with the astronomical positions. Given the substantial direct fraction,
the models effectively optimize the beam component of irradiance, similar to astronomical
tracking. While diffuse irradiance is relatively low compared to beam irradiance, it causes
a minor deviation from the astronomical rotation towards a more horizontal position.
For overcast conditions, as depicted in Figure 4.5, the different models calculate that the
tracker optimal position is horizontal for the majority of the day. In the early morning and
the late afternoon, peaks of DNI can be observed, which results in the tracker moving
closer to the astronomical position.
Finally, Figure 4.6 illustrates a day with variable irradiance conditions. In that case, the
brute force search applied for the ideal case places the tracker between the horizontal and
astronomical positions before the high variability period in the morning while the CENER
model, based on the isotropic model, is closer to a horizontal tilt during the same period.
Later, the high irradiance variability shows through the tracker rotation, going from a hor-
izontal position when the diffuse irradiance component is prevailing to the astronomical
position when the direct one is more significant a few moments later. All models go back
to astronomical tracking when direct irradiance is prevailing again.
In Figures 4.4 and 4.6, around mid-day, the binary model is always a flat-curve while
the other curves appear to be smoother. This is due to the fact that the binary model
compares GPOA(βd) with the actual GHI measurement, while the other models use an
analytical equation or a transposition model to calculate GTI(β = 0°) instead of using
directly the measure of GHI. The Perez transposition model applied for β = 0° does not
return the value of GHI used as an input. This can be observed in Figure 4.7, where
the GHI measured on June 7th, 2023 is higher than the one calculated using the Perez
transposition model for a horizontal tilt (β = 0°).
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
37
==PAGE:46==
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Binary model
Brute force search
CENER model
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.4: Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm on June 7th, 2023
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Binary model
Brute force search
CENER model
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
50
100
150
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.5: Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm on May 23rd, 2023
38
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:47==
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Binary model
Brute force search
CENER model
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.6: Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm on June 1st, 2023
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
200
400
600
800
Irradiance (W/m2)
GHI measured
GHI from Perez transposition model 
= 0°
Figure 4.7: Comparison of actual GHI measurement with the value calculated by the
Perez transposition model for a horizontal tilt on June 7th, 2023
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
39
==PAGE:48==
Decomposition model
The Erbs decomposition model was implemented for the brute
force search model with the ideal algorithm to measure how the error in the DHI calculated
propagates to the tracking curves. Figures 4.8, 4.9 and 4.10 show the DHI and DNI
measured vs. the DHI and DNI calculated using the Erbs decomposition model for the
three reference days.
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
200
400
600
800
Irradiance (W/m2)
GHI
DHI
DNI
DHI Erbs
DNI Erbs
Figure 4.8: Comparison of measured the DHI, DNI with DHI and DNI from the Erbs de-
composition model on June 7th, 2023
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Irradiance (W/m2)
GHI
DHI
DNI
DHI Erbs
DNI Erbs
Figure 4.9: Comparison of measured the DHI, DNI with DHI and DNI from the Erbs de-
composition model on May 23rd, 2023
40
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:49==
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Irradiance (W/m2)
GHI
DHI
DNI
DHI Erbs
DNI Erbs
Figure 4.10: Comparison of measured the DHI, DNI with DHI and DNI from the Erbs
decomposition model on June 1st, 2023
It can be observed that the decomposition model does not calculate the DHI precisely
when the irradiance variability is substantial, but the model seems more accurate during
clear-sky days or fully overcast days (when the weather conditions are not changing).
The observations mentioned in Section 2.1.3 are visible: DHI is overestimated during
the clear-sky day (Figure 4.8) but underestimated during cloudy periods (Figures 4.9 and
4.10). The actual yearly diffuse fraction for 2023 was 15.6% but the Erbs decomposition
model estimated it to be 19.1%, resulting in an absolute difference of 3.5%. Figures 4.11
and 4.12 show two regression plots of DHI and DNI between the value calculated with the
Erbs decomposition model and the value measured.
The relative (to DHI or DNI measured) root mean square difference of the values calcu-
lated with the Erbs decomposition model is 60% for the DHI and 59% for the DNI. This
error, quite significant, would be propagated in the optimal angle calculated if a decom-
position model is used.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 4.11: Regression between the DHI measured and the DHI calculated (hourly
values) with the Erbs decomposition model.
The dotted line is the linear regression
(R2 = 0.8739) and the solid line is the identity line.
Figure 4.12: Regression between the DNI measured and the DNI calculated (hourly
values) with the Erbs decomposition model.
The dotted line is the linear regression
(R2 = 0.9433) and the solid line is the identity line.
42
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:51==
Figures 4.13, 4.14 and 4.15 illustrate how including the decomposition model changes
the tracking curve for the brute force search model implemented with the ideal algorithm.
The tracking curves are almost similar during the clear sky-day (Figure 4.13) and very
close to each other during the fully overcast day (Figure 4.14). However, they differ sig-
nificantly when the irradiance conditions are changing (Figure 4.15). This confirms the
observation that the Erbs decomposition model is more accurate when the conditions are
not changing.
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Irradiance measured
Decomposition model
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.13: Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm with and without a
decomposition model on June 7th, 2023
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
43
==PAGE:52==
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Irradiance measured
Decomposition model
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
50
100
150
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.14: Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm with and without a
decomposition model on May 23rd, 2023
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Irradiance measured
Decomposition model
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.15: Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm with and without a
decomposition model on June 1st, 2023
44
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:53==
4.1.3
Real-time algorithm
For the 15-minute resolution, the results are presented Figures 4.16, 4.17 and 4.18, where
they are compared against ideal astronomical tracking. Similar graphs using a 5-minute
resolution are presented in Appendix, Figures B.1, B.2 and B.3, where they are compared
with the 15-minute resolution. The black dots correspond to the optimal angles calculated
every 15 minutes.
The tracking curves are now step curves: the different models are used to calculate the
optimal tracking rotation every 15 minutes, therefore the tracker stops when it reaches this
position. Although the tracker behavior remains as in the ideal case, it appears that for the
real-time algorithm, the tracker is sometimes away from the optimal position. For instance,
Figure 4.17 shows that the response of the trackers to the peaks of DNI is slower than in
the ideal algorithm as the tracker remains away from the horizontal position for a longer
period. However, the real-time algorithm reduces the tracker rotation in comparison to the
ideal case. As displayed in Figure 4.18, the optimization resolution of 15 minutes reduces
the tracker sensitivity to irradiance variability. Instead of oscillating constantly between
the astronomical position and the horizontal position, the tracker moves only every 15
minutes.
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Binary model
Brute force search
CENER model
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.16: Brute force search implemented for the real-time algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on June 7th, 2023
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
45
==PAGE:54==
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Binary model
Brute force search
CENER model
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
50
100
150
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.17: Brute force search implemented for the real-time algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on May 23rd, 2023
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Binary model
Brute force search
CENER model
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.18: Brute force search implemented for the real-time algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on June 1st, 2023
46
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:55==
4.1.4
Real-time & TeraBase algorithm
Figures 4.19, 4.20 and 4.21 display the irradiance variability for the three reference days.
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
200
400
600
800
Irradiance (W/m2)
GHI
DHI
DNI
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Variability
Variability index
Figure 4.19: Variability index measured on June 7th, 2023
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
Irradiance (W/m2)
GHI
DHI
DNI
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Variability
Variability index
Figure 4.20: Variability index measured on May 23rd, 2023
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
47
==PAGE:56==
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
200
400
600
800
Irradiance (W/m2)
GHI
DHI
DNI
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Variability
Variability index
Figure 4.21: Variability index measured on June 1st, 2023
Different thresholds αV I were investigated for the brute force search implemented with
the real-time algorithm corrected with the TeraBase formula, for both the 5-minute and
the 15-minute resolutions. αV I is significant in the TeraBase correction as it adjusts the
sensitivity of the model to irradiance variability. When it increases, the hesitation factor will
tend to be lower for the same irradiance variability. Therefore, the optimal angle corrected
βc (which corresponds to the tracker rotation angle for this algorithm) will tend to be closer
to the optimal angle βopt (before the TeraBase correction).
48
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:57==
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
No TeraBase model
VI  = 70
VI  = 50
VI  = 30
VI  = 10
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
200
400
600
800
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
0
50
100
Variability
Variability index
Figure 4.22: TeraBase correction angle implemented for the brute force search model and
the real-time algorithm for different αV I on June 1st, 2023
Figure 4.22 shows the brute force search model implemented with the real-time algorithm
and corrected with the TeraBase model for some selected values of αV I. It confirms the
statement that a lower threshold αV I increases the hesitancy and therefore shifts the
tracker closer to the astronomical position.
Figures 4.23, 4.24 and 4.25 illustrate the brute force search model implemented with the
real-time algorithm with and without the TeraBase correction for the three reference days
(T = 5 min). The threshold used in the linear regression between the VI and the hesitation
factor was set to αV I = 40 because the parameter sweep showed that this value would
provide the highest yield for this model and this implementation algorithm.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
49
==PAGE:58==
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
No TeraBase correction
TeraBase correction 
VI  = 40
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
200
400
600
800
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
0
50
100
Variability
Variability index
Figure 4.23: TeraBase correction angle implemented for the brute force search model and
the real-time algorithm on June 1st, 2023
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
No TeraBase correction
TeraBase correction 
VI  = 40
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
200
400
600
800
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
0
50
100
Variability
Variability index
Figure 4.24: TeraBase correction angle implemented for the brute force search model and
the real-time algorithm on June 7th, 2023
50
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:59==
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
No TeraBase correction
TeraBase correction 
VI  = 40
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
50
100
150
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
0
50
100
Variability
Variability index
Figure 4.25: TeraBase correction angle implemented for the brute force search model and
the real-time algorithm on May 23rd, 2023
As expected, the angle βc calculated with the TeraBase equation 3.5 is always between
the optimal angle βopt (calculated with the brute force search model) and the astronomical
angle βd. Figure 4.24 shows that when the variability is low, the TeraBase correction
barely corrects the optimal angle calculated with the brute force search model. The same
trend also appears in Figure 4.25 however this time, the TeraBase model prevents the
tracker from moving away from the horizontal tilt for a too short period of time. When the
irradiance variability is changing e.g. on June 7th, the TeraBase model shifts the tracker
corrected angle slightly closer to the astronomical position during times of high variability.
4.1.5
Forecast algorithm
The tracking curves for the different models implemented with the forecast algorithm are
displayed in Appendix for both the 5-minute (Figures C.3, C.1 and C.2) and the 15-minute
(Figures C.6, C.4 and C.5) resolutions. The tracking curves for the 5-minutes resolution
are compared with the 15-minute resolution. The black dots correspond to the optimal
angles calculated every 15 minutes.
The forecast data behaves similarly to the real-time algorithm, except that it has an offset
due to the irradiance data and optimal rotation being calculated in advance.
Figures 4.26, 4.27 and 4.28 display a comparison between the forecast algorithm and
the real-time algorithm for the brute force search model (with no TeraBase correction
implemented) for T = 15 min.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
51
==PAGE:60==
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Real-time
Forecast
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.26: Comparison of the forecast algorithm and the real-time algorithm for the brute
force search model on June 7th, 2023
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Real-time
Forecast
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
50
100
150
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.27: Comparison of the forecast algorithm and the real-time algorithm for the brute
force search model on May 23rd, 2023
52
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:61==
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Real-time
Forecast
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure 4.28: Comparison of the forecast algorithm and the real-time algorithm for the brute
force search model on June 1st, 2023
If this algorithm was to be implemented in a utility-scale PV park, forecast data would
be supplied by a third-party and the predictions would not be completely accurate. To
measure this difference, forecast data was provided by Solcast, a company that develops
the data and tools needed to plan, construct, operate and manage solar power systems
across the world [49]. It contains GHI, DHI and DNI for 2023 with a time step of 30 minutes.
This data was compared with actual GHI, DHI and DNI measurements
Figure 4.29 shows the comparison between the half-hourly GHI measured and the GHI
predicted by Solcast on June 1st, 2023. Figure 4.30 presents a regression between the
GHI measured and the forecast GHI provided by Solcast.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 4.29: Comparison between the GHI measured and the GHI predicted by Solcast
on June 1st, 2023
Figure 4.30: Regression between the GHI measured and the forecast GHI calculated
(half-hourly values) provided by Solcast. The dotted line is the linear regression (R2 =
0.8747) and the solid line is the identity line.
The relative (to GHI measured) root mean square difference of the dataset (one year)
provided by Solcast was calculated to be 1.3% for the GHI and 0.4% for the DHI. This
error, though small, would be propagated in the optimal angle calculated if such forecast
data is used.
54
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:63==
4.2
Annual simulations
In this section, the results will be presented for the optimal angle models (brute force
search, CENER model, binary model) with the different model implementation algorithms
(ideal case, real-time, real-time & TeraBase and forecast). Results were also computed
for astronomical tracking used as a reference in the comparisons. The simulations for the
real-time, real-time & TeraBase and forecast algorithms are presented for the 5-minute
and the 15-minute resolutions. The CENER model and the binary model cannot be cou-
pled with the real-time algorithm when the optimization resolution is T = 5 min as the
tracker can only move T × ω = 45°, which is potentially less than the maximum possible
rotation 2 × βmax = 110°. However, for T = 15 min., these models can be implemented
with the real-time algorithm as T × ω = 135° > 110°. The gains are estimated in compari-
son to astronomical tracking and are calculated for the energy produced and the energy
produced, including the tracker consumption.
4.2.1
Ideal case
Table 4.1 shows the results of the simulations for the ideal case.
Optimal angle model
∆β
(°)
∆t
(h)
Econs
(kWh)
IPOA
(kWh)
Ep
(kWh)
Gains
Ep
Gains
Ep −Econs
Astronomical tracking
80,300
149
7
1497
21,712
-
-
Brute force search
389,252
721
35
1512
21,949
1.09%
0.96%
CENER model
457,564
847
41
1508
21,887
0.80%
0.65%
Binary model
461,402
854
41
1509
21,906
0.89%
0.74%
Table 4.1: Yearly gains for the different models for the ideal algorithm in comparison to
astronomical tracking
The results show the best achievable yield for each model with and without the tracker en-
ergy consumption. They represent what each model could produce when no constraints
in the tracker movement are implemented for a high resolution (T = 1 min). Brute force
search, implemented with a transposition model, is the model that shows the highest yield
increase in comparison to astronomical tracking with 1.09% more DC energy produced
and 0.96% more net DC energy produced (consumption included).
The results can be compared to those from the different yield studies summarized in Table
1.1, even though these results are insolation gains and not the energy produced, and
they are omitting the energy consumption of the tracker. The gains for brute force search
calculated in the present report (1.09%) can be compared with the value estimated by
Rodríguez-Gallegos et al. (1.8%-3.3%) [17] who use the same transposition model. It
can also be stacked up with the results from Anderson et al. [16] who used pvfactors,
a transposition & view factor model based on the Perez transposition model [18] with
considerations for row-to-row sky diffuse shading, ground shadows and module-module
reflections. They estimated the gains to be between 0.2% and 0.8%. McIntosh et al.
estimated the gains with brute force search and ray-tracing simulations to be in the range
of 1.11%-2.10% [15].
The ideal algorithm applied to the CENER model reaches a 0.80% gain and can be com-
pared to the analytical equations form McIntosh et al. who estimated the increase to be
between 1.71% and 3.11% [15].
Finally, the binary model for the ideal case is estimated to provide a DC energy gain of
0.89% in comparison to astronomical tracking. This can be compared with the article from
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
55
==PAGE:64==
Antonanzas et al. [20] which estimates that this gain could lie between 0.16% and 3.01%.
Among the weather stations investigated in this study, the two closest are Cabauw (in the
Netherlands) and Toravere (in Estonia), for which yield increases of 1.42% and 1.48%
were measured, respectively.
Table 4.2 provides an overview of the monthly gains of the brute force search model in
comparison to astronomical tracking, for the ideal algorithm. The monthly diffuse fraction
is also included. Figure 4.31 illustrates that the gain of the brute force search model for
the ideal case (in comparison to astronomical tracking) is lower when the monthly diffuse
fraction is lower. A regression between these two parameters is presented Figure 4.32
which shows that the coefficient of determination is R2 = 0.9215.
Month
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Diffuse fraction
78%
55%
55%
37%
36%
34%
49%
59%
46%
69%
76%
91%
Gains
Ep −Econs
4.4%
1.7%
1.7%
0.4%
0.3%
0.5%
0.9%
1.6%
0.7%
2.6%
3.7%
6.6%
Table 4.2: Monthly gains of the brute force search model
Figure 4.31: Monthly gains of the brute force search model
56
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:65==
Figure 4.32: Regression between the monthly gain of the brute force search model and
the diffuse fraction (R2 = 0.9215)
Error in the decomposition model
Table 4.3 shows the results of the simulations for the brute force search model for the
ideal case, using a decomposition model.
Model implementation
algorithm
∆β
(°)
∆t
(h)
Econs
(kWh)
IPOA
(kWh)
Ep
(kWh)
Gains
Ep
Gains
Ep −Econs
Astronomical tracking
80,300
149
7
1497
21,712
-
-
Ideal case (actual
irradiance measurements)
389,252
721
35
1512
21,949
1.09%
0.96%
Ideal case
(decomposition model)
377,510
699
34
1,510
21,910
0.91%
0.79%
Table 4.3: Yearly gains for the brute force search model for the ideal case with and without
the use of a decomposition model
The error created by the decomposition model is propagated to the simulations, as the
results show that the gain achieved with the brute force search model for the ideal case (in
comparison to astronomical tracking) would be underestimated if a decomposition model
was used.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
57
==PAGE:66==
4.2.2
Real-time algorithm
For both the 5-minute and the 15-minute resolutions, the results account for the 1-minute
irradiance data between tracker optimal moves, for which the tracker position is calcu-
lated.
5-minute resolution
Table 4.4 shows the results of the simulations for the real-time algorithm with a time res-
olution T = 5 min.
Optimal angle model
∆β
(°)
∆t
(h)
Econs
(kWh)
IPOA
(kWh)
Ep
(kWh)
Gains
Ep
Gains
Ep −Econs
Astronomical tracking
80,300
149
7
1497
21,712
-
-
Brute force search
186,014
344
17
1,503
21,829
0.54%
0.50%
CENER model
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Binary model
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Table 4.4: Yearly gains for the different models for the real-time algorithm in comparison
to astronomical tracking
As mentioned before, the real-time algorithm with an optimization resolution of 15 minutes
cannot be applied to the CENER model and the binary model. For the brute force search
model, it appears that the yield increase could reach 0.50% more than astronomical track-
ing. In comparison to the ideal case for the brute force search model, the real-time algo-
rithm with a 5-minute resolution reduces by 52% the number of degrees moved (389,252°
for the ideal case and 186,014° for the real-time algorithm), while reducing by only 48%
the net DC energy gain in comparison to astronomical tracking (0.96% for the ideal case
and 0.50% for the real-time algorithm). Even though the gain is calculated using 1-minute
irradiance data—as it is the case with the ideal algorithm—there is now a penalty for not
moving back to the true tracking position between optimal moves when it is sunny.
In comparison to astronomical tracking, brute force search with a real-time algorithm
moves 2.3 times more than astronomical tracking (186,014° and 80,300° respectively)
for an energy consumption of 0.4% more and an energy production of 0.50% more.
15-minute resolution
Table 4.5 shows the results of the simulations for the ideal case with a time resolution T
= 15 min.
Optimal angle model
∆β
(°)
∆t
(h)
Econs
(kWh)
IPOA
(kWh)
Ep
(kWh)
Gains
Ep
Gains
Ep −Econs
Astronomical tracking
80,300
149
7
1497
21,712
-
-
Brute force search
108,080
200
10
1,493
21,696
-0.08%
-0.09%
CENER model
103,350
191
9
1,480
21,505
-0.96%
-0.97%
Binary model
122,174
226
11
1,485
21,580
-0.61%
-0.63%
Table 4.5: Yearly gains for the different models for the real-time algorithm in comparison
to astronomical tracking
The results for the models implemented with real-time algorithm and an optimization reso-
lution of 15 minutes all show a yield lower compared to astronomical tracking. The angle
being optimized every 15 minutes only, the position of the tracker in between two opti-
mizations often yields a worse in-plane irradiance compared to astronomical tracking. As
expected, the total degrees moved by the tracker is lower when the resolution is higher
(108,080° for T = 15min and 186,014° for T = 5 min for the brute force search).
58
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:67==
4.2.3
Real-time & TeraBase algorithm
The TeraBase correction is always implemented for the brute force search model. It re-
quires as an input as threshold αV I to define the impact of the variability on the corrected
angle βc. Figure 4.23 shows the tracking curve with and without TeraBase correction
for αV I = 40 while Figure 4.22 shows the resulting tracking curve for different values of
αV I. A sensitivity analysis was conducted on the threshold αV I to measure its impact
on the tracker consumption and the DC energy produced. The results are presented in
the following sections. Once again they account for the 1-minute irradiance data between
tracker optimal moves, for which the tracker position is calculated.
5-minute resolution
For an optimization resolution of T = 5 minutes, Table 4.6 shows the energy consumption
and the energy produced in comparison to astronomical tracking.
αV I
Econs
(kWh)
Ep
(kWh)
Gains
Ep
Gains
Ep −Econs
10
16
21845
0.61%
0.57%
20
16
21848
0.63%
0.59%
30
16
21850
0.63%
0.59%
40
16
21851
0.64%
0.60%
50
16
21851
0.64%
0.60%
60
16
21851
0.64%
0.60%
70
16
21851
0.64%
0.60%
Table 4.6: Yearly gains for the brute force search model for the real-time algorithm (T = 5
min) corrected with the TeraBase model in comparison to astronomical tracking
It appears that the optimal value for αV I is 40. In that case, the yield could reach 0.60%
more than astronomical tracking. The detailed results of the simulation for the brute force
search model implemented with the real-time algorithm corrected with the TeraBase model
for αV I = 40 are presented Table 4.7.
Model implementation algorithm
∆β
(°)
∆t
(h)
Econs
(kWh)
IPOA
(kWh)
Ep
(kWh)
Gains
Ep
Gains
Ep −Econs
Astronomical tracking
80,300
149
7
1497
21,712
-
-
Ideal case
389,252
721
35
1512
21,949
1.09%
0.96%
Real-time, no TeraBase
186,014
344
17
1,503
21,829
0.54%
0.50%
Real-time, TeraBase (αV I = 40)
176,862
328
16
1,505
21,851
0.64%
0.60%
Table 4.7: Yearly gains for the brute force search model for different algorithms (T = 5
min) in comparison to astronomical tracking
Implementing the TeraBase correction for the real-time algorithm provides results that are
higher compared to the real-time algorithm with no TeraBase correction. The TeraBase
model offers an approach that keeps the advantages of the brute force search model
but in the same time avoids potentially unbeneficial movement of the tracker when the
weather variability is high and therefore moving the tracker may be unnecessary. This
algorithm reaches a 0.60% increase of the yield in comparison to astronomical tracking.
Even though this value is less than what the simulations for the brute force search for the
ideal case estimated (gain 0.96%), the real-time algorithm corrected with the TeraBase
model could be implemented in a utility-scale PV park, as the maximum rotation in 1
minute cannot exceed 9°.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
59
==PAGE:68==
15-minute resolution
For an optimization resolution of 15 minutes, Table 4.8 shows the energy consumption
and the energy produced in comparison to astronomical tracking.
αV I
Econs
(kWh)
Ep
(kWh)
Gains
Ep
Gains
Ep −Econs
10
8
21,777
0.30%
0.29%
20
8
21,788
0.35%
0.34%
30
8
21,791
0.36%
0.36%
40
8
21,790
0.36%
0.35%
50
8
21,789
0.35%
0.35%
60
8
21,787
0.34%
0.34%
70
8
21,785
0.33%
0.33%
Table 4.8: Yearly gains for the brute force search model for the real-time algorithm cor-
rected with the TeraBase model in comparison to astronomical tracking
It appears that the optimal value for αV I is 30. In that case, the yield could reach 0.36%
more than astronomical tracking. The detailed results of the simulation for the brute force
search model implemented with the real-time algorithm corrected and the TeraBase cor-
rection for αV I = 30 are presented Table 4.9.
Model implementation
algorithm
∆β
(°)
∆t
(h)
Econs
(kWh)
IPOA
(kWh)
Ep
(kWh)
Gains
Ep
Gains
Ep −Econs
Astronomical tracking
80,300
149
7
1497
21,712
-
-
Ideal case
389,252
721
35
1512
21,949
1.09%
0.96%
Real-time
no TeraBase
108,080
200
10
1493
21,696
-0.08%
-0.09%
Real-time
TeraBase (αV I = 30)
93,184
173
8
1501
21,791
0.36%
0.36%
Table 4.9: Yearly gains for the brute force search model for different algorithms (T =
15min) in comparison to astronomical tracking
For the 15-minute resolution, it can be observed that the TeraBase correction for the real-
time algorithm provides results that are significantly better compared to the real-time algo-
rithm with no TeraBase correction. The gain, negative for the real-time algorithm with no
TeraBase correction in comparison to astronomical tracking, is now positive as it reaches
0.36%. As for the real-time algorithm with no TeraBase correction, the lower resolution
(15 minutes) reaches a lower yield increase than the higher resolution (5 minutes), as the
angle is optimized less frequently.
4.2.4
Forecast algorithm
As for the real-time and the real-time & TeraBase algorithms, the results for the forecast
algorithm for both the 5-minute and the 15-minute resolutions account for the 1-minute ir-
radiance data between tracker optimal moves, for which the tracker position is calculated.
5-minute resolution
As for the real-time algorithm, the forecast algorithm was only ap-
plied to the brute force search model for the 5-minute resolution. The forecast data used
for the simulation corresponds to the actual GHI, DHI and DNI measurements, assuming
that they are predicted 5 minutes in advance with a 100% accuracy (i.e. no forecast data
was used for this simulation).
60
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:69==
Table 4.10 presents the results of the simulation.
Optimal angle model
∆β
(°)
∆t
(h)
Econs
(kWh)
IPOA
(kWh)
Ep
(kWh)
Gains
Ep
Gains
Ep −Econs
Astronomical tracking
80,300
149
7
1497
21,712
-
-
Brute force search
186,106
345
17
1,506
21,870
0.73%
0.68%
CENER model
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Binary model
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Table 4.10: Yearly gains for the different models for the forecast algorithm in comparison
to astronomical tracking
Using forecast data enables to increase the gain in comparison to astronomical tracking,
as the tracker is able to move to the optimal position in advance. In comparison to the
brute force search implemented with the real-time algorithm for T = 5 min, the net energy
produced (including the consumption) has increased from 0.50% to 0.68%.
15-minute resolution
Table 4.11 presents the results of the simulation for the three
different models for T = 15 min.
Optimal angle model
∆β
(°)
∆t
(h)
Econs
(kWh)
IPOA
(kWh)
Ep
(kWh)
Gains
Ep
Gains
Ep −Econs
Astronomical tracking
80,300
149
7
1497
21,712
-
-
Brute force search
108,306
201
10
1,496
21,732
0.09%
0.08%
CENER model
103,660
192
9
1,486
21,592
-0.56%
-0.56%
Binary model
122,618
227
11
1,490
21,656
-0.26%
-0.28%
Table 4.11: Yearly gains for the different models for the forecast algorithm in comparison
to astronomical tracking
As for the real-time algorithm, the forecast algorithm implemented with a lower time resolu-
tion (T = 15 minutes instead of 5 minutes) provides lower results for the brute force search
model, with a gain that is slightly higher compared to astronomical tracking. However, the
results for all the models are higher when forecast data is implemented in comparison to
the real-time algorithm.
4.3
Implementation in a real tracker system at DTU Risø
The brute force search model using the real-time algorithm and the TeraBase correction
was implemented in one tracker at DTU Risø (tracker 5) for approximately two weeks,
to measure how the tracker would respond to the optimal angle calculated. Irradiance
data (GHI, DHI and DNI) was measured by the sensors on site and sent to a File Transfer
Protocol (FTP). It was then retrieved by a laptop that calculated the variability and the
optimal angle of rotation, first by applying the brute force search model, and then by
correcting this angle with the TeraBase formula. The astronomical tracking strategy was
implemented first, and a manual data push to the NCU and the TCU was done when the
tracker tilt had to be changed. A threshold was set to decide whether to move manually
the tracker to the optimal position or to keep the astronomical angle already implemented.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
61
==PAGE:70==
Using βc, the optimal angle calculated with the brute force search and corrected with the
TeraBase formula and βd, the astronomical angle calculated, the tracker rotation was set
as following:
{
βd if |βc −βd| < 5°
βc otherwise
(4.1)
The parameters for this tracker are the same as those detailed in Table 3.2, except for the
GCR and the maximum angle βmax, which are 0.4 and 45°, respectively, for this specific
tracker.
The results of the real-time implementation are presented for three reference days:
• Figure 4.33 shows the irradiance and the tracking curve on May 28th, 2024, a day
with changing weather conditions. Therefore, the tracker was oscillating between
the astronomical position and the optimal position, closer to a horizontal tilt.
• Figure 4.34 shows the irradiance and the tracking curve on May 29th, 2024, a day
with overcast conditions. Direct irradiance was high in the morning but for most of
the day, DHI was the main component of the GHI. From this moment, the tracker
remained almost horizontal.
• Figure 4.35 shows the irradiance and the tracking curve on June 2nd, 2024, a day
with clear sky conditions in the afternoon. The tracker was tilted horizontally in
the morning until the moment when the clouds disappeared and the direct fraction
increased. After that, the tracker followed the astronomical tracking curve.
62
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:71==
Figure 4.33: Implementation of the brute force search model with the real-time algorithm
corrected with the TeraBase formula in DTU Risø on May 28th, 2024
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
63
==PAGE:72==
Figure 4.34: Implementation of the brute force search model with the real-time algorithm
corrected with the TeraBase formula in DTU Risø on May 29th, 2024
64
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:73==
Figure 4.35: Implementation of the brute force search model with the real-time algorithm
corrected with the TeraBase formula in DTU Risø on June 2nd, 2024
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
65
==PAGE:74==
66
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:75==
5
Conclusion
This thesis explored various modeling techniques and simulation parameters to identify
the optimal rotation angles for solar trackers, with the goal of maximizing Plane-of-Array
(POA) irradiance. The study also considered the mechanical limitations of trackers to
develop a feasible model for implementation in utility-scale PV parks.
Several control strategies were evaluated, including ideal case scenarios, real-time ad-
justments, and forecast-based algorithms. The ideal case revealed that the brute force
search model was the most effective, achieving a 0.96% gain compared to standard sun
tracking. In comparison, the binary model provided an upper bound yield increase of
0.74%, while the CENER model offered a 0.65% improvement. A simple real-time al-
gorithm, if implemented with low optimization time resolution, would negate the benefits
of the optimal angle model. However, incorporating irradiance variability to assess the
reliability of tracker adjustments showed that a feasible algorithm could achieve up to a
0.60% gain over astronomical tracking. The forecast algorithm, though slightly less pre-
cise, allowed for anticipatory adjustments based on weather predictions.
Accurate measurement of global and diffuse irradiance is crucial, as errors in the diffuse
horizontal irradiance (DHI) calculated by the decomposition model can lead to inaccura-
cies in the tracking curve, thereby reducing the gains achieved by the brute force search
model in the ideal case.
The research also included practical implementation scenarios at the DTU Risø campus,
validating the theoretical models with real-world data. These implementations confirmed
the feasibility of deploying the optimized algorithms in existing solar tracking systems with
minimal modifications.
5.1
Project limitations
The variability index could benefit from a more detailed investigation, particularly regarding
the resolution used for its calculation. In this report, the variability index at a specific
time was based on 1-minute irradiance data from the last 15 minutes. However, further
exploration of different resolutions could enhance the accuracy of the index.
Investigating different sensors for measuring irradiance and various tracker models could
also be valuable to understand how nominal rotation speeds impact the potential gains
from the implemented algorithms.
A further step in this project could involve comparing the POA irradiance measured for
trackers using the optimal angle model with those following a sun tracking strategy, to
measure the performance of the model.
Additionally, extending the validation of these algorithms to different geographic locations
with varying climates would help in understanding their universal applicability and potential
regional adaptations.
In conclusion, this thesis has shown that optimizing single-axis solar tracking algorithms
for diffuse light conditions can significantly improve energy capture efficiency. The method-
ologies and insights presented provide a strong foundation for future advancements in
solar tracking technology, contributing to more efficient and sustainable solar energy sys-
tems worldwide.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
67
==PAGE:76==
68
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:77==
List of Figures
1.1
Horizontal Single-Axis Solar Tracker (HSAT) [8] [9] . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Comparison of the energy output from different system mountings for five
locations in Europe [12] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Astronomical tracking: the modules are oriented towards the sun to maxi-
mize the beam component of irradiance (adapted from TrinaTracker [14]) .
3
1.4
Average irradiance at the front plane of the module relative to a horizontal
module. In this example the isotropic diffuse light constitutes half the GHI,
the inputs are θs = 45°, γs = 119°, R = 5.5 m and L = 2.064 m [15] . . . . . .
4
2.1
Sensors used to measure irradiance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.2
Relative (to GHI) root mean squared (rRMSD) difference (modeled minus
measured) for each of the 12 decomposition models (x-axis) at each of the
five stations with DHI measurements [29]) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.3
Diagram of the NCU and TCU connections in a utility-scale PV park (from
Nicholas Riedel-Lyngskær, European Energy) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
2.4
Transformation from the global coordinates to the tracker coordinates [13] . 15
2.5
GCR is the ratio of the array width W to the row pitch R [34] . . . . . . . . . 17
3.1
Sensors installed in DTU Risø
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.2
Flow diagram of the astronomical tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.3
Astronomical tracking curve with and without a backtracking strategy for
different GCR on June, 1st 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.4
Flow diagram of the brute force search model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
3.5
Flow diagram of the binary model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.6
Astronomical tracking implemented with a backtracking strategy for the
ideal algorithm on June 1st, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
3.7
Measured Global Horizontal Irradiance vs. (horizontal) Clear Sky Irradi-
ance on June 1st, 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4.1
Irradiance measured on June 7th, 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
4.2
Irradiance measured on May 23rd, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.3
Irradiance measured on June 1st, 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.4
Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm on June 7th, 2023
. 38
4.5
Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm on May 23rd, 2023 . 38
4.6
Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm on June 1st, 2023
. 39
4.7
Comparison of actual GHI measurement with the value calculated by the
Perez transposition model for a horizontal tilt on June 7th, 2023 . . . . . . . 39
4.8
Comparison of measured the DHI, DNI with DHI and DNI from the Erbs
decomposition model on June 7th, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.9
Comparison of measured the DHI, DNI with DHI and DNI from the Erbs
decomposition model on May 23rd, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
4.10 Comparison of measured the DHI, DNI with DHI and DNI from the Erbs
decomposition model on June 1st, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
4.11 Regression between the DHI measured and the DHI calculated (hourly val-
ues) with the Erbs decomposition model. The dotted line is the linear re-
gression (R2 = 0.8739) and the solid line is the identity line. . . . . . . . . . 42
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
69
==PAGE:78==
4.12 Regression between the DNI measured and the DNI calculated (hourly val-
ues) with the Erbs decomposition model. The dotted line is the linear re-
gression (R2 = 0.9433) and the solid line is the identity line. . . . . . . . . . 42
4.13 Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm with and without a
decomposition model on June 7th, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
4.14 Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm with and without a
decomposition model on May 23rd, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.15 Brute force search implemented for the ideal algorithm with and without a
decomposition model on June 1st, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
4.16 Brute force search implemented for the real-time algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on June 7th, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
4.17 Brute force search implemented for the real-time algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on May 23rd, 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.18 Brute force search implemented for the real-time algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on June 1st, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
4.19 Variability index measured on June 7th, 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.20 Variability index measured on May 23rd, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
4.21 Variability index measured on June 1st, 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4.22 TeraBase correction angle implemented for the brute force search model
and the real-time algorithm for different αV I on June 1st, 2023 . . . . . . . . 49
4.23 TeraBase correction angle implemented for the brute force search model
and the real-time algorithm on June 1st, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.24 TeraBase correction angle implemented for the brute force search model
and the real-time algorithm on June 7th, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
4.25 TeraBase correction angle implemented for the brute force search model
and the real-time algorithm on May 23rd, 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
4.26 Comparison of the forecast algorithm and the real-time algorithm for the
brute force search model on June 7th, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.27 Comparison of the forecast algorithm and the real-time algorithm for the
brute force search model on May 23rd, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
4.28 Comparison of the forecast algorithm and the real-time algorithm for the
brute force search model on June 1st, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
4.29 Comparison between the GHI measured and the GHI predicted by Solcast
on June 1st, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
4.30 Regression between the GHI measured and the forecast GHI calculated
(half-hourly values) provided by Solcast. The dotted line is the linear re-
gression (R2 = 0.8747) and the solid line is the identity line. . . . . . . . . . 54
4.31 Monthly gains of the brute force search model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
4.32 Regression between the monthly gain of the brute force search model and
the diffuse fraction (R2 = 0.9215) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4.33 Implementation of the brute force search model with the real-time algorithm
corrected with the TeraBase formula in DTU Risø on May 28th, 2024 . . . . 63
4.34 Implementation of the brute force search model with the real-time algorithm
corrected with the TeraBase formula in DTU Risø on May 29th, 2024 . . . . 64
4.35 Implementation of the brute force search model with the real-time algorithm
corrected with the TeraBase formula in DTU Risø on June 2nd, 2024 . . . . 65
A.1 Flow diagram of the brute force search model with a decomposition model
implemented
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
70
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:79==
B.1 Brute force search implemented with the real-time algorithm for two differ-
ent time resolutions T on June 7th, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
B.2 Brute force search implemented with the real-time algorithm for two differ-
ent time resolutions T on May 23rd, 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
B.3 Brute force search implemented with the real-time algorithm for two differ-
ent time resolutions T on June 1st, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
C.1 Brute force search implemented with the forecast algorithm for two different
time resolutions T on June 7th, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
C.2 Brute force search implemented with the forecast algorithm for two different
time resolutions T on May 23rd, 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
C.3 Brute force search implemented with the forecast algorithm for two different
time resolutions T on June 1st, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
C.4 Brute force search implemented for the forecast algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on June 7th, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82
C.5 Brute force search implemented for the forecast algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on May 23rd, 2023
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
C.6 Brute force search implemented with the forecast algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on June 1st, 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
71
==PAGE:80==
List of Tables
1.1
Overview of the gains from different studies for several models and algo-
rithms, in comparison to astronomical tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.1
Root Mean Square Difference (RMSD) of the 4 highest ranked transposi-
tion models in comparison to measured irradiance data for the 27 locations
investigated [31]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.1
Site parameters for DTU Risø . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.2
Tracker parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.3
Module specifications
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.4
Data availability for 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.5
Overview of the models and algorithms investigated and their optimization
resolutions T
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.6
Simulation parameters for the real-time & TeraBase algorithm . . . . . . . . 32
3.7
Temperature coefficients per the SAPM model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.1
Yearly gains for the different models for the ideal algorithm in comparison
to astronomical tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
4.2
Monthly gains of the brute force search model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
4.3
Yearly gains for the brute force search model for the ideal case with and
without the use of a decomposition model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
4.4
Yearly gains for the different models for the real-time algorithm in compar-
ison to astronomical tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
4.5
Yearly gains for the different models for the real-time algorithm in compar-
ison to astronomical tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
4.6
Yearly gains for the brute force search model for the real-time algorithm (T
= 5 min) corrected with the TeraBase model in comparison to astronomical
tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
4.7
Yearly gains for the brute force search model for different algorithms (T =
5 min) in comparison to astronomical tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
4.8
Yearly gains for the brute force search model for the real-time algorithm
corrected with the TeraBase model in comparison to astronomical tracking . 60
4.9
Yearly gains for the brute force search model for different algorithms (T =
15min) in comparison to astronomical tracking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
4.10 Yearly gains for the different models for the forecast algorithm in compari-
son to astronomical tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
4.11 Yearly gains for the different models for the forecast algorithm in compari-
son to astronomical tracking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
72
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:81==
Bibliography
[1] EU Commission, “Climate strategies & targets.” https://climate.ec.europa.eu/eu-
action/climate-strategies-targets_en. Accessed: 2024-05-25.
[2] Council of the European Union, “European green deal.” https://www.consilium.
europa.eu/en/policies/green-deal. Accessed: 2024-05-25.
[3] R. R. Michael Schmela, “Eu market outlook for solar power 2023-2027,” tech. rep.,
SolarPower Europe, 2023.
[4] International
Energy
Agency,
“Solar
PV.”
https://www.iea.org/energy-system/
renewables/solar-pv. Accessed: 2024-05-25.
[5] J. Stein, C. Reise, J. Castro, G. Friesen, G. Maugeri, E. Urrejola, S. Ranta, M. Alam,
M. Anoma, S. Ovaitt, D. Berrian, E. Bertrand, M. Chiodetti, D. Chudinzow, H. Colin,
M. Devoto Acevedo, R. French, E. Fuentealba Vidal, F. Haffner, and B. Farnung,
“Iea pvps task 13 performance, operation and reliability of photovoltaic systems -
bifacial photovoltaic modules and systems: Experience and results from international
research and pilot applications,” tech. rep., International Energy Agency, 04 2021.
[6] C. Philibert, K. Daszkiewicz, S. Landolina, T. Rinke, and M. Mukherjee, “Solar en-
ergy: Mapping the road ahead,” tech. rep., International Energy Agency, 10 2019.
[7] Berkeley Lab, “Utility-scale solar.” https://emp.lbl.gov/utility-scale-solar/, 2023. Ac-
cessed: 2024-05-25.
[8] “Sunflower
website.”
https://smartflower.com/blog/whats-the-point-of-a-dual-axis-
tracker/. Accessed: 2024-06-04.
[9] “Energy 5 website.” https://energy5.pl/en/the-first-solar-farm-on-energy5-trackers/.
Accessed: 2024-06-04.
[10] C. D. Rodríguez-Gallegos, H. Liu, O. Gandhi, J. P. Singh, V. Krishnamurthy, A. Ku-
mar, J. S. Stein, S. Wang, L. Li, T. Reindl, and I. M. Peters, “Global techno-economic
performance of bifacial and tracking photovoltaic systems,” Joule, vol. 4, no. 7,
pp. 1514–1541, 2020.
[11] I. H. Rosma, I. M. Putra, D. Y. Sukma, E. Safrianti, A. A. Zakri, and A. Abdulka-
rim, “Analysis of single axis sun tracker system to increase solar photovoltaic energy
production in the tropics,” in 2018 2nd International Conference on Electrical Engi-
neering and Informatics (ICon EEI), pp. 183–186, 2018.
[12] T. Huld, M. Suri, and T. Cebecauer, “Performance of single-axis tracking photovoltaic
systems in europe,” Photovoltaic International, pp. 1–5, 2009.
[13] K. Anderson and M. Mikofski, “Slope-aware backtracking for single-axis trackers,”
2020.
[14] TrinaTracker, “Trinatracker intelligent tracking technology.” https://static.trinasolar.
com/sites/default/files/WP-TC_SuperTrack%20White_paper_EN.pdf.
Accessed:
2024-06-04.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
73
==PAGE:82==
[15] K. R. McIntosh, M. D. Abbott, and B. A. Sudbury, “The optimal tilt angle of monofacial
and bifacial modules on single-axis trackers,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 12,
no. 1, pp. 397–405, 2022.
[16] K. Anderson and S. Aneja, “Single-axis tracker control optimization potential for the
contiguous united states,” in 2022 IEEE 49th Photovoltaics Specialists Conference
(PVSC), pp. 1–6, 2022.
[17] C. D. Rodríguez-Gallegos, O. Gandhi, S. K. Panda, and T. Reindl, “On the pv tracker
performance: Tracking the sun versus tracking the best orientation,” IEEE Journal
of Photovoltaics, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 1474–1480, 2020.
[18] R. Perez, P. Ineichen, R. Seals, J. Michalsky, and R. Stewart, “Modeling daylight
availability and irradiance components from direct and global irradiance,” Solar En-
ergy, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 271–289, 1990.
[19] R. Perez and R. Stewart, “Solar irradiance conversion models,” Solar Cells, vol. 18,
no. 3, pp. 213–222, 1986.
[20] J. Antonanzas, R. Urraca, F. M. de Pison, and F. Antonanzas, “Optimal solar tracking
strategy to increase irradiance in the plane of array under cloudy conditions: A study
across europe,” Solar Energy, vol. 163, pp. 122–130, 2018.
[21] T. Muneer, “Solar radiation model for europe,” Building Services Engineering Re-
search and Technology, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 153–163, 1990.
[22] I. Reda and A. Andreas, “Solar position algorithm for solar radiation applications,”
Solar Energy, vol. 76, no. 5, pp. 577–589, 2004.
[23] E. Pigueiras, L. Narvarte, and J. Munoz, “Tracking and back-tracking,” Progress in
Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, vol. 19, pp. 747–753, 09 2011.
[24] National Renewable Energy Laboratory, “Rredc glossary of solar radiation re-
source terms.” https://www.nrel.gov/grid/solar-resource/solar-glossary.html.
Ac-
cessed: 2024-05-26.
[25] “Profec ventus website.” https://shop.profec-ventus.com/index.php. Accessed: 2024-
06-04.
[26] “Direct
industry
website.”
https://www.directindustry.com/prod/eko-instruments/
product-188697-2013515.html. Accessed: 2024-06-04.
[27] L. Harrison, J. J. Michalsky, and J. L. Berndt, “Automated multifilter rotating shadow-
band radiometer: An instrument for optical depth and radiation measurements,” Ap-
plied Optics, vol. 33, no. 22, pp. 5118–5125, 1994.
[28] D. Erbs, S. Klein, and J. Duffie, “Estimation of the diffuse radiation fraction for hourly,
daily and monthly-average global radiation,” Solar Energy, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 293–
302, 1982.
[29] M. Lave, W. Hayes, A. Pohl, and C. Hansen, “Evaluation of global horizontal irradi-
ance to plane-of-array irradiance models at locations across the united states,” IEEE
Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 5, pp. 1–10, 03 2015.
[30] Y. Kotak, M. Gul, T. Muneer, and S. Ivanova, “Investigating the impact of ground
albedo on the performance of pv systems,” in CIBSE Technical Symposium, London,
UK, 04 2015.
74
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:83==
[31] J. E. Hay and D. McKay, Calculation of Solar Irradiances for Inclined Surfaces: Ver-
ification of Models which Use Hourly and Daily Data. Vol 1. Vol 2, Analysis Pack-
age User’s Guide, Reference Manual and Programme Listings. International Energy
Agency, 1988.
[32] P. Loutzenhiser, H. Manz, C. Felsmann, P. Strachan, T. Frank, and G. Maxwell,
“Empirical validation of models to compute solar irradiance on inclined surfaces for
building energy simulation,” Solar Energy, vol. 81, no. 2, pp. 254–267, 2007.
[33] W. Marion, “Rotation angle for the optimum tracking of one-axis trackers,” 2013.
[34] C. Deline, B. Sekulic, J. Stein, S. Barkaszi, J. Yang, and S. Kahn, “Evaluation of
maxim module-integrated electronics at the doe regional test centers,” in 2014 IEEE
40th Photovoltaic Specialist Conference, PVSC 2014, pp. 986–991, 06 2014.
[35] W. Holmgren, C. Hansen, and M. Mikofski, “pvlib python: a python package for mod-
eling solar energy systems,” Journal of Open Source Software, vol. 3, no. 29, p. 884,
2018.
[36] “Eko instruments website.” https://www.eko-instruments.com/eu. Accessed: 2024-
06-04.
[37] A. Forstinger, S. Wilbert, A. Jensen, B. Kraas, C. Peruchena, C. Gueymard,
D. Ronzio, D. Yang, E. Collino, J. Martinez, J. Ruiz-Arias, N. Hanrieder, P. Blanc, and
Y. Saint-Drenan, “Expert quality control of solar radiation ground data sets,” in Pro-
ceedings of SWC 2021: ISES Solar World Congress, pp. 1037–1048, International
Solar Energy Society, 2021. SWC 2021: ISES Solar World Congress ; Conference
date: 25-10-2021 Through 29-10-2021.
[38] I. Muñoz, A. Guinda, G. Olivares, S. Díaz, A. Gracia, and L. Casajús, “Evaluation
of horizontal single￿axis solar tracker algorithms in terms of energy production and
operational performance,” Sol. RRL, oct 2023.
[39] H. Hottel and B. Woertz, “Performance of flat-plate solar-heat collectors,” Trans.
ASME (Am. Soc. Mech. Eng.); (United States), vol. 64, 1 1942.
[40] K.
Rhee,
“Irradiance
optimization.”
https://terabase.atlassian.net/servicedesk/
customer/portal/3/article/1260060675?src=59595139. Accessed: 2024-02-17.
[41] J. Stein, C. Hansen, and M. Reno, “The variability index: A new and novel metric for
quantifying irradiance and pv output variability,” in World Renewable Energy Forum,
05 2012.
[42] P. Ineichen and R. Perez, “A new airmass independent formulation for the linke tur-
bidity coefficient,” Solar Energy, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 151–157, 2002.
[43] R. Perez, P. Ineichen, K. Moore, M. Kmiecik, C. Chain, R. George, and F. Vignola, “A
new operational model for satellite-derived irradiances: description and validation,”
Solar Energy, vol. 73, no. 5, pp. 307–317, 2002.
[44] M. Reno, C. Hansen, and J. Stein, “Global horizontal irradiance clear sky models :
implementation and analysis,” tech. rep., Sandia National Laboratories, 01 2014.
[45] D. King, J. Kratochvil, and W. Boyson, “Photovoltaic array performance model,” tech.
rep., Sandia National Laboratories, 01 2004.
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
75
==PAGE:84==
[46] K. J. Sauer, T. Roessler, and C. W. Hansen, “Modeling the irradiance and tempera-
ture dependence of photovoltaic modules in pvsyst,” IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics,
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 152–158, 2015.
[47] A. Mermoud, “Changes in module performance coefficient generation for version 6,”
in 2nd PV Performance Modeling Workshop, Santa Clara, CA, 2013.
[48] A. Mermoud and T. Lejeune, “Performance assessment of a simulation model for pv
modules of any available technology,” in 25th EU PVSEC / WCPEC-5, 2010.
[49] “Solcast website.” https://solcast.com/. Accessed: 2024-05-25.
76
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:85==
A
Flow diagram of the brute force search
model with a decomposition model
Timeseries
Longitude λ
Latitude Φ
Altitude z
Solar zenith θz
Solar azimuth γs
solarposition.get_solarposition
Tracker/axis azimuth γa
Tracker/axis tilt βa
Real weather data
GHI
β tracker rotation angle
- βmax <= β <= βmax
Resolution of 1°
Initialization: β = - βmax
POA irradiance (global, direct, diffuse, sky diffuse,
ground reflected) GPOA(β)
(Perez irradiance transposition model)
Optimal rotation angle βopt
POA irradiance GPOA,opt
Maximum rotation angle βmax
β = β + 1
irradiance.get_total_irradiance
Inputs
Calculation step
Outputs
DHI, DNI
(Erbs decomposition model)
irradiance.erbs
Iteration
Figure A.1: Flow diagram of the brute force search model with a decomposition model
implemented
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
77
==PAGE:86==
B
Tracking curves for the real-time
algorithm with a 5-minute resolution
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
T = 15min
T = 5min
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure B.1: Brute force search implemented with the real-time algorithm for two different
time resolutions T on June 7th, 2023
78
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:87==
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
T = 15min
T = 5min
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
50
100
150
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure B.2: Brute force search implemented with the real-time algorithm for two different
time resolutions T on May 23rd, 2023
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
T = 15min
T = 5min
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure B.3: Brute force search implemented with the real-time algorithm for two different
time resolutions T on June 1st, 2023
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
79
==PAGE:88==
C
Tracking curves for the forecast
algorithm with 5-minute and 15-minute
resolutions
C.1
5-minute resolution
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
T = 15min
T = 5min
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure C.1: Brute force search implemented with the forecast algorithm for two different
time resolutions T on June 7th, 2023
80
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:89==
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
T = 15min
T = 5min
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
50
100
150
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure C.2: Brute force search implemented with the forecast algorithm for two different
time resolutions T on May 23rd, 2023
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
T = 15min
T = 5min
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure C.3: Brute force search implemented with the forecast algorithm for two different
time resolutions T on June 1st, 2023
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
81
==PAGE:90==
C.2
15-minute resolution
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Brute force search
Binary model
CENER model
00:00
07-Jun
00:00
08-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure C.4: Brute force search implemented for the forecast algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on June 7th, 2023
82
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
==PAGE:91==
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Brute force search
Binary model
CENER model
00:00
23-May
00:00
24-May
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
50
100
150
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure C.5: Brute force search implemented for the forecast algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on May 23rd, 2023
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
50
25
0
25
50
Tracker Tilt (°)
Tracking curves
Astronomical tracking
Brute force search
Binary model
CENER model
00:00
01-Jun
00:00
02-Jun
03:00
06:00
09:00
12:00
15:00
18:00
21:00
0
250
500
750
Irradiance (W/m2)
Irradiance measured
GHI
DHI
DNI
Figure C.6: Brute force search implemented with the forecast algorithm with a 15-minute
resolution on June 1st, 2023
Optimized single axis solar tracking algorithms for diffuse light conditions
83
==PAGE:92==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Ørsteds Plads, Building 343
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.electro.dtu.dk
