==PAGE:1==
Master’s Thesis
Estimating loudspeaker level from
physical metrics in living rooms
by
Alexandre Marc Maria Gilson (s174427)
Mathias Timmer Sutherland (s173988)
DTU
Technical University of Denmark
June 29, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Contents
Abstract
Acknowledgments
Contributions
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Core Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Background
3
2.1
Literature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Data analysis of user-collected data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Method
5
3.1
Loudspeaker level compensation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.2
Distance based sound propagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.3
Clarification of approach
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Measurement equipment and approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.5
Measurement data post-processing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.6
Fitting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6.1
Piecewise linear fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.6.2
Polynomial fitting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.7
Statistical analysis and validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.7.1
Linear Regression Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.7.2
Generalized Linear Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.7.3
Support Vector Regression Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.7.4
Model Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.7.5
Model Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.8
COMSOL® Simulation set-up
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.8.1
Geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
3.8.2
COMSOL ® Pressure Acoustics Parameters
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
3.8.3
Ray tracing Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4
Results
18
4.1
IEC room measurements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Fit and Comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.1
Liner fitting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2.2
Polynomial fitting
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.2.3
Combined polynomial and linear fits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.3
Statistical Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
==PAGE:3==
4.3.1
Linear Regression Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
4.3.2
Generalized Linear Regression Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.3.3
Support Vector Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.3.4
Simulation results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
5
Discussion
40
5.1
Statistical analysis results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.2
Reflection on research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6
Conslusion
42
6.1
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
In this thesis, an investigation of methods and approaches to improve loudspeaker level compensation based
on physical properties of living rooms is performed. As methods exist to determine this with measurements
in a specific living room, this project aims to map the parameters needed to build a predictive model for
an arbitrary setup. To begin uncovering the requirements of such a model, the sound field radiating from
a single regular loudspeaker in a standardized living room is measured, analyzed, complemented with
simulations and used to investigate approaches to fitting a predictive model. The investigation finds that
properties of the room, placement of source and receiver, and loudspeaker design will all have an impact
on the sound pressure level at a given position in the room. An evaluation of regression fitting models is
performed and finds that the diffuse field is well described by a linear model, while the direct field is more
accurately described by a polynomial fit. Additionally a statistical model is built and confirms that linear
models are not sufficient in predicting both the simultaneous direct and diffuse sound field, therefore, a
machine learning model approach is used, and is able to estimate the sound field across the investigated
measurement setups with a single model. Although additional data collection will be needed to determine
the importance of room feature variations outside of this investigation, the work done provides significant
information for a later construction of a generalized prediction model.
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgments
We would firstly like to acknowledge the incredible support, enthusiasm and guidance of our three supervi-
sors Finn Agerkvist, Jonas Brunskog and Oliver Scheuregger, their combined insight helped condense a
broad-spanning topic into a concise investigation, and were crucial in the shaping and execution of this
project. Secondly, we would like to thank our fellow acoustics students, for continued input and perspective,
as well as moral support, camaraderie and encouragement, throughout the entire project. And lastly, a
thank you to our families and friends, who have all endured with us in this intense period, and have helped
us keep our head cool and our focus steady.
==PAGE:6==
Contributions
Authors:
Alexandre Marc Maria Gilson, MSc Engineering Acoustics, DTU
Mathias Timmer Sutherland, MSc Engineering Acoustics, DTU
Supervisors:
Finn Agerkvist, Associate professor, DTU
Jonas Brunskog, Associate Professor, DTU
Oliver Scheuregger, Senior Technology Engineer, Bang & Olufsen
The workload of this thesis was divided equally between both parties, with the focus of Alexandre Marc
Maria Gilson being on simulation and statistical analysis and the focus of Mathias Timmer Sutherland being
on post-processing of measured data and regression fitting.
Some use of Artifical Intelligence (AI) [1] was used in this thesis, specifically for model optimization in the
statistical analysis section.
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
A common obstacle when striving to achieve accurate sound reconstruction with multiple loudspeakers is
the fact that sound from different sources arrive at different locations in space at different points in time,
for a listener in a living room with an irregular loudspeaker setup, where the distance between source and
receiver is different between loudspeakers (figure 1), this affects the temporal alignment of signals, but also
the sound pressure level (SPL), as sound pressure decays in magnitude when sound travels unobstructed
in space. In free field, where sound is able to radiate without obstacle, this decay can be estimated with
quite straightforward relations. But, for enclosed spaces, such as living rooms, this becomes more complex
and free-field decay can no longer be assumed.
Figure 1: Sketch of a possible loudspeaker setup with a listener/receiver in the intersection between an
audio signal from two loudspeakers/sources, but with a significant difference in distance between each
source and receiver.
This project, in collaboration with Bang & Olufsen (B&O), aims to investigate the spatial impact of such
room interactions. Several methods to compensate for these types of interactions already exist, in several
different forms and with different focuses, and B&O have ways to compensate for this in their products.
The obstacle is, that methods for compensation usually require manual measurement of the sound at the
listening position.
The aim for this project is therefore focused on investigating if a method could exist to eliminate the need for
manually measuring the sound pressure level in the room, and if a model could be constructed to predict
this behavior, in a given room, with a satisfactory precision. A large part of the project has therefore been
to uncover exactly which approach would be most beneficial, in the search for an optimized model for
prediction of such room interactions.
This has been an iterative process, in which both understanding the prior work done to perform this kind of
compensation, and condensing the core issue into a set of parameters that can then be used to propose an
experimental design, that can uncover details of this interaction, so that a predictive model can be built to
compensate both for the room interactions, but also the need for detailed measurement of the room, or, if
nothing else, pin-point where the limits of such a model could be.
1.1
Structure
Firstly, an overview of the academic background for this project is described, including brief thoughts
on an analysis of loudspeaker level data provided by B&O. Then, an explanation of the methodology
used, including theoretical, experimental, simulative and statistical approaches. Then, a presentation of
experimentally measured and simulated results, as well as results from analysis and comparisons between
methods used to predict the behavior of these measurements, using known models, different types of
data fitting and statistical analysis. And lastly, a discussion on the validity of these approaches, and which
conclusions can be made from the results of this study. Furthermore, a reflection on further work needed to
strengthen the accuracy of the investigated approaches.
1
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Core Research Question
The main questions this study aims to answer is therefore as follows:
Can the sound pressure level from a loudspeaker be estimated purely from the distance between a source
and a receiver?
What kind of information from the environment is needed to be able to estimate this based on distance
between source and receiver?
Would it be possible to determine a minimum amount of parameters needed for an accurate estimate?
Could a model be created to predict the sound pressure level from regular loudspeaker setups in living
rooms to aid in loudspeaker level correction?
2
==PAGE:9==
2
Background
To accurately determine the starting point and approach of investigation for this thesis, an initial study of
academic literature and prior collected data, provided by B&O was performed. The main objective of this
background section is to give the reader an introduction of previous studies, and theories which led to the
formulation of the research questions, where the literature section is organized by concepts.
2.1
Literature
In the acoustics engineering domain, one of the challenges regarding loudspeakers in rooms is to ensure
an optimal performance of the loudspeakers in its environment, considering the loudspeaker design and
the room characteristics. Therefore, high sound quality reproduction requires thorough speaker design and
adaptation to the acoustic environment. This involves predicting and adjusting the sound pressure level in
the listening space based on the speaker design and the room characteristics.
Early research have focused on building manual and automatic methods for loudspeaker tuning in regards
to its acoustic environment such as in [2] by Jan Abildgaard Pedersen and Kasper Thomsen and [3]
by Jan Abildgaard Pedersen. Where adjustments have been achieved through acoustic measurements
and perceptual evaluations. These methods combine speaker design and placement with automatic
systems using digital signal processing to automatically adapt the loudspeaker output for a given listening
position. These techniques uses real-time feedback to extract the room characteristics in order to adjust
the loudspeaker frequency response and other characteristics. The use of inverse filtering techniques in
the system are evaluated through perceptual evaluation[4].
A key concept in this context is the acoustic room behavior. In [5] by Jianliang Gao, S.K. Tang, Yuezhe Zhao,
Yangsheng Cai, Lili Pan, the development and applications of energy models to predict room behavior are
investigated. In this paper, a energy-based method is discussed and shows the importance of using an
energy based model for complex and intricate environments. Various modeling techniques are investigated
and then validated through experimental data. The various acoustic environments considered in this paper
are big concert halls with intricate geometries. Similar, in [6] by M. Barron and L-J. Lee, objective acoustics
measurements were performed in concert halls. Where both the direct and reflected sound are investigated
for concert hall acoustics. A revised theory accounting for the decay of reflected sound is presented and
shows that the architectural features and their impact needs to be taken into consideration.
Another key concept in this context is the critical distance, where the critical distance is the point were the
sound pressure level of the direct sound field is equal to the sound pressure level of the diffuse sound field.
Characterizing the critical distance becomes a crucial part of optimizing the loudspeaker placement and
understanding what kind of level compensation and delay needs to be applied to the loudspeaker to ensure
a balanced sound distribution at the listening position. Techniques to estimate the critical distance take into
account multiple factors of the room such as the room reverberation time, the absorption coefficient, and
the directivity of the loudspeaker. Don Davis’s paper [7] gives a methodology or framework for optimizing
speaker placement for sound reinforcement taking into consideration and applying concepts such has the
critical distance, equivalent acoustic gain, needed acoustic gain, and potential acoustic gain for various
acoustic environments.
A novel method for automatic gain control was introduced by Walter Etter [8] where a distance sensor is
used to adjust the gain based on the distance between the source and receiver which are respectively a
loudspeaker and a microphone. This method was used to assess the voice transmission and recording
problem were the loudspeakers output does not provide a consistent gain output. This paper gives a
detailed explanation into how gain adjustment is derived from the inverse square law. It also addresses the
proximity effect, where lower frequencies closer to the sound source are boosted, and how to adjust for it.
Furthermore, this paper gives an overview of the methods used for distance measurements .
Further research have shown that adaptive systems do improve the listener experience with paper like
[9] by Floyd E. Toole, that highligths the importance of considering both physical and perceptual domains.
Sebastian Merchel and Stephan Groth also presented a method and implementations for stereophonic
playback system that dynamically adjust the speaker properties for a balanced sound in the ”sweet spot”
(Listening position) to improve the listener audio localization in [10]. They showed that an adaptive system
3
==PAGE:10==
gives a better stereophonic localization over a wider area. A future research focus is centered around a
head tracking method for an adaptive system. In [11] by Juergen Herre, Christof Faller, an advanced user
tracked loudspeaker rendering technique is investigated for a more stable spatial sound in multi-channel
loudspeaker systems. With this technology the aim is to provide the user with a dynamically adjusted
sound field based on the listener’s position. The user were tracked via virtual glasses where a gain and
delay compensation is used along with, a directivity and room reverberation compensation are investigated.
Furthermore a subjective evaluation was performed and showed improvement in the users experience.
Even though further literature was investigated, a significant amount was deemed out of the scope of this
thesis. Papers such as [12] showed the impact of the room on the human perception and tried to adapt the
findings for a room correction system considering timbre to keep the influence of the room in the system. To
understand off-axis listening, the paper on off axis listening for multiple loudspeakers was described in [13],
and showed a method for calculating Q at different positions on the listening plane for multiple loudspeaker
layout. Furthermore, image source algorithm were also research to understand the amplitude panning
techniques as proposed in [14].
Overall, integrating predictive modeling and dynamic algorithms, taking into account the physical and
perceptual aspects, is considered a good approach for high quality sound reproduction, these advancements
can lead the way to a more user friendly loudspeaker systems that give an enhanced and consistent acoustic
experience for various acoustic environments.
2.2
Data analysis of user-collected data
As part of the collaboration with B&O, a dataset of user collected values was provided. The dataset included
loudspeaker level adjustment values, positional data of loudspeakers in the room setups, as well as distance
to the receiver/listening position. Due to privacy restrictions, the dataset did not include any physical or
acoustic information about the room, and therefore, it was not possible to match the level adjustment directly
to impulse responses, reverberation times or room dimensions. An analysis of the data was still performed
to investigate if a pattern could be extrapolated, that could be the basis for a loudspeaker level adjustment
model, purely based on distance.
The dataset consists of several combinations of loudspeakers, with the common factor being the Beolab
Theatre soundbar [15], which includes the measurement equipment necessary to measure the loudspeaker
level balance both of the soundbar and additional loudspeakers in the room setup. The measurement
procedure includes placing a microphone at the listening position, and playing an exponential sweep
from each individual loudspeaker in the system (and from each loudspeaker driver in the soundbar). The
measured sound pressure level is then used to adjust the loudspeaker level of each individual loudspeaker
in the setup.
After an initial investigation of this data, the conclusion was that the variability of unknown parameters impact
on the adjusted loudspeaker level was too large to accurately make any predictions of the loudspeaker
level as a function of distance. Even after sorting the data into specific loudspeaker models and estimating
a lower limit for room volume, based on the minimum area needed to physically place every loudspeaker
setup in a room, there did not seem to be a clear trend.
The decision was therefore made to not perform additional analysis of the data, and pivot to determining
the physical metrics needed to predict loudspeaker level for a given room.
4
==PAGE:11==
3
Method
3.1
Loudspeaker level compensation
For regular living room loudspeaker setups, the audio programme reproduction of the system, with more
than one loudspeaker, is divided onto several loudspeaker channels, based on programme format and
number of loudspeakers. For systems where the distance from each source and the receiver position
correlates directly with the intended loudspeaker configuration for reproduction of the intended programme,
one can assume that no additional spatial and/or positional compensation in the loudspeaker programme
reproduction is needed.
For systems where the setup of loudspeakers does not correlate directly with the intended configuration,
as in systems where the distance between a stereo pair of speakers and the receiver, is not equal, the
unaltered programme material might be perceived to have inter-aural differences, as the sound must travel
further from one loudspeaker than the other. This might result in both perceived level and time differences
at the receiver location. This time difference can be adjusted by accounting for the speed of sound in air,
and delaying the individual loudspeakers to be temporally aligned at the receiver location, and can therefore
be calculated purely based on the distance between sources and receiver location. For level differences,
this compensation is not known to be possible purely based on the distance between the source and the
receiver, as the pattern of sound pressure level decay, when it is traveling from a source, is shown to
depend on environmental factors and even type of source.
This type of compensation is still possible, though, as measurement of the living room conditions in relation
to each loudspeaker can determine the needed loudspeaker level compensation. The common approach to
achieve this, though, is to measure the loudspeaker system once installed into the room. If a method could
be designed to determine the physical quantities needed, to then be measured or approximated beforehand,
a calculation based on the distance from the loudspeakers, could then be implemented to simplify the
compensation for inter-aural differences in non-regular loudspeaker setups. The sound pressure level can
then be estimated at any distance from the source, and the loudspeaker levels can be adjusted to align the
perceived sound level at the receiver location, for accurate audio programme reproduction.
3.2
Distance based sound propagation
Predicting the decay of sound from a single loudspeaker in real world applications can be quite a challenge,
and, ideally, the sound field in the entire room, across frequencies, should be mapped to make the most
accurate prediction. Especially for modal behavior under the Schroeder frequency
FS = 2000
s T
V

,
(1)
where FS is the Schroeder frequency, T is the reverberation time and V is the room volume.
The assumption is, that if the sound from a single loudspeaker, in a room, can be determined sufficiently,
this can be expanded to predict the level difference between loudspeakers.
The goal of this project is to investigate the limits of how a simpler prediction model can be used to predict
this sound field, in a limited use-case of normal living rooms. The challenge will be to investigate the point
where a simpler model might be able to predict this behavior.
In increasing complexity, a theoretical basis for understanding the sound traveling from a single source
can be constructed by starting from the pure basic principles of sound propagation, until a point where,
hopefully, the accuracy is sufficient to explain the sound propagation, in this limited use-case.
From a source in complete free-field, a constant drop in square pressure from a point source is expected to
follow the inverse square law [8],
p2
p(r) ∝1
r2 ,
(2)
5
==PAGE:12==
where p2
p(r) is the squared sound pressure from a point source, and r is the distance from the source. As
the surface area of a propagating sphere (4πr2) will increase in size with the same factor, and assuming
energy conservation, the sound pressure would naturally follow the same decay.
For line-sources, though, the assumption is that
p2
l (r) ∝1
r ,
(3)
because of similar considerations, but assuming a cylindrical instead of spherical propagation, where p2
l (r)
is the squared sound pressure from a line source.
In physical reality, there is seldom either a pure mathematical point or line source, and true free-field
conditions can only be approximately assumed in special cases, such as anechoic chambers, where sound
reflections have been purposely designed to be of minimal impact.
In places with any reflective surfaces, such as regular living rooms, the reflection of sound waves will
impact the sound field. Depending on the location of a listener or receiver, there will come a point where
the magnitude of these reflections is larger than the original propagating sound, and the decay of sound
propagation will diminish as the magnitude of the sound field stabilizes. This point is know as the critical
distance, which is defined as the point where the direct sound field and the diffuse sound field is of equal
magnitude. Following the work of Barron and Lee [6], the sound pressure level of these two parts of the
sound field can be described as
L = 10 log10
 ρc
p2
ref
  W
4πr2 + 4W
A

,
(4)
with the two terms inside the logarithm related to the direct and the reflected sound, respectively, and where
L is the sound pressure level, ρ is the density of air, c is the speed of sound in air, p2
ref is the reference
pressure (20µPa), W is the sound power, and A is the total acoustic absorption. This can be simplified by
using the standardized reference pressure, assuming the sound power of an omni-directional source, at
a set distance, as reference level, and using Sabine’s equation to rewrite the the total absorption as the
relation between reverberation time and room volume, which gives
L −L0 = 10 log10
 100
r2 + 31200 T
V

,
(5)
where L0 is the reference level at 10 meters, T is the reverberation time and V is the volume of the room.
Note that this estimates the late reflections to be constant in magnitude across distance. In reality there
is a slight drop-off in energy, even in the diffuse sound field, with the late reflections being estimated by
Barron-Lee as
l =
 31200 T
V

e−0.4r/T e−1.11/T ,
(6)
where l is the expanded late reflection term from equation (5).
This can then be further expanded on and be written as an impulse response function [5]
gBL(r, t) = 13.82 · 31200
V
e−0.4r/T e−13.82t/T ,
(7)
where gBL(r, t) is a function with energy properties of an impulse response, but without any frequency
content. The sound pressure level can be found from the energy integral over this impulse response energy
function
El(r) =
Z t
0
gBL(r, t) dt,
(8)
6
==PAGE:13==
LEl = 10 log10(El(r)),
(9)
where El is the energy over the impulse response and LEl is the calculated SPL, which then describes the
linearly decreasing diffuse sound field magnitude.
Assuming the prediction of the sound pressure level difference between two sources is only needed at a
distance greater than the critical distance, the revised Barron-Lee model could be sufficient, to predict the
sound field. With the critical distance given by [7]
rc = 1
4
s
Sα
π(1 −α) ≈0.057
r
QV
T ,
(10)
where rc is the critical distance, α is the absorption coefficient, S is the room surface area and Q is the
directivity factor, given by
Q = Pomni
PS
,
(11)
where Pomni is the sound power radiated by an omni-directional source and PS the sound power radiated
by the investigated source. Calculating the sound power of a source is not trivial, but an approximation for
the directivity factor of a piston in an infinite baffle [16]
Qi =
(ka)2
(1 −(J1(2ka)
ka
)
,
(12)
where Qi is the directivity factor of a piston in an infinite baffle, k is the wave-number, a is the piston radius
and J1 is the first order Bessel function, can give us an approximate indication.
If this assumptions holds true, only the volume of the room, reverberation time of the room and the directivity
factor of the source needs to be know to make a prediction of the sound pressure level at a chosen
distance from the loudspeaker. As volume of the room and the reverberation time changes between rooms,
these quantities will need to be measured or estimated. For the directivity factor, this could appear to be
dependent purely on the frequency dependent directionality of the speaker, but placing an omni-directional
source in a room close to a wall, will impact the effective sound power radiated [17]. Therefore closeness of
a source to reflective surfaces will most likely also contribute to the critical distance.
In most cases, for living room setups, it is assumed that this critical distance will be shorter than the
distance to listener position. Therefore, one could assume that the essential prediction would be to estimate
the SPL in the diffuse field. That is, the slope of the diffuse field, assuming it to be linear. Although,
depending on the use-case of this prediction, the drop in SPL from the source at the critical distance might
also be needed. If the direct field drop in SPL is not accurately estimated using free-field assumptions,
more detailed estimation of this field will be necessary. For living rooms, where ceiling height is often a
significantly smaller room dimension than width or length, one could even expect that the direct field decay
could more closely resemble a cylindrical propagation.
3.3
Clarification of approach
Based on this theoretical background, investigation of user-collected data, and several discussions on
different approaches, the conclusion was made to limit the investigation to finding a model where a minimum
amount of variables is used and try to identify these variables. The absolute best-case would be to be able
to predict the SPL decay as a function of purely distance, but, from the user-collected data, this correlation
does not look to be strong enough to predict sound pressure level accurately, at least for arbitrary room
conditions.
The choice was therefore made to create a physical set of measurements, in a controlled location, to
investigate the distance based behavior of sound pressure level from a controlled source and only vary a
7
==PAGE:14==
set of controlled parameters. The idea is that, if the room conditions do not change, purely the position
of source and receiver and knowledge of the type of source, will be able to predict the spread of sound.
Afterwards, a simulation of the same room can be made, evaluated against measurements, and validated.
Then parameters such as volume and reverberation time can more easily be adjusted in a controlled
manner. The impact of room variables can then be mapped, to adjust the model until an accurate minimal
variable predictive model can be built based on fitting methods and statistical analysis.
3.4
Measurement equipment and approach
Several choices were made in the process of deciding on a measurement setup. Firstly, a room where the
acoustic conditions are within a normal range of what could be expected in a living room and where the
conditions are also well known was needed. Therefore a room that follows the IEC-60268-13:1998 [18]
standard was used. The design of the room ensures a reverberation time of 0.4 seconds across the audible
frequency range and dimensions within the ranges of the standard, measured to 7.52 x 4.73 x 2.76 meters
(length x width x height). Secondly, a directional speaker with a flat frequency response, the DynAudio BM6,
was chosen as the source. A directional speaker was chosen over an omni-directional source to closer
resemble a real-world living room setup and thereby avoid any conclusions or interpretations of measured
results that could only be valid for such a case. Lastly, a microphone array consisting of 60 B&K 4957
array microphones, configured in a 6x10 grid, was chosen. This was chosen instead of a single receiver
microphone, to be able to simultaneously record audio at high spatial resolution. This, of course, saves
time when measuring a large amount of points, but the resolution is also critical when investigating the
spatial change in magnitude of sound, especially in the diffuse field, where sound pressure level can vary
greatly within a small area.
Including supplementary items, the equipment used in the measurement is as follows:
• IEC-standard living room
• Directional loudspeaker (DynAudio BM6)
• Loudspeaker stand
• Loudspeaker amplifier (Lab.Gruppen Lab300)
• Microphone array (B&K type 4957)
• Array stand from two trestles and two square
metal beams
• PC connected to front-end interface (B&K
PULSE LAN-XI)
• Signal production and recording software (B&K
Connect)
• Cables
• Laser meter
• Marking tape
The B&K microphone array requires a B&K front-end interface to simultaneously record sixty microphones
at once, while also being able to play a signal to be recorded. After several trials of different types of
software to perform the recording, the choice was made to use B&K Connect. As excitation signal, a 3
second linear sweep from 1 Hz to 12,8 kHz was used and repeated 15 times for each recording position.
This range was chosen to cover the frequency response of, firstly, the microphones, which has a range of
50 Hz to 10 kHz, but also the loudspeaker, which has a range of 43 Hz to 20 kHz, with a crossover of 3.1
kHz between woofer and tweeter. The raw audio from each microphone was then recorded in a 60 channel
wave file for later processing. Additionally a laser meter, and marking tape was used to ensure accurate
position in the room.
Measurements were then performed with four source/receiver configurations. The four setups can be seen
in figure 2. Four source-to-wall distances were investigated, 1.5 m, 1 m, 0.5 m, and 0.308 m, where the
source position is defined as the center of the woofer membrane. In figure 2, both the source position and
the array positions can be seen, where the array positions extend from the far wall towards the source,
with as many continuous array positions as is possible without overlapping the source. This results in 12
array positions for setup 1, 13 array positions for setup 2, and 14 array positions for setup 3 and 4. This
allows for a mapping of the sound field all the way from the direct field of the loudspeaker to the diffuse field,
extended to the far wall of the room. With the back wall being the wall closest to the source position and the
far wall being the wall closest to array position 1. A measurement configuration parallel to the length of the
8
==PAGE:15==
room was chosen to keep any possible interactions from the sidewalls consistent along array positions. An
off-center position, along the width of the room, was chosen to avoid measuring along a modal node, while
still keeping a sufficient distance to the closest sidewall, to avoid the strongest interaction effects.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 2: Sketch of the measurement setups in the IEC room, with source position a 1.5 m, b 1 m, c 0.5m,
d 0.3m.
In figure 3 a panoramic view of the IEC room and a measurement setup can be seen with the microphone
array resting on the trestle and beam construction, allowing for five array positions along the metal beams,
before the trestle and beam support was moved to extend the array measurements from the far wall towards
the loudspeaker. The reverberation time in the IEC room was also measured and confirmed to be 0.4 s and
the volume of the room is 98.2m3 which gives a Shroeder frequency of 127 Hz.
Figure 3: Panoramic picture of the IEC room, with the measurement setup
In figure 4, a closeup of the loudspeaker used, can be seen, as well as a closeup of the B&K front-end and
amplifier as well as the microphone array, confirming the inter-microphone grid spacing of 7.5 cm.
9
==PAGE:16==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4: Closeup of the loudspeaker (a), picture of the front-end and the amplifier (b), picture of the
microphone array (c)
The recordings were controlled from outside of the room, with the door slightly ajar to allow enough room for
cabling. This was deemed to be the better option, opposed to performing the measurements from inside the
room. The excitation signal was set to a fixed level from the front-end and then amplified to a sufficient level
to ensure large enough headroom in post-processing, which was then fixed throughout all measurements.
The microphone array was not explicitly calibrated before measurement, but the LEMO-cable used to
connect the array to the front-end and computer, in combination with B&K connect software allows for
reading of model, serial number, and calibration data, for each microphone. It was therefore decided that
additional calibration would not be of critical importance to the measurement.
3.5
Measurement data post-processing
Once the excitation signal at each array position was recorded, the raw audio files were imported into
Matlab for post-processing and analysis. As a linear sweep was used as the excitation signal (which has
a flat power spectral density), the main area of interest is investigating the sound pressure level over a
frequency range. The choice was made to calculate the measured sound pressure from the spectrum of
the raw recording instead of calculating an intermediary impulse response. This spectrum was constructed
by taking the Fourier transform of the measured signal, with a flattop window of window size equal to
the sampling frequency, to ensure a 1 Hz frequency resolution in the resulting spectrum. The average
magnitude of the spectrum was then calculated over different frequency ranges for further analysis. The
main frequency range of interest used was the 200 to 2kHz range, as this is a common range used [19] to
estimate an averaged speaker level for compensation. This is also above the Schroeder frequency for most
rooms, and does not extend into higher frequencies where frequency response of loudspeakers might be
less consistent. It is also within the frequency range of the loudspeaker woofer used. An analysis in octave
bands was also conducted to confirm the choice of this range.
As the 60-channel wave file for each array is ordered according to the limitations of cabling and front-
end ports, the wave file channels were ordered as columns of 6 microphones for 10 rows, with the first
microphone being the lower right. This configuration was chosen mainly for measurement anchoring, as
this allowed for a clear line of sight to both the closest side wall and back wall. This does mean that the
re-ordering of data points, for both withing and across array positions was necessary both for visualization
and ease of analysis.
10
==PAGE:17==
Table 1: Ordering of microphone number in array.
60
54
48
42
36
30
24
18
12
6
59
53
47
41
35
29
23
17
11
5
58
52
46
40
34
28
22
16
10
4
57
51
45
39
33
27
21
15
9
3
56
50
44
38
32
26
20
14
8
2
55
49
43
37
31
25
19
13
7
1
The absolute room position of each microphone was then calculated from measured position of the lower
right microphone (microphone 1) at each array position, and extrapolated, assuming the measured inter-
microphone distance of 7.5 cm. The relative distance between each microphone and source position was
then calculated with simple vector calculus.
Lastly, a recording error analysis was performed, to remove outlier measurements, where the recorded
sound pressure level was significantly lower than other measurements. A cut-off of more than 5% deviance
from the average array SPL was shown to be sufficient in identifying the outliers. The measurement was
then removed and replaced by an averaged SPL, calculated as the mean of measured values from that
single array position. This resulted in removal and replacement of 24 measurement points out of a total
3780, which was deemed to be within acceptable margins. As seen in table 2, the majority of these errors
were seen in microphone 58, with 14 errors out of 63 measurements, which could be argued to be grounds
to disqualify the microphone from the entire dataset, but after an investigation was deemed unnecessary.
Table 2: Averaged mic Errors.
Source pos.
1
2
3
4
1
4
3
2
4
4
4
4
Array pos.
2
3
3
3
4
4
5
7
7
8
8
9
Mic. Num.
39
39
8
39
9
39
10
9
58
36
58
58
Source pos.
1
4
2
4
2
3
4
2
3
4
3
4
Array pos.
10
10
11
11
12
12
12
13
13
13
14
14
Mic. Num.
9
58
58
58
58
58
58
58
58
58
58
58
3.6
Fitting
To validate results of measured data and comparing to simulated results and theoretical models, different
methods of fitting was used to investigate the sound field as a function of distance.
3.6.1
Piecewise linear fitting
One approach is piecewise linear regression. Using the revised Barron-Lee method of predicting the
diffuse field, as comparison. The assumption that justifies this approach is, if the critical distance can be
estimated accurately, the diffuse field will be enough to estimate the needed speaker level compensation.
This assumption might not be sufficient to determine the level difference between sources with different
directivity, and might only hold true where there is no difference between loudspeakers in the direct field, if
the sound pressure level at the critical distance is unknown.
An expansion of this linear regression model, would then be needed to estimate the direct field as a
single linear slope. This does not explain the exact behavior of the direct field, but it could be sufficient
in explaining the slope in the direct field for different directivity factors, estimate the critical distance, and,
ultimately, estimate the correct SPL value at the point of the critical distance, so that the SPL along the
slope of the diffuse field can be estimated. The piecewise linear function for linear regression would then be
L(r) =
 ar + b
r ≤rc
cr + d
r ≥rc,
(13)
where L is the sound pressure level a,b,c and d are fitting coefficients. The cutoff point of the piecewise
function can then be estimated by optimizing both parts of the function individually, with a moving cutoff
11
==PAGE:18==
point, defining the critical distance as the point where both fits has the best combined fit and then defining
the critical distance where the two linear fits meet. The diffuse field fit can then be compared directly with
the revised Barron-Lee diffuse field model.
3.6.2
Polynomial fitting
A different approach is to use a polynomial fit, using the prediction of the squared pressure of the direct
field given by
p2(r) = a 1
r2 + b1
r + cr + d,
(14)
where the direct field is estimated to be a combination of a point and a line source. The disadvantage
to this approach is that estimating the critical distance directly from the equation might be less accurate.
Assuming that the critical distance is the point where the energy of the direct sound and diffuse sound is
equal. For equation 14, this would be where a function consisting of only the first to terms and a function of
only the last two terms intersect. If the two later terms themselves are a good approximation of the diffuse
field, this might be a plausible way to determine the critical distance. If not, a different way of calculating the
critical distance might be needed. That is assuming the critical distance is even important to the estimate,
which could argued to be of lesser importance as long as the sound-field is accurately estimated.
Three versions of this fitting model was used to fit estimates of the measured and simulated results. Model
1, which uses all terms of equation 14, model 2, with the first term removed (a = 0), and model 3, with the
second term removed (b = 0). Unless specifically mentioned, Model 1 was used for measurement data and
model 2 was used for simulation data, as model 1 behaved strangely when fitting to the limited amount of
points of the simulated data.
Additionally, the Barron-Lee impulse response function was modified to approximate the contribution from
the direct field
gc(r, t) = 13.82 · 31200
V
e−0.4r/T e−13.82t/T e1/r,
(15)
where gc is the combined Barron-Lee and direct field approximation.
3.7
Statistical analysis and validation
For further analysis of the measured data, a thorough statistical investigation of the impact of physical
metrics was performed. This subsection briefly explains of the statistical theory on different statistical
models used throughout the statistical analysis section. It will be divided into two main parts, the first
will give a theoretical background about the statistical models which are the linear regression model, the
generalized linear regression model and the support vector regression model. A methodology along with
the optimization of those models will then be described. The statistical analysis will be performed using R®.
The analysis should reflect on the choices of the settings in regards to the experimental design. A generic
approach to the specific design and handling is showed below in 4 different steps that might need some
iterations.
• Explanatory analysis
• Modeling
• Validation and Assumptions
• Conclusion, summary and the final visualiza-
tion of the results
Three datasets are used in the statistical analysis and restricted to the frequency range of 200Hz to 2kHz.
One dataset combines the sound pressure level measured in the IEC room with all four speaker setup
combined. The two other datasets were data from the COMSOL® simulations in two scenarios, the first
had a room reverberation time of 0.4 seconds and the second had a room reverberation of 0.6 seconds. All
three dataset were organized identically for easier use in R®. The datasets variables were organized as
follows:
12
==PAGE:19==
• Sound pressure level
• Distance from source to receiver
• Distance from source to back wall
• Distance from source to side wall
• Distance from receiver to far wall
• Distance from receiver to side wall
• Azimuth angle between source and receiver
• Room reverberation time
All the variables were continuous variables since they were measured variable that can be expressed with
decimal points and arithmetic operations can be performed on them.
The statistical analysis was performed using three different statistical model, a linear regression model, a
generalized linear model and a support vector regression model. All three models will be explained in the
next sections followed by a methodology on how those models were implemented and optimized.
3.7.1
Linear Regression Model
A simple liner regression model, is a fundamental part of statistics to understand the relationship between
the independent variables and dependent variable. This model assumes a linear relationship between the
dependent variable and the output.
Assumptions of a linear model are linearity, independence, homodeascity and normality. For the linearity
assumption, the relationship between the independent variables and the dependent variables is assumed
to be linear. Secondly, the independence assumption is there to make sure that the observations are
independent of each other. Thereafter, for the homodeascity assumption to be correct the variance of
the error term needs to be constant across all the level of the predictor variable. Finally the normality
assumption holds if the errors are normally distributed.
The output of the linear model will give the values of a couple of coefficients using the least square method.
The first the intercept coefficient serves as a baseline level for the dependent variable. The rest are the
slope coefficient for each independent variable.
3.7.2
Generalized Linear Model
In the second instance of the statistical analysis a GLM statistical model [20] was performed. A GLM model
is similar to a linear model but with a modified error distribution which is useful if the error is not normally
distributed. Theyare used to predict outcomes based on the predictor variables via a link function which
links the linear predictor to the mean of the distribution function of the response. There is a variety of link
function available with four common ones, they are the identity link, logit link, log link and inverse link each
using a different family and used for different purposes. The identy link uses a gaussian family and is used
for linear regression, the logit link uses the binomial family and used for logistic regresion, the log link uses
the poisson and gamma family and used for Poisson regressin and log-linear models, finally the inverse link
uses the gamma family and is used for models with positive continuous variables. A GLM model will explain
the relationships and influences in between the sound pressure level and the other variables included in the
dataset.
The model components are divided into dependent and independent variables. The dependent variable
also called the response variable corresponds to the sound pressure level for all 3 datasets, the independent
variable also called predictors are the continuous variables which relates to the distance from the source to
the its side and its back wall, the receiver distance to its side and back wall, as well as the azimuth between
the source and receiver and the room reverberation time.
3.7.3
Support Vector Regression Model
A support vector regression [21] [22] is a type of support vector machine which is a supervised machine
learning technique. A support vector machine is most commonly used in classification problems in
comparison to the support vector regression which applies the basic principles of SVM for a regression
problem. SVR can handle a big set of data with a balance in between complexity and prediction error,
meaning that it can model complex relationships in the data but can also provide an efficient way to handle
nonlinear regression.
13
==PAGE:20==
The main idea behind a support vector regression model is to find a function in a hyperplane that has a
deviation from the actual data by a value that cannot be greater than ϵ which is a specified threshold by the
user. Thereafter, the model will aim to find a margin that contains all the training data. The data points that
lie on the boundary of the margin are called the support vectors. The hyperplane should be optimized in
order to maximize the margin which is the distance between the hyperplane and the nearest support vector.
In order to handle non linearity SVR can make the use of the kernel trick, where a kernel function is used to
transform the data into a higher-dimensional space where it is becomes linearly separable.
3.7.4
Model Methodology
Before performing any kind of statistical analysis the different libraries and data needs to be imported into
R®. Once imported the data needed to be checked for variables that are only one level, which indicates
that they have no degrees of freedom. In the three datasets used there are two common variables that
have a degree of freedom equal to zero. They are the distance source to side wall and the reverberation
time. Both of those variables are constant throughout each individual datasets. The procedure for each
statistical model are similar but will be explained separately to avoid any confusion.
For Both the linear regression model and the generalized linear regression model the data was first
normalized by a normalizing function for a better efficiency and handling of the model. The data was then
split into training set and test set with a split of 80% for the training and 20% for the test set.
Before training both models, a random forest classification was performed to extract the important features
from the datasets in regards to the target value. These extracted features are then used to build the
model formula. The random forest classification outputs a list of features from most important to the least.
The three most important features were used as baseline and more features were added thereafter for
optimization purposes.
Both models were then trained. For the GLM model a k-fold cross validation was used. The purpose of
using a k-fold cross validation was to see how well a model performs on the training data and new data. A
k-fold cross validation will show how the model performs and indicate any over fitting of the data. This was
achieved by splitting the data into multiple folds, 10 in this case. The model was then trained on the training
set and validated using the validation set while the rest was used as training set on each iteration.
The models were then evaluated on the training set and on the test set separately. The metrics extracted
from the models were then the mean square error (MSE), the root mean square error (RMSE), the mean
absolute error (MAE), and the R-squared.
Once the evaluation metrics extracted the next step was to use these models with new data in order to
show how well the model predicts the sound pressure level based on only the top features of the model.
This was achieved by creating a new function to predict the sound pressure level with new data. The new
data needed to have the same feature columns as before to be able to run.
For the support vector regression model (SVR) the methodology is a bit different. Same as previously,
the data was imported and split into training and test set. The target variable and the features were then
separated. A random forest classification was then performed as done in previous models. The model was
then trained and the metrics could then be extracted, and the model was tested with new data as explained
previously.
3.7.5
Model Optimization
To achieve a robust statistical model, models need to be optimized. To do so, parameters need to be tuned
to find the best possible solution in regards to the problem. This was first achieved with the random forest
classification, were the optimal numbers of trees was tuned to the best fitted value in regards to the out of
bag error (OOB) estimate, which needs to be as small as possible. Therefore a grid search function was
implemented. Once the optimum numbers of tree was found the random forest model was then trained.
In the GLM model a k-fold cross validation was performed to check that the model was not overfitting to the
training data, and generalized well to new data. This made the model be more robust.
14
==PAGE:21==
3.8
COMSOL® Simulation set-up
Due to time constraints throughout this project, it was decided that additional data should be gathered
using simulations. There is a multitude of choices in terms of simulation software available for room
acoustic measurements. For this project it was decided to use COMSOL ® for its wave-based approach at
lower frequencies. Other software such as ODEON ® uses a ray tracing approach to simulate impulse
response which becomes an issue at lower frequencies when the sound field has a modal behavior. A
wave based approach at lower frequencies is then a more accurate representation of what the sound
field actually is. The modal behavior of the sound field is dependent on the Shroeder frequency of the
environment simulated. From equation 1 it can be observed that the Shroeder frequency is dependent to
the reverberation time and the volume of the room. In the IEC room the reverberation time was calculated
to be 0.4 seconds and gives a Shroeder frequency of 127 Hz with equation 1.
The use of either techniques is dependent on the Shroeder frequency of the environment. For the IEC
room, the Shroeder frequency was found to be below the frequency of interest, but since there is no clear
shift in between which methods is better in the transition frequency range, the pressure acoustic module
was used up until 500Hz considering the computation and processing time of such a study.
A COMSOL ® simulation model was then built with the same specifications as the IEC room in order to be
able to compare the results with the measured values in the room. Two different reverberation times were
investigated in the simulations. The first reverberation time was set to 0.4 seconds and the second was set
to 0.6 seconds which corresponds to the typical range of reverberation in standard living rooms.
The description and methods of the simulation are three folded. The first subsection will introduce the
modeling of the geometry inside COMSOL ®, the second will explain the pressure acoustics study, and the
third will deal with the ray tracing study.
3.8.1
Geometry
The modeling of the measurement setup was performed in the COMSOL® [23] software using 2D workplane
and extrusion tools for the room and the speaker enclosure. The first step was to set the dimensions of the
room and extrude it to the desired heigth. The following step was to model the loudspeaker as a rectangular
boxed. To do so another 2D workplane was needed to set the base of the loudspeaker for extrusion.
For each loudspeaker set-up, the loudspeaker was moved to the same exact position as achieved in the
measurements.
The receiver setup was modeled as thirty different spheres with the same radius size as of the ones used
in the experiment. The positions of the receiver was set to mimic what was achieved in the measurements
with lot fewer points. A sketch of the COMSOL ® model can be found in figure 5. Both receivers placed
on each extremity has its dimensions sets to the microphone array width used in the experiment, and a
third line of receivers is placed in a line array on axis of the speaker driver. The positions in the y directions
corresponds to the middle of each array position tested in the lab.
Once the geometry set, each surface was assigned a material property from the material list available
in the COMSOL ® material library. The interior of the room is assigned the air material properties. The
loudspeaker is assigned the material properties of pine wood which would be the closest material available
in the library to the actual enclosure of the loudspeaker. The properties of the loudspeaker do not match one
to one to the reality of the measurements but has very minimal impact on the outcome of the experiment
therefore the choice of the wood properties for the speaker was justified. The loudspeaker is also simulated
with only one driver compared to a full-range driver and a tweeter. This can also be justified with the fact
the frequency range of interest only applies to the full-range driver and not the tweeter.
Once the material properties set, to be able to perform any kind of study with the pressure acoustic module,
the geometry had to undergo a meshing process for the finite element methods. The mesh used for
the simulation was a free tetrahedral shape with a maximum element size corresponding to the result of
equation 16. Where the c variable corresponds to the speed of sound in air which in this case is taken as
343m/s, Fmax was the maximum frequency for the first study and had a value of 500Hz.
maximum element size = c/Fmax/6.
(16)
15
==PAGE:22==
Figure 5: COMSOL ® geometry, includes the room, the speaker, and the receivers
3.8.2
COMSOL ® Pressure Acoustics Parameters
The first study of the model used the Pressure acoustics module with a frequency domain study. The global
parameters first needed to be set for the geometry selected, such as the environmental parameters,in more
details the temperature, absolute pressure and relative humidity. The speed of sound and the density of the
medium are also part of the input parameters. Thereafter, the walls were given a hard boundary condition
which is then overwritten by the impedance surface module which is used to model the reverberation time
of the environment. The impedance model takes as input the absorption coefficient which is calculated
from the Sabine reverberation time formula that can be found in equation 17. Two values for the absorption
coefficient were investigated and showed in the following table 3. Finally a monopole source was used
since the same monopole source was used for the ray tracing. The Monopole point source takes as input a
power rms value and the phase. The power rms set for this monopole source was equal to 0.005W.
T60 = 0.161V
A.
(17)
Table 3: Absorption coefficient and reverberation time for simulated scenarios.
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
absorption coefficient
0.28
0.19
reverberation time
0.4s
0.6s
When all parameters were set the last step was to define the frequency range of interest and the frequency
resolution. The frequency range was set to a range of 200Hz to 500Hz with a frequency resolution of 4Hz.
16
==PAGE:23==
The frequency resolution was decreased from 1Hz to 4Hz due to the computation time and justified with a
convergence study which indicated that 75 points are the same as taking the full resolution and therefore
drastically decreasing the computation time.
3.8.3
Ray tracing Parameters
For the second study the ray tracing module was used with a parametric sweep. To be able to use this
module a second component had to be created. This component had the exact same geometry as the
previous study. The same procedure as previously was also applied for the ray tracing but the meshing
process required a lower resolution mesh. The environmental parameters such as temperature and absolute
pressure are parts of the input of the model as well as the linear elastic part of the model which includes
the speed of sound in the material and the material density. The walls were set as hard boundaries and
overwritten by surface module that takes the absorption coefficient as input. Finally, the rays were released
from the same point source as the previous study and the ray was given a termination criteria in terms of a
threshold power. The numbers of rays was set 800 rays for this study. Each time the loudspeaker setup
was changed a new simulation was performed with the updated geometry.
17
==PAGE:24==
4
Results
4.1
IEC room measurements
Firstly, the SPL for each receiver position was averaged into octave bands (setup 1 in figure 6, setup 2 in
figure 7, setup 3 in figure 8, setup 4 in figure 9). As opposed to the later calculations, this first investigation
was done using a rectangular window. All four measurements setups show clear differences across the
different octave bands. Additional octave bands, other than the shown, were also investigated, but the
chosen bands were deemed sufficient in explaining the the relevant aspects of the sound field. The lowest
shown octave band, the 63 Hz band, shows almost no activity in the first measurement setup (figure 6), but
as the source is moved closer to the back wall, an increase in sound pressure level at the far wall and in the
middle of the room, is apparent (figure 9). This is mostly likely due to modal behavior, as the 63Hz band is
still substantially below the Schroeder frequency. At the 125 Hz band, the remnants of room modes can still
be seen, also most apparent in Setup 3 and 4. For the 250 Hz band the impact of the diffuse field becomes
more clear, and only increases towards the higher octave bands, until the 2 kHz band, where it is clear that
the diffuse field is of lesser magnitude than the lower bands, but we still see a significant increase in SPL
close to the loudspeaker as the distance from source to back wall decreases. Note also that in the 2 kHz
band, compared to the lower bands, the frequency dependent directivity of the loudspeaker can be seen as
the octave band frequency increases.
Figure 6: Measured sound pressure level, across octave bands, for measurement setup 1, shown as
a contour-plot, with the y-position denoting the absolute room position, and the x-position denoting the
position along the width of the microphone array.
18
==PAGE:25==
Figure 7: Measured sound pressure level, across octave bands, for measurement setup 2, shown as
a contour-plot, with the y-position denoting the absolute room position, and the x-position denoting the
position along the width of the microphone array.
Figure 8: Measured sound pressure level, across octave bands, for measurement setup 3, shown as
a contour-plot, with the y-position denoting the absolute room position, and the x-position denoting the
position along the width of the microphone array.
19
==PAGE:26==
Figure 9: Measured sound pressure level, across octave bands, for measurement setup 4, shown as
a contour-plot, with the y-position denoting the absolute room position, and the x-position denoting the
position along the width of the microphone array.
After initial investigation of the octave bands, it was chosen to limit the investigation to the 200 to 2 kHz
band. In figure 10 the measured sound pressure level, normalized to 95 dB between all measurement
setups, can be seen. Note that for all measurements, a higher SPL is seen close to the loudspeaker,
which quickly drops off, and a varying diffuse sound field is seen. This sound field can now be investigated
closer, to determine how to predict sound pressure level. It may also be noted, that apart from the varying
magnitude of the diffuse field, the change in sound pressure level seems to be radiating circularly from the
middle of the source. This strengthens the assumption that the sound field can be estimated at a distance
from the source, and that angle between source and receiver might not be of critical importance.
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 10: Measured sound pressure level, for the 200 Hz to 2000 Hz band, shown as a contour-plot, with
the y-position denoting the absolute room position, and the x-position denoting the position along the width
of the microphone array.
4.2
Fit and Comparison
As mentioned, different approaches were taken to understand the direct and diffuse sound fields, and the
relation between the two.
4.2.1
Liner fitting
In figure 11, 12, 13 and 14 the results of a piecewise linear fitting of the direct and diffuse field (eq. 13), as
a comparison to the theoretical energy integral calculation of the linear revised baron-lee model (eq. 7). As
mentioned, the critical distance was determined as the intersection between the two optimized linear fits
(table 5), which gives two sets of approximate estimates of the critical distance, of 1.3m and 1.8m, which
are both close to the theoretical critical distance of around 1.5m. This is calculated from the directivity factor
of a woofer of the sames size as the measured source (eq. 12). The theoretical diffuse field approximation
was then normalized to the SPL at the critical distance. Across all four setups the theoretical approximation
quite closely resembles the linear diffuse field fit. Especially in setup 2 and 3 (figure 12 and 13), the fit
seems to have almost identical slope (table 4), compared to the calculated theoretical slope of a = −0.434,
and for setup 3 and 4, the theoretical approximation only narrowly underestimates the SPL towards the
wall. In table 6 and 7 the R-squared and RMSE of direct and diffuse fits can be seen, as well as the RMSE
between the diffuse fit and theoretical model.
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 11: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 1, as a function of distance to source, as well as the
piecewise fits for direct field, diffuse field and theoretical prediction.
Figure 12: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 2, as a function of distance to source, as well as the
piecewise fits for direct field, diffuse field and theoretical prediction.
22
==PAGE:29==
Figure 13: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 3, as a function of distance to source, as well as the
piecewise fits for direct field, diffuse field and theoretical prediction.
Figure 14: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 4, as a function of distance to source, as well as the
piecewise fits for direct field, diffuse field and theoretical prediction.
23
==PAGE:30==
Table 4: Fitted coefficients for linear model, for direct- and diffuse field, in SPL.
Setup 1
a
b
Dir.
-4.072
94.062
Diff.
-0.627
87.917
Setup 2
a
b
Dir.
-7.056
96.911
Diff.
-0.409
87.871
Setup 3
a
b
Dir.
-4.932
94.607
Diff.
-0.436
86.191
Setup 4
a
b
Dir.
-7.869
96.012
Diff.
-0.527
86.429
Table 5: Calculated optimal fitting cutoff distance and critical distance, in meters.
Setup
1
2
3
4
Cutoff
1.09
0.72
1.54
1.01
Crit. Dist.
1.83
1.37
1.89
1.31
Table 6: Calculated R-squared value for direct- and diffuse field.
Setup
1
2
3
4
Dir.
0.229
0.165
0.173
0.262
Diff.
0.586
0.638
0.650
0.627
Table 7: Calculated RMSE for direct- and diffuse sound field fit, as well as comparison between diffuse field
fit and theoretical prediction, in SPL.
Setup
1
2
3
4
Dir.
0.219
0.106
0.091
0.242
Diff.
0.036
0.030
0.019
0.099
Diff./Theory
0.389
0.061
0.006
0.263
4.2.2
Polynomial fitting
For the polynomial fitting model, as mentioned, the fitting was performed on the square pressure (eq. 14) of
the measured and simulated results (figure 15, 16, 17 and 18), and compared to the combined diffuse field
theory with the addition of the direct field approximation (eq. 15). For ease of comparison, the measurement
and fit was re-converted to SPL and normalized to match simulations defined as 89.2 dB at 1m from the
source. For all four setups, we see quite good correlation between measured fit and theory. Especially
for setup 3 and 4, where the source is closest to the wall, the estimated fits between measurements and
theory are very close. Comparing to simulated fit results, we also see that the estimates between the three
approaches agree more as the source moves closer to the wall. Additionally, an investigation of the impact
of different terms in the fitting equation (14) was performed (figure 23,24,25 and 26), which show small
differences between the impact of omitting different terms of the fitting equation.
24
==PAGE:31==
Figure 15: Measured and simulated sound pressure level, for setup 1, as a function of distance to source,
as well as the polynomial fits for measured values, simulated values and theoretical prediction.
Figure 16: Measured and simulated sound pressure level, for setup 2, as a function of distance to source,
as well as the polynomial fits for measured values, simulated values and theoretical prediction.
25
==PAGE:32==
Figure 17: Measured and simulated sound pressure level, for setup 3 as a function of distance to source,
as well as the polynomial fits for measured values, simulated values and theoretical prediction.
Figure 18: Measured and simulated sound pressure level, for setup 4, as a function of distance to source,
as well as the polynomial fits for measured values, simulated values and theoretical prediction.
Comparing simulations of the measured room (IEC) with a reverberation time of 0.4 seconds (Sim. 1), and
the simulated room with an adjusted reverberation time of 0.6 seconds (Sim 2.), we can again see that both
results are closely related, with very little change in the theoretical direct field approximation, and a much
larger difference in simulation fits. Althouh both approaches agree that the magnitude of the diffuse field is
larger at a larger reverb time.
26
==PAGE:33==
Figure 19: Comparison between simulated values with different reverberation time (Sim. 1: T=0.4 s and Sim.
2: T=0.6 s), for setup 1, as a function of distance to source, as well as polynomial fits for both simulated
values and theoretical prediction for both simulations.
Figure 20: Comparison between simulated values with different reverberation time (Sim. 1: T=0.4 s and Sim.
2: T=0.6 s), for setup 2, as a function of distance to source, as well as polynomial fits for both simulated
values and theoretical prediction for both simulations.
27
==PAGE:34==
Figure 21: Comparison between simulated values with different reverberation time (Sim. 1: T=0.4 s and Sim.
2: T=0.6 s), for setup 3, as a function of distance to source, as well as polynomial fits for both simulated
values and theoretical prediction for both simulations.
Figure 22: Comparison between simulated values with different reverberation time (Sim. 1: T=0.4 s and Sim.
2: T=0.6 s), for setup 4, as a function of distance to source, as well as polynomial fits for both simulated
values and theoretical prediction for both simulations.
In table 8 the fitting coefficients of the polynomial fit can be seen. Looking at the correlation coefficient
(table 11) between the measured fit, simulated fit and theoretical approximation, it can be seen that all
of the approaches are quite closely correlated, with many correlations being being above 0.99, while no
correlation is below 0.9. For R-squared (table 10), the simulated fit seems to be a lot worse that then
measured, but this is mostly due to the spread of the data points in the simulated results. Lastly, the RMSE
for measured, simulated and comparisons between approaches can be seen in table 12, where it can
be seen that the measured fit seems to get worse for setups with the source closer to the wall, while the
simulation at T=0.4 (sim. 1) seems to do a better job, while the simulation at T=0.6 (sim. 2) seems to be
doing surprisingly well, but better for the setups with the source further from the wall. The critical distance
from the intersection between early and late terms was calculated and show in the 9, which shows to be
quite inconsistent compared to linear fitting.
28
==PAGE:35==
Figure 23: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 1, as a function of distance to source, as well as the
three investigated polynomial model fits for measured values.
Figure 24: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 2, as a function of distance to source, as well as the
three investigated polynomial model fits for measured values.
29
==PAGE:36==
Figure 25: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 3, as a function of distance to source, as well as the
three investigated polynomial model fits for measured values.
Figure 26: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 4, as a function of distance to source, as well as the
three investigated polynomial model fits for measured values.
30
==PAGE:37==
Table 8: Fitted coefficients for polynomial model, for measured- and stimulated values, in squared pressure.
Setup 1
a
b
c
d
Mod. 1
869.50
13630.29
7.69
3557.17
Mod. 2
16204.29
260.90
1878.74
Mod. 3
5236.51
-1446.10
12928.41
Sim. 1
5470.06
-128.39
4075.21
Sim. 2
5914.60
-85.06
6950.70
Setup 2
a
b
c
d
Mod. 1
3966.44
13014.62
683.58
1804.72
Mod. 2
24263.64
1654.61
-5108.31
Mod. 3
8307.83
-537.27
10253.81
Sim. 1
8118.98
72.61
2824.88
Sim. 2
7641.64
-7.06
6069.29
Setup 3
a
b
c
d
Mod. 1
4528.35
8119.91
51.80
3049.74
Mod. 2
20500.39
999.73
-4158.84
Mod. 3
7332.39
-624.77
8050.64
Sim. 1
11714.07
523.99
316.15
Sim. 2
11537.13
446.61
3507.72
Setup 4
a
b
c
d
Mod. 1
5190.67
5835.14
214.84
2463.10
Mod. 2
17267.79
913.99
-3309.89
Mod. 3
7710.86
-169.55
5553.97
Sim. 1
9261.36
-132.78
3508.04
Sim. 2
8935.80
-154.56
6529.22
Table 9: Calculated critical distances for polynomial model, for different models and simulated values, in
meters.
Setup
1
2
3
4
Mod. 1
3.84
3.42
2.99
2.60
Mod. 2
5.03
5.67
6.80
6.52
Mod. 3
0.66
0.92
0.99
1.20
Sim. 1
1.40
2.67
4.42
2.96
Sim. 2
0.87
1.26
2.49
1.43
Table 10: Calculated R-squared value for measured and simulated polynomial fits.
Setup
1
2
3
4
Mod. 1
0.808
0.855
0.863
0.842
Mod. 2
0.805
0.848
0.851
0.823
Mod. 3
0.793
0.847
0.857
0.831
Sim. 1
0.206
0.247
0.377
0.294
Sim. 2
0.204
0.232
0.381
0.273
31
==PAGE:38==
Table 11: Calculated correlation coefficient between polynomial fits.
Setup
1
2
3
4
Meas./Sim. 1
0.997
0.983
0.994
0.964
Meas./Theory
0.983
0.936
0.940
0.909
Sim. 1/Theory
0.994
0.982
0.949
0.985
Sim. 2/Theory
0.997
0.993
0.970
0.994
Table 12: Calculated RMSE for measured and simulated polynomial fits, as well as comparison between
measured and simulated fits and theoretical prediction, in SPL.
Setup
1
2
3
4
Mod. 1
0.241
0.212
0.261
0.244
Mod. 2
0.237
0.177
0.209
0.209
Mod. 2
0.248
0.246
0.280
0.259
Sim. 1
0.908
1.403
1.544
1.299
Sim. 2
0.498
0.816
0.876
0.773
Mod. 1/Sim. 1
2.027
2.207
0.313
0.146
Mod. 1/Theory
0.559
0.636
0.702
0.841
Sim. 1/Theory
1.482
0.969
0.449
0.527
Sim. 2/Theory
0.092
0.293
0.732
0.766
4.2.3
Combined polynomial and linear fits
Since both types of fitting approaches has its advantages, with the diffuse field being more accurately
described by linear fitting and the direct field being more accurately described by polynomial fitting, a
combination of the linear and polynomial fit can be made. In figure 27, 28, 29 and 30 the results of
this combination can be seen. The polynomial part is constructed by purely the direct field terms of the
polynomial (model 1) fit equation (14), while the linear part is the purely diffuse field fit. No new fitting was
done, only the existing polynomial and linear fits were used, although the critical distance was calculated
at the intersection between the two, show in table 13, which shows the most stable critical distance
approximation across all methods, while also being close to the theoretical estimate.
Figure 27: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 1, as a function of distance to source, with the
combination of linear and polynomial fits shown.
32
==PAGE:39==
Figure 28: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 2, as a function of distance to source, with the
combination of linear and polynomial fits shown.
Figure 29: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 3, as a function of distance to source, with the
combination of linear and polynomial fits shown.
33
==PAGE:40==
Figure 30: Measured sound pressure level, for setup 4, as a function of distance to source, with the
combination of linear and polynomial fits shown.
Table 13: Calculated critical distances for combined polynomial and linear model, in meters.
Setup
1
2
3
4
Combi.
1.46
1.47
1.58
1.31
4.3
Statistical Analysis
For the statistical analysis approach, the results for each model will show the performance of the model
with the mean square error (MSE), the root mean square error (RMSE), the mean absolute value (MAE),
and R-squared. The evaluation metrics are given for the training set and the test set separately.
4.3.1
Linear Regression Model
The results for the linear regression model evaluation metrics can be found in table 16. From the results
it can be observed that the values for both the training set and the test set are in in a similar range.
The R-squared results for this model show that around 51% of the variance in the dependent variable is
explained by the independent variables in this model.
Table 14: Results for the random forest classification showing the importance of each features.
Features
Importance
Distance source back wall
8.504057
Distance source - receiver
4.748409
Distance receiver side wall
3.702945
Distance receiver far wall
3.305561
Azimuth
1.898363
The summary of the linear regression model can be found in table 15. The p-value for the intercept,
the distance source to the back wall, the distance between source and receiver show a very low p-
value. Therefore the normality of the residuals was checked and showed that the residuals were normally
distributed.
34
==PAGE:41==
Table 15: Summary of the linear regression model
Estimate
Std. Error
t value
p value
(Intercept)
88.6715
0.1095
809.437
>2e-16
d S bWall
1.3916
0.1027
13.547
>2e-16
d sr
-6.8286
0.1425
-47.928
>2e-16
d R sWall
-0.1328
0.1220
-1.089
0.276
Table 16: Results of evaluation metrics for the linear regression model, with metrics for the training set and
the test set
Training Set
Test Set
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
3.830484
3.789641
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
1.957162
1.9467
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
1.550625
1.541861
R-Squared (R2)
0.5191682
0.5169089
The results of the prediction for two different cases using the linear regression model are shown in table 18.
The new positional data used for the predictions are shown in table 17. For case 1 there is a difference in
SPL of about 3dB and for the second case there is a bigger difference in SPL of around 4.6 dB.
Table 17: Values of the features for the new prediction data for the linear regression model
case 1
case 2
d sr
0.4253575
1.868858
d S bWall
1.5
0.5
d R sWall
1.66
1.810
Table 18: Actual vs predicted sound pressure level with a linear regression model and generalized linear
model
case 1
case 2
Actual SPL (dB)
93.1
86.3
Predicted SPL (dB)
90.1
81.7
4.3.2
Generalized Linear Regression Model
The evaluation metrics for the generalized linear regression model can be found in table 20. The evaluation
metrics for the GLM model shows a sligtly better fit than the normal linear regression model with sligthly
lower values for the MSE, RMSE, and MAE. In terms of the R-squared value its shows that 52% of the
variance in the dependent variable is explained by the independent variables in the model. The results for
the random forest classification are the same as in the linear model and can be found in table 14.
Table 19: Summary of the generalized linear regression model
Estimate
Std. Error
t value
p value
(Intercept)
4.484421
0.001258
3563.444
>2e-16
d S bWall
0.016304
0.001180
13.816
>2e-16
d sr
-0.078416
0.001637
-47.910
>2e-16
d R sWall
-0.001627
0.001401
-1.161
0.246
35
==PAGE:42==
Table 20: Results of evaluation metrics for the generalized linear regression model, with metrics for the
training set and the test set
Training Set
Test Set
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
3.794015
3.751015
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
1.947823
1.936754
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
1.540784
1.531582
R-Squared (R2)
0.5237461
0.5218329
The results of the predicted data using new positional data that can be found in table 21and the values for
the positional for the new positional date can be found in 17. The results in predicted and actual values
show that for case 1 the difference in between the actual and predicted SPL is around 3dB and for case 2
is around 0.2 dB.
Table 21: Actual vs predicted sound pressure level with a generalized linear regression model
case 1
case 2
Actual SPL (dB)
93.1
86.3
Predicted SPL (dB)
90.1
86.1
4.3.3
Support Vector Regression
The evaluation metrics for the support vector regression model are shown in table 22 and the results of
the random forest can be found in figure 31. Overall, all the metrics are found to be under the value of 1
indicating a strong accuracy of the prediction from the model. The R-squared value for the SVR model
shows a higher value than for the linear models with around 76% of the variance in the dependent variable
is explained by the independent variables in the model for both the training set and the test set. In the
random forest results in 31, the percentage increase in mean error shows how much the prediction error is
increased when a certain variable is permuted in a tree. This indicates that the feature distance source
- back wall (far wall) is the most important feature for making accurate predictions. The plot on the right
side shows the total decrease in node purity, meaning that a higher value indicates that a variable is more
important for splitting nodes and increase the models purity.
36
==PAGE:43==
Figure 31: Results of the reandom forest classification for the support vector regression model
Table 22: Results of evaluation metrics for the support vector regression model, with metrics for the training
set and the test set
Training Set
Test Set
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
0.2358587
0.2485829
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
0.4856529
0.4985809
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
0.3797047
0.3964329
R-Squared (R2)
0.7608019
0.7590139
The results of the predicted data using a new set of positional data is shown in table 24, where for case
1, 2, and 3 the difference in between the actual and predicted SPL is around 0.3 dB, 0.3 dB, and 1.5dB
respectively. The values of the features used in the predictions can be found in table 23.
case 1
case 2
case 3
d sr
0.4253575
1.868858
2.861952
theta sr
0.1886932479
-0.1868164883
-0.0577161477
d S bWall
1.5
0
0.308
d R farWall
6.258
5.627
4.820
d R sWall
1.66
1.810
1.735
Table 23: Values of the features for the prediction
An investigation of the residuals was done to check if the residuals were normally distributed, the results
can be found in figure 32.
37
==PAGE:44==
Figure 32: Plot top left: predictions against actual values for the test set, plot top right: Residuals against
predicted values, bottom left: histogram of the residual analysis
Table 24: Actual vs predicted sound pressure level with a support vector regression
case 1
case 2
case 3
Actual SPL (dB)
93.1
86.3
85.7
Predicted SPL (dB)
92.8
86.0
84.2
4.3.4
Simulation results
Results for the support vector regression model using the data from the simulation were the reverberation
is equal to 0.4 seconds are shown in table 25. There is a clear difference in between the results of the
evaluation metrics for the training set and the test set. The test set MSE, RMSE, and MAE show higher
values than for the training set but still under the value of 1. In terms of the R-squared result, the training
set shows that 75% of the variance in the dependent variable is explained by the independent variable,
where the test set only shows 52%.
Table 25: Results of the support vector regression model for simulation with a reverberation time of 0.4
seconds
Training Set
Test Set
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
0.2390518
0.5275052
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
0.4889293
0.7262955
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
0.3310565
0.5463639
R-Squared (R2)
0.7454973
0.524916
The results of the predicted data using a new set of positional data 27 is shown in table 26, where for case
1, 2, and 3 the difference in between the actual and predicted SPL is around 0.5 dB, 2.5 dB, and 4.3dB
respectively.
38
==PAGE:45==
Table 26: Actual vs predicted sound pressure level with a support vector regression model for simulation
with a reverberation time of 0.4 seconds
case 1
case 2
case 3
Actual SPL (dB)
84.1
80.8
87.3
Predicted SPL (dB)
83.6
83.3
82.9
case 1
case 2
case 3
d sr
1.1894084
3.5752891
6.6526526
theta sr
0.07751983
0
0.15972553
d S bWall
1.5
1
0.5
d R farWall
6.945
3.895
0.645
d R sWall
2.1100
1.4350
1.7725
Table 27: Values of the features for the new prediction in the simulations
The results for the evaluation metrics of the simulation results in the case of reverberation of 0.6 seconds
are shown in table 28. The metrics in the training set show a better accuracy in the prediction with lower
values of the MSE,RMSE,MAE. The test set results show less accuracy in the predictions. For the training
the R-squared value with 81% of the variance in the dependent variable is explained by the independent
variables in the model for the training set. In terms of the test this value is only around 57%.
Table 28: Results of the support vector regression model for simulation with a reverberation time of 0.6
seconds
Training Set
Test Set
Mean Squared Error (MSE)
0.1774277
0.4968178
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE)
0.4212216
0.704853
Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
0.2837189
0.5502033
R-Squared (R2)
0.8083346
0.5657043
The results of the predicted data using a new set of positional data 27is shown in table 29, where for case
1, 2, and 3 the difference in between the actual and predicted SPL is around 0.3 dB, 1.2 dB, and 3.4dB
respectively.
Table 29: Actual vs predicted sound pressure level with a support vector regression model for simulation
with a reverberation time of 0.6 seconds
case 1
case 2
case 3
Actual SPL (dB)
86.8
84.0
89.1
Predicted SPL (dB)
86.5
85.2
85.7
39
==PAGE:46==
5
Discussion
Based on these results, a picture begins to form that it seems possible to make some level of prediction on
the behavior of sound pressure level as a function of distance, at least for the specific case investigated,
with different approaches having different strengths.
For the purely linear regression fitting, the linear fitting in purely the diffuse field seem to be a good prediction
of the measurements performed in the IEC room, with some setups being very close to the theoretical
approximated slope, with setup 3’s slope coefficient only deviating with −0.002. The disadvantage of this
model, though, seems to be that the estimation of the critical distance is quite inconsistent, resulting in
two pairs of very close predictions of around 1.3 m and 1.8 meters. It is unfortunate that these two pairs
of close predictions are not related to source-to-wall distance, as this could have aided in explaining the
difference, but instead has one close set of predictions for odd numbered setups and one set of predictions
for even numbered setups.
If one wanted to speculate, there could be modal behavior that might interfere with how the early diffuse
field behaves, which the direct field fit does not take into account. But more likely, it is due to forcing a linear
fit onto data that is known to not be linear, and the action of estimating the direct field onto the measured
data results in an unstable prediction that falls into two different approximations based on the weighting of
the points closest to the source.
In figure 11 and 13, the direct field slope is shallower, underestimating the points closest to the source, and
therefore resulting in a slope that intersects with the diffuse field slope later, and therefore a larger critical
distance. On the other hand, figure 12 and 14 has a steeper slope, giving a better estimate of the early
direct field, and therefore approximates the critical distance to be shorter.
Reflecting on the theoretically calculated directivity factor, it is hard to say if this is a good estimate of the
critical distance. It could over-estimate how directive the actual physical loudspeaker is, and the shorter
critical distance could be closer the the real value, or calculated directivity factor could be underestimated,
especially if effective radiated power is taken into account, and the larger critical distance estimate could
be more correct. There is not even a clear pattern in the R-squared or RMSE values that could aid in
determining this. The specific methodology for determining the critical distance from a combination of fits
might therefore not be incredibly robust. But, as mentioned, this critical distance might not be of such critical
importance, if a model based on the same physical metrics, can predict the direct field in combination with
the diffuse field, and the intersection between the two fields is of less importance.
For the polynomial fitting, the act of fitting to the squared pressure with a combination of terms with coefficient
weighting, seems to produce an overall better fit, at least in terms of R-squared values. Especially the full
term polynomial regression fit of the measured data produces quite good predictions of the sound field.
Although similarly unpredictable between measurement setups. The coefficients between setups for the
measured fit seem to vary quite a bit, also making it difficult to determine a general equation to use to
determine the sound propagation in the room.
Although it can be seen that the coefficient determining the point source contribution becomes larger, while
the line source contribution becomes smaller. Which in effect means that the slope contribution shifts
from favoring the point source estimation towards the line source estimation. This again suggests, as
mentioned before, that a point source at a wall, in a room with one significantly smaller dimension, the
propagation estimate moves closer towards a cylindrical propagation, collapsed in the smallest dimension.
This assumption is again strengthened by the fact that the accuracy of the prediction of the simulated IEC
room fit, where the point source term is omitted, seems to trend toward better values as the source moves
closer to the wall. The backside of this type of fitting is that the later terms become corrections to the
initial decay of the reciprocal distance terms, and is therefore hard to compare directly to the theoretical
approximation of the diffuse field, such as the Barron-Lee method, and the critical distance can not be
determined from comparing terms in the polynomial fit alone.
Therefore, as both the linear and the polynomial approach seem so predict different parts of the sound
field, it seems natural to expand the approach to fitting, with a piecewise fit, where a polynomial fit is used
until the critical distance, and a linear fit used for the diffuse field. This approach also seems to much more
accurately describe the critical distance, with values varying a lot less between measurement setups. The
40
==PAGE:47==
exact model for performing this type of fit might need some slight revision, as neither fits shown in the
piecewise linear/polynomial fit was explicitly calculated for this fit, but just a direct combination of the two
separately calculated fits.
Approaches that might improve this fitting model could include; using a moving point directional fit, with an
increasing amount of points along the source-receiver distance, until a best fit point is found for only the two
direct field terms, and a linear fit using the same approach, but using an increasing amount of data points
starting from the far wall instead of the point closest to the source. Additional investigation of this approach
will be needed to determine if this is viable.
5.1
Statistical analysis results
In the statistical analysis, both linear models, the linear regression model, and the generalized linear
regression model show similar evaluation metrics with only around 52% of the variance in the dependent
variable explained by the independent variable. This shows that the model does not overfit but that the
accuracy of the predictions are smaller than for the support vector regression model. This can be explained
by the fact that the data is not linear, therefore trying to fit with a linear model is not suited. When using
a linear model for the prediction of the sound pressure level, splitting the data into its direct field and the
diffuse field components will show better prediction accuracy for both fields and make the models more
robust. But, since the critical distance is dependent on the speaker setup, splitting the data into its direct
field and diffuse field component respectively would mean that the dataset would need to be split into each
speaker setup, and each of those setup split into direct and diffuse field components. The issue with this
approach, is the fact that the models will be trained with less data, and therefore decrease the accuracy
of the predictions. The generalized linear regression model exhibits better performance than the linear
regression model, this can also be seen in the predicted values of the SPL compared to the actual value for
the same positional value.
The results from the random forest classification is a measure of how much impurity within a node of a
decision tree decreases when a feature is used to split the data. This can enhance the model performance
and efficiency. The two main features that have the most impact on the predictions are the distance source
back wall and the distance source receiver. The distances in between the receiver far and side wall have
a similar importance in the training of the data but found to be less important than the previous ones
mentioned. Finally the azimuth in between the source and receiver is found to be of the smallest importance
for this dataset.
For the support vector model the evaluation metrics show a good accuracy of the predictions considering
the values of r-squared for the training set and the test set. This show that the model is not prone to
overfitting and explains a high proportion of the variance for both sets. It was to be expected that the
support vector regression model would be a more suited model for predicting the sound pressure level
considering the features investigated. This indicates that considering the measurement setup, the variables
necessary to have an accurate prediction are the distance source-back wall, the distance source - receiver,
the distance receiver - sidewall, and the distance receiver - far wall. The azimuth in between the source
and the receiver can be discarded based on the results of the random forest classification.
The results from the simulation shows higher R-squared values for the training set than the test set which
means that for the training set the model explain a high proportion of the variance and for the test set it
explains a smaller proportion of the variance. This then implies that the model is overfitting, meaning it
captures noise and patterns that do not generalizes the test data, or that the model can be too complex.
This could be fixed with a larger dataset. More thorough simulations will be needed in order to produce
accurate predictions. The simulation could also benefit are more precise modeling of the room, with better
precision into the wall modeling and not use a point source for the speaker.
5.2
Reflection on research questions
To explicitly answer the research questions, the sound pressure level in room at a given position cannot
purely be estimated on the distance between the source and the receiver, more variables are needed to
give an accurate prediction. Both analysis approaches show that the position of source and receiver and
the room characteristics are significant. The statistical analysis showed that the distance from source to
41
==PAGE:48==
back wall is the most important parameter, followed by the distance from source to receiver, the distance
from receiver to far wall, the distance from receiver to side wall and the azimuth in between the source
and receiver. A model was then created using a support vector machine extension with a support vector
regression model and gave accurate predictions with a model performance that is deemed adequate. If this
is expandable to other rooms will require additional research.
6
Conslusion
In summary, the combined analysis of the collected data suggests that knowledge of environmental
parameters is significant when trying to accurately determine the propagation of sound from loudspeakers
in living rooms. For this limited case, of measuring in a single standardized room, different approaches
seem to have strengths and weaknesses when predicting different behaviors of the measured sound field.
As expected, the estimation of sound propagation benefits from knowing the room characteristics, i.e.
a combination of reverberation time, room volume or total room absorption, loudspeaker directivity as
well as distance to hard boundaries. If these quantities can be know beforehand, this initial investigation
seems to suggest that the sound pressure level of a single loudspeaker can be estimated at an arbitrary
listener position, although creating a predictive model based on the limited data collected, will most likely
be insufficient in explaining behaviors with different room characteristics or speaker directivity.
Within this thesis an investigation on the parameters needed for an accurate predictions of the sound
pressure level at a given position in a room is explained for the specific standardized case of the IEC room,
through lab measurements, simulations, and statistical analysis. Although more parameters will be needed
to improve the precision of a future model. A reflection on the methodology and kind of model used is
shown with explanations on what could be improved.
6.1
Future Work
Firstly, more accurate modeling of rooms in the simulation and an increase in investigated data points, to
train statistical models efficiently would be greatly beneficial. Extending the investigation to measurements
or simulations of more rooms and incorporating additional changing variables such as aspect ratio, reverber-
ation time, room volume, type of source used or varying height of source and/or receiver, will yield additional
information on importance of physical metrics. If the model still seems robust for additional rooms and
variables, extending the method to predict interactions in setups with multiple loudspeakers, where phase
interference might be of importance, will be necessary. Furthermore, investigating the perceptual aspect
of using a model based on these assumptions will be needed to definitively determine if this approach is
viable for estimating loudspeaker level and using it for level compensation in living rooms.
42
==PAGE:49==
References
[1]
ChatGPT. URL: https://chatgpt.com (visited on 06/28/2024).
[2]
Kasper Thomsen Jan Abildgaard Pedersen. “Fully Automatic Loudspeaker-Room Adaptation – the
RoomPerfect system”. In: AES 32nd International Conference, Hillerød, Denmark, 2007 September
21-23 (2007).
[3]
Jan Abildgaard Pedersen. “Loudspeaker-Room Adaptation for a specific Listening Position using
Information about the Complete Sound Field”. In: AES 121st Convention, San Francisco, CA, USA,
2006 October 5–8 (2006).
[4]
Gilbert A. Soulodre Scott G. Norcross and Michel C. Lavoie. “Evaluation of Inverse Filtering Tech-
niques for Room/Speaker Equalization”. In: Presented at the 113th Convention 2002 October 5–8
Los Angeles, California, USA (2002).
[5]
J. Gao et. al. “On the performance of existing energy models when applied to multi-purpose perfor-
mance halls”. In: Applied Acoustics 167 (2020).
[6]
M. Barron and L-J. Lee. “Energy relations in concert auditoriums. I”. In: Acoust. Soc. Am. (1988).
[7]
Don Davis. “Analyzing Loudspeaker Locations for Sound Reinforcement Systems”. In: Journal of the
Audio Engineering Society 17.6 (1969).
[8]
Walter Etter. “Distance-Based Automatic Gain Control with Continuous Proximity-Effect Compensa-
tion”. In: AES 133rd Convention, San Francisco, USA, 2012 October 26–29 (2012).
[9]
Floyd E. Toole. “Loudspeakers and Rooms for Sound Reproduction—A Scientific Review”. In: Harman
International Industries, Inc., Northridge, CA 91329, USA (2006).
[10]
Sebastian Merchel and Stephan Groth. “Analysis and Implementation of a Stereophonic Play Back
System for Adjusting the “Sweet Spot” to the Listener’s Position”. In: AES 126th Convention, Munich,
Germany, 2009 May 7–10 (2009).
[11]
Christof Faller Juergen Herre. “Spatial Sound Stability Enhancement By Advanced User- Tracked
Loudspeaker Rendering”. In: Audio Engineering Society, Convention Express Paper 178 (2023).
[12]
Fares El-Azm and Jan Abildgaard Pedersen. “Natural timbre in room correction systems Part II”. In:
AES 32nd International Conference, Hillerød, Denmark, 2007 September 21-23 (2007).
[13]
Ted Uzzle Rex Sinclair. “Off-Axis Performance of Multiple Loudspeaker”. In: J.Audio Engineering
Society 31.5 (1983).
[14]
Andreas Franck and Filippo Maria Fazi. “Towards constant-spread panning for multi-loudspeaker
configurations”. In: AES Conference on Immersive and Interactive Audio, York, UK, 2019 March 27 –
29 (2019).
[15]
Beosound Theatre. URL: https://www.bang- olufsen.com/en/us/soundbars/beosound-
theatre (visited on 06/28/2024).
[16]
Finn Jacobsen. An Elementary Introduction to Applied Signal Analysis, Note 7001. eng. 2011.
[17]
Finn Jacobsen and Peter Moller Juhl. Fundamentals of General Linear Acoustics. July 2013: John
Wiley & Sons, Incorporated, 2013, p. 304. ISBN: 9781118346419.
[18]
Sound system equipment - Part 13: Listening tests on loudspeakers. Standard. International Elec-
trotechnical Commission, 1998.
[19]
earfluff and eyecandy. BO Tech: Reading Spec’s – Part 1. 2014. URL: http://www.tonmeister.ca/
wordpress/2014/10/15/bo-tech-reading-specifications-part-1/ (visited on 06/27/2024).
[20]
Introduction to GLM. URL: https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat504/lesson/6/6.1 (visited on
06/28/2024).
[21]
Support Vector Machines. URL: https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/svm.html (visited
on 06/28/2024).
[22]
Tutorial on support vector machine. URL: https://course.ccs.neu.edu/cs5100f11/resources/
jakkula.pdf (visited on 06/29/2024).
43
==PAGE:50==
[23]
COMSOL AB. COMSOL Multiphysics® v. 6.2. https://www.comsol.com. Stockholm, Sweden,
2023.
44
