==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
MASTER’S THESIS                                                                           18 JUNE 2024 
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel 
Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An 
Engineering and Business Approach 
 
AHMET IBRE 
S222442 
MSc Materials and Manufacturing Engineering 
 
Supervisors: Rajan Ambat, Jason Li-Ying 
 
==PAGE:2==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
1 
 
Abstract 
 
This thesis’ ideation phase emerged through the curiosity point of sustainability practices in airport 
construction. It focuses on the sustainability of steel consumption in airport construction, while 
examining regulatory frameworks, sustainable construction practices, and business strategies. Pre-
study has proven that the matching work is either limited or it is highly case-focused due to the 
nature of existing projects. Sustainable construction practices face challenges, particularly in 
developing countries, due to misconceptions about higher costs and the lack of market awareness. 
To address and resolve such challenges, the research question and the scope has been structured as 
follows: 
’How can the cooperation of materials engineering and present business practices optimize 
the environmental impact of steel consumption in airport constructions?’ 
‘An airport construction project emerging in Denmark, 50 years of lifetime projected, in 
defiance of realworld material supply business relations of the country.’ 
Yet, a comprehensive literature review revealed valuable insights. Key regulatory organizations 
provide global standards emphasizing environmental sustainability. Case studies showcase the 
advantages of using laminated wood over steel, demonstrating the effectiveness of glulam material 
in diverse climatic conditions, resulting in significantly lower carbon footprints. 
In the light of mentioned insights, the study is designed around the research questions, shaped as 
a qualitative study, with the analyzed data being simulative. The software in demand is a well-
known material selection tool, Ansys Granta Selector. 
As a result, this study proves that the use of sustainable materials like recycled steel and wood-
like products not only reduces environmental impact but also offers long-term economic benefits. 
These practices include minimizing direct emissions from construction activities and optimizing 
resources throughout the building's lifecycle. This thesis underscores the importance of integrating 
innovative and biodegradable materials, comprehensive regulatory frameworks, and strategic 
business approaches to enhance sustainability in airport construction projects, providing a 
foundation for future advancements in this field. 
==PAGE:3==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
2 
 
Disclaimer 
 
I, AHMET IBRE, hereby declare that;  
• This Master’s Thesis is my original work and all references have been appropriately provided on 
all supporting literature and sources; 
 • This Master’s Thesis contains no material that has been submitted or accepted for a degree or 
diploma in any other educational institution;  
• I have followed the formal and ethical requirements of the DTU while preparing this study; 
 
In addition, I understand that any false claim regarding this work will result in disciplinary action 
per the regulations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
3 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to all those who have supported and guided me 
throughout this thesis project. 
First and foremost, I would like to thank my supervisor, Professor Jason Li-Ying, whose expertise, 
encouragement, and insightful feedback have been priceless to this research. Special thanks for the 
initial inspiration behind this research topic. Your unwavering support and guidance have been 
essential in navigating the complexities of this project. 
I am also deeply grateful to my main supervisor, Professor Rajan Ambat, for making this project 
happen for me in my last journey as a Master’s student. 
A heartfelt thank you to my family and friends for their unconditional love, patience, and 
encouragement. Your support has been my greatest strength and motivation. 
This thesis is dedicated to everyone who has contributed to my academic journey, directly or 
indirectly. Your support has been instrumental in the completion of this work. 
Thank you all. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:5==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
4 
 
List of Figures and Tables 
 
• Figure 1- Airport Emissions by Roland Berger 
• Figure 2 - Visualized Conceptual Framework 
• Figure 3 - Material Tree Screenshot from Ansys Granta Selector 
• Figure 4 - Structural Steels Chart of Tensile vs. Yield Strength 
• Figure 5 - All Steel Types Chart of Tensile vs. Yield Strength 
• Figure 6 - Compatible Metal for Given Limitations 
• Figure 7 - Tensile vs. Yield Strength Chart of Biodegradable Materials 
• Figure 8 - Position of Synthesized Materials 
• Figure 9 - The Difference Between Cut Directions of Bamboo Section 
• Figure 10 - Energy Consumption Comparison of Considered Materials 
• Figure 11 - CO2 Footprint Comparison of Considered Materials 
• Figure 12 - Cost Comparison of Considered Materials 
 
• Table 1 - The Production and Recycle Environmental Effects of Base Materials 
• Table 2 - The Limiting Values for Metallic Material Selection 
• Table 3 - ASTM A36 Environmental Impact Data 
• Table 4 - ASTM A992 Environmental Impact Data 
• Table 5 - S275J Environmental Impact Data 
• Table 6 - Complex Phase Steel, YS500, cold rolled Environmental Impact Data 
• Table 7 - Bamboo Environmental Impact Data 
 
==PAGE:6==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
5 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Abstract ....................................................................................................................................... 1 
Disclaimer .................................................................................................................................... 2 
Acknowledgments ......................................................................................................................... 3 
List of Figures and Tables .............................................................................................................. 4 
Table of Contents .......................................................................................................................... 5 
Introduction .................................................................................................................................. 6 
Background ............................................................................................................................... 6 
Research Problem and Objectives ................................................................................................ 8 
Purpose of the Study .................................................................................................................. 9 
Overall Scope and Limitations ................................................................................................... 10 
Literature Review ........................................................................................................................ 12 
Regulatory Frameworks and Guidelines ...................................................................................... 12 
Sustainability in Airport Construction......................................................................................... 16 
Business Strategies and Sustainability in Construction .................................................................. 20 
Theoretical and Conceptual Framework ......................................................................................... 23 
Methodology .............................................................................................................................. 26 
Data Analyses and Findings .......................................................................................................... 31 
General Overview of Selected Base Steel Materials ..................................................................... 31 
ASTM A36 .......................................................................................................................... 33 
ASTM A992 ........................................................................................................................ 34 
S275J .................................................................................................................................. 34 
Material Selection .................................................................................................................... 35 
Environmental Impact Analysis ................................................................................................. 45 
Results and Recommendations ...................................................................................................... 53 
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................. 58 
References .................................................................................................................................. 62 
Appendix.................................................................................................................................... 69 
 
 
==PAGE:7==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
6 
 
Introduction 
Background 
The context of this thesis includes a variety of broad and elaborative subjects. To brief it with 
keywords, it includes ‘Sustainability’, ’Sustainable Airports’, ‘Airport Constructions’, 
‘Material Selection Processes’, ‘Steel Consumption and Related Analyses’, and ’Sustainable 
Business Strategies for Airport Constructions’. Converging those subjects, this thesis project 
concerns several topics such as sustainability concerns of today’s world, the possible contribution 
of material engineering solutions, and the reflection of business strategies run by airport facilities. 
This thesis aims to provide insight into those aspects by considering them all in one scope. The 
addressed problem is multidisciplinary, regarding the engineering aspect and regulatory business 
aspects.  
Beginning with the report of the World Commission on Environment and Development (1987) and 
followed by Agenda 21 (1992), signed by 179 nations in Rio, adherents of sustainable development 
and sustainability have gained much momentum in their efforts to establish environmental 
guidelines and goal statements (Jickling, 2000). After the duration of 15 years in the millennium 
and MDGs, another significant development year in sustainability was 2015, The Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs of the UN, has published 17 SDG’s. Those sustainable development 
goals include 169 sub-targets, which are ambitious to fully reach by the year 2030 (THE 17 GOALS 
| Sustainable Development, n.d.). The 17 goals presented are a result of holistic approaches done 
foresightedly, valid, and reflecting in today’s world. They are addressing economic, social, and 
natural outcomes of unawareness or/and carelessness in terms of sustainability. Handling a very 
much targeted problem such as this project creates the need to address several different SDG’s. 
Other than the minor crossover points with other goals, the main SDG’s that this project appeals 
to are:  
• Number 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable 
industrialization, and foster innovation,  
• Number 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient, and sustainable, 
• Number 12. Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns. 
==PAGE:8==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
7 
 
When it comes to the tangible objective of this research, the focus is on airports. Since its beginning 
in the early twentieth century, civil aviation has become one of the most fascinating, important, 
and complex industries in the world. The civil aviation system, particularly its airports, has come 
to be the backbone of world transport and a necessity for twenty-first-century trade and commerce 
(Horonjeff, 2010). While the terms aviation and airports have a relatively greater history compared 
to the term sustainability; the inevitable merge of those two, sustainable airports, appears in the 
literature in 1996 for the first time in the article ‘Towards sustainable airport development’ by 
Longhurst. The publication cited represents the earliest reference to 'sustainable airports' 
encountered within the scope of this research. It is acknowledged that there may exist earlier 
mentions, although they were not discovered within the confines of this study. After defining the 
term sustainability and the ways to apply it with the knowledge of the day, the authors state that 
‘Clearly there are a range of spatial and temporal scales over which these considerations will apply 
and the contribution an airport will make to some will be small’(Longhurst et al., 1996). Even so, 
while concluding the paper, the authors state that with the uprising of knowledge and technology, 
it is possible to improve the probability of the sustainable airport concept. As said so, modern-day 
research with quilted, data-based, and current information states that, ‘By considering the steps of 
planning and recommendations for the airport's sustainability and taking care of airport 
sustainability components, the sustainable airport is possible’(Chourasia et al., 2021). And yet, it 
is clear that room for improvement is still available in this matter. 
The following context which gives this research the main depth to it, is the material selection 
process of the construction. The explanation of this process may get as broad as the term 
sustainability depending on the answer to the question of; ‘Material selection of what, where, and 
when?’, since the parameters and limitations always affect the result. Thus, it has been narrowed 
down to the context of constructions, moreover, sustainable constructions. Selecting the best 
materials that ensure maximum performance is crucial in the construction engineering design of 
any construction project(Dongmin et al., 2020). Among such sustainable construction practices, 
sustainable material selection plays a vital role that directly influences building 
sustainability(Govindan et al., 2016). According to the International Energy Agency’s 2010 data, 
the iron and steel industry constitutes 6.7% rate in total carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions on the 
earth. The steel industry is also responsible for a significant amount of resource consumption on 
==PAGE:9==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
8 
 
the earth. According to the US Geological Survey (held in 2009), 2.2 billion tons of iron ore is 
extracted from the ground annually to produce steel used in buildings, bridges, and other 
infrastructure and also it is estimated that current accessible iron ore reserves are 150 billion tons 
on the earth (Aksel & Eren, 2015). According to the facts, it is vital to study this topic in order to 
sustain our future. 
Including the above-mentioned topics in a study and ruling out the business aspect would create a 
deficiency in the logic of the thesis. The construction industry takes the maximum share of 59% 
from natural resource extraction (including metals, non-metallic minerals, gravel, sand, and 
crushed rock) and this will increase significantly in the future due to infrastructure developments. 
The impact of the construction industry on global energy-related carbon emissions is 11% (Selvaraj 
& Chan, 2024). Considering the governmental and non-governmental management of those global 
shares, the forming sustainable regulations of construction businesses will also be addressed. 
Research Problem and Objectives 
The starting point of ideation in this project was the sense of awareness about the room for 
improvement in a sustainable future. Considering the strengths of the available background, and 
after the long-lasting discussions with honorable supervisors, the main research question is set as: 
’How can the cooperation of materials engineering and present business practices optimize 
the environmental impact of steel consumption in airport constructions?’ 
This research question can be further divided into several sub-questions as follows: 
1. What are the environmental impacts of steel consumption in airport constructions, what are 
the sufficient sustainable alternatives? 
2. How may the material science approach improve the construction market in terms of 
sustainability? What could be the outcome of it business-wise? 
3. In what sense do current airport facilities align with sustainability goals, and how to 
integrate the innovation in existing cases? 
4. How effective are the existing regulations and standards related to material sustainability 
in airport construction? What improvements can be made? 
==PAGE:10==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
9 
 
By resolving the research questions, supported by deepening work along the time span of the 
project, the objective will be reached. The essential goal of this project is to examine steel use in 
airport construction and offer sustainable solutions while protecting the structural requirements of 
facilities. Also, by concerns the business interests of airport facilities, which is supported by 
analyzing the real-life airport cases. 
Purpose of the Study 
The addressed problem is multidisciplinary, concerning engineering and business, and keeping 
those in their sustainability scope. Air traffic is a fast-growing sector in the world. This causes 
problems regarding sustainability. Developing sustainable airports is the future of airport 
planning(Oto et al., 2012). The air transport industry relies on a wide range of goods and services 
from many industrial sectors, such as the construction of runways, terminal buildings, ground 
transportation links, and other infrastructure as well as all the materials in daily use to operate the 
airports and aircraft. The use of energy and materials at all stages of these operations has to be 
considered in any analysis of the sustainability of aviation(Douglas & Lawson, 2003). Considering 
those cases, the room for improvement is open to any problem that intersects with sustainability 
issues. Even though the information is far more reachable than in previous years, the lack of 
understanding of the environmental impacts is inevitable. As the philosopher Bob Jickling argued 
at the beginning of this century, sustainability is an important idea, but one with serious limitations. 
It is a mistake to think of it as an omnibus term, an organizing concept, or an aim of education. 
Education for sustainability, as seductive as the idea is, falls short of environmental education’s 
largely unrealized potential(Jickling, 2000). That being said, it would be an illusion to say that this 
project will be the master solution to steel consumption in airport construction and to sustainability 
concerns. Instead, in this period of change to a more sustainable future, this thesis will have a hand 
in a part of the solution by including those aspects of airport construction. 
The purpose is to discover, learn, and get familiarized enough with the contexts to offer sustainable 
solutions for airport facilities, which is supported by analyzing and gaining the learning outcome 
of real-life airport cases, and applying it all in unison to answer the research questions. 
==PAGE:11==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
10 
 
Overall Scope and Limitations 
It is substantial to set the necessary boundaries of the research in terms of the specific aspects of 
the project definition. The scope of this project is to examine the use of steel in airport construction 
in a comprehensive manner. To conduct this project, the following knowledge basis will be used: 
• Environmental impact assessment, 
• Qualitative analyses of steel and offered alternatives, 
• Sustainable material selection theory, 
• Case studies of similar projects, 
• Regulatory analyses of sustainable construction practices. 
The project, thus, requires not only managerial insights derived from literature review, descriptive 
research, and skills from action research at the case company but also engineering skills with 
regard to forming and analyzing a complex solution.  
Yet, the location of those mentioned airports is a massive turning point. The research technique, 
hence, the results may change dramatically according to the specified location. Not only the 
location but also the type of steel is also an important factor that affects the research and results. 
Additionally, different regions and countries may be subjected to particular regulations constituted 
by respective governmental and non-governmental associations. According to the World Steel 
Association, there are more than 3500 different grades of steel with many different physical, 
chemical, and environmental properties. Almost 75% of those have been developed in the past 20 
years. When it comes to producers, there is only one country from Europe in the Top 10 Steel 
producing countries, which is Germany at 7th place with 36.8 million tons in 2022. The list is led 
by China, which produced 1018.0 million tons the same year (“World Steel in Figures 2023,” n.d.). 
Furthermore, to our knowledge, there is no study that considers the environmental impacts of all 
processes and all product types concurrently, but the results would not be reliable since the basis 
would be impossible to specify. What is meant by that is, neglecting the market prices, steel is far 
more reachable in China than a country in Europe. The more goods travel, the more impact on the 
environment they have. Therefore, conducting environmental analyses such as impact, and 
studying specific to a country is of vital importance in order to reach realistic results representing 
==PAGE:12==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
11 
 
country conditions (Olmez et al., 2016). This study will focus on steel consumption in the 
construction of Denmark. 
Despite the clarity of the defined scope, the constraints and/or challenges that may impact the 
validity and reliability of this project should be defined beforehand. The necessary data needed to 
conduct the mentioned analysis are not publicly available in most cases. The issue generated by 
the limitation on public data availability will be minimized through contact with relevant 
responsible individuals. The amount of required data for educational purposes will be enough to 
conduct the analyses, but also may not align with the outcome of the full raw data, which is not 
accessible. Another limiting point is the data availability in the environmental impact assessment 
tool ‘EcoAudit’ of Ansys Granta. The outcome will be as detailed as what this software’s open 
source can offer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:13==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
12 
 
Literature Review 
 
Conducting the literature review section effectively is crucial for providing a comprehensive 
overview of existing research and setting the foundation of the project. Not to fall into repetition, 
the relevant literature has been reviewed to the extent permitted by the time-wise limitations of 
this project. Throughout the existing work, several sources concern the same topics as this project 
and have a similar scope. Nevertheless, research questions differ within the scope and do not target 
the same outcome. However, several pieces of case research focus on using greener alternatives 
instead of steel and analyzing the outcome. But unfortunately, the amount of matching work is 
limited, and existing projects are extremely case-focused. Therefore, the research method has been 
modified. Research has been divided into 3 sub-sections to receive further and clearer information. 
Analyzing the existing topics in terms of ‘relevant regulatory frameworks and guidelines’, 
‘sustainability in airport construction’, and ‘business strategies and sustainability in construction’ 
has given better results. In addition to that, dividing the research sections is a ground for the 
opportunity to blend singular scientific aspects into one united goal, which is to answer this 
project's research question. The mentioned literature types have been listed below as sub-headings. 
To organize the relevant literature systematically, it has been listed from most relevant to least in 
every section. This was defined as the most suitable structuring way to synchronize with the 
objective of this project and allow a coherent presentation of the literature.  
 
Regulatory Frameworks and Guidelines 
As the aspects of the other sub-headings are merely detailed topics, the deduction method will be 
followed to give a better understanding of the context. To start with, The International Air 
Transport Association (IATA) is the trade association for the world’s airlines, representing 320 
airlines or 83% of total air traffic. They support many areas of aviation activity and help formulate 
industry policy on critical aviation issues. Being one of the leads for the aviation industry as a 
certificating association, they also state that all airports should develop a master plan in order to 
guide future infrastructure development programs in a logical, sustainable, and efficient manner 
(Braun, n.d.). Meanwhile, The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) is a United 
==PAGE:14==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
13 
 
Nations agency that helps 193 countries to cooperate and share their skies to their mutual benefit. 
Since it was established in 1944, ICAO’s support and coordination have helped countries to 
diplomatically and technically realize a uniquely rapid and dependable network of global air 
mobility, connecting families, cultures, and businesses all over the world, and promoting 
sustainable growth and socioeconomic prosperity wherever aircraft fly (About ICAO, n.d.). Over 
the years, ICAO and IATA have worked together closely, the common goal being to benefit air 
transport. In a major step forward for the implementation of ICAO’s safety, security, and 
sustainability standards, IATA has entered into a partnership program for the creation and offering 
of training courses in a variety of fields (The Postal History of ICAO, n.d.). ICAO publishes many 
variant sources of information, from annual aviation reports to aircraft-type designator manuals, 
which also include airport planning manuals. The 193 member countries’ aviation legislation is 
based on standards that have been adopted within international aviation organizations. The 
standards are established globally by the UN international aviation organization ICAO. These 
standards are categorized as Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs), and Procedures for 
Air Navigation (PANS). They provide the fundamental basis for harmonized global aviation safety 
and efficiency in the air and on the ground, the worldwide standardization of functional and 
performance requirements of air navigation facilities and services, and the orderly development of 
air transport. ICAO manages over 12,000 SARPs across the 19 Annexes and six PANS to the 
Convention, many of which are constantly evolving in concert with the latest developments and 
innovations (How ICAO Develops Standards, n.d.). Among those annexes, number 14 is the most 
relevant one to this project. Annex 14, Aerodromes, extends from the planning of airports and 
heliports to such details as switch-over times for secondary power supply; from civil engineering 
to illumination engineering; from provision of sophisticated rescue and firefighting equipment to 
simple requirements for keeping airports clear of birds. The 9th and last edition of this annex was 
published in 2022 and it is not accessible to the public. Another significant organization to mention 
is the Airports Council International (ACI). It represents the collective interests of airports around 
the world to promote excellence in the aviation industry. Doing this by working with governments, 
regional ACI members, experts, and international organizations like ICAO to develop policies, 
programs, and best practices that advance airport standards globally, operating in 191 countries 
(About ACI | ACI World, 2021). They are also conducting certification programs and courses on 
how to implement ICAO’s annexes. 
==PAGE:15==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
14 
 
According to those lead organizations’ feedback, the most concerning matter about sustainability 
in terms of aviation is; CO2 emissions created mostly by aircraft fuels and its negative contribution 
to climate change, aircraft noises, and local air quality. As a matter of fact, annex 16 is focused 
specifically on those problems. That is why ICAO Member States adopted a collective long-term 
global aspirational goal (LTAG) of net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. In addition to those, other 
annexes also include environmental issues in their own context. According to the UN and ICAO 
collaboration, environmental protection-related activities contribute to 14 out of 17 SDGs and 
relevant supporting targets in total. The ones regarding this project mentioned in the introduction 
part were 9, 11, and 12.  ICAO’s work on adaptation to climate change includes: improving the 
resilience of aviation infrastructure to serve as a starting point for further work to identify the 
potential impacts of climate change on international aviation operations and related infrastructure 
and adaptation measures to address the impacts, contributing to SDG 9. Similarly, the studies are 
active on SDGs 11 and 12. ICAO’s environmental SARPs, which are addressed and maintained in 
Annex 16 - Environment, and relevant guidance material, including the Environmental Technical 
Manuals and Doc 9184, Airport Planning Manual, contribute to enhancing sustainable 
consumption and production patterns.  
The reason behind focusing on fuels and air quality around aviation facilities is supported by 
another statistical study done by Roland Berger Consultancy company. Carbon footprint is divided 
into 3 scopes. The first one is the direct emission from owned and controlled sources of 
administrative facilities. The second one concerns indirect emissions from the purchase of energy. 
Last but not least, the third scope is the indirect emissions from the supply chain, meaning that it 
is the most challenging to have control over. Airports influence roughly 15% of all carbon 
footprints in the aviation industry. Moreover, >90% of that 15% is within Scope 3 emissions. 
‘Standing & Taxiing’, ‘Take-off & Climb’, and ‘Approach’ of aircraft almost reach up to 60% of 
those emissions in airports, which is an evidential reasoning of priority focuses of ICAO. 
According to the same study, it has been found that construction operations concern only 13% of 
airport emissions, which is almost half of the daily transport of employees and passengers. The 
construction approach will be analyzed in more detail in the upcoming sections by analyzing the 
available Airport Planning Manual published by ICAO, and also other sources. The results of this 
study may create a need for a reasoning for this studies’ defined scope. This thesis focuses on 
==PAGE:16==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
15 
 
structural steels environmental impact while constructions are 13% responsible for airport 
emissions. On top of that, 13% includes all the operations and different type of materials used. The 
time limitation of this thesis, the field of expertise of the author, and the distinct interest path in 
the ideation phase resulted this thesis on moving towards defined scope.  An overall chart for scope 
categorization has been created by the source and can be reviewed in Figure 1 below (Accelerating 
Airport Decarbonization, n.d.). 
Figure 1- Airport Emissions by Roland Berger 
To dive deeper into airport contexts rather than aviation in general, detailed research has been 
conducted to figure out existing planning manuals. The Airport Planning Manual published by 
ICAO consists of 2 different parts, Master Planning, and Land Use and Environmental 
Management. These two parts are developed one after another, and the latest version of Master 
Planning was published in 2023, not accessible publicly. On the other hand, the latest version of 
Land Use and Environment was published in 2018 and is publicly accessible. In addition to this 
limited access, several other airport planning manuals have been discovered in the research. 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is a branch of the United States Department of 
Transportation, and they are running research called the Airport Cooperative Research Program 
(ACRP). This program is an industry-driven, applied research program that develops practical 
solutions to problems faced by airport operators. While the reports published by this program do 
==PAGE:17==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
16 
 
not represent FAA standards, policies, or regulations, it is considered as the promising future 
planning of the FAA. This program published a Sustainable Airport Construction manual in 2011, 
followed by more elaborative topics reports about airports until today, and ongoing. Another study 
was published in the USA by the Illinois Department of Transportation in 2023, named Standard 
Specifications for Construction of Airports. Lastly, there is a book called ‘Planning & Design of 
Airports’ written by Robert Horonjeff, Francis Mckelvey, William Sproule, and Seth Young, which 
published its 5th edition in 2010 (Eves, n.d.) (Airport Cooperative Research Program et al., 2011) 
(Horonjeff et al., 2010). 
After studying the available manuals, reports, studies, and books mentioned above, there is one 
common ground discovered. The content of every source elaborates on the planning and 
constructing processes in depth. It varies from site work to runways, surface treatments, and 
drainages. While including all the procedures to follow in an airport construction project, the 
environmental concerns are always addressed in a separate heading. This heading mostly contains 
suggestions to cover all the previous content in a sustainable manner. There is neither a set of 
obligations towards the green future of airports nor a rule/statement that makes an airport green or 
sustainable anyhow. It is apprehensible that no source dictates narrow rules for sustainability, since 
the addressed audience has different locations, sources, and economic infrastructure for their 
airport projects. Nevertheless, this creates the need for sustainable regulations of airport 
construction nowadays, all the more so with the long-term global aspirational goal (LTAG) of net-
zero carbon emissions by 2050. 
 
Sustainability in Airport Construction 
The research shows that the most recent and related project in the literature is the expansion work 
of Oslo Gardermoen Airport’s Terminal 2. This project was ongoing from 2009 to 2013. 
Gardermoen has grown from 148,000 m² to 265,000 m² with a capacity of 32 million travelers a 
year. The airport terminal received the BREEAM certification “Excellent”, which is the first award 
for an airport worldwide (Oslo Airport | Terminal Expansion | References | DERIX, n.d.). 
BREEAM is the world’s leading science-based suite of validation and certification systems for a 
sustainable built environment (What Is BREEAM?, 2022). According to collaborating companies 
==PAGE:18==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
17 
 
such as COWI, Buro Happold, and Derix, the world's most green airport terminal was constructed 
in this project, which is also supported by certification. The project was a holistic sustainability 
approach in every aspect, such as water management and HVAC, also including the building 
construction. According to public records from those companies, 50% of the total steel used in 
expansion was recycled. The building of the terminal consists of laminated wood instead of steel 
structures. This laminated wood was reinforced with concrete parts and the building is 
approximately 12.000 m2 broad. 3.500 m3 wooden component was used to build this structure and 
half of the carbon footprint was avoided compared to usual construction practices for such a 
building (Lennartz, n.d.). 
The most matching reference paper to this project faced in this review also concerns Oslo Airport 
expansion work. The paper was published in 2002 as a prestudy to the actual project and 
implemented after. It is called ‘Greenhouse gas emissions, life-cycle inventory and cost-efficiency 
of using laminated wood instead of steel construction; Case: beams at Gardermoen Airport’. The 
paper discusses that the total energy consumption in the manufacturing of steel beams is two to 
three times higher and the use of fossil fuel is 6 to 12 times higher than in the manufacturing of 
glulam beams. Manufacturing of steel in the most likely scenario gives five times higher GHG 
emissions compared to manufacturing of glulam beams, including ore or scrap-based 
manufacturing steel. The reason behind this is manufacturing of glulam beams causes one-fifth of 
the GHG emissions from the manufacturing of steel beams. This difference would be even larger 
if one assumed that the steel came from ore-based production. The waste handling part also plays 
a big role because ore-based production significantly produces emissions while scrap-based 
production produces almost zero, and glulam beams even produce negative emissions. In addition 
to the results of the study, additional aspects such as price, system boundaries, nature, and location 
have been included, which was beneficial for this project. For instance, a comparison of 
environmental impacts between products must consider their entire life cycle, that is from cradle 
to grave. In addition, they must meet the same functional requirements. Also, for most building 
constructions wood is within the range of ±20% of the price of steel. The price difference depends 
on whether the beams are many, plain, and similar (this favors steel construction) or if they are 
more irregular, like rounded (this favors glulam). Additionally, the choice of system boundaries is 
vital for such projects, and emissions during the life of a building material happen at different 
==PAGE:19==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
18 
 
points in time. Thus, the lifetime of the building was considered 50 years in this study. In the light 
of valuable information obtained from this study, several sections of this thesis have gained 
inspiration in differing aspects (Petersen & Solberg, 2002). 
Another similar study was conducted and published in 2022, concerning the construction of the 
passenger terminal building at Mactan Cebu International Airport. In this project, glulam material 
was in use for the entire roof part of the terminal such as Oslo Airport. Located in the Philippines, 
on an island, and having utterly different atmospheric conditions from Scandinavia, glulam 
material proved effective in achieving property competency and the desired architectural views, 
and appreciation from stakeholders at Mactan Cebu International Airport. The cost of the roof with 
glulam was economical, compared to steel as material, based on life cycle cost analysis, not on 
initial capital cost only. Of course, the time saved in the project has very high cost savings as well, 
since the transportation of wood was easier to the location compared to steel. The logistic 
operations of materials have a big impact on sustainability concerns as shown in this study 
(Lakshmanan, 2022). 
Furthermore, there are several studies concerning the sustainability of airports as a main focus. 
The first one which analyses this context is ‘Towards sustainable airport development’ which was 
mentioned in the introduction part and argues that the requirements imposed upon an airport may 
differ according to whether the decision is being taken by local, regional, or national decision 
makers. Conflicts and uncertainties will inevitably result but addressing the precise requirements 
of a sustainable airport and determining the empirical indices that will best serve as the indicators 
of sustainability (Longhurst et al., 1996). Another study which was also mentioned in the previous 
part was ‘Airport construction: materials use and geomorphic change’ by Douglas and Lawson, 
which has supporting ideas for this thesis such as improving sustainability by using recycled 
materials in airport construction but mostly focuses on landfilling and pavements(Douglas & 
Lawson, 2003). Furthermore, there is one more study concerning airport pavement construction. 
‘Recycling practices for airport pavement construction: Valorization of on-site materials’ is an 
experiment-based study that evaluates the decrease in carbon dioxide emissions during the 
rehabilitation of taxiway airport pavements when using recycled aggregates from end-of-life 
concrete slabs in order to reduce virgin aggregates consumption and hauling-related emissions, 
which succeeded. The study proved that high-performance materials with a low environmental 
==PAGE:20==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
19 
 
impact constitute an interesting strategy to improve sustainability in airports (Magnoni et al., 
2016). 
Besides these, there are other studies available which are handling the subject from another aspect. 
A study called ‘Airports and Environmental Sustainability: a comprehensive review’ published in 
2020, reviews 108 different articles and reports about the sustainable airports phenomenon to 
assess and measure aspects of airports’ environmental approach. The paper discusses that the 
increased use of assessment methodologies such as LCA will be useful in guiding decision-makers 
and policy outcomes in a more robust, granular direction. In academic literature, LCA is primarily 
used for evaluating the environmental impact of airfield pavement construction. However, LCA 
can and should be applied to evaluate all components of airport construction and operational 
activities and to guide decision-making as to what practices will yield optimal results (Greer et al., 
2020). 
Another approach to this matter discovered in the literature review was educational. ‘Education 
for Sustainable Airports’ and ‘Sustainable Airports Planning and Construction Practices in the 
Context of Environmental Bioethics’ were both published in 2012 by the same two authors. While 
both papers argue the fact that fast fast-growing air traffic sector creates problems regarding 
sustainability, the first one focuses on how to train relevant workforce, customers, and stakeholders 
in terms of environmental awareness and how to conduct sustainability training. While doing so, 
economic viability, operational efficiency, livability, natural resource protection, and social 
responsibilities are looked after. Concluding the paper, the authors highlight the importance of 
education on sustainable airports and converge the concerns of the paper to environmental 
bioethics (Oto et al., 2012). Following that year, the authors published the second paper concerning 
the conclusions of the previous one. In this paper, the question trying to be answered is: ‘What 
kind of ethics and environmental education should we do for sustainable airport construction 
practices?’, by the means of principles/methods of sustainable airport planning, construction, and 
operations are presented from an environmental bioethical perspective. The output of this paper is, 
that the six main goals of environmental bioethics are decreased world population, increased public 
food self-sufficiency, increased public health measures, decreased energy and resource 
consumption relative to the average, priority for essential technology, and definition of acceptable 
and responsible survival. Thus, to ensure the realization of a sustainable airport and its goals, it is 
==PAGE:21==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
20 
 
necessary that we develop and put into practice “biopolitics” that are in complete agreement with 
“environmental bioethics”, starting from the early stages of decision-making and planning to 
construction, and through demolition involved initiatives of the airports, in a holistic approach 
(Oto & Çobanoğlu, 2012). 
The following section is a literature review in light of such information mentioned above, 
regarding the relevance of business strategies in construction. 
 
Business Strategies and Sustainability in Construction 
The term ‘Sustainable Construction’ was first mentioned in 1994, at the first international 
conference of CIB (International Council for Research and Innovation in Building and 
Construction). CIB has been working on a guiding framework called Agenda 21 when this 
conference was held, towards the sustainable development goals for construction practices. This 
agenda was published in 1998. The three main objectives were to create a global framework and 
terminology that would add value to all national, regional, and sub-sectorial Agendas, to create an 
Agenda for CIB activities in the field, and to coordinate CIB with its specialized partner 
organizations, and to provide a source document for the definition of R&D activities (Sjostrom & 
Bakens, 1999). This agenda identified the concepts of sustainable construction not only in terms 
of 'hard issues' such as materials, building components, construction technologies, and energy-
related design concepts, but also in terms of 'soft issues' (e.g. social, cultural, economic, and 
management issues). After this groundbreaking movement through sustainable construction, 
following the steps of the UN’s global effort in sustainable change, more studies of relevance 
emerged. In line with these developments, a study about the construction supply chain for 
concurrent engineering has stated how important it is to seek economic principles in sustainable 
construction. To create a profitable market, value for money, maximum output with minimum 
input, integration of short-term return and long-term benefits, stakeholder partnership between the 
demand and supply sides of the industry, and business pattern changes from a linear process to a 
cyclic process should be taken into consideration (Khalfan et al., 2001). However, the application 
of these concepts applies differently to the countries which are developing, and which are 
considered developed. In the early future after the publication of the agenda, studies focused on it 
==PAGE:22==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
21 
 
tend to be more about developed countries. Integration of sustainable development goals was 
easier to achieve in those countries, which is why the studies were held more than two decades 
ago. All the goals may not be achieved, but the structure for it is set. Nowadays, there are still 
recent studies working on a solution to integrate sustainable construction in developing countries. 
A study done in 2003 states that the misperception of higher capital cost and the lack of awareness 
of market value are still significant barriers to the implementation and demand for sustainable 
construction. It is critical, therefore, to establish the economic performance of sustainable 
construction to motivate stakeholders to consider methods of sustainable construction. Moreover, 
the promotion of sustainable construction has been restricted due to the perception that it will result 
in higher risks and increasing construction costs. Sustainable construction, unfortunately, faces 
some economic challenges. While so, sustainable construction has several potential benefits, not 
only in short-term cost reduction but also in terms of whole-life cost savings. Further, it reduces 
natural and human resource costs; this is beyond the traditional perception of sustainable 
construction. These benefits are critical and will bring better value for the building itself, the 
developers, and end users. The battle between economic growth and environmental protection is 
critical to the construction industry. However, life cycle costing is an ideal economic tool and 
effective for measuring the long-term benefits of sustainable construction, and fixing the lack of 
understanding of the economic benefits of sustainable construction of stakeholders (Zhou & Lowe, 
2003).  
Furthermore, another study called ‘A Strategic Framework for Sustainable Construction in 
Developing Countries’ by Du Plessis published in 2007, states that construction by itself is a large 
sector of the economy, responsible for millions of jobs and a significant proportion of GDP in most 
countries. When allied to other sectors and industries in material production and distribution, as 
well as service sectors such as transport, finance, and the property market, its impact on society 
and the environment and its influence on the character of our world is tremendous. Supporting the 
facts mentioned in this section, the study argues that a meaningful strategy for sustainable 
construction in developing countries cannot be formulated by a small group of experts cloistered 
in a conference room. It can only come from a dialogue between the different levels of government, 
the broader construction industry, universities and research centers, and civil society at national, 
regional, and international levels (Du Plessis, 2007). Even though the content of some referenced 
==PAGE:23==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
22 
 
papers does not match completely with the specified system boundaries of this thesis, it has been 
an informative drive to understand the essential approaches in business. 
Nevertheless, the present challenges are still not an impediment to the fact that sustainable 
construction is an advantage in long-term business cases. The building industry is responsible for 
35% of the total greenhouse gas emissions and 33% of the total waste. Realizing the big room for 
improvement, sustainable construction practices help to minimize the negative impact on the 
environment, human health, and biodiversity. Moreover, green building technologies, which were 
first mentioned in Agenda 21 also, allow using non-renewable resources more optimally (Liu et 
al., 2020). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:24==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
23 
 
Theoretical and Conceptual Framework 
 
A theoretical framework is a tool for the author to define which type of approach will be used to 
answer the research questions and handle the data. To define it more precisely, a theoretical 
framework utilizes theory/theories and their constituent elements as the presumed ‘working model’ 
that drives the investigation and analysis of a social phenomenon (Research Methods in Library 
and Information Science, 7th Edition, n.d.). It is crucial to define the right theoretical framework 
in such a thesis to execute useful outcomes at the end. Since it is obtained from the start, it is wise 
to follow a questioning and broad-minded approach rather than discussing the content in a 
behavioral manner. For instance, using an inductive approach will be better than following 
behaviors in terms of exploring the subject. This mistake can also be seen in the developing 
countries’ challenges with adopting sustainable development mentioned in the previous section, 
caused by following behavioral and traditional business moves. The mentioned inductive 
framework is a type of pathway where the study starts with data, analyses it, and comes up with a 
hypothesis depending on the outcome, mostly used in scientific qualitative research (Hassan, 
2024). Since the research questions of this thesis consist of complex phenomena from divergent 
lines of studies, aim to fill gaps in available directives, and will be inspired by existing work; 
developing a framework will help to organize all the findings while being able to consider different 
aspects in a structured system. On the other hand, a conceptual framework is an analytical tool 
with several variations and contexts. It can be applied in different categories of work where an 
overall picture is needed. It is used to make conceptual distinctions and organize ideas. To be more 
precise, while a theoretical framework covers the theoretical aspect of the study, that is, the various 
theories that can guide the research, a conceptual framework defines the variables for the study 
and presents how they relate to each other. (Learnovate, 2023) As seen from the definitions, 
establishing a conceptual framework is as crucial as the theoretical one, maybe even more so for 
this precise study. To clarify, the hypothesis behind this study is using greener construction 
materials should be more beneficial compared to ordinary options in terms of sustainability. The 
research questions ought to be answered to prove this hypothesis right, or wrong. During the course 
of the study, the theoretical framework is set as inductive to preserve the approach in every step of 
the work done. Meanwhile, the conceptual framework is an effective tool to have when content is 
==PAGE:25==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
24 
 
diverse. It is based on concepts that are the main variables. Along with the analyses of this study, 
the construction steel and sufficient alternatives will be tested through environmental impact 
analyses, and they will have several different variables. These particular variables include the 
accessibility, differentiating types and environmental impacts of production, secondary processes 
until the final form, transportation, storage, ease of handling, maintainability, lifetime, and 
demolishing processes. After having the research question ready, the next step in creating this 
framework is defining key variables. This process is done to have a clear understanding of the 
cause-and-effect relationship between the sides of the initial theory. The key variables are cleaving 
into independent and dependent (Swaen, 2022). For instance, meeting the material properties of 
steel in construction applications, and having less environmental impact than steel are independent 
variables of this framework. On the other hand, providing for these independent variables will give 
a more sustainable alternative to steel, which is the dependent variable. The following step is to 
include previously mentioned particular variables, which have 3 kinds; moderating, mediating, and 
controlling. While over-complexing the system, it will give a clearer outcome at the end. For 
instance, having less CO2 emissions in those life-cycle period processes is a moderating variable, 
which can't be changed but affects the final result. Purchasing the goods from the nearest suppliers 
is a mediating variable, which will affect the environmental impacts in terms of transportation, and 
it is controllable. The last one is the controlling variable, which is an effective factor in the 
outcome, however will be kept constant since it is not the research object of the study. For example, 
the possible economic interest between the material supplier and the construction company may 
affect the outcome of this study quite much, but since it's not preferred to interfere with the results 
of this scheme, it will be kept constant. To create a better understanding of the conceptual 
framework, it has been visualized in Figure 2. Needless to say, this simplified scheme is an 
example of the final advanced scheme, which will be shaped along with the research input. 
==PAGE:26==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
25 
 
 
Figure 2 - Visualized Conceptual Framework (S.C.A.M.P.E.R., Visual Workspace for Innovation, n.d.) 
The obtained theoretical and conceptual frameworks are introduced to be the best fit available for 
this research. Nevertheless, it would be wise to be aware of its limitations, as much as its strengths. 
The probability of these frameworks being fully consistent for this study is likely, but the 
probability of having better approaches should not be neglected. In addition to that, adopted 
inductive techniques work better with empirical data, which is a serious challenge to obtain. The 
simulating data to be used in some parts of the analysis will not reflect on real-time values, 
however, it will be the best possible equivalent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:27==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
26 
 
Methodology 
 
After defining the topic and specifying the research question, theoretical and conceptual 
frameworks have been developed to structure the most suitable methodology. Identifying a 
methodological framework with a correlation to the previous sections’ perspectives should give 
better control over the analysis part and a more scheduled system to result in viable outcomes. 
Accordingly, the research designs, the research and analysis tools, and the scope found suitable for 
the nature of this study will be introduced. The limitations and biases will be included at the end 
of this section. 
To specify the mentioned subject headings, it is necessary to define a sensible way to approach 
those. There are several ways to conduct and design the structure of research depending on the 
topics and research questions. In his book about research methods, Saunders discusses that 
researchers are tied to making assumptions during every stage of the research, maybe about some 
out-of-touch knowledge or the nature of the realities that affect the answer to the research question. 
Additionally, those assumptions made along the way also make the research question, thus the 
findings more understandable. Moreover, it is remarked that if a research question does not adopt 
a philosophy, meaning that it is not a yes or no question such as this study, a pragmatist point of 
view would enhance the handling of the project. Finally, adopting multiple methods is convenient 
and compatible with a pragmatist approach (Saunders et al., 2019). Given all the circumstances, 
the available research question is in need of a qualitative analysis in order to be answered. As 
mentioned in the previous section, an inductive framework with a pragmatist approach will be 
adopted as a combination to conduct this qualitative analysis. Even though there is a literature 
review that searches for previous work, theories, and regulations with an opposing procedure, the 
reason was to strengthen the final findings and support the analysis with reliable references. Since 
the study intends to explore a topic that was unaddressed specifically before, and thus has 
regulatory gaps, also because the results will rely on qualitative data rather than existing theories, 
the selected set of approach methods will be the most beneficial. 
To conduct such designed research, there are several tools used. The process was considered as 
two stages in project planning: collection of data and analysis of data. For the first stage, there 
==PAGE:28==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
27 
 
have been initiatives to collect data from primary sources. The attempts for collaboration are made 
towards Airport Carbon Accreditation, Copenhagen Airport Sustainable Development 
Department, and Istanbul Airport Management contacts. Unfortunately, no replies were received 
in terms of useful data. Then, the research gravitated toward secondary sources. The written data 
collected is web-based. The prologue content which includes the introduction, the literature review, 
the frameworks, and the methodology section is created with the help of information obtained 
online. Those include information from research-based scientific papers, case-based scientific 
papers, policies and regulations from official associations, and empirical data from official 
associations. The search tools used were Google and Google Scholar, Research Gate, and Science 
Direct. The available regulation info and the rest of the included info have been retrieved from 
official web sources of the relevant associations. The advantage of basing the web as a source is 
the high accessibility and range of information. Still, the range of information leads to a drawback 
in finding the most relevant information. The written data collection phase exceeded its time slot 
in the project plan, to make sure that the most suitable information is retrieved. However, the 
numeric data used is collected from the material selection software Ansys Granta Selector. The 
mentioned drawback becomes greater when it comes to numerical data. Thus, the analyzed 
numerical data is decided to be retrieved from a valid source that is accredited by the industry. 
When it comes to the analysis of data, the same software will be on demand again. Which is Ansys 
Granta Selector, and it is used to compare against different materials and properties to come up 
with a green alternative to steel for structural purposes in this stage. After selecting possible 
options, those are submitted to environmental impact analyses with the use of the ‘EcoAudit’ tool 
of the same software. The outcome of this analysis will be integrated and synthesized with the 
information learned along the study and the thesis will be concluded with arguments and 
suggestions for a greener airport future. 
The analyses of steel consumption in airport construction is a broad definition in terms of the 
research scope, considering the countless different parameters involved in the process of 
construction projects in various countries. To provide a brief example taken from the introduction, 
China has been the biggest steel-producing country in the world for consecutive years according 
to the World Steel Association. It would not be false to argue that the steel used in China has fewer 
CO2 emissions in terms of minimizing the transportation of goods, considering that the steel is 
==PAGE:29==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
28 
 
purchased from local suppliers which are cheaper than imported goods. Another aspect of the 
broadness of this topic comes from the steel itself. According to the World Steel Association again, 
there are more than 3500 different grades of steel, varying according to carbon content, other 
alloying elements, or even processing techniques (“World Steel in Figures 2023,” n.d.).  
There will be one software to make use of in this project, as mentioned in the research tools. To 
give a better understanding of its role in the scope, it is explained in detail in this part. The Ansys 
Granta Selector is a tool to enable the best material decisions with comprehensive comparison 
charts according to material properties. The comparisons are supported by graphical analysis, 
which makes it easier to follow the process and progress through it. As for the database, the 
software includes nearly 4000 records of purchasable engineering materials as headings, which 
enlarges in itself when the specific material is chosen. These property values are mostly referenced 
data from either research or suppliers or else estimated with their technology. The educational 
version of this software will be in use for this study. 
In the material universe of this software, there are 7 different main headings for materials, one is 
metals and alloys. This heading has 6 different sub-headings, the ferrous metals option is the one 
which this thesis subjects to. The variety increasingly continues when going into detail as seen in 
the Figure below.  
 
Figure 3 - Material Tree Screenshot from Ansys Granta Selector 
==PAGE:30==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
29 
 
The design of the software made it clearly distinguishable between the usage areas of different 
types for every material. The structural steel subheading includes the types of steel which are 
mostly used in applications that require durability. Those applications are the production of 
construction components, off-shore infrastructures, pressure pipes and vessels, power plants, etc., 
and finally construction purposes. According to the data of the software, among 14 different 
structural options, ‘ASTM A36’, ‘ASTM A992’, and ‘S275J’ are the most used type of steel in 
construction. Thus, the scope is formed around these three types of steel and this study will be 
conducted on them. The factors that affect the qualitative evaluation of those will be based on 
Denmark, the location where this study occurs. Those factors include the timeline (the present 
day), the price (in DKK), the production origin of the materials (variance originated from imported 
goods will be minded), and the location of construction (the following benefits of ease in 
sustainable development). The informative details and property analyses will follow in the data 
analysis section.  
After handling the analyses with the 3 types of steel and alternating them with a more environment-
friendly option, the EcoAudit tool will get into use. This tool will help this study create a whole 
environmental analysis of those materials considering whole life-cycle impact parameters. With 
this finding, not only the materials' impact on the environment will be observed, but also it will be 
clear to evaluate how viable is it to use that greener option in a long-span frame. The basing factors 
used in the Ansys Granta Selector will be kept the same. Additionally, the lifespan of a building 
will be considered 50 years, decided according to several sources and research through life-cycle 
methods (Marsh, 2017). 
In order to maintain the study valid and viable, the biases and limitations have to be acknowledged. 
To start with, the personally biased mindset in the early stage of this study was the tendency to 
ensure that there would be a clearly more sustainable option for such construction projects. 
Regardless, this mindset has been overcome by progressing through the research and 
understanding the depth of it. Studying and acknowledging cross-aspected literature and data while 
structuring the frameworks is also beneficial to obtaining a neutral perspective. On the other hand, 
the bias caused by the predictive algorithms of search engines based on user preferences may 
appear uncontrollable. The variation in keywords used to get the most relevant outcome and the 
time spent on the research phase was the way to control that bias to a certain extent. As for 
==PAGE:31==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
30 
 
limitations, they have a bigger effect on this study and appear more exact than biases. The main 
limitation of this study is the must to define scope as fully occurring in Denmark. Assuming this 
study is conducted as targeted globally, the limitation of time which is 1 semester would be 
unfeasible. In other words, time and location are the essential limitations. Besides those, the lack 
of real-case empirical data due to unreachable authorized organizations created a drawback. 
However, the collaboration of the researcher with the supervisor concluded with approval of using 
simulation data. Additionally, the policy/regulation aspects that were aimed to be analyzed in this 
study were found to be out of reach for public use in most cases. The available minor will be 
included in the findings as much as possible. Lastly, the limiting factor that is caused by the finite 
database of serving software is acknowledged. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:32==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
31 
 
Data Analyses and Findings 
 
This section includes three subsections. The first one is a general overview part to familiarize with 
the selected three types of steel in detail. To get a better understanding of any result that will be 
reached, the knowledge about each material must be constituted beforehand. In addition to this, 
the constituted knowledge will also increase the reliability of comments and recommendations that 
will be made on those results. The sources for information will be the relevant standardization 
associations and the Ansys Granta Selector database. The overview of these materials will include 
information such as material properties, cost, sustainability, and characteristics in general. The 
second one will be the main material selection process inside the Ansys Granta Selector software. 
The selected base materials will be compared with the available more sustainable materials in 
terms of mechanical properties and affordability for structural purposes. The success criteria for 
the material to be selected will be based on some assumptions in several fields due to the nature 
of the project. The adopted assumptions rely on similar previous works’ referenced data and are 
specified in this section. The fund of knowledge grew up until this point of the project is applied 
in selecting the target material in this section, also addressing several research sub-questions 
presented in the beginning. Nevertheless, this proposal for a new material will be selected in stable 
conditions. As Newton’s one of the universally valid statements, the 3rd law, for every action there 
is an equal and opposite reaction. Since the materials that create this thesis’ motivation are 
evaluated on their utilization, which would not be a stable state, there should be further 
investigation. The final sub-section includes this further investigation by assessing the materials' 
environmental impact through their use, from production to waste. This assessment will be 
conducted through the EcoAudit tool of the same software. By doing so, the project will have long-
term pointed solutions to the research questions instead of comparing some regular construction 
materials.  
 
General Overview of Selected Base Steel Materials 
There are several reasons why structural steels are the most commonly used materials in the 
construction of buildings and structural applications. These materials are exceptionally strong 
==PAGE:33==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
32 
 
enough to support the weights of massive structures while having the necessary elongation levels, 
at affordable prices. In terms of mechanical performance; yield strength, tensile strength, and 
elongation are the three prominent properties of structural steels that distinguish them from other 
types (BeamCut, 2022). 
 
Figure 4 - Structural Steels Chart of Tensile vs. Yield Strength from Ansys Granta Selector 
In Figure 1 above, the chart shows all the steel types that are present in the ‘Structural’ listing in 
Ansys Granta Selector with a comparison of tensile strength and yield strength. The three red-
colored zones represent the base materials that have been selected. It can be observed that the range 
of yield strength is changing between 210-450 MPa and tensile strength is changing between 320-
670 MPa. There is a wide range of selection fields for the relevant application and desired 
properties. Additionally, the minimum elongation percentage of these materials is 14% strain and 
advancing up to %40, which is significantly good when metals are considered. When the price 
range is included as a limit of a maximum 15 DKK/kg, there are only 300 types that meet all of 
these specifications out of 1930 different database steel types. The ones that provide those needs 
under limitations other than structurals are mostly variant alloyed and heat-treated steels used in 
automotive and electronics industries and tool production. In Figure 2 below, the location of the 
mentioned base materials is spotted with red among all the metals’ tensile vs. yield strength 
comparison chart, where grey zones indicate 1630 metal types which are not sufficient for the 
==PAGE:34==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
33 
 
determined limits. A comprehensive material properties comparison table for base materials can 
be found in the Appendix. 
 
 
Figure 5 - All Steel Types Chart of Tensile vs. Yield Strength from Ansys Granta Selector 
 
ASTM A36 
ASTM 36 is one of the most commonly used mild carbon steel in construction. The areas of usage 
cover shapes, plates, and bars of A36 for use in the construction of bridges and buildings, and for 
general structural purposes with several joining techniques such as riveting, bolting, and welding.
It has been utilized in the United States and the standardization
by the American Society 
for Testing and Materials (ASTM) in 1960 and updating of standards is still ongoing. The ‘A’ in 
A36 stands for the origin of standardization of the material and ‘36’ corresponds to the yield 
strength of the material which is 36ksi (250 MPa). The governing alloying element in A36 is Mn 
with a percentage of up to 1.2%, followed by C with up to 0.29%. The other mechanical properties 
that are considered relatively important for structural steel are tensile strength and elongation; 
which change between 400-550 MPa and 20-23%strain depending on the alloying concentration 
and heat treatment processes. While it is mostly fabricated in plate form, a variety of production 
==PAGE:35==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
34 
 
forms are present depending on the requirement of use (ASTM, ASTM A36/A36M-19 Standard 
Specification for Carbon Structural Steel, 2019). The price range of this material changes between 
8.33-10.5 DKK per kilogram and 65000-82500 DKK per meter cube. The general information 
charts and detailed properties of the material adopted from Ansys Granta Selector can be found in 
the Appendix. 
 
ASTM A992 
A992 steel is a high-strength, low-alloy structural steel widely used in construction, particularly 
for building frames, wide-flange, and W-S-I beams. It is designed and standardized by ASTM in 
the United States for improved weldability and enhanced toughness. While ‘A’ stands for ASTM, 
unlike the A36 steel, ‘992’ does not specifically stand for a property. It is an identifier of this 
specific type which is for applications requiring enhanced structural integrity and resilience under 
dynamic loads. A992 steel typically features a minimum yield strength of 50 ksi (345 MPa) and a 
minimum tensile strength of 65 ksi (450 MPa), with elongation percentages changing between 18-
25.9% strain. Considering the variations, it generally has more Mn and less C content compared 
to A36, with better ductility and resistance to brittle fracture. This steel grade's balanced 
composition and mechanical properties ensure that it meets the stringent standards set by the 
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), specifically the ASTM A992/A992M 
specification (ASTM, Standard Specification for Structural Steel Shapes, 2022). As a preferred 
material for modern steel construction, A992 steel offers cost-effective performance and reliability 
in demanding structural applications(Zoruba, n.d.). The price range of this material changes 
between 8.25-10.4 DKK per kilogram and 64400-82500 DKK per meter cube. The general 
information charts and detailed properties of the material adopted from Ansys Granta Selector can 
be found in the Appendix. 
 
S275J 
S275J steel is a structural grade steel specified under the European standard EN 10025-2. The "S" 
stands for "structural" and the number "275" indicates the minimum yield strength of 275 MPa. 
The letter "J" denotes the impact test temperature, with "J" indicating testing at 0°C. This steel 
==PAGE:36==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
35 
 
grade offers a tensile strength ranging from 410 to 560 MPa, providing a good balance of strength 
and ductility, making it suitable for various structural applications. S275J steel is widely used in 
the construction industry for structural elements such as beams, columns, and girders. It is also 
used in the construction of bridges, buildings, and other infrastructure projects. The material's good 
weldability and machinability enhance its versatility, allowing it to be easily shaped and joined 
using standard methods. Additionally, S275J steel is used in the manufacturing of machinery 
components and general engineering applications due to its reliable mechanical properties and ease 
of fabrication. Its performance in cold environments makes it a preferred choice for projects where 
toughness at lower temperatures is critical. Overall, S275J steel's combination of yield strength, 
tensile strength, and impact resistance at 0°C makes it a robust and adaptable material for a wide 
range of structural and engineering applications (EN 10025 S275 Steel (S275JR, S275J0 & S275J2) 
| PDF | Steel | Strength Of Materials, n.d.). The price range of this material changes between 8.1-
9.96 DKK per kilogram and 63600-78100 DKK per meter cube. The general information charts 
and detailed properties of the material adopted from Ansys Granta Selector can be found in the 
Appendix. 
 
Material Selection 
This section is a relatively critical point for this project. The outcome that is obtained will directly 
influence the overall result. Therefore, the selection process will be conducted attentively, 
considering every possible aspect. In the meantime, the ways of approaching the research questions 
adopted in the Methodology part are kept in mind to overcome this critical point in the most 
convenient way. As told previously, to complete such a project, there have to be assumptions on 
several points. The target should be specified to form those assumptions according to the process. 
In other words, it has been realized that there are several different scenarios available to examine 
this issue. To start with a lead, it is impossible to aim for a biodegradable material if the replacing 
material is desired to be metallic. Metals and metallic materials alloys are based on inorganic 
elements, and they do not degrade in nature as organic materials do. Corrosion and oxidation of 
metals is a gradual way of degrading and ends in breaking down eventually. Therefore, if the 
ultimate goal is to keep material properties as close as possible to structural steel, the selected 
material should be a metal that meets the same physical requirements while producing fewer CO2 
==PAGE:37==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
36 
 
emissions throughout the production, consumption, wasting, or preferably for all. To conduct such 
selection, the properties of the base materials presented at the beginning of this chapter will be 
adopted. The limiting factor will be the CO2 footprint and embodied energy of typical grades in 
production and recycling processes. The usual grades refer to the production of the material from 
a combination of its ores or feedstocks and some recycled content. The other grade is the virgin 
grade which does not include any recycled content. The study which was referenced to give a piece 
of overall information about steel A992 also states that, ‘Today’s structural steels consist of more 
than 95 percent recycled material. (Zoruba, n.d.)’. Meanwhile, there are also available data in the 
Ansys Granta Selector for ‘Recycle fraction in current supply’. It is around 50% for the selected 
base materials and will come into use for environmental impact assessments. Therefore, this 
analysis will proceed with the typical grade values. The typical grade values for the base materials 
are shown in Table 1. The serving property values and necessary limitation values to create the 
chart in Figure 6 can be observed in Table 2. 
         Property 
Metal 
Embodied energy, 
primary production 
(MJ/kg) 
CO2 footprint, 
primary production 
(kg/kg) 
Embodied energy, 
recycling (MJ/kg) 
CO2 footprint, 
recycling (kg/kg) 
A36 
18.8 - 21.7 
1.91 - 2.2 
7.36 - 8.14 
0.579 - 0.64 
A992 
18.7 - 21.5 
1.9 - 2.19 
7.35 - 8.12 
0.577 - 0.638 
S275J 
16.3 - 19.2 
1.64 - 1.94 
7.2 - 8 
0.566 - 0.626 
Table 1 – The Production and Recycle Environmental Effects of Base Materials 
The 
Property 
Yield 
Strength 
(MPa) 
Tensile 
Strength 
(MPa) 
Elongation 
(%strain) 
Price 
(DKK/kg) 
Embodied 
energy, 
primary 
production 
(MJ/kg) 
CO2 
footprint, 
primary 
production 
(kg/kg) 
Embodied 
energy, 
recycling 
(MJ/kg) 
CO2 
footprint, 
recycling 
(kg/kg) 
Limiting 
Value 
Min. 
Min. 
Min. 
Max. 
Max. 
Max. 
Max. 
Max. 
250 
400 
14*1 
12.5*2 
16.3 
1.64 
7.2 
0.566 
Table 2 – The Limiting Values for Metallic Material Selection 
 
*1 Reduced the %strain value to 14, no other metallic material was meeting the requirement 
*2 Increased the maximum price to 12.5, to make way for other steel types to compete with structurals 
==PAGE:38==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
37 
 
 
Figure 6 -Compatible Metal for Given Limitations from Ansys Granta Selector 
Figure 6 shows that the only available material in the metal family with given constraints on 
selected parameters is Complex Phase Steel, YS500, cold rolled. Complex-phase steels are a part 
of the advanced high-strength steels family. With its special phase tailoring, it supplies outstanding 
values on mechanical properties such as strength, formability, durability, and fracture toughness. 
The term complex phase refers to its microstructure which consists of 4 different phases; 
martensite, bainite, and retained austenite within a ferritic matrix. This mix provides a good 
balance between strength and ductility. As YS500 stands for, the yield strength of the material is 
500 MPa minimum, and elongation levels reach up to 14%strain. Cold rolling is an additional 
metal-treating process, which advances the materials' properties and characteristics. In a simple 
explanation, cold rolling is rolling the steel under high loads and below the recrystallization point 
so it encounters modifications. The deformations on steel emerge increased strength, which can 
take this material up to 700 MPa. Further improvements include upgraded fatigue properties, better 
surface conditions, and tighter tolerances. This type of material in its plain version is mostly used 
in the automotive industry for safety and structural parts. The cold-rolled version is used in 
advanced property requiring applications again in the automotive industry, suspension systems, 
safety components, and also as stiffeners and beams in construction applications. The benefits that 
cold rolling ensures make the material even more convenient for construction applications. The 
increased strength makes the material suitable for bearing higher loads, which will lead to less 
==PAGE:39==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
38 
 
material use and efficient designs. Improved surface conditions as a result of cold rolling enable 
material to be considered in exposed structural elements. Furthermore, tighter tolerances make this 
material a good choice since the exact dimensions for fit and assembly are crucial in construction 
practices. Improved toughness and durability compared to commercial structural steels are also 
advantageous when long-term resistance to impact and wear is considered in airport construction. 
When it comes to the downsides, the main considerations are formability, cost, and availability 
among the standards. Having tight tolerances means that the material does not offer as much 
freedom in forming as standard structural steels do. Thus, the increase in the use of complex phase 
steels in construction practices may require additional specialized forming and fabrication 
techniques. The price of complex-phase steel is approximately 3 DKK more expensive per kg, 
around 20.000 DKK more expensive per unit volume. The gap between prices is equitable and 
may be tempered by using less material for the same project with the help of advanced strength. 
The compatibility of this material with construction standards must be studied and verified before 
action. The international availability and accreditation of commercial structural metals still play a 
big role in the industry. In conclusion, Complex Phase Steel, YS500, cold rolled is a competent 
prospective to replace structural steel in several construction applications. The structural 
components that require high-strength and fatigue resistance such as columns and beams, structural 
sections that are in need of reinforcement such as junctions, and last but not least the exterior 
surfaces and barriers may as well benefit from this material instead of structural steels. 
Nevertheless, to approve and set this material into motion requires further study where the main 
scope is only focused on it. Further analyses will be conducted in the upcoming environmental 
impact analyses section to discover the material in long-term scope with external factors included. 
The detailed material property report extracted from Ansys Granta Selector can be found in the 
Appendix. 
The other way of approaching this search for a more sustainable material would be to find a 
biodegradable material to replace steel in various construction applications. Contrary to the 
previous result of a different metal with lower CO2 emissions, a full replacement process would 
take more extensive studies and experiments. As far as this study's research and gathered 
knowledge goes, it is unlikely to fully replace steel with natural materials. Regardless, several 
biodegradable and natural materials have started trending in some construction applications, also 
==PAGE:40==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
39 
 
discussed in the literature review. Through the reviews, it has been realized that the use of natural 
materials instead of steel occurs in especially specific applications where the excessive strength 
and durability of steel is not required ineluctably. On an overall scale, the examples of where steel 
property requirements may be neglected are temporary structures, low-rise buildings, small-scale 
projects, etc. When it comes to implementing these materials on large-scale projects such as 
airports, as is this project's main focus, the options turn out to be limited compared to overall use. 
Even so, there is a big room for improvement which can lead to innovative changes in the industry. 
While it can vary dramatically depending on design and requirements, according to several sources 
and industrial norms, a rough estimation can be made. Airports include terminal buildings, hangars 
and runways, control towers, and other facilities where steel is consumed. Terminal buildings are 
taking space around 100.000 m2, where typical steel usage is around 80 kg/ m2. For a mid-sized 
airport, it can be assumed that there are 4 hangars sized 10.000 m2 and 600 kg/ m2 steel usage. The 
rest are the control towers (considered 2 of them) which are estimated as 5.000 m2 using 100 kg/ 
m2 of steel and the remaining infrastructure would use 75 kg/ m2 of around 50.000 m2. In light of 
these fact-based rough estimations, a middle-sized airport would consume around ≈40.000 tons of 
steel  (Braun, n.d.; Brettle, n.d.; Brown et al., n.d.). It has to be reminded again that these 
estimations would vary widely depending on the projects and practices. On the other hand, there 
are several sources in addition to the ones investigated in the literature review section that argue 
and suggest a replacement of steel with natural materials potential of up to 50% (Bamboo The Gift 
of The GODS Oscar Hidalgo Lopez | PDF, n.d.; Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT) Handbook - 
Resources, n.d.; Engineered Wood Products, n.d.; Yadav & Mathur, 2021). The numbers added up 
include all types of construction practices. Nevertheless, it can be adjusted according to the 
estimations done above. Considering the necessity of maintaining fire safety and structural 
integrity, the internal structural elements (roof and walls) and non-load-bearing elements in 
terminal buildings may be replaced by natural products, which would correspond to around 30%. 
The hangars, on the other hand, have a lower possibility of replacement due to high load and 
durability requirements, however, a 10% replacement potential would be a realistic assumption for 
the structural elements which are not that critical. The steel in control towers can also be replaced 
in internal structures and external coverings at around 15% in moderation. The remaining 
infrastructure has a higher feasibility in replacing steel since it includes less critical structures 
compared to the rest, which can be assumed around 30%. To sum up, 2.600 tons of steel from 
==PAGE:41==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
40 
 
terminal buildings, 2.400 tons of steel from hangars, 30 tons of steel from control towers, and 
1.250 tons of steel from remaining infrastructure can be replaced with natural material alternatives 
in total. As a total percentage, the total estimated number of 40.000 tons can be reduced to ≈33.000 
which is an 18% reduction potentially. While being less than half of the argued 50% from cross-
referenced sources, 18% still is a promising rate and may have a big impact on the industry. 
Sustainable construction is a dynamic, ever-changing, and evolving practice in today's world 
applied in many aspects. The rough estimations conducted above have a high chance of variance 
factor depending on the technological growth of sustainable approaches. When it comes to 
choosing this replacement material, there will be a wide selection depending on which purpose it 
will be used. Thus, the selection will proceed with a natural material that could replace the selected 
base steels in their area of usage, which were frames, plates, bars, and beams. The selection process 
will be held through Ansys Granta Selector again. As a starting point, a comparison chart 
containing tensile strength and yield strength is created again with available materials in the 
database. The difference this time is the materials that are not biodegradable are eliminated from 
the beginning and all labeled grey. Figure 7 below shows the available biodegradable materials 
strength chart. 
 
Figure 7 - Tensile vs. Yield Strength Chart of Biodegradable Materials from Ansys Granta Selector 
==PAGE:42==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
41 
 
Figure 7 above clearly outlines the biodegradable materials available in the material database. The 
selected base structural steels are also spotted in the chart for an easier comparison. Starting from 
the weaker side, purple records represent honeycomb and soft tissue materials, green records 
represent natural materials, dark blue records represent plastics, light blue records represent 
mineralized tissues, and finally, the pale green records which even have stronger options than base 
steels represent natural fibers.  
Even though the discussed case is not to find a biodegradable material that will compete with steel 
in terms of material properties, instead, it is to replace steel partially in some percentages where 
no critical strength levels are required. In accordance with the purpose of coming up with 
biodegradable material to replace steel at this stage of the project, there is a need to place a 
particular focus on synthesizing technology due to natural fibers having competitive properties. 
This technology may actually allow one to synthesize two natural materials and come up with an 
end product that competes with steel. The process is not as straightforward as it seems and would 
need years of study to achieve success, but it would be a mistake not to mention the possibility.  
Synthesizer is a tool supplied by Ansys Granta Selector where the researchers may choose between 
different material synthesizing models, including battery models, cellular structures with foams, 
multilayer materials, sandwich panels, and composites. Composite models include continuous 
fiber, particulate, and short fiber methods. To explain briefly, the continuous fiber method is 
embedding long continuous fiber strands into the matrix material. It can be conducted as 
unidirectional with aligned fibers in the same direction, or quasi-isotropic where the alignment is 
multi-axial and offers even greater improvements. The fibers are produced as long as the matrix 
materials, so they run uninterrupted. This method provides a promising improvement in material 
properties that ensures load transfer and reinforcement with higher strength and stiffness. The end 
products of this method are used in structural components, especially in load-bearing applications 
compatible with this project target, as well as in architectural elements. The particulate method, on 
the other hand, disperses fiber particles within the matrix material. It offers a better uniform 
distribution of fibers and provides better properties in every direction. Usage areas tend to be the 
applications where uniform properties in every direction are needed, such as boards and panels. 
The short fiber method finally, is dispersing short fibers into the matrix. The short fibers provide 
better improvements than particles but with a disadvantage. The uniformity of fiber distribution is 
==PAGE:43==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
42 
 
challenging to control in this method, but depending on the direction of fibers settled, composite 
material achieves better properties, especially in that direction. Since it also provides better 
bonding between fiber and matrix, it is more suitable for structural applications where directional 
strength and stiffness are required, such as beams or load-bearing components in limited 
applications (Hodzic & Shanks, 2013; Moore & Cown, 2015). When it comes to comparing those 
methods in order to find the best fit for this project application, the continuous fiber method offers 
the most improvement in strength and stiffness (especially in the direction in which fibers are 
embedded), while the other two methods’ improvements are limited by several mentioned factors. 
As might be expected, the continuous fiber method is the most challenging one to produce since it 
requires precise alignment of long fibers, while the short fiber method needs attention to the 
orientation of fibers, and particulate is the easiest to produce among all. The methods are ranked 
in the same way for the matter of cost. Supposing the material selection process was only to find 
this natural composite material, it would need further thought and research to select a composition 
method. However, since this is a reserved section to mention the importance and the possible 
opportunity of composite materials, the continuous method with quasi-isotropic alignment will be 
the one to proceed, neglecting the fact that it is more challenging to produce and likely to be more 
costly.  
In order to reach a common conclusion, two different wood materials are chosen to act as the 
matrix. The first one is the one with the highest tensile strength among others in the biodegradable 
chart, which is Greenheart wood. The other one is the one with the highest yield strength value, 
which is Kaneelhart wood. These two particular kinds of wood also include building and 
construction practices in their typical uses. For the fiber selection, the options are increased to four 
different types, to be able to investigate the situation in a larger scale of possibilities. Even so, the 
selected types of Banana Fiber, Hemp Fiber, Flax Fiber, and Silk (Spider drag-line silk) Fiber are 
the most prominent ones in terms of strength properties among other types. On top of that, they 
have better properties than all the structural steel singularly, but of course, their form and structure 
won’t allow such application. The trial was with four different fiber types, conducted on both wood 
types, with 50% and 60% fiber volume fractions. 16 different synthesized materials were obtained 
in total. The allocation of synthesized materials can be observed in Figure 8 below. 
==PAGE:44==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
43 
 
 
Figure 8 - Position of Synthesized Materials from Ansys Granta Selector 
To clarify, the black labeled circles represent materials with Greenheart wood matrix while the red 
circles represent Kaneelhart wood matrix materials. There is a new set of material property 
overviews generated in the software, which is very limited. This limitation is due to the lack of 
informative details of the synthesized material. Nevertheless, it is understood that these kinds of 
applications are possible and could be the main focus of upcoming sustainability studies. The fact 
that this Synthesizer tool does not consider factors such as the quality of fiber alignment, matrix 
compatibility, manufacturing techniques, application-specific requirements, etc. it can be said that 
this test is not advanced and vague in a manner. There is, however, a gained insight about the 
composite technology through this efficient tool.  
To return back to the main objective, a biodegradable material with an ≈18% replacement rate to 
steel was to be decided with the help of created charts. Looking back to Figure 7, there is an 
outstanding material in the chart with its tensile strength value. That material is Bamboo, with 
tensile strength values reaching up to 320 MPa in the right conditions. To give a small reminder, 
the selected base steels’ tensile strength values start from around 400 MPa. In fact, while designing 
for structural components, since both these properties are essential, yield strength values are one 
step ahead in importance. The reason behind it is yield strength being the ensuring property of the 
==PAGE:45==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
44 
 
materials service load without experiencing a point of no return in deformation. On the other hand, 
the importance of tensile strength is undeniable. This property shows the ultimate capacity of the 
material in terms of load bearing in extreme or unexpected situations. In short, while tensile 
strength indicates the ultimate capacity, yield strength expresses service capacity. However, since 
the objective is not finding a full replacement and the aforementioned 18% is mainly aimed at 
applications with no critical material property requirements, there is a bigger room for freedom to 
investigate materials in different aspects than yield strength. If the two wood materials used in the 
synthesizing section were considered in this part, there would be quite a big challenge to adapting 
those into general daily use in construction due to the prices. Kaneelhart and Greenheart woods 
are exceptional types of wood with low availability, applied in exclusive projects, and absolutely 
not budget-friendly. This low availability and prices reaching up to 80 DKK/kg would also put 
them in a disadvantaged position in the upcoming environmental impact and cost analysis. 
Bamboo, however, is a very strong competitor in terms of price with the selected base materials 
both per kilogram and per unit volume, having almost the same range. In addition to those, the 
review conducted on available cases and studies is proof that bamboo is an applicable material for 
such area of utilization. In these circumstances, Bamboo (longitudinal) will be the selected 
biodegradable material in this section. By its nature, wood and wood-like materials obtain different 
material properties depending on their direction of cutting. Figure 9 below is an explanatory 
example of how bamboo sections look in different cut directions (Onche et al., 2020). In transverse 
directions, the mechanical properties of it drop dramatically, with around 10 times lower values 
than the longitudinal version. Thus, transverse bamboo’s typical uses are for the furniture industry, 
pulp and paper making, ropes, etc. While longitudinal-cut bamboo is in use for building and 
construction, scaffolding, and reinforcement material for construction. 
==PAGE:46==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
45 
 
 
Figure 9 - The Difference Between Cut Directions of Bamboo Section(Onche et al., 2020) 
Bamboo is a material composed of 100% renewable material and is fully biodegradable. It has ten 
times less density than the selected base materials, which is another advantage to compete with 
them in terms of price per volume. The yield strength value is around 40 MPa, but since it will be 
not used in daily load-bearing applications, the gap with base materials can be neglected in that 
manner. When it comes to tensile strength, the values may reach up to 320 MPa, which is a very 
promising level. Since this property is not critical for everyday loading scenarios, but for 
performance under ultimate loads in unexpected cases such as weather, seismic activities, 
accidental impacts, heavy vehicle traffic risks, etc. it is very promising for such material to have 
high values to be considered in airport construction. The elongation(%strain) of the material is not 
as promising compared to base steels, which change between 3-3.5%, even so not creating a big 
problem for non-critical applications. There are two inevitable downsides of this material, which 
are the shaping factor and flammability. These downsides will lead to moderate limitations in the 
design freedom for constructors, but considering it is in use for an adequate amount of cases, it is 
manageable. The detailed overview of the material properties can be found in the Appendix. 
 
Environmental Impact Analysis 
The final section of the Data Analyses and Findings part is about evaluating the selected materials' 
environmental impact. This assessment will be conducted through a tool offered by Ansys Granta 
Selector, named EcoAudit. This tool achieves the environmental impact of the material (or 
==PAGE:47==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
46 
 
product) by focusing on two key factors of environment studies: energy usage and CO2 footprint. 
Additionally, it allows users to consider the cost aspect collated with mentioned environmental 
concerns. The phases of life included in such analyses contain material obtaining, manufacture, 
transport, use, and end-of-life. This approach is called cradle-to-grave in advanced life cycle 
analyses, which would be way more complex and unachievable in terms of this project's time span 
limitations, as well as the author's area of expertise. Yet, to get further information in such scope, 
a life cycle analysis would be recommended for future work. However, this environmental impact 
analysis will be sufficient enough to answer some of the specified research questions. 
To conduct such analyses, there will be several constants and variables to be determined. These 
constants will be kept the same between different materials and will help when interpreting the 
results. The actual differences between materials will appear mostly in variables, which are their 
cost (accessibility in other words), transport, and end-of-life data. The reason behind this is when 
construction materials are in use, they are not consuming or producing any energy. As a matter of 
fact, stationary materials are not the factor that makes the construction industry the most CO2 
footprint-producing industry in the world, it’s the quantity of those materials and incremental 
growth of the market, as mentioned in the literature review part. Supposing that the construction 
needs a thousand beams as its whole steel need, the consideration is that the purchase will be 1000 
pieces of structural beams, 300 kilograms for each piece,10 meters long in length. That number 
corresponds to 300 tons in total. The numbers are created to have a stable outline among all and 
do not reflect on real amounts in construction.  The recycled content used in the production of that 
steel is chosen as 50%, according to the references stating that construction steel contains 50% 
recycled content. The end-of-life option is defined as recycling, with a 50% recovery rate of the 
base material. When it comes to bamboo, it should not be forgotten that the aim of replacement 
will be 18% to steel. However, the purchase must not be limited to 180 pieces of beams, since the 
targeted result here is a different calculation topic. If there were to be 180 pieces of bamboo, it 
would be senseless to try to compare it with 1000 pieces of steel's environmental impact. Balancing 
with replacement rates for further informational data may be a different research topic. Bamboos 
are also purchased as 1000 beams,10 meters long in length. But since its density is around ten 
times less than steel products, the total weight of this purchase will be around 50 tons, which will 
also affect the environmental impact dramatically. The material is extracted from bamboo plants 
==PAGE:48==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
47 
 
completely, which makes it 100% virgin, meaning there is no recycled content in production. The 
end-of-life option is biodegrading. The operating time for every material is selected as 50 years 
(considered the life span of a building) and located in Denmark. Some of the variables are 
mentioned in the system structure flow but the real complex part that has a big effect on outcomes 
comes into play in production location and transport. The Observatory of Economic Complexity 
(OEC) is the world’s leading visualization tool that allows users to create a visual narrative of 
countries, and the products they trade (Library, n.d.). According to this association, Denmark does 
not provide neither its steel nor its bamboo on a sufficient scale. Both these materials are literal 
import items. In fact, bamboo is not a plant type that grows in the Scandinavian climate, not even 
in most of Europe. Thus, Denmark imported 20% of its all imports in 2022 from Germany and 
almost 50% of that was metal products. Imported goods from Germany travel their way to 
Denmark by highway with trucks or seaway with bulk carriers or container ships depending on 
outlet and arrival points. It has been assumed that steel goods are traveling through highways for 
600 kilometers. When it comes to bamboo, the biggest supplier to Denmark is China. In fact, China 
is one of the biggest suppliers of bamboo to the whole world market since they have one of the 
most suitable climates to grow such plants. Denmark has imported 9% of all imported goods from 
China in 2022 10% of it is declared as wood products. The imported goods from China are arriving 
in Denmark mostly by sea freight with big container ships. It assumed that goods are traveling 
from the Port of Shangai to Copenhagen-Malmö Port, there are 12675 nautical miles, which 
correspond to 23.500 kilometers (Denmark (DNK) Exports, Imports, and Trade Partners, n.d.). 
The in-depth details of transportation between manufacturing facilities to port and port to 
construction sites are neglected for both cases. After all the specifications, the next step is to 
conduct the analyses on selected base steels, the alternative steel material selected with less CO2 
footprint, and biodegradable bamboo.  
Starting with ASTM A36 from selected base materials, Table 3 below is a comprehensive data-
gathering chart from the aspects considered for this environmental impact analysis and available 
for each material. As seen, almost 95% of the energy used for this material is generated through 
material execution and manufacturing, that value includes the use of 50% recycled material in the 
execution part. The same situation follows for the C02 footprint generation. In addition to the 
material's impact on the environment with its existence, the manufacturing method also creates a 
==PAGE:49==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
48 
 
difference. This method is considered as extrusion for all metal materials, which also has an effect 
on environmental impact and relevant values of it have been added to the calculation by the 
software. The use phase, however, does not have any effect on any parameter as mentioned before 
since the materials are stationary and stable during their working time of 50 years. Disposal values 
indicate the recycling process of 50% of the material after its usage has ended. Eventually, 300 
tons of ASTM A36 with half recycled content is responsible for 7.31x106 MJ energy usage, 
6.83x105 kg CO2 emission, and it costs 3.61x106 DKK for 50 years of usage in given parameters. 
This energy and C02 emission values may be reduced by 1.56x106 MJ and 1.82x105 kg by 
recycling half of the product. As a matter of fact, the recycling process reduction rate roughly 
corresponds to the energy usage and carbon emissions in the manufacturing phase, helping to offset 
that value. 
 
Phase 
Energy 
(MJ) 
Energy 
(%) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(%) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
Cost 
(%) 
Material 
5.43e+06 
74.3 
5.48e+05 
80.2 
2.82e+06 
77.9 
Manufacture 
1.47e+06 
20.1 
1.1e+05 
16.1 
5.72e+05 
15.8 
Transport 
2.75e+05 
3.8 
1.58e+04 
2.3 
2.11e+05 
5.83 
Use 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Disposal 
1.35e+05 
1.8 
9.45e+03 
1.4 
1.43e+04 
0.396 
Total (for first life) 
7.31e+06 
100 
6.83e+05 
100 
3.61e+06 
100 
End of life potential 
-1.56e+06 
 
-1.82e+05 
 
 
 
Table 3  - ASTM A36 Environmental Impact Data 
 
Continuing with ASTM A992 from structural steels, Table 4 below includes the same parameters. 
As seen again, almost 95% of the energy used for this material is generated through material 
execution and manufacturing, very similar to ASTM A36, and also is similar to the other structural 
steel in the analysis. The difference between them appears in the material phase, while ASTM 
A36’s composition includes more energy-requiring elements, it needs less to be manufactured. In 
overview, both climb up to 95% until they are transported for use. After all, 300 tons of ASTM 
==PAGE:50==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
49 
 
A992 with half recycled content is responsible for 7.93x106 MJ energy usage (the most in structural 
steels), 7.29x105 kg CO2 emission (the most in structural steels), and it costs 3.59x106 DKK for 
50 years of usage in given parameters. This energy and C02 emission values may be reduced by 
1.55x106 MJ and 1.82x105 kg by recycling half of the product. 
 
Phase 
Energy 
(MJ) 
Energy 
(%) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(%) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
Cost 
(%) 
Material 
5.42e+06 
68.4 
5.46e+05 
75.0 
2.79e+06 
77.8 
Manufacture 
2.1e+06 
26.5 
1.57e+05 
21.6 
5.72e+05 
15.9 
Transport 
2.75e+05 
3.5 
1.58e+04 
2.2 
2.11e+05 
5.87 
Use 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Disposal 
1.35e+05 
1.7 
9.45e+03 
1.3 
1.43e+04 
0.399 
Total (for first life) 
7.93e+06 
100 
7.29e+05 
100 
3.59e+06 
100 
End of life potential 
-1.55e+06  
-1.82e+05 
 
 
 
Table 4  - ASTM A992 Environmental Impact Data 
 
Finalizing the structural steels with S275J, Table 5 shows the considered values of environmental 
impact data of the material. As mentioned in the paragraph above, almost 95% of the energy used 
for this material is generated through material execution and manufacturing similar to two other 
structural steels. Having the least energy requirement for its life cycle among structural steels, 300 
tons of S275J with half recycled content is responsible for 7.3x106 MJ energy usage, 6.84x105 kg 
CO2 emission, and it costs 3.52x106 DKK (cheapest among structural steels) for 50 years of usage 
in given parameters. This energy and C02 emission values may be reduced by 1.51x106 MJ and 
1.8x105 kg by recycling half of the product. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
50 
 
Phase 
Energy 
(MJ) 
Energy 
(%) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(%) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
Cost 
(%) 
Material 
5.29e+06 
72.4 
5.38e+05 
78.7 
2.73e+06 
77.4 
Manufacture 
1.6e+06 
22.0 
1.2e+05 
17.6 
5.72e+05 
16.2 
Transport 
2.75e+05 
3.8 
1.58e+04 
2.3 
2.11e+05 
5.97 
Use 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Disposal 
1.35e+05 
1.8 
9.45e+03 
1.4 
1.43e+04 
0.406 
Total (for first life) 
7.3e+06 
100 
6.84e+05 
100 
3.52e+06 
100 
End of life potential 
-1.51e+06  
-1.8e+05 
 
 
 
Table 5  - S275J  Environmental Impact Data 
 
Moving on to selected materials from base materials, Table 6 shows the environmental impact data 
set for Complex Phase Steel, YS500, cold rolled. While it has significantly lower requirements for 
energy for the material itself, manufacturing of this material requires around 2 times more energy 
than structural steels. This problem leads this selection to have higher energy requirements and 
bigger CO2 emissions in total for this material. Overall, 300 tons of Complex Phase Steel, YS500, 
cold rolled with half recycled content is responsible for 8.45x106 MJ energy usage (more than any 
material considered in this analysis), 7.3x105 kg CO2 emission (more than any material considered 
in this analysis), and it costs 4.87x106 DKK (more than any material considered in this analysis) 
for 50 years of usage in given parameters. This energy and C02 emission values may be reduced 
by 1.39x106 MJ and 1.51x105 kg by recycling half of the product. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:52==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
51 
 
Phase 
Energy 
(MJ) 
Energy 
(%) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(%) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
Cost 
(%) 
Material 
4.93e+06 
58.4 
4.72e+05 
64.6 
4.07e+06 
83.6 
Manufacture 
3.11e+06 
36.8 
2.33e+05 
31.9 
5.72e+05 
11.7 
Transport 
2.75e+05 
3.3 
1.58e+04 
2.2 
2.11e+05 
4.33 
Use 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Disposal 
1.35e+05 
1.6 
9.45e+03 
1.3 
1.43e+04 
0.294 
Total (for first life) 
8.45e+06 
100 
7.3e+05 
100 
4.87e+06 
100 
End of life potential 
-1.39e+06  
-1.51e+05 
 
 
 
Table 6  - Complex Phase Steel, YS500, cold rolled Environmental Impact Data 
 
Finalizing the part with the selected biodegradable material Bamboo, Table 7 below has serious 
differences from the previous materials. The manufacturing phase does not contain any values 
because those values are already included in the material phase, and it also does not go through 
the same processes as metals. Even so, 87% of the energy used comes from the material. The tricky 
part of this analysis comes from the transportation as expected. Transport energy values are 3.5 
times higher than the metals which were imported from Germany. CO2 footprint value is even 
higher, reaching up to almost 5 times more. The biodegrading option is qualified to clear those 
numbers after its life. Overall, 300 tons of fully virgin Bamboo, is responsible for 7.45x106 MJ 
energy usage (competent with structural steels even with transportation downgrade), 1.66x105 kg 
CO2 emission (around 5 times lower than the closest competitor material), and it costs 4.1x106 
DKK (reasonable and competent) for 50 years of usage in given parameters. This energy and C02 
emission values may be reduced by 6.47x106 MJ and 0.98x105 kg by biodegrading or re-using the 
product. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:53==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
52 
 
Phase 
Energy 
(MJ) 
Energy 
(%) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(%) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
Cost 
(%) 
Material 
6.47e+06 
86.9 
9.8e+04 
59.2 
3.66e+06 
89.4 
Manufacture 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Transport 
9.17e+05 
12.3 
6.35e+04 
38.3 
4.21e+05 
10.3 
Use 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Disposal 
6e+04 
0.8 
4.2e+03 
2.5 
1.43e+04 
0.35 
Total (for first life) 
7.45e+06 
100 
1.66e+05 
100 
4.1e+06 
100 
End of life potential 
-6.47e+06  
-9.8e+04 
 
 
 
Table 7 - Bamboo Environmental Impact Data 
 
The comprehensive and in-detail EcoAudit reports of all 4 materials mentioned above can be 
found in the Appendix. This section will be followed by Results and Recommendations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:54==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
53 
 
Results and Recommendations 
 
This final section of Results and Recommendations consists of the overall results of this study, a 
review of the research questions presented at the very beginning of this report, and evaluation of 
to what extent they are answered, and lastly recommendations accordingly to practices and 
policies. 
While addressing SDG’s number 9, 11, and 12, the purpose of this project was mentioned as 
‘contributing in a part of the solution in sustainable future by a multidisciplinary approach to 
airport construction material consumption’, via answering the specified research questions. Those 
questions were: 
’How can the cooperation of materials engineering and present business practices optimize 
the environmental impact of steel consumption in airport constructions?’ 
This research question was further divided into several sub-questions as follows: 
1. What are the environmental impacts of steel consumption in airport constructions, what are 
the sufficient sustainable alternatives? 
2. How may the material science approach improve the construction market in terms of 
sustainability? What could be the outcome of it business-wise? 
3. In what sense do current airport facilities align with sustainability goals, and how to 
integrate the innovation in existing cases? 
4. How effective are the existing regulations and standards related to material sustainability 
in airport construction? What improvements can be made? 
The main question presented in bold characters is a very broad question that may not be answered 
with a single solution. Thus, the target was to answer the sub-questions in order to come up with 
an integrated comprehensive answer. The environmental impacts of structural steels have been 
studied and mentioned in the airport construction scale, and sufficient sustainable alternatives to 
those have been presented for different scenarios. Including parameters such as cost, 
transportation, and applicability have broadened the scope from materials engineering to business 
==PAGE:55==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
54 
 
attitude. Some airport cases were discovered and discussed through the literature review section, 
further alignment investigation gave its place to simulation-based study due to the lack of real-life 
connections from airport facilities. However, there are some solid findings in this study to discuss 
the integration to existing and upcoming construction cases and projects. The limited access to 
obligations of aviation institutions defined and prepared by acknowledged aviation authorities and 
locally responsible establishments has confined the elaborative inspection of available regulations 
and standards about material sustainability in airport construction. Even so, the amount of 
information that was able to be reached has been mentioned in previous sections and improvement 
recommendations will be made followingly. 
The three figures below include comparison charts of investigated structural steel, metallic 
replacement suggestion complex phase steel, and biodegradable partial replacement suggestion 
bamboo. The comparisons have been divided into two main headlines in terms of environmental 
impact and one more headline as cost to be able to examine the outcome in terms of business 
viability. The headlines address 6 different stages of the material life cycle, the so-called cradle-
to-grave approach in the life cycle analysis. Those are materials production, manufacturing to get 
it ready to use, transport, use, disposal, and end-of-life potential. The parameters set for each stage 
have been explained and mentioned in the data analyses section. 
 
Figure 10 - Energy Consumption Comparison of Considered Materials from Ansys Granta Selector 
==PAGE:56==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
55 
 
The percentage shift chart on the bottom side of the figure describes the total difference of the 
specific material compared to the rest of the list. The essential learning from this outcome is that 
the environmental impact of a material in a singular version must not be compared to commercial 
products. In the first phases of this study, the complex phase steel was accepted as a more 
sustainable option for structural steels in terms of lower CO2 emission and embodied energy 
values. However, when necessary parameters were included, it is clear that complex phase steel 
has 16% more impact on the environment in the same life cycle requirements as the rest when 
throughout energy requirements were considered. Also, bamboo is considered a better material 
than non-biodegradable materials in common sense, but this consideration's location is crucial. 
When all the import business is included, bamboo is only able to beat against two of the materials 
it was compared out of four in terms of throughout energy requirements. The result may have 
changed dramatically if this project's scope was to investigate the same matter in both bamboo and 
steel producer countries such as China. 
 
Figure 11 - CO2 Footprint Comparison of Considered Materials from Ansys Granta Selector 
When it comes to CO2 emissions in the designated life cycle for the materials, the biodegradable 
feature of bamboo has an outstanding performance against the others. The gap between constitutes 
in the very early stage of materials production. Even if the manufacturing of bamboo is added to 
its production phase, it has at least six times lower CO2 footprint than the competitors. The 
==PAGE:57==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
56 
 
transport phase also affects the CO2 footprint of bamboo way more significantly than others since 
it is imported from a distant country compared to Germany. When the end-of-life potential is 
observed, all materials have promising values in terms of recyclability. Still, those variables do not 
change the fact that bamboo has 76% less CO2 footprint than the rest throughout the cycle. Also, 
it should be noted that complex phase steel again failed to give credible outcomes in this impact 
parameter, having 7% more impact than the other materials, sharing the first place with S75J. 
 
Figure 12 - Cost Comparison of Considered Materials from Ansys Granta Selector 
Finally, Figure 13 indicates the price distribution of the materials for the same cycle and 
parameters. Structural steels, being commercially and traditionally available for many years, keep 
a stable curve and are cheaper than replacement materials. In fact, S275J is 2% cheaper than the 
rest. On the other hand, complex phase steel again fails to meet expectations, being more expensive 
than the rest with a striking amount of 35%. The overall results of complex phase steel have 
resulted in failing the material in the conclusion section. Thus, it will not be mentioned in the 
recommendations part. When it comes to bamboo, a margin of 13% can be tolerated up to some 
extent since it also includes the transportation expense. On top of that, the comparison is done as 
such these materials are indeed to provide the necessity of whole construction. Since this ratio will 
be deducted roughly 82%, it is an acceptable value. When the importance of today's sustainability 
concerns is added to this equation, the 13% cost difference will nearly be invisible. 
==PAGE:58==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
57 
 
According to the discussed results of this study above, there are some recommendations to be made 
in order to answer the research questions and fulfill one of the purposes of this study which was 
addressing the room for improvement in existing standards and regulations. Based on the 
comprehensive research conducted for this study, which can be summarized as sustainable trends 
in airport construction projects and business aspects, it has been realized that construction is a 
practice where conventional executions are favored. Facilities that were already operating before 
the known sustainability movement of the UN are set aside, it is challenging to regulate the 
upcoming growth of any traditional construction project, especially in so-called non-developed 
and developing countries. The construction and aviation sectors together have a big share in the 
environmental impact chart of sectors. Thus, attention has to be drawn more to this lane, if the 
sustainable development goals are set to be met by 2030. There are several cases discussed, where 
biodegradable structural materials took part in airport construction practices. The ones located in 
developed countries were concerned with sustainability goals, and in some cases, it was more 
convenient to use the relevant wood structures since it was growing in that country, and the 
possibility of constructing it that way was seen in developed countries. The outcome reached from 
these different interests was that there is still no common ground and understanding, and also 
relevant sources for each and every member country of the rule maker aviation precursors. This 
research proved that the foreseen room for improvement in this exact matter is bigger than 
expected. Focusing the UN’s, ICAO’s, IATA’s, and ACI’s energy together to conduct further 
studies on this matter and discover common ground to reduce the environmental impact of airport 
construction is the main recommendation of this study. While doing so, following as a result of 
this thesis, bamboo is a material that has to be promoted in the journey of shifting to a greener 
future. As a starting point, the 18% replacement of steel with bamboo may be imposed for 
upcoming projects (such as new or enlarging airports, and new terminal buildings) in countries 
that are already developed. This imposing factor may also start to enter into force in other countries 
with incentive packages to gear up the process. It is essential to find the mentioned common ground 
among the countries with further studies by the institutions, or else it would not be viable to change 
the rules of aviation construction controlled by the mentioned annexes. In this way, if the 
recommended pathways are followed, this thesis may reach its purpose by contributing to a part 
of the solution in a sustainable future through a multidisciplinary approach to airport construction 
material consumption.  
==PAGE:59==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
58 
 
Conclusion 
Concluding this study, this chapter contains a summary of the findings, the contributions to the 
targeted field, the limitations that have led to the results, a summary of recommendations, and 
suggestions for future research. Moreover, the purpose of the study and the literature review will 
be briefly discussed to show how the overall results align with relevant research questions. 
Starting with the introduction, the thesis explored the intersection of sustainability, airport 
construction, material selection processes, and business strategies, aiming to provide insights into 
these areas by addressing both engineering and regulatory business aspects. It studied the evolution 
of sustainable development, highlighting key milestones such as the World Commission on 
Environment and Development report (1987), Agenda 21 (1992), and the 17 Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG’s) of 2015. Focusing on airports, the study identified the earliest 
mention of 'sustainable airports' in a 1996 publication and delved into the material selection 
process for construction, emphasizing the importance of sustainable materials like steel due to its 
significant environmental impacts. Accordingly, main and sub-research questions were presented. 
By analyzing real-life cases and addressing both engineering and business aspects, the study aimed 
to provide sustainable solutions for airport facilities. The scope included a comprehensive 
examination of steel use in airport constructions, focusing on Denmark, and covered 
environmental impact assessments, qualitative analyses of steel and alternatives, sustainable 
material selection theory, case studies, and regulatory analysis. Limitations included are data 
availability, regional specificity, software limitations, material variability, and economic factors, 
which are acknowledged while aiming to provide realistic and focused analysis and 
recommendations. 
Moving toward the literature review part, it was essential to keep the scope and limitations in mind 
for investigating and studying the literature that is relevant and aligned with the target. Given the 
time constraints, the relevant literature has been reviewed thoroughly, revealing that several 
sources address similar topics to this project but with different research questions and outcomes. 
However, the limited amount of matching work and the highly case-focused nature of existing 
projects necessitated a modification in the research method. The modification was to divide the 
review into three subsections including regulatory frameworks and guidelines, sustainability in 
airport construction, and business strategies and sustainability in construction. This modification 
==PAGE:60==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
59 
 
has been turned into an opportunity, that being to gain a deeper understanding of every aspect of 
this project and integrate them together for a united result. The learning outcomes in the literature 
review part were briefly as follows: 
• The International Air Transport Association (IATA) and the International Civil Aviation 
Organization (ICAO) are pivotal in setting standards for the aviation industry. ICAO's 
standards and recommended practices (SARPs) provide a global framework for aviation 
safety, efficiency, and environmental sustainability. Annex 14 and Annex 16 focus on 
aerodromes and environmental issues, respectively, supporting the long-term goal of net-
zero carbon emissions by 2050. Studies indicate that airports contribute significantly to 
CO2 emissions, with a notable impact on aircraft operations and construction activities. 
Manuals from ICAO and other organizations, such as the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA), emphasize sustainable construction practices but lack binding regulations for green 
airport construction. 
• The expansion of Oslo Gardermoen Airport’s Terminal 2 exemplifies a holistic approach 
to sustainability in airport construction. The project utilized laminated wood instead of 
steel, significantly reducing the carbon footprint. Studies comparing the environmental 
impacts of steel and laminated wood reveal that wood construction offers substantial 
benefits in terms of lower greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption. Similar 
findings were reported in the construction of Mactan Cebu International Airport, where 
glulam material was used effectively under different climatic conditions. Other studies 
emphasize the importance of using recycled materials and conducting life cycle 
assessments (LCA) to guide sustainable decision-making in airport construction. 
• The concept of sustainable construction emerged in the mid-1990s, emphasizing both 'hard 
issues' like materials and technologies and 'soft issues' such as social, cultural, and 
economic aspects. Sustainable construction faces challenges, particularly in developing 
countries, due to misconceptions about higher costs and the lack of market awareness. 
However, sustainable practices offer long-term economic benefits, including cost savings 
and resource optimization. Integrating sustainable development goals requires 
collaboration among governments, the construction industry, and civil society. Despite 
==PAGE:61==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
60 
 
current challenges, sustainable construction practices remain advantageous for long-term 
business viability, reducing greenhouse gas emissions, waste, and environmental impact. 
Afterward, background knowledge was gained and a foundation for the thesis was set. 
According to this foundation, theoretical, conceptual, and methodological frameworks are 
constituted utilizing the best fit for the nature of the project and presented. The data analysis 
part was conducted with the awareness of these frameworks. Accordingly, three structural 
steels were selected among other options to proceed with the comparison to more sustainable 
options. The reason behind the selection was the high usage rate of those. Those steel types 
were ASTM A36, ASTM A992, and S275J. Supported by references, the three types are some 
of the most used materials in construction. The types were presented and investigated in terms 
of their material properties which strongly supports them to be used as structural elements. 
Later, the possible replacement materials have been specified for different potential scenarios. 
These scenarios were, continuing with a metallic material but with a decreased C02 footprint 
and embodied energy, or else continuing with a biodegradable material with as much 
replacement rate as possible. This replacement rate was specified based on references and 
industry norms, as well as educated assumptions. The first scenario resulted in selecting 
Complex Phase Steel, YS500, cold roll, while the second scenario resulted in selecting Bamboo 
(Longitudinal) to proceed with the analysis. After that, the final part of the analysis was 
introducing the environmental impact and cost situation of these materials, which were 
structured with relevant parameters. These parameters include the production location, 
transport, use location, life span, and end-of-life potential. The results of those analyses have 
reached a conclusion that, while Complex Phase Steel has better environmental properties than 
structural steels in a singular dimension, it is not a feasible replacement when comprehensive 
application parameters are introduced to the equation. On the other hand, Bamboo had come 
up with acceptable results considering the replacement rate. Within the acknowledged 
limitations of this project, the results may be considered as a significant contribution to this 
exact field that has been examined. The motivation before starting was to provide a more 
sustainable-driven material selection process for airport construction. But instead, a bigger 
room for improvement in this targeted matter has been discovered than forecasted. Thus, the 
recommendations were directed more toward the standard-setting associations in aviation 
==PAGE:62==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
61 
 
rather than construction planners. In short, more material and construction-targeted planning 
manuals are recommended to be worked on, that are applicable to every member of these 
associations. Starting this research on a bigger scale from governmental levels, universities, 
and the mentioned rule-makers will create a solid foundation and ground-level experience. 
Then preparing it to be applicable to any project, in countries from different development 
levels, happening under the rule of those responsible associations will be way possible. Only 
then, the recommendations of this thesis through the construction practices and applicability 
of it can be discussed. Apart from those, this report may serve as a learning foundation, a 
starting point for those who aim to conduct a project that targets to study sustainable material 
selection in airport construction. Last but not least, future research may include an investigation 
of proven replacing materials compatibility with construction regulations depending on 
countries, a further environmental inspection on resulting materials through life cycle analyses, 
and finally, a cost-resource saving study that focuses on the business aspect even more. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:63==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
62 
 
References 
1. About ACI | ACI World. (2021, April 7). https://aci.aero/about-aci/ 
2. About ICAO. (n.d.). Retrieved April 3, 2024, from https://www.icao.int/about-
icao/Pages/default.aspx 
3. Accelerating airport decarbonization. (n.d.). Roland Berger. Retrieved April 3, 2024, 
from https://www.rolandberger.com/en/Insights/Publications/Accelerating-airport-
decarbonization.html 
4. Airport Cooperative Research Program, Transportation Research Board, & National 
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. (2011). Sustainable Airport 
Construction Practices (p. 22925). Transportation Research Board. 
https://doi.org/10.17226/22925 
5. Aksel, H., & Eren, Ö. (2015). A Discussion on the Advantages of Steel Structures in the 
Context of Sustainable Construction. International Journal of Contemporary 
Architecture The New ARCH, 5, 46–53. https://doi.org/10.14621/tna.20150405 
6. Bamboo The Gift of The GODS Oscar Hidalgo Lopez | PDF. (n.d.). Scribd. Retrieved 
May 27, 2024, from https://www.scribd.com/document/357265548/Bamboo-the-Gift-of-
the-GODS-Oscar-Hidalgo-Lopez 
7. BeamCut. (2022, April 6). Three Important Properties of Structural Steel. Beamcut. 
https://beamcut.com/three-important-mechanical-properties-of-structural-steel/ 
8. Braun, M. (n.d.). Airport Master Planning. 
9. Brettle, M. E. (n.d.). Steel Building Design: Introduction to the Eurocodes. 
10. Brown, D. G., Mice, Be. Ce., Iles, D. C., & Yandzio, E. (n.d.). Steel building design: 
Medium rise braced frames. 
==PAGE:64==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
63 
 
11. Chourasia, A. S., Jha, K., & Dalei, N. N. (2021). Development and planning of 
sustainable airports. Journal of Public Affairs, 21(1), e2145. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/pa.2145 
12. Cross-Laminated Timber (CLT) Handbook—Resources. (n.d.). RDH Building Science. 
Retrieved May 27, 2024, from https://www.rdh.com/resource/cross-laminated-timber-clt-
handbook/ 
13. Denmark (DNK) Exports, Imports, and Trade Partners. (n.d.). The Observatory of 
Economic Complexity. Retrieved June 4, 2024, from 
https://oec.world/en/profile/country/dnk 
14. Dongmin, L., Dongyoun, L., Lee, M., Kim, M., & Kim, T. (2020). Analytic Hierarchy 
Process-Based Construction Material Selection for Performance Improvement of 
Building Construction: The Case of a Concrete System Form. Materials, 13, 1738. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ma13071738 
15. Douglas, I., & Lawson, N. (2003). Airport construction: Materials use and geomorphic 
change. Journal of Air Transport Management, 9(3), 177–185. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0969-6997(02)00082-0 
16. Du Plessis, C. (2007). A strategic framework for sustainable construction in developing 
countries. Construction Management and Economics, 25(1), 67–76. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01446190600601313 
17. EN 10025 S275 Steel (S275JR, S275J0 & S275J2) | PDF | Steel | Strength Of Materials. 
(n.d.). Scribd. Retrieved May 21, 2024, from 
https://www.scribd.com/document/546062464/EN-10025-S275-Steel-S275JR-S275J0-
S275J2 
==PAGE:65==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
64 
 
18. Engineered Wood Products: A Guide for Specifiers, Designers, and Users - ProQuest. 
(n.d.). Retrieved May 27, 2024, from 
https://www.proquest.com/docview/214630542?parentSessionId=eCXnmrHMBDUK%2
F2qOhbGNskq41%2FhAi8rn2AxhJDwpkFw%3D&sourcetype=Scholarly%20Journals 
19. Eves, W. (n.d.). Standard Specifications for Construction of Airports 2023. 
20. Govindan, K., Madan Shankar, K., & Kannan, D. (2016). Sustainable material selection 
for construction industry – A hybrid multi criteria decision making approach. Renewable 
and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 55, 1274–1288. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.07.100 
21. Greer, F., Rakas, J., & Horvath, A. (2020). Airports and environmental sustainability: A 
comprehensive review. Environmental Research Letters, 15(10), 103007. 
https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abb42a 
22. Hassan, M. (2024, March 25). Theoretical Framework—Types, Examples and Writing 
Guide. Research Method. https://researchmethod.net/theoretical-framework/ 
23. Hodzic, A., & Shanks, R. (2013). Natural Fibre Composites Materials, Processes and 
Properties. 
24. Horonjeff, R., McKelvey, F. X., Sproule, W. J., & Young, S. B. (2010). Planning and 
Design of Airports (5th Edition). McGraw-Hill Education. 
https://www.accessengineeringlibrary.com/content/book/9780071446419 
25. How ICAO Develops Standards. (n.d.). Retrieved April 3, 2024, from 
https://www.icao.int/about-icao/AirNavigationCommission/Pages/how-icao-develops-
standards.aspx 
==PAGE:66==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
65 
 
26. Jickling, B. (2000). A Future for Sustainability? Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 123(1), 
467–476. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1005211410123 
27. Khalfan, M., Anumba, C., Siemieniuch, C., & Sinclair, M. (2001). Readiness Assessment 
of the construction supply chain for concurrent engineering. European Journal of 
Purchasing & Supply Management, 7, 141–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0969-
7012(00)00023-X 
28. Lakshmanan, R. (2022). Benefits of Glulam Timber Roof Structure for Airport Passenger 
Terminal Building. Journal of The Institution of Engineers (India): Series A, 103(2), 
689–694. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40030-022-00631-7 
29. Learnovate, M. I. M. (2023, February 26). Difference between Conceptual Framework 
and Theoretical Framework. MIM Learnovate. https://mimlearnovate.com/difference-
between-conceptual-framework-and-theoretical-framework/ 
30. Lennartz, M. W. (n.d.). Oslo Flughafen 2015. Retrieved April 4, 2024, from 
https://derix.de/wp-content/uploads/2015_04-Flughafen-Oslo_bmh.pdf 
31. Library, H. B. (n.d.). The Observatory of Economic Complexity (OEC) | Baker Library | 
Bloomberg Center | Harvard Business School. Retrieved June 4, 2024, from 
https://www.library.hbs.edu/citations/the-observatory-of-economic-complexity-oec 
32. Liu, Z.-J., Pypłacz, P., Ermakova, M., & Konev, P. (2020). Sustainable Construction as a 
Competitive Advantage. Sustainability, 12(15), Article 15. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su12155946 
33. Longhurst, J., Gibbs, D. C., Raper, D. W., & Conlan, D. E. (1996). Towards sustainable 
airport development. Environmentalist, 16(3), 197–202. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01324760 
==PAGE:67==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
66 
 
34. Magnoni, M., Toraldo, E., Giustozzi, F., & Crispino, M. (2016). Recycling practices for 
airport pavement construction: Valorisation of on-site materials. Construction and 
Building Materials, 112, 59–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2016.02.142 
35. Marsh, R. (2017). Building lifespan: Effect on the environmental impact of building 
components in a Danish perspective. Architectural Engineering and Design 
Management, 13(2), 80–100. https://doi.org/10.1080/17452007.2016.1205471 
36. Moore, J. R., & Cown, D. J. (2015). 2—Processing of wood for wood composites. In M. 
P. Ansell (Ed.), Wood Composites (pp. 27–45). Woodhead Publishing. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-78242-454-3.00002-0 
37. Olmez, G. M., Dilek, F. B., Karanfil, T., & Yetis, U. (2016). The environmental impacts 
of iron and steel industry: A life cycle assessment study. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
130, 195–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.09.139 
38. Onche, E. O., Azeko, S. T., Obayemi, J. D., Oyewole, O. K., Ekwe, N. B., Rahbar, N., & 
Soboyejo, W. O. (2020). Compressive deformation of Bambusa Vulgaris-Schrad in the 
transverse and longitudinal orientations. Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of 
Biomedical Materials, 108, 103750. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2020.103750 
39. Oslo Airport | Terminal Expansion | References | DERIX. (n.d.). DERIX GmbH. 
Retrieved April 4, 2024, from https://derix.de/en/project/airport-terminal-oslo/ 
40. Oto, N., & Çobanoğlu, N. (2012, October 1). Sustainable Airports Planning and 
Construction Practices in the Context of Environmental Bioethics. 
41. Oto, N., Çobanoğlu, N., & Geray, C. (2012). Education for Sustainable Airports. 
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 47, 1164–1173. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.06.795 
==PAGE:68==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
67 
 
42. Petersen, A. K., & Solberg, B. (2002). Greenhouse gas emissions, life-cycle inventory 
and cost-efficiency of using laminated wood instead of steel construction.: Case: beams 
at Gardermoen airport. Environmental Science & Policy, 5(2), 169–182. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1462-9011(01)00044-2 
43. Research Methods in Library and Information Science, 7th Edition. (n.d.). Retrieved 
April 15, 2024, from https://publisher.abc-clio.com/9781440878589/ 
44. Saunders, M., Lewis, P., Thornhill, A., & Bristow, A. (2019). “Research Methods for 
Business Students” Chapter 4: Understanding research philosophy and approaches to 
theory development (pp. 128–171). 
45. S.C.A.M.P.E.R., Visual Workspace for Innovation. (n.d.). Retrieved April 18, 2024, from 
https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVKSCqCpM=/ 
46. Selvaraj, S., & Chan, T.-M. (2024). Recommendations for Implementing Circular 
Economy in Construction: Direct Reuse of Steel Structures. Journal of Constructional 
Steel Research, 214, 108439. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcsr.2023.108439 
47. Sjostrom, C., & Bakens, W. (1999). CIB Agenda 21 for sustainable construction: Why, 
how and what. Building Research & Information, 27(6), 347–353. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/096132199369174 
48. Swaen, B. (2022, August 2). What Is a Conceptual Framework? | Tips & Examples. 
Scribbr. https://www.scribbr.com/methodology/conceptual-framework/ 
49. THE 17 GOALS | Sustainable Development. (n.d.). Retrieved March 18, 2024, from 
https://sdgs.un.org/goals 
50. The Postal History of ICAO. (n.d.). Retrieved April 3, 2024, from 
https://applications.icao.int/postalhistory/iata_international_air_transport_association.htm 
==PAGE:69==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
68 
 
51. What is BREEAM? - BRE Group. (2022, February 10). 
https://bregroup.com/products/breeam/ 
52. World Steel in Figures 2023. (n.d.). Worldsteel.Org. Retrieved March 23, 2024, from 
https://worldsteel.org/steel-topics/statistics/world-steel-in-figures-2023/ 
53. Yadav, M., & Mathur, A. (2021). Bamboo as a sustainable material in the construction 
industry: An overview. Materials Today: Proceedings, 43, 2872–2876. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.01.125 
54. Zhou, L., & Lowe, D. (2003). Economic Challenge of Sustainable Construction. 
55. Zoruba, S. (n.d.). ASTM A992 has become the standard material specification for wide-
flange steel shapes. Here’s why. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:70==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
69 
 
Appendix 
1. Comparison of Base Steel Materials 
 
Structural steel, ASTM A36 
Structural steel, ASTM A992 Structural steel, S275J 
General information 
Condition 
As rolled 
As rolled 
Hot rolled 
UNS number 
K02600 
 
 
US name 
ASTM A36 
 
 
EN name 
 
 
S275JR, S275J0, S275J2 
EN number 
 
 
1.0045, 1.0143, 1.0145 
Included in Materials Data for 
Simulation 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Materials Data for Simulation 
name 
Structural steel, ASTM A36 
Structural steel, ASTM A992 Structural steel, S275J 
Composition overview 
Material family 
Metal (ferrous) 
Metal (ferrous) 
Metal (ferrous) 
Base material 
Fe (Iron) 
Fe (Iron) 
Fe (Iron) 
Composition detail (metals, ceramics and glasses) 
C (carbon) (%) 
0 - 0.29 
0 - 0.23 
0 - 0.22 
Cr (chromium) (%) 
0 
0 - 0.35 
0 
Cu (copper) (%) 
0.2 
0 - 0.6 
0 - 0.55 
Fe (iron) (%) 
97.8 - 99.2 
95.9 - 99.5 
97.6 - 100 
Mn (manganese) (%) 
0.6 - 1.2 
0.5 - 1.6 
0 - 1.5 
Mo (molybdenum) (%) 
0 
0 - 0.15 
0 
N (nitrogen) (%) 
0 
0 
0 - 0.012 
Nb (niobium) (%) 
0 
0 - 0.05 
0 
Ni (nickel) (%) 
0 
0 - 0.45 
0 
P (phosphorus) (%) 
0 - 0.04 
0 - 0.035 
0 - 0.035 
S (sulfur) (%) 
0 - 0.05 
0 - 0.045 
0 - 0.035 
Si (silicon) (%) 
0 - 0.4 
0 - 0.4 
0 
V (vanadium) (%) 
0 
0 - 0.15 
0 
Price 
Price (DKK/kg) 
8.33 - 10.5 
8.25 - 10.4 
8.1 - 9.96 
Price per unit volume (DKK/m^3) 65000 - 82500 
64400 - 82500 
63600 - 78100 
Physical properties 
Density (kg/m^3) 
7800 - 7900 
7800 - 7900 
7850 
==PAGE:71==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
70 
 
Mechanical properties 
Young's modulus (GPa) 
200 - 212 
200 - 210 
205 - 215 
Young's 
modulus 
with 
temperature (GPa) # 
212 
212 
 
Specific stiffness (MN.m/kg) 
25.5 - 27 
25.5 - 26.8 
26.1 - 27.4 
Yield strength (elastic limit) 
(MPa) 
250 - 292 
345 - 450 
275 - 321 
Yield strength with temperature 
(MPa) # 
250 
 
 
Tensile strength (MPa) 
400 - 550 
450 - 525 
410 - 580 
Specific strength (kN.m/kg) 
31.8 - 37.2 
43.9 - 57.3 
35 - 40.9 
Elongation (% strain) 
20 - 23 
18 - 25.9 
15 - 23 
Tangent modulus (MPa) 
1430 
886 
1410 
Compressive modulus (GPa) 
200 - 212 
200 - 210 
205 - 215 
Compressive strength (MPa) 
250 - 292 
345 - 450 
275 - 321 
Flexural modulus (GPa) 
200 - 212 
200 - 210 
205 - 215 
Flexural strength (modulus of 
rupture) (MPa) 
257 - 353 
291 - 340 
266 - 376 
Shear modulus (GPa) 
77.6 - 82.3 
76.9 - 80.8 
78.9 - 82.7 
Shear strength (MPa) 
144 - 168 
338 - 394 
159 - 185 
Bulk modulus (GPa) 
160 - 174 
167 - 175 
171 - 179 
Poisson's ratio 
0.26 - 0.289 
0.27 - 0.3 
0.3 
Shape factor 
62 
54 
61 
Hardness - Vickers (HV) 
126 - 161 
138 - 152 
127 - 162 
Hardness - Brinell (HB) 
119 - 162 
130 - 144 
121 - 163 
Elastic stored energy (springs) 
(kJ/m^3) 
152 - 206 
295 - 487 
181 - 244 
Fatigue strength at 10^7 cycles 
(MPa) 
198 - 231 
206 - 240 
199 - 232 
Fatigue strength model (stress 
amplitude) (MPa) # 
158 - 290 
188 - 263 
155 - 299 
Impact & fracture properties 
Fracture 
toughness 
(MPa.m^0.5) 
47.9 - 58 
81.8 - 99 
52.9 - 64 
Toughness (G) (kJ/m^2) 
11.2 - 16.2 
32.9 - 47.5 
13.4 - 19.4 
Thermal properties 
Melting point (°C) 
1480 - 1530 
1500 - 1540 
1480 - 1530 
Maximum service temperature 
(°C) 
335 - 351 
390 - 410 
473 - 519 
Minimum service temperature 
(°C) 
-54.9 - -44.9 
-65 - -40 
-54 - -44 
==PAGE:72==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
71 
 
Thermal conductivity (W/m.°C) 
50 - 52.5 
56.6 - 68.5 
40 - 53.4 
Thermal 
conductivity 
with 
temperature (W/m.°C) # 
52.5 
57.7 
 
Specific heat capacity (J/kg.°C) 470 - 501 
448 
460 - 480 
Specific 
heat 
capacity 
with 
temperature (J/kg.°C) # 
502 
 
 
Thermal expansion coefficient 
(µstrain/°C) 
11 - 13 
12.1 
11 - 13 
Thermal expansion coefficient 
with temperature (µstrain/°C) # 
11.4 
11.4 
 
Thermal expansion coefficient 
with 
temperature_Reference 
temp (°C) 
19.9 
20 
 
Thermal shock resistance (°C) 
97.8 - 123 
139 - 182 
106 - 133 
Thermal distortion resistance 
(MW/m) 
3.93 - 4.67 
4.68 - 5.66 
3.28 - 4.55 
Latent heat of fusion (kJ/kg) 
354 - 375 
331 - 351 
343 - 364 
Electrical properties 
Electrical resistivity (µohm.cm) 
14.4 - 16 
16 - 19 
19.7 
Electrical conductivity (%IACS) 10.8 - 12 
9.07 - 10.8 
8.75 
Galvanic potential (V) 
-0.52 - -0.44 
-0.51 - -0.43 
-0.52 - -0.44 
Magnetic properties 
Magnetic type 
Magnetic 
Magnetic 
Magnetic 
Optical, aesthetic and acoustic properties 
Transparency 
Opaque 
Opaque 
Opaque 
Acoustic velocity (m/s) 
5050 - 5200 
5050 - 5170 
5110 - 5230 
Mechanical loss coefficient (tan 
delta) 
0.00022 - 0.00093 
0.00022 - 0.00093 
0.00022 - 0.00093 
Healthcare & food 
Food contact 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Restricted substances risk indicators 
RoHS 2 (EU) compliant grades? Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
EU 
REACH 
Candidate 
List 
indicator (0-1, 1 = high risk) 
0 
0 
0 
SIN List indicator (0-1, 1 = high 
risk) 
0 
0 
0 
Critical materials risk 
Contains 
>5wt% 
critical 
elements? 
No 
No 
No 
Abundance risk level 
Medium 
Low 
Very low 
Sourcing and geopolitical risk 
level 
Low 
Low 
Low 
==PAGE:73==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
72 
 
Environmental country risk level Low 
Low 
Low 
Price volatility risk level 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
Conflict material risk level 
Caution 
None 
None 
Processing properties 
Metal casting 
Unsuitable 
Unsuitable 
Unsuitable 
Metal cold forming 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Metal hot forming 
Excellent 
Acceptable 
Excellent 
Metal press forming 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Metal deep drawing 
Limited use 
Limited use 
Limited use 
Machining speed (m/min) 
38.4 
36.9 
36.3 
Weldability 
Good 
Excellent 
Good 
Weldability_Notes 
Preheating and post weld heat 
treatments may be required 
Preheating and post weld 
heat 
treatments 
may 
be 
required 
Preheating and post weld 
heat treatments may be 
required 
Carbon equivalency 
0.113 - 0.57 
0.0833 - 0.763 
0 - 0.323 
Durability 
Water (fresh) 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Water (salt) 
Limited use 
Limited use 
Limited use 
Weak acids 
Limited use 
Limited use 
Limited use 
Strong acids 
Unacceptable 
Unacceptable 
Unacceptable 
Weak alkalis 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Strong alkalis 
Limited use 
Limited use 
Limited use 
Organic solvents 
Excellent 
Excellent 
Excellent 
Oxidation at 500C 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
UV radiation (sunlight) 
Excellent 
Excellent 
Excellent 
Galling 
resistance 
(adhesive 
wear) 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Acceptable 
Flammability 
Non-flammable 
Non-flammable 
Non-flammable 
Corrosion resistance of metals 
Stress corrosion cracking 
Slightly susceptible 
Slightly susceptible 
Slightly susceptible 
Stress corrosion cracking_Notes Rated 
in 
chloride; 
Other 
susceptible 
environments: 
Nitrate, hydroxide, carbonate, 
ammonia 
Rated 
in 
chloride; 
Other 
susceptible 
environments: 
Nitrate, hydroxide, carbonate, 
ammonia 
Rated in chloride; Other 
susceptible environments: 
Nitrate, 
hydroxide, 
carbonate, ammonia 
Primary production energy, CO2 and water 
Embodied 
energy, 
primary 
production (virgin grade) (MJ/kg) 
27.1 - 29.9 
27 - 29.8 
26.3 - 29 
Embodied 
energy, 
primary 
production 
(typical 
grade) 
(MJ/kg) 
18.8 - 21.7 
18.7 - 21.5 
16.3 - 19.2 
==PAGE:74==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
73 
 
CO2 
footprint, 
primary 
production (virgin grade) (kg/kg) 
2.9 - 3.19 
2.89 - 3.19 
2.85 - 3.14 
CO2 
footprint, 
primary 
production 
(typical 
grade) 
(kg/kg) 
1.91 - 2.2 
1.9 - 2.19 
1.64 - 1.94 
Processing energy, CO2 footprint & water 
Roll forming, forging energy 
(MJ/kg) 
2.47 - 2.72 
3.47 - 3.83 
2.69 - 2.96 
Roll 
forming, 
forging 
CO2 
(kg/kg) 
0.185 - 0.204 
0.26 - 0.287 
0.202 - 0.222 
Extrusion, foil rolling energy 
(MJ/kg) 
4.66 - 5.13 
6.66 - 7.34 
5.09 - 5.61 
Extrusion, 
foil 
rolling 
CO2 
(kg/kg) 
0.349 - 0.385 
0.499 - 0.551 
0.382 - 0.421 
Wire drawing energy (MJ/kg) 
16.7 - 18.4 
24.2 - 26.7 
18.3 - 20.2 
Wire drawing CO2 (kg/kg) 
1.25 - 1.38 
1.82 - 2 
1.37 - 1.51 
Metal powder forming energy 
(MJ/kg) 
39 - 43 
38 - 41.9 
38.4 - 42.4 
Metal powder forming CO2 
(kg/kg) 
2.93 - 3.22 
2.85 - 3.14 
2.88 - 3.18 
Metal powder forming water 
(l/kg) 
44.2 - 63.6 
43.1 - 62 
43.5 - 62.7 
Vaporization energy (MJ/kg) 
14600 - 16100 
13600 - 15000 
14100 - 15600 
Vaporization CO2 (kg/kg) 
1100 - 1210 
1020 - 1120 
1060 - 1170 
Vaporization water (l/kg) 
6320 - 9110 
5890 - 8480 
6120 - 8810 
Coarse machining energy (per 
unit wt removed) (MJ/kg) 
0.804 - 0.886 
0.954 - 1.05 
0.837 - 0.922 
Coarse machining CO2 (per unit 
wt removed) (kg/kg) 
0.0603 - 0.0665 
0.0715 - 0.0788 
0.0627 - 0.0692 
Fine machining energy (per unit 
wt removed) (MJ/kg) 
3.75 - 4.14 
5.26 - 5.8 
4.08 - 4.5 
Fine machining CO2 (per unit wt 
removed) (kg/kg) 
0.281 - 0.31 
0.395 - 0.435 
0.306 - 0.337 
Grinding energy (per unit wt 
removed) (MJ/kg) 
7.03 - 7.75 
10 - 11.1 
7.69 - 8.47 
Grinding CO2 (per unit wt 
removed) (kg/kg) 
0.527 - 0.581 
0.753 - 0.83 
0.576 - 0.636 
Non-conventional 
machining 
energy (per unit wt removed) 
(MJ/kg) 
146 - 161 
136 - 150 
141 - 156 
Non-conventional 
machining 
CO2 (per unit wt removed) 
(kg/kg) 
11 - 12.1 
10.2 - 11.2 
10.6 - 11.7 
Recycling and end of life 
Recycle 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
==PAGE:75==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
74 
 
Embodied 
energy, 
recycling 
(MJ/kg) 
7.36 - 8.14 
7.35 - 8.12 
7.2 - 8 
CO2 footprint, recycling (kg/kg) 0.579 - 0.64 
0.577 - 0.638 
0.566 - 0.626 
Recycle 
fraction 
in 
current 
supply (%) 
40 - 44 
40 - 44 
49.4 - 54.6 
Downcycle 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Combust for energy recovery 
No 
No 
No 
Landfill 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Biodegrade 
No 
No 
No 
Geo-economic data for principal component 
Principal component 
Iron 
Iron 
Iron 
Typical exploited ore grade (%) 45.1 - 49.9 
45.1 - 49.9 
45.1 - 49.9 
Minimum economic ore grade 
(%) 
25 - 70 
25 - 70 
25 - 70 
Abundance in Earth's crust 
(ppm) 
41000 - 63000 
41000 - 63000 
41000 - 63000 
Abundance in seawater (ppm) 
0.0025 - 0.003 
0.0025 - 0.003 
0.0025 - 0.003 
Annual 
world 
production, 
principal component (tonne/yr) 
2.23e9 
2.23e9 
2.23e9 
Reserves, principal component 
(tonne) 
1.59e11 
1.59e11 
1.59e11 
Links 
Elements in this material 
4 
3 
2 
ProcessUniverse 
125 
125 
125 
Producers 
19 
19 
19 
Reference 
10 
10 
11 
Shape 
24 
24 
24 
Full Datasheet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:76==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
75 
 
2. A36 General Overview 
 
 
==PAGE:77==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
76 
 
 
 
==PAGE:78==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
77 
 
 
 
==PAGE:79==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
78 
 
 
 
==PAGE:80==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
79 
 
3. A992 General Overview 
 
 
==PAGE:81==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
80 
 
 
 
==PAGE:82==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
81 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
82 
 
 
 
==PAGE:84==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
83 
 
4. S275J General Overview 
 
 
==PAGE:85==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
84 
 
 
 
==PAGE:86==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
85 
 
 
 
==PAGE:87==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
86 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:88==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
87 
 
5. Complex Phase Steel, YS500, Cold Rolled General Overview 
 
 
==PAGE:89==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
88 
 
 
 
==PAGE:90==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
89 
 
 
 
==PAGE:91==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
90 
 
 
 
==PAGE:92==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
91 
 
6. Bamboo (Longitudinal) General Overview 
 
 
==PAGE:93==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
92 
 
 
 
==PAGE:94==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
93 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:95==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
94 
 
 
7. ASTM A36 Detailed Environmental Impact Report 
 
Eco Audit Report 
Product name 
ASTM A36 
Country of manufacture 
Germany 
Country of use 
Denmark 
Product life (years) 
50 
Summary: 
Energy details 
CO2 footprint details 
Cost details 
Phase 
Energy 
(MJ) 
Energy 
(%) 
CO2 footprint 
(kg) 
CO2 footprint 
(%) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
Cost 
(%) 
Material 
5.43e+06 
74.3 
5.48e+05 
80.2 
2.82e+06 
77.9 
Manufacture 
1.47e+06 
20.1 
1.1e+05 
16.1 
5.72e+05 
15.8 
Transport 
2.75e+05 
3.8 
1.58e+04 
2.3 
2.11e+05 
5.83 
Use 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Disposal 
1.35e+05 
1.8 
9.45e+03 
1.4 
1.43e+04 
0.396 
Total (for first life) 
7.31e+06 
100 
6.83e+05 
100 
3.61e+06 
100 
End of life potential 
-1.56e+06 
 
-1.82e+05 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:96==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
95 
 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
Energy Analysis 
 
Energy (MJ/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life): 
1.46e+05 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Structural steel, ASTM A36 
50.0% 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
5.4e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
5.4e+06 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Component 
Process 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Extrusion 
- 
3e+05 
kg 
1.5e+06 
100.0 
==PAGE:97==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
96 
 
Total 
 
 
 
1.5e+06 
100 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
Germany to Denmark 
Truck >32t, EURO 6 
6e+02 
2.8e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
6e+02 
2.8e+05 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
3e+05 
2.8e+05 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
2.8e+05 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
1.4e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
1.4e+05 
100 
EoL potential: 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
-1.6e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
-1.6e+06 
100 
==PAGE:98==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
97 
 
Notes: 
Summary 
 
 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
CO2 Footprint Analysis 
 
CO2 (kg/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life): 
1.37e+04 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Structural steel, ASTM A36 
50.0% 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
5.5e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
5.5e+05 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
==PAGE:99==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
98 
 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Component 
Process 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Extrusion 
- 
3e+05 
kg 
1.1e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1.1e+05 
100 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
Germany to Denmark 
Truck >32t, EURO 6 
6e+02 
1.6e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
6e+02 
1.6e+04 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
3e+05 
1.6e+04 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
1.6e+04 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
9.5e+03 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
9.5e+03 
100 
==PAGE:100==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
99 
 
EoL potential: 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
-1.8e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
-1.8e+05 
100 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
Cost Analysis 
 
Cost (DKK/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life): 
7.23e+04 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Structural steel, ASTM A36 
50.0% 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
2.8e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
2.8e+06 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
==PAGE:101==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
100 
 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Country of manufacture 
Germany 
Component 
Process 
Length (m) 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Extrusion 
10 
- 
3e+05 
kg 
5.7e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
5.7e+05 
100 
Transport: 
Summary 
Package dimensions 
Height (m) 
Width (m) 
Depth (m) 
0 
0 
0 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
Germany to Denmark 
Truck >32t, EURO 6 
6e+02 
2.1e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
6e+02 
2.1e+05 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
3e+05 
2.1e+05 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
2.1e+05 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
1.4e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
1.4e+04 
100 
==PAGE:102==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
101 
 
 
8. ASTM A992 Detailed Environmental Impact Report 
 
Eco Audit Report 
Product name 
ASTM A992 
Country of manufacture 
Germany 
Country of use 
Denmark 
Product life (years) 
50 
Summary: 
 
Energy details 
CO2 footprint details 
Cost details 
Phase 
Energy 
(MJ) 
Energy 
(%) 
CO2 footprint 
(kg) 
CO2 footprint 
(%) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
Cost 
(%) 
Material 
5.42e+06 
68.4 
5.46e+05 
75.0 
2.79e+06 
77.8 
Manufacture 
2.1e+06 
26.5 
1.57e+05 
21.6 
5.72e+05 
15.9 
Transport 
2.75e+05 
3.5 
1.58e+04 
2.2 
2.11e+05 
5.87 
Use 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Disposal 
1.35e+05 
1.7 
9.45e+03 
1.3 
1.43e+04 
0.399 
Total (for first life) 
7.93e+06 
100 
7.29e+05 
100 
3.59e+06 
100 
End of life potential 
-1.55e+06 
 
-1.82e+05 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:103==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
102 
 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
Energy Analysis 
 
Energy (MJ/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life):  
1.59e+05 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Structural steel, ASTM A992 
50.0% 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
5.4e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
5.4e+06 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Component 
Process 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Extrusion 
- 
3e+05 
kg 
2.1e+06 
100.0 
==PAGE:104==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
103 
 
Total 
 
 
 
2.1e+06 
100 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
Germany to Denmark 
Truck >32t, EURO 6 
6e+02 
2.8e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
6e+02 
2.8e+05 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
3e+05 
2.8e+05 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
2.8e+05 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
1.4e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
1.4e+05 
100 
EoL potential: 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
-1.6e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
-1.6e+06 
100 
 
 
==PAGE:105==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
104 
 
Eco Audit Report 
Summary 
CO2 Footprint Analysis 
 
CO2 (kg/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life):  
1.46e+04 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Structural steel, ASTM A992 
50.0% 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
5.5e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
5.5e+05 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Component 
Process 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Extrusion 
- 
3e+05 
kg 
1.6e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1.6e+05 
100 
 
==PAGE:106==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
105 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
Germany to Denmark 
Truck >32t, EURO 6 
6e+02 
1.6e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
6e+02 
1.6e+04 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
3e+05 
1.6e+04 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
1.6e+04 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
9.5e+03 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
9.5e+03 
100 
EoL potential: 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
-1.8e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
-1.8e+05 
100 
 
 
==PAGE:107==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
106 
 
Eco Audit Report 
Summary 
Cost Analysis 
 
Cost (DKK/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life):  
7.18e+04 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Structural steel, ASTM A992 
50.0% 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
2.8e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
2.8e+06 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Country of manufacture 
Germany 
Component 
Process 
Length (m) 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Extrusion 
10 
- 
3e+05 
kg 
5.7e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
5.7e+05 
100 
 
==PAGE:108==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
107 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Package dimensions 
Height (m) 
Width (m) 
Depth (m) 
0 
0 
0 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
Germany to Denmark 
Truck >32t, EURO 6 
6e+02 
2.1e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
6e+02 
2.1e+05 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
3e+05 
2.1e+05 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
2.1e+05 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
1.4e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
1.4e+04 
100 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:109==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
108 
 
9. S275J Detailed Environmental Impact Report 
 
Eco 
Audit 
Report 
Product name 
S275J 
Country 
of 
manufacture 
Germany 
Country of use 
Denmark 
Product 
life 
(years) 
50 
Summary: 
Energy 
details 
CO2 
footprint 
details 
Cost details 
Phase 
Energy 
(MJ) 
Energy 
(%) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(%) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
Cost 
(%) 
Material 
5.29e+06 
72.4 
5.38e+05 
78.7 
2.73e+06 
77.4 
Manufacture 
1.6e+06 
22.0 
1.2e+05 
17.6 
5.72e+05 
16.2 
Transport 
2.75e+05 
3.8 
1.58e+04 
2.3 
2.11e+05 
5.97 
Use 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Disposal 
1.35e+05 
1.8 
9.45e+03 
1.4 
1.43e+04 
0.406 
Total (for first life) 
7.3e+06 
100 
6.84e+05 
100 
3.52e+06 
100 
End of life potential 
-1.51e+06 
 
-1.8e+05 
 
 
 
==PAGE:110==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
109 
 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
Energy Analysis 
 
Energy (MJ/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life): 
1.46e+05 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Structural steel, S275J 
50.0% 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
5.3e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
5.3e+06 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Component 
Process 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Extrusion 
- 
3e+05 
kg 
1.6e+06 
100.0 
==PAGE:111==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
110 
 
Total 
 
 
 
1.6e+06 
100 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
Germany to Denmark 
Truck >32t, EURO 6 
6e+02 
2.8e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
6e+02 
2.8e+05 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
3e+05 
2.8e+05 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
2.8e+05 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
1.4e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
1.4e+05 
100 
EoL potential: 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
-1.5e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
-1.5e+06 
100 
 
 
==PAGE:112==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
111 
 
 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
Cost Analysis 
 
Cost (DKK/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life): 
7.05e+04 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Structural steel, S275J 
50.0% 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
2.7e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
2.7e+06 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Country of manufacture 
Germany 
Component 
Process 
Length (m) 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
==PAGE:113==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
112 
 
 
Extrusion 
10 
- 
3e+05 
kg 
5.7e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
5.7e+05 
100 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Package dimensions 
Height (m) 
Width (m) 
Depth (m) 
0 
0 
0 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
Germany to Denmark 
Truck >32t, EURO 6 
6e+02 
2.1e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
6e+02 
2.1e+05 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
3e+05 
2.1e+05 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
2.1e+05 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
1.4e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
1.4e+04 
100 
==PAGE:114==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
113 
 
10.  Complex Phase Steel, YS500, cold rolled Detailed Environmental Impact Report 
 
Eco Audit Report 
Product name 
Complex Phase Steel, YS500, cold rolled 
Country of manufacture 
Germany 
Country of use 
Denmark 
Product life (years) 
50 
Summary: 
Energy details 
CO2 footprint details 
Cost details 
Phase 
Energy 
(MJ) 
Energy 
(%) 
CO2 footprint 
(kg) 
CO2 footprint 
(%) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
Cost 
(%) 
Material 
4.93e+06 
58.4 
4.72e+05 
64.6 
4.07e+06 
83.6 
Manufacture 
3.11e+06 
36.8 
2.33e+05 
31.9 
5.72e+05 
11.7 
Transport 
2.75e+05 
3.3 
1.58e+04 
2.2 
2.11e+05 
4.33 
Use 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Disposal 
1.35e+05 
1.6 
9.45e+03 
1.3 
1.43e+04 
0.294 
Total (for first life) 
8.45e+06 
100 
7.3e+05 
100 
4.87e+06 
100 
End of life potential 
-1.39e+06 
 
-1.51e+05 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:115==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
114 
 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
Energy Analysis 
 
Energy (MJ/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life): 
1.69e+05 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Complex phase steel, YS500, 
cold rolled 
50.0% 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
4.9e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
4.9e+06 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Component 
Process 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Extrusion 
- 
3e+05 
kg 
3.1e+06 
100.0 
==PAGE:116==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
115 
 
Total 
 
 
 
3.1e+06 
100 
Transport: 
Summary 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
Germany to Denmark 
Truck >32t, EURO 6 
6e+02 
2.8e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
6e+02 
2.8e+05 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
3e+05 
2.8e+05 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
2.8e+05 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
1.4e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
1.4e+05 
100 
EoL potential: 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
-1.4e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
-1.4e+06 
100 
 
 
==PAGE:117==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
116 
 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
CO2 Footprint Analysis 
 
CO2 (kg/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life): 
1.46e+04 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Complex phase steel, YS500, 
cold rolled 
50.0% 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
4.7e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
4.7e+05 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Component 
Process 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
==PAGE:118==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
117 
 
 
Extrusion 
- 
3e+05 
kg 
2.3e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
2.3e+05 
100 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
Germany to Denmark 
Truck >32t, EURO 6 
6e+02 
1.6e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
6e+02 
1.6e+04 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
3e+05 
1.6e+04 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
1.6e+04 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
9.5e+03 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
9.5e+03 
100 
EoL potential: 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
-1.5e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
-1.5e+05 
100 
 
 
==PAGE:119==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
118 
 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
Cost Analysis 
 
Cost (DKK/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life): 
9.74e+04 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Complex phase steel, YS500, 
cold rolled 
50.0% 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
4.1e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
4.1e+06 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Country of manufacture 
Germany 
Component 
Process 
Length (m) 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
==PAGE:120==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
119 
 
 
Extrusion 
10 
- 
3e+05 
kg 
5.7e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
5.7e+05 
100 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Package dimensions 
Height (m) 
Width (m) 
Depth (m) 
0 
0 
0 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
Germany to Denmark 
Truck >32t, EURO 6 
6e+02 
2.1e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
6e+02 
2.1e+05 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
3e+05 
2.1e+05 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
2.1e+05 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Recycle 
50.0 
1.4e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
1.4e+04 
100 
==PAGE:121==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
120 
 
11.  Bamboo (Longitudinal) Detailed Environmental Impact Report 
 
Eco Audit Report 
Product name 
Bamboo (Longitudal) 
Country of manufacture 
P.R. of China 
Country of use 
Denmark 
Product life (years) 
50 
Summary: 
Energy details 
CO2 footprint details 
Cost details 
Phase 
Energy 
(MJ) 
Energy 
(%) 
CO2 footprint 
(kg) 
CO2 footprint 
(%) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
Cost 
(%) 
Material 
6.47e+06 
86.9 
9.8e+04 
59.2 
3.66e+06 
89.4 
Manufacture 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Transport 
9.17e+05 
12.3 
6.35e+04 
38.3 
4.21e+05 
10.3 
Use 
0 
0.0 
0 
0.0 
0 
0 
Disposal 
6e+04 
0.8 
4.2e+03 
2.5 
1.43e+04 
0.35 
Total (for first life) 
7.45e+06 
100 
1.66e+05 
100 
4.1e+06 
100 
End of life potential 
-6.47e+06 
 
-9.8e+04 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:122==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
121 
 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
Energy Analysis 
 
Energy (MJ/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life): 
1.49e+05 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Bamboo (longitudinal) 
Virgin (0%) 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
6.5e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
6.5e+06 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Component 
Process 
% Removed 
Amount 
processed 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
Total 
 
 
 
 
100 
==PAGE:123==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
122 
 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
China to Denmark 
Sea, container ship 
2.4e+04 
9.2e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
2.4e+04 
9.2e+05 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
3e+05 
9.2e+05 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
9.2e+05 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Reuse 
100.0 
6e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
6e+04 
100 
EoL potential: 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Energy 
(MJ) 
% 
 
Reuse 
100.0 
-6.5e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
-6.5e+06 
100 
==PAGE:124==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
123 
 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
CO2 Footprint Analysis 
 
CO2 (kg/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life): 
3.31e+03 
 
 
==PAGE:125==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
124 
 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Bamboo (longitudinal) 
Virgin (0%) 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
9.8e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
9.8e+04 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Component 
Process 
% Removed 
Amount 
processed 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
Total 
 
 
 
 
100 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
China to Denmark 
Sea, container ship 
2.4e+04 
6.3e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
2.4e+04 
6.3e+04 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
3e+05 
6.3e+04 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
6.3e+04 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
==PAGE:126==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
125 
 
Mode 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Reuse 
100.0 
4.2e+03 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
4.2e+03 
100 
EoL potential: 
Component 
End of life option % recovered 
CO2 
footprint 
(kg) 
% 
 
Reuse 
100.0 
-9.8e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
-9.8e+04 
100 
 
 
==PAGE:127==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
126 
 
Eco Audit Report 
 
Summary 
Cost Analysis 
 
Cost (DKK/year) 
Equivalent annual environmental burden (averaged over 50 year product life): 
8.19e+04 
Detailed breakdown of individual life phases 
Material: 
Summary 
Component 
Material 
Recycled 
content* 
(%) 
Part 
mass 
(kg) 
Qty. 
Total 
mass 
processed** 
(kg) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Bamboo (longitudinal) 
Virgin (0%) 
3e+02 
1000 3e+05 
3.7e+06 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
 
1000 3e+05 
3.7e+06 
100 
*Typical: Includes 'recycle fraction in current supply' 
**Where applicable, includes material mass removed by secondary processes 
***User-defined material 
Manufacture: 
Summary 
Country of manufacture 
P.R. of China 
Component 
Process 
Length (m) 
% Removed 
Amount processed 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
==PAGE:128==
Sustainable Airports: Comprehensive Analyses of Steel Use and Green Alternatives in Constructions, An Engineering and Business Approach 
 
 
127 
 
Total 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100 
 
Transport: 
Summary 
Package dimensions 
Height (m) 
Width (m) 
Depth (m) 
0 
0 
0 
Breakdown 
by 
transport 
stage 
Stage name 
Transport type 
Distance 
(km) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
China to Denmark 
Sea, container ship 
2.4e+04 
4.2e+05 
100.0 
Total 
 
2.4e+04 
4.2e+05 
100 
Breakdown by components 
Component 
Mass 
(kg) 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
3e+05 
4.2e+05 
100.0 
Total 
3e+05 
4.2e+05 
100 
Use: 
Summary 
Relative contribution of static and mobile modes 
Mode 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
Static 
0 
 
Mobile 
0 
 
Total 
0 
100 
Disposal: 
Summary 
Component 
End 
of 
life 
option 
% recovered 
Cost 
(DKK) 
% 
 
Reuse 
100.0 
1.4e+04 
100.0 
Total 
 
 
1.4e+04 
100 
 
