==PAGE:1==
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the
Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering, Geotechnics & Geology
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
Master Thesis
July, 2024
By
Alkis Sideris
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Published by:
DTU, Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering,
Geotechnics & Geology, Brovej, Building 119, 2800 Kgs. Lyn­
gby Denmark
https://sustain.dtu.dk/
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over five months at the Department of Environ­
mental and Resource Engineering, Geotechnics & Geology, Department of Civil
Engineering, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in collaboration with
Cadeler in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng. This MSc thesis was under the supervision of Yuepeng Dong (DTU) and
Can Mollaibrahimoglu (Cadeler).
Alkis Sideris ­ s222724
Signature
Date
ii
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
The impact­driven installation of a monopile foundation of an offshore wind turbine
is a very widespread method used in the industry. This operation applies signifi­
cant dynamic loads to the pile that are transmitted to the soil, and that can affect
the leg load distribution and the final penetration of the adjacent jacked­up spud­
can. As pile diameters continue to increase rapidly, the dynamic loads required to
reach necessary depths are escalating, intensifying concerns about their impact.
The investigation was prompted by observed incidents of leg load loss during the
driving of monopiles, a phenomenon of considerable potential consequences for
the jack­up unit. The study utilizes real­life data for the soil properties, hammer
logs, and penetration records for both the spudcan and monopile to construct a de­
tailed 3D Coupled Eulerian­Lagrangian (CEL) finite element model using Abaqus/­
Explicit. The primary aim of this thesis is to develop a precise numerical model
that accurately captures the observed phenomena and to benchmark it with em­
pirical data. The simulations focus on the application of quasi­static models with
the Mohr­Coulomb Plasticity constitutive model for the problems of spudcan and
monopile penetration. A parametric study concerning different sand strength prop­
erties is also launched in an effort to account for the inherent inaccuracies of the
input soil parameters collected from the offshore wind farm. The results indicated
that the Mohr­Coulomb constitutive model accurately models spudcan penetra­
tion, as verified by the industry guidelines. For the monopile installation, higher
friction angles showcased an increase in soil resistance, with localized stress ef­
fects primarily around the monopile. However, the numerical models captured a
greater reduction in spudcan reaction forces than observed in real­life scenarios,
suggesting the need for more sophisticated soil modeling to enhance predictive
accuracy.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
iii
==PAGE:6==
Resumé
Den slagdrevne installation af et monopælefundament til en havvindmølle er en
meget udbredt metode i industrien. Denne operation påfører pælen betydelige
dynamiske belastninger, der overføres til jorden, og som kan påvirke benets be­
lastningsfordeling og den endelige indtrængning af den tilstødende opjævnede
spudcan. I takt med at pælediametrene fortsætter med at stige hurtigt, eskalerer
de dynamiske belastninger, der kræves for at nå de nødvendige dybder, hvilket
øger bekymringen for deres indvirkning. Undersøgelsen blev foranlediget af ob­
serverede hændelser med tab af benbelastning under ramning af monopæle, et
fænomen med betydelige potentielle konsekvenser for jack­up­enheden. Under­
søgelsen anvender virkelige data for jordegenskaber, hammerlogs og indtrængn­
ingsregistreringer for både spudcan og monopæl til at konstruere en detaljeret 3D
Coupled Eulerian­Lagrangian (CEL) finite element model ved hjælp af Abaqus/Ex­
plicit. Det primære formål med denne afhandling er at udvikle en præcis numerisk
model, der nøjagtigt indfanger de observerede fænomener, og at sammenligne
den med empiriske data. Simuleringerne fokuserer på anvendelsen af kvasis­
tatiske modeller med brug af Mohr­Coulomb Plasticity konstitutive model for prob­
lemerne med spudcan og monopile penetration. En parametrisk undersøgelse af
forskellige sandstyrkeegenskaber er også iværksat i et forsøg på at tage højde
for de iboende unøjagtigheder i de indgående jordparametre, der er indsamlet
fra havmølleparken. Resultaterne viste, at Mohr­Coulomb­modellen er en nø­
jagtig måde at modellere spudcan­penetration på, da den blev verificeret med
branchens retningslinjer. For monopælinstallationen viste højere friktionsvinkler
en stigning i jordmodstanden med lokale stresseffekter primært omkring monopælen.
De numeriske modeller viste dog en større reduktion i spudcan­reaktionskræfterne
end observeret i virkelige scenarier, hvilket tyder på, at der er behov for mere
sofistikeret jordmodellering for at forbedre forudsigelsesnøjagtigheden.
iv
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
This project would not have been possible without the invaluable help and sup­
port of all the people involved in this project. First and foremost, I would like to
express my gratitude to Can Mollaibrahimoglu, my supervisor from Cadeler, who
conceptualized this project and was responsible for building a very strong team to
help with this endeavor. He was there at every step of the way, providing assis­
tance, insights, and constant encouragement. His commitment and involvement
have greatly contributed to the success of this project, and I am sincerely thankful
for his mentorship and support. I would also like to extend my gratitude to the
Associate Professor, Yuepeng Dong, who was my DTU supervisor, for his guid­
ance and help all this time. His expertise and feedback have been invaluable in
advancing this research. His constant availability and prompt responses to any
inquiries I had really helped expedite the learning process, and I appreciate that.
A large group of people was involved with this project and contributed to it, and
I want to express my gratitude to them. Dr.­Ing. Patrick Staubach, Head of the
Chair of Geotechnics at Bauhaus­Universität Weimar, who provided the Abaqus
subroutines along with his deep knowledge on the subject and his constant desire
to help that significantly contributed to overcoming a lot of obstacles. Professor
Britta Bienen of the University of Western Australia, who brought with her an
extensive set of expertise, knowledge, and experience, provided insightful guid­
ance and feedback along the way that helped to shape the format of this the­
sis and constant encouragement. I want to deeply thank my colleague Volkan
Emren, Geotechnical & Jacking Engineer at Cadeler, who was always available
for any question I might had, providing valuable comments with his experience
and encouragement.
I could not forget to acknowledge Sylvie Raymackers,
Geotechnical Manager at DEME Group, and Dr. Ramtin Hosseini­Kamal, Prin­
cipal Geotechnical Engineer at DNV, for all the time they dedicated all these five
months as well as for their constructive comments.
Last but not least, I want to extend my deepest gratitude to the Norwegian Geotech­
nical Institute, specifically Sparsha Sinduri Nagula, Jörgen Johansson, Harun
Kursat Engin, and Hans Petter Jostad. Their knowledge and expertise covered
a very broad spectrum of geotechnical engineering, leading to very insightful com­
ments and feedback for every possible aspect of interest of this thesis. Special
thanks to Sparsha and Jörgen, who were always available and willing to answer
any question I had in depth. Their help was invaluable.
To my family and loved ones, a warm thank you for once again being there for me
and constantly supporting me.
Thank you all for the time invested in this project. I really appreciate all of you.
Alkis
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Resumé . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective of the project
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Project Data
3
2.1
Vessel Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Soil Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Geotechnical Behavior and Installation Process
17
3.1
Wave Propagation during impact driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.2
Cyclic soil degradation during impact driving . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
3.3
WTG foundation installation procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4
Numerical Analysis
21
4.1
Spudcan penetration model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.2
Monopile installation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5
Results
29
5.1
Numerical challenges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.2
Spudcan penetration model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
5.3
Monopile installation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6
Conclusion
49
7
Further Research
51
List of Figures
53
List of Tables
55
Bibliography
57
A Appendix ­ Hypoplastic Model
61
A.1 Hypoplastic Model with Intergranular Strain Extension ­ Basic Prin­
ciples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
A.2 Results of Hypoplastic Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
vii
==PAGE:10==
viii
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:11==
1
Introduction
The global transition towards renewable energy sources is imperative to combat
climate change and reduce dependency on fossil fuels. Among renewable energy
technologies, offshore wind power stands out due to its potential for high energy
yield and relatively consistent power generation compared to onshore sources.
As a result, the offshore wind industry is experiencing rapid growth, driven by
technological advancements and increasing governmental support. However, this
expansion is not without challenges, particularly when it comes to the installation
of offshore wind turbines.
The development and deployment of offshore wind farms, in a short period of time,
are complex challenges. One of the critical aspects of offshore wind farm installa­
tion is the setting of foundations, such as monopiles that is a very popular solution
for shallow to medium­depth locations, which are commonly installed using im­
pact driving techniques. According to Wind Europe 2021 statistics, the monopiles
constituted 80.5% of all installations in 2020 [1]. This fast­paced development is
achieved by wind turbines with higher capacity, something that leads to increasing
monopile diameters in order to accommodate larger vertical loads and overturn­
ing moments of the newer models. Alongside the pile diameters, the hammer
dimensions are also increasing, so it can be secured that the full penetration is
achieved, leading to more significant loads transferred to the soil. This method,
while effective, involves significant interaction with the seabed, where the impact
driving can cause cyclic degradation of the soil’s properties. This degradation can
affect the stability and longevity of the structures, thus posing potential delays and
safety risks in the construction and operational phases.
Moreover, as the demand for offshore wind energy increases, developers are
forced to consider more challenging locations, including seismic zones and areas
with complex seabed compositions. These environments demand even greater
precision and innovation in installation techniques to ensure wind turbines’ struc­
tural integrity and operational reliability. The industry’s push into these new loca­
tions highlights the need for advanced research in understanding and mitigating
the effects of impact driving on seabed soil dynamics.
The motivation for this research stems from real­life incidents observed during
the installation of monopiles for an offshore wind turbine, which highlighted po­
tential issues in current installation practices. The incidents involved a noticeable
leg load loss in each case, initially attributed to cyclic soil degradation due to the
dynamic loading imposed by the impact driving of the pile. This load loss, indi­
cating additional penetration of the spudcan, could lead to significant damage to
the jack­up unit. The redistribution of the loads on the other legs, if it exceeds the
design limit, can have, as a result, the overstressing of the legs or even potential
failure in extreme cases. Additionally, an unprecedented load loss over the limits
can be the cause of the hull experiencing uneven forces or even uneven forces in
the pinions of the jacking system. Such consequences might not necessarily lead
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
1
==PAGE:12==
to failure in all instances but can be responsible for the wear and tear of the jack­
ing system, reducing this way the life span of the jack­up vessel or endangering
future operations. In order to ensure the realization of the sustainability goals that
we need to reach, the longevity of these vessels is of paramount importance.
This phenomenon prompted a detailed examination of a single location with such
behavior, using a combination of real­world operational data and advanced simu­
lation techniques to understand and mitigate the underlying causes. By improving
our understanding of the interactions between installation processes and seabed
soil properties, this study seeks to contribute to the broader goal of advancing
renewable energy technologies. This not only supports environmental and sus­
tainability goals but also enhances energy security and supports economic devel­
opment in coastal communities worldwide.
1.1
Objective of the project
This thesis aims to address these challenges by focusing on the effects of impact
driving on adjacent spudcan installations. By exploring this specific aspect, the
research contributes to developing more resilient and efficient installation tech­
niques that could enhance the safety and stability of offshore wind structures.
The problem was simulated using the Abaqus/Explicit software to address the
complex nature of the soil­structure interaction and the large deformations in­
volved. This choice was guided by the need for a robust computational tool capa­
ble of handling the Coupled Eulerian­Lagrangian (CEL) method, which is partic­
ularly well­suited for scenarios involving significant deformations and interactions
between multiple bodies.
The simulation phase commenced with the development of a simplified numerical
model of spudcan penetration. This model served as a preliminary step to verify
the more complex, dual­structure simulation involving both the monopile and the
spudcan. The objective of this initial model was to replicate the spudcan pen­
etration during the pre­loading phase to validate the accuracy of the simulation
parameters and methodologies before applying them to the more intricate system
dynamics of the actual installation scenario.
Once verified, the simulation was extended to a comprehensive model that in­
cluded both the monopile and the spudcan. This model aimed to capture the
interaction effects and quantify the impact of various operational parameters on
the structural integrity and performance of the installation. By simulating the real­
life conditions as closely as possible, the study sought to identify critical factors
contributing to load loss and propose practical solutions to enhance the reliability
and safety of offshore wind turbine installations.
2
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:13==
2
Project Data
The primary data used in this study are divided into two main categories: the
vessel data and the soil data. The former includes soil­site characteristics de­
rived from CPTs and both offshore and onshore laboratory experiments, and the
latter concerns leg load curves recorded during the operation, preloading values
for spudcan penetration, and the hammer log detailing the impact driving of the
monopile. These datasets provided the necessary empirical foundation to simu­
late accurately enough the interaction between the monopile and the seabed soil
and the loading on the pile and the spudcan, focusing particularly on the mechan­
ical responses of the spudcan during installation processes.
2.1
Vessel Data
This thesis was a collaborative effort with Cadeler, an offshore wind turbine instal­
lation company. During one of their projects, they experienced an unexpected leg
load loss during the installation of the monopile as Figure 2.1 depicts. This phe­
nomenon can be better understood by first understanding what a normal piling
operation should look like. This is illustrated in the left figure of Figure 2.1, where
it is shown that the only load change taking place in the legs concerns mainly leg
6, where the crane is attached (highlighted by the blue continuous curve). This
change is associated with the lifting and removal of the hammer from the WTG
foundation at the start and end of the installation, respectively. Under normal
circumstances, no significant load changes are expected during the installation;







	

















  













	











  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.1: Leg load loss curves obtained from the vessel during the monopile
installation.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
3
==PAGE:14==
thus, the leg loads should remain stable. In contrast, at the investigated loca­
tion, the leg load logs captured in the right figure of Figure 2.1 exhibit significant
deviations. The two rectangular increases in leg 6’s load (blue continuous line)
at approximately 00:40:00 and at 02:15:00 correspond to the hammer lift at the
beginning and end of the hammering operation, respectively, clearly indicating
a load loss of approximately 438 tonnes during the monopile installation. This
phenomenon could result in severe consequences for the jack­up unit, such as
uneven weight distribution, leading to the tilting of the vessel in an extreme case
and potentially causing damage to the leg, the hull, or other components of the
vessel.
Table 2.1 shows the first five rows of the hammering log for the location of interest.
There is a detailed registration of time­dependent variables like the penetration of
the monopile for specific time periods, the blow­count and blow­rate, as well as
the total and average energy per 25cm penetration distance. Having these data
provided enables the user to extrapolate other parameters like the frequency of
blows by dividing the blow­rate by 60sec or the distance per blow if the 25cm are
divided by the blow­count. The penetrations start from a depth of 5.25m because
the self­penetration of the monopile due to its weight was 5m.
Table 2.1: Hammer log for monopile installation.
Time [­]
Penetration
[m]
Blow­
Count
[­/25cm]
Blow­
Rate
[­/min]
Total Energy
per Distance
[kJ/25cm]
Average
Energy per
Distance
[kJ/25cm]
00:00:00
5.25
3
2
1454
485
00:13:37
5.50
7
19
3397
485
00:13:55
5.75
13
43
6975
537
00:14:11
6.00
13
46
7598
584
00:14:28
6.25
13
47
7540
580
The monopile that was used in the specific location had an outer diameter of 9.3m
with a wall thickness of 10cm and a total length of 67.8m, and it was installed with
a hydraulic hammer S­4000. The vessel is jacked up in a position so the center
of the closest leg (the one that has the crane mounted on it) is at a distance of
28.15m from the center of the WTG. This led to the clear distance between the
edge of the spudcan and the outer face of the monopile being 18m since the
effective diameter of the spudcan is 11m.
2.2
Soil Data
In this section, soil data from the WTG location used for the monopile and spudcan
installation will be presented. This segment aims to show the soil values used
as input in the numerical analysis and the methodology behind how they were
4
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:15==
derived from in­situ field tests, like CPT and other onshore laboratory experiments.
It should be mentioned at this point that for the specific project’s design, relevant
soil information has been used from neighboring sites with similar soil stratigraphy,
as it is part of a greater offshore wind farm (OWF) that consists of many similar
sites. The geological formations of importance for the foundation of the turbines in
the project area can be divided into 5 major groups/units, with each one including
both sand and clay subunits. In this thesis, the location that is being investigated
only interacts with 3 of these subunits and is presented at Table 2.2.
Table 2.2: Soil units relevant to the WTG foundation design for the investigated
location.
Soil units ­
Stratigraphy
Soil description from geotechincal samples
Layer 1 (Sand)
Loose to very dense sand with gravel and shell
fragments
Layer 2 (Clay)
Firm to very stiff becoming hard clay with gravel,
shell fragments and laminations, beds and pockets
of silt
Layer 3 (Sand)
Medium dense to very dense locally silty sand
The behavior of all soil units has been initially classified by considering investi­
gated locations with both particle size distribution (PSD) and Cone Penetrometer
Test (CPT) data available to directly correlate CPT soil behavior type to the con­
stituent make­up of each geological unit.
2.2.1
Particle Size Distribution
The particle size distribution (PSD) of the respective soil types present at the site
of interest has been determined from laboratory sieving analyses. A total of 356
sieve analyses have been performed on all soil units at the site. Figure 2.2 illus­
trate the representative PSD curves for the 3 soil subunits that were encountered
during the monopile installation.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
5
==PAGE:16==

 

 

 













	








Figure 2.2: Representative particle size distribution curves for soils of interest at
the investigated location.
The median particle size, d50, for the subunits that constitute Layer 1 and Layer
3 ranges from 0.02 to 1mm and 0.006 to 0.4mm, correspondingly, but a common
representative value of 0.15mm can be used for both soil formations. The coef­
ficient of uniformity (CU) is a measure of the shape of the grading curve, based
on the ratio of particle diameters d60 and d10, which correspond to 60% and 10%
respectively of the mass of a sample passing through the sieve during a PSD test.
According to ISO14688­1 [2], if CU is less than 6, then soil units are classified as
even­graded; between 6 and 15, they are medium­graded, and greater than 15,
they are multi­graded. Layer 1 shows a coefficient with a representative range of
3 to 4, and Layer 3 has a range of 2 to 3, labeling them both as even­graded.
2.2.2
CPTs
Interpretation of in­situ piezocone penetrometer testing (CPTu) data has been
made to characterize the nature of the soil units. Normalized soil behavior type
(SBTn) has been assessed using CPT data and the interpretation method pro­
posed by Lunne et al. [3]. Cone penetration tests were typically performed using
a cone with a pore water pressure measurement sensor (CPTu), with the output
parameters being:
• Measured cone resistance, qc [MPa]
• Measured sleeve friction, fs [kPa]
• Measured pore pressure at the cone shoulder, u2 [kPa]
6
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:17==
Figure 2.3 shows the CPT at the location of the WTG foundation. It can be ob­
served that the registrations of u2 are not consistent with depth, and this is at­
tributed to the fact that if a CPTu cone could not be advanced into the ground,
a 5cm2 CPT cone was used without incorporating a porewater pressure sensor,
and therefore no u2 data was collected in this situation.
Lunne et al. [3] proposed that the normalized Soil Behaviour Type (SBTn) could be
characterized based on the relationship between the normalized corrected cone
resistance (Qt) and the normalized friction ratio (Fr), which are normalized by in­
situ effective vertical stress and total vertical stress respectively. The measured
cone resistance is corrected for unequal area effects where the influence of excess
water pressure on the cone is accounted for. These parameters are defined in
Table 2.3.



q
c


	

	

	

	

q
c
f
s
 


u
2


	
	

	
R
f





f
s

Figure 2.3: CPT curves for the investigated location.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
7
==PAGE:18==
Table 2.3: Definition of derived CPTu parameters.
Parameter
Equation
Input parameter
details
Corrected cone
resistance (Seabed
CPT mode)
qt = qc + (1 −α)u2
α = AN
AC
Corrected cone
resistance (CPT
down­hole mode)
qt = qc + (1 −α)u2 + u0
AN = Cross­sectional
area of cone shaft
AC = Projected cone
area
Friction ratio
Rf = fs
qt
­
Normalized corrected
cone resistance
Qt = qt−σv0
σ′
v0
σv0 = in­situ total
vertical stress
σ′
v0 = in­situ effective
vertical stress
Normalized friction ratio
Fr =
fs
qt−σv0
­
The normalized corrected cone resistance (Qt) and normalized friction ratio (Fr)
can be presented in the normalized Robertson and Campanella’s classification
charts to classify nine different soil types encountered during CPTu testing, as
shown in Figure 2.4.
Figure 2.4: Normalised Robertson & Campanella’s classification chart [4].
The Figure 2.5 shows the normalized Robertson and Campanella’s charts for each
geological unit of interest of the investigated location in a visual representation of
the data with the help of the heat map format. This graphical representation in a
8
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:19==
color matrix, where the light yellow color signifies very low intensity and the dark
red very high intensity of the CPT measurement, makes it easier for the reader
to quickly identify what type of soil behavior should be expected from each soil
Layer. In particular, the subfigure for Layer 1 indicates that the expected behavior
in the simulated location would be the one of sand since the darker colors are
inside zone 6, but also, some sand­mixture behavior should be expected due to
the overlap of the heat map with zone 5. With the same reasoning, in Layer 2,
soil formations exhibit mainly a silt­mixture behavior with few thin sub­layers of
clay, very stiff fine­grained, and sand mixture behaviors. The latter one should
be anticipated in the interface of Layer 1 and 2. Layer 3 showcases mainly sand
behavior with a lot of instances having interbedded layers of very stiff to clayey
sand, as it can also be verified from Table 2.4 where a layer of stiff clay with
thickness less than 1m is noticeable at greater depths.






F
r
 








Q
t





	



 






F
r
 








Q
t





	



 






F
r
 








Q
t





	



 
Figure 2.5: Normalised Robertson & Campanella’s classification charts for soil
subunits encountered in Layers 1, 2, and 3 in the location of interest.
2.2.2.1
Density Index
The density index, ID, is calculated from CPTu data to be used in the calculation of
the effective strength parameters for coarse­grained soils. The relationship from
Baldi et al. [5] was used as Equation 2.1 shows.
ID = 1
C2
ln
qc
C0(σ′
m)C1
(2.1)
In the equation above, the σ′
m is the effective mean stress measured in kPa and
equal to
σ′
v0+2 K0 σ′
v0
3
, while the soil constants C0, C1, and C2 are equal to 181, 0.55,
and 2.61, respectively, based on the Lunne et al. (2002) [6].
2.2.2.2
Over consolidation ratio
The over­consolidation ratio (OCR) expresses the maximum historical vertical ef­
fective stress that a soil sample has experienced, known as effective pre­consolidation
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
9
==PAGE:20==
stress (σ′
pc), as a ratio of its in­situ vertical effective stress (σ′
v0), see Equation 2.2.
OCR = σ′
pc
σ′
v0
(2.2)
Effective pre­consolidation stress is interpreted and estimated from oedometer
test results by using the Casagrande method [7]. For a given oedometer test
result, the effective pre­consolidation stress is the maximum stress that the soil
has been exposed to along the virgin compression line in the past before the
unloading state.
Across the offshore wind farm site, 301 Oedometer (IL+CRS) tests have been per­
formed, whereof 233 tests are representative fines­grained tests where it has been
possible to determine σ′
pc and OCR. A representative curve for Layer 2 from one of
the oedometer tests is presented at Figure 2.6. In this case, the pre­consolidation
pressure is approximately 1600kPa, as it can be identified from the intersection
point of the compression and recompression line. Provided that the results corre­
spond to a specimen taken from a depth of 7.45m and the specific soil subunit has
a particle density of 2.66 Mg/m3 an OCR ≈13 is derived. This value is in good ac­
cordance with the general OCR values given for Layer 2 for the whole site, where
it starts from OCR=30 when Layer 2 is found on the seabed and decreases with
depth until OCR=3 for depths larger than 30m.











  



	




  
Figure 2.6: Representative oedometer results for Layer 2.
2.2.2.3
Coefficient of lateral earth pressure at rest
The coefficient of lateral earth pressure at rest, for both coarse and fine­grained
soils, can be derived from Equation 2.3, which is based on the effective angle of
10
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:21==
internal friction and over consolidation ratio, according to Mesri & Hayat (1993)[8].
K0 = (1 −sinϕ′
cv) · OCRsinϕ′
cv
(2.3)
The constant volume effective angle of internal friction for the fine­grained mate­
rials has been considered to be in the range of 28o and 30o, values derived from
previous studies in the region of the greater OWF as mentioned at the beginning
of this section and have been adopted for the investigated site. Based on Equa­
tion 2.3 and the OCR values for the depths of interest, Layer 2 has a K0 of 1 to
1.8.
For the OCR values of the coarse­grained soils, it was assumed to use the ”lower
end” of the general for all site OCR profiles (OCR ≈2) because it was assumed
that surficial sand was slightly over­consolidated due to the effect of soil erosion
and re­deposition due to constant effect of currents, etc., for which the soil might
be subjected to a very large amount of small unloading­reloading loops. The co­
efficient of lateral earth pressure for the soil subunit of Layer 1 is calculated to be
0.66 for an average angle of internal friction of 37o, with the help of Equation 2.3.
2.2.2.4
Strength properties
Coarse­grained soils
Isotropically consolidated drained (CID) triaxial tests have been performed for
coarse­grained soils. 334 CIDc triaxial tests have been conducted on samples
across the greater OWF zone. The ϕ′ results were determined by Mohr­Coulomb
failure theory. Due to the wide area of extracting samples for the CID tests and the
lack of individual laboratory tests for each location, the derivation of ϕ′ is based
on linear relationships with in­situ density index (ID), interpreted for each soil unit.
Density index, ID,triax, is determined from the minimum and maximum void ratios
derived from the maximum and minimum density tests, respectively, and the initial
void ratio measured in each CIDc test according to Equation 2.4.
ID,triax
100
= emax −etriax
emax −emin
(2.4)
The investigated location’s minimum and maximum dry density tests have been
performed according to Blaker et al. (2015) [9].
Many of the tests that were conducted have been excluded from deriving the cor­
relation for various reasons, including faulty test results due to specimen inhomo­
geneities and the high fine content of the sample. In addition, due to the significant
difference between the peak angle of friction at shallow and at deeper depths for
the soil subunit of Layer 1, two different ID −ϕ′ were created, one for depths less
than 10m and one for depths larger than 10m. The results for the shallow case are
presented here since, in the location of interest, Layer 1 was encountered on the
seabed floor. Equation 2.5 shows the formula that correlates ID and ϕ, for which
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
11
==PAGE:22==
the best­fit trend line is achieved for α = ϕ′
cv = 32o and β = 0.14. An average
value for the peak friction angle for the soil Layer 1 at these depths is 37o. For the
deeper sand layer, Layer 3, α = 30 and β = 0.11 were the fitting parameters that
were used. A remark that should be made for the specific soil subunit is that it is
a problematic unit to sample due to the complexity of the soil matrix and that all
attempts to sample this unit have led to the destruction of the original soil matrix.
Consequently, it has not been possible to reconstitute them in the same way as
the soil units are presented in situ. Therefore, it is believed that the angle of fric­
tion resulting from the interpretation of the CID tests is conservative with respect
to the “real” value. Subsequently, the coefficient of lateral earth pressure at rest,
K0, would be larger.
ϕ′ = α + β · ID
(2.5)
Figure 2.7 shows the axial strain curve of an indicative specimen from a differ­
ent borehole that underwent an isotropically consolidated drained triaxial onshore
laboratory test to determine its strength properties.
 
 
 
Δε
A
[%]
        σ
A
−
σ
R
[kPa]
Figure 2.7: Isotropically Consolidated Drained (CID) triaxial test result for Layer 1
specimen from a different borehole.
Fine­grained soils
The undrained shear strength (cu) of fine­grained soils can be derived from in­
situ CPT data adopting a correlation determined between the undrained shear
strength measured from laboratory testing and the net cone resistance (qnet) of
the CPTu testing, calculated as an average over an interval of 20 cm above and
below the sample top depth.
12
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:23==
The derivation of the relationship between cu and qnet was based on the results of
215 Anisotropically Consolidate Undrained Triaxial Compression (CAUc) tests,
4 Isotropically Consolidated Undrained Triaxial Compression (CIUc) tests, 20
Anisotropically Consolidated Undrained Triaxial Extension (CAUe) tests, 1098
Unconsolidated Undrained Triaxial Compression (UU) tests and 31 Direct Sim­
ple Shear (DSS) tests. However, 370 of these tests have been excluded from the
derivation of the relationship between cu and qnet due to various reasons, including
faulty test results caused by specimen inhomogeneities, poor sample preparation,
and unavailable qnet data. These tests were conducted with specimens from the
greater area of the OWF, where similar soil units are encountered, and the corre­
lation of the cu and qnet is needed because the boreholes for the lab specimens
did not correspond to each WTG location individually.
Due to the nature of the clays in the OWF zone, it is expected that unusually
high values of qnet for a clay soil type might be encountered and that a linear Nkt
based approach might lead to a significantly higher undrained shear strength than
measured in the lab and to a significant difference between the lower bound and
the upper bound undrained shear strength to the best estimate. Therefore, site­
specific relationships between cu and qnet have been derived using the natural
logarithmic form shown in Equation 2.6.
ln(cu) = α ln(qnet) + β
(2.6)
The parameters α and β that provide the best­fit curve for the soil subunit of inter­
est, Layer 2, are 0.69 and ­0.39, respectively.



	



	

 










  
Figure 2.8: Unconsolidated Undrained Triaxial Compression for a specimen rep­
resenting Layer 2, from a different borehole.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
13
==PAGE:24==
Figure 2.8 provides an indicative example of one of the UU triaxial compression
tests that were realized for the characterization of the strength properties of the
soils for the specific offshore wind farm. The undrained shear strength su can be
derived from this plot by using half of the deviatoric stress, amounting to approx­
imately 190kPa falling inside the range of the su presented at Table 2.4 for the
location of interest.
2.2.2.5
Soil stiffness properties
A soil unit’s small strain shear modulus (G0) is generally associated with shear
strain levels of less than 0.001%. The small strain shear modulus can be de­
termined from in­situ testing, advanced laboratory testing, or correlations with
geotechnical parameters from conventional in­situ and laboratory tests [10]. Seis­
mic CPTs and P­S logging in­situ tests measure shear wave velocity (Vs) by prop­
agating shear waves through the soil. G0 can then be determined using Equa­
tion 2.7.
G0 = ρV 2
s
(2.7)
Laboratory resonant column tests (RCTs) are performed by applying torsional vi­
bration to a cylindrical soil specimen, calculating wave propagation velocity in the
soil with established resonant frequency, and further computation of shear mod­
ulus for varying shear strains. Laboratory bender element tests (BETs) measure
the time a shear wave passes through a cylindrical soil specimen to calculate Vs.
G0 can then be determined using Equation 2.7. Both of these advanced laboratory
testing methods were used, along with in situ tests like Seismic CPTs.
The small strain stiffness of the Layer 1 soil unit was determined by using literature
correlations and resonant column tests due to the large variance in small strain
shear modulus in the upper meters and the inability to recreate a similar profile
solely using the literature correlations.
Based on the available data, the Hegazy & Mayne (1995) [11] literature correlation
reasonably represents the lowest small strain shear modulus measured in Layer
1. Equation 2.8 shows the formula suggested by Hegazy & Mayne for calculating
the shear wave velocity.
Vs = 13.18 · q0.192
c
· σ′0.179
v0
(2.8)
Based on the comparison with the results from four resonant column tests for
Layer 3, the Hegazy & Mayne (1995) correlation shows the best agreement with
the measured laboratory data and was adopted to model G0 for this soil unit.
For the fine­grained soils, a total of 18 resonant column tests were performed
on samples from all sites. Three resonant column tests have been disregarded
based on uncharacteristic stiffness degradation curves. The results from the 15
tests that have been used in this assessment. Equation 2.9 by Kramer (1996) [12]
14
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:25==
for OCR = 5 shows the best match with the measured G0 and was adopted for the
design with a k parameter of 600.
G0
cu
= k, f(OCR)
(2.9)
The soil properties and the soil description for the investigated location are sum­
marized at Table 2.4. It is evident that there are 5 layers, with their depth being
denoted in the first two columns, with the soil unit of Layer 1 being encountered at
the seabed floor and Layer 2 describing the underlying layer of very high­strength
clay, while Layer 3 occupies the rest of the 3 deeper layers. Meanwhile, there has
been a further distinction into sublayers for a better presentation of the strength
properties with depth. The fourth column introduces the end depth of each of
these sublayers.
Table 2.4: Summary of soil properties and soil profile for location of interest.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
15
==PAGE:26==
16
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:27==
3
Geotechnical Behavior and
Installation Process
The interaction of the soil structure in a monopile foundation through offshore
hammering operations leads to an incidence of damage in the marine floor pro­
duced mainly by the generation and propagation of stress waves and the resulting
soil degradation. The current chapter attempts to present the geotechnical impli­
cations of such phenomena due to these stresses, starting with the fundamental
physical processes and moving to wider consequences for soil behavior and the
properties of soils, as also to provide a brief presentation of the installation process
of the an offshore WTG foundation.
3.1
Wave Propagation during impact driving
A pile installed on the sea floor under a hammering action generates vibrations
seen as P and S waves in the soil medium. P­waves are longitudinal, and the
motion involves the compression and expansion of the particles in the direction of
wave propagation. These are the fastest seismic waves and can travel through
any type of material, including fluids. In the context of offshore monopile installa­
tions, P­waves are significant because they directly alter the pore water pressure
and the soil particles. On the other hand, S­waves are transverse and consist of
particle movement perpendicular to the direction of the wave propagation. These
will only travel through solids, as fluids do not support shear stresses. The trans­
mission of S­waves through marine soils could induce changes in soil structure,
mainly through the initiation of the generation of the already­mentioned shear
Figure 3.1: Propagation of P and S waves through a medium [12].
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
17
==PAGE:28==
strains, which could affect the mechanical behavior of the soil. The reach and
intensity of these waves depend on hammer energy, pile geometry, and soil type.
As they travel through the ground, they generate cyclic loads and strains that put
the soil structure and properties through significant evolution over time. The dif­
ference in how these two waves propagate is illustrated as Figure 3.1 by Kramer
(1996) [12].
The pile driving process, apart from the P and S waves, which originate from
the pile toe and expand outwards, leads to the generation of Rayleigh and Love
waves on the seabed surface; they are combined on the seabed surface. The
Rayleigh waves cause an anti­clockwise elliptical movement of the soil on a verti­
cal plane (parallel to the direction of the wave transmission) and a soil deformation
of combined 1D compression and shear, while the Love waves force the soil to
a horizontal and transverse to the direction of propagation soil movement result­
ing in an alternating shearing deformation of the soil [12]. However, the ground
vibration propagation mechanisms become more complex in layered soil profiles,
where additional waves are generated due to reflections and refractions at layer
boundaries. Experimental and numerical studies [13] have shown the effects of
impact driving on ground vibrations. By using the average peak particle velocities
has been observed a decay with increasing distances from the pile, as expected,
although it does not follow the same trend in all directions as the magnitude of the
vertical vibration is more significant than those in the transverse and longitudinal
directions.
3.2
Cyclic soil degradation during impact driving
Impact driving, as a monopile installation method in sandy soils, can significantly
influence the design and sustainability of foundations as it poses some very se­
rious geotechnical challenges. Such an installation method is very widespread
in the offshore wind industry for monopile foundations and is realized by driving
piles into the ground using heavy blows from a hammer. It is a very efficient and
effective method for penetrating dense soil layers. However, it includes complex
interactions between the pile and the surrounding sandy soil.
The soil behavior during the monopile installation is different depending on whether
the pile is open­ended or close­ended. The former monopile category records a
higher rate of pile penetration in the soil than the rate of soil entering the inner part
of the pile, a behavior that can result in the soil­plugging effect, mostly observed
for small diameter piles and in dense soil formations [14, 15]. In this instance, the
problem starts resembling the soil behavior under the penetration of close­ended
piles, leading to more significant soil resistance and endangering the whole pro­
cess if soil plugging has not been considered. Results of the numerical analysis
indicate that the jacked piles show a higher tendency to lead to a plug formation
rather than the dynamic installation methods, like impact and vibratory driving,
due to the more significant horizontal stress peaks captured inside the pile during
the installation process [14].
18
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:29==
The maximum effective radial stress of the monopile shaft is achieved the mo­
ment the pile is penetrating the soil, as with increasing depth of penetration, this
stress diminishes significantly near the shaft, and it continues to distance from the
tip. This effect is amplified with the cyclic shearing that takes place with dynamic
methods of pile installation, as it leads to more soil contraction than monotonic
shearing. These behaviors have been verified by using the Coupled Eulerian­
Lagrangian (CEL) method [16], where the reduction of radial stresses during the
monopile installation procedure is evident. Additionally, in this study, the effect
of friction fatigue, introduced by [17], is also explained and showcased from the
numerical results. This phenomenon describes the behavior of reducing radial
stress with increasing penetration depths. In a long­term time frame, the reduced
radial stress may gradually increase again, although this is not linked to the pore
water pressure dissipation rather to the relaxation of initial high­stress gradients
near the pile shaft.
It has been noticed that silty sands or silts with a fines content (< 0.0625mm) rang­
ing from 25% to 45% and moisture content from 20% to 30% are more susceptible
to the cyclic loading conditions introduced by pile driving. Additional penetration
of the spudcan due to bearing failure occurring from strength reduction is a pos­
sible outcome of such loading conditions [18]. The cyclic effects for temporary
activities like pile driving can be assessed by estimating the peak particle veloc­
ity (PPV) near the spudcan’s edge. The PPV can be converted into cyclic shear
stress by using wave propagation theory, as [19] has exhibited in some examples.
This stress can then be used to calculate the soil’s excess pore pressure and re­
sultant strength degradation, as discussed in [20]. Each of the aforementioned
methodologies includes a certain degree of uncertainty.
In saturated soils, pile driving can generate excess pore pressures, potentially
reducing effective soil stresses, leading to soil strength loss and liquefaction. In
scenarios where significant spudcan settlement or liquefaction is possible, con­
ducting a fully non­linear, cyclically degrading numerical analysis with the most
advanced soil modeling technology is recommended. Some significant factors
that influence the generation and dissipation of excess pore water pressure in­
clude pile driving characteristics, such as the size of the spudcan and its distance
from the piling operation [18].
3.3
WTG foundation installation procedure
The process of installing an offshore wind turbine generator (WTG) using a monopile
foundation involves a series of steps that are dependent on one another to ensure
the structural integrity and operational efficiency of the wind turbine. Upon arriving
at the installation location, the jack­up vessel lifts itself above sea level using its
legs, providing a stable platform for installation activities free from wave and cur­
rent interferences. This is achieved by driving the spudcans, the usually conical­
shaped foundation of each leg, into the soil by applying a pre­loading force larger
than the one that is expected to reach during the operational stage (i.e., founda­
tion installation in this case). Once the vessel is safely jacked up, the monopile
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
19
==PAGE:30==
is lifted by the vessel’s crane and is carefully lowered into the water, and guided
into position on the seabed. As expected, an initial penetration occurs due to the
monopile’s weight, which is aided by gravity.
Once the monopile is correctly positioned and has achieved initial stability, a hy­
draulic piling hammer is attached to drive the monopile further into the seabed.
A depth that has been designed in order to sustain all the lateral loads the wind
turbine will be subjected to throughout its lifetime. This design includes wind and
wave loads for storms with a return period of 50 years. The hammer, then, delivers
blows to the top of the monopile, driving it deeper until it reaches a stable layer that
can withstand operational loads, as determined by geotechnical data, structural
calculations, and meteocean data. Throughout the hammering process, parame­
ters such as blow count, penetration depth, and resistance are closely monitored,
with adjustments made as necessary to ensure optimal installation and avoid is­
sues like refusal or excessive tilting.
20
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:31==
4
Numerical Analysis
The installation of an offshore monopile is an inherently large deformation prob­
lem. The classical FE Lagrangian formulations offer a very accurate depiction of
the interface of two parts for the whole duration of the analysis, due to the fact
that both the mesh and the material are deforming together since the movement
of the continuum is regulated based on the material coordinates and time. Such
properties could lead to excessive mesh distortions concerning a simulation with
large deformations, as investigated in this thesis. Another approach would be
the Eulerian analysis, where the mesh refrains from being distorted, allowing the
material to move freely through the Eulerian elements. This method is mainly ap­
plied in fluid mechanics, and a possible drawback is the high chance of numerical
diffusion in the case of multiple Eulerian materials [21].
In an effort to combine the advantages of both methods, the Coupled Eulerian­
Lagrangian (CEL) method was used. In the numerical predictions, using this CEL
formulation, the motion of Eulerian material along the mesh is tracked through the
computation of the material’s Eulerian volume fraction (EVF). This fraction rep­
resents the volume occupied by material within an Eulerian element. When the
EVF is equal to 1, it means the element is completely filled. When the EVF is at 0,
the element is empty. The interaction between Eulerian and Lagrangian materials
is governed by a general contact mechanism that functions by a penalty contact
method. In this general contact approach, unlike in specific contact enforcement,
Lagrangian elements are allowed to pass through the Eulerian mesh freely. How­
ever, they will meet an Eulerian element carrying any material, as a non­zero EVF
indicates. [21]
Figure 4.1: Procedure for using the volume fraction tool for the discrete fields
definition [22].
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
21
==PAGE:32==
In the analyses conducted for this thesis, the structures like the spudcan and the
monopile were defined as the Lagrangian bodies, and the soil was assigned to be
the Eulerian element. Through the Interaction module in Abaqus/CAE, both struc­
tures for all analyses were set with the rigid body constraint, and all of the bound­
ary and loading conditions applied to them were assigned to their reference point.
This is due to the fact that spudcans and monopiles are constructed from mate­
rials with significantly higher stiffness in comparison with the soil material. This
discrepancy in material properties, under normal operational conditions, will lead
to little to no deformation of the spudcan and the monopile during the penetration
process. Therefore, the reference parts were assigned to be these structures, and
with the help of the volume fraction tool through Abaqus/CAE, the discrete fields
were defined with the Eulerian material being outside the reference instances. A
more detailed description of this procedure can be found in the Abaqus manuals
[22].
Abaqus software offers the CEL analysis option only when Abaqus/Explicit is
used. This explicit dynamics finite element Abaqus solver provides a nonlinear,
dynamic analysis of solids and structures using explicit time integration. An ex­
plicit integration scheme is used to solve the equation of motion in this solver.
Unlike implicit methods, required in Abaqus/Standard, which needs a solution of
a set of simultaneous linear equations, this explicit method calculates the system’s
state at a future time, t + Δt, from the state at the current time, t. Integration steps
are regarded as very efficient and proven best for problems with complex contact
interactions among parts. The stability of the analysis depends on the stable time
increment, Δt, size, which is defined as Equation 4.1 shows. This estimate for Δt
is only approximate and, in most cases, is not a conservative (safe) estimate. In
general, the actual stable time increment chosen by Abaqus/Explicit will be less
than this estimate by a factor between 1/
√
2 and 1 in a two­dimensional model
and between 1/
√
3 and 1 in a three­dimensional model [22]. Equation 4.1 sug­
gests that the stable time increment, Δt, depends on the smallest element length
Lmin and the wave speed cd.
∆t ≈Lmin
cd
(4.1)
In all models with different geometries that will be presented in the following sub­
sections, the first layer (its thickness varies from model to model from 1 to 2m)
is not material filled in order to allow for any potential heave that will occur with
the spudcan’s and monopile’s penetration. The rest of the Eulerian mesh rep­
resents a homogeneous sand soil profile, with soil properties matching the ones
of the surface layer of Layer 1 soil subunit from Table 2.4. The simplification of
using a single layer to describe the whole soil domain was made to decrease the
computational time of the analysis and reduce some of the numerical inaccura­
cies. In particular, models containing soil domains with multiple layers require a
finer mesh than the homogeneous ones, especially near the interfaces of the dif­
ferent layers, to avoid compatibility issues. Moreover, as mentioned earlier, the
soil inputs from the OWF contain some inherent inaccuracies due to the lack of
an extensive geotechnical borehole campaign for each WTG location; thus, a re­
22
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:33==
duced precision in the definition of the layer interfaces was expected, introducing
additional numerical difficulties.
In Abaqus/Explicit analyses, a linear bulk viscosity and a quadratic bulk viscosity
of 0.06 and 1.2, respectively, are introduced at each step by default. The former
viscosity creates a bulk viscosity pressure, which is linear in the volumetric strain,
and the latter one concerns only continuum elements and is introduced solely
when the volumetric strain rate is compressive [22]. These viscosity parameters
are utilized to control numerical damping of high­frequency oscillations in highly
dynamic events, such as impact simulations, aiming to improve the accuracy of
the results by damping out unnatural, artificial oscillations without significantly af­
fecting the overall dynamics of the model.
The upcoming subsections shall further explain the tuned properties of the nu­
merical values in each respective model, optimized to satisfy the prescribed de­
mands and objectives of the unique simulations. Where the last section touched
on general settings that applied to all models, this section addresses the specific
boundary conditions and loading type for each analysis, as well as the constitutive
model that was used.
4.1
Spudcan penetration model
The first step of the simulation process included the creation of a model that would
capture solely the penetration of the spudcan. The reasoning behind this was to
verify the validity of this simulation in a separate model, which will later function
as the precedent step of the monopile installation operation. Accordingly, a three­
dimensional model of the spudcan and the soil below it was constructed as it is
illustrated in Figure 4.2. It is evident that only a quarter of both the soil domain
and the spudcan were modeled, as the symmetrical design of the spudcan and
the one­dimensional loading it experienced allowed for accurate simulation of the
  RP
Figure 4.2: Spudcan penetration model mesh.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
23
==PAGE:34==
spudcan penetration in an efficient manner. This way, the computational time was
reduced, and a finer mesh was simultaneously allowed since only a quarter of the
actual problem was modeled.
  RP
Figure 4.3: Spudcan Lagrangian body mesh.
The mesh depicted in Fig­
ure 4.2 has a width of 28m in
both directions and a depth of
37m.
As mentioned before,
the first 1m contains no ma­
terial, and the remaining 36m
are assigned with the Eulerian
material. By only modeling a
quarter of the actual case, only
half of the spudcan’s effective
diameter is used and is equal
to 5.5m.
Subsequently, the
distance from the edge of the spudcan to the vertical boundaries is just above
two times the effective diameter and from the bottom, above three times the di­
ameter.
A mesh of a total 190449 elements was created (see Figure 4.2), which 185000
linear hexahedral elements of type EC3D8R consisted the soil Eulerian soil do­
main and the rest 5449 quadratic tetrahedral elements of type C3D10M were used
for the Lagrangian rigid body of the spudcan, as it is shown at Figure 4.3. The
meshes were created using the ”sweep” technique, a method that Abaqus/CAE
uses to mesh complex solid and surface regions, ensuring the most uniform mesh
possible for the current geometry [22]. From Figure 4.2, it can also be observed a
gradual increase in the element’s size towards the boundaries, both vertical and
horizontal. This meshing technique enables a finer mesh in the areas of interest,
closest to the spudcan, for the best accuracy of the results and a coarser mesh
close to the boundaries where they are not the focal point of the analysis. This
way, accuracy is preserved while a reasonable computational time is maintained.
The larger mesh elements towards the boundaries not only serve the purpose
of shorter computational times but also can act as a form of artificial damping.
In particular, when elements are too large to capture the wave properties accu­
rately, numerical dispersion can occur, leading to phase errors and attenuation of
the wave due to the inaccurate representation of the wave speed and amplitude.
Larger elements may not resolve the high­frequency components of the wave, ef­
fectively damping out these components. This can appear as if the wave is losing
energy as it travels through the model, even though this is not physical damping
but rather a numerical artifact. The primary consequence of this method is the
reduced accuracy in the results since the wave characteristics in these areas are
miscalculated. It is not the suggested practice for purely dynamic models, but it
was applied in the quasi­static models that used the constitutive model of Mohr­
Coulomb since the loading rates were selected in an effort to avoid inertia effects,
where the expected dynamic effects were anticipated to be insignificant. The dif­
ference in element size between the area close to the pile and the boundaries is
more visible in Figure 4.5 because it is a larger model, and it was more imperative
24
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:35==
to have a larger size difference between the elements.
4.1.1
Constitutive model
The constitutive model used for this analysis was the in­built Abaqus Mohr­Coulomb
Plasticity, which is a linear, elastic, perfectly plastic model. The linear elastic part
depends on Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio of the material, while the plastic
region satisfies the classical Mohr­Coulomb criterion, which assumes that yield
occurs when the shear stress on any point in a material reaches a value that de­
pends linearly on the normal stress in the same plane. The Young’s modulus, E, of
the material can be calculated according to Equation 4.2 based on the small strain
stiffness, G0 (see Section 2.2.2.5), and the Poisson’s ratio ν which was assumed
to be 0.3.
E = 2 G0 (1 + ν)
(4.2)
The Mohr­Coulomb model is a relatively simple and computationally efficient con­
stitutive model for simulating the mechanical behavior of granular materials like
sand under load. In a quasi­static analysis, where dynamic effects such as inertia
and rate dependency are not the primary concerns, the simplicity of the MC model
makes it a favorable choice. It efficiently captures the essential aspects of soil be­
havior, including cohesion and internal friction, which are critical for understanding
how soils will resist the pressures exerted by a spudcan during penetration. The
use of MC is used in multiple similar researches. Zhao et al. [23] and Hu et al.
[24] are some of the literature that used Mohr­Coulomb for a spudcan penetration
model with a CEL analysis in Abaqus. In addition, they also verified their results
with centrifuge testing and concluded that both methods’ results are in good ac­
cordance, rendering the MC constitutive model a suitable option for a simplified
analysis with good accuracy.
4.1.2
Boundary conditions and loading
The analysis consisted from two steps, one where the geostatic stress state is es­
tablished to represent the stress state before the arrival of the jack­up vessel and
a second one where the spudcan is being driven into the soil. For both steps, the
soil domain had boundary conditions set on each vertical plane and the bottom
horizontal one to prevent any movement perpendicular to its surface. By setting
the normal velocity component to zero, the plane is fixed in that direction, while
movement parallel to the plane is allowed. This constraint is essential for accu­
rately modeling the structural response under the given loading conditions and
for maintaining the simulation’s integrity. For the spudcan, all movements were
prohibited during the first step, and during the second, only the vertical movement
along the direction of axis Z was allowed.
The purpose of this analysis was to simulate in quasi­static conditions the spud­
can penetration until the depth that was reached in the real­life scenario. The
explicit solution method has proven valuable in solving quasi­static problems, but
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
25
==PAGE:36==
it is mainly a true dynamic procedure originally developed to model high­speed
impact events in which inertia plays a dominant role in the solution. The out­of­
balance forces are propagated as stress waves between neighboring elements
while solving for a state of dynamic equilibrium. Since the minimum stable time
increment is usually quite small, most problems require a large number of incre­
ments. One advantage of the explicit procedure over the implicit procedure is its
greater ease in resolving complicated contact problems. Applying the explicit dy­
namic procedure to quasi­static problems requires some special considerations.
Since a static solution is, by definition, a long­time solution, it is often compu­
tationally impractical to simulate an event in its natural time scale, which would
require an excessive number of small time increments. To obtain an economical
solution, the event must be accelerated in some way. The problem is that as the
event is accelerated, the state of static equilibrium evolves into a state of dynamic
equilibrium in which inertial forces become more dominant. The goal is to model
the process in the shortest time period in which inertial forces remain insignificant
[22].
Abaqus has a simple, built­in smooth step amplitude curve that automatically cre­
ates a smooth loading amplitude. By using the smooth step amplitude curve,
Abaqus automatically connects each of the data pairs with curves whose first and
second derivatives are smooth and whose values are zero at each of the data
points. Since both of these derivatives are smooth, a displacement loading with
a smooth step amplitude curve can be applied using only the initial and final data
points, and the intervening motion will be smooth. This way, Abaqus enables the
user to perform a quasi­static analysis without generating waves due to disconti­
nuity in the rate of applied loading [22]. An indicative example of this smooth step
amplitude function is presented in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4: Amplitude definition using a smooth step amplitude curve [22].
For this model, the geostatic stresses were introduced by applying the gravita­
tional acceleration, g, over a time period of 30 seconds with the smooth step,
26
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:37==
being followed by an additional 30 seconds of constant amplitude 100% in order
for any dynamic effects to be attenuated in a conservative approach. The spud­
can was driven by applying instantaneously a constant velocity of 0.1m/s on the
spudcan’s reference point along the Z direction for a total step time of 13 seconds.
This way, it was ensured that the spudcan reached the desired depth, and as a
verification method, the vertical reaction force was compared with the 1/4th of the
real­life applied preload, as only one quarter of the whole problem was modeled.
The results of all analyses are presented in Chapter 5.
4.2
Monopile installation model
The modeled system is a 3D CEL quasi­static model, created in Abaqus to capture
the interaction of the adjacent spudcan of the jack­up with the driven monopile.
The modeling domain extends up to 38 meters below the water level, including
2 meters of void on top and 36 meters of soil height, with a constant width of 62
meters on all sides. The main structures of interest are the monopile, with an outer
radius of 4.65 m and a thickness of 10cm, and the spudcan, which has a diameter
of 11 m. This is located at a distance of 18 m from the monopile, in accordance
with the field conditions that were in place during the actual operation, and 28m
from the boundaries as the one presented in the previous section. Figure 4.5
depicts the setup that was encountered on the field, only accounting for the crane
leg.
The number of elements in the mesh was 190742 elements, of which 186240
were linear hexahedral elements of type EC3D8R, solely allocated to the Eulerian
material as the ”E” notation indicates. An additional 4065 linear hexahedral ele­
ments of type C3D8R are used to mesh the pile and most parts of the spudcan.
In addition, 437 linear wedge elements of type C3D6 are used exclusively to pre­
serve some areas of the spudcan to represent its geometrical particularity more
practically.
The analysis comprises three steps, aiming to achieve a proper evaluation of the
installation effects and the interaction between the monopile and the spudcan,
and are listed below:
• Step 1: The initial geostatic stress state within the soil is defined, giving the
ability to have a proper baseline for the loading state to evaluate the behavior
of the soil further. The same smooth step amplitude function is used as the
one shown in Figure 4.4.
• Step 2: The spudcan is driven into the ground to establish as close as pos­
sible to the real­life case stress conditions before the monopile installation.
The spudcan is being driven similarly to what was described in the previous
section.
• Step 3: The monopile is driven, with an instantaneously applied and con­
stant velocity of 0.1m/s for a total step time of 20 seconds, to evaluate mutual
interaction behavior with the neighboring spudcan.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
27
==PAGE:38==
Such a step­wise approach enables one to take into consideration all the neces­
sary procedures that were followed in the actual location in real­life, in an effort to
acquire an accurately enough response which will resemble the real load loss.
  RP−1
  RP
Figure 4.5: Monopile installation model including both structures.
4.2.1
Constitutive model
As outlined in Section 4.1.1, the Mohr­Coulomb Plasticity constitutive model was
utilized for the full model analyses also.
This constitutive approach was also
adopted for simulating the pile driving operations since the loading rate was ap­
plied in an effort to maintain quasi static conditions where the inertia effects are
negligible.
4.2.2
Boundary conditions and loading
In a similar manner as previously in the spudcan penetration model, the Eulerian
soil domain was constrained in a way that all five planes (apart from the horizontal
one on the surface) were prohibited from any movement perpendicular to them.
The spudcan for step 1 (application of geostatic stresses) was confined from any
movement, while during step 2, the vertical degree of freedom (DOF) was released
so it could be driven into the soil. For the last step, all DOFs were constrained
again. This was decided due to the fact that, in reality, Cadeler experienced a
load loss on the crane leg accompanied by an additional settlement. Detailed and
accurate records, although, exist solely for the load loss, so the spudcan was not
allowed to penetrate further than the 1.3m that was located with the use of dis­
placement control techniques that allowed to monitor and capture any potential
load loss, through the reduction in the reaction force of the spudcan’s reference
point. The monopile is already embedded in the self­penetration depth due to its
own weight, as it can be observed from Figure 4.5, reducing this way the com­
putational time. For the first two steps, the monopile is forced to remain still by
constraining all of its DOFs and only allowing at step 3 to move along the Z axis
and be driven with a constant speed of 0.1m/s.
28
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:39==
5
Results
This chapter presents the results of the numerical analyses that were described
above. These models were applied to investigate the soil­structure interaction
during the spudcan penetration processes and the interaction of the monopile
installation with the predriven spudcan. Initially, the results of the Mohr­Coulomb
model are examined for both the spudcan and monopile problems. In the former
analysis, the focus was on the ability to predict soil failure patterns and derive the
correct bearing capacity of the soil for specific penetration, while in the latter, the
emphasis shifted to understanding the interactions between the spudcan and the
driven monopile, capturing the real­time stress distribution.
It should be noted at this point that all the mesh contours presented in this chapter
concern the material­filled soil domain, so the total height of the models is 36m.
5.1
Numerical challenges
The finite element (FE) simulations are very strong tools for understanding com­
plex problems, like geotechnical interactions during large displacement offshore
installations, but they inherently include simplifications that introduce some dis­
crepancies compared to real­world behaviors. Additionally, there are some re­
alistic limitations that concern the computational resources and duration of each
analysis, which also affect the accuracy of the results or the details of the simu­
lation. This section outlines key challenges encountered during the simulation of
the spudcan and monopile penetration processes, as also some parameters that
could give better insight into the current topic:
• The Mohr­Coulomb constitutive model used in the simulations does not ac­
count for the transient pore pressures that can significantly influence soil
behavior under dynamic loading conditions. This omission primarily derives
from computational constraints, as modeling these pressures would sub­
stantially increase the simulation time and complexity. This limitation is very
important when considering that real­life offshore installations usually inter­
act with neighboring structures by the alterations in pore pressure condi­
tions, as mentioned in chapter 3.
• Studies, using more sophisticated constitutive models like the hypoplastic
one, have shown that the impact driving of monopiles causes considerable
changes in the sand’s void ratio during the piling operation [25, 26, 27].
This behavior cannot be accurately captured with the Mohr­Coulomb model,
simplifying soil behavior to plasticity without accounting for the densification
effects in real soils under cyclic loading.
• The computational time of the analysis constrained the model by relatively
short boundaries, which can lead to wave reflections that inaccurately rep­
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
29
==PAGE:40==
resent the semi­infinite nature of real soil media. These reflections can po­
tentially skew the results by introducing artificial stress waves that do not
occur in field conditions.
• The accuracy of input soil properties is another critical limitation. The vari­
ability of soil properties laterally across the site was not fully captured, pri­
marily because cone penetration tests (CPTs) were conducted only at the
center of wind turbine locations, whereas the vessels are often jacked up
at some distance from these points (approximately 28m from monopile cen­
ter to spudcan center for the investigated case). This discrepancy can lead
to significant deviations in the prediction of soil behavior under the spud­
can and monopile due to potential differences in soil conditions between the
modeled and actual installation locations.
With these points in mind, the study aims to approximate quasi­static conditions
through controlled loading rates, thereby mitigating but not entirely eliminating
dynamic effects. The adoption of larger elements near the boundaries serves
to dampen wave propagation effects artificially, enabling to focus on the primary
geotechnical behaviors without extensive dynamic complications. However, the
model’s absence of explicit damping mechanisms and reliance on the elements’
size for wave attenuation necessitates a cautious interpretation of the simulation
outcomes, acknowledging the potential for non­physical behaviors influencing the
results.
5.2
Spudcan penetration model
The spudcan penetration model concerns a 3D CEL quasi­static analysis, where
the spudcan is driven by a constant velocity of 0.1m/s, which is applied instanta­
neously to the spudcan’s reference point until a depth of 1.3m (penetration depth
derived from the actual operations).
The purpose of this model was to verify
that the simulation of the spudcan penetration with the Mohr­Coulomb constitu­
tive model and the settings described in Chapter 4 can give accurate results that
resemble the real­life scenario.
5.2.1
Results
Figure 5.1 shows the stress state in terms of vertical stress, S33, after the 1.3m
of spudcan penetration into the soil. The stresses are presented in Pascal and
showcase an expected trend that seems to affect the soil until deep layers, but
laterally, the change in the stresses is less significant as it barely exceeds the
spudcan’s half diameter, at least for the surface layers.
30
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:41==
Figure 5.1: Vertical stresses contours after spudcan penetration.
A frequent phenomenon observed for spudcans that have been driven deeper
than their shoulder depth is backfilling, which occurs when the soil displaced from
the path of the spudcan during penetration through the seabed starts flowing back
into the cavity above the spudcan. Usually, penetrations in sand are not large
enough in order to occur this, as was the case in the investigated location, es­
pecially when the spudcan is relatively flat with a thick enough region of constant
diameter, which requires even more significant penetrations. In order to verify if
the existing numerical model could capture such behavior, an additional analysis
was conducted where the spudcan was driven up to a depth of 4.8m, and its re­
sults are depicted at Figure 5.2 in terms of vertical stresses. It is evident that the
vertical stresses are significantly larger (more than double) than the ones shown
at Figure 5.1, as was expected since the spudcan reached greater depths and
larger soil volume was mobilized. Figure 5.2b focuses on the backfilling effect, as
it is a zoomed­in detail of Figure 5.2a, where it is clear that the soil flows back to
the cavity created from the rigid body. It should be noted at this point that due to a
lack of accurate data and for conservatism, the dilation angle used in the Abaqus
analysis was equal to 1 degree since Layer 1 is a loose sand formation. Such
an assumption led to a slightly unrealistic backfill mechanism because, in deep
penetrations where the soil undergoes a significant shearing, the dilation angle
becomes more important as it governs the volumetric expansion of the soil with
shearing.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
31
==PAGE:42==
(a) Stress state after 4.8m of spudcan penetration.
(b) Detail of backfilling.
Figure 5.2: Results in terms of vertical stresses in contour plotting after a 4.8m
spudcan penetration.
The second way this analysis was verified was by comparing the vertical reaction
force of the spudcan with the actual preload applied by Cadeler during the jacking­
up operation and using the various industry guidelines for calculating the soil’s
bearing capacity. In particular, for the comparison, we only used the 1/4th of the
preload since only a quarter of the soil domain and spudcan are simulated.
The first method used to calculate the soil’s bearing capacity was the InSafeJIP
guidelines [28], which is summarised by Equations 5.1 and 5.2. The former equa­
tion refers to the period that the spudcan is only partially penetrated in the soil
where the effective diameter, Deff, and effective area, Aeff, change every moment
until the maximum bearing area is reached. Until the full spudcan diameter (11m)
is reached, the effective area is calculated at every time step as
πD2
eff
4
with Vc be­
ing the submerged volume of the spudcan. Both of these parameters depend
on Deff, which increases along with depth. The bearing factor Nγ is advised to
be taken from Cassidy and Houlsby (2002) [29], and it depends on the following
three parameters:
• the cone angle β, which is equal to spudcan’s slope in this case
• the roughness factor α, which is recommended to be assumed 0.5
• the peak friction angle ϕ ′
Qv = 1
2 γ ′Deff Nγ Aeff + γ ′ Vc
(5.1)
Qv =
(1
2γ ′D Nγ ζhγ + γ ′ h Nq ζsq ζhq
)
A + γ ′(
VC −Vsoil
)
(5.2)
Equation 5.2 concerns the bearing capacity calculation when the full bearing area
is in contact with the soil and is an extension of Equation 5.1. The volumes VC and
32
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:43==
Vsoil represent the volume of the conical spudcan below the shoulder level and the
volume of the backfill soil that rests on the spudcan, respectively. For the bearing
factor Nq there are no calculations linked straight to conically shaped foundations,
but it is suggested to adopt the theoretical value by Vesic (1975) [30] shown in
Equation 5.3. The ζ factors are calculated as follows:
• ζhγ = 1, recommended by InSafeJIP and Vesic (1975) [30]
• ζsq = 1 + tanϕ ′
• ζhq = 1 + 2 tanϕ ′ (1 −sinϕ ′)2 tan−1(
h
D
)
Nq = eπ tan(ϕ) tan2(π
4 + ϕ ′
2
)
(5.3)
The ISO guidelines [31] use only Equation 5.4 for the calculation of the bearing ca­
pacity, but the bearing factors Nγ and Nq are derived by using the slip­line method
for a flat, rough, circular footing from Martin (2004) [32]. The factors dγ and dq are
equal to 1 and ζhq, respectively. The variable p ′
o accounts for the effective sur­
charge of the overburden soil after the spudcan reaches depths where its widest
point is in full contact with the soil.
QV = γ ′ dγ Nγ π B3
8
+ p ′
o dq Nq π B2
4
(5.4)
Figure 5.3 compares the curves from the two analytical solutions of the industry’s
guidelines, with the curve obtained from Abaqus and with one­fourth of the actual







%! #') 








#'  

!
	$(&
	'( #%"
Figure 5.3: Comparison of spudcan’s vertical reaction force from Abaqus with the
industries guidelines and the actual preloading value.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
33
==PAGE:44==
preloading value. It is clear that all three curves are in good accordance with
each other until the depth at which the maximum bearing area is in contact with
the soil is reached. After that, the InSafeJIP method seems to underestimate the
bearing capacity of the soil by calculating a steeper slope for the curve, while
Abaqus and ISO continue to provide matching results. Abaqus reaches a value
of vertical reaction force at the spudcan’s reference point of 20.32MN, when the
actual preload for the whole spudcan was 9100MT, translating to 89.27MN and
divided by 4 produces the value of 22.32MN that is depicted at Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.4 demonstrates the results of all the spudcan penetration analyses that
took place in order to find which velocity is computationally efficient and produces
accurate results also. It can be seen that the higher velocities (larger than 1m/s)
generate curves with similar trends as the one presented in Figure 5.3, but tend
to overestimate the bearing capacity of the soil. Meanwhile, the analysis with a
spudcan velocity of 0.05m/s produces practically identical results with the one of
0.1m/s. Based on those results, the constant velocity of 0.1m/s was decided that
offered decent accuracy (see Figure 5.3) and remained computationally efficient
as it led to faster analysis time than the more conservative option of 0.05m/s.






   



	




 
  
  
  
  
  
Figure 5.4: Comparison of spudcan’s vertical reaction force from Abaqus for dif­
ferent jacking velocities.
5.3
Monopile installation model
This section presents the results of the 3D CEL analyses that simulated both the
spudcan and the monopile penetration. Deformed contours and time histories
34
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:45==
of field data are used to describe the interaction of the monopile installation pro­
cedure with the existing adjacent spudcan. Additionally, a parametric study was
conducted to investigate the effects of different friction angle values for the homo­
geneous loose sand of Layer 1. Inspiration for that constituted the lack of WTG
location­specific laboratory data. It is a common practice at offshore wind farms
(OWFs) that geotechnical surveys involve a small amount of specimens for on­
shore laboratory testing compared with the number of WTGs that will be installed.
The soil strength properties are then correlated based on a statistical analysis that
uses the in­situ measurements of CPT that are conducted for all WTG locations.
Consequently, these results inherently contain inaccuracies due to the statistical
nature of the analysis. This parametric study also addresses the potential inac­
curacies in soil properties related to the lateral variability of the soil, as the CPT is
conducted at the WTG location, but the spudcan is jacked up at a 28m distance
(center to center), and it is assumed that the same soil conditions will exist there.
Figure 5.5 depicts the Eulerian volume fraction contours at the end of the analysis.
These contours illustrate the distribution and fractions of the soil material within
the Eulerian mesh. In particular, the contour shows how much of each Eulerian
element is occupied by the soil material. As expected, the majority of the soil
domain is completely filled with material, and only in the vicinity of the structures
do they have different EVF values. The whole surface is half­filled with material
as a result of the residual settlement induced by the introduction of gravity to the
model in step 1. Around the spudcan, it can be noticed that due to the heaving
of the soil, the elements in close proximity have raised to the surface and filled
these Eulerian elements, while the adjacent elements have followed the spudcan’s
penetration and have EVF values lower than 0.5. For the monopile, a similar
behavior is observed on the outside surface, with even smaller EVF values since
Figure 5.5: Soil material distribution during the spudcan and monopile penetration.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
35
==PAGE:46==
the monopile is being driven for 2m and not for 1.3m as the spudcan. Inside the
monopile, it is predicted a rise of the soil material in the middle of the quadrant
with a subsequent settlement of the surrounding soil until the interface with the
inner monopile surface, where it seems the soil to be rising a bit due to frictional
forces. Such behavior is expected to happen in jacked piles, as the one simulated
here, since it is being driven into the soil with a constant velocity, with the soil in
the middle of the pile to be elevated [33]. The results showcased in Figure 5.5
concern the 3D model with a friction of angle, ϕ = 35o.
Figure 5.6 depicts the deformed contours of the vertical stress S33 in Pascals at
the end of the 2m monopile penetration for all three models with different friction
angles ϕ. It is evident that the monopile’s effect is being contained to a very small
radius around it without affecting the stress state in the spudcan vicinity, which
is located approximately 2Dmonopile and 1.6Dspudcan away from the pile. Similarly,
no significant difference is spotted with the variation of the friction angle, as the
models with higher ϕ seem to affect slightly deeper soil layers than the ones with
smaller values of ϕ. It should be mentioned at this stage that the results depicted
in Figures 5.6 ­ 5.8 concern the 3D model despite being presented in a 2D plane.
This was decided only to help visualize and focus on the plane that contained the
information on the interaction of the two structures.
36
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:47==
−6.727e+05
−6.166e+05
−5.606e+05
−5.045e+05
−4.485e+05
−3.924e+05
−3.364e+05
−2.803e+05
−2.242e+05
−1.682e+05
−1.121e+05
−5.606e+04
+0.000e+00
−3.951e+06
+1.901e−01
(a) Friction of angle 35o
−6.727e+05
−6.166e+05
−5.606e+05
−5.045e+05
−4.485e+05
−3.924e+05
−3.364e+05
−2.803e+05
−2.242e+05
−1.682e+05
−1.121e+05
−5.606e+04
+0.000e+00
−3.492e+06
+1.762e+00
(b) Friction of angle 33o
−6.727e+05
−6.166e+05
−5.606e+05
−5.045e+05
−4.485e+05
−3.924e+05
−3.364e+05
−2.803e+05
−2.242e+05
−1.682e+05
−1.121e+05
−5.606e+04
+0.000e+00
−4.211e+06
+1.124e−01
(c) Friction of angle 37o
Figure 5.6: Vertical stress contours in Pa after monopile installation.
Figure 5.7 shows the deformed contours of the horizontal stress S22 in Pascals
after the monopile driving has been completed. It can be seen that the localized
effect on the soil stresses is apparent, supported by the concentration of the stress
contours in the monopile’s tip close vicinity. Therefore, it is indicated that the
installation of a monopile mainly affects the surroundings of itself. On the other
hand, the influence on the spudcan is relatively small because it is at a 2Dmonopile
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
37
==PAGE:48==
distance from the monopile. The three subfigures in which the friction angles
are 35°, 33°, and 37° show relatively small differences in the distribution of S22.
The most distinct one is the difference in the shape of stress distribution below
the spudcan. For a friction angle of 33o (Figure 5.7b), the stress contours have
an approximately circular shape while Figure 5.7c show more clear two distinct
stress­inclined bulbs. In a more detailed look, it can be distinguished that beneath
the spudcan for each case, the shape and size of the horizontal stress distributions
are asymmetric along the Z­axis, suggesting a small interaction with the driven
monopile.
Figure 5.8 illustrates the deformed contours of the shear stress S23 in Pascals
for the plane where both the spudcan and the monopile are located at the end of
step 3. In all cases, a symmetric shear stress distribution can be observed since,
on both sides of the spudcan’s axis of symmetry, the shear stresses are of similar
magnitude but have different signs. This stress distribution suggests a balanced
loading condition where the soil deforms symmetrically around the spudcan dur­
ing monopile driving. This symmetry indicates a uniform transfer of shear forces
across the soil body and the spudcan. The increase in the angle of friction is
accompanied by an increase in the shear stresses below each structure. As the
friction angle increases, the soil’s resistance to sliding or shearing under lateral
and vertical loads intensifies, leading to higher shear stress levels and resulting
in higher shear stresses around the foundation interface. The maximum and min­
imum shear stress values that appear in the legend are located at both inner and
outer surfaces of the tip of the pile.
38
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:49==
−2.883e+05
−2.643e+05
−2.403e+05
−2.162e+05
−1.922e+05
−1.682e+05
−1.442e+05
−1.201e+05
−9.610e+04
−7.208e+04
−4.805e+04
−2.403e+04
+0.000e+00
−2.102e+06
+1.428e−02
(a) Friction of angle 35o
−2.883e+05
−2.643e+05
−2.403e+05
−2.162e+05
−1.922e+05
−1.682e+05
−1.442e+05
−1.201e+05
−9.610e+04
−7.208e+04
−4.805e+04
−2.403e+04
+0.000e+00
−1.433e+06
+1.546e−02
(b) Friction of angle 33o
−2.883e+05
−2.643e+05
−2.403e+05
−2.162e+05
−1.922e+05
−1.682e+05
−1.442e+05
−1.201e+05
−9.610e+04
−7.208e+04
−4.805e+04
−2.403e+04
+0.000e+00
−1.398e+06
+1.417e−02
(c) Friction of angle 37o
Figure 5.7: Horizontal stress contours after monopile installation.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
39
==PAGE:50==
−3.796e+05
−3.152e+05
−2.508e+05
−1.864e+05
−1.220e+05
−5.760e+04
+6.797e+03
+7.119e+04
+1.356e+05
+2.000e+05
+2.644e+05
+3.288e+05
+3.932e+05
−6.451e+05
+7.227e+05
(a) Friction of angle 35o
−3.796e+05
−3.152e+05
−2.508e+05
−1.864e+05
−1.220e+05
−5.760e+04
+6.797e+03
+7.119e+04
+1.356e+05
+2.000e+05
+2.644e+05
+3.288e+05
+3.932e+05
−6.609e+05
+6.206e+05
(b) Friction of angle 33o
−3.796e+05
−3.152e+05
−2.508e+05
−1.864e+05
−1.220e+05
−5.760e+04
+6.797e+03
+7.119e+04
+1.356e+05
+2.000e+05
+2.644e+05
+3.288e+05
+3.932e+05
−6.451e+05
+8.129e+05
(c) Friction of angle 37o
Figure 5.8: Shear stress contours after monopile installation.
As mentioned in Chapter 4, Abaqus/Explicit could be used for quasi­static analy­
ses, but it is an inherently dynamic solver, so it lies with the user to define correctly
the conditions for such analysis. A method to verify if the loading was applied in­
deed in a quasi­static way is to ensure that the ratio of the kinetic energy, which
occurred by the movement of the dynamic model, compared to the internal or total
work’s energy, is sufficiently small. Figure 5.9 shows exactly this, by comparing
the Internal and Total Work energy with the Kinetic one for all models, and it is
40
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:51==
clear that the Kinetic energy is orders of magnitude smaller than the other two as
it is practically depicted overlapping with the horizontal axis.


 





 

ϕ  35
o
	 
 
 
 


 
ϕ  33
o
	 
 
 
 


 
ϕ  37
o
	 
 
 
 
Figure 5.9: Numerical check for maintaining quasi­static conditions.
Figure 5.10 plots the vertical reaction force that was captured at the monopile’s
reference point during the whole analysis, for two models with different amplitude
functions in step 1 in an effort to visualize the contribution of the smooth step
function in maintaining quasi static conditions. The dark orange line represents
the model that uses the smooth step amplitude function (see Figure 4.4) as it
has been described in the previous section of the thesis, while the blue line was
produced with the use of a tabular amplitude function that the Abaqus by default





  








!  
	!"!  
	 !
! 
! 
! 

 !
! !
Figure 5.10: Comparison of monopile’s vertical reaction forces for the models with
linear and smooth step amplitude functions.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
41
==PAGE:52==
uses a linear relation to connect the points. In both cases, the gravity is introduced
in the model over a period of 30 seconds, as the vertical dotted line signifies, where
it increases from 0% to 100% (either linearly or with the smooth step), and then it
remains at 100% for additional 30 seconds until the end of step 1 which is marked
by the second dotted line. All the following steps are identical in both models.
It is evident that the linear step cannot ensure the quasi­static conditions, to the
same extent as the smooth step, that was intended since the monopile records
a fluctuating reaction force of maximum amplitude of 1MN before the monopile is
activated, even though they are reduced to 0 by the end of step 2. Given that the
monopile is not affected by the two previous steps with a smooth step, this could
be interpreted as an additional sign that the loading applied on the two previous
steps resembled quasi­static conditions. Additionally, for the monopile installation
part (step 3), both curves exhibit a similar trend, with the linear step one recording
some more significant spikes that are not predicted in the analysis with the smooth
step.
Figure 5.11 depicts the vertical reaction forces of the monopile during step 3, when
the monopile commences being driven with a speed of 0.1m/s, for all models with
different friction angles. The curve of the reaction forces follows a ”smooth” trend
until approximately step time of 7sec, namely a penetration depth of 70cm, but
after that, a lot of fluctuations can be observed. The three curves showcase a
similar trend behavior, but they deviate at the end result, as was expected. The
model with a friction angle ϕ = 33o records an 11.5MN reaction force, while for
every 2 degrees of increase in the friction angle, there is noted an increase of 11%
in the reaction force as well, resulting in a reaction force of 14.2MN for the model
with ϕ = 37o. Such behavior was anticipated as the larger ϕ angle, the stronger









 




	




   

ϕ
=
35
0
ϕ
=
33
0
ϕ
=
37
0
Figure 5.11: Comparison of monopile’s vertical reaction forces for the models with
different friction angles.
42
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:53==
the soil, so larger forces were required to penetrate until the same depth.
Figure 5.12 til Figure 5.16 contain the time histories of the points in the soil domain
in the area of the spudcan. In particular, spudcan point 1 is located at a depth of
1.3m at the side closest to the monopile, and spudcan point 2 is at the same depth
but on the other side. These points are used to capture some field variable outputs
accurately instead of solely relying on the contours and give a better idea about
how the soil is affected below the spudcan during the monopile installation.
Figure 5.12 shows the horizontal accelerations that reach the spudcan area dur­
ing the monopile installation step. Initially, it is noticed that in all models, there
are residual accelerations from the previous step, the spudcan penetration, since
in all cases at step time 0, there are noticeable accelerations. The graphs illus­
trate a dynamic behavior of the soil at both nodes, which could be explained by
numerical dynamic effects provided that the loading is not applied in a dynamic
way, like impact driving, for example. The three subfigures tend to result in slightly
larger fluctuations with more frequent significant spikes for higher friction angles.
The figure for ϕ = 33o, which shows a smaller amplitude in oscillations, could
be pointing to a softer soil response that absorbs and dampen movements more
effectively.




 


s
2

ϕ35
o

	

	




ϕ33
o

	

	




ϕ37
o

	

	
Figure 5.12: Comparison of horizontal accelerations that reach the spudcan for
the models with different friction angles.
In terms of vertical accelerations, the difference between the three models is less
significant as all of them present similar behavior, with only the ϕ = 37o model
recording oscillations of larger average magnitude, as Figure 5.13 shows.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
43
==PAGE:54==





 
 



s
2

ϕ35
o
	
	





ϕ33
o
	
	





ϕ37
o
	
	
Figure 5.13: Comparison of vertical accelerations that reach the spudcan for the
models with different friction angles.
The higher than anticipated accelerations presented in the two figures above,
prompted to the investigation of the accelerations that reach the borders of the
model. Figure 5.14 shows both the horizontal and vertical accelerations that reach
the vertical outer borders (left plot) and the bottom border (right plot). It is clear
that throughout the whole analysis time, no significant accelerations in terms of
magnitude reached them, so the case of having waves reflecting at the borders
with major accelerations is not probable.




	

 
 




s
2











	







Figure 5.14: Vertical and horizontal accelerations that reach the borders during
the whole analysis.
Figures 5.15 and 5.16 indicate that the monopile driving at a distance of 18m
from the spudcan has a very small effect on both the horizontal and vertical dis­
placements at the area of the spudcan. In both figures, the displacements do not
exceed three millimeters in absolute terms, and the variation of the friction an­
gle appears to have negligible influence on the magnitude of the deformations.
From Figure 5.16, it could be mentioned that for a short period of time, there is a
tendency for the spudcan to settle unevenly due to the different signs of the dis­
44
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:55==
placements, that for the largest friction angle model exhibit a maximum value of
2mm differential displacement which translates to an approximately 0.02% incli­
nation for the spudcan with a diameter of 11m.




 
 




ϕ35
o

	

	




ϕ33
o

	

	




ϕ37
o

	

	
Figure 5.15: Comparison of horizontal displacements that occur at the spudcan
area for the models with different friction angles.





 
 






ϕ35
o
	
	





ϕ33
o
	
	





ϕ37
o
	
	
Figure 5.16: Comparison of vertical displacements that occur at the spudcan area
for the models with different friction angles.
Figure 5.17 contains the time histories of the vertical reaction force that the spud­
can underwent for the last two steps of the analysis. During step 2, the spudcan
is driven into the soil from time instance 0 til 13sec; therefore, the reaction force
is increasing. Then, the spudcan is held in place, and the monopile commences
its driving operation for 20 seconds. The inspiration for this thesis was the vessel
recordings of the leg load loss (see Figure 2.1) during the monopile installation for
the investigated location, and Figure 5.17 is the Abaqus output that is the closest
to be compared with real­life data. It is evident that all three models manage to
capture a reduction of the spudcan’s vertical reaction force, which mimics the ac­
tual load loss. All of the three cases lead to a similar reduction, with the ϕ = 33o
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
45
==PAGE:56==









 








   	
ϕ
=
35
0
ϕ
=
33
0
ϕ
=
37
0
Figure 5.17: Comparison of spudcan’s vertical reaction forces for the models with
different friction angles.
model noting a reduction of 8.79MN and the ϕ = 37o one of 9.66MN. In the ac­
tual field scenario, the load loss recorded accounted for 438 metric tonnes, which
translates to 4.3MN for the whole spudcan. In order to directly compare it with
the values of Abaqus, only half of the actual load loss should be used, resulting
in 2.15MN, which is practically four times lower than what the numerical analysis
produced. The deviation from the real­life data is significant, and it exceeds the
anticipated numerical inaccuracies due to the different simulation of the soil profile
(homogeneous soil profile instead of a layered one). These results indicate that
using a simplified constitutive model like the one of Mohr­Coulomb is insufficient
to accurately capture all the soil mechanisms that led to the load loss in real life.
Potential reasons for such a large deviation from the actual results could be at­
tributed to many factors. The Mohr­Coulomb Plasticity constitutive model is a
linear, elastic, perfectly plastic model that could lead to an initial overestimation
of the soil stiffness and strength due to the lack of consideration of any gradual
softening or degradation that occurs in real soil under cyclic loading conditions.
Such overestimation could result in a sudden drop in the spudcan’s vertical re­
action force (RF3) as the soil abruptly yields and weakens. With the absence of
cyclic degradation, the initial elastic phase of the Mohr­Coulomb model might re­
sist higher loads before yielding and to a more pronounced stress redistribution
after yielding, leading to a larger drop in the reaction force than the one antic­
ipated in real life. Additionally, such an abrupt transition from a stiff state to a
yielded state can result in a larger total reduction in RF3 because the transition
captures the full extent of the stress redistribution at once
Apart from the constitutive model related reasons, there are other factors that
46
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:57==
contribute to this deviation from the real­life data. The recording of the spudcan’s
reaction force might be the closest metric of this model to the actual leg load
loss obtained from the actual operation but it cannot be directly compared with
the results of Figure 2.1. The reason for this is that, in reality, it is not solely
one spudcan at the location, but there is the whole led­spudcan system with total
stiffness, and there are multiple legs in a jack­up vessel that the load is shared to
all of them. By not modeling a detailed structural element representing the leg of
the spudcan and not accounting for the load­sharing effect to the rest of the vessel
legs, it could be attributed to capturing a more significant vertical reaction force in
the one single modeled spudcan than what occurred in reality.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
47
==PAGE:58==
48
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:59==
6
Conclusion
The results from the Abaqus/Explicit analysis using the coupled Eulerian­Lagrangian
(CEL) method for simulating the penetration of a spudcan and a monopile provide
insightful conclusions regarding the soil­structure interaction in offshore installa­
tions and how a simplified constitutive model like Mohr­Coulomb could capture
it. This study specifically focused on capturing the interactions between a jacked
spudcan and the monopile that was being driven at a distance of 18m.
The results of the spudcan penetration model proved to be in good accordance
with the established industry guidelines of InSafeJIP and ISO. In particular, until
the depth of the maximum bearing capacity area, all three approaches had similar
results, while after that, the InSafeJIP method underestimated the soil bearing ca­
pacity. Both the ISO and the Abaqus results reached a bearing capacity that was
smaller than the actual one by approximately 9%, a deviation that is not alarming
considering the different soil profiles that existed in reality.
Concerning the model with both structures being simulated, apart from their inter­
action during the monopile installation, the effect of different sand strength prop­
erties to account for potential inaccuracies in the soil properties obtained from
the field was also investigated. The reaction forces experienced by the monopile
during its penetration exhibited an expected increase with higher friction angles,
indicating stronger soil resistance. For example, the model with a friction angle of
37o recorded a reaction force of 14.2 MN, which is 11% higher than that with a 33o
friction angle. This trend aligns with the understanding that higher friction angles
correspond to stronger soil characteristics, requiring greater forces for penetra­
tion.
The stress contours for vertical and horizontal stresses around the monopile and
spudcan showed that the monopile’s effect was localized near its vicinity, with
minimal impact on the spudcan located 18m away. The stress distribution patterns
indicated that higher friction angles resulted in deeper stress development, though
the overall influence remained localized around the monopile.
The horizontal and vertical displacements in the spudcan area were minimal, not
exceeding three millimeters, indicating that the monopile driving had a negligi­
ble effect on the spudcan in terms of displacements. The horizontal and vertical
accelerations recorded near the spudcan showed residual effects from previous
steps, with higher friction angles resulting in slightly larger fluctuations and spikes.
The reduction in the spudcan’s vertical reaction force during monopile installation
was captured effectively by the numerical models, though the magnitude of the
reduction was significantly higher than field observations. This discrepancy sug­
gests that while the simplified Mohr­Coulomb model can capture general trends, it
may not fully represent the complex soil behavior and interactions under dynamic
loading conditions.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
49
==PAGE:60==
The study underscores the importance of using accurate constitutive models and
realistic simulation conditions to predict soil behavior in offshore installations bet­
ter. The limitations noted, such as using a simplified constitutive soil model and
homogeneous soil profile, highlight areas for further research, including adopting
more sophisticated soil models and accounting for soil layering effects. Overall,
the CEL method in Abaqus/Explicit provides a robust framework for simulating off­
shore geotechnical interactions of large deformation problems, with the potential
for further refinement to enhance predictive accuracy.
50
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:61==
7
Further Research
The findings of this thesis have illuminated several key aspects of soil­structure in­
teraction during offshore monopile and spudcan installations. However, the com­
plexities inherent in geotechnical engineering and the limitations encountered dur­
ing the simulations highlight the need for continued investigation. Further research
should address the simplifications and assumptions made in this study, particu­
larly regarding soil modeling, simulation accuracy, and real­world applicability. By
exploring advanced constitutive models, like the hypoplastic with the intergranu­
lar extension (see Appendix), which allows the hypoplastic model to accurately
capture the soil behavior at small strains and enhances the model’s capability
to simulate cyclic loading by incorporating the effects of intergranular strain, the
model will be able to account for the effects of cyclic and dynamic loads more
effectively and capture the nonlinear response of soil, including both plastic and
elastic deformations.
The incorporation of the pore water pressure in the analysis, along with the use of
dynamic loading, will help to better resemble the real­life scenario. It will enable
the capture of the main factors that lead to cyclic soil degradation since such a
model will be able to calculate the excess pore pressure and its dissipation (com­
putationally expensive action). This way, more realistic soil mechanisms will be
activated, suggesting a numerical prediction closer to the actual case. Addition­
ally, incorporating these factors will enhance the model’s ability to simulate the
time­dependent behavior of the soil, providing deeper insights into the interac­
tions between the soil and the structure under dynamic conditions.
Lastly, another step towards more accurate and reliable predictive numerical tools
would be the simulation of layered soil profiles; despite all the numerical struggles,
it entails the accurate modeling of a monopile being driven through various soil
layers. The numerical difficulties include handling the discontinuities and varying
material properties at the interfaces between different soil layers, such as sand,
clay, and sand. Additionally, the complexity increases due to the need for more
sophisticated constitutive models to capture the distinct behaviors of each layer
under dynamic loading and the requirement for fine mesh discretization to rep­
resent the stress and strain gradients accurately. These challenges necessitate
substantial computational resources and advanced numerical techniques to en­
sure stable and convergent solutions. Future studies can build upon this work to
develop more for offshore foundation design.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
51
==PAGE:62==
52
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:63==
List of Figures
2.1
Leg load loss curves obtained from the vessel during the monopile
installation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Representative particle size distribution curves for soils of interest
at the investigated location. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.3
CPT curves for the investigated location. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.4
Normalised Robertson & Campanella’s classification chart [4].
. .
8
2.5
Normalised Robertson & Campanella’s classification charts for soil
subunits encountered in Layers 1, 2, and 3 in the location of interest.
9
2.6
Representative oedometer results for Layer 2.
. . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.7
Isotropically Consolidated Drained (CID) triaxial test result for Layer
1 specimen from a different borehole.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
2.8
Unconsolidated Undrained Triaxial Compression for a specimen
representing Layer 2, from a different borehole. . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.1
Propagation of P and S waves through a medium [12]. . . . . . . .
17
4.1
Procedure for using the volume fraction tool for the discrete fields
definition [22]. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.2
Spudcan penetration model mesh. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.3
Spudcan Lagrangian body mesh. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
4.4
Amplitude definition using a smooth step amplitude curve [22].
. .
26
4.5
Monopile installation model including both structures.
. . . . . . .
28
5.1
Vertical stresses contours after spudcan penetration. . . . . . . . .
31
5.2
Results in terms of vertical stresses in contour plotting after a 4.8m
spudcan penetration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.3
Comparison of spudcan’s vertical reaction force from Abaqus with
the industries guidelines and the actual preloading value.
. . . . .
33
5.4
Comparison of spudcan’s vertical reaction force from Abaqus for
different jacking velocities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
5.5
Soil material distribution during the spudcan and monopile penetra­
tion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
5.6
Vertical stress contours in Pa after monopile installation. . . . . . .
37
5.7
Horizontal stress contours after monopile installation.
. . . . . . .
39
5.8
Shear stress contours after monopile installation. . . . . . . . . . .
40
5.9
Numerical check for maintaining quasi­static conditions. . . . . . .
41
5.10 Comparison of monopile’s vertical reaction forces for the models
with linear and smooth step amplitude functions. . . . . . . . . . .
41
5.11 Comparison of monopile’s vertical reaction forces for the models
with different friction angles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
5.12 Comparison of horizontal accelerations that reach the spudcan for
the models with different friction angles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
53
==PAGE:64==
5.13 Comparison of vertical accelerations that reach the spudcan for the
models with different friction angles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.14 Vertical and horizontal accelerations that reach the borders during
the whole analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
5.15 Comparison of horizontal displacements that occur at the spudcan
area for the models with different friction angles.
. . . . . . . . . .
45
5.16 Comparison of vertical displacements that occur at the spudcan
area for the models with different friction angles.
. . . . . . . . . .
45
5.17 Comparison of spudcan’s vertical reaction forces for the models
with different friction angles. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
A.1 Comparison of particle size distributions for Layer 1 soil unit and
Baskarp sand.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
A.2 Comparison of spudcan’s vertical reaction force from Abaqus with
the hypoplastic model with the previous results of the spudcan pen­
etration model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
A.3 Vertical effective stress contours for hypoplastic model.
. . . . . .
65
A.4 Timehistory of the vertical effective stresses in the spudcan vicinity.
66
A.5 Void ratio contours at the end of the analysis. . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
54
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:65==
List of Tables
2.1
Hammer log for monopile installation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Soil units relevant to the WTG foundation design for the investi­
gated location.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Definition of derived CPTu parameters.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
2.4
Summary of soil properties and soil profile for location of interest. .
15
A.1 Hypoplastic parameter set for Baskarp sand.
. . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
55
==PAGE:66==
56
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
[1]
Lizet Ramírez et al. Offshore Wind in Europe: Key Trends and Statistics
2020. Brussels, Belgium, Feb. 2021. URL: https://windeurope.org/intelligence-
platform/product/offshore-wind-in-europe-key-trends-and-statistics-2020/.
[2]
Geotechnical investigation and testing – Identification and classification of
soil, Part 1: Identification and description. International Organization for Stan­
dardization, 2002.
[3]
Tom Lunne, P. Robertson, and John Powell. “Cone Penetration Testing in
Geotechnical Practice”. In: Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering 46
(Jan. 1997). DOI: 10.1007/s11204-010-9072-x.
[4]
P. Robertson. “Soil classification using the cone penetration test”. In: Cana­
dian Geotechnical Journal ­ CAN GEOTECH J 27 (Feb. 1990), pp. 151–
158. DOI: 10.1139/t90-014.
[5]
“Interpretation of CPTs and CPTUs. Part 2: drained penetration of sands”.
eng. In: International Journal of Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences and
Geomechanics Abstracts 25.25 (1988), p. 229. ISSN: 18792073, 01489062.
DOI: 10.1016/0148-9062(88)90235-5.
[6]
Tom Lunne, John JM Powell, and Peter K Robertson. Cone penetration test­
ing in geotechnical practice. CRC Press, 2002.
[7]
Arthur Casagrande. “The determination of the pre­consolidation load and
its practical significance”. In: Proc. 1st Int. Conf. Soil Mech. 1936, pp. 3–60.
[8]
Gholamreza Mesri and TM Hayat. “The coefficient of earth pressure at rest”.
In: Canadian Geotechnical Journal 30.4 (1993), pp. 647–666.
[9]
Ø Blaker et al. “Method dependency for determining maximum and mini­
mum dry unit weights of sands”. In: Frontiers in Offshore Geotechnics III ­
3rd International Symposium on Frontiers in Offshore Geotechnics, ISFOG
2015 (May 2015), pp. 1159–1166. DOI: 10.1201/b18442-174.
[10]
Chris Clayton. “Stiffness at small strain: Research and practice”. In: Géotech­
nique 61 (Jan. 2011). DOI: 10.1680/geot.2011.61.1.5.
[11]
Y.A. Hegazy and Paul Mayne. “Statistical correlations between Vs and CPT
data for different soil types”. In: Proc. Cone Penetration Testing (CPT’95) 2
(Jan. 1995), pp. 173–178.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
57
==PAGE:68==
[12]
Steven Lawrence Kramer. Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering. Prentice
Hall International Series in Civil Engineering and Engineering Mechanics.
Prentice Hall, 1996, pp. XVIII, 653. ISBN: 0133749436, 9780133749434.
[13]
Pubudu Jayawardana et al. “Use of in­filled trenches to screen ground vi­
bration due to impact pile driving: experimental and numerical study”. In:
Heliyon 4.8 (2018), e00726. ISSN: 2405­8440. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.heliyon.2018.e00726. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2405844018306820.
[14]
Sascha Henke and Jürgen Grabe. “Numerical investigation of soil plugging
inside open­ended piles with respect to the installation method”. In: Acta
Geotechnica 3 (2008), pp. 215–223.
[15]
Sascha Henke and Britta Bienen. “Centrifuge tests investigating the influ­
ence of pile cross­section on pile driving resistance of open­ended piles”.
In: International Journal of Physical Modelling in Geotechnics 13.2 (2013),
pp. 50–62.
[16]
Patrick Staubach. “Contributions to the numerical modelling of pile installa­
tion processes and high­cyclic loading of soils”. PhD thesis. May 2022. DOI:
10.13154/294-9088.
[17]
Predicting Pile Driveability: Heather As An Illustration Of The ”Friction Fa­
tigue” Theory. Vol. All Days. SPE Europec featured at EAGE Conference
and Exhibition. Oct. 1978, SPE­8084–MS. DOI: 10.2118/8084-MS. eprint:
https://onepetro.org/SPEEURO/proceedings-pdf/78EUR/All-78EUR/SPE-
8084-MS/2056957/spe-8084-ms.pdf. URL: https://doi.org/10.2118/8084-MS.
[18]
T&R Panel OC­10 Offshore Renewable Energy J­REG JIP. Guideline for
the Site­Specific Assessment (SSA) of Offshore Wind Farm Jack­Ups. Tech.
rep. Technical and Research Bulletin No. 5­7. Prepared under the direction
of the Offshore Committee of the SNAMET&R Program. 99 Canal Center
Plaza, Suite 500, Alexandria, VA 22314 USA: The Society of Naval Archi­
tects and Marine Engineers, Mar. 2024.
[19]
K Rainer Massarsch and Bengt H Fellenius. “Ground vibrations induced by
impact pile driving”. In: (2008).
[20]
K.H. Andersen. “The Third ISSMGE McClelland Lecture: Cyclic soil parame­
ters for offshore foundation design”. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International
Symposium on Frontiers in Offshore Geotechnics (ISFOG 2015). Oslo, Nor­
way, 2015.
[21]
Gang Qiu, Sascha Henke, and Jürgen Grabe. “Application of a Coupled
Eulerian–Lagrangian approach on geomechanical problems involving large
deformations”. In: Computers and Geotechnics 38.1 (2011), pp. 30–39. ISSN:
58
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:69==
0266­352X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compgeo.2010.09.002. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0266352X10001175.
[22]
Dassault Systèmes. Abaqus 2023 Documentation. https://help.3ds.com/
2023/English/DSSIMULIA_Established/SIMULIA_Established_FrontmatterMap/
sim-r-DSDocAbaqus.htm?contextscope=all&redirect_lang=English. 2023.
[23]
Jun Zhao et al. “Simplified numerical prediction of the penetration resistance
profile of spudcan foundation on sediments with interbedded medium­loose
sand layer”. In: Applied Ocean Research 55 (2016), pp. 89–101. ISSN:
0141­1187. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apor.2015.11.010. URL: https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0141118715001522.
[24]
Pan Hu et al. “Predicting the resistance profile of a spudcan penetrating
sand overlying clay”. In: Canadian Geotechnical Journal 51.10 (2014), pp. 1151–
1164.
[25]
Shengsheng Fan, Britta Bienen, and Mark F Randolph. “Effects of monopile
installation on subsequent lateral response in sand. I: Pile installation”. In:
Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering 147.5 (2021),
p. 04021021.
[26]
P. Staubach et al. “Impact of the installation on the long­term cyclic be­
haviour of piles in sand: A numerical study”. In: Soil Dynamics and Earth­
quake Engineering 138 (2020), p. 106223. ISSN: 0267­7261. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.soildyn.2020.106223. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0267726119312837.
[27]
Marie Lücke. “Untersuchungen zur Installation von Offshore­Pfahlgr¨undungen
neben Spudcans”. Studienarbeit. Bauhaus­Universität Weimar, 2023.
[28]
Julian Osborne et al. “Improved Guidelines for the Prediction of Geotechni­
cal Performance of Spudcan Foundations During Installation and Removal
of Jack­up Units”. In: May 2009. DOI: 10.4043/OTC-20291-MS.
[29]
M. J. Cassidy and G. T. Houlsby. “Vertical bearing capacity factors for conical
footings on sand”. In: Géotechnique 52.9 (2002), pp. 687–692. DOI: 10.
1680/geot.2002.52.9.687. eprint: https://doi.org/10.1680/geot.2002.52.9.687.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1680/geot.2002.52.9.687.
[30]
A.S. Vesic. “Bearing capacity of shallow foundations”. In: Foundation Engi­
neering Handbook, Winterkorn and Fang (Jan. 1975).
[31]
Petroleum and natural gas industries — Site­specific assessment of mobile
offshore units —, Part 1: Jack­ups. International Organization for Standard­
ization, 2016.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
59
==PAGE:70==
[32]
C. M. Martin. User guide for ABC – analysis of bearing capacity. Department
of Engineering Science, University of Oxford. 2004.
[33]
Shengsheng Fan. “Effect of the installation process on the subsequent re­
sponse of monopiles under lateral loading in sand”. English. PhD thesis.
The University of Western Australia, 2020. DOI: 10.26182/3dyy-r158.
[34]
Patrick Staubach. “Hydro­mechanically coupled CEL analyses with effec­
tive contact stresses”. In: International Journal for Numerical and Analytical
Methods in Geomechanics 48.8 (2024), pp. 2207–2215. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1002/nag.3725. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/
nag.3725. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/nag.3725.
[35]
Patrick Staubach et al. “Monopile installation in clay and subsequent re­
sponse to millions of lateral load cycles”. In: Computers and Geotechnics
155 (2023), p. 105221. ISSN: 0266­352X. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compgeo.2022.105221. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0266352X22005584.
[36]
P.­A. von Wolffersdorff. “A hypoplastic relation for granular materials with a
predefined limit state surface”. In: Mechanics of Cohesive­frictional Mate­
rials 1.3 (1996), pp. 251–271. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099-
1484(199607)1:3<251::AID-CFM13>3.0.CO;2-3. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/%28SICI%291099-1484%28199607%291%3A3%
3C251%3A%3AAID-CFM13%3E3.0.CO%3B2-3. URL: https://onlinelibrary.
wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/%28SICI%291099-1484%28199607%291%3A3%
3C251%3A%3AAID-CFM13%3E3.0.CO%3B2-3.
[37]
A. Niemunis and I. Herle. “Hypoplastic model for cohesionless soils with
elastic strain range”. In: Mechanics of Cohesive­frictional Materials 2.4 (1997),
pp. 279–299. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1099- 1484(199710)2:
4<279::AID-CFM29>3.0.CO;2-8. eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
pdf/10.1002/%28SICI%291099-1484%28199710%292%3A4%3C279%3A%
3AAID-CFM29%3E3.0.CO%3B2-8. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1002/%28SICI%291099-1484%28199710%292%3A4%3C279%3A%
3AAID-CFM29%3E3.0.CO%3B2-8.
[38]
Torsten Wichtmann. “Explicit Accumulation Model for Non­cohesive Soils
under Cyclic Loading”. PhD thesis. Nov. 2005.
[39]
Andrzej Niemunis. Extended hypoplastic models for soils. Vol. 34. Inst. für
Grundbau und Bodenmechanik Vienna, 2003.
60
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:71==
A
Appendix ­ Hypoplastic Model
This appendix presents the methodology and results obtained using the hypoplas­
tic constitutive model, which were not included in the main body of the thesis due
to their unrealistic nature and the constraints of a tight timeline that did not allow
them to be fixed. The hypoplastic model was selected for its advanced capabili­
ties in simulating the complex behavior of non­cohesive soils under cyclic loading
and for a straight comparison with the Mohr­Coulomb model, as the geometry
and the analysis steps were the same. The subroutines with VUMAT codes for
the implementation of the hypoplasticity were provided by Dr. Staubach, whose
results on similar large deformation problems can be found in [34, 35]. For this
specific project, these codes were provided modified so they excluded the hydro­
mechanical coupling due to the increased complexity of such models but also in
an effort to be directly comparable with the results of the Mohr­Coulomb models
presented in the main body of the thesis. The challenges that were encountered
highlight the need for further refinement and development of this model for the
current project. Documenting these findings serves as a foundation for future re­
search aimed at improving the model and serves as a first step toward a more
accurate model that hopefully will be able to come closer to the actual results
obtained from the field.
A.1
Hypoplastic Model with Intergranular Strain
Extension ­ Basic Principles
The behavior of granular materials, such as soils, is complex due to their grain
structure, which requires sophisticated numerical formulations to approximate their
mechanical properties. The hypoplastic model is a powerful constitutive model
used to simulate this behavior under various loading conditions, particularly for
non­cohesive soils. The basic hypoplastic model, initially formulated by von Wolf­
fersdorff [36], and its extension to include intergranular strain, developed by Niemu­
nis and Herle [37], provide a comprehensive framework for capturing the non­
linear and path­dependent behavior of soils under cyclic loading.
The basic hypoplastic model characterizes the stress­strain relationship using a
combination of linear and non­linear stiffness tensors. The general form of the
model is:
˙T = L(T, e) : D + N(T, e)∥D∥
(A.1)
where:
• ˙T is the Jaumann stress state
• D is the strain rate
• L is the fourth­order linear stiffness tensor
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
61
==PAGE:72==
• N is the second­order non­linear stiffness tensor
• e is the void ratio
The model considers the influence of pressure (barotropy) and density (pyknotropy)
on soil stiffness, and it requires several material constants that are typically de­
termined from laboratory tests. For the basic hypoplastic model, the following soil
parameters are required:
• Critical friction angle ϕc
• Granular hardness hs
• Limiting void ratios (ei0, ec0, ed0)
• Exponents related to pressure dependence and void ratios (n, α, β)
where the constant α controls the influence of the density on the peak friction an­
gle of the soil and is derived from triaxial compression tests performed on initially
dense samples. Constant β is derived from oedometric tests on specimens of dif­
ferent initial densities [38]. These constants influence the stress­strain response
and volumetric changes in the soil.
Niemunis identified that the original hypoplastic model exhibited too low shear
stiffness near the p­axis, leading to an unrealistic rapid build­up of pore water
pressure during cyclic loading. A modification introducing a new stiffness tensor
was proposed to increase the shear stiffness, enhancing numerical stability and
accuracy under cyclic loading. [39]
The hypoplastic model was extended to include intergranular strain, a concept in­
troduced by Niemunis and Herle, to capture cyclic behavior better and reduce the
unrealistic accumulation of strains (ratcheting). The intergranular strain variable
h memorizes the previous strain path and adjusts material stiffness accordingly,
with the state variable ρ measuring the degree of mobilization of the intergranular
strain [38].
This extension allows for a more accurate representation of hysteresis and secant
stiffness during cyclic loading, which is crucial for predicting settlements and other
cyclic loading effects. The inclusion of intergranular strain introduces additional
conditions and parameters:
• Maximum value of intergranular strain R
• Increase factors of stiffness mR and mT
• Exponents βr and χ
This extension enhances the model’s ability to accurately simulate cyclic loading
effects, making it a robust tool for geotechnical applications, particularly in offshore
engineering where non­linear stress paths and excess pore water pressures are
common.
All these parameters, for the hypoplastic model to be defined, require exten­
sive laboratory testing, as mentioned above, which was not available in the input
geotechnical parameters used in this thesis. Therefore, by comparing the PSD
62
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:73==
curve of Layer 1 with an existing library of soils with hypoplastic parameter sets
provided by Dr. Staubach, the following parameters of Table A.1 were used of the
Baskarp Sand as the two PSD curves exhibited similar particle size distribution
curves, as Figure A.1 illustrates.
Table A.1: Hypoplastic parameter set for Baskarp sand.

 

 

 













	





Figure A.1: Comparison of particle size distributions for Layer 1 soil unit and
Baskarp sand.
A.2
Results of Hypoplastic Model
The model, whose results are presented in this section, had the same geom­
etry and number of steps, so it could be compared with the Mohr­Coulomb one.
Apart from the different constitutive models, also each step was shorter in duration
because the use of more complex constitutive models and VUMAT subroutines
led to significantly longer computational times. More complex and non­linear soil
behaviors, a larger set of material parameters that require evaluation at each iter­
ation step, and more challenging convergence problems are some of the factors
that contribute to making the use of hypoplasticity more computationally demand­
ing than the Abaqus in­built Mohr­Coulomb model. Step 1 had a total duration
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
63
==PAGE:74==
of 1sec, as the geostatic stress state was introduced to the model as initial con­
ditions, and in the first step, g was introduced. Thanks to the initial conditions,
the model could reach equilibrium much faster, so the total duration was reduced
from 60sec to 1sec. In the second step, the spudcan driving was simulated again
in 1sec as its velocity was increased to 1.3m/s, and the results were compared
with the ones from Figure 5.3 and are plotted in Figure A.2. It is evident that the
”Abaqus HPP” line shows more fluctuations, but it was expected with a speed 13
times higher. In general, it is in good accordance with the previous results, the in­
dustry’s guidelines, and the actual preloading value, so no further calibration was
made.







&" $(* 








$( !

"
	%)'
	%)' 
	()  $& #
Figure A.2: Comparison of spudcan’s vertical reaction force from Abaqus with the
hypoplastic model with the previous results of the spudcan penetration model.
Step 3 was also expedited, with the monopile being jacked with a 1m/sec veloc­
ity for a total step duration of 2 seconds. Similar and even larger velocities have
been used in literature for this type of problem with the use of hypoplastic mod­
els, as in [25] for example. Figure A.3 showcases the vertical effective stresses
contours in kPa at the end of step 2 (Figure A.3a) and at the end of the analysis
(Figure A.3b). It is evident that these results do not provide logical, numerical
predictions as the stress state below the spudcan during the monopile installation
reduces dramatically. It should be noted that also in this model, the depth of the
soil domain proved to be insufficient as the area of influence from the monopile is
larger and largely interacts with the bottom border of the model, even though it is
not depicted in this zoomed figure.
Figure A.4 makes this stress reduction even more obvious as it provides a time
history of the stresses below the spudcan at a depth of 1.4m. Abruptly, from the
instant that step 3 commences, the vertical stresses are reduced significantly.
64
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:75==
−3.275e+02
−3.003e+02
−2.730e+02
−2.457e+02
−2.184e+02
−1.911e+02
−1.638e+02
−1.365e+02
−1.092e+02
−8.189e+01
−5.459e+01
−2.730e+01
+0.000e+00
−1.488e+04
(a) End of Step 2.
−3.275e+02
−3.003e+02
−2.730e+02
−2.457e+02
−2.184e+02
−1.911e+02
−1.638e+02
−1.365e+02
−1.092e+02
−8.189e+01
−5.459e+01
−2.730e+01
+0.000e+00
−1.742e+04
+1.264e−01
(b) End of Step 3.
Figure A.3: Vertical effective stress contours for hypoplastic model.
This type of behavior rendered the results of the hypoplastic unrealistic, and they
are presented in this Appendix as a more complete presentation of all the works
that were carried out in the framework of this thesis, as it occupied a considerable
amount of time to calibrate these models and obtain these results.
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
65
==PAGE:76==










 







   
	 
	 
	 
Figure A.4: Timehistory of the vertical effective stresses in the spudcan vicinity.
Lastly, the capability of the hypoplastic model to capture and calculate the changes
in the void ratio during the analysis is exhibited in Figure A.5, where it can be seen
that each structure affects a small area in their vicinity. However, these results
should not be trusted as the particular model has been demonstrated to produce
unrealistic results.
+5.650e−01
+5.901e−01
+6.152e−01
+6.402e−01
+6.653e−01
+6.904e−01
+7.155e−01
+7.406e−01
+7.657e−01
+7.907e−01
+8.158e−01
+8.409e−01
+8.660e−01
Figure A.5: Void ratio contours at the end of the analysis.
66
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
==PAGE:77==
Effect of Offshore Monopile Driving on the Adjacent Spudcan Penetration
67
==PAGE:78==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Brovej, Building 119
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://sustain.dtu.dk/
