==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Physics-Informed Neural Networks 
for Synchronous Machine Models
Author: 
Ioannis Karampinis
DTU Wind-M-0785
June 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0785
June 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors:
Spyros Chatzivasileiadis
Ignasi Ventura Nadalm
Rahul Nellikkath 
DTU Wind & Energy Systems
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark 
Department of Wind and Energy Systems 
Frederiksborgvej 399
4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.vindenergi.dtu.dk
Author: 
Ioannis Karampinis
Title:
Physics-Informed Neural Networks for 
Synchronous Machine Models
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This thesis explores the application of Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs)
in modelling and simulating the transient behavior of synchronous machines. PINNs
have demonstrated the ability to approximate the behavior of dynamical systems,
whose dynamics are expressed by ordinary differential equations (ODEs). The in-
creasing demand for faster and more eﬀicient mechanisms to analyze and control the
dynamic behavior of power system components motivates the deployment of PINNs.
PINNs are at least 10 times faster than traditional numerical methods for a single ini-
tial state and significantly faster when multiple initial conditions are examined. This
work is divided in two interconnected pipelines, that led to the creation of the re-
spective computational frameworks, the ODE and the PINN framework. Firstly, the
behavior of different complexities of synchronous machine is simulated with conven-
tional numerical methods. The ODE framework is responsible for generating the ODE
solutions and the corresponding equations with substituted parameters. Secondly, the
PINN framework utilizes both the generated dataset and the corresponding equations
during the training phase. The integration of data-driven and physics-informed losses
in the training process is a key aspect of this study, as it improves the performance
of the developed neural networks. To optimize and generalize the training process,
techniques such as using soft-adapted weights for the training losses have been em-
ployed.
The PINN’s performance is assessed through a series of experiments and
evaluations. The results obtained show that PINNs are able to simulate the behavior
of various modellings of synchronous machines with an accuracy of around 2.3e-3.
In conclusion, PINNs can significantly contribute to the simulation and analysis of
synchronous machines by providing accurate and eﬀicient models. Their notable scal-
ability and robustness in exploring the state space further enhance their applicability.
The limitations of PINNs are also discussed, along with potential future research
directions to further improve their performance and broaden their application scope.
==PAGE:4==
Preface
The present MSc thesis is a partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree Mas-
ter of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng., at Technical University of Denmark.
The project accounts for 30 ECTS and is conducted between 22.01.2024 and 22.06.2024.
The exact topic along with the objectives of the project are defined in collaboration
between the author and the supervisors.
Kongens Lyngby, June 22, 2024
Ioannis Karampinis (s222559)
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
First and foremost, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to all those who
helped me develop the present master’s thesis.
I also would like to thank my supervisors Spyros Chatzivasileiadis, Ignasi Ventura
Nadal and Rahul Nellikkath for giving me this great opportunity and supporting me
during this very interesting and challenging topic. Special thanks to Ignasi Ventura
Nadal and Rahul Nellikkath for their continuous support, guidance, and feedback
throughout this thesis.
The support and motivation I received from my family and friends during this
two-year journey were invaluable.
They helped me overcome any challenges that
arose and succeed. Finally, special thanks to A., who decided to join me on this
unforgettable journey and made it beautiful.
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Abstract
i
Preface
ii
Acknowledgements
iii
Contents
iv
List of Figures
vi
List of Tables
vii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Background and Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Objective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Thesis structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Background
4
2.1
Transient Stability of Synchronous Machines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.1
Power System Transient Stability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.2
Synchronous Machine Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.1.3
Formulation and solution of Ordinary Differential Equations . .
9
2.1.4
Ordinary Differential Equation Solvers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.1.5
Solving Initial Value Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.1.6
Dataset Generation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
2.2
Physics Informed Neural Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.1
Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
2.2.2
Training of Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
2.2.3
Physics Inform Neural Networks (PINNs) . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.2.4
Dataset and Ordinary Differential Equations
. . . . . . . . . .
19
3
Methodology
21
3.1
Creating the dataset and the equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.1.1
Synchronous Machine Modelling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.1.2
Chosen Initial State
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
==PAGE:7==
Contents
v
3.1.3
Set of System Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.1.4
Synchronous machine parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.1.5
Set of Equations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.6
The Ordinary Differential Equations Solver . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.1.7
The roadmap to the framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.2
Developing the Physics-Informed Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.2.1
Dataset, collocation points and Ordinary Differential Equations
27
3.2.2
Dataset tranformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2.3
Neural network architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
An overview of the whole pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.4
The training process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
4
Results
36
4.1
Ordinary Differential Equation Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
4.2
The interactive ODE solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.3
Utilizing the ODE framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.4
Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . .
44
4.4.1
Optimizing the training process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.4.1.1
Experimentation in larger state space . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4.1.2
An overview of the performance for all the developed
synchronous machine’s modellings . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.4.1.3
Performance Assessment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
5
Conclusion
58
6
Future Work
59
Bibliography
60
==PAGE:8==
List of Figures
3.1
The pipeline for the solution of the ODEs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3.2
An overview of the total pipeline . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
3.3
The information flow over a single training step . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
4.1
The solution from the ODE solver for a 2-axis synchronous machine with
AVR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
4.2
The solution from the ODE solver for a 2-axis synchronous machine with
AVR and Governor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
4.3
The solutions from the ODE solver for a 2-axis synchronous machine for
a number of different initial conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
4.4
The derivatives of the above solutions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
4.5
The solutions for machine number 6 for all the available formulations under
the same initial conditions of the synchronous machine dynamics obtained
from the ODE solver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
4.6
The solutions for machine number 3 for all the available formulations under
the same initial conditions of the synchronous machine dynamics obtained
from the ODE solver.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
4.7
The solutions from the single trajectory trained PINN for a classic syn-
chronous machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
4.8
Comparison between the PINN prediction (blue line) and the ground truth
data (orange line) for a test trajectory.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.9
MAE test score for each variable of the synchronous machine. Orange
line: Mean Score of Adjusted FCNN variation, Green line: Mean Score
of FCNN variation. The shaded regions represent the standard deviation
of the scores, indicating the variability around the mean score for each
variation.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
==PAGE:9==
List of Tables
2.1
Overview of the Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Overview of AVR and governor Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
The parameters for different synchronous machines. The first three ma-
chine parameters were obtained from [5] p.167 and [29]. The last 4 machine
parameters were obtained from [30].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.2
The AVR parameters from from [5] p.167
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.3
The Governor parameters from [5] p.86
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Neural Network hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.5
Dynamic hyperparameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
4.1
Initial values used in 4.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
4.2
Second set of Parameters for Initial Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.3
Variations of implemented Neural Networks, where Data and Dt refer
to data-driven and physics-driven loss, respectively, using the available
ground truth data, while IC and Pinn refer to the same concepts but
derived from collocation points. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4.4
Average MAE & MSE test scores for various neural network training loss-
based variations using the classical FCNN to approximate the behavior of
a 2-axis synchronous machine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.5
Average MAE & MSE test scores of the synchronous machines variables
for various neural network training loss-based variations. . . . . . . . . . .
47
4.6
Average MAE & MSE test score for PINN with different Neural Net-
work types of architecture that approximate the behavior of a 2-axis syn-
chronous machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.7
Initial weights of the losses
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.8
Average MAE & MSE test scores for a PINN with the different methods
to update the weights of the losses, that approximate the behavior of a
2-axis synchronous machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.9
Average MAE & MSE test scores for different PINN variants that approx-
imate the behavior of a 2-axis synchronous machine in the state space
4.2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
4.10 Average MAE & MSE test scores for different PINN variants that approx-
imate the behavior of the various synchronous machine modellings. . . . .
56
==PAGE:10==
List of Tables
viii
4.11 Average MAE & MSE test scores for different PINN variants that approx-
imate the behavior of the various synchronous machine modellings. . . . .
56
==PAGE:11==
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1
Background and Motivation
In the modern power systems, the increasing penetration of renewable energy sources
leads to both opportunities and challenges.
On the one hand, their potential is
tremendous, offering cleaner and more sustainable energy serving towards the scope
of net zero emissions. On the other hand, this continuous integration of renewable
energy sources introduces dangers for the stability and the reliability of the power
systems [1].
For these reasons, the necessity of integrating faster and more eﬀicient mechanisms
to analyze and control the dynamic behavior of power systems is more than essential
[2]. Consequently, there is a growing demand for simulation tools that can accurately
model power system transients. These tools would facilitate comprehensive stability
analyses and ensure system reliability. They simulate the system’s response accord-
ing to the differential equations that express its dynamics [3]. [4] and [5] provide a
good overview of well established modeling techniques. However, analytical solutions
to these models are often intractable [6]. Therefore, numerical methods that approx-
imate the dynamic behavior are employed [7]. These methods offer high accuracy,
but at the cost of computational time and resources.
At the same time, the capabilities of machine learning and especially Neural Net-
works(NNs) have contributed to tackling highly complex tasks, providing accurate
and faster solutions. In general, such solutions require large amounts of data. [8]
reviews several deep learning solutions that concern power system. However, such
solutions are characterized by their high dependence on data. The concept of using
NNs to approximate differential equations was first introduced by [9], and developed
recently by [10], creating a new field of hybrid data and physics agnostic solutions,
that of Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs). They leverage existing knowl-
edge of physical laws governing systems, bridging the gap between data-driven and
physics-based modeling. The concept of PINNs have been already investigated and
explored in power systems, where an recent review [11] presents relevant developed
solutions [12], [13], [14], [15] for a number of different applications, unveiling their
potential for further integration into the existing simulation toolset.
There is a research gap in the application of PINNs in power systems components,
such as the synchronous machines. Synchronous machines, which play a critical role
in maintaining system stability and reliability, pose unique challenges due to their
==PAGE:12==
1.2 Objective
2
complex dynamic behavior. The majority of the aforementioned studies examine the
performance of PINNs using only the swing equation, neglecting additional dynamic
aspects.
By incorporating the principles of PINNs, it is possible to develop more eﬀicient
and accurate models for synchronous machine dynamics.
This research aims to explore and advance the application of PINNs in modeling and
simulating the transient behavior of synchronous machines, thereby contributing to
the overall enhancement of power system stability and performance. As a benchmark,
numerical methods will be used, as an alternative physics agnostic approach.
1.2
Objective
This thesis investigates the PINN’s potential for accurately and eﬀiciently approx-
imating the dynamic behavior of synchronous machines under transient conditions.
The core objective is to determine if PINNs can outperform conventional numerical
methods in terms of computational speed, while also providing accurate and reliable
results.
The research will be conducted in a step-by-step manner, mirroring the project’s
development process:
• Solid Foundation: We begin by establishing a thorough understanding of
synchronous machine fundamentals.
Existing mathematical models, ranging
from simple to complex formulations, will be critically examined.
• Simulating with Traditional Methods: These existing models will be simu-
lated under transient conditions using established numerical methods for solving
the governing ODEs associated with initial value problems.
• PINNs Fundamentals and Implementation: The theoretical background
of PINNs will be followed by their implementation to different modellings of the
synchronous machines.
• Performance Enhancement: Frameworks, pipelines, and optimization tech-
niques will be employed to enhance the performance and eﬀiciency of PINNs.
• Computational Framework Development: Two computational frameworks
will be developed: one for generating solutions with an ODE solver and creating
the respective ODEs, and the other for training PINNs with various optimiza-
tion methods.
• Evaluation and Future Directions: Throughout the development process,
experiments and evaluations will be conducted to assess the performance of
PINNs. The potential for incorporating more complex synchronous machine
==PAGE:13==
1.3 Thesis structure
3
modellings and other power system components will be explored.
Addition-
ally, the establishment of easily modifiable frameworks for future research and
industrial applications will be pursued.
• Understanding PINNs Limitations: Finally, the project aims to compre-
hensively understand and explain the limitations of PINNs in terms of accuracy
and computational eﬀiciency for a given setting. This will involve identifying
limitations, proposing solutions, and ultimately improving their overall perfor-
mance.
1.3
Thesis structure
The thesis structure is as follows:
• Chapter 2: The theoretical background of the thesis is covered
• Chapter 3: The methodology describes the approach and the workflow followed
• Chapter 4: The experimental results and the corresponding analysis are pre-
sented
• Chapter 5: The conclusion summarizes the developed work and discusses the
key findings from the obtained results and the corresponding analysis
• Chapter 6: Potential future work is outlined
==PAGE:14==
CHAPTER 2
Background
The purpose of this chapter is to explain the concepts required to develop the neces-
sary understanding of the theory used in this project. The implemented mathematical
models of the synchronous machine are introduced in Section 2.1. Then, in Section
2.2, an extensive explanation of Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs), their
components, and some modern techniques that address their associated problems is
presented.
2.1
Transient Stability of Synchronous Machines
2.1.1
Power System Transient Stability
Power system stability refers to the ability of the system to maintain a balanced
and steady state, even if a disturbance occurs. Transient stability specifically focuses
on the system’s response to dynamics of the speed control systems, line outages, or
sudden load changes. It concerns mainly the system’s response over a short period,
typically from a few milliseconds to several seconds after the disturbance. Transient
stability involves the dynamics of synchronous machines, network equations, and
control systems, which are expressed through differential equations [16].
2.1.2
Synchronous Machine Modelling
The majority of work on synchronous machines is based on reduced-order modeling
[17]. This approach takes advantage of physical and practical intuition gained through
experiments. Due to this, maintaining consistency in terms of conventions and nota-
tion is mandatory. This study will follow the conventions and notation established in
[5]. In addition, when data are obtained from external sources, verifying the meaning
of symbols is crucial. This ensures that the parameters and values are consistently
converted into the data used for modeling. The Park’s transformation along with the
per-unit system are widely used tools in synchronous machine modeling.
The physics laws that govern the Synchronous Machine are the fundamental Kirch-
hoff’s, Faraday’s and Newton’s laws.
These laws form the basis for the detailed
Three-Damper-Winding Model. However, significant modeling challenges arise due
to complexity and lack of real data, necessitating simplifications and assumptions in
==PAGE:15==
2.1 Transient Stability of Synchronous Machines
5
the model equations. During this study, the infinite bus concept is used, which sim-
plifies the study of the machine’s behavior by providing a constant reference point. It
represents an ideal power system with constant voltage and frequency. Power system
stability studies extensively employ the infinite bus concept, as it enables the analysis
of the influence of machine parameters and control mechanisms in isolation. Conse-
quently, the behavior of the machine can be analyzed under transient conditions.
Two-axis generator model
This study primarily utilizes reduced-order models for the analysis of synchronous
machines.
These models capture the essential dynamic behavior of the machines
while maintaining computational eﬀiciency. The foundation for these reduced-order
models is the fundamental two-axis generator model, which offers fertile ground for
investigating the behavior of synchronous machines under transient conditions. The
two-axis model is implemented in two different variations: Following the formulation
of [5] but replacing ω −ΩB with ω:
dδ
dt = ω
(2.1)
dω
dt = ΩB
2H
(
PM −E′
dId −E′
qIq −
(
X′
q −X′
d
)
IdIq −Dω
)
(2.2)
dE′
d
dt
=
1
T ′qo
(
−E′
d +
(
Xq −X′
q
)
Iq
)
(2.3)
dE′
q
dt
=
1
T ′
do
(
−E′
q −(Xd −X′
d) Id + Efd
)
(2.4)
Where, Equation 2.1 expresses the rate of change of rotor angle(s), Equation 2.2
the rate of change of rotor speed(s) and Equation 2.3, Equation 2.4 the transient field
voltage dynamics. The table 2.1 provides an overview with all the used parameters:
==PAGE:16==
2.1 Transient Stability of Synchronous Machines
6
Variable
Meaning
H
shaft inertia constant(s)
Pm
mechanical torque applied to the shaft(pu)
D
damping coeﬀicient
ΩB
rated frequency of the power grid(rad/s)
T
′
d
time constant of d-axis(s)
T .
q
′
time constant of q-axis(s)
X
′
d
transient reactance of d-axis(pu)
X
′
q
transient reactance of q-axis(pu)
Xd
reactance of d-axis(pu)
Xq
reactance of q-axis(pu)
Efd
scaled field voltage(pu)
Rs
stator resistance(pu)
Rs
exciter resistance(pu)
Vs
stator voltage magnitude(pu)
θvs
stator voltage angle(pu)
Table 2.1: Overview of the Parameters
The currents are calculated through the following equations:
0 = (Rs + Re)Id −(Xq + Xe)Iq + Vs sin(δ −θvs)
(2.5)
0 = (Rs + Re)Iq + (X′
d + Xe)Id + Vs cos(δ −θvs)
(2.6)
The voltage Vt is calculated as following:
Vd = ReId −XepIq + Vssin(δ −θvs)
(2.7)
Vq = ReIq −XepId + Vscos(δ −θvs)
(2.8)
Vt =
√
V 2
d + V 2
q
(2.9)
The classic synchronous machine
Initially, the fundamental classic synchronous machine , which is a simplification of
the model above, is examined.
It occurs by setting the reactance X
′
q = X
′
d and
TCH = T
′
qo = T
′
do = ∞, leading to constant voltages of E
′
dandE
′
q. The final form of
the classic synchronous machine equations is:
dδ
dt = ω
(2.10)
dω
dt = ΩB
2H (PM −E′
dId −E′
qIq −
(
X′
q −X′
d
)
IdIq −Dω)
(2.11)
==PAGE:17==
2.1 Transient Stability of Synchronous Machines
7
dE′
d
dt
= 0
(2.12)
dE′
q
dt
= 0
(2.13)
Automatic voltage regulator and governor
The two-axis generator model serves as a foundation and can be further extended to
incorporate more detailed dynamic models. These advanced models can include the
effects of control systems like automatic voltage regulators (AVRs) and governors.
The AVR is responsible for maintaining a stable output voltage of the generator,
helping to regulate the system voltage. The AVR limit can be multivalued, allowing
a higher limit during transients. This capability helps to analyze and understand the
transient behavior of the power system, shaping the regulatory response to achieve
desirable dynamic performance. Its model introduces additional state variables and
equations that describe the dynamics of the voltage control system. The first two
ODEs concern the dynamics of the exciter and the third the dynamic of the AVR.
TE
dEfd
dt
= −(KE + SE (Efd)) Efd + VR
(2.14)
TF
dRf
dt
= −Rf + KF
TF
Efd
(2.15)
TA
dVR
dt
= −VR + KARf −KAKF
TF
Efd + KA (Vref −Vt)
(2.16)
with the limit constraint
V min
R
≤VR ≤V max
R
(2.17)
The governor is a speed control system that regulates the prime mover’s (e.g., tur-
bine) power output to maintain the desired system frequency. Similarly to the AVR,
it introduces additional state variables and equations related to the dynamics of the
speed control system. The first ODE is related to turbine and governor dynamics
and the last to the speed governor dynamics
TCH
dPM
dt
= −PM + PSV
(2.18)
PSV
dPSV
dt
= −PSV + PC −
1
RD
( ω
ΩB
)
(2.19)
with the limit constraint
0 ≤PSV ≤P max
SV
(2.20)
The table 2.2 provides the overview of the AVR and governor parameters:
==PAGE:18==
2.1 Transient Stability of Synchronous Machines
8
Variable
Meaning
KA
AVR gain(pu)
TA
AVR time constant(s)
KE
AVR excitation system gain(pu)
TE
AVR excitation system time constant(s)
KF
AVR feedback gain(pu)
TF
AVR feedback time constant(s)
Vref
Reference voltage(pu)
Pc
Governor control signal(pu)
Rd
Governor droop coeﬀicient(pu)
Tch
Governor time constant(s)
Tsv
Governor servo time constant(s)
Table 2.2: Overview of AVR and governor Parameters
The respective formulation for 2-axis synchronous machine with AVR and Gover-
nor found in [4] is provided below. It occurs from the replacement ω′ = ω∗ΩB, where
ω′ is ω, in [5] formulation. The other reduced-order models can be obtained directly
from that formulation.
dδ
dt = ω · ΩB
(2.21)
dω
dt =
1
2H
(
PM −E′
dId −E′
qIq −
(
X′
q −X′
d
)
IdIq −D · ω · ΩB
)
(2.22)
dE′
d
dt
=
1
T ′qo
(
−E′
d +
(
Xq −X′
q
)
Iq
)
(2.23)
dE′
q
dt
=
1
T ′
do
(
−E′
q −(Xd −X′
d) Id + Efd
)
(2.24)
TE
dEfd
dt
= −(KE + SE (Efd)) Efd + VR
(2.25)
TF
dRf
dt
= −Rf + KF
TF
Efd
(2.26)
TA
dVR
dt
= −VR + KARf −KAKF
TF
Efd + KA (Vref −Vt)
(2.27)
TCH
dPM
dt
= −PM + PSV
(2.28)
PSV
dPSV
dt
= −PSV + PC −
1
RD
· ω
(2.29)
The equations for the calculation of the currents and the voltages remain the same
as before.
==PAGE:19==
2.1 Transient Stability of Synchronous Machines
9
2.1.3
Formulation and solution of Ordinary Differential Equations
The mathematical model of a synchronous machine is formulated using a set of ODEs.
These equations describe the rate of change of the machine’s state variables (repre-
sented by the vector χ ∈ℜn of dimension n) with respect to time t ∈ℜ. The function
f : ℜn →ℜn defines the right-hand side of the ODEs, where each state variable’s rate
of change depends only on the current values of all the state variables. When time
t is the independent variable, the system is classified as a dynamical system. The
dynamic system has the following form:
∂x
∂t = f(t, x, u)
(2.30)
0 = g(t, x, u),
(2.31)
where t is the time, x(t) is the dynamic state of the system, and u the system
and the control parameters. Solving ODEs involves finding a function y(x,t) that
satisfies the given equation and any initial or boundary conditions. Depending on
the complexity of the equation, analytical or numerical methods may be employed to
solve ODEs.
Given a set of initial conditions x0(initial state), the system described by the ODEs
will have a unique solution, x(t), over a specific time interval, T. This solution is called
a trajectory. This form of problem is usually impossible to be solved analytically, to
find exact solution. For this reason numerical methods are usually deployed, that
aim to approximate the solution. They accomplish that through the restriction of
the funciontal form of x to a certain approximation ˆx.
The central idea behind
them is the approximation of a function by a series of other (“simpler”) functions. It
approximates a function f(x) on the interval [a, b] by an infinite series of polynomials.
2.1.4
Ordinary Differential Equation Solvers
As described previously, the mathematical model of a synchronous machine is formu-
lated using a set of ODEs. Solving these ODEs numerically is crucial to analyze the
machine’s behavior. ODE solvers achieve this by approximating the solution trajec-
tory over a specified time interval (T) using a series of small time steps. This iterative
process can be computationally expensive, especially for complex systems with many
state variables or stiff equations. To address this challenge, a wide variety of numer-
ical methods have been developed for solving ODEs. They are classified based on
their accuracy requirements, the system’s equations stiffness and the computational
cost [18], [6]. Higher-order methods like Rugne Kutta 4-5 offer better accuracy but
come with a computational cost, while in same cases where the solutions may change
rapidly in certain regions, specialized solvers need to deployed to capture these dy-
namics effectively.
Runge-Kutta (RK) Schemes This is widely used class of single-step explicit
numerical methods for solving ODEs. RK schemes advance the solution over a step
==PAGE:20==
2.1 Transient Stability of Synchronous Machines
10
size h by combining multiple evaluations of the derivative function f(t, x, u) within
each step.
2.1.5
Solving Initial Value Problem
An Initial Value Problem refers to finding a solution to a differential equation subject
to given initial conditions.
These initial conditions typically specify the value(s)
of the dependent variable(s) at a particular point (or points) in the domain of the
independent variable [6], [19]. In our case, these are time points. Setting the initial
conditions at time t0 = 0, it is desired to solve the differential equations in a specific
time horizon (T).
2.1.6
Dataset Generation
In power systems research, simulations are frequently utilized to construct databases
because both historical data are largely inaccessible and the available historical data
are insuﬀicient to train machine learning models [20], as they often lack a suﬀicient
representation of the boundaries of the system or insecure regions [45]. To address this
lack of data, simulations are necessary. Simulations incorporate established physical
models, integrating existing understanding of the system’s behavior into the simu-
lation framework.
In addition, such simulations can generate synthetic data that
represent a wider range of operating conditions and system disturbances compared to
what might be available from historical records. This approach helps to gain valuable
insights into system behavior in various scenarios.
Data points sampling
During the generation of initial conditions, an important operation is the selection
of the sampling technique [21]. Having a set of lower and upper bounds, and the
number of points to be considered for this variable, one of the following sampling
methods will return the sampled input data.
• Linear sampling is a sampling method that divides the input space into a
given number of equally spaced points.
• Random sampling is a sampling technique in which each point in the input
space is selected randomly, using a random number generator. Each point is
considered to have an equal probability of being chosen and this method does
not impose any structure on the sample distribution.
• Latin Hypercube Sampling is a stratified sampling technique that ensures
that all portions of the input space were sampled. By dividing the range of
each parameter into equally probable intervals and ensuring that each interval
is sampled exactly once, LHS allows for comprehensive coverage of the input
space with fewer samples than simple random sampling.
==PAGE:21==
2.2 Physics Informed Neural Networks
11
Limitations of the Ordinary Differential Equation Solvers
The classic ODE solver solutions using numerical methods, although precise, ex-
hibit computational ineﬀiciencies, particularly when the order of the models increases.
These solvers achieve accurate solutions but at the cost of significant computational
time and resources, making them impractical for real-time applications or large-
scale simulations. To address these limitations, Physics-Informed Neural Networks
(PINNs) are deployed, enabling faster computation while maintaining the desired
level of accuracy.
2.2
Physics Informed Neural Networks
Physics Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) gained a lot of interest by the work of
[10], after the initial study of [9]. PINNs are a new and potentially powerful tool
for modeling dynamical equations, and thanks to their remarkable performance, they
have gained a lot of attention over the last years. Quite a lot of research was conducted
from engineering teams with different problems, either trying to apply PINNs in new
fields or trying to optimize them. The whole model is based on the idea of exploiting
Neural Networks(NNs) and the knowledge of physics governing equations. NNs are
known for their widespread success based on two main factors: their power and
usability [22]. Alongside with their automatic derivative, allow for exploitation of
the physics governing equations, by their integration into the training process of the
network.
2.2.1
Neural Network
Neural networks (NNs) have been developed in an attempt to simulate the function of
biological NNs in computational units. Each NN consists of a number of very simple
processors, but with complex and multiple interconnections between them, analogous
to neurons.
Specifically, each NN is divided into three parts with corresponding
layers: the input layer, the output layer, and the hidden layer(s) in between, which
may contain one or more layers. Each layer consists of a finite number of neurons.
Architecture of Neural Network
The architecture of a NN is determined by the arrangement and connectivity of its
layers, the number of neurons within each layer, and the connections between them.
• Fully Connected Neural Network (FCNN)
One of the fundamental NN architectures is that of the Fully Connected NN. It
is divided into layers. The input layer, which receives the input data, the hidden
layers that process the input from the input layer or the previous hidden layer,
and the output layer that produces the final output of the network. The nodes
==PAGE:22==
2.2 Physics Informed Neural Networks
12
of each layer are connected to all the nodes of the previous and next layers, and
each connection is associated with a weight.
• Residual Network (ResNet)
It introduces residual blocks, enabling the network to learn residual mappings in-
stead of directly learning the underlying mapping. Each residual block consists
of several layers followed by skip connections, also known as shortcut connec-
tions, which allow the input to be directly added to the output of the block,
alongside more complex transformations. Additionally, FCNN can suffer from
vanishing or exploding gradients, making it diﬀicult to train, an issue that these
shortcuts partially address.
Activation functions
Between the output of each neuron and the next layer, a non-linear function takes
place, the activation function. In that way, the non-linear behavior of the biological
NNs is mimicked.
During this project, two activation functions have been imple-
mented:
The sigmoid function has an input space ranging from [−∞, ∞] and an output space
of [0,1]:
σ(x) =
1
1 + e−x
(2.32)
The tanh function has the same input space as the sigmoid but its output space
ranges from [-1,1]:
tanh(x) = ex −e−x
ex + e−x
(2.33)
The ReLu (Rectified Linear Unit) function, that outputs zero when the input is
negative, otherwise it is linear:
ReLU(x) = max(0, x)
(2.34)
Mathematical Modelling of Neural Networks
The mathematical modeling of a fully connected feedforward Neural Network (FCNN)
involves defining the structure and operations of the network. A FCNN is generated
by stacking layers, each consisting of multiple neurons:
The input data:
z(0) = X
(2.35)
The output of each layer:
z(k+1) = σ
(
W (k)z(k) + W (k)
0
)
for k = 0, 1, . . . , NL−1
(2.36)
==PAGE:23==
2.2 Physics Informed Neural Networks
13
The output of each neuron:
hδ(X) = W (K)z(K) + W (K)
0
(2.37)
In this formulation σ represents the activation function, W (k) represents the weight
matrix for the layer k, b(k) represents the bias vector for the layer k, and NL repre-
sents the total number of layers in the NN. W (k) and W (k)
0
constitute the adjustable
parameters.
2.2.2
Training of Neural Networks
The fundamental condition for the training of a NN is the existence of pairs of data. In
simpler terms, these models aim to learn from examples by minimizing the difference
between the output of the model for a given input and the corresponding target during
the training process. This necessitates the creation or acquisition of a collection of
such paired data points, known as a training set. The effectiveness of NNs is heavily
influenced by the quality and size of this training set, as insuﬀicient data can lead to
undertraining (limited learning). It is necessary to define the training epoch, which
is a forward and a backward propagation of all of the training data.
Dissemination of Information in Neural Networks
NNs process information through a two-way flow: forward propagation and backprop-
agation.
• Forward Propagation
Information travels sequentially through the network. Input layer neurons are
activated first, followed by hidden layers and finally the output layer.
This
process ultimately leads to the production of the network’s output. Note that
during forward propagation, the network weights remain the same; no learning
occurs.
• Backpropagation
Inspired by biological processes, the network learns by adjusting the strengths
of connections between neurons (synapses). Backpropagation accomplishes this
by iteratively adjusting the weights of the network in a direction opposite to
forward propagation. These adjustments aim to minimize the difference between
the actual and desired output.
In essence, backpropagation is the learning
process for NNs.
Loss Function
The training process requires a measure of behavioral assessment of the neural net-
work. Having a training set that contains a total of N input examples x, the output
==PAGE:24==
2.2 Physics Informed Neural Networks
14
of the NN yi should be the corresponding desired output ˆyi. The measure that essen-
tially quantifies how well the network is performing, is the error. At the same time, it
gives a first insight into the network’s scope for improvement. To measure this error,
we employ an error function (also called a loss function), denoted as:
Loss(w) = 1
N
∑
F(yi, ˆyi)
(2.38)
where:
w: Network weights (independent variables of the error function)
N: Number of examples in the training set
F: Error Metric Used
ˆyi or NN(xi): Output of the neural network for input xi
Σ: Summation of all N examples
Since the goal is to minimize the network’s error, the loss function serves as the
objective function for optimization algorithms that adjust the network weights (w)
during training.
The most common used error metrics F are Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Mean
Absolute Error (MAE): MSE This metric calculates the average of the squares of the
errors. The error is the difference between the predicted value and the target (actual
value). By squaring the errors, MSE gives more weight to larger errors, making it
sensitive to outliers.
MSE = 1
M
M
∑
i=1
(yi −ˆyi)2
(2.39)
MAE: This metric calculates the average of the absolute differences between the
predicted values and the actual values. Unlike MSE, MAE treats all errors equally,
providing a linear measure of the average magnitude of errors.
MAE = 1
M
M
∑
i=1
|yi −ˆyi|
(2.40)
Optimization algorithms
During NN training, optimization algorithms play a crucial role. These algorithms
are responsible for adjusting the network’s weights, which are essentially the tun-
able parameters that influence the network’s output. The goal of optimization is to
iteratively update these weights to minimize the value of the error function. This
minimization process allows the network to learn from the training data and improve
its performance.
Gradient-Based methods
The most widely used optimization algorithms are based on the concept of gradient
descent, which iteratively updates the model weights w in the direction that mini-
==PAGE:25==
2.2 Physics Informed Neural Networks
15
mizes the loss function, exploiting the partial derivative of the loss with respect to
each weight. The step size to be considered towards that direction is controlled by the
Learning Rate(LR). A high learning rate can lead to instability and divergence, while
a low learning rate can cause slow convergence. Techniques like adaptive learning
rates or a scheduler can assist in the faster and more accurate convergence of the al-
gorithm. Additionally, another term that is added in many algorithms is momentum,
which allows the algorithm to espace local minima in the loss landscape.
The two most commonly used optimization algorithms considered during this work
are the Adaptive Moment Estimation algorithm (Adam)[23] and the Limited-memory
Broyden–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (L-BFGS) algorithm. Adam can be considered
an extension of the gradient descent algorithm that combines the benefits of momen-
tum and adaptive learning rates. L-BFGS, on the other hand, is a quasi-Newton
method that aims to approximate the Hessian of the loss function, which can be
substantially helpful for accelerating the training process.
Scheduler
The role of the scheduler is to be a conductor for the training process leading to better
performance and faster convergence of the model.
As mentioned previously, it is
responsible for controlling a crucial hyperparameter, the learning rate. The scheduler
adjusts this value during the training process according to a predefined strategy. A
common strategy is exponential decay, which gradually reduces the learning rate over
time, allowing for finer adjustments as the model converges.
Error Backpropagation
As mentioned above, the partial derivative of the loss function with respect to the
network’s weights is required, and the technique that evaluates it eﬀiciently is called
error backpropagation. The idea behind the concept of backpropagation is to use
information from later parts of the network, starting at the loss function, and go
backwards through the network(backward pass). So the opposite path of the input
signal is followed by the error signal, running through the entire network from the
output to the input layer.
Automatic differentiation
There are four categories of methods for the computation of derivatives in computer
programs: (1) manually working out derivatives and coding them; (2) numerical dif-
ferentiation using finite difference approximations; (3) symbolic differentiation using
expression manipulation in computer algebra systems such as Mathematica; and (4)
automatic differentiation, also called algorithmic differentiation. AD or “autodiff”
[24],[25], is a family of techniques similar to but more general than backpropagation
for eﬀiciently and accurately evaluating derivatives of numeric functions expressed
==PAGE:26==
2.2 Physics Informed Neural Networks
16
as computer programs by systematically applying the chain rule. It consists of four
components/concepts:
• Function Decomposition: each complex computation can be expressed as a series
of simpler elementary functions, e.g., additions, multiplications, or trigonomet-
ric functions, with known derivative.
• Computational Graph: the order and the combination of the above functions
can be represented as a directed graph.
• Forward Mode: AD traverses the computational graph from the input and step-
by-step calculates the derivative of each sub-function with respect to the input
alongside the function’s output.
• Reverse Mode: corresponds to a generalized backpropagation algorithm, which
propagates derivatives backward from a given output.
In that case, all the
derivatives of the output are calculated with respect to each sub-function and
the input.
It must be noted that AD enables eﬀicient computation of both function outputs
and their derivatives. This eﬀiciency in derivative calculations is crucial and makes
AD a key enabler for training complex machine learning models.
Regularization
NNs are prone to overfitting, which occurs when a model is unable to capture irrel-
evant patterns in the training data, resulting in poor performance on unseen data.
The main goal of the regularization, that is expressed in a set of techniques, is to
encourage the model to generalize its performance, over both seen and unseen data.
Early stopping: is a form of regularization that stops the training process when
the performance on a validation set starts to deteriorate, thus preventing the model
from overfitting.
Weight Initialization
Weight initialization is a step of the training of the NNs that can accelarate signi-
ficatnly the convergence and the final performance of the model. The goal of this
step is to set initial values for the NN weights in a more eﬀicient way than random
initialization. By default, the initial weights follow a normal (Gaussian). Alternative
initilization have been proposed and implemented, such as xavier [26]& kaiming ini-
tilizations [27]. The first method (xavier) initializes weights from a normal or uniform
distribution with zero mean and variance calculated based on the number of input
and output connections of the layer, aiming to keep the variance of activations and
gradients consistent across layers, promoting stable training.
The second method
(Kaiming or He)
is similar to the first method but the variance is determined only
by the input of the layer.
==PAGE:27==
2.2 Physics Informed Neural Networks
17
Dataset transformation
Transforming the dataset can be an effective method that improves the performance of
the NN. Data transformation can be applied to both input and output. Two common
transformations are Min-Max normalization and Standardization. The first scales
independently, each variable from 0 to 1, while the second ensures that each variable
will follow a normal distribution. These methods can improve the generalization of
the solution and lead to more eﬀicient training and test performance.
Hyperparameters
Hyperparameters are external configuration variables that control the learning pro-
cess of a model, in our case a NN. They can affect significantly the learning output
of the model, and their fine tuning is essential for achieving an optimal performance
for different reasons, such as generalizability, training eﬀiciency and model complex-
ity. The reason behind is that they can modify both the complexity of the NN, e.g.
through different number of layers, select an optimal learning rate , and in general
adjust them in order to avoid overfitting. Fine tuning between different problems
can be extremely computational expensive. A way to optimize it is to deploy random
search instead of grid search, which performs more eﬀiciently in larger search spaces.
Data-driven Neural Networks
Data-driven NNs rely solely on pairs of input-output data to learn and approximate
the behavior of the examined system without incorporating any underlying physical
laws. While this approach can be highly effective in many applications, its perfor-
mance is heavily dependent on the quality and quantity of the available data.
2.2.3
Physics Inform Neural Networks (PINNs)
The fusion of well established physical laws described by differential equations and
capabilities of machine learning has offered a novel approach to modeling complex
physical systems.
Unlike traditional methods that rely on explicitely solving the
equations, PINNs exploit the power of NNs to approximate complex systems. These
NNs are characterized by their capability to combine data driven and physics driven
solutions. On the one hand, as mentioned previously they use pairs of data in order
to approximate the respective system. Additionally, AD offers the derivative of each
output with respect to each input. In the case of ordinary differential equations, the
derivative of the output with respect to time, can be extremely valueable. At this
point, it is useful to make the following clarifications:
• The input x of the NN is always the set of initial conditions and the time t for
which the state of the system is desired to be approximated.
• When time t=0, this state is called initial conditions state or IC.
==PAGE:28==
2.2 Physics Informed Neural Networks
18
• The output ˆy of the NN is the approximation of the state, and through AD,
also the derivative of the output with respect to the time t, ∂ˆy
∂t .
Returning back to the synchronous machine ODEs, it is clear that the left hand side
of the equations is approximated from the AD, while the right hand side can be also
calculated either from the known target, y or through the output of the NN, ˆy. Ideally,
in both of the cases the two sides will have the same value.
Based on the above concept, the physics agnostic side of PINNs is introduced.
More specifically, apart from the data loss, which is the difference between output
and target, the pinn loss is introduced, which corresponds to the difference between
the two sides of the set of the ODEs.
Ground truth data
The optimal training of PINNs includes a big number of ground truth data. Leverag-
ing these data, the two following errors can be obtained:
Lossdata = 1
N
∑
F( ˆyi, yi)
(2.41)
where ˆyi the output of the PINN, and yi the ground truth target
Lossdt = 1
N
∑
F(∂ˆyi
∂t , f(yi))
(2.42)
where ∂ˆ
yi
∂t is the AD with respect to time, and f(yi)) is the right hand side of the
ODEs when the ground truth target replace the independent variables.
Collocation points
The collocation points have the form of the PINN input, xi, which consists of the
time step and the respective initial conditons. Their time step must be within the
selected time horizon and their initial conditions can vary within the desired state
space. The value of these data, originate from the two following errors:
Lossic = 1
N
∑
F( ˆyi, yi)
(2.43)
when xi(t = 0) the initial conditions yi or xi without t must match exactly the output
ˆyi of the PINN
Losspinn = 1
N
∑
F(∂ˆyi
∂t , f( ˆyi))
(2.44)
where ∂ˆ
yi
∂t is the AD with respect to time, and f( ˆyi)) is the right hand side of the
ODEs when the output of the PINN replace the independent variables. Their main
contribution lies in satisfying the governing equations of the system for any given
input within the examined state space.
==PAGE:29==
2.2 Physics Informed Neural Networks
19
2.2.4
Dataset and Ordinary Differential Equations
NNs require paired data for training. To prevent overfitting, where the model memo-
rizes training data specifics rather than learning general patterns, the data undergoes
a crucial pre-processing step: splitting into training, validation, and test sets.
• Training Set: This is the largest portion of the data (e.g., 60%). The NN learns
from this set by updating its weights in an effort to identify the patterns within
the data.
• Validation Set: This set (e.g., 20%) serves as a monitor during training. The
NN’s performance on the validation set is evaluated throughout the training
process. A rising validation loss indicates overfitting, prompting adjustments
to the training process, or even stopping it when early stopping is employed.
• Test Set: This unseen data (e.g., 20%) provides an unbiased evaluation of the
model’s ability to generalize.
Since the test set is completely separate from
training and validation, it reflects how well the model performs on entirely new
data.
This separation of data helps mitigate bias and ensures a more robust evaluation of
the NN’s performance.
Additionally, as mentioned earlier, PINNs leverage not only data but also physical
equations, often taking the form of differential equations. To elaborate further, the
AD capability of the NN provides the derivative of the output with respect to the
known input.
This derivative represents the differential aspect of the differential
equations.
Therefore, during the implementation of PINNs, it is crucial to have
the corresponding equations readily available. In addition to data, PINNs leverage
physical laws expressed as differential equations. This unique capability differentiates
PINNs from standard NNs. A key advantage of using AD within the NN architecture
is its ability to eﬀiciently compute the derivative of the output with respect to the
input variables. Specifically, this derivative corresponds directly to the differential
component of the governing differential equations.
During the implementation of
PINNs, it is crucial to have the respective equations available to effectively incorporate
the physical laws into the learning process.
The trade off between data-driven and physics-driven approach
The major difference between a data-driven and physics-driven approach is the train-
ing process, and more specifically the respective losses that contribute to the total
loss.
The learning process aims to minimization of this loss.
The total loss L is
expressed through a weighted sum of the above losses. Depending on the data taken
into account, ground truth data or collocation points, which represent the two ap-
proaches, the weights of the losses are adjusted accordingly. The final formulation of
the total loss is as follows:
==PAGE:30==
2.2 Physics Informed Neural Networks
20
L = Λdata · Lossdata + Λdt · Lossdt + Λic · Lossic + Λpinn · Losspinn
(2.45)
The weights of the losses
The weights Λ directly influence the learning loss in PINNs, functioning similarly
to the learning rate. Extensive research has been conducted to optimize the learn-
ing rate, and these findings can be directly applied to adjust the weights Λ.
By
fine-tuning these weights, the stiffness of the solutions can be mitigated. The base-
line approach involves keeping the weights constant throughout the training process.
However, these values can be dynamically adjusted using various methods. One such
method is the use of schedulers, which control each weight independently during the
training process. This allows for more eﬀicient adaptation to the learning dynamics.
Another approach is the Self-Adaptive Weighting [28], a method where the weights Λ
are treated as trainable parameters. In this method, the weights are updated with the
help of their derivatives, provided by AD. The core idea behind self-adaptive weights
is to increase the weights as the corresponding losses increase. This is achieved by
training the network to simultaneously minimize the losses and maximize the weights,
ensuring that the network will emphasize more to the losses that the training opti-
mization struggles to minimize. By employing these advanced weighting strategies,
the performance and eﬀiciency of PINNs can be significantly improved, leading to
more accurate and faster solutions.
==PAGE:31==
CHAPTER 3
Methodology
In this chapter, we present the methodology followed to obtain solutions for the
problems addressed in this work, including both simple and scaled-up versions. The
first part focuses in implementing traditional numerical methods for well-established
mathematical models of synchronous machines using Ordinary Differential Equations
(ODEs). This establishes a baseline for performance and accuracy. The subsequent
part aims to develop, train, and test Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) to
capture the behavior of the same machines.
3.1
Creating the dataset and the equations
The pipeline presented in Figure 3.1 follows the subsequent steps to create the dataset
and the equations. The pipeline consists of the following components:
Figure 3.1: The pipeline for the solution of the ODEs
==PAGE:32==
3.1 Creating the dataset and the equations
22
• Synchronous Machine Modelling This component defines the system of the
ODEs that will be investigated. These modellings vary from simpler to more
complex system of equations.
• Chosen Initial State This component is responsible for generating the initial
conditions for the respective initial value problem. These values represent the
values of the independent variables of the system at t=0.
• Set of System Parameters This component defines all the parameters of the
ODEs that originate from the power system that this synchronous machine is
connected.
• Set of Machine Parameters According to the synchronous machine that is
examined, the respective machine parameters must be used. Additionally, in
case of the inclusion of AVR and Governor, the related values are also included.
• Set of Equations The three components above, generate the next component,
Equations with the Parameters, which can be later used to solve the ODEs
or can be used by PINNs.
• ODE Solver This component solves the IVP problem(s).
Using the set of
equations from above, the (set of) chosen initial values, solves the dynamic
system numerically.
• Numerical Solutions For each independent variable, the solution is saved at
different time steps within the selected time frame, representing the benchmark
solutions.
The pipeline was formulated in a way that enhanced the robustness and flexibility of
testing different synchronous machines under different conditions. These components
form the core part of the pipeline for providing numerical solutions.
3.1.1
Synchronous Machine Modelling
This study implemented four models of increasing complexity to analyze the behavior
of synchronous machines connected to an infinite bus:
• Classic Synchronous Machine
• 2-axis Synchronous Machine
• 2-axis Synchronous Machine with AVR
• 2-axis Synchronous Machine with AVR and Governor
The classic model, despite its simplicity, serves as a foundation for many studies. As
the model complexity increases (2-axis, AVR, governor), the number of independent
variables also rises (from 4 to 7 and then 9). This highlights the growing complexity
involved in modeling a single component within a power system.
==PAGE:33==
3.1 Creating the dataset and the equations
23
3.1.2
Chosen Initial State
In order to investigate the behavior of the synchronous machine under various con-
ditions, a wide range of initial values is assigned to its independent variables (e.g.,
rotor speed, field voltage). Depending on the chosen analysis, either a single initial
value is used for each parameter or a set of values is explored. In both cases, these
values can be obtained through sampling techniques. By defining upper and lower
bounds for each variable, along with the desired number of points within that range
and the chosen sampling method (e.g., random, grid, Latin hypercube), a table of
initial conditions is generated. This table encompasses all possible combinations of
starting points for the analysis. Different bounds can be assigned based on physical
scenarios that represent different operating scenarios, such as varying load levels or
fault conditions. Additionally, extreme states can work as good indicators for faulty
parameters or even wrong formulation of the system. In an effort to understand better
the system’s dynamics, a portion of the parameter space relevant to synchronous ma-
chine behavior was explored. During the experimentation, specific ranges for initial
conditions on the particular synchronous machine variables were selected:
• δ: The rotor angle is relative. Having as a refenerence value the phase angle of
the stator voltage, δvs, δ varies from [-2,2]
• ω: The rotor speed relative to synchronous speed has a value between [-10,10]
rad/s
• Ed and Eq: The first transient field voltage is fixed to 1 and the second has a
range at [1,1.5] p.u.
As for the initial values for the variables of the AVR and Governor, the used values
were found in [5] p.86 and given below:
• RF (field resistance): 1 (pu)
• Vr(exciter input-scaled output of the amplifier): 1.105 (pu)
• Efd(field voltage): 1.08 (pu)
• Psv(steam valve position): 0.7048 (pu)
• Pm(mechanical power input): 0.7048 (pu)
3.1.3
Set of System Parameters
During this work, one Set of System Parameters was used based on the infinite bus
concept.
This set of System parameters, [5] p.
88, serve as reference values for
modelling:
==PAGE:34==
3.1 Creating the dataset and the equations
24
• Vs(infinite bus terminal voltage): 1 (pu)
• ΩB(base angular frequency): 2*π*50 (Hz)
• θvs(synchronous machine terminal angle): 0
3.1.4
Synchronous machine parameters
The most important part for the development of the ODEs is the use of well es-
tablished and consistent in terms of notation and conventions synchronous machine
and system parameters. The parameters that were used during this work and are
presented below.
Model
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
H(secs)
23.64
6.4
3.01
5.148
6.54
5.06
5.06
Xd(pu)
0.146
0.8958
1.3125
0.8979
1.05
1.25
1.25
X
′
d(pu)
0.0608
0.1198
0.1813
0.2995
0.185
0.232
0.232
Xq(pu)
0.0969
0.8645
1.2578
0.646
0.98
1.22
1.22
X
′
q(pu)
0.0969
0.1969
0.25
0.646
0.36
0.715
0.715
T
′
d(sec)
8.96
6.0
5.89
7.4
6.1
4.75
4.75
T
′
q(sec)
0.31
0.535
0.6
0.1
0.4
1.6
1.6
D
2.364
1.28
0.903
2
2
2
2
Rs(pu)
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Pm(pu)
0.71
1.612
0.859
2.32
-0.942
-0.122
0
Efd(pu)
1.08
1.32
1.04
1
1
1
1
Table 3.1:
The parameters for different synchronous machines.
The first three
machine parameters were obtained from [5] p.167 and [29]. The last 4 machine pa-
rameters were obtained from [30].
AVR and Governor parameters The parameters that were used for both of
these controllers:
KA
TA
KE
TE
KF
TF
20(pu)
0.2(s)
1.0(pu)
0.314(s)
0.063(pu)
0.35(s)
Table 3.2: The AVR parameters from from [5] p.167
Pc
Rd
Tch
Tsv
0.7(pu)
0.05(pu)
0.4(s)
0.2(s)
Table 3.3: The Governor parameters from [5] p.86
==PAGE:35==
3.1 Creating the dataset and the equations
25
Assumptions and definitions A number of parameters were assumed not im-
portant and set to zero, and these are the Re=0 and Xep=0, while the reference
voltage for the AVR Vref was always set to 1.095(pu).
3.1.5
Set of Equations
The primary difference between the two formulations discussed above lies in the value
of omega. In the first case, omega represents the exact difference ( ω(rad/s)), while
in the latter, denotes the relative change in omega. Different formulations, models,
and machine parameters can be freely selected. In the subsequent step, numerical
values will be assigned to the parameters within the differential equations, while the
independent variables will remain unchanged. These equations form the basis for the
PINNs.
3.1.6
The Ordinary Differential Equations Solver
The classical 4th-order Runge-Kutta method (RK45) is one of the most widely used
due to its balance of accuracy and computational eﬀiciency, making it a good option
for benchmarking the performance of PINNs. Other methods, such as LSODA and
the 2nd-order Runge-Kutta method (RK23), can also be implemented depending on
the specific needs of the application. In order to generate the solution for the given
equation and initial states, the time horizon T and the number of points within this
interval must be defined.
Once again, depending on the needs of the application
and the transient period, these values must be adjusted. Increasing the number of
data points (smaller step sizes) lead to more accurate solutions but also increase the
number of steps needed to cover the same time interval, thus longer computation
time.
3.1.7
The roadmap to the framework
Implementing the pipeline
The first step that was taken, was to establish the pipeline in order to obtain the
solutions for specific parameters (machine and system) and one given set of initial
conditions. Knowing already that under steady state, the dynamic system variables
must converge, and also ω converges to zero, the synchronous machine synchronizes
with the connected power system, the verification of the correct use of notation and
scales was allowed. In that way, for both of the sets of equations that were imple-
mented, the various parameters were checked. The output of this first implementation,
was a set of only one solution for each of the synchronous machine modellings and
each machine by modifying the respective parameters.
==PAGE:36==
3.1 Creating the dataset and the equations
26
The interactive pipeline
An interactive notebook that will allow the user to choose among the various formu-
lations and also adjust the initial conditions and the parameters of the synchronous
machine could be quite intuitive exploration of synchronous machine dynamics, com-
bining robust numerical methods with user-friendly interfaces. The key steps in this
methodology include defining the ODE system, implementing the solver, creating an
interactive user interface, and visualizing the simulation results.
The Ordinary Differential Equations framework
During the development of the pipeline, the need for building a robust framework
emerged. This framework facilitates the generation of solutions from the ODE solvers
for different synchronous machines, under various initialconditions,s and diverse syn-
chronous machine models and modellings. Currently, there is a lack of such a robust
and adaptable framework dedicated to generating solutions for the given initial value
problem (IVP). This research proposes a novel framework for generating ODE solu-
tions and the corresponding equations with substituted parameters. The key aspects
of this framework are its flexibility, adaptability, and generalization. Its flexibility
lies in its ability to specify a variety of settings:
• Synchronous Machine Modelling: Switch between the implemented mod-
ellings
• Set of Machine Parameters Selection: Choose from a range of synchronous
machines and adjust easily its parameters
• System Parameters Selection: Select the desired Set of System Parameters
• Set of Equations: Choose between the different implemented formulations.
Their output is the same, apart from omega value as mentioned earlier.
• ODE Solver Parameters Selection: The time horizon and the number of
data points within this interval can be easily adjusted, as well as the numerical
method to be used.
Its adaptability is connected to the direct adjustment of all its basic components.
This allows the framework to be further exploited, offering more generalized solutions
for larger state spaces, more complex synchronous machine models, or even entirely
different problems.
Using the framework
The ODE framework was extensively exploited during this work.
Solutions were
generated for all the different synchronous machine parameters and various models.
The formulation of Sauer and Pai was preferred over Kundur’s because the scale of
==PAGE:37==
3.2 Developing the Physics-Informed Neural Networks
27
ω parameter significantly affected the performance of PINNs. However, it should be
noted that obtaining the same output with a simple transformation of this variable
is straightforward.
The chosen sampling method was Latin Hypercube Sampling
(LHS), with a time horizon of 5 seconds and 5000 data points within this horizon,
corresponding to 1 point per millisecond. The initial state space within the range of
3.1.2 was used throughout this work. An increased state space requires more samples
to cover it eﬀiciently. Initially, a smaller part of the state space was used, with a
limited number of trajectories. Furthermore, the ODEs were easily accesible for the
PINNs’ training.
3.2
Developing the Physics-Informed Neural Networks
The development of Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) consists of data and
physical laws, the neural network architecture, and the training process that opti-
mizes the weights of the neural network. This is a complex task that encompasses
several smaller tasks. In the following sections, the fundamental components of this
development will be analyzed.
3.2.1
Dataset, collocation points and Ordinary Differential
Equations
The dataset obtained from the ODE framework includes solutions for a various initial
conditions.
Initially, the solutions are shuffled in order to enhance generalization.
Each solution is characterized by the time horizon and the number of interval points.
This dataset, which contains a state condition for each timestep, is transformed to
generate the input and desired output for the PINN. Specifically, the input consists
of the initial condition and the timestep, while the output is the corresponding state
at that timestep. In this way, labeled pairs of data are obtained. The next step is
splitting the dataset into Training(60%), Validation (20%) and Test (20%) set.
The collocation points correspond only to the input of the PINN, meaning that
for each point, there is an initial condition state and a timestep, with no need for
an output. These collocation points can originate either from the previous dataset
or, based on the study needs, be generated using the Chosen Initial State component
from the previous framework. The generation process is identical, but its parameters,
such as the bounds of each variable or the sampling method, can be adjusted accord-
ingly. Having a number of initial conditions, which also constitute the input Initial
Conditions (IC) dataset, the input dataset for the PINN can be generated by adding
the desired timesteps. The timesteps are defined by the time horizon and the chosen
number of data points within this interval. New collocation points are generated each
time using LHS sampling, with the same initial state bounds and range as previously
defined. During the training process, the Training, Validation, IC, and PINN datasets
==PAGE:38==
3.2 Developing the Physics-Informed Neural Networks
28
are exploited to improve the model’s performance.
As for the ordinary differential equations (ODEs), exploiting the structure of
the previous framework, direct access to the ODEs is gained. This accessibility fa-
cilitated seamless integration and eﬀicient training processes, enhancing the overall
performance and accuracy of the PINNs in approximating the dynamic behavior of
the synchronous machines.
3.2.2
Dataset tranformation
Based on the needs of the PINNs, the training datasets can be constrained to the
desired time horizon. For the study of the synchronous machine’s behavior under
transient conditions, the time horizon was set to 1 second with 1000 data points within
that time frame. This approach helps prevent overfitting, by avoiding unnecessary
complexity that may arise from including extraneous data, and optimizes the training
process, focusing on the training on relevant portions of the system’s dynamics.
Additionally, data points were selectively skipped within the same trajectory. This
form of regularization also contributes to preventing overfitting and helps the PINN
to generalize to unseen data, rather than closely approximating the given trajectories.
Simultaneously, the training time is reduced, leading to faster training for the same
level of accuracy. The number of skipped points can vary in each training dataset.
Another method that improves the training of the PINNs is the transformation of the
input and output data. Specifically, the input and/or output data are normalized or
standardized. This transformation ensures that the data fall within a specific range
or distribution, enhancing the eﬀiciency and accuracy of the training process.
Normalization: Refers to the process of scaling data to a specific range, typically
[0, 1]. This is achieved using the following formula:
xnorm =
x −xmin
xmax −xmin
(3.1)
Normalization2: This variation of the above transformation scales data to a specific
range, typically [-1, 1], using the formula:
xnorm2 = 2 ∗
x −xmin
xmax −xmin
−1
(3.2)
Standardization: rescales the data to have zero mean value and a standard
deviation of one. The formula used is:
xstd = x −xmean
xstd
(3.3)
It is necessary to note that the values needed for these input and/or output trans-
formations are calculated only from the training set and applied to all the datasets.
Each variable has its own set of values, either in the input or in the output. These val-
ues must be saved for the inference of the model and allow for both the transformation
and the revert of the transformation.
==PAGE:39==
3.3 An overview of the whole pipeline
29
3.2.3
Neural network architecture
The FCNN and the ResNet were used during this study. Their architecture is dy-
namic, meaning that both the number of hidden layers and the number of neurons in
each layer are defined on demand. In our case, a neural network with 3 hidden layers
and 64 neurons each was used across all the different implementations. The num-
ber of input and output neurons are directly connected to the synchronous machine
modelling and more specifically the number of independent variables. The activation
function that was used is the tanh. A variety of weight initialization techniques were
implemented, such as xavier & kaiming normal & uniform and also no initialization
can be chosen as well. Through experimentation xavier normal was prefered. Addi-
tionally, an adjustment of the final layer of the FCNN, that was proposed in [29] was
implemented. We refer to this netowrk as Adjusted FCNN
yiadj = x0i + t · yi
(3.4)
This adjustment incorporates the concept of the ResNet, and enforces that the
initial condition is met when t=0.
3.3
An overview of the whole pipeline
Figure 3.2: An overview of the total pipeline
The figure 3.2 presents an overview of the development of the PINNs. This pipeline
contains the basic actions of the PINN and has as preresquite the existance of the
previous framework. In this study, exactly the same pipeline components were ex-
ploited. This reproducability allows for error minimization and also improved eﬀi-
ciency. Starting from the solutions that contain a number of different trajectories for
==PAGE:40==
3.4 The training process
30
each independent variable x(t), which will be limited in time, shuffled and splitted in
train/validation and test set according to the given ratio. The train and validation
set will form as the ground truth data during the training of the PINN. Additionally,
with the help of the previous framework, a number of different initial conditions is
generated. These initial conditions will form the IC dataset. By adding the timesteps
according to the time horizon and the number of points within that time interval the
PINN dataset is created. The IC and PINN dataset will be used in the training as well.
In parallel, the NN will be defined according to the given set of NN parameters
and the number of independent variables of the ODEs, which can be derived directly
from the ODE solver solutions. The training exploits the aforementioned datasets &
the NN, and with the help of the Equations with the parameters component from the
ODE framework, is allowed to train PINNs. The parameters and flags for different
approaches define the rest of the processes involved. The NN is trained iteratevly
with its performance being validated using the validation set, which can lead to early
stopping if the specified conditions are met. When the training is stopped, the output
is the plots of the solutions in different training steps and the weights of the trained
NN. Finally, the performance of the trained PINN is tested with the help of the test
dataset.
3.4
The training process
The training of the PINN stands out as the most intricate process in this study, which
encompasses numerous components and a multitude of hyperparameters. Extensive
experimentation was conducted to refine the training process. For training, the Mean
Squared Error (MSE) loss function was selected, while for testing, both MSE and
Mean Absolute Error (MAE) were employed, with a greater emphasis on MAE. MSE
was selected for training due to its sensitivity to larger errors, which helps in effectively
minimizing significant deviations during the learning process. For testing, MAE pro-
vides a straightforward average of absolute differences between predicted and actual
values, offering a more interpretable measure of performance and helping in assessing
the model’s robustness against outliers. The focus on MAE during testing provided
a balanced evaluation of the model’s accuracy in unknownn test data. Regarding
optimizers, various options were explored, with Adam and LBFG-S demonstrating
superior performance.
In terms of training epochs, a maximum of 15,000 epochs was set when utilizing
the Adam optimizer, while 750 epochs suﬀiced for the LBFG-S optimizer due to its
intrinsic iterative process. Although different schedulers for learning rate adjustment
were developed, they did not significantly enhance training optimization. A fixed
learning rate of 0.001 was used in all training sessions.
As described in 2.2.2, early stopping was integrated into the training pipeline. Its
parameters were configured with a patience of 500 epochs for Adam optimizer, and
100 epochs for LBFGs, and a threshold of 3e-6, signifying that if the validation loss
==PAGE:41==
3.4 The training process
31
fails to decrease by the specified threshold during the patience period, training is
stopped to mitigate overfitting risks.
Furthermore, the weights of the PINN are periodically saved during training, in-
cluding after the final epoch, enabling their subsequent utilization for inference pur-
poses.
Figure 3.3: The information flow over a single training step
The figure 3.3 presents the information flow over a single train step. The train-
ing process has three main components, the data, the neural network, and the loss.
On the left side (blue boxes) represent the input of the neural network (NN). The
dataset trajectories (training dataset) comprise the ground truth data, while the col-
location trajectories provide physics-agnostic data. From the collocation trajectories,
their initial conditions are obtained, as they can serve as ground truth data as well.
During a single training step, the weights of the NN remain constant, meaning that
the forward pass with the same input will consistently yield the same output. As
for the output on the right, the red boxes denote the output of the NN or the corre-
sponding target values. The purple boxes represent the derivative of the output with
respect to the NN’s input time step, or the calculated value of the right-hand side
of the ordinary differential equations (ODEs). These values are computed using the
connected independent variable. In the first scenario, ”ODE Y train”, it is computed
using the ground truth values at the specific time step. In the second case, ”ODE Y
col”, it is computed utilizing Then collocation points. Subsequently, employing a loss
criterion and the pairs of values, various losses are derived: ”Data loss” & ”IC loss”
for the ground truth and initial conditions respectively, and ”Dt loss” & ”PINN loss”
for the physics-agnostic losses. Throughout each training step, the NN undergoes
optimization via a weighted sum of all these losses.
==PAGE:42==
3.4 The training process
32
Updating the Weights of the Losses
The weights of the losses play a crucial role in eﬀicient training of the PINNs and
and these weights can be either static or dynamic. Each loss has its own weight.
There exist three distinct implementations for dynamic updating. The first approach
employs a scheduler that incrementally increases each weight exponentially until it
reaches a predefined threshold:
ΛE+1 = min(αmax, Λ0 ∗e
E
E′ )
(3.5)
where αmax = 0.2 is the maximum weight value, Λ0 is the initial weight, E the train-
ing epoch, and E’=50 determines the rate of the fade-in.
The remaining two methods involve self-adaptive techniques, where the weights
serve as learnable parameters. The first, the ReLoBRaLo method was introduced
in [31], which also provides the related code. The other method, named SAM, was
developed during this thesis. The inspiration for the last method stems from [28] and
[32]. According to that approach the total loss L(W,Λ) is a function of the weights of
the NN and the losses. AD contributes in the updating method of Λi similarly with
the weights of the NN. The update method of this approach for each Λi at epoch E
is:
ΛE+1 = ΛE + α ∗
1
∇ΛEL + ϵ
(3.6)
where α is the update rate: 0.1, and ϵ is a small value: 1e-8.
Validating the model
To ensure that PINN generalizes well beyond the training data, a validation strategy
is essential throughout the training process. The implemented validation strategy
uses the validation dataset, comprising 500 distinct trajectories, each with 1000 data
points. During the implementation, a number of data points within the trajectory
were skipped as in the training datasets. The validation loss, a critical metric, serves
a dual purpose: it evaluates the model’s performance on unseen data, indicating its
ability to generalize, and triggers the early stopping mechanism to prevent overfitting.
This approach offers valuable insights into the model’s effectiveness (generalization
ability) and robustness (consistency across different data).
Finally, as mentioned
earlier, validation loss is also used during the hyperparameter optimization process
by Sweep.
Testing process
Following the training and validation stages, a thorough testing process is crucial to
evaluate the generalization and robustness of the trained PINN. Utilizing the PINN
weights obtained from the training, the model is applied to a separate, previously
==PAGE:43==
3.4 The training process
33
unseen dataset to assess its predictive performance and reliability. The test stage
utilizes the entire test dataset, comprising 500 distinct trajectories, each with 1000
data points.
The model’s performance is evaluated using two metrics: Mean Squared Error
(MSE) and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). Additionally, plotting the predicted solu-
tions provides valuable insights into the model’s performance, helping to identify any
potential weak points.
It is important to note that a similar process will be employed during inference
when the model is deployed.
Building the workflow
Building a consistent workflow for PINNs is crucial to ensure reproducibility and
eﬀiciency in experimentation. Having already a set up workflow through the ODE
framework, the respective framework is built for PINNs. Starting by standardizing
the data preprocessing, starting with the generation of input and output dataset from
the solutions obtained from the previous framework. The process continues with the
rest of the steps mentioned in 3.2.1.
Next, the architecture of the NN is defined
automatically by the dataset which is defined by the dynamics of the investigated
system. Finally, the workflow has an established pipeline for training and testing
PINNs. The implemented components are established and common between all the
variations of PINNs. This allows for easy adjustment of all the different components
according to the desired needs.
One trajectory training
Initially, PINNs are trained and tested for a single trajectory, as it is essential to
verify the correct implementation of the model in a very small state space.
The
PINN must exhibit satisfactory performance on a single trajectory before progressing
to more complex scenarios. For that reason, the training complexity is increasing
gradually. Firstly, only the data loss is considered, and then the pinn loss is added to
the total loss functions. Training on a single trajectory allows for monitoring of the
model’s performance ensuring that it accurately learns and represents the dynamics
of the synchronous machine before scaling to a larger state space. This approach
helped to identify and address issues related to ODEs formulation, training process,
and also experimentation with new approaches. Especially in the early development
stage, this approach made debugging easier and validated the results before adding
the complexity of multiple initial conditions.
Simulating the behavior of a synchronous machine
The satisfactory performance of PINNs is followed by the scaled up development.
Through this layered learning the model can learn to generalize from a simple to
a more complex dataset, improving its robustness and flexibility. In more detail, a
==PAGE:44==
3.4 The training process
34
number of different trajectories with different initial condition consist of the training
dataset. Depending on the number of trajectories included and the range of the initial
conditions, the more information the PINN is exposed to to assess the behavior of
the synchronous machine.
This state space difference has a direct impact to the
performance of a specific PINN.
During this work, the range of initial conditions was kept consistent, ensuring that the
performance metrics are comparable. This uniformity was utilized to accurately assess
improvements or degradations in the PINNs’ performance, offering a fair comparison
ground between different configurations and adjustments. Moreover, keeping a small
range of initial conditions, stable training dynamics are ensured.
This originates
from the behavior of the synchronous machine under sparse initial conditions, as
there might be gradient explosion or vanishing, and if there are a lot of samples
considered, the trained dynamics of the PINNs may not have the optimal output.
Balanced training is also satisfied, by preventing the model to become biased towards
a certain range of trajectories, allowing to for more broad generalization.
Finally, the computational cost of the training process of PINNs can be a bottleneck
of the generalization. Upon that, keeping a reasonable range and number of initial
conditions, and optimize the hyperparameters only for them, the hyperparameters will
remain effective even this range and number are increased. If the initial conditions’
range is expanded consistently with a reasonable number of different initial conditions,
the hyperparameters can still guide the model towards robust performance across the
new, broader dataset.
Hyperparameter Tuning and random seed
During the development of PINNs, various approaches and modifications were rigor-
ously tested. To ensure fair and consistent performance evaluation and comparison,
the optimization algorithm itself was kept constant. However, to achieve reliable and
generalizable results, a different random seed was used for each experiment. This
approach balances determinism for single runs with the ability to assess performance
variability across different initializations. It is recommended to run multiple times
for each initialization to enhance the fairness of the results.
Throughout the development process, multiple hyperparameters were fine-tuned
to enhance the performance of the PINNs.
Additionally, variations of the initial
algorithm were proposed to further improve accuracy and eﬀiciency.
To track all
hyperparameters and modifications effectively, Weights & Biases, a logging library,
was employed. This library allows for the storage, monitoring, and visualization of
hyperparameters, metrics, and results. It was used extensively during this work both
in the development of the ODE solver and in the training of the PINNs.
An important functionality of Weights & Biases [33] is the Sweep function. Given
a range of values for each hyperparameter (e.g., number of skipped points, optimizer),
Sweep eﬀiciently explores the hyperparameter space in order to minimize the chosen
metric. It selects a set of hyperparameters and execute the training process for each
combination, constituting one experimental run. Sweep can explore these combina-
==PAGE:45==
3.4 The training process
35
tions using grid search, random search, or Bayesian optimization, depending on the
desired approach. The exploration stops when all combinations are evaluated or a
predefined number of runs is reached. During each run, the final validation loss is
logged. The selected metric for Sweep optimization was the validation loss. This ap-
proach facilitated the eﬀicient discovery of configurations that improve the accuracy
and eﬀiciency of the PINNs.
Hyperparameters
Throughout the training process, a number of hyperparameters were used. A portion
of them was static, meaning that they remained the same across all the different
experiments, while some others were fine tuned with the help of Sweep, or activate
the mode or method. Depending on the optimizer, the number of epochs and the
early stop patience are adjusted accordingly. The most important hyperparameters
are stated below:
Hyperparameter
Value
Number of hidden layers
3
Number of neurons per layer
64
Activation function
tanh
Weight initialization method
xavier uniform
Learning rate
1e-4
Loss function
MSE
Epochs
15000(Adam) / 750 (LBFG-S)
Early stop patience
500(Adam) / 25 (LBFG-S)
Loss function
MSE
Table 3.4: Neural Network hyperparameters
The dynamic hyperparameters below activate the related mode/method, as a
broad aspect of approaches was developed.
Hyperparameter
Options
ODE modelling
[SMC, SM, SM AVR, SM AVR GOV]
Skipped data points
>0
Skipped collocation points
>0
NN type
[FCNN, Adjusted FCNN, Resnet]
Weight Data loss
≥0
Weight Dt loss
≥0
Weight Pinn loss
≥0
Weight IC loss
≥0
Update weight method
[Static, Dynamic, ReLoBRaLo, Sam]
Table 3.5: Dynamic hyperparameters
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 4
Results
This chapter expands on the methodology presented in Chapter 3. It is organized as
follows: First, the solution for a simple set of initial conditions is presented. Next,
the chapter progresses to the interactive implementation and then to the development
of the ODE framework to obtain multiple solutions for various initial conditions.
Subsequently, PINNs are developed and tested, initially for a single trajectory and
then for a scaled-up version that includes multiple trajectories in an effort to capture
the behavior of the tested synchronous machine. Numerous adjustments were made
throughout the implementation of the methodology.
It is important to note that
all solutions can be applied to all the different machines and different synchronous
machine modelings. Finally, the chapter concludes with a discussion of the results
and findings. All Python code generated during the project can be found in [34].
4.1
Ordinary Differential Equation Solutions
This section presents the Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) solutions obtained
by implementing the pipeline in 3.1. All the four different synchronous machine mod-
ellings can be used, selecting the respecting set of equations. One set of synchronous
machine parameters, that of Model 1 from 3.1, was used during the pipeline devel-
opment. The initial conditions for the synchronous machine’s dynamics were chosen
arbitrarily, and the numerical method that was employed was RK-45. The results of
the numerical simulations are illustrated in 4.1. This figure demonstrates the tran-
sient response of the synchronous machine number 0 to a set of initial conditions. The
synchronous machine was modelled as a 2-axis synchronous machine with Automatic
Voltage Regulator (AVR). The ODE solver provided a solution with 10s horizon and
1000 data points per second.
==PAGE:47==
4.1 Ordinary Differential Equation Solutions
37
Figure 4.1: The solution from the ODE solver for a 2-axis synchronous machine
with AVR
==PAGE:48==
4.2 The interactive ODE solver
38
The initial conditions considered are:
δ
ω(rad/s)
E′
d(pu)
E′
q(pu)
Efd(pu)
RF (pu)
Vr(pu)
0.385
50
0
1.1
1
0.05
0
Table 4.1: Initial values used in 4.1
We can observe that the values of ω and E
′
d find a steady state, while δ, Rf
and VR is almost finishing its transient state. E
′
q still needs some time to converge
completely.
All the parameters, the initial conditions and the modelling can be adjusted man-
ually. This development was really beneficial for the further developement of this
work and more specifically:
• Using a set of known parameters and initial conditions found in [5], it was
necessary to create a ground truth that the implementation would converge
• The system must converging to a steady-state. This depends always on the
initial conditions, as they can force the system to an unstable state. In this
study, the main focus is in safe regions, where the machine can return to its
steady state. The first and most important indicator is the value of omega over
time. It must be zero, as even a small variation would affect the whole system.
Then, all the rest variables of the system must converge over time.
• The difference between different formulation could be assessed directly from the
results. This was essential due to incosistency between the formulations found
in literature and the values found for the damping torque D. This value affects
significantly the rate of the system’s convergence and consistency is more than
essential when formulating the swing equation that contains it.
4.2
The interactive ODE solver
This approach facilitates an interactive and intuitive exploration of synchronous ma-
chine dynamics, combining robust numerical methods with user-friendly interfaces. It
ensures that users can easily modify simulation parameters and observe the resulting
behavior. In this way, it allows for easy exploration of how different initial conditions
and parameters affect the machine’s response. Additionally, it enables an immediate
comparison of different synchronous machine models under similar initial conditions,
providing a deeper understanding of their behavior.
Below is a screenshot of the developed UI interface. All adjustable parameters can
be modified on the left panel, and the solution for the selected synchronous machine
is plotted on the right.
==PAGE:49==
4.3 Utilizing the ODE framework
39
Figure 4.2: The solution from the ODE solver for a 2-axis synchronous machine
with AVR and Governor
4.3
Utilizing the ODE framework
The accessibility provided by the ODE framework enabled seamless integration and
eﬀicient training processes for PINNs in approximating the dynamic behavior of syn-
chronous machines. This setup facilitated a comprehensive exploration of the initial
state space, ensuring robust and reliable results across various scenarios and machine
configurations. The figures referenced in 4.3 and 4.4 illustrate the solutions and their
derivatives for a 2-axis synchronous machine model under 500 different initial condi-
tions using machine number 5 3.1. Subsequently, the solutions for other machines
6 and 3, 3.1 are presented in 4.5 & 4.6 under the same initial conditions but with
various modeling approaches implemented. Machine number 3 is observed to operate
in an unstable state space for the 2-axis synchronous machine with and without AVR
modeling, which is caused by the increased value of Pm that was used. During this
study, the chosen range of initial conditions is within the stable state space.
==PAGE:50==
4.3 Utilizing the ODE framework
40
Figure 4.3: The solutions from the ODE solver for a 2-axis synchronous machine
for a number of different initial conditions
==PAGE:51==
4.3 Utilizing the ODE framework
41
Figure 4.4: The derivatives of the above solutions
==PAGE:52==
4.3 Utilizing the ODE framework
42
Figure 4.5: The solutions for machine number 6 for all the available formulations
under the same initial conditions of the synchronous machine dynamics obtained from
the ODE solver
==PAGE:53==
4.3 Utilizing the ODE framework
43
Figure 4.6: The solutions for machine number 3 for all the available formulations
under the same initial conditions of the synchronous machine dynamics obtained from
the ODE solver.
Currently, there is a lack of a robust and adaptable framework dedicated to gen-
erating data for PINNs focused on synchronous machine modeling, a gap addressed
by the ODE framework. This framework overcomes the limitations of existing ap-
proaches by offering the following key features.
Flexibility: The framework allows users to specify a variety of settings, including:
• Machine Selection: Choose from a library of predefined synchronous machine
models or machine parameters.
• Initial Condition Range: Define ranges for initial conditions such as rotor angle,
speed, etc.
==PAGE:54==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
44
• ODE Solver Parameters: Select the time horizon for which the ODE solver will
provide the solution.
• Equation generation: The framework not only generates solutions from the ODE
solver, but also generates the corresponding equations with the substituted
machine parameters, which can be further exploited by the PINN’s training
process.
Adaptability and Generalization: By enabling users to introduce different models or
adjust existing ones, the framework promotes the generalizability of the proposed
approach. While there are examples of applying PINNs to specific machine models
and operating conditions, a generalizable framework for data generation tailored to
this domain has been absent until now.
4.4
Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
During this thesis, a Physics Informed Neural Network (PINN) framework was devel-
oped. This framework requires two essential components to operate effectively. The
first component is the data for the data-driven aspect of the PINNs, while the second
component is the ODEs.
Both components are provided by the ODE framework,
which is currently dedicated to synchronous machines. Although the PINN frame-
work is tailored to approximate the behavior of this specific class of problems, the
entire implementation adheres to the standard PINNs pipeline. Consequently, it can
be applied to any given set of data and their ODEs.
The first-single trajectory PINN
At first, the performance of PINNs for a single trajectory was examined. Initially,
the development of PINNs was based in the data-driven aspect of the concept. More
specifically, exploiting the dataset obtained from the previous framework, the NN was
trained to approximate a given trajectory. Data only from that specific trajectory are
given, and the performance of the model was the first benchmark. Then, the Dt loss
produced by the same data was considered. The prerequisite for continuing to the
next phase is the improved performance of the model. The impact of the two losses
is inextricably linked to their respective weights. It is worth mentioning that both
losses are monitored, even if they do not contribute to the optimization of the PINN,
e.g. their weight is zero. This approach was helpful in the beginning of the project,
where no collocation protocols were considered, but contributed to identifying that a
basic workflow is established.
==PAGE:55==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
45
Figure 4.7:
The solutions from the single trajectory trained PINN for a classic
synchronous machine
From the plot 4.8, it is evident that PINN exhibits superior performance compared
to the FCNN. The trajectories of δ and ω display different scales, impacting the
training process as the loss calculated from the latter differs significantly.
When
comparing the trajectories produced by the NN and PINN with the ground truth, it
is noticeable from the ω trajectory that the PINN trajectory is consistently ahead of
the training, indicating the contribution of physics-informed loss.
A hint for the performance A useful way to observe that PINN has managed
to integrate the correct set of ODEs for the given data is by monitoring the losses.
When considering only one loss for training, all losses should decrease simultaneously
as the training epochs progress. Even if the initial losses are very high, they should
gradually decrease. More details and examples will follow in the next part.
During this work, only the simulated data generated through the given ODEs
were used for the development of the project. In the case of real data, where ODEs
are not standard, this technique can be extremely helpful.
Ground truth data and collocation points
Next follows the definition of a broader dataset, which will be used to train the
PINN for a broad but strict range of initial conditions as mentioned in 3.4. The
initial state space for δ, ω, E
′
d and E
′
q was [-2,2], [-0.2,0.2] rad/s, [1] pu and [0.9,1.1]
pu respectively. The numbers of different values from that range were [10,10,1, 5],
respectively, resulting in a total of 500 different training trajectories. This consists
of the first set of parameters for initial values. The same ranges and numbers were
also used for the collocation points, which were generated similarly. So in total the
number of trajectories that can potentially contribute to the training is 1000.
The next step was to consider broader range, which is presented in the table below:
The computational burden for considering bigger ranges was a bottleneck during
the implementation. The experimentation phase will concentrate to the smaller state
==PAGE:56==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
46
Variable
δ
ω(rad/s)
E′
d(pu)
E′
q(pu)
Range
[-2,2]
[-5,5]
[0]
[0.9 , 1.1]
Population
5
300
1
4
Table 4.2: Second set of Parameters for Initial Values
space, and prove that the same principals are valid also for bigger state spaces, by
implementing the same PINNs. As a result, the broader ranges will be used only in
limited experiments.
The variations of the Neural Network
After verifying the effective integration of physics-informed loss for only one set of
initial conditions, more ground truth trajectories and collocation points were consid-
ered. Several different NNs with the FCNN architecture were implemented based
on the different losses used during the training phase. As a benchmark, the NN is
utilized, which only considers data loss in its training process. The next approach
is the NN-DT, which incorporates Dt loss during training. This approach considers
the law of physics according to (Equation 2.42). Subsequently, the inclusion of col-
location points is introduced. The PINN emerges as the first approach that exploits
a number of collocation points, with the Pinn loss (Equation 2.44) being the second
physics-informed loss term. Finally, the PINN-IC variant also incorporates the ini-
tial conditions that generated the collocation points. The table below presents all
combinations of these different losses that exhibit scientific interest:
Network
Loss(es)
NN
Data
NN-DT
Data + Dt
PINN
Data + Dt + Pinn
PINN-IC
Data + Dt + Pinn + IC
Table 4.3: Variations of implemented Neural Networks, where Data and Dt refer
to data-driven and physics-driven loss, respectively, using the available ground truth
data, while IC and Pinn refer to the same concepts but derived from collocation
points.
The goal is to demonstrate that the integration of physics will further enhance the
performance of the NNs. According to the results in 4.4, the PINN variant achieved
the best performance in terms of Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Mean Squared Er-
ror (MSE). MAE provides a simple and balanced evaluation of performance, whereas
MSE delivers a more comprehensive error analysis due to squaring the errors, espe-
cially useful in applications where large errors are critical. PINN variant leverage all
available physics-based loss functions, aligning with our initial expectations. The suc-
cessful integration of collocation points underscores their effectiveness in improving
==PAGE:57==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
47
the training process. However, the inclusion of the initial conditions of the colloca-
tion points within the training process of the PINN-IC variant does not guarantee
improved performance. One possible reason for this is that incorporating initial con-
ditions may introduce additional complexity, which can hinder the model’s ability
to generalize for time ̸= 0 and adapt to other time moments. The training dataset
contains 175 data points at each time step ti, while the integration of 500 data points
at t = 0 from the initial conditions of the collocation points shows that the training
becomes unbalanced. For that reason, the PINN variant will be utilized for the rest
of the experiments, which showed a more stable performance.
The results obtained from the multiple execution of the above are presented below:
Network
MAE
MSE
NN
3.157e-3
3.092e-5
NN-DT
3.098e-3
2.981e-5
PINN
2.156e-3
1.12e-5
PINN-IC
2.261e-3
1.17e-5
Table 4.4: Average MAE & MSE test scores for various neural network training loss-
based variations using the classical FCNN to approximate the behavior of a 2-axis
synchronous machine.
Valuable insights can be offered by assessing the respective loss for each variable
independently. The table below provides the corresponding results:
Network
MAEδ
MAEω
MAEE′
d
MAEE′
q
NN
0.002268
0.004688
0.005126
0.002527
NN-DT
0.004042
0.004797
0.005421
0.004085
PINN
0.002129
0.002859
0.001844
0.003027
PINN-IC
0.003789
0.003916
0.004035
0.002056
Table 4.5: Average MAE & MSE test scores of the synchronous machines variables
for various neural network training loss-based variations.
It can be observed that the PINN and PINN-IC consistently achieve the best per-
formance in both MAE and MSE test scores. However, in a number of single runs,
the inherent nature of neural networks can lead to variability in outcomes, as they
may become trapped in local minima or find a global minimum. Nevertheless, it is
significant that the PINN variations outperformed other models in all MAE variable
scores. Another useful insight comes from the observation of the MAE test score for
each variable individually. Despite varying scales among different variables, such as
ω and E
′
q, all scores exhibit comparable magnitudes within the same tested variant.
This observation highlights the neural network’s capability to provide balanced im-
provements across diverse outputs.
==PAGE:58==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
48
The following test example provides a concrete illustration of how the trained
PINN performs on unseen data. By observing the plots 4.8, it is evident as previously
that all the NN variants achieved accuracy within the same order of magnitude,
despite each variable having a different scale. This demonstrates the robustness and
adaptability of the neural networks across varying input and output scales.
Figure 4.8: Comparison between the PINN prediction (blue line) and the ground
truth data (orange line) for a test trajectory.
4.4.1
Optimizing the training process
To further improve the performance and generalizability of PINNs, a range of meth-
ods were implemented and their results are presented and analyzed below. For all
==PAGE:59==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
49
implementations, the classic synchronous machine modeling was utilized to ensure a
fair comparison of all algorithms. As mentioned earlier, the PINN variant was used
for the remaining comparisons due to its more stable performance. During the devel-
opment of the PINN framework, various adjustments and optimizations were made
to the hyperparameters. In the initial fine-tuning stage, several key hyperparameters
were identified and defined to enhance the model’s performance and accuracy.
Data
The data used during training are fixed. However, the number of trajectories within
a specific and limited range and their respective data points lead the PINN to over-
fitting. The reason behind is the finite number of initial conditions considered. An
advantageous strategy that was followed was to skip points within each trajectory.
More specifically, data points from both data and collocation trajectories are sam-
pled at regular intervals: every 23rd point for dataset points and every 6th point for
collocation points. During the hyperparameter tuning, it was observed that the more
data or collocation points from the same state space added, the slower the training
process is, and without any significant effect to the accuracy of the model.
The architecture of Neural Networks
Similarly, the size of the NN is linked to the complexity of the problem.
A NN
with 3 hidden layers and 64 neurons each, can effectively capture the dynamics of the
examined dynamical systems. This architecture was consistently used across different
types of NNs and various synchronous machine models. However, in the case of a
higher-order model, more hidden layers may be necessary. As for the different types
of NNs architecture, the results for FCNN, Adjusted FCNN and ResNet are presented
below:
Neural Network Architecture
MAE
MSE
FCNN
2.156e-3
1.12e-5
Adjusted FCNN
3.566e-3
2.76e-5
ResNet
34.29e-3
316.8e-5
Table 4.6: Average MAE & MSE test score for PINN with different Neural Network
types of architecture that approximate the behavior of a 2-axis synchronous machine
The FCNN outperforms Adjusted FCNN, while ResNet does not show the ex-
pected results. It is interesting to investigate further why the FCNN outperforms
Adjusted FCNN, considering that the latter enforces the satisfaction of the initial
conditions, whereas the former approximates them. This initial advantage, however,
does not translate into an overall performance improvement for PINNs.
On the
contrast, the Adjusted FCNN has the advantage that it can be trained with solely
collocation points, which might be necessary when ground truth data for examined
==PAGE:60==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
50
trajectories are not available-physics driven approach. Depending on the application,
the volume of data and the desired level of accuracy, the respective architecture
should be deployed.
An insightful visualization is the MAE scores of each variable throughout the simu-
lation period. This approach allows for the identification of strengths and weaknesses
in the implemented variations. For example, it can highlight whether a NN archi-
tecture performs well only in the initial phase of the transient period or maintains
consistent performance throughout. This analysis is particularly valuable for assess-
ing the performance across three different neural network architectures, revealing
significant insights into their effectiveness. The following visualization will represent
the respective performance only for the two promising FCNN and Adjusted FCNN.
==PAGE:61==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
51
Figure 4.9: MAE test score for each variable of the synchronous machine. Orange
line: Mean Score of Adjusted FCNN variation, Green line: Mean Score of FCNN vari-
ation. The shaded regions represent the standard deviation of the scores, indicating
the variability around the mean score for each variation.
Adjusted FCNN outperforms the FCNN only in the very first moments of the
simulation, as expected.
However, after a certain point, the FCNN maintains a
steady and better performance than Adjusted FCNN. Additionally, the performance
of the FCNN improves slightly over time, as the transient period ends. This suggests
that even a hybrid approach, which utilizes the performance of Adjusted FCNN in the
early phase of the simulation and the FCNN for the remainder of the simulation, will
not significantly affect overall performance. A tree-based method could potentially
==PAGE:62==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
52
serve this purpose without adding complexity to the entire system.
An alternative approach could involve a second training phase for the FCNN that
focuses solely on the loss associated with the initial conditions. Without interfering
with the entire training process, this additional phase would enable the trained NN
to adapt to this subset of the state space.
Adam vs LBFGS
Both Adam [23] and LBFGS [35] exhibit distinct advantages and weaknesses, making
them suitable for different scenarios.
In the examined task, which requires high
precision and fast convergence, LBFGS outperforms Adam. However, it is important
to note that for larger-scale problems and datasets with noisy gradients, such as real
data instead of simulations, the Adam optimizer is preferred. The primary reason
is that LBFGS has higher memory and computational requirements per iteration,
making it less eﬀicient for large datasets. Moreover, the number of iterations tends
to increase when handling larger training datasets or more complex systems. Both
algorithms have played crucial roles in the development and training of PINNs.
Transforming the data
Standardization of the output data proved to be an effective technique in specific
scenarios. Specifically, standardization enhanced the performance of PINNs by ≈25
% when utilizing the soft adaptive technique SAM for updating the weights of differ-
ent losses, and by ≈35 % compared to the classic approach with the static weights,
with a MAE score of 1.398e-3. By ensuring a zero mean and unit standard deviation
across all output variables, the model was able to assign equal importance to each
variable during training and mitigate issues arising from different scales. However,
similar transformations applied to the input data, initially hypothesized to be ben-
eficial, did not yield significant improvements. This suggests that the PINN might
be particularly sensitive to the original structure of the input features, especially the
time variable, which could negatively affect the respective derivative of the output.
This highlights the importance of careful data pre-processing. Min-Max normaliza-
tions did not offer the desired results for neither input nor output data.
In future work, it is recommended to first establish a pipeline without transfor-
mation, as their contribution is not guaranteed [36]. Then, experiment with trans-
formations applied only to the output. For the input, an adjusted transformation
that affects only the initial state input might be applied to avoid the aforementioned
issues.
The losses
During the training of a well established pipeline, it can be observed that the all
the losses decrease gradually. The rate of the decrease depends on the effect of the
==PAGE:63==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
53
respective loss to the loss function. Generally, the ground truth data loss has the most
significant impact, leading to a more rapid reduction of the total loss. In contrast,
the Dt or Pinn losses tend to reduce the total loss at a slower pace. This slower
reduction is due to the added complexity of incorporating differential equations into
the model’s training.
The weights of the losses
Careful weighting of the losses involved in PINNs training is essential to ensure a
balanced optimization process, that achieves both good data fitting and adherence
to physical laws. This balance directly impacts the model’s performance. The losses
observed on ground truth data and the physics agnostic losses, may have different
magnitudes and scales. During the training, the optimizer prioritizes minimizing the
bigger loss over the others, potentially neglecting important aspects of the problem.
In case of imbalanced loss terms, the training can be unstable leading to a local
minima, where the model aims to optimize only in that. A common strategy is to
prioritize the ground truth data. The reason behind this is that the physics loss is
interrelated to the PINN, through the data. PINN uses its prediction to generate
the PINN loss.
The start of training is the most sensitive phase, and where the
losses reduce significantly. In later phase, the importance of physics informed losses
arises, as the goal is to approximate the behavior of the synchronous machines under
different initial conditions. Focusing only on data, may lead to overfitting. However,
the prediction of the PINN must also adhere to the physical laws. This trade-off
between the losses was examined thoroughly during the implementation. The initial
weights used for the weighted sum of losses, differ by magnitude(s) of orders and given
by the table 4.7 below:
Weight Data
Weight Dt
Weight Pinn
Weight IC
1
1e-4
1e-5
1e-3
Table 4.7: Initial weights of the losses
Updating the loss weights
The table 4.8 presents the results using the different methods to update the weights
of the losses. From this table, the results of ReLoBRaLo method are absent, as the
results obtained did not show any potential.
The static method was used as a baseline, where the weights of the losses re-
mained constant, and the total loss changed only based on the current partial loss.
This method provided a consistent reference point for evaluating other techniques.
Next, the implemented dynamic method, which gradually increases each loss, did not
guarantee better performance. The dynamic adjustment of the weights introduced
additional complexity without yielding the expected benefits.
==PAGE:64==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
54
Update method
MAE
MSE
Static
2.156e-3
1.12e-5
Dynamic
5.56e-3
6.38e-5
SAM
1.82e-3
0.77e-5
Table 4.8: Average MAE & MSE test scores for a PINN with the different methods
to update the weights of the losses, that approximate the behavior of a 2-axis syn-
chronous machine
The next two methods involved soft adaptive techniques designed to improve
training stability and performance. The ReLoBRaLo method, despite its innovative
approach to dynamically balancing losses based on their relative magnitudes, resulted
in an unstable loss and did not perform well in practice. This instability could be
attributed to the method’s sensitivity to fluctuating loss values.
In contrast, the SAM method demonstrated promising results with minimal fine
tuning. By adaptively adjusting the trainable weights rates in response to their gra-
dients, the SAM method provided a more balanced and stable training process. This
approach effectively mitigated the issues faced by the ReLoBRaLo method, leading to
more consistent and reliable performance improvements. The SAM method’s ability
to dynamically adjust the trainable weights in response to their gradients allowed for
better handling of varying losses’ scales.
COC The success of the SAM method underscores the importance of adaptive
strategies in achieving stable and eﬀicient training, paving the way for further research
and optimization in this area. The weights of the losses express the importance of
each loss. In particular, the initial weights of the various losses significantly affect the
performance of the model, playing a role as important as the learning rate 2.2.2.
Hyperparameter tuning and monitoring
Sweep contributed significantly to identify the influence of each hyperparameter.
Bayesian method utilization offered accelarated exploration of the hyperparameters,
while the visualizations and logs to [33], were a good indicator to prevent mistakes in
training in early stage.
The sweep process played a crucial role in identifying the influence of each hyper-
parameter. By systematically varying the hyperparameters, we could observe their
individual and combined effects on the model’s performance. The utilization of the
Bayesian optimization method that sweep offered further accelerated the exploration
of the hyperparameter space. This method eﬀiciently navigated the complex land-
scape of hyperparameters, focusing on the most promising configurations with fewer
iterations.
Additionally, integration of visualizations and logs into the wandb platform pro-
vided valuable insights during the training process. These tools enabled real-time
==PAGE:65==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
55
monitoring and analysis, helping to identify and correct potential issues at an early
stage.
Overall, the combination of systematic sweeps, Bayesian optimization, and com-
prehensive logging and visualization significantly enhanced the optimization of the
hyperparameters, leading to improved performance and reliability of the PINNs.
4.4.1.1
Experimentation in larger state space
With an optimized pipeline in place, the next step was to experiment with broader
ranges of initial conditions. It is crucial for this pipeline to exhibit robustness and
to deliver consistent, reliable results when PINNs explore a larger state space of the
synchronous machine’s operation. The initial conditions ranges provided in 4.1 and
4.2 were tested with different PINN variants of the FCNN and the results are shown
below:
PINN Variant
MAE
MSE
Static
2.23e-3
1.3e-5
SAM
1.67e-3
0.59e-5
SAM with standardized output
1.48-3
0.57e-5
Table 4.9: Average MAE & MSE test scores for different PINN variants that ap-
proximate the behavior of a 2-axis synchronous machine in the state space 4.2.
It is obvious that PINN not only can successfully capture the behavior of the
selected synchronous machine for a broader state space but also achieve improved
performance. These findings strongly indicate that earlier experimental outcomes may
have been affected by overfitting, underscoring PINN’s robust ability to generalize
beyond specific training conditions.
4.4.1.2
An overview of the performance for all the developed synchronous
machine’s modellings
Using 4.1 and 4.2 as the state spaces for the synchronous machine initial condition
variables among the different modellings, the following results were obtained, using
the PINN variant with FCNN:
==PAGE:66==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
56
Synchronous Machine Modelling
PINN Variant
MAE
MSE
Classic Synchronous Machine
Static
2.25e-3
1.5e-5
Classic Synchronous Machine
SAM
1.82e-3
0.8e-5
2-axis Synchronous Machine
Static
2.16e-3
1.12e-5
2-axis Synchronous Machine
SAM
1.82e-3
0.77e-5
2-axis Synchronous Machine with AVR
Static
3.44e-3
2.595e-5
2-axis Synchronous Machine with AVR
SAM
2.37e-3
1.35e-5
2-axis Syn. Machine with AVR and governor
Static
3.46e-3
2.99e-5
2-axis Syn. Machine with AVR and governor
SAM
2.49e-3
1.6e-5
Table 4.10:
Average MAE & MSE test scores for different PINN variants that
approximate the behavior of the various synchronous machine modellings.
Synchronous Machine Modelling
PINN Variant
MAE
MSE
Classic Synchronous Machine
Static
1.82e-3
8.19e-6
Classic Synchronous Machine
SAM
1.46e-3
4.98e-6
2-axis Synchronous Machine
Static
2.23e-3
13.03e-6
2-axis Synchronous Machine
SAM
1.67e-3
5.86e-6
2-axis Synchronous Machine with AVR
Static
2.71e-3
18.31e-6
2-axis Synchronous Machine with AVR
SAM
2.47e-3
17.18e-6
2-axis Syn. Machine with AVR and governor
Static
2.57-3
15.61e-6
2-axis Syn. Machine with AVR and governor
SAM
2.34-3
13.23e-6
Table 4.11:
Average MAE & MSE test scores for different PINN variants that
approximate the behavior of the various synchronous machine modellings.
According to 4.10 and 4.11, the developed PINNs verify previous findings regard-
ing their robustness across different synchronous machine models and broader state
spaces. It can be observed that as the complexity of the studied model increases, the
performance of the PINNs tends to decline. This observation highlights the necessity
for more extensive data to achieve comparable accuracy to that of simpler models.
Additionally, a deeper neural network could be considered for more complex models.
The increased complexity of the models necessitated a longer training time. De-
spite this, it is noteworthy that the same PINN setup can be effectively employed
across various models, showcasing the flexibility and adaptability of the PINN ap-
proach. Furthermore, expanding the state space increased the training time as well,
but resulted in improved accuracy of the PINNs overall. This enhancement is at-
tributed to the network’s ability to better understand and predict the system’s be-
havior under various operating conditions.
In summary, while the complexity of the model directly impacts the performance
and training time of PINNs, the broader state space contributes positively to their ac-
curacy. These findings underscore the importance of comprehensive data and careful
consideration of model complexity in the development and application of PINNs.
==PAGE:67==
4.4 Developing the Physics Informed Neural Networks
57
4.4.1.3
Performance Assessment
As mentioned earlier, PINNs eﬀiciency stems from the inherent ability to incorporate
physical laws directly into the learning process, thereby reducing the need for ex-
tensive data and computationally expensive simulations and also provide faster and
accurate results.
Time
In terms of time eﬀiciency, it is crucial to highlight the reduced computation time
required by PINNs compared to traditional numerical methods. As a benchmark, the
time needed to obtain the solution for a single set of initial conditions is examined.
For the ODE solver, the time required to generate one solution from t0 = 0 to t0 = 1s
is 0.01 ± 0.005 s. In contrast, PINNs achieve the same in just 0.001 ± 0.0003 s. This
reduction underscores the 10x eﬀiciency of PINNs.
Furthermore, PINNs excel in their ability to parallelize outputs. While the times
mentioned above pertain to a single trajectory, the true potential of PINNs is revealed
when inferring multiple trajectories. For all 50 test trajectories, the ODE solver’s
time scales linearly, amounting to approximately 50 times the time for one trajectory,
whereas for PINNs, the total time required is only 0.0012 ± 0.0003 s. This shows
that as the inference state space grows, the advantages of PINNs become even more
pronounced. Additionally, the performance of the ODE solver tends to degrade with
an increased simulation time, which is not observed with PINNs. This robustness
allows eﬀicient assessment of a broad range of initial parameters, making PINNs a
superior choice for time-sensitive and large-scale simulations.
Accuracy
In terms of accuracy, the results highlight the capability of PINNs to simulate the
dynamic behavior of a synchronous machine. In the investigated cases, the most effec-
tive variant of PINNs approximated this behavior with an accuracy of approximately
2.1e-3 ± 0.2e-3 across various models of synchronous machines and different state
spaces 4.10. Although this level of accuracy may suﬀice for certain applications, the
current project development revealed substantial potential for further enhancement.
The level of accuracy and time eﬀiciency of PINNs can be particularly advantageous
in real-world scenarios where initial conditions are imprecise or vary.
PINNs can
swiftly generate solutions for a range of initial values, enabling rapid control response
and effective risk mitigation strategies.
==PAGE:68==
CHAPTER 5
Conclusion
In this project, the ultimate goal was to create an end-to-end pipeline for assessing the
performance of Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) in modeling synchronous
machines. We began by simulating the behavior of various synchronous machines, rep-
resented by ordinary differential equations (ODEs), using classical numerical methods.
An ODE framework was built to generate solutions and corresponding equations for
a given set of parameters and hyperparameters, with potential for extension to other
components within power systems. Subsequently, these simulations, particularly fo-
cusing on transient periods, were utilized for training and benchmarking PINNs. The
PINNs framework was implemented and rigorously evaluated to assess the transient
behavior of synchronous machines. A key insight from this research is the critical
role of adaptive strategies, such as the SAM method, in achieving stable and eﬀicient
training. The project aimed to generalize the application of PINNs across different
modellings by identifying optimized hyperparameters and establishing best practices.
Through comprehensive testing and validation were conducted, and the most effec-
tive hyperparameters, such as learning rates, network architectures, and methods to
update the weights of losses, were identified. This led to a robust framework that
ensures reliable PINN performance across different applications.
The application of PINNs to synchronous machines showed significantly faster
results compared to traditional methods due to their ability to incorporate physical
laws directly into the learning process.
This reduces the need for extensive data
and simulations, enabling real-time stability analysis. However, the computational
burden for larger state spaces was a challenge during this work. This project focused
on smaller state spaces and specific synchronous machine modellings. This approach
demonstrated the scalability and validity of PINNs principles, underscoring their
potential across broader applications.
==PAGE:69==
CHAPTER 6
Future Work
Based on the conclusions drawn from the previous section, there are several avenues
for future research on the topic of developing Physics-Informed Neural Networks
(PINNs) to assess the behavior of synchronous machines or other power system com-
ponents during a transient period.
An area of potential improvement lies in exploring alternative approaches to up-
date the weights of PINNs’ training losses. As discussed in Chapter 4, soft adaptive
methods have demonstrated promising results, suggesting room for further enhance-
ments. One promising direction could involve incorporating stochastic elements into
these adaptive methods. By introducing randomness, exploration across the solution
space can be enforced, potentially aiding in escaping local minima and improving
model robustness.
Additionally, exploring a hybrid approach for data integration in the PINN’s train-
ing holds promise for advancing their performance. This approach would combine
training data that effectively represent the state space with available real-world data.
Incorporating real-world data could provide additional insights and improve model
accuracy by capturing practical complexities and variations.
It is also crucial to
investigate the effect of collocation points in the training process.
By leveraging
these diverse data sources and understanding their impact, PINNs could be better
equipped to handle a broader range of scenarios and enhance their applicability in
complex real-world problems.
Finally, the development of a generalized toolbox offers fertile ground for exper-
imenting with a broader range of power systems components. The ODE and PINN
frameworks serve this purpose, and their further development can enhance this ca-
pability. Standardizing the pipeline not only holds significant research interest but
also facilitates a systematic exploration of PINNs. This standardization ensures a
consistent and reproducible approach, enabling researchers to build upon established
methodologies and advance the application of PINNs in power systems analysis.
By delving into these future research directions, further refinement and optimiza-
tion of the PINN’s development for power systems can be achieved. Exploring alterna-
tive methods for updating training losses, investigating hyperparameter adjustments
for expanded state spaces, integrating diverse data sources, and developing a stan-
dardized toolbox will collectively enhance the robustness, accuracy, and applicability
of PINNs in various complex domains.
This effort will contribute significantly to
establishing PINNs as a reliable and effective tool.
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
[1]
Erdiwansyah et al. A critical review of the integration of renewable energy
sources with various technologies. Dec. 2021. doi: 10.1186/s41601-021-00181-
3.
[2]
Oyeniyi Akeem Alimi, Khmaies Ouahada, and Adnan M. Abu-Mahfouz. A Re-
view of Machine Learning Approaches to Power System Security and Stability.
2020. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3003568.
[3]
John Rogosich. n79-. Tech. rep. 2008. url: https://epubs.siam.org/terms-
privacy.
[4]
“Power-System-Stability-and-Control-by-Prabha-Kundur.” In: ().
[5]
Peter W Sauer and M A Pai. POWER SYSTEM DYNAMICS AND STABIL-
ITY. Tech. rep.
[6]
K. E. Brenan, S. L. Campbell, and L. R. Petzold. Numerical Solution of Initial-
Value Problems in Differential-Algebraic Equations. Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics, Jan. 1995. isbn: 978-0-89871-353-4. doi: 10.1137/1.
9781611971224.
[7]
K. R. Padiyar. Power System Dynamics Stability and Control. Hyderabad. India:
B.S. Publications, 2002.
[8]
Dongxia Zhang, Xiaoqing Han, and Chunyu Deng. “Review on the research
and practice of deep learning and reinforcement learning in smart grids.” In:
CSEE Journal of Power and Energy Systems 4.3 (Sept. 2018), pp. 362–370. issn:
20960042. doi: 10.17775/CSEEJPES.2018.00520. url: https://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8468674.
[9]
I.E. Lagaris, A. Likas, and D.I. Fotiadis. “Artificial neural networks for solving
ordinary and partial differential equations.” In: IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks 9.5 (1998), pp. 987–1000. issn: 10459227. doi: 10.1109/72.712178.
[10]
M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis. “Physics-informed neural net-
works: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems in-
volving nonlinear partial differential equations.” In: Journal of Computational
Physics 378 (Feb. 2019), pp. 686–707. issn: 0021-9991. doi: 10.1016/J.JCP.
2018.10.045.
==PAGE:71==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[11]
Bin Huang and Jianhui Wang. “Applications of Physics-Informed Neural Net-
works in Power Systems - A Review.” In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems
38.1 (Jan. 2023), pp. 572–588. issn: 15580679. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2022.
3162473.
[12]
George S. Misyris, Andreas Venzke, and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis. “Physics-
Informed Neural Networks for Power Systems.” In: (Nov. 2019). url: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1911.03737.
[13]
Laurent Pagnier and Michael Chertkov. “Physics-Informed Graphical Neural
Network for Parameter & State Estimations in Power Systems.” In: (Feb. 2021).
url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2102.06349.
[14]
Rahul Nellikkath et al. “Physics Informed Neural Networks for Phase Locked
Loop Transient Stability Assessment.” In: (Mar. 2023). url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/2303.12116.
[15]
Ignacio de Cominges Guerra, Wenting Li, and Ren Wang. “A Comprehen-
sive Analysis of PINNs for Power System Transient Stability.” In: Electronics
(Switzerland) 13.2 (Jan. 2024). issn: 20799292. doi: 10.3390/electronics13020391.
[16]
Nikos Hatziargyriou et al. “Definition and Classification of Power System Stabil-
ity - Revisited & Extended.” In: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 36.4 (July
2021), pp. 3271–3281. issn: 15580679. doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2020.3041774.
[17]
Guide : Kiran and R Patil. Comparative Study of Synchronous Machine, Model
1.0 and Model 1.1 in Transient Stability Studies with and without PSS Abhijit N
Morab, Abhishek P Jinde, Jayakrishna Narra, Omkar Kokane. Tech. rep. url:
www.ijert.org.
[18]
Qingkai Kong, Timmy Siauw, and Alexandre M. Bayen. “Ordinary Differen-
tial Equations (ODEs) Initial-Value Problems.” In: Python Programming and
Numerical Methods. Elsevier, 2021, pp. 371–398. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-
819549-9.00032-4.
[19]
Joakim Sundnes. Simula SpringerBriefs on Computing 15 Solving Ordinary
Differential Equations in Python. Tech. rep.
[20]
Laurine Duchesne, Efthymios Karangelos, and Louis Wehenkel. Recent Develop-
ments in Machine Learning for Energy Systems Reliability Management. Tech.
rep.
[21]
M D Mckay, R J Beckman, and W J Conover. American Society for Quality
A Comparison of Three Methods for Selecting Values of Input Variables in the
Analysis of Output from a Computer Code. Tech. rep. 1. 2000, pp. 55–61.
[22]
M Jordan, J Kleinberg, and B Schölkopf. Pattern Recognition and Machine
Learning. Tech. rep.
[23]
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Opti-
mization.” In: (Dec. 2014). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[24]
Adam Paszke et al. Automatic differentiation in PyTorch. Tech. rep.
==PAGE:72==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
62
[25]
Atilim Gunes Baydin et al. “Automatic differentiation in machine learning: a
survey.” In: (Feb. 2015). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.05767.
[26]
Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the diﬀiculty of training deep
feedforward neural networks. Tech. rep. url: http://www.iro.umontreal..
[27]
Kaiming He et al. “Delving Deep into Rectifiers: Surpassing Human-Level Per-
formance on ImageNet Classification.” In: (Feb. 2015). url: http://arxiv.
org/abs/1502.01852.
[28]
A. Ali Heydari, Craig A. Thompson, and Asif Mehmood. “SoftAdapt: Tech-
niques for Adaptive Loss Weighting of Neural Networks with Multi-Part Loss
Functions.” In: (Dec. 2019). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.12355.
[29]
Jochen Stiasny, Baosen Zhang, and Spyros Chatzivasileiadis. “PINNSim: A
Simulator for Power System Dynamics based on Physics-Informed Neural Net-
works.” In: (Mar. 2023). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.10256.
[30]
Sameh Kamel, Mena Kodsi, and Claudio A Cañizares. MODELING AND SIM-
ULATION OF IEEE 14 BUS SYSTEM WITH FACTS CONTROLLERS. Tech.
rep.
[31]
Rafael Bischof and Michael A Kraus. Multi-Objective Loss Balancing for Physics-
Informed Deep Learning. Tech. rep. url: https://github.com/rbischof/
relative_balancing..
[32]
Levi D. McClenny and Ulisses M. Braga-Neto. “Self-adaptive physics-informed
neural networks.” In: Journal of Computational Physics 474 (Feb. 2023), p. 111722.
issn: 0021-9991. doi: 10.1016/J.JCP.2022.111722.
[33]
https://wandb.ai/.
[34]
https://github.com/radiakos/Physics-Informed-Neural-Networks-for-Synchronous-
Machine-Models.
[35]
Dong C Liu and Jorge Nocedal. ON THE LIMITED M E M O R Y BFGS M
E T H O D FOR LARGE SCALE O P T I M I Z A T I O N. Tech. rep. 1989,
pp. 503–528.
[36]
Sifan Wang et al. “An Expert’s Guide to Training Physics-informed Neural
Networks.” In: (Aug. 2023). url: http://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08468.
