==PAGE:1==
Portfolio Optimization using
Mixed Integer Linear
Programming
Andri Dagur Ófeigsson - s222544
M.Sc. Thesis
Hekla Mist Valgeirsdóttir - s223229
Master of Science in Engineering
Ingibjörg Einarsdóttir - s223228
DTU Industrial Engineering and Management
Department of Technology, Management and Economics
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Portfolio Optimization using Mixed Integer Linear Programming
M.Sc. Thesis
June, 2024
By
Andri Dagur Ófeigsson & Hekla Mist Valgeirsdóttir & Ingibjörg Einarsdóttir
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include
the customary bibliographic citation, including author attribution,
report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Technology, Management and Economics,
Akademivej, Building 358, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.man.dtu.dk
==PAGE:4==
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This thesis explores the usage of two widely recognized linear optimization mod-
els to create the optimal portfolio of stocks. The models under consideration are
the Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD) and Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR). To
estimate the weekly stock returns for the optimization models various scenario gener-
ation techniques have been explored. These methods include the Historical method,
Fama-French three-factor, four-factor, five-factor, and six-factor models, as well as
Monte Carlo simulation, Vector Auto-regressive Moving Average (VARMA) model
and Block bootstrapping.
These model and methods are explored on two markets, the U.S. market using the
S&P 500 index as a benchmark as well as the Nordic market using the NASDAQ
OMX Nordic 120 index as a benchmark.
This is done to see if the results are
comparable across markets and markets of varying size. Additionally, the results
are analysed for both markets across two distinct periods: during market upswings
and downswings.
Understanding which models and methods provide robust portfolio optimization
across different market sizes and conditions is important as it can guide investors in
making informed investment decisions, potentially improving investment outcomes.
The findings indicate that the performance of the methods and models is highly
dependent on the data they are fed, and examining different periods may yield
varying outcomes. The optimization models had more success outperforming the
index during market downswings compared to upswings. However, the Fama-French
factor models consistently performed well in both markets, while the VARMA model
showed strong performance in the Nordic market but less so in the U.S. market.
This research contributes to the field of portfolio optimization by providing em-
pirical evidence and analytical insights into the effectiveness of different models
and methods under various market conditions. It offers valuable guidance for both
academic research and practical investment management, helping to inform better
decision-making and strategy development in portfolio management.
iii
==PAGE:6==
iv
==PAGE:7==
Preface
This 30 ETCS master’s thesis was prepared at and submitted to the Department of
Technology, Management and Economics at the Technical University of Denmark.
This project constitutes the final requirement for the degree Master of Science in
Engineering in Industrial Engineering and Management. The work has been super-
vised by Professor Stefan Røpke. It is assumed that the reader of this thesis has
basic knowledge in the areas of finance, statistics, and mathematical modelling.
Acknowledgements
We would like to extend our deepest gratitude to our supervisor, Stefan Røpke, for
his invaluable guidance and expert knowledge throughout the development of our
thesis. His insightful input and constructive feedback were instrumental in shaping
our research. We are profoundly appreciative of the time he invested in ensuring
the progression and completion of our work.
Andri Dagur Ófeigsson
Hekla Mist Valgeirsdóttir
Ingibjörg Einarsdóttir
s222544
s223229
s223228
Signature
Signature
Signature
Date
Date
Date
v
==PAGE:8==
vi
==PAGE:9==
Contents
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
Abbreviations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Objective and Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2
Research Question
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2
Literature Review
5
2.1
Background on Indexes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Methodology
11
3.1
Optimization Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Transaction Cost . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
3.3
Sample Analysis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Scenario Generation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.5
Probability Distribution of Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.6
Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4
Data
51
4.1
Data Gathering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2
Data Handling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
52
5
Preliminary Analysis
59
5.1
Number of Scenarios . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
5.2
Assessing Randomness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.3
Parameter Tuning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
73
6
Results
81
6.1
Results for the S&P 500 index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.2
Results for the Nordic 120 index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
vii
==PAGE:10==
7
Conclusions
97
7.1
Discussions & Future Work
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
List of Figures
108
List of Tables
114
Bibliography
115
A Data Appendix
119
A.1
List of S&P 500 companies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119
A.2
List of Nordic 120 companies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
B Preliminary Analysis Appendix
121
B.1
S-Curve results for determining the number of scenarios . . . . . . . . 121
B.2
Quality Check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
B.3
Parameter Tuning Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
C Results Appendix
139
C.1
Top Assets
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
C.2
MAD and CVaR comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
C.3
Quality Check . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
C.4
Risk free rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
C.5
Evaluation of a Two Year out-of-sample Period
. . . . . . . . . . . . 146
==PAGE:11==
Abbreviations
MPT Modern Portfolio Theory
MAD The Mean Absolute Deviation
CVaR Conditional Value at Risk
S&P 500 The Standard and Poor’s 500
Nordic 120 NASDAQ OMX Nordic 120
FF3 Fama-French three-factor model
FF4 Fama-French four-factor model
FF5 Fama-French five-factor model
FF6 Fama-French six-factor model
VARMA Vector Auto-regressive Moving Average
MV Mean-Variance
CAPM Capital Asset Pricing Model
SMB Small Minus Big
HML High Minus Low
ROA Return on Asset
RMW Robust Minus Weak
ROE Return on Equity
CMA Conservative Minus Aggressive
BIC Bayesian Information Criterion
KPI Key Performance Indicators
ix
==PAGE:12==
==PAGE:13==
Chapter 1
Introduction
Investing is the process of acquiring assets with the expectation that their monetary
value will increase over time, consequently increasing the value of your own assets.
There are various approaches that can be employed to accomplish this. One method
to invest is to build a portfolio.
In 1952 Harry Markowitz set forward what is referred to as the Modern Portfolio
Theory (MPT). Part of the theory Markowitz set forward was a new way to build
an investment portfolio and optimize it. Diversification was the key element to the
theory. Investments should either be high risk and high return or low risk and low
return, the arguments made by Markowitz was that by mixing the two the optimal
return would be found given a predetermined tolerance for risk. The risk of the
portfolio being measured through the variance of the rate of return.
These principles are followed to this day when assembling portfolios. When investing
the investor must asses the risk they are ready to take with their assets. Riskier
investments often have a higher payout, however, on the flip side they can also result
in major losses. No investment can be considered a sure thing, especially risky ones,
so when assembling a portfolio the risk of each asset must be considered as well as
the risk of the whole portfolio.
In a perfect world, we could know how the market might change and evolve in
order to maximise our investment chances. The closest thing we have is to predict
the market’s future with prediction models or use historical data to estimate the
future. There is never a guarantee of success when making predictions, and different
prediction models are not equally reliable.
Chapter: Introduction
1
==PAGE:14==
1.1
Objective and Motivation
In this thesis two linear optimization models will be explored in cooperation with
different simulation methods of estimating the market, using the S&P 500 index
as a benchmark. The S&P 500 is a large and thoroughly researched and analysed
index, this thesis will therefore additionally look at a smaller market like the Nordic
market, including the largest companies from Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland,
and Iceland, using the NASDAQ OMX Nordic 120 index as a benchmark. Explor-
ing how a smaller market will perform with the models applied and whether the
conclusion will alter under those circumstances.
The two optimization models under considerations are the Mean Absolute Deviation
(MAD) and the Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR). The MAD model provides a
measure of the average of the absolute value of the difference between a random
variable and its expected value. In the case of this thesis the random variable would
be the return of the portfolio. The CVaR model provides insight into the conditional
risk of a portfolio by quantifying the expected loss given that the loss of the portfolio
exceeds a predefined threshold.
Various methods have been utilized to generate the return rate of stocks, including
the Fama-French three-factor, four-factor (also known as the Carhart four-factor),
five-factor, and six-factor models, as well as Monte Carlo simulation, Vector Auto-
regressive Moving Average (VARMA) models and Block bootstrapping. These di-
verse methodologies have then been incorporated into the before mentioned math-
ematical optimization models, and the resultant outcomes have been thoroughly
analysed.
1.2
Research Question
Achieving accurate predictions in the stock market and making wise investment
decisions are highly coveted skills. While numerous funds and experts in this field
have made significant advancements, the ultimate best approach remains elusive.
Each method carries its own set of advantages and disadvantages to varying degrees.
This phenomenon can be partly explained by the Eﬀicient Market Hypothesis (EMH),
which suggests that asset prices fully reflect all available information at any given
time. According to the EMH, investors have no opportunity to achieve abnormal
profits or beat the market because market prices should immediately adjust to new
information. Consequently, the only way for an investor to achieve higher returns
2
Chapter: Introduction
==PAGE:15==
is by taking on greater risk. The EMH has sparked a wide range of opinions, with
some researchers and practitioners rejecting it, while others firmly support it [1].
Proponents of the EMH argue that instances of market outperformance are more
likely due to luck rather than skill. This argument is based on the laws of probabil-
ity, which dictate that in a market with numerous participants, some will inevitably
exceed the average performance while others will fall below it [2].
To gauge the success of predictions in the U.S. market, many rely on the S&P
500 index as a benchmark, given its consistent upward trajectory over the years.
While some manage to outperform the S&P 500 index within specific time frames,
sustaining this outperformance over extended periods remains a challenge that only
a few have successfully overcome.
Numerous methods have been proposed in pursuit of this objective, with varying
degrees of success. A subset of these methods was outlined in Section 1.1, repre-
senting those of particular interest to the authors. Examining these models and
methods involves assessing their performance relative to benchmarking against the
S&P 500 index, a substantial fund comprising approximately 500 U.S. companies.
This raises questions about the applicability of these methods and models to other
regions and markets. Is the sheer size of the U.S. market a determining factor for
the effectiveness of these models, and will they yield similar results when applied to
smaller markets?
The aim of this thesis is therefore to answer the following questions
1. Among the Historical method, Fama-French three-factor, four-factor, five-
factor, and six-factor models, as well as Monte Carlo simulation, the VARMA
model, and the Block bootstrapping method, which demonstrates superior
performance, and are any of these methods capable of outperforming the S&P
500 index?
2. Do these methods exhibit comparable performance when applied to a smaller
market, such as the NASDAQ OMX Nordic 120 index, in comparison to their
performance in the U.S. market?
Chapter: Introduction
3
==PAGE:16==
1.3
Limitations
Every research endeavor inevitably encounters limitations to some degree. These
limitations can vary significantly, influenced by both their impact on the study and
the inherent nature of the constraints themselves. In this thesis, one such limitation
pertains to data availability. The analysis relies on the S&P 500 and the Nordic 120
indexes as a benchmark and the only companies under consideration for this study
are the companies in the indexes, utilizing historical data spanning several years.
Given the dynamic nature of the two indexes, companies are added, removed, or
undergo changes in status over time. An issue arises from the fact that the data used
in this study inherently knows which companies will be included in the indexes since
the index lists were extracted from the first quarter of 2024. This foresight allows
for the selection of companies with a known track record of success, introducing a
bias in the comparisons made in this thesis to the indexes.
Another challenge arises due to missing data. Companies enter the stock market (not
the indexes) at different times, some more recently than others. The models require
an equally large number of returns from each asset. To address this issue, companies
with incomplete data for the time interval under consideration are excluded from the
analysis. This exclusion prevents the models from selecting new stocks for the time
period under consideration. While the authors do not anticipate this exclusion to
significantly affect the study’s outcomes, it is nonetheless important to acknowledge
these limitations.
4
Chapter: Introduction
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 2
Literature Review
A portfolio is the collection of financial assets an investor holds, but several dif-
ferent frameworks have been developed to optimize portfolio selection.
Modern
Portfolio Theory (also called Mean-Variance analysis) is widely used to analyse and
optimize investment portfolios, and its origins can be traced back to the 1950s.
Harry Markowitz is widely regarded as the father of Modern Portfolio Theory after
publicizing the article ”Portfolio Selection” in the Journal of Finance. His ground-
breaking research in 1952 signifies the initial development of an optimization model
for portfolio selection, aiming to maximize returns while managing a specified level
of risk or minimize risk while achieving a predetermined level of return. His seminal
work, expanded upon by numerous researchers, forms the cornerstone of what is
now known as Modern Portfolio Theory [3].
Markowitz introduced the concept of diversification and effectively demonstrated
through a model the significance of investing in a diversified portfolio. His ground-
breaking model aims to identify the optimal balance between investment risk and
return. In his model, portfolio risk is assessed by analysing the variance of the port-
folio’s rate of return. The resulting optimization model, designed for single-period
portfolio selection, takes a quadratic form indicating its divergence from linearity
[4].
The LP solvability is crucial for practical applications in real-life financial decisions,
especially when constructing portfolios that must satisfy numerous side constraints
and incorporating additional features of the investment problem such as transaction
costs [5]. Consequently, following Markowitz’s contributions, numerous other port-
folio optimization models have been suggested in academic literature. In the book
Linear and Mixed Integer Programming for Portfolio Optimization, different linear
models and mixed-integer linear models are presented, including the Mean Absolute
Deviation (MAD) and Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) [4].
In 1990s the Mean-Absolute Deviation (MAD) model was introduced by Konno and
Yamazaki as an optimization model for dealing with very large-scale portfolio opti-
Chapter: Literature Review
5
==PAGE:18==
misation problems. The model is an advancement of the standard Mean-Variance
(MV) model introduced by Markowitz. In comparison to the MV model introduced
by Markowitz that uses the variance as a measure of the risk, the MAD uses the
absolute-deviation from the mean return of a portfolio. From a mathematical stand
point the two models are almost equivalent. Their significant difference lies in their
computational differences. The MAD model has the potential to be reduced to a
linear programming problem, whereas the MV results in a convex quadratic pro-
gramming problem. At the time and to this day quadratic programming problems
are not as easily and speedily solvable, so the significance of the computational
differences were notable [6].
In the late 1990s to early 2000s Rockafellar and Uryasev started experimenting with
using Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR) also known as Mean Excess Loss, Mean
Shortfall, or Tail VaR to optimize a financial portfolio. Up to this point CVaR had
not been used in this context, although it had been gaining some popularity in the
insurance industry. CVaR provides information about the expected value of losses
that exceed a certain threshold, given that the loss has occurred. It calculates the
average value of the losses that fall beyond a specified threshold. It gives a more
comprehensive view of the tail risk or extreme losses in a portfolio, compared to
Value-at-Risk (VaR), which only provides information about the maximum potential
loss at a specific confidence level.
CVaR can provide valuable insights into the
potential downside risk of an investment or portfolio [7].
Guastaroba [8] aimed to prove that portfolio optimization models can be used as
reliable decision making tools. The reliability of mathematical models solutions to
be used as a decision making tool for future uncertain events is a challenge. The
input data highly effects the quality and effectiveness of the models. In the portfolio
selection process, models require a set of scenarios, where each scenario represents a
potential outcome of the rate of return of assets. How these scenarios are generated
can vastly vary, and can have a significant impact on the models predictive power and
reliability. Several scenario generation technique are mentioned in the PhD thesis
Portfolio Optimization: Scenario Generation, Models and Algorithms by Gianfranco
Guastaroba, and tested out. Guastaroba [8] was able to make several conclusions
after his analysis. His first conclusion was that portfolio optimization models are in
fact valuable tools for financial decision-making, yielding favorable outcomes during
market upswings and proving particularly crucial during downturns by substantially
reducing portfolio return volatility. The effectiveness of the models is evidenced
by their ability to consistently outperform market indexes across various market
conditions. Moreover, their findings suggest that the suitability of various scenario
6
Chapter: Literature Review
==PAGE:19==
generation techniques depends on investors’ risk aversion levels.
Having explored various portfolio optimization models, we now turn our attention
to a seminal contribution in the field of asset pricing: the Fama-French model. This
model, developed by Eugene Fama and Kenneth French, is a significant advancement
in our understanding of portfolio construction and risk management.
The Fama-French models build upon the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), by
incorporating additional factors beyond market risk. The CAPM aims to determine
the expected return on an investment based on its systematic risk relative to the
overall market. In essence it is a factor model that considers one factor, the market
risk [9]. It is a relatively simple model that has then been built upon. The basic
Fama-French model includes two additional factors aside from market risk, those
are size and value. Size, measured by market capitalization, captures the effect of
company size on stock returns, while value, measured by the Book-to-Market ratio,
reflects the impact of a firm’s valuation metrics on its returns. The model suggests
that stocks with smaller market capitalization and higher Book-to-Market ratios
tend to exhibit higher average returns, even after accounting for market risk. This
observation challenges the traditional CAPM framework, which considers only mar-
ket beta as the sole determinant of expected returns [10]. The Fama-French model
has been further developed from its original version, leading to the Fama-French
four-factor model (also known as Carhart four-factor model), the five-factor model,
and the six-factor model. In 1997 Carhart [11] published an article on the persis-
tence of mutual fund performance and whether past performance can predict future
performance. Carhart introduced a four-factor model that combines market risk,
size, value, and momentum factors. The momentum factor measures the likelihood
that assets that have performed well in the recent past will continue to perform
well in the near future, and vice versa. Carhart concluded that past mutual fund
performance is indeed predictive of future performance, even after accounting for
various risk factors.
Fama and French [12] proposed a further extension of the Fama-French three-factor
model in 2015. The additions made to the model are the profitability, and invest-
ment patterns of stocks. These factors are intended to capture additional aspects of
stock returns beyond those accounted for in the original three-factor model. Specif-
ically, the authors use profitability and investment factors to better explain the
heterogeneity in average stock returns. Fama and French concluded from their ex-
amination that the five-factor model generally performs better than the original
three-factor model in explaining the cross-section of stock returns. However, they
also noted that the five-factor model faces challenges in its oversight in account-
Chapter: Literature Review
7
==PAGE:20==
ing for the low average returns on small stocks with high investment despite low
profitability. A six-factor model was proposed by Fama and French in 2018 that
included the momentum factor introduced by Carhart [13].
Another study conducted by Belen Blanco compares the Fama-French three-factor
model with the CAPM by using historical data and constructing portfolios in vari-
ous ways. The portfolios are selected based on market capitalization and Book-to-
Market ratios, employing a similar method to Kenneth French’s when constructing
the Fama-French factors. The study concludes that the Fama-French three-factor
model outperforms the CAPM. However, it is noted that the results may vary de-
pending on the portfolio construction method used [14]. Similarly, in a paper written
by Chiah, Chai, Zhong, and Li, the Fama-French models are compared to the CAPM
using data from the Australian stock market, with results also indicating that the
Fama-French model outperforms the CAPM [15].
A study examining the use of the Fama-French factors for portfolio selection con-
cludes that employing multiple factor models does not necessarily lead to better
performance. In fact, it can reduce performance due to the additional estimation
uncertainty introduced. The main focus of their study was to assess the accuracy of
various estimators of the covariance matrix using different factor models [16].
Furthermore, a study using CVaR for portfolio optimization concludes that the
Fama-French factor portfolios offer a reliable path to achieving diversification bene-
fits. This reinforces the viability of factor investing as a strategy for managing risk
and enhancing portfolio performance [17].
8
Chapter: Literature Review
==PAGE:21==
2.1
Background on Indexes
2.1.1
The Standard and Poor’s 500
The S&P 500 index, formally known as the Standard and Poor’s 500 index, was
introduced in 1957. Originally designed as a benchmark to gauge the performance
of the U.S. stock market, it tracks the value of 500 leading companies listed on both
the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the Nasdaq exchange. Representing
a diverse cross-section of industries, the stocks comprising the S&P 500 serve as a
measure of the state of the economic health of the U.S. economy.
The composition of the S&P 500 is not static, it evolves over time as new compa-
nies emerge and established ones evolve. Dynamic by nature, the index undergoes
adjustments quarterly to reflect changes in market conditions and economic trends
[18]. Companies included in the index are carefully selected based on specific cri-
teria, including stringent liquidity and size requirements. For instance, to qualify
for inclusion, a company must meet a minimum market capitalization threshold,
set at $12.7 billion or higher. Ultimately, a committee tasked with overseeing the
index determines which corporations the index is comprised of [19]. The S&P 500
index is a float-adjusted market capitalization weighted index. This means that each
company’s weight in the index is determined by its market capitalization, adjusted
by the number of shares available for public trading, known as the free float. The
weight of each company in the S&P 500 is determined by dividing its float-adjusted
market cap by the total float-adjusted market cap of all the companies in the index
[20].
Figure 2.1: Cumulative return of the S&P 500 index
Chapter: Literature Review
9
==PAGE:22==
2.1.2
NASDAQ OMX Nordic 120
The NASDAQ OMX Nordic 120, referred to as Nordic 120 in this thesis, was in-
troduced around 2010. The stock market index tracks the performance for the 120
largest and most actively traded companies listed on the NASDAQ OMX Nordic Ex-
change, which includes stock exchanges in Copenhagen, Oslo, Helsinki, Reykjavík,
and Stockholm. The index was introduced to serve as a benchmark to measure the
performance of the largest and most influential companies in the Nordic region, in-
dicating the economic activity in the area. Like the S&P 500, the Nordic 120 index
evolves with the market, its composition is reviewed and updated on a semi-annual
basis to ensure that it remains representative [21]. The index is a free float market
capitalization weighted index, similar to the S&P 500 index, and is capped according
to UCITS IV which sets limits on the maximum weight any single stock can have
in the index [22].
Figure 2.2: Cumulative return of the Nordic 120 index
10
Chapter: Literature Review
==PAGE:23==
Chapter 3
Methodology
In the following chapter, the methodologies employed in this thesis will be delved
into, offering a comprehensive overview and elucidation. We begin by elucidating
the optimization models utilized and their underlying principles. Subsequently, we
explore the various techniques employed to generate scenarios of return rates, as
well as how the data will be utilized and partitioned to feed into the models. Lastly
the evaluation process will be explained, outlining how the results will be critically
analysed. Upon completing this chapter, readers will gain a thorough understanding
of the methods employed and their application in this study.
3.1
Optimization Models
This thesis will focus on two primary optimization models: the Mean Absolute
Deviation (MAD) model and the Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR) model.
The MAD model is an optimization model for optimizing a portfolio, aiming to
minimize risk. The risk of the portfolio is expressed as the Mean Absolute Deviation
(MAD) of the portfolio return. This measure incorporates the deviations of the
portfolio’s returns from its expected value, and the model seeks to minimize the
average of the absolute deviations.
To illustrate this, Figure 3.1 shows the returns of a portfolio across 25 scenarios
(blue line). The red line indicates the expected return of the portfolio. The length
of the vertical segments represent the absolute deviations from the expected return.
For example, the deviation d15 for scenario s = 15 is shown. The MAD model seeks
to minimize the average of these absolute deviations.
Chapter: Methodology
11
==PAGE:24==
Figure 3.1: Illustration of the MAD measure, as illustrated in [4, Fig. 2.1].
Before delving into the model and its constraints, let’s establish a clear understand-
ing of the notation and decision variables that will be encountered in the MAD
model. Understanding these notations and variables is crucial for interpreting the
subsequent constraints within the optimization framework.
Notation:
S
Set of scenarios
n
Set of available assets considered for an investment
ps
Probability that scenario s will happen
rjs
Return of asset j under scenario s
µ0
Lower bound on the expected return of the portfolio required by the investor
µj
Expected return of asset j
Decision variables:
xj
Weight of asset j in portfolio
ys
Return of the portfolio in scenario s
ds
Deviation in scenario s
µ
Portfolio expected return
The following is a linear formulation of the MAD model, as it is defined in the book
Linear and Mixed Integer Programming for Portfolio Optimization [4, Model 2.8]:
12
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:25==
Min
S
X
s=1
psds
(3.1a)
s.t.
ds ≥ys −µ
∀s = 1, ..., S
(3.1b)
ds ≥−(ys −µ)
∀s = 1, ..., S
(3.1c)
ys =
n
X
j=1
rjsxj
∀s = 1, ..., S
(3.1d)
µ =
n
X
j=1
µjxj
(3.1e)
µ ≥µ0
(3.1f)
ds ≥0
∀s = 1, ..., S
(3.1g)
x ∈Q
(3.1h)
Where Q represents the constraint system that defines the set of feasible portfolios,
that includes
n
X
j=1
xj = 1
and
xj ≥0
∀j = 1, ..., n
and other requirements on the weights of the assets requested by the investor, such
as the minimum and maximum weight for particular assets, or the overall weight of
a set of assets.
When investors face uncertainty, they naturally seek to minimize risk, making use of
risk metrics. These risk measures generally describe the variability of the portfolio’s
rate of return. However, the risk can be substituted with another type of measure,
known as safety measures. The safety measures consider the worst realization of
the portfolio rate of return and focus on shielding the investor from the worst-case
situations.
Risk measures and safety measures differ on the approach in which they assist in-
vestors in managing their portfolios.
Risk measures quantify the uncertainty or
variability of the returns of a portfolio, focusing on how much the returns deviate
from their expected value. In contrast, safety measures are designed to protect in-
vestors from extreme negative outcomes. Concentrating on downside risk and the
protection against severe negative outcomes. Risk measures are more suitable for in-
Chapter: Methodology
13
==PAGE:26==
vestors looking to understand and manage general volatility and uncertainty, safety
measures are for those who prioritize robust protection against extreme negative
outcomes [4].
The MAD model employs MAD as a risk measure, focusing on minimizing the risk
through deviation of the portfolio rate of return from its expected value, considering
both upside and downside deviations equally, treating all deviations from the mean
as risk. Conversely, the CVaR model employs a safety measure, aiming to maximize
it. The aim is to maximize the rate of return on the portfolio at its worst realization
[4].
In this context, the worst realization is denoted by M(x).
The M(x) measure
represents the worst-case scenario return of the portfolio, simply focusing on the
single worst-case scenario. However, the CVaR model introduces the tail mean or
worst conditional expectation, Mβ(x). The Mβ(x) measure is defined as the mean
return of the portfolio taken over a given tolerance level (percentage) 0 < β ≤1 of
the worst scenarios. This measure generalizes the concept of M(x) by considering
not just the single worst outcome, but the average of the worst β · 100% scenarios.
For the simplest case of equally probable scenarios (ps = 1
S) and proportional β = k
S
the CVaR measure Mβ(x) is defined as the average of the k worst realizations
M k
S (x) = 1
k
k
X
i=1
ysi
(3.2)
where ys1,ys2,...,ysk are the k worst realizations for the portfolio rate of return [4].
To better illustrate the concept of the CVaR model, consider Figure 3.2, which
displays the returns of a portfolio across 25 scenarios. With k = 3, the three worst
realizations considered in the CVaR calculation are highlighted in red.
Figure 3.2: Illustration of worst realizations in CVaR calculation, as illustrated in [4,
Fig. 2.5].
14
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:27==
To implement this in a practical optimization framework, the CVaR model can be
formulated linearly. First, the notation and decision variables used in the CVaR
model are clarified.
Notation:
S
Set of scenarios
n
Set of available assets considered for an investment
ps
Probability that scenario s will happen
rjs
Return of asset j under scenario s
µ0
Lower bound on the expected return of the portfolio required by the investor
µj
Expected return of asset j
k
Number of worst realizations
β
k/S
Decision variables:
xj
Weight of asset j in portfolio
ys
Return of the portfolio in scenario s
µ
Portfolio expected return
η
Value at Risk (VaR)
d−
s
The loss beyond VaR in scenario s
Chapter: Methodology
15
==PAGE:28==
The following is a linear formulation of the CVaR model, as it is defined in the book
Linear and Mixed Integer Programming for Portfolio Optimization [4, Model 2.20]:
Max
η −1
β
S
X
s=1
psd−
s
(3.3a)
s.t.
d−
s ≥η −ys
∀s = 1, . . . , S
(3.3b)
ys =
n
X
j=1
rjsxj
∀s = 1, . . . , S
(3.3c)
µ =
n
X
j=1
µjxj
(3.3d)
µ ≥µ0
(3.3e)
d−
s ≥0
∀s = 1, . . . , S
(3.3f)
x ∈Q
(3.3g)
Upon examining the two optimization models there are some input parameters that
would be beneficial to further explain and show how they are formulated for the
models.
Different scenario generation techniques utilized with CVaR and MAD could employ
varying distributions for the probability p. One approach is to assign equal probabil-
ities to each scenario (uniform distribution), while another approach assigns higher
probabilities to more recent scenarios and lower probabilities to older ones (referred
to as S-curve distribution). Regardless of the distribution applied the probabilities
ps must always sum to 1.
S
X
s=1
ps = 1
The expected return of asset j is calculated as:
µj =
S
X
s=1
psrjs
16
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:29==
where rjs represents the return of asset j in scenario s. These scenarios of returns
can be generated in multiple ways.
The parameter µ0 represents the minimum required expected return of the portfo-
lio. It ensures that the optimized portfolio meets a certain threshold of expected
performance, aligning with the investor’s objectives. The parameter β represents
the proportion of scenarios considered in the calculation of the CVaR measure. Fur-
ther tuning of the µ0 and β parameters will be conducted including testing different
ranges and combinations of them.
3.2
Transaction Cost
To accurately reflect reality, transaction costs should be carefully considered in port-
folio optimization. With every buy or sell transaction of a stock, there are associated
costs. Therefore, the cost of adjusting a portfolio is a significant factor to consider,
as it could influence decisions regarding whether to buy or sell stocks. These costs
may outweigh the risks associated with holding onto a stock and making changes to
the portfolio. There are various computational methods for factoring in transaction
fees, and implementing these costs into optimization models is crucial for realistic
portfolio management [4].
There follows a proportional cost of the capital invested. If the proportional cost
of the capital is under a certain minimum a minimum cost is applied. The cost of
investing is dependent on who the investor is. For the sake of this thesis the investor
is a VIP investor, meaning that the proportional cost associated is 0.03% and the
minimum cost is $1 according to Saxo Bank [23].
Chapter: Methodology
17
==PAGE:30==
3.2.1
Optimization Models Including Transaction Cost
Accounting for transaction costs requires revisions to the optimisation models men-
tioned in Section 3.1, such as MAD and CVaR. New parameters and decision vari-
ables must be introduced, as well as new constraints and modifications to some of
the existing constraints.
New Notations:
C
Capital invested
M
Big M
PC
Proportional cost associated with buying/selling asset j
xold
j
Weight of asset j in portfolio from the previous time step
New decision variables:
zj
1 if invested amount changes in asset j, 0 otherwise
γj
Changed amount invested in asset j in $
tcj
Transaction cost on asset j
The following is a linear formulation of the MAD model with transaction cost,
created by the authors as an extension of the MAD model presented above, from
the book Linear and Mixed Integer Programming for Portfolio Optimization [4,
Model 2.8]:
18
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:31==
Min
S
X
s=1
psds
(3.4a)
s.t.
tcj ≥PCγj −M(1 −zj)
∀j = 1, . . . , N
(3.4b)
tcj ≥1 −(1 −zj)
∀j = 1, . . . , N
(3.4c)
γj ≥|Cxold
j
−Cxj|
∀j = 1, . . . , N
(3.4d)
ds ≥|ys −µ|
∀s = 1, . . . , S
(3.4e)
ys =
n
X
j=1
rjsxjC −
n
X
j=1
tcj
∀s = 1, . . . , S
(3.4f)
µ =
n
X
j=1
µjxjC −
n
X
j=1
tcj
(3.4g)
zj ≥|xold
j
−xj|
∀j = 1, . . . , N
(3.4h)
µ ≥µ0C
(3.4i)
ds ≥0
∀s = 1, . . . , S
(3.4j)
x ∈Q
(3.4k)
zj ∈{0, 1}
∀j = 1, . . . , N
(3.4l)
γj ≥0
∀j = 1, . . . , N
(3.4m)
tcj ≥0
∀j = 1, . . . , N
(3.4n)
If compared to the original model one can see that some significant alterations have
been made to the model to account for transaction costs. The same alterations have
been made to the CVaR model. The following is a linear formulation of the CVaR
model with transaction cost, created by the authors as an extension of the CVaR
model presented above, from the book Linear and Mixed Integer Programming for
Portfolio Optimization [4, Model 2.20]:
Chapter: Methodology
19
==PAGE:32==
Max
η −1
β
S
X
s=1
psd−
s
(3.5a)
s.t.
tcj ≥PCγj −M(1 −zj)
∀j = 1, ..., N
(3.5b)
tcj ≥1 −(1 −zj)
∀j = 1, ..., N
(3.5c)
γj ≥|Cxold
j
−Cxj|
∀j = 1, ..., N
(3.5d)
d−
s ≥η −ys
∀s = 1, ..., S
(3.5e)
ys =
n
X
j=1
rjsxjC −
n
X
j=1
tcj
∀s = 1, ..., S
(3.5f)
µ =
n
X
j=1
µjxjC −
n
X
j=1
tcj
(3.5g)
zj ≥|xold
j
−xj|
∀j = 1, ..., N
(3.5h)
µ ≥µ0C
(3.5i)
d−
s ≥0
∀s = 1, ..., S
(3.5j)
x ∈Q
(3.5k)
zj ∈{0, 1}
∀j = 1, . . . , N
(3.5l)
γj ≥0
∀j = 1, . . . , N
(3.5m)
tcj ≥0
∀j = 1, . . . , N
(3.5n)
Observe constraints 3.4c and 3.5c, one of the new constraints introduced to the
models. These constraints address the minimum cost, serving as a fallback mecha-
nism when proportional costs fall short. In essence, they ensure the application of
a minimum transaction cost.
Moreover the big M also introduced to the transaction models is determined as the
proportional cost of the maximum value that the decision variable γ could possibly
reach, corresponding to the entire capital when invested in a single asset.
This
ensures that the transaction cost will be 0 if no changes are made to the portfolio.
M = PC · C
(3.6)
20
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:33==
Important note to expound upon is that the models are multi-period and allow for
rebalancing between time steps. The model can choose to either sell, buy or hold
assets in each time step.
Transaction fees are applied whenever the portfolio is
altered, either assets are sold or bought. Alternatively the models have the option
to hold on to assets and circumvent the transaction fees, apart from the initial
transaction fee to assemble the portfolio.
As explained the model has the option to alter the portfolio in each time step, t.
Initially at t = 0, $1,000,000 is provided to the model for portfolio construction.
Right after the first investment, the total transaction fee is calculated based on
the portfolio composition and then deducted from the initial capital. The Invested
Capital (ICt) at the initial time step is therefore:
IC0 = 1, 000, 000 −TC0
(3.7)
Here, the total transaction fee, TCt, is determined as:
TCt =
n
X
j=1
tcj
(3.8)
Where j denotes the asset. The transaction fee for acquiring an asset depends on
how much is invested in an asset j.
After each time step, t, the capital is recalculated to adjust for the shifts in market
dynamics, with asset prices potentially rising or falling. The updated capital is then
determined by the following formula:
Ct =
n
X
j=1
ICt−1 · xt−1
j
· (1 + rt
j)
(3.9)
Here, ICt−1 is the invested capital from the previous time step, t−1, already adjusted
for any transaction costs incurred. xt−1
j
represents the weight allocation to each
asset made in the previous time step, and rt
j denotes the return on each asset for
the current time step, which may be positive or negative depending on market
movements.
Once recalculated, the model undergoes another iteration of solving, and any trans-
action costs are deducted from the updated capital, Ct. At this stage the three
options come into consideration, buying, selling, or holding. If the model chooses
to hold the assets, no fees transpire of the capital. However, if the model chooses
to alter the portfolio, transaction cost is applied. Thus, the capital available at the
Chapter: Methodology
21
==PAGE:34==
outset is:
ICt = Ct −TCt
(3.10)
Algorithm 1 outlines the previously explained steps for recalculating the capital
between time steps while accounting for transaction costs. The process begins with
an initial capital and iteratively adjusts it, considering the costs associated with
transactions. By the end of the algorithm, the final capital at the last time step of the
period under consideration is obtained, after considering both market fluctuations
and transaction costs incurred throughout the period.
Algorithm 1 Multi-period portfolio optimization process with transaction cost
Input: Initial capital C
Output: Final capital C
1: t ←0
2: Ct ←$1, 000, 000
3: Solve model to get xt
j and tcj
4: TCt ←Pn
j=1 tcj
5: ICt ←Ct −TCt
6: for t = 1...tend do
7:
Recalculate capital Ct to adjust for shifts in market:
8:
Ct ←Pn
j=1 ICt−1 · xt−1
j
· (1 + rt
j)
9:
Solve model to get xt
j and tcj
10:
TCt ←Pn
j=1 tcj
11:
ICt ←Ct −TCt
12: end for
3.2.2
Limitation to Method
In this calculation of the transaction costs there are some limiting factors. Those
limitation include the capital invested and the transaction cost. Assumption made
on the computation of the invested capital after accounting for transaction fees are
based on the Pure Proportional Cost (PPC)[4].
Working under the assumption that fractional stocks can be bought and sold. Re-
alistically a bank would compute the transaction cost differently. The transaction
fee would be computed per unit price of stock. The method employed for including
transaction fees is a more simplistic method. However, the difference in the result
are assumed to be minuscule and are slightly overestimate in this thesis.
22
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:35==
For instance, if the entire capital is invested in a single company, such as Apple, with
the price per stock of $193, Table 3.1 shows how the transaction cost is computed
in this thesis, while Table 3.2 demonstrates the more accurate computation.
Capital
$1,000,000.00
Transaction Cost
$300.00
Invested Capital
$999,700.00
Total paid
1,000,000.00
Table 3.1: Computation in this thesis.
Capital
$1,000,000.00
Nr. of stocks
5,181.35
Invested Capital
$999,933.00
Transaction Cost
$299.98
Total paid
$1,000,233.98
Table 3.2: Accurate computation.
Initially, we start with a capital of $1,000,000. In the simplified calculation method
used in this thesis, the transaction cost is calculated as a percentage of the amount
invested in an asset. Specifically, if the entire capital is invested in a single company,
such as Apple, the transaction cost is calculated as:
TC = Capital · 0.03% = $300.00
This results in an invested capital of $1, 000, 000 −TC = $999, 700, and the total
amount paid remains $1,000,000.
In the more accurate computation, starting with the same capital of $1,000,000 and
investing in Apple with a stock price of $193, the number of stocks that can be
purchased is: Number of stocks =
C
Stock Price = $1,000,000
$193
= 5, 181.35. The number
of stocks is then rounded down to the nearest whole number and multiplied by the
stock price to find the invested capital: 5, 181·$193 = $999, 933.00. The transaction
cost is calculated based on the invested capital, resulting in:
TC = $999, 933.00 · 0.03% = $299.98
Consequently, the total amount paid, which includes the invested capital and the
transaction cost, exceeds the initial capital: $999, 933 + $299.98 = $1, 000, 233.98.
Chapter: Methodology
23
==PAGE:36==
3.3
Sample Analysis
To effectively solve the optimization models under consideration, data input is nec-
essary. The data fed into the models, known as the in-sample dataset, is the data
available at the time that the portfolio is constructed and is utilized to construct the
portfolio. This construction occurs at a specific investment date, marking the point
in time when the portfolio allocation decisions are made based on the in-sample data.
On the other hand, the data that is not available during portfolio construction, and
only becomes accessible afterwards is referred to as the out-of-sample data. The
out-of-sample data is used to evaluate the performance of the constructed portfo-
lio during the out-of-sample period. The in-sample and out-of-sample datasets are
dynamic. As the investment date advances by one time step, so does the in-sample
and out-of-sample datasets. Importantly, the datasets maintain a constant size even
as it progresses forward in time; with each new time step added, the oldest data is
systematically removed from consideration. In this thesis the time step is set to one
week, meaning the portfolio will be rebalanced on a weekly basis.
The historical rates of returns are the foundation of the in-sample data, and are
utilized across various scenario generation techniques. These techniques encompass
a range of approaches to simulate different scenarios, providing the basis for the
model input.
The out-of-sample data, on the other hand, is solely employed to
assess the performance of the portfolio constructed by the model.
Figure 3.3 illustrates an in-sample dataset spanning three years, used for scenario
generation. The investment date is set at January 1, 2022, followed by an out-of-
sample period of one year, used to evaluate the portfolio.
Figure 3.3: Visualization of the in-sample and out-of-sample periods.
24
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:37==
Conducting tests on datasets representing various trends in the market allows for
a thorough evaluation of the model’s performance. Therefore, an evaluation using
different in-sample and out-of-sample datasets will be performed.
This analysis will explore various market trends within the out-of-sample period,
encompassing both upswings and downswings. The study will examine scenarios
where the out-of-sample data reflects an upswing, and conversely, a downswing.
By analysing these trends, we aim to understand how the models perform under
different market conditions.
Specifically, the investment dates of January 1, 2022, which corresponds to a down-
swing period, and January 1, 2023, which corresponds to an upswing period, will be
explored. The amount of in-sample data will be analysed in Section 5.1, while the
out-of-sample period will consistently be one year.
3.4
Scenario Generation
Linear models can be derived through scenarios and require a collection of scenarios
for their formulation. A scenario is a possible instance of the multivariate random
variable that represents the rates of return of all the assets. An example of three
scenarios for four assets is shown in Table 3.3, where the rates of return of each asset
is shown under each scenario. Furthermore, each scenario has a specific probability
of happening, but for this example the expected return of each asset is computed by
assuming equal probability of all scenarios. For every scenario technique explored
the probability distribution applied has been carefully considered.
Asset
Scenario 1 (%)
Scenario 2 (%)
Scenario 3 (%)
Mean Return Rate (%)
1
r11 = 3.1
r21 = -2.7
r31 = 1.6
µ1 = 0.67
2
r21 = 2.3
r22 = -2.3
r32 = 1.3
µ2 = 0.43
3
r31 = 4.2
r23 = -3.1
r33 = -0.2
µ3 = 0.43
4
r41 = 1.5
r24 = -2.0
r34 = -0.1
µ4 = -0.2
Table 3.3: Example of three scenarios for four assets along with the expected return of
each asset [4, Tab. 2.1].
A substantial number of scenarios is required for statistical significance [4]. In this
study, the number of scenarios will never go below 100, ensuring a substantial sam-
ple size for achieving statistical significance. An analysis of how many is optimal is
conducted and can be seen in Chapter 5. Various approaches can be employed to
Chapter: Methodology
25
==PAGE:38==
generate scenarios of the rates of return. The methods explored in this thesis vary
from both simple and more complex approaches, parametric and non-parametric
methods, as well as methods that incorporate randomness. The following methods
are the ones explored in this thesis to generate scenarios.
3.4.1
Historical Method
Utilizing historical data stands out as a frequently employed method due to its
simplicity, founded on the premise that past data can serve as indicators of potential
future trends. In this method, each scenario corresponds to the observed weekly
rates of return across all assets during a specific historical period.
The process begins by selecting a specific period for collecting historical data for
each stock available during that time. The longer the period, the more scenarios are
generated for each asset. For each stock in the indexes, historical data is collected,
and weekly scenarios are generated by calculating the weekly return based on the
adjusted closing price at the end of each week. The return at time t is computed by
[4]:
Rt = Vt −Vt−1
Vt−1
(3.11)
Where Vt is the adjusted closing price at time t, and Vt−1 is the adjusted closing
price at time t −1.
For clarification, a simple example is provided. In this example, weekly data has
been collected over a period of one month, up to the investment date, January 1,
2024. The weekly returns of three stocks, Apple (AAPL), Netflix (NFLX), and Tesla
(TSLA), are shown for the four consecutive weeks leading up to the investment date,
therefore creating four scenarios. These returns are calculated based on the adjusted
closing prices at the end of each week, like described before.
Scenario
1
2
3
4
Time step
Dec 4, 2023
Dec 11, 2023
Dec 18, 2023
Dec 25, 2023
AAPL
2.34%
0.95%
-2.01%
-0.55%
NFLX
-2.57%
4.03%
3.11%
0.02%
TSLA
2.10%
3.96%
-0.38%
-1.61%
Table 3.4: Example of scenarios of weekly returns generated with the Historical method.
Note: The investment date is scheduled one week after the last time step (Dec 25, 2023), which is
Jan 1, 2024.
26
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:39==
The historical returns form the basis for generating scenarios for multiple methods
utilized in this thesis, so for clarification the given example will be utilized through-
out the method explanations.
A notable drawback of the Historical method, shared with other approaches utilizing
historical data, is the possibility of future scenarios diverging significantly from those
observed in the past. Despite this concern, a relatively modest number of scenarios,
typically around a few hundred, can still provide meaningful insights [24].
3.4.2
Monte Carlo Simulation
Monte Carlo simulation, a mathematical method, offers a powerful tool for estimat-
ing potential outcomes in the face of uncertainty, such as fluctuating stock prices.
It constructs a model of potential results by employing probability distributions,
like uniform or normal distributions, for variables with inherent unpredictability. In
this instance a univariate normal distribution was used. The process involves iter-
atively recalculating results using different sets of random numbers within defined
ranges, mimicking the variability of real-world scenarios. Through numerous repeti-
tions, often thousands, Monte Carlo simulation generates a broad spectrum of likely
outcomes, providing valuable insights into the range of possible future scenarios [25].
The process of the Monte Carlo method is almost identical to the historical method.
Instead of using the historical weekly returns directly as scenarios, the Monte Carlo
method simulates a larger number of scenarios based on statistical properties of
these weekly returns. The mean and standard deviation are calculated from the
historical weekly returns, and a univariate normal distribution is used to simulate
as many scenarios as desired.
The previous example in Table 3.4 will be used to further illustrate the process
of simulating Monte Carlo scenarios. Table 3.5 extends the example by including
the mean and standard deviation of the returns for each asset, which is the initial
process of simulating Monte Carlo scenarios.
Scenario
1
2
3
4
Statistics
Time step
Dec 4, 2023
Dec 11, 2023
Dec 18, 2023
Dec 25, 2023
Mean
StDev
AAPL
2.34%
0.95%
-2.01%
-0.55%
0.18%
0.019
NFLX
-2.57%
4.03%
3.11%
0.02%
1.15%
0.030
TSLA
2.10%
3.96%
-0.38%
-1.61%
1.02%
0.025
Table 3.5:
Historical weekly returns for Apple, Netflix, and Tesla, along with their
calculated mean and standard deviation, used in the Monte Carlo simulation.
Chapter: Methodology
27
==PAGE:40==
Once the mean and standard deviation of the assets have been determined, they
are used to create a univariate normal distribution for simulating scenarios.
To
illustrate this process, an example focusing solely on Apple (AAPL) is provided in
Figure 3.4. The mean and standard deviation of the weekly returns for Apple over
four weeks have been used to create a univariate normal distribution. Subsequently,
1,000 scenarios have been randomly sampled from this normal distribution, although
any number of scenarios can be chosen.
Figure 3.4: Example of Monte Carlo simulated scenarios for Apple’s weekly returns.
Figure 3.4 shows that more scenarios will be closer to the mean due to the nature
of the normal distribution, which has a higher probability density near the mean
and lower probability densities as you move further from the mean. The tails of
the histogram indicate less likely but possible extreme returns, which are crucial for
understanding potential high-risk scenarios.
3.4.3
Fama-French Factor Model
The Fama-French factor model is a widely utilized tool in finance for analysing
and describing stock returns. By comparing the returns of a portfolio stock with
those of the overall market, this model provides insights into the potential perfor-
mance of a stock investment. The models are available in configurations of three
and five factors, incorporating the following factors: excess market return (Rm-Rf),
Small Minus Big (SMB), High Minus Low (HML), Robust Minus Weak (RMW),
and Conservative Minus Aggressive (CMA). The subsequent introduction of a Mo-
mentum factor (Mom) led to the implementation of two additional factor models:
the four-factor and six-factor models. The factors can be accessed pre-computed,
and following is a short description of each factor:
28
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:41==
• The Rm-Rf factor represents the difference between the market return (Rm)
and the risk-free rate (Rf). It captures the systematic risk associated with
investing in the overall market, where a positive value of the factor indicates
that the market outperformed the risk-free rate.
The risk-free rate is the
return an investor can expect from a completely risk-free investment [26].
• SMB, representing the size factor, denotes the return difference between small-
cap stocks and large-cap stocks. A positive SMB value signifies that smaller
companies, relative to market capitalization, are outperforming large compa-
nies.
• HML, denoting the value factor, captures the return difference between value
and growth stocks. When companies with high book-to-market ratios, known
as value stocks, outperform those with lower ratios, a positive HML value is
observed.
• RMW, also referred to as the profitability factor, measures the return gap
between firms with robust and weak profitability. A positive RMW value in-
dicates that firms with robust profitability outperform those with weak prof-
itability.
• CMA, known as the investment factor, highlights the difference between con-
servative and aggressive firms. A positive CMA value indicates that conser-
vative firms outperform their aggressive counterparts [27].
• Mom captures the return difference between past winning and past losing
stocks, indicating the historic excess returns of past winners over losers. A
positive Mom value signifies that past winning stocks, those that have per-
formed well in the recent past, outperform past losing stocks [11].
The mathematical representation of the Fama-French three-factor model is struc-
tured as follows [12]:
Rjt = Rft + αj + β1j(Rmt −Rft) + β2jSMBt + β3jHMLt + ϵjt
(3.12)
Where Rjt is the return of asset j at time t, α and β1, 2, 3 signify the factor coeﬀi-
cients, and lastly ϵ denotes the error term.
Chapter: Methodology
29
==PAGE:42==
Expanding upon this model, the Fama-French four-factor model introduces the Mo-
mentum factor, Mom (Winners Minus Losers) [11]:
Rjt = Rft + αj + β1j(Rmt −Rft) + β2jSMBt + β3jRMWt + β4jMomt + ϵjt
(3.13)
The Fama-French five-factor model then incorporates the profitability factor, RMW,
and the investment factor, CMA , in addition to the three factors [12]:
Rjt = Rft + αj + β1j(Rmt −Rft) + β2jSMBt + β3jRMWt
+β4jCMAt + β5jHMLt + ϵjt
(3.14)
The Fama-French six-factor model integrates all of the aforementioned factors [13]:
Rjt = Rft + αj + β1j(Rmt −Rft) + β2jSMBt + β3jRMWt
+ β4jCMAt + β5jHMLt + β6jMomt + ϵjt
(3.15)
The main difference between the factor values and the coeﬀicients (β) is that the
factor values represent the performance of the market factors themselves, whereas
the coeﬀicients measure how sensitive a specific company’s stock return responds
to changes in these market factors. For example, if a company has a β2 = −0.2,
it means that if the SMB factor increases by 1%, the company’s stock return is
expected to decrease by 0.2%.
Overall process
The coeﬀicients of the Fama-French factor models are determined through linear
regression, with the excess return serving as the dependent variable and the factors
as explanatory variables. In this method, all available historical data is employed
to compute the coeﬀicients, which are subsequently used to calculate the expected
return of the asset according to the respective Fama-French factor model formulas
(Equations 3.12, 3.13, 3.14 and 3.15).
Before performing linear regression, it is essential to calculate both the weekly return
and the excess return. The weekly return, Rjt, is calculated by Equation 3.11. The
excess return is calculated as follows:
Excess returnjt = Rjt −Rft
(3.16)
Once the excess returns have been calculated, linear regression can be performed on
these values to generate the coeﬀicients, which are later used for scenario generation.
30
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:43==
Similar to the Historical method, a specific period is chosen. Based on the length
of the period, more scenarios are generated for each asset.
The execution of this method can be split in the following steps:
1. Perform linear regressions on all available historical data to estimate α and β
coeﬀicients.
2. Compute error term.
3. Use the factors, the estimated coeﬀicients and error term to generate scenarios
of returns on the chosen time period.
Here, the error term is computed by finding the difference of actual and calculated
return on all available data up until the investment date for each asset. The cal-
culated return would be the return based on the Fama-French factor model using
the coeﬀicients previously computed and the outlined factors. To incorporate cor-
relation between the errors, a random number, let us denote it as e, is selected.
The error term corresponding to element number e is then used for all assets. This
way the errors across various assets are interconnected through the shared random
number, thereby incorporating correlation between them.
To illustrate the Fama-French method, Apple will be used as an example again. The
example focuses on the Fama-French three-factor model, but the concept remains
the same for other factor models, with the only difference being the inclusion of
additional factors. The weekly U.S. Fama-French three-factor data is used, but this
data spans back to July 2, 1926. The returns for the stock under consideration are
computed starting from the earliest available date. For instance, if Apple was added
to the stock market on December 1, 1984, the returns can be computed starting one
week later.
Chapter: Methodology
31
==PAGE:44==
Date
Rm-Rf
SMB
HML
Rf
Return
07.12.1984
−0.99
−0.60
1.19
0.16
0.00%
14.12.1984
0.25
−0.09
−0.63
0.16
0.00%
21.12.1984
1.80
−0.24
−0.84
0.16
11.11%
28.12.1984
0.29
0.31
0.23
0.16
0.00%
04.01.1985
−1.26
1.71
0.02
0.161
0.00%
...
...
...
...
...
...
24.11.2023
0.91
0.00
−0.76
0.11
0.67%
01.12.2023
1.01
1.63
1.75
0.107
2.34%
08.12.2023
0.20
0.95
0.98
0.107
0.95%
15.12.2023
2.72
1.62
1.83
0.107
−2.01%
22.12.2023
0.86
1.97
0.52
0.107
−0.55%
Table 3.6: Sample of the weekly U.S. Fama-French three-factor dataset along with the
actual returns for Apple, from the earliest available date up to (but not including) the
investment date of this example.
Using this data, we perform a linear regression with the excess return as the de-
pendent variable (calculated as Return −Rf) and Rm-Rf, SMB, and HML as ex-
planatory variables. This provides us with the coeﬀicients, α and β values. For this
example, the estimated coeﬀicients from the linear regression are demonstrated in
Table 3.7.
Coeﬀicient
Std. Error
p-value
Lower 95%
Upper 95%
αAAPL (Intercept)
0.0031
0.0011
0.0049
0.0009
0.0053
β1AAPL (Rm-Rf)
1.0976
0.0474
<1e-99
1.0045
1.1906
β2AAPL (SMB)
0.1412
0.0840
0.0928
-0.0235
0.3058
β3AAPL (HML)
-0.5818
0.0734
<1e-14
-0.7257
-0.4379
Table 3.7: Regression results for Apple.
When examining the coeﬀicients from Table 3.7 several observations emerge. The
Rm-Rf factor is positive, indicating that the market outperformed the risk-free rate,
reflecting positive market conditions during the period considered. Given Apple’s
significant market influence and its role in the technology sector, this result is ex-
pected.
Interestingly, Apple’s returns show a positive correlation with the SMB factor, sug-
gesting that during the specific period analysed, Apple’s return pattern exhibited
32
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:45==
some characteristics more commonly associated with small-cap stocks. This implies
that when small-cap stocks outperform large-cap stocks, Apple also tends to perform
well. Typically, Apple is considered a large-cap stock, so we would expect the SMB
coeﬀicient to be negative. However, the coeﬀicient is not very strong nor statically
significant (p-value greater than 0.05). This positive SMB value could be attributed
to using all the available data for Apple. Notably, a different result is observed when
using a smaller dataset, which is further examined in Section 7.1.4.
A negative HML coeﬀicient for Apple indicates that it is considered a growth stock
with a low book-to-market ratio. This is consistent with its characteristics as a lead-
ing technology company, with a high price-to-earnings ratio and significant future
growth expectations.
If the historical time period selected is one month, we then generate weekly scenarios
for that time period. Using the estimated coeﬀicients and the factors, we can cal-
culate the scenarios of returns from Equation 3.12. Table 3.8 shows the generated
scenarios for Apple (FF3 Return) for the selected time period in addition to the
weekly U.S. Fama-French three-factor dataset and the actual returns.
Date
Rm-Rf
SMB
HML
Rf
Return
FF3 Return
01.12.2023
1.01
1.63
1.75
0.107
2.34%
0.43%
08.12.2023
0.20
0.95
0.98
0.107
0.95%
−0.11 %
15.12.2023
2.72
1.62
1.83
0.107
−2.01 %
2.26%
22.12.2023
0.86
1.97
0.52
0.107
−0.55 %
1.03%
Table 3.8: Four scenarios for Apple using Fama-French three-factor model.
To incorporate the error term, the error for each asset is computed from the earliest
available date to the investment date. This term is calculated as the difference be-
tween the actual return and the computed FF3 return, Table 3.9 shows the computed
errors for this example.
Chapter: Methodology
33
==PAGE:46==
Date
Return
FF3 Return
Computed error
07.12.1984
0.00%
-1.70%
-1.70%
14.12.1984
0.00%
0.79%
0.79%
21.12.1984
11.11%
2.59%
-8.52%
...
...
...
...
01.12.2023
2.34%
0.43%
1.91%
08.12.2023
0.95%
-0.11%
1.06%
15.12.2023
-2.01%
2.26%
-4.27%
22.12.2023
-0.55%
1.03%
-1.58%
Table 3.9: Example of computed error terms of Fama-French three-factor returns for
Apple for all available data.
The table clearly demonstrates that the Fama-French three-factor model has signifi-
cant limitations in its estimation accuracy, at least for this company and this specific
time period. There is a notable discrepancy between the returns estimated by the
Fama-French three-factor model and the actual returns. It underscores the impor-
tance of considering additional factors or alternative models to improve estimation
accuracy and account for the inherent uncertainties in financial markets.
An index is then randomly selected by choosing a random number between one
and the smallest vector size of computed errors across all assets. Since the errors
across different assets are aligned from the most recent date backwards (due to their
different dates added to the stock market), this element from the end is used. For
simplicity, in this example, we randomly chose the number three. The third element
from the end corresponds to the error term of 1.06%, which is bolded in Table 3.9
above. This selected error term is then added to the FF3 returns on the selected
time-period to generate the adjusted FF3 returns including the error term. Table
3.10 demonstrates this results.
Date
FF3 Return
Randomly selected error
FF3 Return w error
01.12.2023
0.43%
1.06%
1.49%
08.12.2023
-0.11%
1.06%
0.95%
15.12.2023
2.26%
1.06%
3.32%
22.12.2023
1.03%
1.06%
2.09%
Table 3.10: Example of incorporating a randomly selected error term into Fama-French
three-factor returns for Apple.
34
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:47==
In this thesis, scenario generation using Fama-French will be explored both with
and without the inclusion of an error term. Further discussion of different methods
considered for selecting the error term can be found in Section 7.1.6.
A limitation of the Fama-French method is that it cannot be used for future pre-
dictions due to its reliance on historical data and the factors are only available
for past periods. Consequently, a method called VARMA, which can predict the
Fama-French factors, was explored.
3.4.4
VARMA
The Vector Auto-Regression Moving Average (VARMA) model can be used to make
forecasts of multiple variables over time, while preserving the relationship between
them. Therefore, VARMA will be utilized to forecast the Fama-French factors of the
Fama-French three- and five-factor models. VARMA is composed of two different
models: Vector Auto-Regression (VAR) and Moving Average (MA) [28].
Model formulation
VAR captures the linear interdependencies among multiple time series. It does so
by regressing each variable on its own past values and the past values of all other
variables in the system.
Mathematically, a VAR model of order p (denoted as
VAR(p)) for a K-dimensional time series {yt}, where yt =






y1t
y2t
...
yKt






is a K × 1 vector
of variables at time t, is represented as:
yt = A1yt−1 + A2yt−2 + · · · + Apyt−p + ut
(3.17)
where A1, . . . , Ap are K × K coeﬀicient matrices and ut is a white noise error term.
MA accounts for the past forecast errors (or shocks) in predicting the current values
of the time series. A MA model of order q (denoted as MA(q)) for the same K-
dimensional time series is given by:
yt = ut + M1ut−1 + · · · + Mqut−q
(3.18)
where M1, . . . , Mq are K × K matrices and ut represents the white noise errors.
Chapter: Methodology
35
==PAGE:48==
The VARMA model integrates these two components, capturing both the autore-
gressive dynamics and the moving average dynamics in the time series. The general
form of a VARMA(p, q) model is:
yt = A1yt−1 + · · · + Apyt−p + ut + M1ut−1 + · · · + Mqut−q
(3.19)
where A1, . . . , Ap are K ×K auto-regressive parameter matrices and M1, . . . , Mq are
K × K moving average parameter matrices. Here, ut represents a white noise (error
term) process with zero mean and covariance matrix Σu. The parameters matrices
are determined by fitting the model to data. The only unknown is the error term,
but the model assumes its distribution to be multivariate normal, ut ∼N (0, Σu).
Considering a two-dimensional time series yt =
 
y1t
y2t
!
, where y1t and y2t are the two
time series variables. The VARMA(2,2) model for this two dimensional time series
would be written as [29]:
 
y1t
y2t
!
= A1
 
y1,t−1
y2,t−1
!
+ A2
 
y1,t−2
y2,t−2
!
+
 
u1t
u2t
!
+ M1
 
u1,t−1
u2,t−1
!
+ M2
 
u1,t−2
u2,t−2
!
An important consideration in time series modeling is whether the series is station-
ary or non-stationary. A time series is stationary if its properties do not change
depending on the time at which it is observed. It is crucial that the process is sta-
tionary for the validity of many time series models, including VARMA. Differencing
non-stationary time series can help achieving stationarity. While the visual inspec-
tion of the time series in Figure 3.5 provides some insights, the definitive assessment
of stationarity can be made using statistical tests [30].
36
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:49==
Figure 3.5: Time series of weekly Fama-French factors sample.
To determine the stationarity of the Fama-French factors, the Augmented Dickey-
Fuller (ADF) test was performed on each factor.
The ADF test checks for the
presence of a unit root in the time series data, which would indicate non-stationarity.
The null hypothesis of the ADF test is that the time series has a unit root, indicating
it is non-stationary. Conversely, the alternative hypothesis suggests that the time
series is stationary. A significance level (p-value) of 0.05 is typically used. If the
p-value falls below this threshold, the null hypothesis is rejected, indicating that the
time series is stationary [31].
The results of the ADF tests are summarized in Table 3.11. For all factors (Rm-Rf,
SMB, HML, RMW, CMA, and Mom), the p-values were found to be 0.01. Since
all p-values are below the significance level of 0.05, we reject the null hypothesis for
each factor, concluding that the time series are stationary.
Chapter: Methodology
37
==PAGE:50==
Factor
p-value
Conclusion
Rm-Rf
0.01
Stationary
SMB
0.01
Stationary
HML
0.01
Stationary
RMW
0.01
Stationary
CMA
0.01
Stationary
Mom
0.01
Stationary
Table 3.11: ADF Test Results for Fama-French factors.
Forecasting process
The forecasting process involves estimating future values of the time series based
on past values and past forecast errors. For our analysis, we focus only on 1-step
ahead forecast. Multiple scenarios for future paths can be generated by sampling
random error terms from its distribution. Specifically, the fitted VARMA model
parameters define the structure of the time series, and random samples from the
errors’ distribution are then drawn and applied to the model equations recursively
to generate future values. This process creates a set of potential future scenarios,
reflecting different possible realizations of the future based on the model [32].
Order selection
Determining the appropriate parameters for the VARMA model involves identify-
ing the order of lag (p) and the moving average (q). Given the numerous potential
parameter combinations, it is essential to have a strategy for selecting the most
appropriate ones. Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC), Bayesian Information Cri-
terion (BIC), and LogLikelihood (LL) are commonly used measures to assess how
well the model explains the observed data. Among several alternative models, the
preferred model is the one that exhibits the lowest BIC or AIC value, while higher
LL values are preferred. The model selected by the BIC is often the same as the one
chosen by the AIC, otherwise BIC tends to select the model with fewer parameters
due to its stronger penalty for the number of parameters. Therefore, caution is
advised when using AIC, as it typically favors models with more lags. Additionally,
both AIC and BIC incorporate the log-likelihood (LL) value in their calculations.
Therefore, to identify the most suitable values for p and q, the model with the lowest
BIC value is selected [30].
38
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:51==
Overall process
The execution here is similar to the method described for Fama-French factor models
in Section 3.4.3. However, instead of using the factor data directly, we utilize a
specified amount of factors and make forecasts for these factors using VARMA for
the subsequent time step.
1. Perform linear regressions on all available historical data to estimate α and β
coeﬀicients.
2. Determine suitable parameters, p and q, for the VARMA model.
3. Make 1-step ahead interval forecast of factors with VARMA, using data from
the chosen time-period.
4. Compute error term.
5. Use the forecasted factors, estimated coeﬀicients and error term to generate
scenarios of returns on the chosen time period.
Continuing with the same example from the Fama-French factor model in Section
3.4.3, the coeﬀicients α and β have already been computed from all available data,
as shown in Table 3.7. To determine suitable parameters p and q for the model, in-
sample data from the 5 years preceding the investment date will be used to fit the
model, as VARMA requires significant amount of data to fit the model. A range of
values will be tested for both the VAR and MA orders, here [0, 1, 2, 3]. Lower values
of BIC indicate a better fit of the model to the data, so the final model selection
is based on the lowest BIC. Table 3.12 shows the results of the model selection,
indicating that the best model has p = 1 and q = 0.
p
0
0
0
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
q
1
2
3
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
BIC
2,963.44
2,883.94
4,564.57
1,393.97
4,081.02
2,745.06
1,626.77
2,106.04
4,394.99
3,120.60
1,846.37
2,143.81
2,803.76
4,539.87
Table 3.12: Results of VARMA model selection for different orders of p and q.
With the parameters p and q chosen, a 1-step ahead interval forecast is made with
VARMA. While the interval can be any number, Figure 3.6 displays ten forecasted
values of the Fama-French factors (Rm-Rf, SMB, HML, RF) alongside the actual
factor values. This figure shows the progression of the factors over the last 20 weeks
leading up to the investment day, even though 5 years of historical data were used
for the forecasting.
Chapter: Methodology
39
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.6: Ten predicted values of each factor alongside the actual factor values and
the past values leading up to the investment date.
With ten predictions of the factors, it is now possible to compute ten scenarios of
returns using the Fama-French three-factor Equation 3.12. Table 3.13 presents the
ten predicted values for the Fama-French factors for the investment day. Addition-
ally, it includes the corresponding returns calculated using the previously estimated
coeﬀicients from Table 3.7 with Equation 3.12. When the actual factors for this date
are used in Equation 3.12, the computed return is 0.07%, while the actual weekly
return of this date is -5.90%.
40
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:53==
Scenario
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Rm-Rf
-3.52
-1.00
2.21
3.23
1.80
0.96
-1.87
2.57
2.77
0.87
SMB
-0.99
-1.80
-0.29
1.19
-1.48
-0.27
-0.27
-1.21
-0.39
-0.29
HML
-0.95
2.31
-4.14
2.09
1.64
0.33
-0.63
0.85
1.80
3.04
Rf
0.11
0.11
0.10
0.11
0.10
0.10
0.11
0.12
0.10
0.11
Returns
-3.34%
-2.59%
4.90%
2.61%
0.93%
0.93%
-1.62%
2.27%
2.05%
-0.74%
Table 3.13: Ten predictions of the factor values for the investment date and their corre-
sponding returns. The return based on the actual factors for this date is 0.07%, and the
actual return for this date is -5.90%.
The error term is computed in the same way as in the Fama-French factor method, as
shown in Table 3.10. Historical factors are used to calculate the return and compare
it with the actual return, then a random error term is selected to be subtracted
from all the predicted returns. The forecasted returns are not used in calculating
the error because the actual return in the next time step is unknown, as are the
factors in the next time step. However, it is interesting to see how well the factors
are predicted and how accurately the predicted factors estimate the return.
Table 3.14 compares the actual returns with the returns based on the predicted
factors and shows the difference between them. This table highlights the differences
between the actual and predicted returns, providing insight into how accurately the
predicted factors estimate the return. Additionally, the Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
is calculated, providing the average magnitude of the errors in the predictions.
Chapter: Methodology
41
==PAGE:54==
Date
Actual Return
Return from predicted factors
Difference
1.1.2024
-5.90%
-3.34%
2.56%
1.1.2024
-5.90%
-2.59%
3.31%
1.1.2024
-5.90%
4.90%
10.80%
1.1.2024
-5.90%
2.61%
8.51%
1.1.2024
-5.90%
0.93%
6.83%
1.1.2024
-5.90%
0.93%
6.83%
1.1.2024
-5.90%
-1.62%
4.28%
1.1.2024
-5.90%
2.27%
8.17%
1.1.2024
-5.90%
2.05%
7.95%
1.1.2024
-5.90%
-0.74%
5.16%
MAE
6.44%
Table 3.14: Comparison of actual return and returns based on predicted factors, along
with the difference between them.
Table 3.15 presents a comparison of returns based on actual factors and returns
based on predicted factors, with the difference between them.
This comparison
provides insight into how accurately the factors are predicted.
Date
Return from actual factors
Return from predicted factors
Difference
1.1.2024
0.07%
-3.34%
-3.41%
1.1.2024
0.07%
-2.59%
-2.66%
1.1.2024
0.07%
4.90%
4.83%
1.1.2024
0.07%
2.61%
2.53%
1.1.2024
0.07%
0.93%
0.85%
1.1.2024
0.07%
0.93%
0.86%
1.1.2024
0.07%
-1.62%
-1.69%
1.1.2024
0.07%
2.27%
2.20%
1.1.2024
0.07%
2.05%
1.97%
1.1.2024
0.07%
-0.74%
-0.81%
MAE
2.18%
Table 3.15:
Comparison of return based on the actual factors and returns based on
predicted factors, along with the difference between them.
Comparing the two Mean Absolute Errors (MAE), it is evident that the MAE for
the returns based on predicted factors compared to actual returns is 6.44%. When
the returns are calculated using actual factors and then compared to the predicted
42
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:55==
factors, the MAE is significantly lower at 2.18%. This indicates that the factors
are predicted more accurately than the returns are estimated with the factors. The
high MAE in the earlier case suggests that while the predicted factors can provide a
good estimate, there are still challenges in accurately forecasting the actual returns.
3.4.5
Block Bootstrap
Block bootstrapping is a resampling technique commonly employed to generate sce-
narios for modeling purposes. It involves breaking down the original dataset into
blocks B, which are segments of consecutive observations O1, O2,..., On, where n
marks the size of the block. These blocks are then resampled with replacement
to create simulated datasets. Each block retains the temporal ordering of the ob-
servations B = O1, O2,..., On, preserving any inherent time dependencies present
in the data. The size of the blocks are dependent on how long the time-frame of
each observation is desired to be [33]. The block-size in this study is set to 5 (since
the market is only open on working days), considering that the study is looking at
weekly data. One block B then consists of 5 consecutive days, or 5 observations O,
where the observations are the daily returns of stocks.
B = O1,
O2,
O3,
O4,
O5
Once the blocks have been assembled with 5 consecutive days, the daily returns are
then compounded to make a weekly return.
B =
5
Y
n=1
(Rn + 1) −1
(3.20)
Chapter: Methodology
43
==PAGE:56==
Continuing with the same example as above, this is how the blocks are assembled.
Blocks
Time stamp
Return
Blocks return
4.12.2023
-0.009489
5.12.2023
0.021066
6.12.2023
-0.005702
7.12.2023
0.010166
Week 1
8.12.2023
0.007432
2.34%
11.12.2023
-0.012961
12.12.2023
0.007941
13.12.2023
0.016684
14.12.2023
0.000760
Week 2
15.12.2023
-0.002733
0.95%
18.12.2023
-0.008475
19.12.2023
0.005323
20.12.2023
-0.010691
21.12.2023
-0.000772
Week 3
22.12.2023
-0.005562
-2.01%
Table 3.16: Example of how blocks are created for the Block bootstrapping technique
for Apple.
The subsequent step involves resampling. After forming the blocks from the in-
sample data, the blocks are randomly selected from the dataset. The quantity of
numbers selected is determined by the number of scenarios desired.
Table 3.17
provides four different representation of how the blocks could be arranged for this
small example, with three scenarios.
Chronological order
B1 = 2.34%
B2 = 0.95%
B3 = -2.01%
Resampling
B2 = 0.95%
B1 = 2.34%
B3 = -2.01%
Resampling
B1 = 2.34%
B3 = -2.01%
B2 = 0.95%
Resampling
B1 = 2.34%
B1 = 2.34%
B2 = 0.95%
Resampling
B3 = -2.01%
B2 = 0.95%
B3 = -2.01%
Resampling
...
...
...
Table 3.17: Example of how the Block bootstrapping technique resamples the blocks.
Given just these three weeks of data and generating three scenarios, there are 27
ways that the Block bootstrapping technique can resample the data, given more
data and scenarios that number becomes exponentially large.
44
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:57==
3.5
Probability Distribution of Scenarios
The probability of scenarios will be tested with two distinct distributions: the uni-
form distribution, and the S-curve distribution. The uniform distribution assigns
equal probabilities to each scenario, while the S-curve distribution assigns higher
probability to most recent scenarios and lower probabilities to older ones. A vi-
sual representation of the S-curve distribution is shown in Figure 3.7. The example
includes 10 scenarios, where scenario 1 is the oldest and scenario 10 is the most
recent. The graph shows that the probability assigned to each scenario increases as
the scenarios become more recent. Notably, the probabilities are normalized so that
their total sum is 1.
Figure 3.7: S-curve distribution.
The choice between these distributions depends on the dataset fed into the optimiza-
tion model. For the scenario generation techniques solely based on historical data,
like the Historical method and the Fama-French factor models, it is considered that
recent data may hold greater significance than older data. The significance may
lie in the fact that to estimate the next period the previous period could be the
most relevant piece of data. Therefore, the S-curve distribution is applied along
with uniform distribution for the Historical method, the result from which will be
applicable to other methods based solely on historical data.
For the remaining scenario generation techniques, only the uniform distribution was
employed. These techniques diverge from solely considering the historical evolution
of the data. While a comprehensive explanation of all methods used can be found in
Chapter: Methodology
45
==PAGE:58==
Section 3.4, here is a concise rationale for employing uniform distribution in these
cases:
• Block bootstrapping involves resampling the historical data, thus rendering
the time period irrelevant as the data is shuffled.
• Monte Carlo simulation incorporates historical data but applies univariate
normal distribution to it, thereby making the data independent of specific
time periods.
• The VARMA method generates multiple scenarios of the Fama-French factors
for the next given period, with each scenario equally likely to occur.
3.6
Evaluation
Evaluation of the models and the different scenario generation techniques employed,
will be performed. The evaluation is performed to see how every method performs
and which can show positive results. The MAD and CVaR models including trans-
action cost, Models 3.4 and 3.5, are applied using each scenario technique, and the
returns of the resulting portfolios compared to the actual rate of returns of the S&P
500 and Nordic 120 indexes for the given time period analysed.
For each scenario generation technique the scenarios are generated and fed into the
two different models, each resulting in the creation of an optimal portfolio at the
investment start date. Subsequently, we progress one time step forward at a time
until we reach the end of the out-of-sample period. At each step, the models are
re-solved, incorporating additional data that has become available up to that point,
remaining responsive to changing market conditions.
Utilizing the asset weights, wjt, determined by the model and the actual asset re-
turns, rjt, at that particular time, the return of the constructed portfolio is calculated
in each time step. The portfolio rate of return in time step t is:
Rt =
n
X
j=1
wjtrjt
(3.21)
The cumulative returns of the portfolios constructed by the models are then com-
pared to the observed cumulative returns of the S&P 500 index. Let us have port-
folio rates of return over m periods, R1, R2,..., Rm. The cumulative portfolio rate
46
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:59==
of return in time step t, t ≤m, is equal to:
((1 + R1)(1 + R2)...(1 + Rt)) −1
(3.22)
Figure 3.8 provides an overview of this computational process, illustrating the it-
erative steps involved in generating scenarios, optimizing portfolios, and evaluating
their performance against market indexes and various other performance metrics.
Figure 3.8: Overview of the computational process.
This analysis provides comprehensive insights into the performance of the optimal
portfolios constructed by the models. By comparing the outcomes, we can evaluate
the eﬀicacy of each model under various scenario generation techniques. Another
aspect of evaluation involves analysing the composition of the optimal portfolios
constructed by the models. This analysis focuses on the number and type of selected
assets within the portfolio composition.
Chapter: Methodology
47
==PAGE:60==
To compare and evaluate the performance of the proposed models, a selection of
meaningful Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) has been chosen as performance
metrics. These metrics are shown in Table 3.18 and will be referenced repeatedly
throughout the various examinations and analyses.
KPI
Description
Capital gain
The profit realized when the overall value of the portfolio increases and assets are
sold for more than their purchase prices. A negative Capital gain indicates a loss,
where assets are sold for less than their purchase prices.
Avg r
Average weekly return of the portfolio.
Stdev r
Standard deviation of the portfolio’s weekly return.
Avg index dev
Average deviation of the portfolio weekly return from the index over the out-of-
sample period.
Avg cum index dev
Average deviation of the portfolio cumulative weekly return from the index over the
out-of-sample period.
End cum index dev
Deviation of the portfolio cumulative weekly return from the index at the end of the
out-of-sample period.
Growth
Cumulative portfolio return at the end of the out-of-sample period.
Sharpe ratio
Sharpe ratio (risk-adjusted return of the portfolio).
Avg time
Average solving time of the model in seconds.
Avg # assets
Average number of assets selected into the portfolio over the out-of-sample period.
TC
The total transaction cost at the end of the out-of-sample period.
Avg obj
Average objective value.
Table 3.18: Key Performance Indicators.
The capital gain KPI is calculated as the difference between the capital at the end
of the out-of-sample period and the initial investment capital, which is $1,000,000.
The final capital at the end of the out-of-sample period is determined as described
in Algorithm 1, where transaction costs are subtracted from the capital every time
the portfolio is altered, and the capital is updated to reflect changes in asset prices
at each time step.
The average deviation of the portfolio from the index is computed as mean of the
differences between the portfolio returns and the corresponding index returns. Pro-
viding a metric for how much the portfolio on average deviates from the index, both
positively and negatively. The cumulative index deviations is computed the same
way, except using the cumulative returns. It calculates the mean of the differences
between the cumulative portfolio returns and the cumulative index returns. Addi-
tionally, the end cumulative index deviation is determined by taking the difference
between the cumulative portfolio return and the cumulative index return at the end
of the period
48
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:61==
The growth, defined as the cumulative portfolio return at the end of the out-of-
sample period, is calculated according to the cumulative return formula 3.22, where
the returns of the portfolio from the first time period to the end of the out-of-sample
period are accumulated.
The Sharpe ratio is one of the KPIs being analysed. The Sharpe ratio has been
defined as the ratio of the expected excess return (expected return minus risk-free
rate) to the standard deviation of excess returns. It essentially tells us how much
excess return we are receiving for the level of risk taken with the investment. A
higher Sharpe ratio indicates a better risk-adjusted return. The formula for the
Sharpe ratio is [34]:
Sharpe ratio = µ
σ
(3.23)
Where µ is defined as
µ = 1
T
T
X
t=1
(Rt −Rft)
(3.24)
In Equation 3.24, Rt represents a sample of portfolio returns, and Rft denotes
a sample of the risk-free rate of return over the out-of-sample period. The term
R −Rf indicates the excess return. In the subsequent equation, σ signifies the
standard deviation of the excess return.
σ =
v
u
u
t
1
T −1
T
X
t=1
(Rt −Rft −µ)2
(3.25)
Typically, the Sharpe ratio is calculated on an annual basis, however, in this thesis, it
is computed using weekly returns. This results in a lower Sharpe ratio compared to
its annual counterpart. The shorter the period, the smaller the ratio becomes. This
occurs because weekly returns exhibit a higher standard deviation than monthly re-
turns. Similarly, daily returns have a higher standard deviation than weekly returns.
Thus, as the measurement period shortens, the volatility increases, resulting in lower
Sharpe ratios for shorter time frames [35]. It would be possible to approximately
annualize the Sharpe ratio by multiplying by the
√
52. Since the ratio is only being
compared to results within this thesis and they are all computed the same way this
is not considered a necessary step.
Chapter: Methodology
49
==PAGE:62==
The average time is the average time it takes the model to solve the problem in
seconds for each week. A limit has been set on the running time for the model, with
a maximum of 3 minutes (180 seconds) per instance. This restriction is implemented
to manage the total running time of the model. Consequently, each model can run
for a maximum of 156 minutes (2.6 hours) when evaluating an out-of-sample period
of 1 year (52 weeks).
The average objective value of both models is also considered as one of the KPIs.
When looking at the results of the average objective value it is important to keep in
mind that for MAD a low value is desirable, while for CVaR a high value is desirable.
This analysis provides comprehensive insights into the performance of the optimal
portfolios constructed by the models. By comparing the outcomes, we can evaluate
the eﬀicacy of each model under various scenario generation techniques. Another
aspect of evaluation involves analysing the composition of the optimal portfolios
constructed by the models. This analysis focuses on the number and type of se-
lected assets within the portfolio composition. Considering what the maximum and
minimum weights are on assets put in the portfolio, along with what assets the
portfolio invests the most in.
50
Chapter: Methodology
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 4
Data
In this chapter, an overview of the data utilized in this study is provided. Con-
siderations that needed to be made in regards to data are for example; the source
of the data and modifications made to the data after their acquisition. Decisions
made in regards to the data are represented in this chapter and further explana-
tions on some data input is demonstrated. Additionally, explanation on how the
Fama-French factors are constructed for the Nordic market.
4.1
Data Gathering
Historical price data collection was facilitated through the Yahoo Finance website
[36], due to its compatibility with Julia, enabling utilisation of the ”YFinance”
package. This gathering encompassed the prices of all companies listed in the S&P
500 index in the first quarter of 2024, alongside data pertaining to the S&P 500
index itself. Additionally, prices for the companies listed in the Nordic 120 index
in the first quarter of 2024 were also collected during this process. However, Yahoo
Finance does not provide data regarding the Nordic 120 index itself. Consequently,
this data was collected from the Nasdaq webpage [21].
Moreover, to fulfill the prerequisites of the Fama-French factor methods, the Kenneth
R. French Data Library served as an additional resource for acquiring the factors [37].
It is important to note that there is a lag when collecting the factor data because
the factors are not published immediately. There is up to a one-month lag in the
data. Therefore, the Fama-French method cannot be used for present analysis unless
the factors are generated manually. For the companies listed in S&P 500 index, we
employed the U.S factors. However, Fama-French factors specifically tailored for the
Nordic region did not exist, and only factors for the whole European market were
available. However, using the European factors was opted against as they might not
adequately capture the dynamics of the Nordic market. Consequently, the factors for
the Nordic market were calculated manually to ensure a more precise representation
Chapter: Data
51
==PAGE:64==
of the Nordic market conditions. The data used for these calculations was obtained
from the Financial Modeling Prep website [38] and through the Investing website
[39].
In order to gather data it was necessary to determine the appropriate time interval
for data collection.
The determined interval was one week, resulting in the use
of weekly data. This decision was based on several factors. Given the limitation
discussed in Section 1.3, which lead to data loss, it is desirable to have as much data
as possible without relying on data that dates too far back. A drawback of shorter
intervals is the transaction cost. However, as stated in Section 3.2 for this thesis,
the investor is considered a VIP investor, which means they incur lower transaction
costs. It would be possible to compress the time interval to one day for example,
but then there would be a daily transaction fee. This alternative is considered to
drastic by the authors to be considered. Another strong argument for considering
weekly data is that Mansini, Ogryczak, and Speranza [4] in their book Linear and
Mixed Integer Programming for Portfolio Optimization used weekly data. As this
book is heavily referenced in this thesis it could be considered appropriate to utilize
the same time interval.
4.2
Data Handling
Following the data acquisition phase, the subsequent step necessitated computing
the return rates requisite for the methodologies under examination.
The return
rates are calculated by using Equation 3.11. An obstacle arises when computing
the return rates for the first time stamp. As the data for the previous time stamp
is always required to compute the return rate. To account for this the initial time
stamp must be one time step after the price data is available.
As previously noted in Section 1.3, certain limitations within the dataset emerge at
this juncture. The S&P 500 index consists of approximately 500 companies, and as
previously mentioned these 500 companies do not stay constant in reality. However,
the list of companies considered in this thesis is constant throughout the study and
was extracted from the first quarter of 2024. Same applies for the Nordic 120 index.
List of all companies included in the S&P 500 and the Nordic 120 index can be found
in Appendix A.1 and A.2 respectively. This introduces potential bias, particularly
as the investment start date moves further from the present. For instance, if the
models are applied to the year 2019, they would use the list of companies from the
2024 index, even though the performance is compared against the S&P 500 index
of 2019. This discrepancy means that the index in 2019 is not comprised of the
52
Chapter: Data
==PAGE:65==
same companies as those used by the models, creating a bias wherein the models
are working with the 2024 index list.
Another limitation concerning data availability is that only companies from the in-
dexes with complete data for the entire time period under consideration are included
in the working dataset. This means that companies lacking data for the full period
are excluded. Consequently, the models cannot invest in new stocks that enter the
stock market during the period. Additionally, companies are excluded as well when
missing data occurs for a certain time stamp. This missing data has a large impact
on the computation, therefore those companies must be removed from the list of
available companies, further limiting the number of companies.
4.2.1
Fama-French Factor Creation for the Nordic
Market
Due to the limitation in the Kenneth R. French Data Library regarding Fama-French
factors for the Nordic region, we decided to construct them ourselves. However, the
Momentum (Mom) factor was not constructed due to resource constraints required
for its construction, but a discussion on how it could be calculated can be found
in Section 7.1.5. This limitation prevents the use of the Fama-French four- and
six-factor models for the Nordic analysis. Consequently, the following factors were
created: SMB, HML, RMW, and CMA. The factors are constructed using value-
weighted portfolios formed on size, Book-to-Market, Return on Asset (ROA), and
investment ratio.
Portfolio construction
The factor creation process begins by constructing different portfolios composed of
the Nordic companies in various ways. The stocks are categorized into two size
groups based on market capitalization: Small and Big. Each size group is further
divided into three Book-to-Market groups (Low, Medium, High), two profitability
groups (Robust, Weak), and two investment groups (Conservative, Aggressive). This
classification results in a total of 14 portfolios, as shown in Table 4.1.
Chapter: Data
53
==PAGE:66==
(Size)
Small
(Book-to-Market)
Low
(1) Small Low
Medium
(2) Small Medium
High
(3) Small High
(Profitability)
Weak
(4) Small Weak
Robust
(5) Small Robust
(Investment)
Conservative
(6) Small Conservative
Aggressive
(7) Small Aggressive
(Size)
Big
(Book-to-Market)
Low
(8) Big Low
Medium
(9) Big Medium
High
(10) Big High
(Profitability)
Weak
(11) Big Weak
Robust
(12) Big Robust
(Investment)
Conservative
(13) Big Conservative
Aggressive
(14) Big Aggressive
Table 4.1:
Portfolio categorization based on size, Book-to-Market, profitability, and
investment groups.
Before constructing the portfolios, certain data cleaning procedures were necessary.
During the sorting process for calculating the ratios, specific filters were applied.
Firstly, stocks with a Market cap below e1,000,000 were excluded from the sorts,
since smaller stocks are less likely to follow traditional risk patterns and may in-
troduce unnecessary noise to the analysis. Secondly, all negative Book-to-Market
values were removed because they were likely data errors. Lastly, any stocks lacking
data of the investment ratio values over a specific period were disregarded, as the
investment ratio requires data spanning a significant period to be meaningful [27].
It is also worth noting that in certain instances, outliers were excluded due to errors
encountered during the price collection from Yahoo Finance.
The process of generating the 14 portfolios occurs annually and is based on data at
the end of June each year. The necessary data was collected for all available stocks in
the Danish, Swedish, Norwegian, Finnish, and Icelandic markets from 01.01.2010 to
01.01.2024, sourced from the Financial Modeling Prep [38]. Our dataset includes a
total of 1,400 companies from the Nordic market: 173 companies from Denmark, 795
companies from Sweden, 251 companies from Norway, 159 companies from Finland,
and 22 companies from Iceland. Utilizing this data, key variables could be defined,
such as Total assets, Total liabilities, Net income, and Market capitalization (Market
cap). Each June from 2010 to 2024 these variables were used to calculate sorting
54
Chapter: Data
==PAGE:67==
ratios which were required to sort the portfolios.
To categorize stocks based on size, all the Nordic stocks were sorted by Market cap,
and then split in half into two groups, Small and Big. This approach is similar to the
one used in the article A five-factor asset pricing model [12], however in their study
the 10th and 90th percentiles were used as breakpoints due to the sheer volume
of stocks in the U.S. market. Compared to the available stocks from the Nordic
countries it was decided to set the breakpoint at the 50th percentile to ensure as
many stocks in each portfolio as possible.
Furthermore, all the stocks were sorted based on the Book-to-Market ratio and split
into three groups (Low, Medium, and High), where the breakpoints were the 33rd
and 66th percentiles [27]. The Book-to-Market ratio is calculated as:
Book-to-Market = Book equity
Market cap
(4.1)
Where Book equity = Total assets −Total liabilities.
To categorize stocks according to their profitability the ROA ratio was used. While
the Return on Equity (ROE) could have been an alternative, the decision to utilize
ROA was made based on the available data. ROA can be calculated as
ROA = Net income
Total assets
(4.2)
A stock was classified as robustly profitable if its ROA was above the 50th percentile,
otherwise, it was classified as weakly profitable.
Finally, the investment ratio was determined by assessing the change in Total asset
over time:
Investment ratio = Total assetst −Total assetst−1
Total assetst−1
(4.3)
All the stocks were sorted based on the investment ratio and split in half, enabling
the formation of two groups: Conservative and Aggressive. Stocks were categorized
as conservative if their investment ratios fell below the 50th percentile, while those
exceeding this threshold were classified as aggressive [12].
Finally, portfolios could be constructed by comparing groups together and gathering
the stocks that belonged to both groups. For instance, if a stock fell into the Small
size category and also the Low Book-to-Market category, it would be allocated to
the Small Low portfolio.
Chapter: Data
55
==PAGE:68==
The SMB factor relies on a 2x3 sort, where 6 portfolios are created based on the
size of the stocks (Small and Big), and the values of the Book-to-Market ratio (Low,
Medium, and High).
High
Medium
Low
Small
Small High
Small Medium
Small Low
Big
Big High
Big Medium
Big Low
Table 4.2: Portfolios used for SMB creation.
However, HML, RMW, and CMA rely on a 2x2 sort, where 8 new portfolios are
created, 4 for each factor except for HML, which uses the same portfolios as SMB.
The new portfolios are based on ROA (Weak and Robust) and the investment ratio
(Conservative and Aggressive).
High
Low
Small
Small High
Small Low
Big
Big High
Big Low
(a) HML
Robust
Weak
Small
Small Robust
Small Weak
Big
Big Robust
Big Weak
(b) RMW
Conservative
Aggressive
Small
Small Conservative
Small Aggressive
Big
Big Conservative
Big Aggressive
(c) CMA
Table 4.3: Portfolios used for HML, RMW, and CMA creation
There are multiple ways to sort the portfolios, but this strategy was selected not
only because it is the most widely used method but also because the article A
five-factor asset pricing model [12] found no difference in model performance when
testing various sorting strategies.
Factor construction
Once the 14 portfolios have been constructed, they are used to calculate the weekly
Fama-French factors for the Nordic market. This involves calculating the weekly
return of each portfolio and applying the formulas presented in Equations 4.4, 4.5,
4.6 and 4.7 to compute the factors.
The SMB (Small Minus Big) factor captures the return difference between portfolios
of small-cap stocks and large-cap stocks. In other words, the average return on the
three small portfolios minus the average return on the three big portfolios.
SMB = 1/3(Small Low + Small Medium + Small High)
−1/3(Big Low + Big Medium + Big High)
(4.4)
56
Chapter: Data
==PAGE:69==
The HML (High Minus Low) factor captures the return difference between stocks
with high Book-to-Market and low Book-to-Market ratios. Calculated as the average
return on the two high portfolios minus the average return on the two low portfolios.
HML = 1/2(Small High + Big High)
−1/2(Small Low + Big Low)
(4.5)
The RMW (Robust Minus Weak) or the profitability factor is calculated as the
average return on the two robust profitability portfolios minus the average return
on the two weak profitability portfolios.
RMW = 1/2(Small Robust + Big Robust)
−1/2(Small Weak + Big Weak)
(4.6)
The CMA (Conservative Minus Aggressive) or the investment factor measures the
difference in return between portfolios of companies with high and low investment
levels [12].
CMA = 1/2(Small Conservative + Big Conservative)
−1/2(Small Aggressive + Big Aggressive)
(4.7)
The excess market return, (Rm −Rf) is the only factor not constructed by sorting
portfolios. Instead, it is the difference between the market return (Rm) and the risk-
free rate (Rf). In this study, the Nordic 120 index is used to represent the market.
This benchmark was chosen because it captures the performance of a diverse set
of stocks in the Nordic countries. The risk-free rate is typically represented by the
yield on government bonds, reflecting a return on an investment with zero risk.
For instance, a 1-month government bond yield of 0.2% reflects the return on a
government bond, assuming no risk, over a specified period. In this study, the 1-
month Swedish bond yield served as the risk-free rate and not a Nordic bond yield.
The Swedish bond yield was chosen because the majority of assets in the Nordic 120
index originate from Sweden. The bond yield was collected through the Investing
website [39]. The excess market return is essential for understanding the additional
return expected from the market over a risk-free investment [27].
Chapter: Data
57
==PAGE:70==
58
Chapter: Data
==PAGE:71==
Chapter 5
Preliminary Analysis
This chapter presents the preliminary analysis necessary to move on to final testing
of the models and methods. Several significant factors have been examined, such
as determining the number of scenarios, selecting probability distribution, and tun-
ing critical parameters, as well as for how applicable parameter tuning is for each
method. The analysis was carried out in the same order as they are noted in the
following sections, with the result of each analysis having a significant impact on the
next. The basis of decisions made in the following chapter are based on the KPIs
selected, previously described in Table 3.18. The capital gain will be the deter-
mining factor of the analysis, while also considering the influence of other KPIs on
the results. The MAD and CVaR models used for analysis from this point forward
will be the MAD and CVaR model with the transaction cost extension, respectively
Models 3.4 and 3.5. As discussed in Section 3.6, a time limit has been imposed on
the models. This time constraint limits the duration the models have to find the
optimal solution. Consequently, this restriction will inevitably affect the outcomes
generated by the models. In any instance where the time limit is reached the caption
”Cap” will appear.
5.1
Number of Scenarios
The number of scenarios is one of the inputs that needs to be determined for the
models. For most methods, this number refers to the historical data period used
to generate scenarios. For example, if the determined historical data period is 1
year, this translates to 52 scenarios, since the scenarios are based on a weekly basis.
However, for methods such as Monte Carlo, VARMA, and Block bootstrapping,
the number of scenarios can be chosen flexibly while keeping the historical data
period fixed. Therefore, the determined amount of historical data is selected first.
Following this, for methods such as Monte Carlo, VARMA, and Block bootstrapping,
the number of scenarios is identified using the determined amount of historical data.
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
59
==PAGE:72==
The Historical method was employed as the scenario generation technique to eval-
uate the amount of historical data due to its simplicity and non-random nature,
facilitating comparative analysis across multiple runs. The conclusion made from
the testing will be assumed for the other methods as well. The analysis was con-
ducted with both uniform and S-curve distribution for the scenario probabilities, to
determine whether recent data holds more significance. The investment start date
was fixed at January 1, 2010 and the test was conducted with weekly in-sample
data of the S&P 500 spanning periods of 2, 3, 4 and so forth up to 10 years back,
subjected to testing, and out-of-sample period of 1 year. The investment start date
was chosen as close to the present without comprising the testing with an overlap
in datasets. Additionally the smallest in-sample data considered is 2 years, or 104
scenarios, not 1 year since that would only result in 52 scenarios which is not con-
sidered as a significant amount of scenarios. As a base for testing, the parameters
µ0 and β have been set to 0 and 0.1. The performance metrics resulting from these
tests are shown in Figure 5.1 for MAD and Figure 5.2 for CVaR.
Figure 5.1: Graphical comparison of the different KPIs of MAD, tested with different
numbers of scenarios as input.
Note: The figure shows two different distributions of scenario probabilities of the MAD model:
S-Curve (light blue) and Uniform (dark blue). Each subplot represents a different KPI, and the x-
axis labels indicate the number of years of historical data used as input. For KPIs (3), (8) and (9),
lower values indicate better performance, whereas for the other KPIs, higher values are preferable.
60
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
==PAGE:73==
From Figure 5.1, a remarkable pattern emerges. Across KPIs (1), (2), (4), (5), (6)
and (7) for the uniform distribution, the results consistently peak around the 5-year
mark. This suggests a notable trend where performance reaches its maximum with
five years of data as input, before potentially declining or experiencing diminished
results.
Moreover, there is a clear distinction between the eﬀicacy of the two different dis-
tribution approaches, uniform and S-curve. Up until the 5-year mark, the uniform
distribution appears to outperform the S-curve distribution across various metrics.
The initial superiority of the uniform distribution highlights its effectiveness when
using more recent data as input and moderate number of scenarios. However, be-
yond the 5-year threshold, a notable shift occurs where the S-curve distribution be-
gins to outshine the uniform distribution in terms of performance evaluation. This
transition indicates that as the dataset includes older data, the S-curve distribution
becomes more suitable.
The S-curve distribution will not be utilized, as the uniform distribution provides
comparable results except in cases where the dataset spans 6 or more years. Addi-
tionally, the complexity and additional computational overhead associated with the
S-curve distribution are not justified by the marginal performance improvements ob-
served only in longer-term datasets. Hence, the uniform distribution is the preferred
choice for its balance of simplicity, eﬀiciency, and adequate performance across the
considered time frames. More detailed results of the performance metrics using uni-
form distribution are shown in Table 5.1. A similar table was constructed for the
S-curve distribution, which can be found in Appendix B.1.
Model
MAD
# Scenarios
104 (2y)
156 (3y)
208 (4 y)
260 (5y)
312 (6y)
364 (7y)
416 (8y)
468 (9y)
520 (10y)
Capital gain
110,071.94
147,161.75
182,428.75
186,322.03
131,890.47
124,377.38
117,225.17
114,243.55
92,238.37
Avg return
0.31%
0.35%
0.43%
0.44%
0.35%
0.31%
0.30%
0.30%
0.27%
Stdev
1.35
1.43
1.46
1.43
1.43
1.45
1.48
1.45
1.50
Avg index dev
0.08%
0.12%
0.20%
0.21%
0.12%
0.08%
0.07%
0.07%
0.04%
Avg cum index dev
3.50%
6.03%
8.68%
8.60%
5.80%
5.83%
6.38%
6.39%
4.96%
Growth
17.34%
19.55%
24.78%
25.24%
19.49%
17.01%
16.55%
16.77%
14.72%
Sharpe ratio
0.23
0.25
0.30
0.31
0.25
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.18
Avg time [s]
0.58
1.21
0.67
0.87
1.04
1.23
1.51
1.73
1.94
Avg # assets
17.27
19.46
20.37
24.25
26.33
25.81
26.27
32.08
35.44
TC
56,443.16
43,922.33
57,071.14
58,234.14
56,338.23
42,258.16
44,871.27
48,713.47
50,223.25
Avg obj.
11,878.38
13,232.88
12,414.31
11,597.01
10,928.79
10,665.66
10,937.58
11,046.10
11,247.57
Table 5.1: Performance metrics of MAD with uniform distribution tested with different
numbers of scenarios as input
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
61
==PAGE:74==
The results in Table 5.1 indicate that the best outcome is achieved using in-sample
data from 3 to 5 years (156 to 260 scenarios). These periods outperform others
on most metrics, especially capital gain. Both 3 years (156 scenarios) and 6 years
(312 scenarios) of in-sample data yield similar results, with the 3-year input slightly
outperforming the 6-year input on a few KPIs. However, the 3-year input results in
better capital gain, which is the desired outcome. Consequently, 3, 4, and 5 years of
in-sample data will be further tested with a validation dataset to confirm the ideal
amount of historical data.
Figure 5.2: Graphical comparison of the different KPIs of CVaR, tested with different
numbers of scenarios as input.
Note: The figure shows two different distributions of scenario probabilities of CVaR: S-Curve (light
red) and Uniform (dark red). Each subplot represents a different KPI, and the x-axis labels indicate
the number of years of historical data used as input. For all KPIs, higher values are preferable,
except for (3) standard deviation and (8) average time.
On Figure 5.2 the comparison between applying CVaR with uniform and S-curve dis-
tribution is presented. Unlike the MAD analysis, where a distinct peak performance
point was evident, the CVaR results exhibit more fluctuations across the different
amount of data input, lacking a clear maximum performance point. Additionally,
the division between the uniform and S-curve distributions is not as pronounced,
with both showing periods of relative strength.
62
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
==PAGE:75==
The uniform distribution particularly demonstrates a strong performance with a
two-year input, where it yields noticeably superior results across the majority of
metrics. The peak performance for the uniform distribution is otherwise generally
achieved with 4-5 year inputs, while the best performances using the S-curve dis-
tribution are typically seen with 6-7 year inputs. Since the uniform distribution
with 4-5 year inputs are comparable to those achieved using 6-7 year with S-curve
distribution, the uniform distribution remains the preferred choice, offering simplic-
ity and eﬀiciency without compromising on performance. The performance metrics
using a uniform distribution are presented in greater detail in Table 5.2. A similar
table was constructed for the S-curve distribution, which can be found in Appendix
B.2.
Model
CVaR
# Scenarios
104 (2y)
156 (3y)
208 (4y)
260 (5y)
312 (6y)
364 (7y)
416 (8y)
468 (9y)
520 (10y)
Capital gain
327,527.70
242,802.92
263,880.39
270,000.00
200,949.01
219,532.07
251,570.84
245,829.08
226,724.34
Avg return
0.56%
0.43%
0.46%
0.46%
0.36%
0.39%
0.44%
0.43%
0.40%
Stdev
1.42
1.42
1.45
1.51
1.43
1.47
1.60
1.56
1.51
Avg index dev
0.32%
0.19%
0.22%
0.23%
0.13%
0.16%
0.21%
0.20%
0.17%
Avg cum index dev
11.37%
6.82%
7.12%
6.86%
4.20%
6.41%
9.01%
8.53%
7.45%
Growth
33.06%
24.38%
26.45%
26.85%
20.19%
22.02%
25.27%
24.67%
22.81%
Sharpe ratio
0.39
0.30
0.32
0.31
0.25
0.27
0.28
0.28
0.27
Avg time [s]
1.02
2.13
1.20
1.63
1.12
1.41
1.75
2.22
2.79
Avg # assets
15.44
18.85
18.21
16.81
19.29
23.04
21.42
24.79
25.40
TC
2,624.84
818.98
497.84
634.41
819.23
540.96
973.36
702.09
1,107.25
Avg obj.
- 28,810.46
- 30,180.40
- 28,206.92
- 26,618.91
- 25,688.72
- 25,365.57
- 26,577.37
- 27,307.86
- 27,715.43
Table 5.2: Performance metrics of CVaR with uniform distribution tested with different
numbers of scenarios as input.
Upon analysing the performance metrics from Table 5.2, the model using 2 years
of in-sample data (104 scenarios) shows exceptional results across nearly all KPIs,
except for the objective value and transaction cost. In addition, 4 years (208 scenar-
ios) and 5 years (260 scenarios) of in-sample data outperform other input periods
on most KPIs, with some exceptions. These observations highlight the effectiveness
of using 2, 4, and 5 years of in-sample data, which will be further tested with a
validation dataset.
After conducting the initial analysis on data with an investment start date of Jan-
uary 1, 2010, a validation dataset was examined using an investment start date of
January 1, 2016. This validation test was performed to further scrutinize the re-
sults obtained from the initial analysis and assess their significance. The investment
start date for the validation test was selected to ensure no overlap in the datasets.
The initial period analysed began on January 1, 2010, and spanned 1 year forward.
For the validation test, it was necessary to examine data from five years prior to
the investment start date selected and avoid overlapping with the initial dataset.
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
63
==PAGE:76==
Therefore, the investment start date for the validation test was set to 5 years from
2011, resulting in a start date of January 1, 2016. This analysis was conducted on
the three top-performing scenarios for both the MAD model, with 3, 4, and 5 years
of in-sample data, and CVaR model, with 2, 4, and 5 years of in-sample data.
Model
MAD
CVaR
# Scenarios
156 (3y)
208 (4y)
260 (5y)
104 (2y)
208 (4y)
260 (5y)
Capital gain
28,837
-34,144.22
32,900.39
50,500.40
145,879.03
162,894.14
Avg return
0.22%
0.13%
0.21%
0.11%
0.27%
0.30%
Stdev
1.28
1.14
1.26
1.49
1.36
1.46
Avg index dev
0.02%
-0.06%
0.01%
-0.09%
0.07%
0.11%
Avg cum index dev
5.72%
2.99%
4.88%
1.48%
6.70%
6.53%
Growth
11.56%
6.87%
11.13%
5.25%
14.71%
16.46%
Sharpe ratio
0.17
0.11
0.16
0.07
0.20
0.21
Avg time [s]
2.56
1.46
1.01
1.16
1.35
1.50
Avg # assets
29.52
31.56
30.75
20.5
24.25
23.63
TC
83,872.36
101,011.64
74,794.54
1,916.77
1,060.29
1,570.70
Avg obj.
7,253.87
7,496.86
8,747.94
-12,217.44
-14,963.31
-17,327.58
Table 5.3: Performance metrics of both models with uniform distribution tested with
the top performing numbers of scenarios as input.
The validation test results are shown in Table 5.3. The first three columns show
the results of the MAD model. The highest capital gain acquired is with 5 years
of in-sample data. For all other KPIs 3 and 5 years show nearly identical results
with 3 years acquiring slightly better results. The difference is minuscule for most
metrics and in-sample data of 5 years does acquire the highest capital gain and
lowest transaction costs. For this reason in-sample data of 5 years is selected as the
amount of historical data used as input for future analysis performed.
For the CVaR model, 5 years of in-sample data also deliver the best results. Al-
though 5 years of in-sample data does not achieve the best result in all metrics, it
performs best overall. 5 years of in-sample data acquires the highest capital gain,
average return, average index deviation, growth, and Sharpe ratio.
While it might be tempting to assume that increasing the number of scenarios leads
to improved outcomes, the results presented in Table 5.1 and 5.2 challenge this
assumption. Across both models, the results reveal that optimal performance is
often achieved with a moderate number of scenarios, particularly 260. Interestingly,
the addition of more scenarios does not necessarily translate to better results and
may even lead to reduced or negligible improvements in the majority of metrics.
64
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
==PAGE:77==
Therefore, based on these findings, 260 scenarios are selected, representing a period
of 5 years.
5.1.1
Determining the Number of Scenarios for Monte
Carlo, VARMA, and Block bootstrapping
Monte Carlo, VARMA, and Block bootstrapping methods differ from other ap-
proaches due to their flexibility in selecting the number of scenarios while using a
fixed historical data period. Specifically, these methods allow us to maintain a con-
sistent 5-year historical data input, regardless of the number of scenarios generated.
Therefore, analysis on the optimal number of scenarios will be conducted on those
methods without altering the historical data window of 5 years. The analysis will
proceed with an investment start date of January 1, 2016. The scenario count cho-
sen ranged from 260 to 5,000, with a interval that roughly doubled. So the interval
is; 260, 500, 1,000, 2,000, and 5,000. The lower bound on the interval is the same as
considering 5 years of data (5 · 52). In any instances where the best outcome can be
seen on the edge of this interval, the interval is extended to see whether the optimal
scenario count can be found outside the chosen interval. The lowest scenario count
that will be considered is 100, as a lower scenario count is not considered significant.
There is no upper limit set on the number of scenarios considered. The subsequent
scenario count to 5,000 is however set to 7,000 and not 10,000 as that is considered
a comparatively large gap.
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
65
==PAGE:78==
Monte Carlo results
The results for the Monte Carlo simulation with MAD and CVaR, tested with dif-
ferent numbers of scenarios, using 5-years of historical data, are presented in Tables
5.4 and 5.5, respectively.
Model
MAD
# Scenarios
260
500
1,000
2,000
5,000
Capital gain
-657.14
3,288.87
-11,917.46
-16,998.97
-160,746.56
Avg return
0.35%
0.34%
0.32%
0.31%
0.39%
Stdev
1.68
1.62
1.63
1.58
2.18
Avg index dev
0.15%
0.14%
0.12%
0.11%
0.19%
Avg cum index dev
5.32%
6.01%
5.26%
5.20%
3.19%
Growth
18.79%
18.71%
17.03%
16.47%
21.14%
Sharpe ratio
0.20
0.21
0.19
0.19
0.18
Avg time [s]
4.72
8.58
15.43
47.42
126.80
Avg # assets
238.44
293.10
355.58
399.62
375.65
TC
169,948
167,069
166,497
166,723
349,037
Avg obj.
86.97
509.13
775.89
946.75
6,542.04
Table 5.4: Performance metrics of Monte Carlo simulation with MAD tested with dif-
ferent number of scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical data.
From Table 5.4 it is noticeable that 500 scenarios yield the best results considering
the capital gain, being the only one receiving a positive capital gain. Therefore, 500
scenarios were chosen for the MAD model. The table shows that while the portfolio
growth percentages are positive across all scenarios, the actual capital gains reveal
a different story. For example, the portfolio growth for 260 scenarios is 18.79%, but
it results in a capital loss of $657.14. This discrepancy occurs because capital gain
values include the transaction costs, which significantly impact overall performance.
High transaction costs can reduce profits, despite high growth rates.
66
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
==PAGE:79==
Model
CVaR
# Scenarios
260
500
1,000
2,000
5,000
7,000
Capital gain
120,485.20
110,244.90
126,870.84
108,898.66
140,650.13
125,666.05
Avg return
0.28%
0.26%
0.28%
0.24%
0.28%
0.25%
Stdev
1.79
1.74
1.68
1.58
1.67
1.60
Avg index dev
0.08%
0.06%
0.09%
0.04%
0.09%
0.06%
Avg cum index dev
2.23%
1.93%
4.01%
3.34%
3.82%
2.13%
Growth
14.70%
13.57%
15.06%
12.48%
15.11%
13.37%
Sharpe ratio
0.15
0.15
0.17
0.15
0.17
0.16
Avg time [s]
Cap
Cap
Cap
Cap
Cap
Cap
Avg # assets
151.31
216.52
278.50
162.44
90.75
100.12
TC
23,935.19
23,167.66
21,686.87
14,770.58
9,433.77
7,246.63
Avg obj.
4,661.96
3,194.43
2,280.46
-77.74
-4,693.60
-2,985.09
Table 5.5: Performance metrics of Monte Carlo simulation with CVaR tested with dif-
ferent number of scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical data.
Table 5.5 indicates that 5,000 scenarios produces the most favorable outcome, out-
performing other scenario counts on several KPIs. Notably, achieving a peak in
capital gain at $140,650.13 with 5,000 scenario counts. While the results from 1,000
scenarios are comparable and present a strong alternative with better average ob-
jective value and average cumulative index deviation, 5,000 scenarios achieves the
highest capital gain. Therefore, 5,000 scenarios are selected as the optimal number
for analysis. As can be observed in Table 5.5 an additional scenario count number
was added, 7,000.
The results from 7,000 scenario counts did however not out-
perform the 5,000. The maximum time cap was reached for all test subjects, and
the average gap between the primal and dual values increased with increasing the
number of scenarios. The solution quality results can be seen in Appendix B.3.
VARMA results
Tables 5.6 and 5.7 present the results for the VARMA method applied to MAD and
CVaR, tested with various numbers of scenarios using a 5-year data input. The
method was employed without the error term to be make sure that the scenarios
were consistent across every scenario count. Additionally the test is conducted on
the VARMA Fama-French three-factor model and the conclusion made from the
testing will be assumed for the VARMA Fama-French five-factor method as well.
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
67
==PAGE:80==
Model
MAD
# Scenarios
260
500
1,000
2,000
5,000
Capital gain
- 71,521.01
- 46,199.09
- 37,439.14
- 85,781.10
- 41,403.77
Avg return
0.012%
0.043%
0.097%
0.038%
0.10%
Stdev
3.08
3.13
3.12
3.17
3.07
Avg index dev
-0.19%
-0.16%
-0.10%
-0.16%
-0.10%
Avg cum index dev
2.68%
2.62%
5.66%
3.37%
5.08%
Growth
-1.85%
-0.33%
2.55%
-0.67%
2.92%
Sharpe ratio
0.002
0.012
0.030
0.011
0.032
Avg time [s]
2.10
1.79
4.02
7.22
21.11
Avg # assets
1.94
2.00
2.00
2.00
2.00
TC
56,366.44
44,373.98
65,817.97
83,795.10
73,77.82
Avg obj.
7,144.13
7,194.26
7,263.39
7,110.90
7,215.72
Table 5.6: Performance metrics of VARMA with MAD tested with different number of
scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical data.
Looking at Table 5.6 it can be observed that all scenarios result in a negative capital
gain. However the smallest loss occurring with 1,000 scenarios. Notice that 5,000
scenarios slightly outperform 1,000 scenarios across some KPIs, including average
return, standard deviation, portfolio growth, Sharpe ratio and average objective
value. There is however only a minuscule difference on these KPIs compared to
the difference in the capital gain. Concluding that 1,000 scenarios is the preferred
number of scenarios.
Model
CVaR
# Scenarios
260
500
1,000
2,000
5,000
Capital gain
95,136.57
9,355.73
123,758.11
97,487.38
97,133.21
Avg return
0.24%
0.076%
0.29%
0.24%
0.23%
Stdev
3.28
3.14
3.32
3.24
3.12
Avg index dev
0.04%
-0.12%
0.09%
0.04%
0.04%
Avg cum index dev
12.80%
3.90%
12.66%
11.15%
9.35%
Growth
10.07%
1.34%
12.81%
10.09%
10.06%
Sharpe ratio
0.07
0.02
0.09
0.07
0.07
Avg time [s]
2.31
3.41
6.80
14.47
41.13
Avg # assets
1.67
1.77
1.73
1.83
1.81
TC
5,737.27
4,112.73
4,352.07
3,459.92
3,478.78
Avg obj.
- 15,855.01
- 14,571.86
- 15,526.65
- 15,540.44
- 15,219.74
Table 5.7: Performance metrics of VARMA with CVaR tested with different number of
scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical data.
68
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
==PAGE:81==
From Table 5.7 a clear conclusion can be drawn, that 1,000 scenarios is the dom-
inating column. 1,000 scenarios provides the highest capital gain by a significant
margin, as well as outperforming on several KPIs. 1,000 scenarios is dominated on
KPIs; standard deviation, average cumulative index deviation, average time, trans-
action cost and average objective. However, 1,000 scenario counts dominates on as
many KPIs as it is dominated on, and most importantly dominating on capital gain.
Block bootstrapping results
The results from Block bootstrapping are presented in Tables 5.8 and 5.9. This
method utilized the same amount of input data as the other approaches and was
evaluated for both MAD and CVaR metrics.
Model
MAD
# Scenarios
260
500
1,000
2,000
5,000
Capital gain
-12,972.22
-16,936.74
-18,901.97
-4,907.02
-14,390.00
Avg return
0.33%
0.32%
0.32%
0.34%
0.47%
Stdev
1.68
1.64
1.57
1.59
1.94
Avg index dev
0.13%
0.12%
0.12%
0.14%
0.27%
Avg cum index dev
5.10%
4.96%
4.88%
5.78%
8.48%
Growth
17.69%
17.30%
17.17%
18.63%
26.13%
Sharpe ratio
0.19
0.19
0.20
0.21
0.24
Avg time [s]
5.86
25.22
14.45
67.53
108.90
Avg # assets
240.13
302.27
363.23
409.56
392.31
TC
172,460.13
172,751.25
173,377.57
173,102.20
223,983.34
Avg obj.
85.21
468.07
768.54
950.98
3,801.05
Table 5.8: Performance metrics of Block bootstrapping with MAD tested with different
number of scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical data.
Table 5.8 demonstrates the performance metrics of Block bootstrapping using the
MAD model. It can be observed that none of the scenario count results in a positive
capital gain, and this is considered the most important aspect. None the less the
highest the capital gain or rather the minimum loss is for 2,000 scenario counts.
Notably, the average return is not the highest for 2,000 scenarios, but rather 5,000
scenarios. This scenario however also has a larger capital loss, this discrepancy is
due to this scenario count being affected by a significant transaction cost. From this
a conclusion can be drawn that 2,000 scenarios are the selected amount of scenarios
for Block bootstrapping.
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
69
==PAGE:82==
Model
CVaR
# Scenarios
260
500
1,000
2,000
5,000
7,000
Capital gain
195,348.17
161,348.43
189,729.47
120,923.27
296,884.67
135,500.55
Avg return
0.40%
0.34%
0.38%
0.25%
0.56%
0.29%
Stdev
1.86
1.76
1.68
1.60
1.87
1.52
Avg index dev
0.21%
0.14%
0.18%
0.06%
0.36%
0.09%
Avg cum index dev
5.66%
4.41%
6.23%
3.66%
8.08%
5.91%
Growth
22.27%
18.49%
21.13%
13.36%
32.20%
15.46%
Sharpe ratio
0.22
0.19
0.23
0.16
0.30
0.19
Avg time [s]
Cap
Cap
Cap
Cap
Cap
Cap
Avg # assets
152.71
217.31
280.96
178.77
146.71
112.21
TC
23,920.29
21,070.28
19,171.2
11,700.03
20,586.79
17,804.23
Avg obj.
4,978.08
3,536.55
2,627.04
1,098.05
-15,626.57
-9,474.32
Table 5.9: Performance metrics of Block bootstrapping with CVaR tested with different
number of scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical data.
Considering the results in Table 5.9 the capital gain is consistently positive and peaks
at $296,884.67 at scenario count 5,000. Average return fluctuates but peaks at 0.56%
for 5,000 scenarios like the capital gain. All metrics except standard deviation, total
transaction cost, and average objective peak at scenario count 5,000. In this table
it can be observed that the range of scenario counts has been increased. As the
optimal scenario count can be concluded to be 5,000 and that value is at the edge
of the chosen interval, an additional value was added to observe if better results
could be found with increased scenario counts. However, that is not the case and
therefore 5,000 scenario counts remains as the selected number of scenarios for Block
bootstrapping with CVaR. Similar to the CVaR results from Monte Carlo, Table 5.5,
the time cap is reached on every scenario count. The solution quality can be seen
in Appendix B.3.
Table 5.10 summarizes the final results of the determined number of scenarios for
the different scenario generation methods for both the MAD and CVaR model. The
Historical method was exclusively used to determine the amount of historical data,
due to its simplicity and non-random nature, and the same amount assumed for
the other methods as well. Furthermore, methods incorporating an error term are
assumed to have the same number of scenarios as those without it.
70
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
==PAGE:83==
Method
Amount of Historical Data
Nr of Scenarios (MAD)
Nr of Scenarios (CVaR)
Historical
5 years
260
260
FF3
5 years
260
260
FF4
5 years
260
260
FF5
5 years
260
260
FF6
5 years
260
260
Monte Carlo
5 years
500
5,000
VARMA FF3
5 years
1,000
1,000
VARMA FF5
5 years
1,000
1,000
Block-Bootstrap
5 years
2,000
5,000
Table 5.10: Determined number of scenarios for each scenario generation method and
model.
5.2
Assessing Randomness
Several of the techniques employed contain a randomness factor, which must be con-
sidered during parameter tuning. Tuning parameters on methods that exhibit ex-
cessive randomness will not result in any meaningful analysis. Hence, every method
containing randomness has been analysed for the extent of its randomness. Those
methods include; Monte Carlo simulation, Block bootstrapping, VARMA with and
without error terms, and the Fama-French three-, four-, five-, and six-factor models
with error terms. Methods that demonstrate significant random fluctuations will
not be subject to parameter tuning. The randomness test was conducted using the
determined amount of scenarios for each method, as shown in Table 5.10. The in-
vestment start date was set to January 1, 2016, consistent with earlier tests, and
the out-of-sample period extended for one year. The parameters µ0 and β remain
set at 0 and 0.1, respectively.
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
71
==PAGE:84==
(a) Monte Carlo
(b) Block Bootstrap
(c) FF3 with error term
(d) FF4 with error term
(e) FF5 with error term
(f) FF6 with error term
(g) VARMA FF3
(h) VARMA FF3 with error term
(i) VARMA FF5
(j) VARMA FF5 with error term
Figure 5.3: Model performances on cumulative return across different methods incorpo-
rating randomness.
72
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
==PAGE:85==
Figure 5.3 above illustrates the results of running both models for each method five
times.
The purpose is to determine whether the methods exhibit excessive ran-
domness, which would hinder effective parameter tuning.
In a scenario without
randomness, each line in the graph would overlap, showing only three distinct lines:
MAD, CVaR, and S&P500. However, this is not the case in any of the graphs.
Graphs 5.3a, 5.3b, 5.3g, and 5.3i indicate that, despite not yielding identical results,
the trajectories are consistent across runs. This consistency suggests that the ran-
domness present does not impede parameter tuning. While exact results may not
be replicated each time, the overall outcomes are considered reliable. On the other
hand, graphs 5.3c, 5.3d, 5.3e, 5.3f, 5.3h, and 5.3j reveal significant discrepancies.
Although the MAD model maintains consistent principles, the CVaR model does
not. The introduction of an error term in these cases generates substantial variance
for the CVaR model, highlighting the impact of randomness on its performance. A
possible explanation for this large variance in the CVaR model, and not the MAD
model, could be that the MAD model considers all scenarios in the objective while
the CVaR model only consider a predetermined percentage of the of the scenarios,
in this case 10%. The lower the β value is set the fewer scenarios are consider and
that may result in the CVaR model being more sensitive to extreme scenarios. The
computation of the error term could also be a factor in variance created, a different
computational method of the error term could affect the randomness. Due to the
large variance created with the error term in the CVaR model, parameter tuning
will be conducted without the error. Although the MAD model demonstrated more
consistency it will not be subjected to parameter tuning, in methods including the
error term.
5.3
Parameter Tuning
When employing the models, several parameters must be set and determined. The
following section provides a summary of how and why these parameters have been
chosen. The parameter tuning test has been performed on every scenario gener-
ation technique that did not include the error term since it exhibited significant
fluctuations, as detailed in Section 5.2. This was done using the selected amount
of scenarios as determined in Table 5.10. The investment date remains January 1,
2016 and the out-of-sample period spans one year. In cases where parameter tun-
ing does not yield a clear optimal value for the parameters, the following steps are
taken to resolve the ambiguity: First, the average of the results of each columns is
computed to identify the value of µ0 that delivers the highest average performance.
This approach helps in determining the parameter that generally performs best. If
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
73
==PAGE:86==
the optimal value remains indeterminate after averaging, the historical parameter
tuning results are adopted as the default, as these results are considered a reliable
baseline.
µ0 Parameter
The µ parameter determines the portfolios expected return. A high and positive
µ is therefore desirable.
An initial µ0 must be set, as the lower bound on the
portfolios expected return. The lower bound should be set by the investor as the
minimal return they are willing to accept. The lower the lower bound is set the
more free the model is to invest in stocks. If µ0 is set too high however, the model
will not find any solutions. To address this, a fallback method was applied. When a
situation is infeasible, the fallback method decreases µ0 by 0.1% increments until the
situation becomes solvable. This allows investors to select a high µ0 and receive the
solution at the highest feasible µ0. Additionally, the fallback method was utilized
to determine the range of µ0 for parameter tuning. This approach identified the
maximum possible µ0 for each scenario generation method during the tuning period.
From this maximum µ0, five to six steps were selected, ranging from zero up to the
highest µ0, to be used in the process.
β Parameter
The β parameter for the CVaR model has to be determined. It is defined as β = k
S,
where k is the number of worst realizations for the portfolio rate of return, and S
is the total number of scenarios. Thus, the β parameter represents the proportion
of scenarios considered in the calculation of the CVaR, with 0 < β ≤1.
For
example, if β = 0.1 (or 10%), the objective considers the average return of the worst
10% of scenarios. As β approaches 0, the CVaR measure becomes the worst return,
effectively focusing on the absolute worst-case scenario. Conversely, as β approaches
1, it converges to the mean return of the portfolio, encompassing all scenarios. For
the parameter tuning of β the following values were examined: 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9.
This range was selected to cover a variety of β values and ensure a comprehensive
analysis.
74
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
==PAGE:87==
5.3.1
Results of the Parameter Tuning
In Tables 5.11 and 5.12 the results of the Historical parameter tuning can be seen.
For the remaining methods the results can be seen in Appendix B.3.
Table 5.11: Comparison of different KPIs for parameter tuning µ0 using the Historical
method for the MAD model. Each cell’s color represents the performance with green being
better and red being worse.
Looking at Table 5.11 the results of the parameter tuning for the Historical methods
using MAD can be observed. Taking a close look at capital gain the green colouring
clearly indicates that µ0 = 0.6% results in the highest gain, $117,262.76.
This
makes µ0 = 0.6% the optimal choice in terms of capital gain. Examining the other
metrics it can be observed that µ0 = 0.6% performs well on many of them. Notably
it is outperformed on the standard deviation, average cumulative index deviation,
Sharpe ratio, average solving time and average objective.
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
75
==PAGE:88==
(a) Capital gain or loss
(b) Average return
(c) Standard deviation
(d) Average index deviation
(e) Average cumulative index deviation
(f) End cumulative index deviation
(g) Growth
(h) Sharpe ratio
(i) Average solving time
(j) Average number of assets selected
(k) Total transaction cost
(l) Average objective
Table 5.12:
Comparison of different KPIs for parameter tuning β and µ0 using the
Historical method for the CVaR model. Each cell’s color represents the performance with
green being better and red being worse.
Let us consider the results of the parameter tuning for Historical CVaR. The de-
termining KPI is the capital gain or loss, which is shown in Table 5.12a.
The
table clearly indicates, through the green coloration, that β = 0.1 is the optimal
76
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
==PAGE:89==
value. A closer look at that row reveals that µ0 = 0% yields the highest capital
gain of $162,782.14. When considering the other KPIs, it is evident that β = 0.1
and µ0 = 0% provide the best results for most KPIs. The exceptions to this are
the average solving time (Table 5.12i), transaction cost (Table 5.12k), and average
objective (Table 5.12l).
Furthermore, the analysis shows that β = 0.1 not only
maximizes capital gains but also performs well in terms of portfolio growth (Table
5.12g) and Sharpe ratio (Table 5.12h), indicating a robust balance between risk and
return. Despite the slightly higher solving time and transaction costs associated
with β = 0.1 and µ0, the overall performance in terms of return and risk metrics
justifies this selection.
In summary, the combination of β = 0.1 and µ0 = 0% stands out as the most
effective configuration for the Historical method with CVaR, delivering the highest
capital gain while maintaining competitive performance across various other KPIs.
The same analysis has been conducted for all methods. Table 5.13 presents the
results for the capital gain or loss for each method in the MAD model, as this is the
determining KPI, but the full results can be seen in Appendix B.3.
Table 5.13: Comparison of Capital Gain or Loss of each method for parameter tuning
µ0 for the MAD model.
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
77
==PAGE:90==
In Table 5.13, the results of parameter tuning for the MAD model are presented.
The table displays the capital gain for each method corresponding to their tested µ0
values. While capital gain was a primary determining factor, other KPIs were also
considered for the final conclusion. The chosen µ0 for each method is highlighted as
the greenest column in each row, indicating the best-performing parameter setting.
(a) Monte Carlo
(b) Block Bootstrap
(c) Fama-French three-factor model
(d) Fama-French four-factor model
(e) Fama-French five-factor model
(f) Fama-French six-factor model
(g) VARMA of Fama-French three-factor model
(h) VARMA of Fama-French five-factor model
Table 5.14: Capital Gain or Loss of each method for parameter tuning β and µ0 for the
CVaR model
The capital gain results of parameter tuning the CVaR model are presented in Table
5.14 for each method, the full results can be seen in Appendix B.3. All methods have
been analysed with the same scrutiny as the Historical method. For Tables 5.14a,
5.14b, 5.14g, and 5.14h a clear conclusion can be reached from the capital gain or
loss which are the optimal values for the parameters. Respectively the conclusion
is µ0 = 0.0% and β = 0.3 for Monte Carlo, µ0 = 0.8% and β = 0.9 for Block
bootstrapping, µ0 = 0% and β = 0.5 for VARMA Fama-French three-factor, and
µ0 = 0.2% and β = 0.3 for VARMA Fama-French five-factor. For the remaining
methods determining the optimal parameters is not as straight forward. In Table
78
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
==PAGE:91==
5.14c, for the Fama-French three-factor model, β = 0.9 yields the same capital gain
across all µ0 values. The reason for these consistent values when β = 0.9, is most
likely because only one asset is chosen on average throughout the entire period,
regardless of µ0, resulting in identical outcomes. Averaging across each µ0 values
reveals that µ0 = 1.1% results in the highest capital gain. Similarly, Fama-French
four-factor method shown in Table 5.14d shows identical capital gains across multiple
β and µ0 values. The same reasoning likely applies here for the consistent values;
the portfolio remains unchanged, with the same number of assets chosen on average
throughout the entire period, regardless of µ0, leading to identical results. In this
case, averaging each column is not a viable solution as the averages are the same
across multiple µ0 values. Consequently, the Fama-French four-factor is subject to
the same parameters as the Historical method.
In Table 5.15 here below the results of the parameter tuning for both models is
presented in a concise way.
Model
MAD
CVaR
Parameter
µ0
µ0
β
Historical
0.6%
0.0%
0.1
Monte Carlo
0.4%
0.0%
0.3
FF3
1.1%
1.1%
0.9
FF4
0.3%
0.0%
0.1
FF5
0.6%
0.0%
0.1
FF6
0.3%
0.6%
0.1
VARMA3
0.2%
0.0%
0.5
VARMA5
0.7%
0.2%
0.3
Block Bootstrap
0.4%
0.8%
0.9
Table 5.15: Selected parameters for each method of the MAD and CVaR model.
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
79
==PAGE:92==
80
Chapter: Preliminary Analysis
==PAGE:93==
Chapter 6
Results
This chapter presents the results from applying the two optimization models, Models
3.4 and 3.5, with various inputs. A total of 64 portfolios were created, utilizing
different models, methods, markets and time periods.
The analysis includes an
examination of each model, method, and index across two distinct periods: an
upswing period and a downswing period. The downswing period begins on January
1, 2022, while the upswing period starts on January 1, 2023.
As established in
the previous chapter, the in-sample period spans five years, followed by a one-year
out-of-sample period.
The results are presented through a series of figures and tables.
Each figure il-
lustrates the performance of a model in terms of portfolio growth, highlighting how
well each model performs under various scenario generation techniques for each time
period. For every analysed period, two tables accompany the figures. The first ta-
ble provides the key performance indicators (KPIs) for both models. The second
table reveals the average number of assets selected over the entire period for every
method, along with the maximum and minimum weights of the selected assets dur-
ing these periods. These weights are determined from the highest and lowest average
weight observed of the assets over the period, considering only non-zero weights. In
Appendix C.1 tables demonstrating the top five assets chosen with every method
and their average weight in the portfolio, for each period and index are presented.
Chapter: Results
81
==PAGE:94==
6.1
Results for the S&P 500 index
6.1.1
Downswing period
Figure 6.1: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation methods
using the MAD model against the S&P 500 index, over the year 2022.
Figure 6.1 illustrates that most of the scenario generation methods managed to
outperform the S&P 500 index using the MAD model, during the downswing period.
However, the Block bootstrap method was the exception, remaining below the index
for the entire period. Among the different methods analysed, FF6 and FF4 stand
out as the top performers. The FF6 method demonstrated the highest cumulative
returns for nearly the entire period, closely followed by the FF4 method. Notably,
these two methods were the only ones to achieve a positive return at the end of the
period, despite the overall market downturn.
82
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:95==
Figure 6.2: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation methods
using the CVaR model against the S&P 500 index, over the year 2022.
Looking at the growth of the portfolios for the different methods using the CVaR
model in Figure 6.2, several methods managed to outperform the S&P 500 index
throughout the period. These were the methods, in order, FF5, followed by FF4,
FF6, and the Historical method. Remarkably, the FF5 method was the only one to
achieve a positive return by the end of the year, despite the overall market downturn.
Scenario method
Capital gain
Avg r
Std r
Avg index dev
Avg cum index dev
End cum index dev
Growth
Sharpe ratio
Avg time
TC
Avg obj
MAD
Historical
-116,172.47
-0.19%
3.15
0.18%
4.01%
7.95%
-11.49%
-0.07
13.08
1,310.03
13,099.05
Monte Carlo
- 140,335.10
-0.19%
3.20
0.17%
3.61%
7.53%
-11.91%
-0.07
Cap
21,586.56
710.40
FF3
- 91,273.25
-0.12%
3.51
0.24%
1.08%
10.40%
-9.05%
-0.04
1.83
819.00
19,830.00
FF4
23,406.75
0.09%
2.94
0.45%
14.18%
21.83%
2.39%
0.02
3.44
447.24
1,541.15
FF5
- 82,212.13
-0.12%
3.09
0.25%
8.65%
11.26%
-8.18%
-0.05
3.37
457.36
3,463.31
FF6
70,076.69
0.17%
2.67
0.53%
16.92%
26.69%
7.25%
0.05
1.67
2,199.34
2,456.98
VARMA FF3
- 145,810.43
-0.22%
2.89
0.15%
6.21%
6.80%
-12.65%
-0.09
5.72
19,457.53
6,452.86
VARMA FF5
- 68,444.61
-0.09%
3.02
0.28%
3.33%
12.91%
-6.53%
-0.04
7.52
3,022.06
3,287.67
Block bootstrapping
- 309,614.79
-0.58%
4.12
-0.21%
-12.24%
-9.76%
-29.21%
-0.15
Cap
19,395.06
10,160.86
CVaR
Historical
- 118,161.94
-0.21%
2.57
0.16%
5.81%
7.77%
-11.67%
-0.09
3.29
1,517.55
- 23,409.12
Monte Carlo
- 298,833.74
-0.60%
3.75
-0.24%
-14.14%
-10.09%
-29.53%
-0.17
Cap
3,687.84
- 10,088.33
FF3
- 289,126.81
-0.56%
4.39
-0.19%
-9.11%
-9.43%
-28.88%
-0.13
1.71
473.17
3,925.32
FF4
- 19,510.26
0.02%
3.34
0.38%
10.00%
17.53%
-1.92%
0.00
2.90
339.07
- 361.12
FF5
21,541.30
0.08%
2.80
0.45%
11.94%
21.64%
2.20%
0.02
2.74
457.35
- 2,496.63
FF6
- 56,874.19
-0.06%
3.21
0.30%
7.42%
13.81%
-5.63%
-0.03
1.83
588.47
- 2,914.57
VARMA FF3
- 285,764.13
-0.48%
4.73
-0.12%
-10.34%
-7.04%
-26.49%
-0.11
8.91
7,547.30
- 2,086.42
VARMA FF5
- 430,036.21
-0.93%
5.37
-0.56%
-16.10%
-23.30%
-42.74%
-0.18
8.35
3,239.45
1,940.51
Block bootstrapping
- 372,356.77
-0.71%
5.87
-0.34%
-14.20%
-17.30%
-36.74%
-0.13
70.15
5,684.87
5,604.37
Table 6.1: KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the S&P 500 index
using different scenario generation methods with the MAD and CVaR models for the year
2022.
Chapter: Results
83
==PAGE:96==
From Table 6.1, we can observe several key points regarding the performance of
the MAD and CVaR models during the down period.
Examining capital gains
and growth, we see that for the MAD model, FF4 and FF6 had positive capital
gains and were the only methods with growth above 0%, indicating positive growth.
In contrast, for the CVaR model, FF5 was the only method to achieve a positive
capital gain and positive growth. Now looking at the average index deviation, it is
evident that MAD consistently exceeds the index across all methods except Block
bootstrapping. However, CVaR only manages this with four out of nine methods.
Comparing the results of MAD and CVaR, MAD demonstrates superior performance
during this particular period, downswing.
As previously mentioned, the Sharpe
ratio remains notably low due to the weekly data frequency.
The table reveals
that the Sharpe ratio frequently takes negative values, this is due to the negative
average return. This phenomenon could also be influenced by a high risk-free rate
(Rf), used in the Sharpe ratio calculations. The development of the risk-free rate
during the periods being analysed can be found in Appendix C.4. Furthermore,
when evaluating the average objective value, no definitive conclusion can be drawn
regarding the best methods based solely on this metric.
The average objective
values for MAD and CVaR do not align with the best performance when considering
other KPIs. Furthermore, the time cap was reached for Monte Carlo and the Block
bootstrapping for the MAD model. The solution quality on these results can be
found in Appendix C.5.
MAD
CVaR
Scenario method
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Historical
36.87
14.25%
0.007%
19.90
26.42%
0.012%
Monte Carlo
293.67
0.59%
0.002%
29.54
22.08%
0.01%
FF3
2.85
64.00%
10.53%
2.00
68.10%
31.90%
FF4
3.00
64.47%
9.40%
2.90
77.75%
0.17%
FF5
5.00
31.87%
6.84%
4.19
45.82%
0.58%
FF6
3.54
44.31%
0.002%
5.00
29.43%
8.86%
VARMA FF3
2.79
86.25%
1.84%
2.35
43.40%
0.07%
VARMA FF5
5.35
39.01%
0.010%
3.31
41.13%
4.22%
Block bootstrapping
19.83
37.13%
0.87%
17.88
17.17%
0.01%
Table 6.2: Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the S&P 500 index
using different scenario generation methods with each model for the year 2022.
Note: The portfolios were constructed from a total of 499 assets.
Table 6.2 displays the average number of assets for each model and method. Com-
paring the transaction cost (TC) from Table 6.1 and the average number of as-
sets from Table 6.2 reveals significant insights.
Consider methods Monte Carlo
and VARMA FF3 for MAD. Respectively, Monte Carlo selects many assets while
VARMA FF3 selects relatively few assets. Despite this their transaction cost are
84
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:97==
similar. This can be attributed to VARMA FF3’s frequent portfolio adjustments
despite holding fewer stocks, leading to higher total transaction costs. Notably, the
MAD model tends to select more assets on average compared to the CVaR model,
as observed from the table.
6.1.2
Upswing period
Figure 6.3: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation methods
using the MAD model against the S&P 500 index, over the year 2023.
Figure 6.3 shows that when using the MAD model during the upswing period, the
FF3 stands out as the best performer and was the only method to consistently
outperform the S&P 500 index. This raises questions about whether its success was
due to the model’s robustness or simply a matter of coincidence or luck. In addition
to the FF3, several other methods, including the FF5, Monte Carlo, VARMA FF5,
and the Historical method, managed to end the year with positive growth or returns.
Despite the overall positive market trend, it is notable that four methods ended with
negative growth.
Chapter: Results
85
==PAGE:98==
Figure 6.4: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation methods
using the CVaR model against the S&P 500 index, over the year 2023.
From Figure 6.4 it can be seen that the FF3 once again stood out as the best
performer, demonstrating its effectiveness in both the CVaR and MAD model during
the upswing period.
The FF3, Block bootstrap, and VARMA FF5 managed to
outperform the S&P 500 index at the end of the period and showed a positive
growth. In addition to those methods, several other methods, including the FF6 and
Monte Carlo, also ended the year with positive growth. Interestingly, the VARMA
FF3 method performed the worst in both the MAD and CVaR model, highlighting
its consistent poor performance across both models during the upswing period.
86
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:99==
Scenario method
Capital gain
Avg r
Std r
Avg index dev
Avg cum index dev
End cum index dev
Growth
Sharpe ratio
Avg time
TC
Avg obj
MAD
Historical
103.75
0.02%
1.59
-0.42%
-12.83%
-24.07%
0.16%
-0.05
4.98
1,515.44
16,376.49
Monte Carlo
138,147.36
0.31%
1.97
-0.12%
-6.06%
-7.75%
16.48%
0.11
Cap
24,072.82
957.70
FF3
537,355.02
0.87%
2.71
0.43%
9.03%
29.70%
53.93%
0.28
1.71
1,516.31
31,210.69
FF4
-46,810.24
-0.07%
2.05
-0.51%
-17.24%
-28.87%
-4.64%
-0.08
2.32
461.91
1,684.26
FF5
177,570.87
0.34%
2.22
-0.10%
-1.48%
-6.42%
17.81%
0.11
3.30
448.03
4,484.61
FF6
-31,962.03
-0.04%
1.97
-0.48%
-16.17%
-27.37%
-3.14%
-0.07
1.59
598.98
2,496.91
VARMA FF3
-301,107.34
-0.54%
2.99
-0.98%
-24.46%
-50.53%
-26.30%
-0.21
5.97
45,297.12
5,939.65
VARMA FF5
42,231.02
0.11%
2.27
-0.33%
-10.55%
-19.81%
4.42%
0.00
9.24
1,856.80
3,518.88
Block bootstrapping
-83,036.22
-0.01%
2.50
-0.44%
-21.27%
-26.16%
-1.93%
-0.04
84.47
60,784.57
2,652.88
CVaR
Historical
-12,866.24
-0.01%
1.82
-0.44%
-13.15%
-25.39%
-1.16%
-0.06
2.16
1,277.83
-26,845.18
Monte Carlo
38,188.84
0.11%
2.78
-0.32%
-16.38%
-20.30%
3.93%
0.004
Cap
1,078.31
-27,267.19
FF3
719,329.55
1.10%
3.11
0.66%
19.77%
47.81%
72.04%
0.32
1.85
789.86
5,656.18
FF4
-17,231.92
-0.01%
2.34
-0.44%
-15.83%
-25.92%
-1.69%
-0.05
2.05
305.18
-691.58
FF5
-32,007.61
-0.04%
1.97
-0.48%
-16.04%
-27.40%
-3.17%
-0.07
2.41
319.76
-2,647.94
FF6
156,673.04
0.30%
2.15
-0.13%
-3.19%
-8.51%
15.72%
0.09
1.68
469.80
-4,137.39
VARMA FF3
-231,543.84
-0.43%
3.52
-0.86%
-29.21%
-46.76%
-22.53%
-0.15
8.97
6,853.68
-1,868.62
VARMA FF5
290,886.57
0.59%
4.28
0.15%
8.12%
5.22%
29.45%
0.11
9.67
3,240.97
4,002.60
Block bootstrapping
284,664.61
0.55%
3.13
0.11%
1.10%
5.26%
29.49%
0.14
148.90
8,909.47
7,403.72
Table 6.3: KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the S&P 500 index
using different scenario generation methods with the MAD and CVaR models for the year
2023.
In the first row of Table 6.3, the Historical method with MAD is shown, where
the total transaction cost is higher than the capital gain. Notably, the Historical
method also exhibits a negative Sharpe ratio and a positive average return, which
could be attributed to a high risk-free rate.
The capital gain analysis indicates
that for MAD, the best solution is found with FF3, while the worst solution is
produced with VARMA FF3, suggesting that the estimated factors perform worse
than the actual factors. For CVaR, a very favorable solution is achieved with FF3,
resulting in a portfolio growth of 72.04% or a capital gain of $719,329.55. Table
6.4 reveals that this solution is attained by selecting, on average, 2 assets, and
the model holds assets for extended periods, as reflected in the transaction costs.
When examining the average objective value for both models, it is evident that for
CVaR, the methods with the best objective values (the highest) are also the best
solutions. These methods include FF3, VARMA FF5, and Block bootstrapping.
However, for MAD, despite FF3 being the best solution, it has the worst objective
value. Furthermore, Monte Carlo reached the time cap for both models, the solution
quality can be found in Appendix C.5.
Chapter: Results
87
==PAGE:100==
MAD
CVaR
Scenario method
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Historical
27.19
15.71%
0.005%
24.44
25.46%
0.03%
Monte Carlo
285.52
0.58%
0.009%
2.00
33.75%
2.91%
FF3
2.65
73.28%
1.03%
2.00
76.88%
2.73%
FF4
3.00
63.23%
9.66%
2.00
75.69%
24.31%
FF5
5.00
33.29%
10.27%
3.12
47.23%
0.08%
FF6
3.06
43.03%
0.460%
5.06
31.85%
0.02%
VARMA FF3
2.88
88.57%
3.24%
2.40
45.72%
0.38%
VARMA FF5
5.67
40.74%
0.123%
3.35
37.46%
2.91%
Block bootstrapping
426.52
1.97%
0.003%
28.85
9.65%
0.01%
Table 6.4: Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the S&P 500 index
using different scenario generation methods with each model for the year 2023.
Note: The portfolios were constructed from a total of 501 assets.
Table 6.4 reveals several noteworthy observations. First, the Block bootstrapping
method selects an average of 426.52 assets out of 501 in the MAD model, while the
Monte Carlo method, similar to its asset selection during the downswing period with
MAD, selects just shy of 300 assets. These methods select significantly more assets
than any other method. Additionally, there is a substantial difference between the
asset selections of the MAD and CVaR models. Consistent with the downswing
period, the MAD model selects more assets on average compared to the CVaR
model.
Summary
The analysis of the S&P 500 reveals several key insights.
The models perform
better during downswing periods, making it easier to outperform the index during
these times, while outperforming the index during up periods proves to be more
challenging. In terms of outperforming the index, the MAD model excels during
downswings, while the CVaR model is more effective during upswings. Despite these
observations, it is diﬀicult to discern any consistent patterns across different periods
which methods perform the best. During downswings, the VARMA FF5 method
performs well with the MAD model but not with the CVaR model. Conversely,
during upswings, VARMA FF5 performs well with the CVaR model but not with
the MAD model. Additionally, in downswings, FF4, FF5, and FF6 perform well with
both MAD and CVaR models, but this is not the case during upswings. Overall the
FF3 showed the most constant performance, in relation to outperforming the S&P
500 index, across both models and periods. In Table 6.5 a representation of how
many times every method outperformed the S&P 500 index can be found.
88
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:101==
Performance Comparison of Methods Against the S&P 500 Index
Historical
2/4
Monte Carlo
1/4
FF3
3/4
FF4
2/4
FF5
2/4
FF6
2/4
VARMA FF3
1/4
VARMA FF5
2/4
Block bootstrapping
1/4
Table 6.5: Number of instances each method outperformed the S&P 500 index across
the two periods and two models.
Furthermore, to satisfy curiosity, the downswing and upswing periods were combined
for additional analysis, extending the out-of-sample period to two years (2022-2024)
instead of one. The detailed results are available in Appendix C.5.1.
Chapter: Results
89
==PAGE:102==
6.2
Results for the Nordic 120 index
6.2.1
Downswing period
Figure 6.5: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation methods
using the MAD model against the Nordic 120 index, over the year 2022.
Looking at results for the MAD model, Figure 6.5 illustrates that VARMA FF3,
FF5, VARMA FF5, and the Historical methods outperform the Nordic 120 index,
and in that order during the downswing period. Notably, the VARMA FF3, FF5,
and VARMA FF5 methods ended the period with positive growth despite the overall
market downswing. In contrast, the Monte Carlo and Block bootstrapping methods
closely follow the index’s performance, failing to outperform it. Similarly, the FF3
did not manage to perform better than the index.
90
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:103==
Figure 6.6: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation methods
using the CVaR model against the Nordic 120 index, over the year 2022.
Figure 6.6 shows that for the CVaR model, VARMA FF5, VARMA FF3, FF5, and
the Historical methods all outperform the Nordic 120 index during the downswing
period, in that order. Notably, VARMA FF3, FF5, and VARMA FF5 methods
achieved positive growth during a downswing period. Interestingly, the Monte Carlo
method closely follows the index, indicating its performance was closely aligned
with the benchmark. The same methods that outperformed the index in the MAD
model, also outperform the index in the CVaR model. Conversely, the methods that
underperformed in the MAD model, specifically Block bootstrapping and FF3, were
also the worst performers in the CVaR model.
Scenario method
Capital gain
Avg r
Std r
Avg index dev
Avg cum index dev
End cum index dev
Growth
Sharpe ratio
Avg time
TC
Avg obj
MAD
Historical
-80,254.47
-0.12%
2.94
0.17%
6.55%
7.69%
-7.92%
-0.05
0.95
1,112.09
14,645.09
Monte Carlo
-167,458.93
-0.29%
2.87
0.00%
0.72%
-0.08%
-15.68%
-0.11
35.30
10,914.14
2,899.03
FF3
-213,554.21
-0.21%
7.06
0.07%
-4.43%
-5.61%
-21.21%
-0.03
0.34
1,440.46
12,343.11
FF5
58,755.06
0.22%
4.79
0.51%
17.68%
21.54%
5.94%
0.04
0.47
577.58
10,094.26
VARMA FF3
20,309.21
0.40%
4.74
0.68%
27.52%
31.46%
15.86%
0.08
0.96
133,551.07
7,876.05
VARMA FF5
-27,438.32
0.10%
4.16
0.38%
17.26%
16.17%
0.57%
0.02
0.72
33,896.60
9,603.35
Block bootstrapping
-180,418.07
-0.33%
3.00
-0.04%
-0.19%
-1.93%
-17.53%
-0.12
175.83
5,283.29
3,184.00
CVaR
Historical
-33,158.62
-0.03%
2.43
0.25%
10.15%
12.39%
-3.21%
-0.03
0.41
1,056.55
-28,809.07
Monte Carlo
-172,437.12
-0.31%
3.02
-0.02%
-0.44%
-1.06%
-16.66%
-0.11
177.00
6,005.63
-1,467.60
FF3
-283,758.95
-0.38%
7.24
-0.09%
-9.17%
-12.68%
-28.28%
-0.06
0.23
998.96
5,235.81
FF5
126,423.41
0.34%
4.70
0.62%
24.55%
28.28%
12.68%
0.066
0.50
300.00
-16,930.92
VARMA FF3
194,030.65
0.60%
6.93
0.89%
19.79%
36.61%
21.01%
0.08
1.31
14,136.90
-2,944.01
VARMA FF5
340,708.41
0.73%
5.55
1.01%
36.02%
50.62%
35.02%
0.13
0.90
9,020.46
-8,877.50
Block bootstrapping
-294,800.34
-0.55%
4.73
-0.27%
-10.05%
-13.56%
-29.16%
-0.12
12.98
3,488.34
4,080.03
Table 6.6: KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the Nordic 120 index
using different scenario generation methods with the MAD and CVaR models for the year
2022.
Chapter: Results
91
==PAGE:104==
From Figure 6.5 of the MAD model, the VARMA FF3 demonstrates superior per-
formance compared to other methods. However, Table 6.6 reveals that the FF5
has the highest capital gain, not VARMA FF3 considering the MAD model. This
discrepancy is due to the very high transaction costs associated with VARMA FF3,
underscoring the importance of considering both KPI tables and figures. Both FF5
and VARMA FF3 achieve positive capital gains with MAD and CVaR, while in
the CVaR model, VARMA FF5 also achieves positive capital gains. For the MAD
model, VARMA FF5 shows a small positive portfolio growth, but its capital gain
is negative due to transaction costs. An interesting phenomenon is observed with
FF5 in the CVaR model, where transaction costs are just $300, indicating that the
model bought a single asset and held it throughout the entire period without alter-
ing the portfolio. While this strategy yields very good results, it is inherently risky.
Overall, examining the entire Table 6.6 suggests that CVaR performed better than
MAD during this downswing period for the Nordic market.
MAD
CVaR
Scenario method
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Historical
18.21
18.65%
0.005%
15.90
22.91%
0.006%
Monte Carlo
81.19
2.58%
0.18%
93.15
2.24%
0.09%
FF3
2.00
89.38%
4.49%
1.35
90.86%
9.14%
FF5
2.00
65.60%
34.40%
1.00
100.00%
100.00%
VARMA FF3
1.21
91.50%
8.50%
1.35
59.23%
1.92%
VARMA FF5
1.87
66.03%
0.09%
1.35
86.77%
0.38%
Block bootstrapping
91.02
2.69%
0.09%
12.85
18.03%
0.01%
Table 6.7: Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the Nordic 120 index
using different scenario generation methods with each model for the year 2022.
Note: The portfolios were constructed from a total of 103 assets.
From Table 6.7 it can be observed that VARMA FF3 with MAD selects an average
of 1.21 assets. This low average, coupled with very high transaction costs, indicates
frequent portfolio adjustments. Once again the Monte Carlo method selects a large
number of assets, this time for both models. Block bootstrapping also selects very
many assets with the MAD model compared to all the Fama-French methods that
tend to select few assets.
92
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:105==
6.2.2
Upswing period
Figure 6.7: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation methods
using the MAD model against the Nordic 120 index, over the year 2023.
Figure 6.7 illustrates that for the MAD model the FF3 performed exceptionally
well in the Nordic market during the upswing period. This is in accordance with
its performance with the S&P 500 in the upswing period. The FF3 was the only
method that managed to outperform the Nordic 120 index at the end of the pe-
riod. Interestingly, the FF3 was the worst performer in the MAD model during
the downswing period but emerged as the best during the upswing period. On the
other hand, VARMA FF3 and VARMA FF5 were the worst performers during this
upswing period in the MAD model, ending the period with negative growth, which
is interesting since they were among the top performers in during the downswing
period.
Chapter: Results
93
==PAGE:106==
Figure 6.8: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation methods
using the CVaR model against the Nordic 120 index, over the year 2023.
Figure 6.8 shows that for the CVaR model the VARMA FF3 method significantly
outperformed all other methods by a wide margin during the upswing period in
the Nordic market. VARMA FF5 and FF3 also performed well, showing strong
positive growth. While most methods achieved positive growth, two methods did
not outperform the index, the Historical method and the FF5. Notably, only one
method, the FF5, ended the period with negative growth, whereas all other methods
showed positive returns. This is particularly interesting since the FF5 was among
the top performers during the downswing period in CVaR, yet struggled in the
upswing period.
Scenario method
Capital gain
Avg r
Std r
Avg index dev
Avg cum index dev
End cum index dev
Growth
Sharpe ratio
Avg time
TC
Avg obj
MAD
Historical
86,391.51
0.18%
2.14
-0.08%
3.15%
-4.43%
8.79%
0.04
1.11
1,419.24
19,435.83
Monte Carlo
103,442.89
0.24%
2.21
-0.02%
1.23%
-1.51%
11.71%
0.06
41.96
12,811.11
3,627.43
FF3
245,242.95
0.56%
5.15
0.30%
17.71%
11.48%
24.70%
0.09
0.33
1,651.90
19,574.67
FF5
97,540.50
0.23%
3.23
-0.03%
-1.33%
-3.40%
9.81%
0.04
2.23
532.28
10,588.30
VARMA FF3
-200,273.47
-0.07%
3.48
-0.33%
-14.86%
-19.80%
-6.59%
-0.05
0.84
128,996.37
6,361.50
VARMA FF5
-233,810.11
-0.36%
3.61
-0.62%
-14.44%
-32.85%
-19.63%
-0.13
0.82
40,587.56
8,292.26
Block bootstrapping
106,844.39
0.23%
2.16
-0.03%
1.26%
-1.84%
11.37%
0.06
175.75
6,495.74
4,173.03
CVaR
Historical
16,402.04
0.05%
1.76
-0.21%
-3.15%
-11.47%
1.74%
-0.03
0.43
1,016.07
-31,963.02
Monte Carlo
126,064.62
0.26%
2.12
0.00%
2.42%
0.11%
13.32%
0.08
173.39
6,702.62
-2,226.53
FF3
255,751.46
0.60%
5.60
0.34%
21.75%
12.51%
25.73%
0.09
0.32
1,591.80
8,440.05
FF5
-14,372.35
0.03%
3.46
-0.23%
-13.07%
-14.62%
-1.41%
-0.02
0.39
300.00
-15,017.61
VARMA FF3
910,857.82
1.37%
4.01
1.11%
46.18%
81.56%
94.78%
0.32
1.17
27,723.54
-2,057.91
VARMA FF5
461,719.70
0.83%
4.00
0.57%
4.73%
34.62%
47.83%
0.18
0.98
12,355.02
-6,367.07
Block bootstrapping
153,342.69
0.33%
3.18
0.07%
7.97%
2.78%
15.99%
0.07
16.46
6,287.79
4,989.62
Table 6.8: KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the Nordic 120 index
using different scenario generation methods with the MAD and CVaR models for the year
2023.
94
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:107==
Table 6.8 reveals some remarkable results, particularly highlighting the performance
of the VARMA FF3 with CVaR. The portfolio growth for VARMA FF3 in CVaR
is an impressive 94.78%, resulting in a capital gain of $910,857.82. This extraordi-
nary performance in CVaR contrasts sharply with its poor performance in MAD. To
understand this disparity, the assets selected by both models were analysed. The
top five assets for each method and model, shown in Table C.4 in Appendix C.1,
indicate that MAD invests heavily in just two companies, with 89.23% allocated to
a single asset, which is detrimental to the model’s performance. Although CVaR
also invests in this company, it distributes investments more broadly, including a
third company. The MAD model incurs significantly higher transaction costs, ap-
proximately $100,000 more than CVaR, suggesting frequent portfolio adjustments.
Conversely, the FF3 with MAD adopts a similar strategy to VARMA FF3, investing
90% in one asset but achieving great success, making it the best-performing method
with MAD. During this period, the CVaR model shows consistent success across
most methods, with all but one (FF5) generating a positive capital gain. However,
the Sharpe ratio analysis reveals that two CVaR methods have negative values, likely
due to a low average return combined with a potentially high risk-free rate.
MAD
CVaR
Scenario method
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Historical
20.12
24.34%
0.004%
15.46
21.71%
0.03%
Monte Carlo
84.19
2.79%
0.20%
95.83
2.46%
0.11%
FF3
2.00
90.01%
2.22%
1.13
97.20%
2.80%
FF5
2.00
66.77%
33.23%
1.00
100.00%
100.00%
VARMA FF3
1.21
89.23%
10.77%
1.50
46.25%
13.10%
VARMA FF5
1.85
67.04%
0.003%
1.42
71.25%
1.26%
Block bootstrapping
91.94
3.17%
0.08%
15.12
16.59%
0.01%
Table 6.9: Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the Nordic 120 index
using different scenario generation methods with each model for the year 2023.
Note: The portfolios were constructed from a total of 103 assets.
Table 6.9 reveals that FF5 with CVaR only selects one asset and holds the assets
for the whole period. An observation can be made about the methods using Fama-
French that they generally all choose very few assets to invest in. In contrast Monte
Carlo chooses very many in both models.
Chapter: Results
95
==PAGE:108==
Summary
For the Nordic 120, the CVaR model generally outperforms the MAD model in
both upswings and downswings. Consistent with the S&P 500 analysis, both models
generally yield better results during downswings. Notably, the same methods mange
to outperform the index for both models during downswing, these methods in no
particular order are Historical, FF3, VARMA FF3, and VARMA FF5.
During
upswing, the CVaR model achieves respectable results across several methods, where
four methods outperform the index, VARMA FF3 as well as VARMA FF5, FF3, and
Block bootstrapping. However, only one method with MAD is able to outperform
the index during upswing, FF3. In contrast with the CVaR model during upswing
the VARMA methods are the absolute worst performing with MAD. In Table 6.10 a
representation of how many times every method outperformed the Nordic 120 index
can be found.
Performance Comparison of Methods Against the Nordic 120 Index
Historical
2/4
Monte Carlo
1/4
FF3
2/4
FF5
2/4
VARMA FF3
3/4
VARMA FF5
3/4
Block bootstrapping
1/4
Table 6.10: Number of instances each method outperformed the Nordic 120 index across
the two periods and two models.
Furthermore, to satisfy curiosity, the downswing and upswing periods were combined
for additional analysis, extending the out-of-sample period to two years (2022-2024)
instead of one. The detailed results are available in Appendix C.5.2.
96
Chapter: Results
==PAGE:109==
Chapter 7
Conclusions
This study has explored two portfolio optimization models where scenarios of the
returns have been generated with various methods. In particular, it focused on multi-
period portfolio optimization models incorporating transaction cost with MAD and
CVaR as objective measures. Real-life data from both the U.S. stock market and
the Nordic stock market has been utilized for the analysis. This thesis set out to
answer two key questions, and an extensive analysis has been conducted to provide
answers to these questions. Here are the questions this thesis aims to address:
1. Among the Historical method, Fama-French three-factor, four-factor, five-
factor, and six-factor models, as well as Monte Carlo simulation, the VARMA
model, and the Block bootstrapping method, which demonstrates superior
performance, and are any of these methods capable of outperforming the S&P
500 index?
2. Do these methods exhibit comparable performance when applied to a smaller
market, such as the NASDAQ OMX Nordic 120 index, in comparison to their
performance in the U.S. market?
Starting with the first question, we examined which methods, if any, were able to
outperform the S&P 500 index. As presented in the previous chapter, several in-
stances were found where this was achieved across different methods and models.
The key factor determining whether the models and methods outperformed the in-
dex was the period under examination. During market downswings, the models
and methods showed strong performance. However, during market upswings, out-
performing the index was less successful. This implies that the results are not as
consistent as initially hoped. It can be concluded that the performance of the models
and methods heavily depends on the data they are fed, and examining a different
period may yield very different outcomes, as Guastaroba concluded [8].
Examining the smaller market revealed that the models and methods that showed
favorable outcomes during specific periods also exhibited similar results for the NAS-
Chapter: Conclusions
97
==PAGE:110==
DAQ OMX Nordic 120 index. Notably, the Fama-French three-factor model excelled
during upswings in both markets and models, while the Fama-French five-factor
model performed well during downswings across both markets and models. Con-
versely, the Block bootstrapping and Monte Carlo simulation methods were gen-
erally the worst performers across both markets. The Historical method exhibited
average performance in both markets, performing better during downswings than
upswings. Similarly to the results from the S&P 500, the methods had better success
in beating the Nordic 120 index during downswings.
The VARMA model performed well in the Nordic market but did not show similar
success in the S&P 500. Conversely, the Fama-French three-factor model was the
most consistent performer for the S&P 500.
Overall, the Fama-French methods
performed the best across both markets. However, determining which Fama-French
factor model is optimal cannot be conclusively determined. During downswings,
Fama-French factor models with more factors (FF4, FF5 and FF6) exhibited better
results compared to FF3, while the reverse was true for upswing.
Regarding model performance, which is measured by the ability to outperform the
indexes, the CVaR model slightly outperforms the MAD model, achieving a 50%
success rate, out of 32 opportunities, compared to 43.8% for MAD. However, the
MAD model performs better than CVaR for the S&P 500 index, whereas CVaR
outperforms MAD in the Nordic market, as shown in Table 7.1.
MAD Ranking
CVaR Ranking
S&P 500
9/18
S&P 500
7/18
Nordic 120
5/14
Nordic 120
9/14
Total
14/32
Total
16/32
Table 7.1: Number of methods that outperformed the indexes during both periods.
In summary, there are methods that can outperform the index across both the U.S.
market and the comparatively smaller Nordic market, but their success varies with
different levels of certainty and risk. Some methods may yield significant gains in
some instances but also carry the risk of major losses in other, while other methods
offer more consistent, average performance. The Fama-French three-factor model
showed the most consistent performance in the U.S market, while the VARMA
model showed strong performance in the Nordic market but less so in the U.S.
market. In essence, the models are highly dependant of the data made available to
them. Outperforming an index during market downswing proves to be an easier feat
than during market upswing.
98
Chapter: Conclusions
==PAGE:111==
7.1
Discussions & Future Work
This thesis has explored two optimization models using various scenario techniques
in an attempt to create strong portfolios. However, there are some areas covered
in this study that could be further extended and expounded upon. These are some
ideas the authors have cultivated that could be of particular interest for future
research.
7.1.1
Data Limitations and Enhancements
A significant limitation of the study was related to the data. The dataset used was
limited to companies listed on the S&P 500 or the Nordic 120 index list for the first
quarter of 2024. This could be an interesting aspect to change, updating the list of
companies as the index itself does. This would allow the study to limit its bias and
create a more accurate depiction of reality. This could be achieved by integrating an
API into our system, connected to an updated list of the indexes. The company list
would then update automatically, ensuring that if a company is dropped from the
index, it is no longer included in the investments, and conversely, new companies
added to the index would be included.
For this research, weekly data was used, however, it would be intriguing to explore
how using monthly data would affect the results. Comparing the same time period
and examining the difference between models that make changes 52 times per year
versus those that only have the opportunity to change 12 times. Some investors
might prefer to use monthly data due to transaction costs and the lack of access to
VIP memberships, which would result in higher transaction fees. Therefore, eval-
uating the performance of models with less frequent trading could provide insights
into cost eﬀiciency and practical applicability for a broader range of investors.
7.1.2
Models and Constraints
Two optimization models were used in this study, the MAD and CVaR models
with the transaction cost extension, Models 3.4 and 3.5.
These models aim to
minimize the associated risk, although that goal is not achieved in the same way.
To further expand the optimization models, a new model could possibly be developed
that simultaneously minimizes the risk and maximizes the return. Thus creating a
multi-objective optimization model.
Exploring whether this yields better results
than using the before mentioned models.
Chapter: Conclusions
99
==PAGE:112==
Our models do not consider the unit price of each asset selected for investment.
Instead, they provide the percentage of capital that the investor should allocate to
each asset. Implementing the unit price into the models would enhance the accuracy
of their prediction. This is because the stock market operates based on unit prices,
where transactions occur in discrete quantities of shares.
By incorporating unit
prices, the models can account for the actual number of shares that can be purchased
with a given amount of capital, leading to more precise and realistic investment
strategies.
Another topic worth exploring regarding the models is the addition of constraints
that limit the number of assets selected in the portfolios and the minimum number
of assets. When examining the results in Chapter 6, it is evident that for the Fama-
French factor methods and VARMA, the number of assets selected is often around
2 to 3 and in some cases only 1. Although these methods can perform well as seen
in the results, they can also perform poorly. Some investors might find it too risky
to invest in only 1 to 3 assets and would prefer a more diversified portfolio. In
contrast, the results from the Block bootstrapping method in Table 6.4 showed that
the model selected 426 assets on average, resulting in high transaction costs. Adding
constraints on the number of assets selected could help create more practical and
balanced portfolios by avoiding the extremes of selecting too few or too many assets.
7.1.3
Usability of the Fama-French Factor Models
A significant part of the thesis covered the Fama-French factors. The availability of
the factors obtained from Kenneth French’s web-page [37], may cause a significant
hindrance for this to being applied in real-time. The factors have up to one-month
of lag, which means that if an investor wants to use the Fama-French method in
July, the June factors would not be available yet. Therefore, the investor could only
generate scenarios in May and before, which is not ideal. This could be resolved
by creating the Fama-French factors manually, as explained in Section 4.2.1 where
factors were created for the Nordic market. If portfolios are already sorted, it takes
little time to create the factors for the latest week and continue doing so each
week. The only issue with this solution is that, based on Kenneth French’s paper
[12], portfolios are typically sorted once a year, at the end of each June. However,
companies can often delay their quarterly reports, meaning that in July, there could
still be a lag in sorting new portfolios to generate the Fama-French factors.
100
Chapter: Conclusions
==PAGE:113==
Another solution would be to utilize the VARMA method. Instead of forecasting a
single time step, it would be possible to forecast all the missing factors up to the
present and then forecast an additional step to generate the scenarios needed for
the models.
7.1.4
Fama-French Coeﬀicient Calculation
As discussed in Section 3.4.3, the coeﬀicients for the Fama-French factors are gener-
ated by performing a linear regression on all available data for each asset. However,
using all available data may not always yield accurate coeﬀicients, as demonstrated
by the unexpected coeﬀicient value in the Apple example provided in the same sec-
tion. When we constructed the coeﬀicients for Apple using all available data, as
shown in Table 3.7, we obtained a positive SMB value. This indicates that Apple
performs well when small-cap companies outperform large-cap companies. Typi-
cally, we would expect the SMB coeﬀicient to be negative because Apple is consid-
ered a large-cap stock. To further investigate, another regression was performed to
estimate Apple’s coeﬀicients based on the last 10 years of data, as shown in Table
7.2.
Coef.
Std. Error
p-value
Lower 95%
Upper 95%
(Intercept)
0.0025
0.0011
0.0329
0.0002
0.0047
MktRF
1.1298
0.0494
<1e-79
1.0328
1.2269
SMB
-0.4068
0.0872
<1e-05
-0.5780
-0.2356
HML
-0.3971
0.0574
<1e-10
-0.5099
-0.2844
Table 7.2: Regression results for AAPL using 10 years of data.
As seen in Table 7.2 a negative SMB coeﬀicient value is observed, which more accu-
rately reflects Apple’s characteristics. Notably, all the coeﬀicients are statistically
significant, unlike the results in Table 3.7. This raises the question of whether using
all available data to calculate the coeﬀicients is the best approach, or if it provides
a misleading picture of the companies. As we know, Apple is not a small-cap stock,
which contradicts the results in the earlier table. This discrepancy suggests that
a more recent and relevant time frame might yield more accurate and representa-
tive coeﬀicients for certain assets. Further research could explore the optimal time
frame for regression analysis and consider the impact of different data periods on
the accuracy of the Fama-French factors.
Chapter: Conclusions
101
==PAGE:114==
7.1.5
Construction of the Fama-French Factors
As mentioned in Section 4.2.1 all the Fama-French factors were constructed for the
Nordic market, except the Momentum (Mom) factor. Implementing the Mom factor
would enable us to use the Fama-French four- and six-factor models for analysing the
Nordic market. One challenge we faced was that according to Kenneth R. French’s
website [37], the Mom factor could be calculated as follows:
Mom = 1/2(Small High + Big High)
−1/2(Small Low + Big Low)
(7.1)
It is identical when comparing this equation to the HML equation (Equation 4.5).
However, upon further investigation, we discovered that the ”High” and ”Low”
portfolios in the Mom calculation are distinct from those in the HML equation,
they are often called the ”Winners” and ”Losers” portfolios. These portfolios are
constructed by calculating the cumulative returns from the past 11 months and then
sorting the assets based on their performance. Conversely, the ”High” and ”Low”
portfolios for HML are constructed with the Book-to-Market ratio.
Different breakpoints could be applied in the sorting process. For our analysis, we
decided to use the 50th percentile as the breakpoint. Kenneth French typically uses
the 10th and 90th percentile due to the large number of stocks in the US market.
However, we opted to include as many companies as possible in each portfolio, which
might have led to a less accurate reflection of the factors.
The risk-free rate could have been explored more thoroughly. A 1-month Swedish
bond yield was used as the risk-free rate when constructing the factors for the
Nordic market. The reason for using a Swedish bond yield was due to resource
constraints and the majority of assets in the Nordic 120 index being located in
Sweden. However, after further investigation, other approaches could have been
considered. For example, instead of using only the 1-month Swedish bond yield, we
could have used bond yields from all the countries in the index and calculated the
average or weighted average risk-free rate from all the 1-month government bond
yields. Another possibility would be to explore treasury bills instead of government
bonds. An interesting article, ”What is the risk-free rate? A Search for the Basic
Building Block”[26], delves deeper into the risk-free rate and discusses what to do
when a government bond is not available, as well as common errors when gathering
the risk-free rate.
102
Chapter: Conclusions
==PAGE:115==
Many elements need to be considered when constructing the Fama-French factors,
presenting numerous opportunities to analyse different methods. Future research
could focus on the construction of the Mom factor to enable the utilization of the
Fama-French four- and six-factor models in the Nordic market. Additionally, ex-
ploring different approaches for determining the breakpoints and the risk-free rate.
7.1.6
Error Term
An aspect that affected our models more than anticipated was the error term related
to the Fama-French and VARMA methods. As discussed in Section 5.2, we decided
to proceed with the tuning and the results without the error term to achieve more
stabilized outcomes. An alternative approach could involve using the error term
and running the model multiple times to gather a range of results. By averaging the
asset weights obtained from portfolios of multiple runs, we could assess the method’s
performance more robustly. This approach would mitigate the risk of relying on a
single run of the error methods, which could yield results influenced by chance.
Initially, the error term was calculated with a univariate normal distribution, and
then one error was collected for each asset. To correlate the errors between assets,
we selected them as discussed in Section 3.4.3, multivariate normal distribution
could also have been used. Other possible methods for selecting the error could
have been explored. For example, instead of choosing one error for all the scenarios
for each asset, we could select a different error for each scenario and correlate them
accordingly. So for the first scenario, we would randomly generate an index number
that every company would use for its first scenario. For the next scenario, we would
generate another index number, and so on.
Another approach, instead of selecting an index based on the smallest vector size
of errors across all assets, an index could be selected by picking a random number
(between 1 and the average length of all vectors). If an asset does not have a vector
of that length, it would take the first number in the vector. This approach would
mean that not all errors would be correlated, but most of them would. This method
would eliminate the scenario where the smallest vector of all assets is very small,
and the error term is chosen only from a small selection.
We also considered choosing more than one error term. By selecting three error
terms, we could have tripled the scenarios input into our models.
However, we
decided not to utilize this method because, as seen in Section 5.1, increasing the
number of scenarios does not necessarily lead to a better solution.
Chapter: Conclusions
103
==PAGE:116==
Lastly, an analysis of the error terms when they are correlated and uncorrelated
would be interesting to see if there are any effects from this correlation. There are
endless possibilities when it comes to selecting the error term. Each method offers
different trade-offs between complexity, correlation, and the stability of the results.
Future work could explore these options and others to further identify the optimal
approach.
7.1.7
VARMA Stock Price Estimation
The main reason for implementing the VARMA scenario generation method was
to estimate the Fama-French factors of the next time step. However, this method
could also be adapted to estimate stock prices of the next time step. In this case,
instead of using historical factor data, the method would utilize historical stock
price data. The primary challenge of applying VARMA to forecast the prices of
approximately 500 stocks in the S&P 500 lies in the significant increase in compu-
tational complexity and the risk of overfitting. Implementing VARMA for such a
large dataset involves estimating a vast number of parameters and determining very
large matrices (around 500x500). This makes the model computationally intensive,
posing practical challenges in terms of model fitting. Overfitting is a major concern
when dealing with a large number of parameters, since complex models tend to
overfit the training data and fail to generalize effectively to new, unseen data [40].
While it is theoretically feasible to use VARMA to forecast stock prices, manag-
ing the complexity of large matrices and mitigating the risk of overfitting must be
addressed.
7.1.8
Validation, Tuning and Testing Periods
A validation period could have been considered more thoroughly throughout the
research. It was only used for determining the size of the in-sample data. Validation
could also have been applied to parameter tuning and when determining the number
of scenarios for Monte Carlo, Block bootstrap, and VARMA methods.
When considering the testing period, an alternative approach could have been taken.
The decision was made to test our models on data that did not overlap with the
data used for generating results. However, another strategy could have involved
conducting most of our tests on 2021 data, with one year designated as the out-of-
sample period. This would mean that the in-sample data would overlap with our
results tests. The rationale behind this approach is that, if we were in the year 2022,
we could tune our parameters based on the most recent year and apply those results
to the following year.
104
Chapter: Conclusions
==PAGE:117==
Another perspective worth considering is that our results and tuning processes were
run on three different computers. Due to the time cap imposed on our models, the
results could vary. This variability primarily affects methods that require significant
computation time to find the optimal solution, such as Monte Carlo and Block
bootstrap. For future work, it would be beneficial to remove the time cap on these
models. Allowing the models to run without a time constraint would enable them
to find the optimal solution, thereby eliminating discrepancies in results caused by
the time limitations.
Chapter: Conclusions
105
==PAGE:118==
106
Chapter: Conclusions
==PAGE:119==
List of Figures
2.1
Cumulative return of the S&P 500 index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.2
Cumulative return of the Nordic 120 index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.1
Illustration of the MAD measure, as illustrated in [4, Fig. 2.1]. . . . .
12
3.2
Illustration of worst realizations in CVaR calculation, as illustrated
in [4, Fig. 2.5].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.3
Visualization of the in-sample and out-of-sample periods. . . . . . . .
24
3.4
Example of Monte Carlo simulated scenarios for Apple’s weekly returns. 28
3.5
Time series of weekly Fama-French factors sample.
. . . . . . . . . .
37
3.6
Ten predicted values of each factor alongside the actual factor values
and the past values leading up to the investment date.
. . . . . . . .
40
3.7
S-curve distribution.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3.8
Overview of the computational process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
5.1
Graphical comparison of the different KPIs of MAD, tested with dif-
ferent numbers of scenarios as input. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
5.2
Graphical comparison of the different KPIs of CVaR, tested with
different numbers of scenarios as input. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
5.3
Model performances on cumulative return across different methods
incorporating randomness. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
6.1
Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the MAD model against the S&P 500 index, over the
year 2022. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
6.2
Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the CVaR model against the S&P 500 index, over the
year 2022. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.3
Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the MAD model against the S&P 500 index, over the
year 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
6.4
Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the CVaR model against the S&P 500 index, over the
year 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
86
List of Figures
107
==PAGE:120==
6.5
Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the MAD model against the Nordic 120 index, over
the year 2022. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
6.6
Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the CVaR model against the Nordic 120 index, over
the year 2022. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6.7
Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the MAD model against the Nordic 120 index, over
the year 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
93
6.8
Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the CVaR model against the Nordic 120 index, over
the year 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
C.1
Model comparison to the S&P 500 index during 2022, downswing
period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 141
C.2
Model comparison to the S&P 500 index during 2023, upswing period.142
C.3
Model comparison to the Nordic 120 index during 2022, downswing
period. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 143
C.4
Model comparison to the Nordic 120 index during 2023, upswing period.144
C.5
The weekly U.S. risk-free rate from 2022 to 2024. . . . . . . . . . . . 145
C.6
The weekly Swedish 1M bond yield from 2022 to 2024, which served
as the Nordic risk-free rate.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
C.7
Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the MAD model against the S&P 500 index, over the
years 2022 and 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
C.8
Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the CVaR model against the S&P 500 index, over the
years 2022 and 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146
C.9
Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the MAD model against the Nordic 120 index, over
the years 2022 and 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
C.10 Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation
methods using the CVaR model against the Nordic 120 index, over
the years 2022 and 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
108
List of Figures
==PAGE:121==
List of Tables
3.1
Computation in this thesis.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.2
Accurate computation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Example of three scenarios for four assets along with the expected
return of each asset [4, Tab. 2.1].
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
3.4
Example of scenarios of weekly returns generated with the Historical
method. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3.5
Historical weekly returns for Apple, Netflix, and Tesla, along with
their calculated mean and standard deviation, used in the Monte
Carlo simulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
3.6
Sample of the weekly U.S. Fama-French three-factor dataset along
with the actual returns for Apple, from the earliest available date up
to (but not including) the investment date of this example. . . . . . .
32
3.7
Regression results for Apple. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
3.8
Four scenarios for Apple using Fama-French three-factor model. . . .
33
3.9
Example of computed error terms of Fama-French three-factor re-
turns for Apple for all available data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.10 Example of incorporating a randomly selected error term into Fama-
French three-factor returns for Apple. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
3.11 ADF Test Results for Fama-French factors. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
3.12 Results of VARMA model selection for different orders of p and q. . .
39
3.13 Ten predictions of the factor values for the investment date and their
corresponding returns. The return based on the actual factors for
this date is 0.07%, and the actual return for this date is -5.90%. . .
41
3.14 Comparison of actual return and returns based on predicted factors,
along with the difference between them.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
3.15 Comparison of return based on the actual factors and returns based
on predicted factors, along with the difference between them. . . . . .
42
3.16 Example of how blocks are created for the Block bootstrapping tech-
nique for Apple. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
3.17 Example of how the Block bootstrapping technique resamples the
blocks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
List of Tables
109
==PAGE:122==
3.18 Key Performance Indicators. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
4.1
Portfolio categorization based on size, Book-to-Market, profitability,
and investment groups. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
4.2
Portfolios used for SMB creation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
4.3
Portfolios used for HML, RMW, and CMA creation . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.1
Performance metrics of MAD with uniform distribution tested with
different numbers of scenarios as input . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
5.2
Performance metrics of CVaR with uniform distribution tested with
different numbers of scenarios as input. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
5.3
Performance metrics of both models with uniform distribution tested
with the top performing numbers of scenarios as input. . . . . . . . .
64
5.4
Performance metrics of Monte Carlo simulation with MAD tested
with different number of scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical
data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
5.5
Performance metrics of Monte Carlo simulation with CVaR tested
with different number of scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical
data. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
5.6
Performance metrics of VARMA with MAD tested with different
number of scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical data.
. . . .
68
5.7
Performance metrics of VARMA with CVaR tested with different
number of scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical data.
. . . .
68
5.8
Performance metrics of Block bootstrapping with MAD tested with
different number of scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical data. 69
5.9
Performance metrics of Block bootstrapping with CVaR tested with
different number of scenarios as input, using 5 years of historical data. 70
5.10 Determined number of scenarios for each scenario generation method
and model.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
5.11 Comparison of different KPIs for parameter tuning µ0 using the His-
torical method for the MAD model. Each cell’s color represents the
performance with green being better and red being worse.
. . . . . .
75
5.12 Comparison of different KPIs for parameter tuning β and µ0 using the
Historical method for the CVaR model. Each cell’s color represents
the performance with green being better and red being worse. . . . .
76
5.13 Comparison of Capital Gain or Loss of each method for parameter
tuning µ0 for the MAD model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.14 Capital Gain or Loss of each method for parameter tuning β and µ0
for the CVaR model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
110
List of Tables
==PAGE:123==
5.15 Selected parameters for each method of the MAD and CVaR model. .
79
6.1
KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the S&P 500
index using different scenario generation methods with the MAD and
CVaR models for the year 2022. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6.2
Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the S&P 500
index using different scenario generation methods with each model
for the year 2022. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
6.3
KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the S&P 500
index using different scenario generation methods with the MAD and
CVaR models for the year 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6.4
Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the S&P 500
index using different scenario generation methods with each model
for the year 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
6.5
Number of instances each method outperformed the S&P 500 index
across the two periods and two models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
6.6
KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the Nordic
120 index using different scenario generation methods with the MAD
and CVaR models for the year 2022.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
6.7
Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the Nordic 120
index using different scenario generation methods with each model
for the year 2022. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
92
6.8
KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the Nordic
120 index using different scenario generation methods with the MAD
and CVaR models for the year 2023.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
6.9
Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the Nordic 120
index using different scenario generation methods with each model
for the year 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
6.10 Number of instances each method outperformed the Nordic 120 index
across the two periods and two models. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
7.1
Number of methods that outperformed the indexes during both periods. 98
7.2
Regression results for AAPL using 10 years of data. . . . . . . . . . . 101
B.1
Performance metrics of MAD with S-Curve distribution tested with
different numbers of scenarios as input. The investment start date
was set to January 1, 2010.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
List of Tables
111
==PAGE:124==
B.2
Performance metrics of CVaR with S-Curve distribution tested with
different numbers of scenarios as input. The investment start date
was set to January 1, 2010.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
B.3
Quality check on solutions that reached the time limit in Section
5.1.1, Tables 5.5 and 5.9. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
B.4
Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning
µ0 using Monte Carlo simulation method for the MAD model. Each
cell’s color represents the performance with green being better and
red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 122
B.5
Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β
and µ0 using Monte Carlo simulation method for the CVaR model.
Each cell’s color represents the performance with green being better
and red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 123
B.6
Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning
µ0 using Block bootstrapping method for the MAD model.
Each
cell’s color represents the performance with green being better and
red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 124
B.7
Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β
and µ0 using the Block bootstrapping method for the CVaR model.
Each cell’s color represents the performance with green being better
and red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125
B.8
Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0
using the Fama-French 3 Factor method for the MAD model. Each
cell’s color represents the performance with green being better and
red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
B.9
Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β
and µ0 using the Fama-French 3 Factor method for the CVaR model.
Each cell’s color represents the performance with green being better
and red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
B.10 Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0
using the Fama-French 4 Factor method for the MAD model. Each
cell’s color represents the performance with green being better and
red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 128
B.11 Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β
and µ0 using the Fama-French 4 Factor method for the CVaR model.
Each cell’s color represents the performance with green being better
and red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
112
List of Tables
==PAGE:125==
B.12 Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0
using the Fama-French 5 Factor method for the MAD model. Each
cell’s color represents the performance with green being better and
red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
B.13 Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β
and µ0 using the Fama-French 5 Factor method for the CVaR model.
Each cell’s color represents the performance with green being better
and red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131
B.14 Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0
using the Fama-French 6 Factor method for the MAD model. Each
cell’s color represents the performance with green being better and
red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 132
B.15 Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β
and µ0 using the Fama-French 6 Factor method for the CVaR model.
Each cell’s color represents the performance with green being better
and red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
B.16 Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0
using VARMA on the Fama-French 3 Factor method for the MAD
model. Each cell’s color represents the performance with green being
better and red being worse.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 134
B.17 Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β
and µ0 using VARMA on the Fama-French 3 Factor method for the
CVaR model. Each cell’s color represents the performance with green
being better and red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
B.18 Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0
using VARMA on the Fama-French 5 Factor method for the MAD
model. Each cell’s color represents the performance with green being
better and red being worse.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 136
B.19 Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β
and µ0 using VARMA on the Fama-French 5 Factor method for the
CVaR model. Each cell’s color represents the performance with green
being better and red being worse. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137
C.1
The top 5 assets chosen from the S&P 500 list by each method and
model in the downswing period of 2022.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
C.2
The top 5 assets chosen from the S&P 500 list by each method and
model in the upswing period of 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
List of Tables
113
==PAGE:126==
C.3
The top 5 assets chosen from the Nordic 120 list by each method and
model in the downswing period of 2022.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
C.4
The top 5 assets chosen from the Nordic 120 list by each method and
model in the upswing period of 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
C.5
Quality check on solutions that reached the time limit in Section 6.1
and 6.3. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
C.6
KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the S&P 500
index using different scenario generation methods with the MAD and
CVaR models over the years 2022 and 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
C.7
Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the S&P 500
index using different scenario generation methods with each model
over the years 2022 and 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 147
C.8
The top 5 assets chosen from the S&P 500 list by each method and
model over the years 2022 and 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 148
C.9
KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the Nordic
120 index using different scenario generation methods with the MAD
and CVaR models over the years 2022 and 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
C.10 Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the Nordic 120
index using different scenario generation methods with each model
over the years 2022 and 2023. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
C.11 The top 5 assets chosen from the Nordic 120 list by each method and
model over the years 2022 and 2023.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 150
114
List of Tables
==PAGE:127==
Bibliography
[1]
Alexandra Gabriela Ţiţan. “The Eﬀicient Market Hypothesis: Review of Spe-
cialized Literature and Empirical Research”. In: Procedia Economics and Fi-
nance 32 (2015), pp. 442–449. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S2212567115004161.
[2]
Andrew W. Lo. “Eﬀicient Markets Hypothesis”. In: The New Palgrave Dic-
tionary of Economics. Ed. by Macmillan Publishers Ltd. Palgrave Macmillan,
2018, pp. 3543–3560. url: https://link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.1057/
978-1-349-95189-5_42.
[3]
Harry Markowitz. “Portfolio Selection”. In: The Journal of Finance 7.1 (1952),
pp. 77–91. url: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2975974 (visited on 03/08/2024).
[4]
Renata Mansini, Wlodzimierz Ogryczak, and M. Grazia Speranza. Linear and
Mixed Integer Programming for Portfolio Optimization. Springer, 2015.
[5]
Renata Mansini, Wlodzimierz Ogryczak, and M. Grazia Speranza. LP Solvable
Models for Portfolio Optimization: A Survey and Comparison-Part I. Tech.
rep. Citeseer, 2001.
[6]
Hiroshi Konno and Tomoyuki Koshizuka. “Mean-absolute deviation model”.
In: IIE Transactions 37.10 (2005), pp. 893–900.
[7]
R. Tyrrell Rockafellar and Stanislav Uryasev. “Optimization of conditional
value-at-risk”. In: Journal of risk 2 (2000), pp. 21–42.
[8]
Gianfranco Guastaroba. “Portfolio Optimization: Scenario Generation, Models
and Algorithms”. PhD thesis. Department of Mathematics, Statistics, Com-
puter Science and Applications: University of Bergamo, 2010. url: https://
aisberg . unibg . it / retrieve / e40f7b84 - 006f - afca - e053 - 6605fe0aeaf2 / Guastaroba -
PhDThesis.pdf.
[9]
William F. Sharpe. “Capital asset prices: a theory of market equilibrium under
considtions of risk”. In: The Journal of finance 19.3 (1964), pp. 425–442.
[10]
Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French. “The Cross-Section of Expected
Stock Returns”. In: The Journal of Finance 47.2 (1992), pp. 427–465. url:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1540-6261.1992.tb04398.x.
[11]
Mark M. Carhart. “On persistence in mutual fund performance”. In: The Jour-
nal of finance 52.1 (1997), pp. 57–82.
Bibliography
115
==PAGE:128==
[12]
Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French. “A five-factor asset pricing model”.
In: Journal of financial economics 116.1 (2015), pp. 1–22.
[13]
Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French. “Choosing factors”. In: Journal of
financial economics 128.2 (2018), pp. 234–252.
[14]
Belen Blanco. “The use of CAPM and Fama and French Three Factor Model:
portfolios selection”. In: Public and Municipal Finance 1.2 (2012). Released on
2012.11.27. url: https://www.businessperspectives.org/images/pdf/applications/
publishing/templates/article/assets/4288/pmf_2012_02_Blanco.pdf.
[15]
Mardy Chiah et al. “A Better Model? An Empirical Investigation of the Fama–
French Five-Factor Model in Australia”. In: International Review of Finance
16.4 (2016). First published: 20 September 2016, Citations: 103, pp. 595–638.
url: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/irfi.12099.
[16]
Gianluca De Nard, Olivier Ledoit, and Michael Wolf. “Factor Models for Port-
folio Selection in Large Dimensions: The Good, the Better and the Ugly”. In:
Journal of Financial Econometrics 19.2 (2021). Published: 10 January 2019,
pp. 236–257. url: https://academic.oup.com/jfec/article/19/2/236/5285483?
login=true.
[17]
Yang Zhao et al. “Revisiting Fama–French factors’ predictability with Bayesian
modelling and copula-based portfolio optimization”. In: International Jour-
nal of Finance & Economics (2019). First published: 05 August 2019. url:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ijfe.1742.
[18]
S&P 500 Global. The Gauge of the U.S. Large-Cap Market. Brochure. 2023.
[19]
S&P 500 Global. SP Dow Jones Indices Announces Update to S&P Com-
posite 1500 Market Cap Guidelines and Results of SP Composite 1500 Index
Consultation on Market Capitalization and Liquidity Eligibility Criteria. https:
//www.spglobal.com/spdji/en/documents/indexnews/announcements/20230104-
1460758/1460758_spcomposite1500indexmktcapfalrconsultationresults1- 4- 2023.pdf.
Jan. 2023.
[20]
S&P Dow Jones Indices. S&P U.S. Indices Methodology. 2024. url: https :
//www.spglobal.com/spdji/en/documents/methodologies/methodology- sp- us-
indices.pdf.
[21]
Nasdaq. Accessed: 2024-05-06. url: https://www.nasdaqomxnordic.com/.
[22]
NASDAQ OMX. NASDAQ OMX Nordic 120 Index Overview. 2024. url: https:
//indexes.nasdaqomx.com/Index/Overview/NOMXN120.
[23]
Saxo Bank. https : / / www . home . saxo / da - dk / products / stocksd ? wtkw =
kom + i + gang + med + aktiehandel & cmpid = ppc _ google _ 71700000028632081 _
58700003608567703 & ds _ rl = 1292379 & gad _ source = 1 & ds _ rl = 1292379 & gclid =
116
Bibliography
==PAGE:129==
Cj0KCQjw_GxBhC1ARIsADGgDjupetGUKy_Kwmu5XB1jwjaF4EKgybCSiqe9pwWx59RHmRl_
6LiRGHgaAqzmEALw_wcB&gclsrc=aw.ds. Accessed: 2024-05-06.
[24]
Gianfranco Guastaroba, Renata Mansini, and M. Grazia Speranza. “On the
effectiveness of scenario generation techniques in single-period portfolio opti-
mization”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 192.2 (2009), pp. 500–
511. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221707009903
(visited on 03/14/2024).
[25]
Paul Glasserman. Monte Carlo Methods in Financial Engineering. Springer,
2003.
[26]
Aswath Damodaran. “What is the Riskfree Rate? A Search for the Basic
Building Block”. In: (Dec. 2008). https : / / people . stern . nyu . edu / adamodar /
pdfiles/papers/riskfreerate.pdf.
[27]
Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French. “Common risk factors in the returns
on stocks and bonds”. In: Journal of Financial Economics 33.1 (1993), pp. 3–
56.
[28]
Helmut Lütkepohl. New Introduction to Multiple Time Series Analysis.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2005.
[29]
Helmut Lütkepohl. “Forecasting with VARMA Models”. In: Handbook of Eco-
nomic Forecasting. Ed. by Graham Elliott, Clive W.J. Granger, and Allan
Timmermann. Vol. 1. Elsevier, 2006. Chap. 6, pp. 287–325.
[30]
George Athanasopoulos and Rob J. Hyndman. Forecasting: Principles and
Practice. OTexts, 2018. url: https://otexts.com/fpp3/.
[31]
Zhichao G Guo. “Research on the Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test for Predict-
ing Stock Prices and Returns”. In: ResearchGate (2023). url: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/375551467_Research_on_the_Augmented_Dickey-
Fuller_Test_for_Predicting_Stock_Prices_and_Returns.
[32]
Georgios Tsaousoglou. Decision Making under Uncertainty (02435), Lecture
4. Lecture notes. Accessed: 2024-02-21. 2023.
[33]
Jens-Peter Kreiss and Soumendra Nath Lahiri. “Bootstrap Methods for Time
Series”. In: Handbook of Statistics. Ed. by Tata Subba Rao, Suhasini Subba
Rao, and C.R. Rao. Vol. 30. Elsevier, 2012, pp. 3–26. url: https : / / www .
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780444538581000016.
[34]
Geng Deng et al. “Robust portfolio optimization with Value-at-Risk-adjusted
Sharpe ratios”. In: Journal of Asset Management 14.5 (2013). Accsessed: 2024-
06-08, pp. 293–305.
[35]
CFA Institute. Sharpe Ratio and the Information Ratio. https://rpc.cfainstitute.
org/-/media/documents/code/gips/sharpe-ratio-and-the-information-ratio.pdf.
Accessed: 2024-06-10.
Bibliography
117
==PAGE:130==
[36]
Yahoo Finance. Accessed: 2024-05-06. url: https://finance.yahoo.com/.
[37]
Kenneth R. French. Kenneth R. French. Available online. Accessed: 2024-05-
06. 2024. url: https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_
library.html.
[38]
Financial Modeling Prep. Accessed: 2024-05-23. url: https://site.financialmodelingprep.
com/.
[39]
Investing.com. Sweden 1-Month Bond Yield Historical Data. https : / / www .
investing.com/rates-bonds/sweden-1-month-bond-yield-historical-data. Accessed:
2024-06-07. 2024.
[40]
Joel Grus. Data Science from Scratch. Second Edition. O’Reilly Media, Inc.,
2019.
118
Bibliography
==PAGE:131==
Appendix A
Data Appendix
This appendix provides additional information from Chapter 4. Below is a list of
companies that were included in the indexes at the time of acquisition, the first
quarter of 2024.
A.1
List of S&P 500 companies
MMM, AOS, ABT, ABBV, ACN, ADBE, AMD, AES, AFL, A, APD, ABNB,
AKAM, ALB, ARE, ALGN, ALLE, LNT, ALL, GOOGL, GOOG, MO, AMZN,
AMCR, AEE, AAL, AEP, AXP, AIG, AMT, AWK, AMP, AME, AMGN, APH,
ADI, ANSS, AON, APA, AAPL, AMAT, APTV, ACGL, ADM, ANET, AJG, AIZ,
T, ATO, ADSK, ADP, AZO, AVB, AVY, AXON, BKR, BALL, BAC, BK, BBWI,
BAX, BDX, BRKB, BBY, BIO, TECH, BIIB, BLK, BX, BA, BKNG, BWA, BXP,
BSX, BMY, AVGO, BR, BRO, BFB, BLDR, BG, CDNS, CZR, CPT, CPB, COF,
CAH, KMX, CCL, CARR, CTLT, CAT, CBOE, CBRE, CDW, CE, COR, CNC,
CNP, CF, CHRW, CRL, SCHW, CHTR, CVX, CMG, CB, CHD, CI, CINF, CTAS,
CSCO, C, CFG, CLX, CME, CMS, KO, CTSH, CL, CMCSA, CMA, CAG, COP,
ED, STZ, CEG, COO, CPRT, GLW, CTVA, CSGP, COST, CTRA, CCI, CSX, CMI,
CVS, DHR, DRI, DVA, DAY, DE, DAL, XRAY, DVN, DXCM, FANG, DLR, DFS,
DG, DLTR, D, DPZ, DOV, DOW, DHI, DTE, DUK, DD, EMN, ETN, EBAY, ECL,
EIX, EW, EA, ELV, LLY, EMR, ENPH, ETR, EOG, EPAM, EQT, EFX, EQIX,
EQR, ESS, EL, ETSY, EG, EVRG, ES, EXC, EXPE, EXPD, EXR, XOM, FFIV,
FDS, FICO, FAST, FRT, FDX, FIS, FITB, FSLR, FE, FI, FLT, FMC, F, FTNT,
FTV, FOXA, FOX, BEN, FCX, GRMN, IT, GEHC, GEN, GNRC, GD, GE, GIS,
GM, GPC, GILD, GPN, GL, GS, HAL, HIG, HAS, HCA, PEAK, HSIC, HSY, HES,
HPE, HLT, HOLX, HD, HON, HRL, HST, HWM, HPQ, HUBB, HUM, HBAN, HII,
IBM, IEX, IDXX, ITW, ILMN, INCY, IR, PODD, INTC, ICE, IFF, IP, IPG, INTU,
ISRG, IVZ, INVH, IQV, IRM, JBHT, JBL, JKHY, J, JNJ, JCI, JPM, JNPR, K,
KVUE, KDP, KEY, KEYS, KMB, KIM, KMI, KLAC, KHC, KR, LHX, LH, LRCX,
Appendix: Data Appendix
119
==PAGE:132==
LW, LVS, LDOS, LEN, LIN, LYV, LKQ, LMT, L, LOW, LULU, LYB, MTB, MRO,
MPC, MKTX, MAR, MMC, MLM, MAS, MA, MTCH, MKC, MCD, MCK, MDT,
MRK, META, MET, MTD, MGM, MCHP, MU, MSFT, MAA, MRNA, MHK,
MOH, TAP, MDLZ, MPWR, MNST, MCO, MS, MOS, MSI, MSCI, NDAQ, NTAP,
NFLX, NEM, NWSA, NWS, NEE, NKE, NI, NDSN, NSC, NTRS, NOC, NCLH,
NRG, NUE, NVDA, NVR, NXPI, ORLY, OXY, ODFL, OMC, ON, OKE, ORCL,
OTIS, PCAR, PKG, PANW, PARA, PH, PAYX, PAYC, PYPL, PNR, PEP, PFE,
PCG, PM, PSX, PNW, PXD, PNC, POOL, PPG, PPL, PFG, PG, PGR, PLD,
PRU, PEG, PTC, PSA, PHM, QRVO, PWR, QCOM, DGX, RL, RJF, RTX, O,
REG, REGN, RF, RSG, RMD, RVTY, RHI, ROK, ROL, ROP, ROST, RCL, SPGI,
CRM, SBAC, SLB, STX, SRE, NOW, SHW, SPG, SWKS, SJM, SNA, SO, LUV,
SWK, SBUX, STT, STLD, STE, SYK, SYF, SNPS, SYY, TMUS, TROW, TTWO,
TPR, TRGP, TGT, TEL, TDY, TFX, TER, TSLA, TXN, TXT, TMO, TJX, TSCO,
TT, TDG, TRV, TRMB, TFC, TYL, TSN, USB, UBER, UDR, ULTA, UNP, UAL,
UPS, URI, UNH, UHS, VLO, VTR, VLTO, VRSN, VRSK, VZ, VRTX, VFC, VTRS,
VICI, V, VMC, WRB, WAB, WBA, WMT, DIS, WBD, WM, WAT, WEC, WFC,
WELL, WST, WDC, WRK, WY, WHR, WMB, WTW, GWW, WYNN, XEL, XYL,
YUM, ZBRA, ZBH, ZION, ZTS
A.2
List of Nordic 120 companies
AAK.ST, ABB.ST, ADDT-B.ST, ALFA.ST, ALIV-SDB.ST, AMBU-B.CO, ASSAB.ST,
ATCOA.ST, ATCOB.ST, AXFO.ST, AZA.ST, AZN.ST, BALD-B.ST, BAVA.CO,
BEIJ-B.ST, BILL.ST, BOL.ST, CARLB.CO, CAST.ST, CGCBV.HE, COLO-
B.CO, DANSKE.CO, DEMANT.CO, DSV.CO, EKTAB.ST, ELISA.HE, ELUX-
B.ST, EMBRAC-B.ST, EPI-A.ST, EPI-B.ST, EQT.ST, ERIC-B.ST, ESSITY-
B.ST, EVO.ST, FABG.ST, FNOX.ST, FORTUM.HE, GETI-B.ST, GMAB.CO,
GN.CO, HEXA-B.ST, HM-B.ST, HOLM-B.ST, HPOL-B.ST, HUH1V.HE, HUSQ-
B.ST, INDT.ST, INDU-A.ST, INDU-C.ST, INVE-A.ST, INVE-B.ST, ISS.CO,
JYSK.CO, KCR.HE, KESKOB.HE, KINV-B.ST, KNEBV.HE, LATO-B.ST, LIFCO-
B.ST, LUND-B.ST, MAERSK-A.CO, MAERSK-B.CO, MANTA.HE, METSO.HE,
NDA-FI.HE, NESTE.HE, NIBE-B.ST, NKT.CO, NOKIA.HE, NOVO-B.CO, NSIS-
B.CO, ORNBV.HE, ORSTED.CO, PNDORA.CO, RBREW.CO, ROCK-B.CO,
SAAB-B.ST, SAGA-B.ST, SAMPO.HE, SAND.ST, SCA-B.ST, SEB-A.ST, SECU-
B.ST, SHB-A.ST, SKA-B.ST, SKF-B.ST, SOBI.ST, SSAB-B.ST, STERV.HE,
SWED-A.ST, SYDB.CO, TEL2-B.ST, TELIA.ST, THULE.ST, TIETO.HE, TIGO-
SDB.ST, TREL-B.ST, TRYG.CO, UPM.HE, VALMT.HE, VOLV-B.ST, VWS.CO,
WRT1V.HE, ZEAL.CO
120
Appendix: Data Appendix
==PAGE:133==
Appendix B
Preliminary Analysis
Appendix
This appendix includes additional tables for Chapter 5.
While these tables are
integral to the conducted analysis, they were not deemed essential for understanding
the thesis and the results presented in that chapter. They have been included here
to manage space constraints. The sections are presented in the same order as they
appear in the thesis.
B.1
S-Curve results for determining the
number of scenarios
Model
MAD
# Scenarios
104 (2y)
156 (3y)
208 (4y)
260 (5y)
312 (6y)
364 (7y)
416 (8y)
468 (9y)
520 (10y)
Capital gain
26,244.66
98,353.29
119,147.40
155,327.04
164,923.16
162,298.03
169,804.35
150,322.84
133,220.85
Avg return
0.29%
0.35%
0.40%
0.43%
0.43%
0.41%
0.41%
0.39%
0.36%
Stdev
1.43
1.26
1.34
1.41
1.41
1.42
1.42
1.41
1.39
Avg dev
0.06%
0.11%
0.16%
0.19%
0.19%
0.17%
0.17%
0.15%
0.12%
Avg cumulative dev
3.57%
5.73%
6.43%
8.15%
8.27%
8.04%
8.04%
7.41%
6.16%
Portfolio growth
15.87%
19.54%
22.44%
24.19%
24.18%
23.16%
23.10%
21.88%
19.93%
Sharpe ratio
0.20
0.28
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.29
0.29
0.28
0.26
Avg time [s]
1.48
2.46
1.16
1.78
1.65
2.15
2.39
3.08
3.05
Avg obj.
8,266.33
10,976.15
12,510.93
13,197.25
13,048.50
12,586.57
12,306.23
11,861.83
11,519.76
Table B.1: Performance metrics of MAD with S-Curve distribution tested with different
numbers of scenarios as input. The investment start date was set to January 1, 2010.
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
121
==PAGE:134==
Model
CVaR
# Scenarios
104 (2y)
156 (3y)
208 (4y)
260 (5y)
312 (6y)
364 (7y)
416 (8y)
468 (9y)
520 (10y)
Capital gain
236,766.03
278,105.04
271,810.95
249,155.30
274,729.97
281,546.96
256,122.29
221,842.02
201,500.79
Avg return
0.43%
0.49%
0.48%
0.44%
0.48%
0.49%
0.45%
0.40%
0.37%
Stdev
1.53
1.49
1.51
1.45
1.44
1.45
1.46
1.48
1.47
Avg dev
0.19%
0.25%
0.24%
0.20%
0.24%
0.25%
0.21%
0.16%
0.13%
Avg cumulative dev
8.23%
8.30%
7.51%
6.33%
7.67%
8.06%
6.55%
4.68%
4.01%
Portfolio growth
23.98%
28.03%
27.32%
25.01%
27.55%
28.22%
25.68%
22.25%
20.22%
Sharpe ratio
0.28
0.33
0.31
0.30
0.33
0.33
0.31
0.27
0.25
Avg time [s]
1.08
2.34
1.19
1.75
1.75
2.16
2.61
3.52
3.30
Avg obj.
- 14,860.16
- 25,241.31
- 29,341.87
- 29,717.24
- 29,573
- 28,990
- 28,073.54
- 27,301.83
- 27,051.62
Table B.2: Performance metrics of CVaR with S-Curve distribution tested with different
numbers of scenarios as input. The investment start date was set to January 1, 2010.
B.2
Quality Check
Model
Scneario method
Scenarios
Inv. Start date
Time Limit (s)
Average Best Objective (Primal)
Averag Best Bound (Dual)
Average Gap (%)
CVaR
Monte Carlo
260
January 1, 2016
180
4547.12
4555.58
0.19
CVaR
Monte Carlo
7000
January 1, 2016
180
-2653.35
1175.10
190.32
CVaR
Block Bootstrap
260
January 1, 2016
180
4955.06
4963.81
0.18
CVaR
Block Bootstrap
5000
January 1, 2016
180
-41128.90
1296.29
109.32
Table B.3: Quality check on solutions that reached the time limit in Section 5.1.1, Tables
5.5 and 5.9.
Note: The quality check was applied at the edge of the interval. From the numbers presented, it
is evident that as the number of scenarios increases, the solution quality decreases.
B.3
Parameter Tuning Results
B.3.1
Monte Carlo
Table B.4: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0 using
Monte Carlo simulation method for the MAD model.
Each cell’s color represents the
performance with green being better and red being worse.
122
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
==PAGE:135==
(a) Capital Gain or Loss
(b) Average return
(c) Standard deviation
(d) Average Index Deviation
(e) Average cumulative index deviation
(f) End cumulative index deviation
(g) Portfolio growth
(h) Sharpe Ratio
(i) Average Solving Time
(j) Average number of assets selected
(k) Total Transaction Cost
(l) Average objective
Table B.5: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β and µ0
using Monte Carlo simulation method for the CVaR model. Each cell’s color represents
the performance with green being better and red being worse.
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
123
==PAGE:136==
B.3.2
Block Bootstrap
Table B.6: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0 using
Block bootstrapping method for the MAD model. Each cell’s color represents the perfor-
mance with green being better and red being worse.
124
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
==PAGE:137==
(a) Capital Gain or Loss
(b) Average return
(c) Standard deviation
(d) Average Index Deviation
(e) Average cumulative index deviation
(f) End cumulative index deviation
(g) Portfolio growth
(h) Sharpe Ratio
(i) Average Solving Time
(j) Average number of assets selected
(k) Total Transaction Cost
(l) Average objective
Table B.7: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β and µ0
using the Block bootstrapping method for the CVaR model. Each cell’s color represents
the performance with green being better and red being worse.
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
125
==PAGE:138==
B.3.3
Fama-French 3 Factor model
Table B.8: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0 using
the Fama-French 3 Factor method for the MAD model. Each cell’s color represents the
performance with green being better and red being worse.
126
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
==PAGE:139==
(a) Capital Gain or Loss
(b) Average return
(c) Standard deviation
(d) Average Index Deviation
(e) Average cumulative index deviation
(f) End cumulative index deviation
(g) Portfolio growth
(h) Sharpe Ratio
(i) Average Solving Time
(j) Average number of assets selected
(k) Total Transaction Cost
(l) Average objective
Table B.9: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β and µ0
using the Fama-French 3 Factor method for the CVaR model. Each cell’s color represents
the performance with green being better and red being worse.
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
127
==PAGE:140==
B.3.4
Fama-French 4 Factor model
Table B.10: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0 using
the Fama-French 4 Factor method for the MAD model. Each cell’s color represents the
performance with green being better and red being worse.
128
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
==PAGE:141==
(a) Capital Gain or Loss
(b) Average return
(c) Standard deviation
(d) Average Index Deviation
(e) Average cumulative index deviation
(f) End cumulative index deviation
(g) Portfolio growth
(h) Sharpe Ratio
(i) Average Solving Time
(j) Average number of assets selected
(k) Total Transaction Cost
(l) Average objective
Table B.11: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β and µ0
using the Fama-French 4 Factor method for the CVaR model. Each cell’s color represents
the performance with green being better and red being worse.
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
129
==PAGE:142==
B.3.5
Fama-French 5 Factor model
Table B.12: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0 using
the Fama-French 5 Factor method for the MAD model. Each cell’s color represents the
performance with green being better and red being worse.
130
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
==PAGE:143==
(a) Capital Gain or Loss
(b) Average return
(c) Standard deviation
(d) Average Index Deviation
(e) Average cumulative index deviation
(f) End cumulative index deviation
(g) Portfolio growth
(h) Sharpe Ratio
(i) Average Solving Time
(j) Average number of assets selected
(k) Total Transaction Cost
(l) Average objective
Table B.13: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β and µ0
using the Fama-French 5 Factor method for the CVaR model. Each cell’s color represents
the performance with green being better and red being worse.
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
131
==PAGE:144==
B.3.6
Fama-French 6 Factor model
Table B.14: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0 using
the Fama-French 6 Factor method for the MAD model. Each cell’s color represents the
performance with green being better and red being worse.
132
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
==PAGE:145==
(a) Capital Gain or Loss
(b) Average return
(c) Standard deviation
(d) Average Index Deviation
(e) Average cumulative index deviation
(f) End cumulative index deviation
(g) Portfolio growth
(h) Sharpe Ratio
(i) Average Solving Time
(j) Average number of assets selected
(k) Total Transaction Cost
(l) Average objective
Table B.15: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β and µ0
using the Fama-French 6 Factor method for the CVaR model. Each cell’s color represents
the performance with green being better and red being worse.
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
133
==PAGE:146==
B.3.7
VARMA Fama-French 3 Factor model
Table B.16: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0 using
VARMA on the Fama-French 3 Factor method for the MAD model. Each cell’s color
represents the performance with green being better and red being worse.
134
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
==PAGE:147==
(a) Capital Gain or Loss
(b) Average return
(c) Standard deviation
(d) Average Index Deviation
(e) Average cumulative index deviation
(f) End cumulative index deviation
(g) Portfolio growth
(h) Sharpe Ratio
(i) Average Solving Time
(j) Average number of assets selected
(k) Total Transaction Cost
(l) Average objective
Table B.17: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β and
µ0 using VARMA on the Fama-French 3 Factor method for the CVaR model. Each cell’s
color represents the performance with green being better and red being worse.
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
135
==PAGE:148==
B.3.8
VARMA Fama-French 5 Factor model
Table B.18: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning µ0 using
VARMA on the Fama-French 5 Factor method for the MAD model. Each cell’s color
represents the performance with green being better and red being worse.
136
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
==PAGE:149==
(a) Capital Gain or Loss
(b) Average return
(c) Standard deviation
(d) Average Index Deviation
(e) Average cumulative index deviation
(f) End cumulative index deviation
(g) Portfolio growth
(h) Sharpe Ratio
(i) Average Solving Time
(j) Average number of assets selected
(k) Total Transaction Cost
(l) Average objective
Table B.19: Comparison of different performance metrics for parameter tuning β and
µ0 using VARMA on the Fama-French 5 Factor method for the CVaR model. Each cell’s
color represents the performance with green being better and red being worse.
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
137
==PAGE:150==
138
Appendix: Preliminary Analysis Appendix
==PAGE:151==
Appendix C
Results Appendix
This appendix contains additional tables and figures from Chapter 6. The contents
presented is mainly placed here to manage space constraints. However, the content
are not integral in understanding any results presented in the thesis, they mainly
provide additional analysis.
C.1
Top Assets
Scenario method
Asset 1
Asset 2
Asset 3
Asset 4
Asset 5
MAD
Historical
GIS
15.71%
LLY
13.05%
HSY
9.09%
AZO
7.85%
PWR
6.78%
Monte Carlo
LLY
0.58%
RSG
0.54%
HSY
0.52%
CDNS
0.47%
COST
0.46%
FF3
NVR
73.28%
AMGN
19.98%
MRNA
2.90%
AMZN
2.81%
SO
1.03%
FF4
AMCR
63.23%
SO
27.11%
NVR
9.66%
...
...
...
...
FF5
SO
33.29%
MNST
29.27%
AMCR
15.31%
TSLA
11.86%
NVR
10.27%
FF6
AMCR
43.03%
SO
40.85%
MNST
15.65%
KDP
0.46%
...
...
VARMA FF3
HRL
88.57%
NEM
8.19%
MRNA
3.24%
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF5
SO
40.74%
MNST
33.97%
MRNA
10.18%
NVR
9.63%
AMCR
3.50%
Block bootstrapping
ENPH
1.97%
CL
0.58%
PEP
0.56%
MDLZ
0.54%
JNJ
0.53%
CVaR
Historical
HRL
25.46%
NEM
9.49%
MKTX
7.31%
GIS
6.39%
MRK
6.00%
Monte Carlo
ABT
33.75%
MMM
30.65%
ABBV
19.60%
AOS
13.10%
ZTS
2.91%
FF3
NVR
76.88%
AMZN
20.39%
MRNA
2.73%
...
...
...
...
FF4
AMCR
75.69%
NVR
24.31%
...
...
...
...
...
...
FF5
AMCR
47.23%
SO
29.69%
MNST
23.00%
TSLA
0.08%
...
...
FF6
MNST
31.85%
SO
26.46%
AMCR
20.29%
NVR
11.17%
TSLA
10.21%
VARMA FF3
SO
45.72%
MRNA
44.28%
CEG
4.36%
NVR
4.27%
HRL
0.98%
VARMA FF5
NVR
37.46%
TSLA
33.38%
MRNA
26.25%
MNST
2.91%
...
...
Block bootstrapping
ENPH
9.65%
TSLA
6.61%
NVDA
6.25%
BLDR
5.82%
AMD
5.43%
Table C.1: The top 5 assets chosen from the S&P 500 list by each method and model in
the downswing period of 2022.
Appendix: Results Appendix
139
==PAGE:152==
Scenario method
Asset 1
Asset 2
Asset 3
Asset 4
Asset 5
MAD
Historical
GIS
15.71%
LLY
13.05%
HSY
9.09%
AZO
7.85%
PWR
6.78%
Monte Carlo
LLY
0.58%
RSG
0.54%
HSY
0.52%
CDNS
0.47%
COST
0.46%
FF3
NVR
73.28%
AMGN
19.98%
MRNA
2.90%
AMZN
2.81%
SO
1.03%
FF4
AMCR
63.23%
SO
27.11%
NVR
9.66%
...
...
...
...
FF5
SO
33.29%
MNST
29.27%
AMCR
15.31%
TSLA
11.86%
NVR
10.27%
FF6
AMCR
43.03%
SO
40.85%
MNST
15.65%
KDP
0.46%
...
...
VARMA FF3
HRL
88.57%
NEM
8.19%
MRNA
3.24%
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF5
SO
40.74%
MNST
33.97%
MRNA
10.18%
NVR
9.63%
AMCR
3.50%
Block bootstrapping
ENPH
1.97%
CL
0.58%
PEP
0.56%
MDLZ
0.54%
JNJ
0.53%
CVaR
Historical
HRL
25.46%
NEM
9.49%
MKTX
7.31%
GIS
6.39%
MRK
6.00%
Monte Carlo
ABT
33.75%
MMM
30.65%
ABBV
19.60%
AOS
13.10%
ZTS
2.91%
FF3
NVR
76.88%
AMZN
20.39%
MRNA
2.73%
...
...
...
...
FF4
AMCR
75.69%
NVR
24.31%
...
...
...
...
...
...
FF5
AMCR
47.23%
SO
29.69%
MNST
23.00%
TSLA
0.08%
...
...
FF6
MNST
31.85%
SO
26.46%
AMCR
20.29%
NVR
11.17%
TSLA
10.21%
VARMA FF3
SO
45.72%
MRNA
44.28%
CEG
4.36%
NVR
4.27%
HRL
0.98%
VARMA FF5
NVR
37.46%
TSLA
33.38%
MRNA
26.25%
MNST
2.91%
...
...
Block bootstrapping
ENPH
9.65%
TSLA
6.61%
NVDA
6.25%
BLDR
5.82%
AMD
5.43%
Table C.2: The top 5 assets chosen from the S&P 500 list by each method and model in
the upswing period of 2023.
Scenario method
Asset 1
Asset 2
Asset 3
Asset 4
Asset 5
MAD
Historical
AXFO.ST
18.65%
AZN.ST
9.94%
FNOX.ST
9.46%
NESTE.HE
8.99%
NOVO-B.CO
8.86%
Monte Carlo
AXFO.ST
2.58%
INVE-A.ST
2.52%
NOVO-B.CO
2.42%
INVE-B.ST
2.16%
TRYG.CO
2.10%
FF3
FNOX.ST
89.38%
AXFO.ST
6.13%
EVO.ST
4.49%
...
...
...
...
FF5
AXFO.ST
65.60%
FNOX.ST
34.40%
...
...
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF3
AXFO.ST
91.50%
FNOX.ST
8.50%
...
...
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF5
AXFO.ST
66.03%
FNOX.ST
30.97%
SOBI.ST
1.93%
ESSITY-B.ST
0.98%
AZN.ST
0.09%
Block bootstrapping
AXFO.ST
2.69%
NOVO-B.CO
2.54%
INVE-A.ST
2.52%
INVE-B.ST
2.27%
AZN.ST
2.09%
CVaR
Historical
ELISA.HE
22.91%
AXFO.ST
21.18%
AZN.ST
8.16%
TRYG.CO
7.04%
COLO-B.CO
6.94%
Monte Carlo
AXFO.ST
2.24%
INVE-A.ST
2.24%
NOVO-B.CO
2.17%
INVE-B.ST
2.00%
AZN.ST
1.85%
FF4
FNOX.ST
90.86%
EVO.ST
9.14%
...
...
...
...
...
...
FF5
AXFO.ST
100.00%
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF3
AXFO.ST
59.23%
FNOX.ST
33.39%
EVO.ST
5.46%
EQT.ST
1.92%
...
...
VARMA FF5
AXFO.ST
86.77%
FNOX.ST
12.85%
EQT.ST
0.38%
...
...
...
...
Block bootstrapping
FNOX.ST
18.03%
SAGA-B.ST
12.93%
EVO.ST
12.74%
NIBE-B.ST
10.78%
BEIJ-B.ST
9.87%
Table C.3: The top 5 assets chosen from the Nordic 120 list by each method and model
in the downswing period of 2022.
Scenario method
Asset 1
Asset 2
Asset 3
Asset 4
Asset 5
MAD
Historical
NOVO-B.CO
24.34%
AZN.ST
14.34%
ELISA.HE
10.88%
FNOX.ST
9.32%
EVO.ST
7.71%
Monte Carlo
NOVO-B.CO
2.79%
INVE-A.ST
2.53%
ABB.ST
2.49%
INVE-B.ST
1.98%
TRYG.CO
1.95%
FF3
FNOX.ST
90.01%
AXFO.ST
7.78%
EVO.ST
2.22%
...
...
...
...
FF5
AXFO.ST
66.77%
FNOX.ST
33.23%
...
...
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF3
AXFO.ST
89.23%
FNOX.ST
10.77%
...
...
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF5
AXFO.ST
67.04%
FNOX.ST
32.08%
ESSITY-B.ST
0.87%
AZN.ST
0.00%
...
...
Block bootstrapping
NOVO-B.CO
3.17%
INVE-B.ST
2.74%
INVE-A.ST
2.70%
AZN.ST
2.37%
ABB.ST
2.09%
CVaR
Historical
ELISA.HE
21.71%
AXFO.ST
12.72%
AZN.ST
11.43%
ESSITY-B.ST
8.75%
SWED-A.ST
7.29%
Monte Carlo
NOVO-B.CO
2.46%
INVE-A.ST
2.37%
INVE-B.ST
2.13%
ABB.ST
2.00%
ELISA.HE
1.93%
FF3
FNOX.ST
97.20%
EVO.ST
2.80%
...
...
...
...
...
...
FF5
AXFO.ST
100.00%
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF3
AXFO.ST
46.25%
FNOX.ST
40.65%
EVO.ST
13.10%
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF5
AXFO.ST
71.25%
FNOX.ST
27.49%
EQT.ST
1.26%
...
...
...
...
Block bootstrapping
FNOX.ST
16.59%
EVO.ST
14.26%
SAGA-B.ST
10.51%
NOVO-B.CO
10.45%
ADDT-B.ST
9.15%
Table C.4: The top 5 assets chosen from the Nordic 120 list by each method and model
in the upswing period of 2023.
140
Appendix: Results Appendix
==PAGE:153==
C.2
MAD and CVaR comparison
C.2.1
S&P 500 downswing
(a) Historical method
(b) Block Bootstrapping
(c) Monte Carlo
(d) Fama-French three-factor model
(e) Fama-French four-factor model
(f) Fama-French five-factor model
(g) Fama-French six-factor model
(h) VARMA of Fama-French three-factor
model
(i)
VARMA
of
Fama-French
five-factor
model
Figure C.1: Model comparison to the S&P 500 index during 2022, downswing period.
Appendix: Results Appendix
141
==PAGE:154==
C.2.2
S&P 500 upswing
(a) Historical method
(b) Block Bootstrapping
(c) Monte Carlo
(d) Fama-French three-factor model
(e) Fama-French four-factor model
(f) Fama-French five-factor model
(g) Fama-French six-factor model
(h) VARMA of Fama-French three-factor
model
(i)
VARMA
of
Fama-French
five-factor
model
Figure C.2: Model comparison to the S&P 500 index during 2023, upswing period.
142
Appendix: Results Appendix
==PAGE:155==
C.2.3
Nordic 120 downswing
(a) Historical method
(b) Block Bootstrapping
(c) Monte Carlo
(d) Fama-French three-factor model
(e) Fama-French five-factor model
(f) VARMA of Fama-French three-factor
model
(g)
VARMA of Fama-French five-factor
model
Figure C.3: Model comparison to the Nordic 120 index during 2022, downswing period.
Appendix: Results Appendix
143
==PAGE:156==
C.2.4
Nordic 120 upswing
(a) Historical method
(b) Block Bootstrapping
(c) Monte Carlo
(d) Fama-French three-factor model
(e) Fama-French five-factor model
(f) VARMA of Fama-French three-factor
model
(g)
VARMA of Fama-French five-factor
model
Figure C.4: Model comparison to the Nordic 120 index during 2023, upswing period.
144
Appendix: Results Appendix
==PAGE:157==
C.3
Quality Check
Model
Scneario method
Scenarios
Inv. Start date
Time Limit (s)
Average Best Objective (Primal)
Averag Best Bound (Dual)
Average Gap (%)
MAD
Monte Carlo
500
January 1, 2022
180
697.85
665.96
4.59
CVaR
Monte Carlo
5000
January 1, 2022
180
-18994.01
940.53
104.75
MAD
Monte Carlo
500
January 1, 2023
180
929.92
900.10
3.19
CVaR
Monte Carlo
5000
January 1, 2023
180
-27672.25
798.29
102.94
MAD
Block Bootstrap
2000
January 1, 2022
180
24807.95
982.55
95.05
Table C.5: Quality check on solutions that reached the time limit in Section 6.1 and 6.3.
C.4
Risk free rate
Figure C.5: The weekly U.S. risk-free rate from 2022 to 2024.
Figure C.6: The weekly Swedish 1M bond yield from 2022 to 2024, which served as the
Nordic risk-free rate.
Appendix: Results Appendix
145
==PAGE:158==
C.5
Evaluation of a Two Year
out-of-sample Period
C.5.1
S&P 500
Figure C.7: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation meth-
ods using the MAD model against the S&P 500 index, over the years 2022 and 2023.
Figure C.8: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation meth-
ods using the CVaR model against the S&P 500 index, over the years 2022 and 2023.
146
Appendix: Results Appendix
==PAGE:159==
Scenario method
Capital gain
Avg r
Std r
Avg index dev
Avg cum index dev
End cum index dev
Growth
Sharpe ratio
Avg time
TC
Avg obj
MAD
Historical
-104,368.87
-0.07%
2.48
-0.11%
1.23%
-10.27%
-10.20%
-0.06
7.12
2,383.36
13,874.60
Monte Carlo
-5,033.27
0.07%
2.61
0.04%
5.00%
4.17%
4.24%
0.00
Cap
42,283.14
819.54
FF3
403,934.92
0.38%
3.16
0.34%
10.78%
40.57%
40.65%
0.10
1.31
1,898.32
24,176.49
FF4
-25,323.23
0.01%
2.52
-0.03%
10.28%
-2.56%
-2.48%
-0.02
1.65
537.78
1,631.23
FF5
85,853.09
0.12%
2.69
0.08%
10.15%
8.57%
8.65%
0.02
1.84
584.03
3,797.84
FF6
33,933.86
0.06%
2.34
0.03%
14.45%
3.66%
3.73%
0.00
1.55
3,341.39
2,559.43
VARMA FF3
-363,358.25
-0.31%
3.03
-0.35%
1.02%
-31.43%
-31.36%
-0.13
5.81
55,347.23
6,105.52
VARMA FF5
-34,128.84
0.004%
2.65
-0.03%
2.66%
-3.17%
-3.10%
-0.02
8.08
4,057.15
3,225.44
Block bootstrapping
-118,793.36
-0.03%
3.38
-0.06%
-11.05%
-8.44%
-8.37%
-0.03
Cap
30,333.69
11,010.75
CVaR
Historical
-126,521.97
-0.10%
2.22
-0.14%
1.50%
-12.50%
-12.42%
-0.08
2.19
2,390.91
-23,578.00
Monte Carlo
-344,703.43
-0.34%
3.47
-0.38%
-25.05%
-34.37%
-34.29%
-0.118
Cap
1,925.28
-16,368.65
FF3
223,398.98
0.27%
3.89
0.23%
-2.68%
22.37%
22.44%
0.05
1.16
811.92
3,976.94
FF4
-36,332.10
0.01%
2.87
-0.03%
6.90%
-3.68%
-3.60%
-0.02
1.20
344.69
-516.90
FF5
-8,856.28
0.02%
2.41
-0.01%
9.81%
-0.91%
-0.84%
-0.02
1.19
482.96
-2,600.58
FF6
94,310.31
0.12%
2.72
0.09%
10.00%
9.44%
9.51%
0.02
1.45
735.13
-3,408.43
VARMA FF3
-481,165.19
-0.57%
4.06
-0.60%
-22.16%
-49.34%
-49.27%
-0.16
8.56
12,430.03
-1,829.90
VARMA FF5
-260,818.52
-0.17%
4.90
-0.20%
-19.80%
-25.66%
-25.58%
-0.05
8.84
4,698.50
2,107.77
Block bootstrapping
-64,148.80
0.06%
4.79
0.03%
-9.07%
-5.07%
-5.00%
0.00
122.41
11,731.87
5,601.62
Table C.6: KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the S&P 500 index
using different scenario generation methods with the MAD and CVaR models over the
years 2022 and 2023.
MAD
CVaR
Scenario method
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Historical
35.71
10.08%
0.005%
21.91
26.11%
0.006%
Monte Carlo
289.36
0.54%
0.005%
2.65
34.40%
6.21%
FF3
2.75
68.43%
0.51%
2.00
71.89%
1.36%
FF4
3.00
63.83%
9.50%
2.06
76.73%
0.09%
FF5
5.01
32.60%
8.53%
4.11
46.53%
0.29%
FF6
3.37
43.72%
0.001%
5.03
30.55%
0.01%
VARMA FF3
2.79
87.97%
0.16%
2.79
40.90%
0.30%
VARMA FF5
5.36
40.83%
0.090%
3.36
37.35%
3.84%
Block bootstrapping
13.37
35.40%
2.762%
24.32
12.85%
0.003%
Table C.7: Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the S&P 500 index using
different scenario generation methods with each model over the years 2022 and 2023.
Note: The portfolios were constructed from a total of 499 assets.
Appendix: Results Appendix
147
==PAGE:160==
Scenario method
Asset 1
Asset 2
Asset 3
Asset 4
Asset 5
MAD
Historical
LLY
10.08%
KDP
9.07%
GIS
8.20%
AZO
6.38%
HSY
4.98%
Monte Carlo
MSFT
0.54%
SNPS
0.51%
LLY
0.51%
COST
0.49%
HSY
0.48%
FF3
NVR
68.43%
AMGN
22.61%
AMZN
6.99%
MRNA
1.45%
SO
0.51%
FF4
AMCR
63.83%
SO
26.67%
NVR
9.50%
...
...
...
...
FF5
SO
32.60%
MNST
28.64%
AMCR
15.28%
TSLA
14.95%
NVR
8.53%
FF6
AMCR
43.72%
SO
38.55%
MNST
16.27%
KDP
1.38%
BRK-B
0.08%
VARMA FF3
HRL
87.97%
NEM
6.85%
MRNA
4.09%
SO
0.84%
CPB
0.16%
VARMA FF5
SO
40.83%
MNST
32.03%
MRNA
10.77%
NVR
9.73%
TSLA
4.02%
Block bootstrapping
ZTS
35.40%
TSCO
10.53%
TDG
6.61%
DVA
6.35%
HPE
6.31%
CVaR
Historical
HRL
26.11%
NEM
8.87%
KDP
8.44%
MKTX
7.02%
VZ
3.81%
Monte Carlo
MMM
34.40%
AOS
31.73%
ABT
20.10%
ABBV
7.56%
ABBV
7.56%
FF3
NVR
71.89%
AMZN
26.74%
MRNA
1.36%
...
...
...
...
FF4
AMCR
76.73%
NVR
23.18%
TSLA
0.09%
...
...
...
...
FF5
AMCR
46.53%
SO
27.45%
MNST
23.30%
TSLA
2.42%
NVR
0.29%
FF6
MNST
30.55%
AMCR
24.35%
SO
20.98%
TSLA
14.12%
NVR
9.99%
VARMA FF3
MRNA
40.90%
SO
37.14%
HRL
13.69%
NVR
4.06%
HUBB
0.30%
VARMA FF5
TSLA
37.35%
NVR
34.70%
MRNA
24.11%
MNST
3.84%
...
...
Block bootstrapping
ENPH
12.85%
TSLA
8.48%
AMD
6.91%
FTNT
6.76%
NVDA
4.94%
Table C.8: The top 5 assets chosen from the S&P 500 list by each method and model
over the years 2022 and 2023
C.5.2
Nordic 120
Figure C.9: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation meth-
ods using the MAD model against the Nordic 120 index, over the years 2022 and 2023.
148
Appendix: Results Appendix
==PAGE:161==
Figure C.10: Growth of the portfolios generated with different scenario generation meth-
ods using the CVaR model against the Nordic 120 index, over the years 2022 and 2023.
Scenario method
Capital gain
Avg r
Std r
Avg index dev
Avg cum index dev
End cum index dev
Growth
Sharpe ratio
Avg time
TC
Avg obj
MAD
Historical
-16,426.69
0.02%
2.57
0.03%
7.87%
3.03%
-1.42%
-0.02
1.53
2,173.29
16,102.18
Monte Carlo
-26,678.88
0.03%
2.65
0.04%
3.48%
4.02%
-0.43%
-0.01
77.76
20,204.66
3,001.61
FF3
-21,874.70
0.17%
6.16
0.18%
1.84%
2.54%
-1.90%
0.02
0.37
2,492.48
13,856.29
FF5
160,574.34
0.23%
4.07
0.24%
19.25%
20.60%
16.15%
0.04
0.49
806.39
10,641.56
VARMA FF3
-199,590.44
0.13%
4.09
0.14%
18.65%
9.11%
4.66%
0.02
1.29
245,869.95
7,098.46
VARMA FF5
-190,551.80
-0.04%
4.03
-0.03%
15.49%
-7.49%
-11.94%
-0.03
1.27
81,077.87
9,555.83
Block bootstrapping
-49,265.79
0.00%
2.64
0.01%
1.37%
0.71%
-3.73%
-0.03
178.93
10,913.43
3,387.74
CVaR
Historical
-19,610.43
0.005%
2.12
0.02%
9.86%
2.67%
-1.78%
-0.03
0.76
1,763.53
-29,819.90
Monte Carlo
-65,898.53
-0.02%
2.61
-0.01%
-0.52%
-1.48%
-5.93%
-0.03
179.90
6,091.66
-1,461.24
FF3
-100,309.35
0.11%
6.46
0.12%
-3.30%
-5.39%
-9.83%
0.01
0.26
1,924.48
5,643.42
FF5
110,567.23
0.19%
4.11
0.20%
19.56%
15.54%
11.09%
0.029
0.29
300.00
-16,922.79
VARMA FF3
1,266,330.78
0.97%
5.56
0.98%
53.27%
138.11%
133.67%
0.16
2.08
42,190.58
-2,604.23
VARMA FF5
885,522.49
0.75%
4.92
0.76%
48.17%
96.72%
92.28%
0.14
1.83
26,877.10
-8,932.96
Block bootstrapping
-211,177.08
-0.14%
4.02
-0.13%
-10.52%
-15.88%
-20.33%
-0.05
11.55
7,541.63
3,739.21
Table C.9: KPI comparison of portfolios constructed from assets in the Nordic 120 index
using different scenario generation methods with the MAD and CVaR models over the
years 2022 and 2023.
Appendix: Results Appendix
149
==PAGE:162==
MAD
CVaR
Scenario method
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Average Asset Count
Max weight
Min weight
Historical
18.54
16.55%
0.004%
15.56
22.11%
0.003%
Monte Carlo
84.83
2.56%
0.16%
98.05
2.45%
0.06%
FF3
2.00
89.65%
3.35%
1.24
94.03%
5.97%
FF5
2.00
66.23%
33.77%
1.00
100.00%
100.00%
VARMA FF3
1.23
89.61%
10.39%
1.42
52.03%
0.96%
VARMA FF5
1.88
65.97%
0.28%
1.44
77.62%
0.44%
Block bootstrapping
90.93
2.88%
0.07%
14.15
17.58%
0.004%
Table C.10: Comparison of portfolio characteristics from assets in the Nordic 120 index
using different scenario generation methods with each model over the years 2022 and 2023.
Note: The portfolios were constructed from a total of 103 assets.
Scenario method
Asset 1
Asset 2
Asset 3
Asset 4
Asset 5
MAD
Historical
NOVO-B.CO
16.55%
AZN.ST
11.80%
AXFO.ST
11.54%
FNOX.ST
9.36%
ELISA.HE
9.29%
Monte Carlo
NOVO-B.CO
2.56%
AXFO.ST
2.37%
INVE-A.ST
2.34%
INVE-B.ST
1.99%
ELISA.HE
1.91%
FF3
FNOX.ST
89.65%
AXFO.ST
6.99%
EVO.ST
3.35%
...
...
...
...
FF5
AXFO.ST
66.23%
FNOX.ST
33.77%
...
...
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF3
AXFO.ST
89.61%
FNOX.ST
10.39%
...
...
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF5
AXFO.ST
65.97%
FNOX.ST
30.41%
SOBI.ST
2.02%
EQT.ST
0.75%
ESSITY-B.ST
0.58%
Block bootstrapping
NOVO-B.CO
2.88%
INVE-A.ST
2.61%
INVE-B.ST
2.42%
AXFO.ST
2.36%
AZN.ST
2.34%
CVaR
Historical
ELISA.HE
22.11%
AXFO.ST
16.94%
AZN.ST
9.76%
ESSITY-B.ST
7.41%
TRYG.CO
6.32%
Monte Carlo
NOVO-B.CO
2.45%
INVE-A.ST
2.42%
INVE-B.ST
2.16%
AXFO.ST
2.10%
AZN.ST
1.92%
FF3
FNOX.ST
94.03%
EVO.ST
5.97%
...
...
...
...
...
...
FF5
AXFO.ST
100.00%
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
VARMA FF3
AXFO.ST
52.03%
FNOX.ST
37.13%
EVO.ST
9.88%
EQT.ST
0.96%
...
...
VARMA FF5
AXFO.ST
77.62%
FNOX.ST
20.75%
EQT.ST
1.19%
EVO.ST
0.44%
...
...
Block bootstrapping
FNOX.ST
17.58%
EVO.ST
13.53%
SAGA-B.ST
11.05%
NIBE-B.ST
9.60%
BEIJ-B.ST
7.72%
Table C.11: The top 5 assets chosen from the Nordic 120 list by each method and model
over the years 2022 and 2023.
150
Appendix: Results Appendix
==PAGE:163==
Appendix: Results Appendix
151
==PAGE:164==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Akademivej, Building 358
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
+45 4525 4800
www.man.dtu.dk
