==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Master thesis 
 
Membrane reinforcement strategies 
for alkaline water electrolysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Songyu Yang 
 
S222464
==PAGE:2==
Content 
 
Abstract 
1. Background                                                       
1.1 Carbon Neutrality: an imperative for global sustainability 
1.2 Different technologies of water electrolysis for hydrogen production 
1.2.1 Principles of water electrolysis 
1.2.2 Different technologies of water electrolysis 
1.2.3 Comparison for the four technologies 
1.3 Pathway for development of alkaline water electrolysis technology 
1.4 Technological evolution in separators for alkaline water electrolysis 
1.5 Research on PSU and PVP blend ion-solvating membrane 
1.6 Project objectives and thesis outline 
2. Methodology and experiment methods 
2.1 Solution preparation and viscosity measurement 
2.1.1 Solution preparation 
2.1.2 Viscosity measurement 
2.2 Membrane preparation and reinforcement 
2.2.1Casting method for membrane preparation 
2.3 Membrane characterization 
2.3.1 Electrolyte uptake 
2.3.2 Ionic conductivity measurement 
2.3.3 Scanning electron microscope(SEM) 
2.3.4 Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy(NMR) 
2.3.5 Thermogravimetric analysis(TGA) 
2.3.6 Tensile strength measurement 
2.4 Cell test for water electrolysis 
3. Result and discussion 
==PAGE:3==
3.1 Viscosity measurement of different solutions 
3.2 The impact of varying molecular weight PVP on this ion-solvating membrane 
3.3 TGA 
3.4 The impact of solvent removal process following solvent evaporation on the ionic 
conductivity of the ion-solvating membranes 
3.5 NMR  
3.6 Impact of thickness on ion-solvating membranes 
3.7 The impact of varying reinforcement materials 
3.8 The impact of varying reinforcement meshes on the mechanical strength of the 
membranes 
3.9 Cell test for water electrolysis 
3.9.1 Impact of temperature on ionic conductivity and operational performance 
of ion-solvating membranes. 
3.9.2 Impact of reinforcement meshes on the electrolysis performance of ion-
solvating membranes 
3.9.3 Comparison of the performance of reinforced ion-solvating membranes 
with different thicknesses 
3.9.4 Performance improvement with better HER catalysts 
4. Conclusions and outlook 
5. Reference 
 
 
==PAGE:4==
Title 
Membrane reinforcement strategies for alkaline water electrolysis 
Submitted 15th of June , 2024 
 
Author  
Songyu Yang 
E-mail: s222464@dtu.dk  
 
Principal supervisor  
David Aili, Senior Researcher, DTU Energy  
E-mail: larda@dtu.dk  
 
 
Co-supervisors 
Qingfeng Li, Professor, DTU Energy 
E-mail: qfli@dtu.dk 
 
Dmytro Serhiichuk, Research Assistant, DTU Energy 
E-mail: dmyse@dtu.dk 
 
 
 
Department of Energy Conversion and Storage  
Technical University of Denmark  
Anker Engelunds Vej 
Building 375 
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark  
Tel: +45 46 77 58 00  
info@energy.dtu.dk  
www.energy.dtu.dk
==PAGE:5==
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
为天地立心 
为生民立命 
为往圣继绝学 
为万世开太平 
 
——北宋 张载 
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgment 
I would like to sincerely thank my supervisors: David Aili and Qingfeng Li.  David 
has inspired me when I was confused and helped me with a lot of my experiments. 
Qingfeng is very patient and responsible to me. He taught me how to do a good research 
while greatly inspiring my interest and opening my eyes to a wider world. I greatly 
admire their extensive knowledge and precise scientific intuition. 
 
In addition, I would like to thank my senior fellow and good friends, Xia Yifan, who 
accompanied me through my study in DTU and inspired me step by step into research! 
I am also very grateful to Zhongtao Ma, Zhipeng Zhou, Sinu, Dima and Yika who have 
helped me a lot in my research and life.  
 
My research journey has just begun, and there is a long road ahead. I will carry the 
wisdom and guidance I have received from all of you along the way. 
 
Songyu
==PAGE:7==
Abstract 
 
The ion-solvating membrane is a new concept for the development of high-performance 
electrolysers. It effectively combines the cost advantages of traditional alkaline water 
electrolysis with the higher performance of anion exchange membranes for hydrogen 
production. At present, research into the development of ion-solvating membranes is 
still at an early stage with problems of degradation and lack of durability, and there is 
much scope for exploration. 
 
In this work, the properties of polysulfone (PSU)+ polyvinylpyrrolidone(PVP) blend 
ion-solvating membranes for water electrolysis applications are investigated. The 
sensitivity of the membrane to the different molecular weights of PVP and the 
concentration of alkaline solution was experimentally investigated in detail. And the 
strategy to make the ion-solvating membrane with superior and stable performance is 
discussed for the membrane preparation process. Meanwhile, on this basis, polymer 
meshes are used to enhance the mechanical properties to improve its stability, so as to 
promote its development towards industrialization.  
 
In the optimization process for the ion-solvating membrane, its conductivity can reach 
60mS/cm, which is similar to that of the m-PBI system. No signs of performance 
degradation were observed during a 72-hour cell test. Due to the tight schedule, it is not 
possible to verify its durability for a long time, but the current experimental results 
show that the co-casting blend PSU+PVP ion-solvating membrane with the reinforced 
mesh and optimal process is a very promising solution for the alkaline water electrolysis.
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations 
 
 
AWE Alkaline water electrolyzer 
PEMEC Proton exchange membrane water electrolyzer  
SOEC Solid oxide water electrolyzer cell 
AEM Anion exchange membrane 
ISM Ion-solvating membrane 
PSU Polysulfone 
PVP Polyvinylpyrrolidone 
PPS Polyphenylene sulfide 
PEEK Polyether ether ketone 
DMAC Dimethylacetamide 
DMSO Dimethyl sulfoxide 
HTO Hydrogen in oxygen 
TGA Thermogravimetric analysis 
SEM Scanning electron microscopy 
NMR Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
EIS Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy. 
OER Oxygen evolution reaction 
HER Hydrogen evolution reaction 
TFSA Trifluoromethanesulfonic acid 
 
==PAGE:9==
CHAPTER   1 
Background  
 
1.1 Carbon Neutrality: an imperative for global sustainability 
The global energy mix is transitioning from a fossil fuel-based energy system to a low 
carbon energy system based on renewable energy sources to achieve the global carbon 
neutrality. Green hydrogen produced from renewable energy sources can not only 
connect massively intermittent renewable electricity to end-use applications, but can 
also be further converted into other energy carriers such as ammonia, methanol and 
liquid hydrocarbons to help decarbonize the chemical and transport industries.1 
 
Hydrogen can be used in fuel cells, internal combustion engines, gas turbines, large-
scale power generation (power plants and microgrids etc.) and transportation (fuel cell 
cars, fuel cell trucks and ships, etc.)2. Hydrogen can also be widely used as a chemical 
in ammonia production, fuel hydrocracking (petroleum refining, methanol production, 
etc.), iron and steel metallurgy, glass, electronics, and specialty chemical. In 2020, the 
European Union published its European Strategy for Climate Neutral Hydrogen Energy, 
which proposes a target of 10 million tons of renewable hydrogen per year by 2030, to 
be used as a fuel, chemical feedstock and energy carrier. The European Union has also 
published a Strategy for the Development of a Climate Neutral European Hydrogen 
Energy Sector3. 
 
The transition to renewable energy sources involves shifting from fossil fuel-based 
energy systems to those powered by renewable sources such as solar, wind, hydro, 
geothermal, and bio weight. Each of these sources offers distinct benefits and 
challenges, and together, they form a diversified approach to sustainable energy. 
==PAGE:10==
 
The main obstacles to large-scale development of renewable energy are the properties 
of its intermittent (volatile), cyclical (seasonal) and regional generation characteristics. 
Therefore, the search for suitable energy storage methods is a necessary way forward 
for the development of renewable energy on a large scale. At present, the mainstream 
energy storage methods include battery energy storage and hydrogen energy storage as 
shown in Fig 1.1, each of which has its own characteristics and a strong 
complementarity with each other. Dynamic batteries, represented by lithium-ion 
batteries, are the best choice for short-term, distributed, and small-scale renewable 
energy storage because their self-discharging characteristics don’t allow them to 
achieve long-term storage across seasons. However, in large-scale energy storage 
scenarios, the cost of storing energy using batteries will far exceed that of storing energy 
using hydrogen. For large-scale, long-term storage of centralised renewable energy, 
hydrogen energy is therefore the best option. 
 
Fig 1.1 Comparison between different energy storage technologies4. 
Furthermore, as far as hydrogen production is concerned, according to the statistics 
published by the European Hydrogen Strategy5 , only about 4% of hydrogen comes 
from the electrolysis of sodium chloride solution (industrial by-product hydrogen from 
the chlor-alkali industry), and low-carbon hydrogen produced by electrolysis of water 
accounts for an extremely small proportion6. Renewable hydrogen (green hydrogen) 
==PAGE:11==
produced by electrolysis of renewable energy will fully cover various sectors, including 
industry, construction, power supply, and transport, to achieve decarbonization of the 
entire industrial sector in the future. 
 
On the basis of the above two issues, water electrolysis using renewable energy is 
certain to become one of the most important technologies in the medium and long term. 
There are four main solutions for producing hydrogen by electrolysis: alkaline water 
electrolysis (ALKWE), proton exchange membrane water electrolysis (PEMWE), 
anion 
exchange 
membrane 
water 
electrolysis(AEM) 
and 
solid 
oxide 
electrolysis(SOEC).  
 
1.2 Different technologies of water electrolysis for hydrogen production 
1.2.1 Principles of Water Electrolysis 
The principle of water electrolysis was first discovered in the early 19th century by 
William Nicholson and Anthony Carlisle, marking the beginning of a significant 
advancement in chemical sciences7. Over the years, the process has been refined and 
adapted, making it a cornerstone in various industrial applications, including chemical 
synthesis, metallurgy, and, more recently, energy storage and fuel production.8 
 
Water electrolysis involves the decomposition of water (H₂O) into oxygen (O₂) and 
hydrogen (H₂) gas through the application of an electric current. The fundamental 
reaction can be represented by the following equation: 
2H2O(l) → 2H2 (g) + O2(g) 
This reaction takes place in an electrolyzer, which consists of two electrodes (an anode 
and a cathode) and an electrolyte that facilitates the movement of ions between the 
electrodes. When a voltage is applied across the electrodes, water molecules at the 
anode lose electrons (oxidation), producing oxygen gas and positively charged 
hydrogen ions (protons). These protons migrate through the electrolyte towards the 
cathode, where they gain electrons (reduction) to form hydrogen gas. 
==PAGE:12==
 
Based on the diversity of electrolytes and operating temperature used in water 
electrolysis, water electrolysis technologies are classified into four main categories: 
alkaline 
water 
electrolysis(AWE), 
proton 
exchange 
membrane 
water 
electrolysis(PEMWE), anion exchange membrane electrolysis(AEM), and solid oxide 
electrolysis(SOEC)8. 
 
1.2.2 Different technologies of water electrolysis 
Alkaline water electrolysis(AWE) 
Alkaline electrolysis is a well-established method to produce hydrogen and oxygen , 
using an alkaline electrolyte solution such as potassium hydroxide (KOH) or sodium 
hydroxide (NaOH). This process, known for its simplicity and robustness, has been 
utilized for over a century in various industrial applications, including chemical 
manufacturing, metallurgy, and more recently, in the burgeoning field of renewable 
energy storage.  
 
The basic principle of alkaline water electrolysis involves passing an electric current 
through water, facilitated by the alkaline electrolyte, which enhances the conductivity 
of the solution. The electrolyte not only serves to conduct the electrical current but also 
participates in the chemical reactions at the electrodes. This process involves two 
independent half-cell reactions: the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) at the cathode 
and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at the anode.9 
 
The reactions can be summarized as follows: 
1. Cathode (Reduction Reaction): 4H2O + 4e- → 2H2 + 4OH- 
2. Anode (Oxidation Reaction): 4OH- → O2 + 2H2O + 4e- 
==PAGE:13==
 
Fig1.2 Alkaline water electrolysis system10 
Alkaline electrolysis is distinguished by several key advantages. It operates at relatively 
low temperatures (typically between 60-80°C) and does not require expensive or rare 
materials for its construction, making it a cost-effective solution for hydrogen 
production. The use of non-precious metal catalysts and simple cell designs contribute 
to its economic feasibility and scalability. Moreover, the technology has a long 
operational history, with established manufacturing and operational protocols that 
ensure reliability and durability. 
 
Alkaline electrolysis is distinguished by several key advantages. The process operates 
at relatively low temperatures (typically between 60-80°C) 8 and does not require the 
use of expensive or rare metal for catalyst in its construction, making it a cost-effective 
solution. Furthermore, the technology has a long history of operation, with well-
established manufacturing and operating protocols in place to ensure reliability and 
durability. However, the development of this technology is constrained by the corrosive 
nature of the high pH electrolyte and the low current density. 
 
Proton exchange membrane (PEM) water electrolysis 
Proton exchange membrane (PEM) water electrolysis is an advanced and efficient 
technology. This method utilizes a solid polymer electrolyte, known as a proton 
exchange membrane, to conduct protons from the anode to the cathode while acting as 
==PAGE:14==
a barrier to separate the hydrogen and oxygen gases. Some of the leading commercial 
products and related companies for proton exchange membranes include Nafion serious 
membrane (from DuPontTM) with longer side-chain and Aquivion (from SolvayTM) with 
shorter side-chain11. 
 
The fundamental reactions involved in PEM water electrolysis can be described as 
follows: 
1. Anode (Oxidation Reaction):  
2H2O → O2 + 4Н+ + 4e- 
2. Cathode (Reduction Reaction):  
4Н+ + 4e- →2H2 
 
Fig1.3 PEM water electrolysis system 
PEM electrolysis is particularly well-suited for integration with renewable energy 
sources due to its ability to operate dynamically and efficiently with fluctuating power 
inputs in the 10% to 100% power range12. This makes it look like a promising 
technology for producing green hydrogen. 
 
Despite its advantages, PEM electrolysis faces challenges related to the quite high 
==PAGE:15==
capital expenditures (CapEx), particularly for the precious metal catalysts, and 
expensieve membranes. Ongoing research and development efforts are focused on 
finding cost-effective materials, reducing membrane degradation, and decreasing 
overall system cost to make PEM electrolysis more commercially viable. Some 
researchers have also employed the operating characteristics of differential pressure on 
both sides of the PEM water electrolysis to generate high-pressure hydrogen directly, 
thus eliminating the mechanical compression process and reducing the cost. Prof Yang's 
team at Tsinghua University has developed a 30 MPa differential pressure electrolyzer 
that feeds directly into a high-pressure hydrogen storage cylinder13. 
 
Anion Exchange Membrane (AEM) electrolysis 
AEM combines the advantages of both PEM and AWE, allowing the use of pure water  
or low pH base solution as electrolyte and ultra-thin dense membranes, as well as the 
use of abundant and inexpensive catalyst. At present, AEM is still in the laboratory 
research stage, with a significant number of literature reports on the membrane and 
catalyst. These reports indicate that the durability is not more than 1000 h and the 
pressure is not more than 30 bar14. Furthermore, due to its low lye concentration, the 
catalyst is still required in order to achieve optimal performance. So there are only a 
small number of commercialization cases, such as Enapter from Italy14.  
 
Solid oxide electrolyzer cell (SOEC) 
Solid Oxide Electrolyzer Cells (SOEC) represent a cutting-edge technology for 
hydrogen production through the high-temperature splitting of water. Operating at 
temperatures typically ranging from 600 to 1000°C15, SOECs use solid oxide ceramics 
as their electrolyte, which conducts oxygen ions (O²⁻) from the cathode to the anode. 
This high-temperature operation allows SOECs to achieve higher electrical efficiency 
and leverage thermal energy, making them a promising option for integrating with 
industrial processes and renewable energy systems. 
 
The fundamental operation of SOECs involves two half-cell reactions.  
==PAGE:16==
At the cathode: 
H2O + 2e- → H2 + O2- 
 
At the anode: 
O2- → ½O2+2e- 
 
SOEC technology boasts several advantages, including higher efficiency compared to 
low-temperature electrolysis methods due to reduced thermodynamic losses. This 
makes SOECs particularly attractive for coupling with high-temperature industrial 
process, such as steel manufacturing and chemical production, where excess heat can 
be effectively utilized15. 
 
Another significant advantage of SOECs is their ability to perform co-electrolysis, 
where both water and carbon dioxide (CO₂) can be simultaneously reduced to produce 
syngas, a mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide16. This capability offers a pathway 
for synthesizing hydrocarbon fuels and chemicals from renewable electricity and 
captured CO₂, thus contributing to carbon recycling and the reduction of greenhouse 
gas emissions. 
 
Despite these promising attributes, SOEC technology faces several challenges that need 
to be addressed for widespread commercial deployment. The high operational 
temperatures can lead to material degradation and reduced lifetime. Additionally, the 
development of cost-effective and durable materials for electrodes and electrolytes is 
essential to enhance the long-term stability and economic viability. 
 
1.2.3 Comparison for the four technologies 
Table 1.1 compares the four water electrolysis technologies in terms of principle, basic 
performance, operating conditions and key component materials17. 
==PAGE:17==
 
Table 1.1 Characterization of the four types of water electrolysers17. 
AWE technology is the earliest developed and the most mature technology, offering a 
number of advantages. These include a simple stack structure, safety and reliability, a 
long operation lifetime, ease of operation, and a low selling price. The electrolysis 
efficiency ranges from 59% to 70%, with the current highest market share in the field 
of water electrolysis hydrogen production. This technology has been used in the large-
scale commercialization for hydrogen production18.  
 
SOEC electrolytic water hydrogen production technology has an efficiency of more 
than 90% to reduce energy consumption. However, they have limitations related to 
rapid material degradation, short run times, and high manufacturing costs with initial 
small-scale commercial applications.  
 
PEM water electrolysis technologies have electrolysis efficiencies of between 65% and 
82%, and are more compact, but are more costly due to the use of rare metals as catalyst 
==PAGE:18==
materials. Therefore, it is advantageous in special scenarios such as hydrogen 
production in off shore wind farms and in space. Currently, EU is at the forefront of 
industrial application in the field of hydrogen production technology, with the majority 
of production based on AWE hydrogen production and supplemented by proton 
exchange membrane electrolysis technology. 
 
While PEM and SOEC technologies offer higher efficiencies and advanced capabilities, 
their high costs and durability issues pose significant challenges. Alkaline Electrolysis, 
with its cost-effectiveness, proven reliability, and robustness, remains a competitive and 
viable option for large-scale hydrogen production, especially in contexts where budget 
constraints and long-term stability are critical considerations.  
 
1.3 Pathway for development of alkaline water electrolysis technology  
The history of alkaline water electrolysis (AWE) technology can be traced back to last 
century, when its potential for industrial application was first recognized. Following the 
evolution including from unipolar to bipolar plate, small to large stack, atmospheric to 
pressurized operation, and manual to fully automatic control, AWE technology has now 
reached a stage of mature industrial application18. 
 
The requisite cell voltage for this electrochemical reaction can be determined by 
thermodynamics. The free reaction enthalpy ΔG can be calculated using the reaction 
enthalpy △H, the temperature T, and the reaction entropy △S. 
△𝐺=△𝐻−𝑇△𝑆 
The reversible cell voltage Urev is determined by the ratio of the free reaction enthalpy 
△G to the product of the number of exchanged electrons z = 2 and the Faraday constant 
F (96,485 C·mol- 1)8. 
𝑈𝑟𝑒𝑣= −△𝐺
𝑧𝐹 
 
At a temperature of 25 °C and an ambient pressure of 1 bar (standard conditions), the 
==PAGE:19==
free reaction enthalpy for the water splitting reaction is △G = 237 kJ· mol-, which 
leads to a reversible cell voltage of Urev = -1.23 V. Given that the free reaction enthalpy 
is positive at standard conditions, it can be concluded that the water-splitting reaction 
is a non-spontaneous process. Due to the irreversibility of the water splitting reaction, 
the actual cell voltage must be greater than the reversible cell voltage in order for the 
reaction to proceed.8 
𝑈𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙= −△𝐻
𝑧𝐹= −1.48𝑉 
 
The AWE system consists of the hydrogen generation electrolysis stack and the balance 
of plant (BOP) system. Electrolyzer is the main place for electrolysis reaction, which 
consists of electrodes, diaphragm/membrane, bipolar plate and other main parts.  
 
The BOP system comprises a number of interconnected subsystems, including 
electrical, separation, purification and pure water replenishment systems shown in the 
figure below. The electrical system comprises a rectifier and transformer, which provide 
a stable power supply for the electrolysis reaction by converting alternating current into 
direct current. The separation system contains a gas-liquid separator, scrubber, 
condenser, gas-water separator, lye pump, heat exchanger, filter, and other main 
components. In this system, hydrogen and oxygen are separated from lye, and complete 
cooling and preliminary gas-water separation occurs. The lye then participates in the 
electrolysis reaction again after being cooled. The purification system comprises a 
deoxidation tower, gas-water separator, drying tower and other principal components. 
In this system, hydrogen is deoxidized and dried, thereby improving the purity of the 
pure water replenishment system. The purification system comprises a deoxidation 
tower, a gas-water separator, a drying tower and other principal components19. In this 
system, hydrogen is subjected to a deoxidation and drying process, resulting in a purity 
of 99.9%. The pure water replenishment system comprises a water purifier, pumps and 
other principal components, which are employed to replenish the water consumed in 
the reaction process. 
==PAGE:20==
 
Figure 1. 4 inside of an alkaline electrolyser with its BoP20 
The evaluation indices of the AWE system encompass several key parameters, 
including single-cell power, single-cell hydrogen production, current density, energy 
consumption, lower power load limit, start-up time, cost, lifetime, maintenance time, 
and so forth. Among the key technical issues that require urgent attention in the AWE 
system are high energy consumption, low current density, and dynamic characteristics19. 
 
In terms of energy consumption, the ohmic loss of the diaphragm, as well as the 
electrode polarization loss, are the primary factors contributing to the high energy 
consumption observed during electrolysis. 
 
The disadvantages of the dynamic characteristics of the AWE system are more evident, 
including the lengthy start-up time of the cold stack, the narrow load range, the delayed 
response of the hydrogen concentration in the oxygen, the delayed response of the 
pressure, and the high dynamic fluctuation of the working conditions, which can lead 
to an imbalance of the level of hydrogen and oxygen and the exceeding of the hydrogen 
content in the oxygen, thereby posing potential safety risks. The primary cause of this 
issue is the suboptimal gas barrier performance of the diaphragm and the obsolete 
structural design of the electrolyzer. 
 
==PAGE:21==
Ideally, the voltage for water electrolysis is 1.23 V and the thermo-neutral voltage is 
1.48 V. The amount of charge required to electrolyze 1 mol of water is 2×96485 C. 
Therefore, the amount of electricity required to generate 1 Nm3 of hydrogen is: 
 
2 × 96485 × 1000
3600 × 22.4
= 2.39 𝑘𝐴/𝑚! 
 
The electrolytic generation of hydrogen requires the joint action of electric energy and 
heat energy. All heat energy is derived from the conversion of electric energy, and thus 
the theoretical electric energy required to generate 1 Nm3 of hydrogen is 2.39×
1.48=3.54 kWh. The polarization loss of electrodes and the ohmic loss of the diaphragm 
in the actual electrolysis process are unavoidable, resulting in an electrolysis energy 
consumption of more than 4 kWh/Nm3 H2. At the present stage, the DC energy 
consumption index of commercial electrolyzers can reach 4.6 kWh/Nm3 H2. This is due 
to the optimization of the structural parameters and preparation process of core 
components (diaphragm, electrode, etc.)19. It is expected that in 2025 and 2030, its 
energy consumption will reach 4.4 kWh/Nm3 H2 and 4.3 kWh/Nm3 H2, respectively21. 
A significant proportion of this energy loss is attributable to the voltage loss of the 
diaphragm, which converts electrical energy into heat. The most effective method of 
reducing energy consumption is to optimize the resistance of the membrane. 
 
==PAGE:22==
Fig 1.5 Different type of voltage loss for alkaline water electrolysis8 
The lower load limit is a another crucial indicator for evaluating the performance of the 
electrolyser, which is primarily constrained by amount of hydrogen in oxygen (HTO). 
A HTO content between 4% and 95.4% is prone to cause safety problems. In the actual 
operation process, when the HTO content is more than 2%, i.e., whicn mea it reaches 
50% of the explosion limit, it is necessary to force the system to shut down and purge 
nitrogen22. The sources of hydrogen impurities in oxygen are caused by the 
concentration difference of dissolved hydrogen on both sides of the diaphragm, gas 
convection by the pressure difference between the two sides of the diaphragm, and 
mixing of dissolved hydrogen.  
 
However, the hydrogen cross-diffusion rate is subject to a minimal impact from the 
current change. Conversely, reducing the operating current will result in a higher HTO 
content. Therefore, there exists a minimum current that must be reached in order to 
bring the HTO content to a critical value. This minimum current, expressed as a 
percentage of the rated current, represents the lower load limit of the electrolyzer. A 
reduction in the resistance of the membrane can be employed to enhance the rated 
current density of the electrolyzer, while an increase in the gas barrier of the membrane 
can be utilized to diminish the HTO content. This membrane research facilitates the 
expansion of the lower load limit for hydrogen storage scenarios in conjunction with 
renewable energy sources. 
 
In conclusion, the integration of fluctuating wind, photovoltaic energy has brought a 
significant challenge for the development of separators. Membrane research is at the 
center of the overall alkaline water electrolysis technology development. 
 
1.4 Technological evolution in separators for alkaline water electrolysis 
 
The distance between electrodes plays a key role in the hydrogen production process in 
==PAGE:23==
electrolytic water production. Zero gap water electrolysis reduces the ohmic resistance 
and enhances the efficiency of the electrolysis process by the minimal distance between 
the electrodes and the membrane. In order to achieve the ideal zero gap electrolyzer and 
to avoid the problem of hydrogen-oxygen crossover, electrode separators are required 
to reduce the crossover of hydrogen-oxygen and to enable the transport of ions between 
the electrodes. 
 
The development of separators is currently divided into four main development stages. 
They are (1)asbestos diaphragm and fabric diaphragm, (2)composite diaphragm, (3) 
anion exchange membrane, (4)ion-solvating membrane. 
 
Fig 1.6  four main development stages for separators23 
 
Asbestos diaphragm and fabric diaphragm 
Asbestos diaphragms were first introduced in the early 20th century and rapidly became 
the standard for alkaline water electrolysis. Asbestos is a naturally fibrous mineral that 
is highly resistant to chemical degradation and can withstand the corrosive environment 
of alkaline electrolytes. The fibers of asbestos form a porous structure that allows for 
efficient ion transfer while providing some protection against the mixing of hydrogen 
==PAGE:24==
and oxygen. 
 
However, the discovery of serious health risks associated with asbestos exposure, such 
as lung cancer and asbestosis, has driven the search for safer alternatives. 
 
Fig 1.7 Asbestos diaphragm24 
In response to the health concerns associated with asbestos, researchers and 
manufacturers have developed a variety of alternative diaphragms. Fabric diaphragms 
are typically manufactured from polymeric materials, including polysulfone (PSU), 
polypropylene (PSU), and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) 25. 
 
Fabric diaphragm, which is made using a knitting process with a typical channel size 
of 500 nm and a typical membrane thickness of 700-900 μm. Since fabric diaphragms 
are made by a knitting process, their pore size can be freely regulated by knitting 
methods within a certain scale25. The pore size of the fabric diaphragm is still large, so 
the higher membrane thickness leads to a higher impedance of the membrane, poor 
safety due to hydrogen-oxygen crossover, inability to operate at high electrical densities 
and insufficient dynamic performance for green hydrogen scenarios under renewable 
energy coupling. 
 
Composite diaphragm 
The second generation of porous diaphragms are organic-inorganic composite porous 
==PAGE:25==
diaphragms prepared using the phase transition method. This process allows the 
membrane to reach microscopic scale pore sizes, with conducting hydroxide channels 
typically in the 100 nm size range.  
 
Composite diaphragms, particularly Zirfon separator membrane, represent a significant 
commercial advancement in the field of alkaline water electrolysis. The development 
of Zirfon composite membranes emerged as a response to the need for safer, more 
efficient, and durable alternatives to traditional diaphragms such as asbestos and early 
polymeric fabrics25.  
 
Zirfon was developed in the late 20th century by Agfa, combining the benefits of 
different materials to optimize performance and safety. Zirfon composite diaphragms 
are typically made from a blend of polysulfone polymer and zirconium oxide (zirconia) 
particles. The diaphragm is prepared by a non-solvent phase conversion method. This 
involves the polymer being miscible with an organic solvent, which is then coated onto 
a substrate. The substrate is then subjected to a solidification bath and water washing 
to form a membrane26. 
 
This combination of polysulfone and zirconium oxide represents a novel approach to 
the development of chemical and mechanical stability, ionic conductivity, and chemical 
resistance in membrane technology. The result is a highly porous yet robust membrane 
that is capable of efficiently separating the anode and cathode compartments in an 
alkaline electrolysis cell. 
 
In comparison to the first generation, the gas barrier performance of porous diaphragms 
has been significantly enhanced. This is due to the reduction in membrane thickness, 
which has resulted in a reduction in ohmic impedance. Furthermore, the diaphragm 
itself is more durable. 
 
In the context of composite diaphragms, the high temperature and alkali concentration 
==PAGE:26==
(85-99°C, 30% wt. KOH) in the working environment of alkaline hydrogen production 
necessitates the fulmembraneent of heightened material requirements. This is 
accompanied by the incorporation of a considerable quantity of inorganic materials 
(accounting for approximately 60-90% of the solid content) to ensure the hydrophilicity 
of the diaphragm and consequently reduce the surface resistance26.  
 
This results in a number of significant challenges25.  
 
(1) There are few types of high-temperature and alkali-resistant hydrophilic additives 
available, and the choice of material types is limited.  
(2) The serious agglomeration of the high proportion of inorganic materials and the 
mechanism of regulation of the membrane-forming process are not clear.  
(3) There is a trade-off between the area resistance and the gas barrier, and the two 
performances cannot be optimized at the same time.  
(4) In order to further reduce the area resistance and the thickness of the diaphragm, the 
intermediate support PPS mesh of the composite diaphragm needs to be cancelled or 
thinner. However, this results in a deterioration of the mechanical strength of the 
composite diaphragm.  
 
In order to address the aforementioned issues, a solution was sought based on the 
zirconia-rich organic-poor interfacial control technology, which aims to resolve the 
interface problem between organic and inorganic materials26. This involved the 
decoupling control of two target parameters, namely area resistance and gas barrier, 
through the combination of formulation and unique technology, including ultrasonic 
spraying, in order to achieve the simultaneous optimization of the two parameters. 
Additionally, a diaphragm strength enhancement technology was employed to address 
the issue of the strength of the composite diaphragm by eliminating the PPS support 
mesh. 
 
Anion exchange membranes 
==PAGE:27==
Anion exchange membranes (AEM) have gained significant attention in the field of 
alkaline water electrolysis due to their potential to improve efficiency and reduce costs.  
 
Anion exchange membranes are typically composed of a polymer backbone 
functionalized with cationic groups, such as quaternary ammonium groups, which 
facilitate the transport of anions (e.g., hydroxide ions, OH-) across the membrane27.  
 
Typical channel size for AEM is 5 nm. Compared to the second-generation porous 
composite diaphragm, the structure of the ion exchange membrane is improved directly 
from a diaphragm to a dense membrane. The gas barrier of the membrane is 
significantly improved, allowing for high electrical density operation and differential 
pressure, while the membrane thickness is reduced, resulting in lower membrane 
impedance and lower energy consumption. But AEMs may face chemical degradation 
when operating in high pH alkaline environments27.  
 
The main issues currently facing the development of anion membranes include:  
(1) The side chain hydrophilic structure is chemically unstable and prone to degradation. 
The anion exchange membrane will be degraded by quaternary ammonium groups 
during electrolysis. Furthermore, it is unable to withstand strong acid/alkali 
environments, and therefore can only be operated in a low concentration of alkaline 
environments28.  
(2) The membrane has insufficient electrical conductivity and must be operated in weak 
alkaline environments, necessitating the use of highly active precious metals 1such as 
platinum catalysts.  
(3) The stability and durability of anion exchange membranes remain unresolved,. 
Ionomer Company from Canada developed AemionTM products employed a specialized 
alkylated PBI (mes-PBI) structure to optimize this issue28. 
 
 
1  
==PAGE:28==
In conclusion, AEM technology is still an immature technology and has a high cost and 
development space. 
 
Ion-solvating membrane29 
The fourth generation for separator development is the ion-solvating membrane, which 
is actually a quite new and significant developed concept in this field. Ion-solvating 
membrane is membrane made from any hydrophilic polymer with positive, negative or 
neutral backbone or side chains30. The hydrophilic polymer absorbs the electrolyte to 
achieve ionic conductivity. The conductivity behavior inside the membrane is similar 
to the electrolyte, so it's like a solid polymer with solvent properties for ion 
transportation, which is so called ion-solvating membrane.  
 
Fig 1.8 Concept of ion-solvating membrane30 
The difference between AEM and ion-solvating membrane is ion-solvating membrane 
is dense and homogeneous in microscale, while anion exchange membrane have micro 
phase separation between the hydrophilic and hydrophobic component to create the ion 
transport channel23. 
 
The first application for ion-solvating membrane is Xing et al. used polybenzimidazole 
(PBI) in alkaline fuel cells. David Aili et al.29 discovered the use of poly(2,2´-(m-
phenylene)-5,5´-bibenzimidazole) (m-PBI) doped with KOH solution in an alkaline 
electrolyzer showed outstanding performance in water electrolysis, which is a 
==PAGE:29==
extremely remarkable breakthrough in this field.  
 
The imidazole ring of PBI will undergo a deprotonation reaction process with 
potassium hydroxide solution at pH greater than 13. The benzimidazole ring becomes 
a benzimidazolide group after deprotonation, which has better hydrophilicity because 
it carries a negatively charge29. 
 
 
Fig 1.9 Benzimidazole deprotonation process 
Other hydrophilic polymers with charged groups such as carboxylate, sulfonate will 
conduct protons by absorbing the alkaline electrolyte through some similar pathways. 
 
But whether uncharged polymers with hydrophilic properties can be used as ion-
solvating membranes in alkaline solutions has rarely been investigated. For example, 
the use of PVP as a hydrophilic material for ion-solvating membrane are well worth 
exploring. David has conducted research into the blend membrane of PSU with PVP31. 
The results indicated that the blend membrane exhibited a notable increase in 
electrolyte uptake with an elevated PVP content. When the PVP content exceeds 45 
wt%, the membrane is capable of achieving 10-100 mS/cm or even higher ionic 
conductivity in a 20 wt% KOH solution, which has the potential for further 
development. 
 
However, the fully hydrated material for the alkaline water electrolysis membrane 
exhibited low mechanical stability, which could be easily damaged on the edge of 
membrane after long-term operation29. Due to mechanical damage or cracks in the 
membrane, the separation of hydrogen and oxygen becomes less effective, which may 
lead to crossover.  
 
In order to solve the above mentioned problems, membrane reinforcement and 
==PAGE:30==
optimization for ion-solvating membrane is a needed way both for research 
development and industry application. This study builds upon the work of David to 
further investigate the properties of PSU and PVP blended membranes. Furthermore, 
the objective is to optimize and enhance the material so that it has the potential for 
further industry applications. 
 
1.5 Research on PSU PVP blend ion-solvating membrane 
 
PVP materials are widely used in the phase inversion process to make water treatment 
membranes32. The alkaline electrolytic water diaphragm Zirfon UTP 500 also 
incorporates PVP material to form microchannels. For instance, Ehsan Saljoughi 
utilized cellulose acetate (CA)/polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) blends for ultrafiltration 
and reverse osmosis membranes. As the concentration of PVP increases, the formation 
of channels during the phase transition is enhanced, resulting in a significant increase 
in membrane porosity and water flux.33 
 
In many studies, PVP is often used as an additive in the process of making porous 
diaphragms due to its water soluble nature. For example, in the study of B. 
Chakrabarty.34 PVP was employed as an additive in the preparation of polysulfone 
(PSU) membranes. The effect of varying molecular weights on the morphology of the 
membranes following phase transition was also investigated. It is indicated that high 
MW PVP have substantial role on the precipitation rate, which will result significantly 
suppressing for a finger-like cavities in the sublayer. And The membrane pore number 
and pore area will increase with high molecular weight of PVP. 
 
Furthermore, PVP can be blended with other materials to prepare dense membranes 
with a variety of applications. The amide group, which is present in the pyrrolidone 
ring, is a polar group. The oxygen and nitrogen atoms of the amide group are highly 
electronegative and therefore capable of forming hydrogen bonds with ease35. The 
==PAGE:31==
amide group enables the PVP molecule to interact with water molecules through 
hydrogen bonding and dipole-dipole interactions. The oxygen atom can act as an 
acceptor for hydrogen bonding, while the hydrogen on the nitrogen atom can act as a 
donor for hydrogen bonding, thereby forming strong hydrogen bonding interactions 
with the hydrogen and oxygen in the water molecule. This enables the material to be 
doped with acids (phosphoric acid) and bases (KOH), thereby facilitating ionic 
conduction. So it's very reminiscent of their use in fuel cells and electrolysis of water. 
 
Fig 1.10 The molecular structure of PVP 
Studies have been conducted using PVP blended membranes as dense membranes in 
high temperature fuel cells. Guo Zhibin et al. 36used PVP blended with PVDF to prepare 
ion-solvating membrane, and found that when the PVP content was equal to or higher 
than 40 wt%, the flow properties of PVDF were significantly improved due to the 
formation of effective hydrogen bonding between the PVP and the PVDF functional 
groups, resulting in the formation of single-phase PVDF-PVP polymers with uniform 
microstructure.20 wt% PVDF-80 wt% PVP achieved a proton conductivity of 0.037 
and 0.093 S cm−1 at 100 and 200 °C, which is better than or compatible with the state-
of-the-art PBI/PA membranes. 
==PAGE:32==
 
Fig 1.11 Proton conductivity of PVDF–PVP composite membranes measured at 
different temperatures with no external humidification measured by Guo.36 
 
David used PSU and PVP for casting to obtain uniform ion-solvating membranes over 
the entire composition range31. The best optimization of properties and mechanical 
strength was found to be achieved at a ratio of 75% PVP to 25% PSU. 
 
Nevertheless, there are numerous areas that require further investigation and remain 
unexplored in the context of PSU and PVP blended membranes. For instance, the 
impact of the molecular weight of PVP on the blended membrane has yet to be 
investigated. Furthermore, the performance of blend membranes in a wider range of 
alkali concentrations warrants investigation. The mechanical strength of the blended 
membrane is inadequate in a dry state, and the enhancement method and effect require 
further experimentation and verification. 
 
1.6 Project objectives and thesis outline 
The objective of this project is to develop reinforcement strategies based on ion-
solvating membranes to improve their long-term durability and commercialization. An 
in-depth study is also conducted for the process of ion-solvating membrane to find the 
==PAGE:33==
optimal recipe and parameters for ion-solvating membranes. 
Consequently, the work in brief fall into three categories: 
a. Investigating the KOH doping properties of PSU and PVP blend ion-solvating 
membrane systems. 
b. Exploring the methods of enhancing the mechanical properties of ion-solvating 
membranes, thus optimizing to find the most suitable process method. 
c. Verifying the effect of enhancement strategy for ion-solvating membranes by 
electrolysis tests. 
d.  
The contents of this work are structured as follows: 
Chapter 1: Background introduction to different water electrolysis technologies and 
background on the development for alkaline water electrolysis separators 
Chapter 2: Experimental methods: ion-solvating membrane development and alkaline 
water electrolysis testing and key characterization methods. 
Chapter 3: Result and discussion 
Chapter 4: Summary and outlook  
 
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER   2 
Methodology and  
Experimental methods 
 
2.1 Solution preparation and viscosity testing 
2.1.1 Solution preparation 
The ion-solvating membrane is formulated as a blend of PSU and PVP. PSU is from 
UDEL. There are three types of PVP, which are from Sigma Aldrich. The number of 
the PVP used in this experiment are W10, W40 and K90 named by Sigma. They mainly 
differ in molecular weight, which will be shown in the table below. The solvent used is 
Dimethylacetamide(DMAc). 
 
Table 2.1 Molecule weight for 3 kinds of PVP 
The solution ratio used in this experiment is 1:3 in weight (PSU:PVP). The ratio used 
is the optimal result obtained from the experiment of David31. However in the 
experiment of the impact of different molecular weights of PVP on the final membrane 
was not explored, so at the beginning of this experiment, a comparative study of 
different molecular weights of PVP is worth studying. The following is a list of all the 
co-casting solutions prepared at the outset of the experiment. 
==PAGE:35==
 
Table 2.2 Recipe for casting membranes in weight percentage 
The objective of Groups 123, 456 and 789 is to observe the effect of viscosity on the 
membrane casting liquid, with a view to selecting the most appropriate viscosity for the 
scraping coating method. A comparison is conducted between the three groups to 
ascertain the impact of PVP molecular weight on the viscosity of the blended solution. 
Groups 10, 11, and 12 are intended to serve as a reference for the experimental groups 
described above. 
 
2.1.2 Viscosity measurement 
Viscosity is tested by means of glass capillary viscometers. The equipment is a glass 
capillary viscometer from Xylem Analytics shown in the figure. The liquid to be 
measured is injected into the capillary viscometer, usually by drawing the liquid above 
a marking line. By gravity, the liquid is caused to flow from one marking line to the 
other. A timer is used to measure the time it takes for the liquid to flow from the upper 
mark to the lower mark. Three measurements are taken for each liquid and averaged. 
==PAGE:36==
 
Fig 2.1 Glass capillary viscometers 
The basic principle of the glass capillary viscometer is to calculate the viscosity of a 
liquid by measuring the time it flows in a capillary tube. According to Hagen-Poiseuille 
law, under certain conditions shown below, when the liquid flows in a thin tube, its 
volume flow rate is inversely proportional to the viscosity of the liquid. 
37 
While η is the dynamic viscosity of the liquid; ΔP is the pressure drop (usually the 
pressure difference due to the difference in height of the liquid column) ; r is the radius 
of the capillary tube; t is the time for the liquid to flow through the capillary tube; V is 
the volume of liquid flowing through the capillary tube and L is the length of the 
capillary tube. 
 
The formula for the calculation is shown in the figure below 
 
ηs= Viscosity of given sample; 
ηw = Viscosity of triple distilled water at given temperature; 
ρs = Density of given sample at given temperature; 
ts = time required in sec. by sample to cover distance (A to B) on viscometer. 
==PAGE:37==
ρw = Density of triple distilled water at given temperature. 
 
Given that the density of the mixed solution varies at different concentrations, a fixed 
volume of 5 ml was obtained for each concentration of the mixed solution using a 
syringe and weighed in order to calculate the density individually. 
 
The unit for the viscosity used it centipoise, where 1 poise= 100 cP = 1 g /cm·s). The 
viscosity of water at 25℃ is 1 centipoise while for DMAc it’s 0.92cP. 
 
It’s found that the concentrations in the range of 15% and 25% are so high that direct 
measurement with the instrument requires a time period of more than half an hour. In 
such instances, the viscosity test of the solution can be affected by numerous external 
factors, which can give rise to inaccurate readings. These factors include interaction 
between macromolecules, which can also influence the rate at which the solution flows 
down the tube. Consequently, in this experiment, the concentration was diluted to 1% 
to 10% for measurement. 
 
The relationship between the concentration of a polymer solution and its viscosity can 
be described using a variety of models, depending on the concentration range of the 
solution. One of the most commonly used models, particularly for dilute and semi-
dilute polymer solutions, is the empirical equation known as the Huggins equation37.  
 
The Huggins equation is a mathematical model that describes the relationship between 
the intrinsic viscosity, the concentration of the polymer, and the viscosity of the solution. 
 
For dilute polymer solutions, the Huggins equation37 is given by: 
𝜂𝑟𝑒𝑙= 1 + 𝜂𝑐+ 𝑘"𝜂#𝑐# 
Where: 
• ηrel is the relative viscosity of the solution (the ratio of the viscosity of the polymer 
==PAGE:38==
solution to the viscosity of the solvent)η 
• η is the intrinsic viscosity, which is a measure of the contribution of an individual 
polymer molecule to the viscosity of the solution. 
• c is the concentration of the polymer in the solution (typically in g/dL or g/mL). 
• kH is the Huggins constant, which is an empirical parameter that accounts for polymer 
solvent interactions and the degree of polymerization. 
 
Viscosity in Different Concentration Regimes 
At very low concentrations, the viscosity of the polymer solution increases linearly with 
concentration. The Huggins equation simplifies to37: 
𝜂$%& = 1 + 𝜂𝑐 
As the concentration of the solution increases, the interactions between the polymer 
molecules become significant, leading to the quadratic term in the Huggins equation37: 
𝜂$%& = 1 + 𝜂𝑐+ 𝑘"𝜂#𝑐# 
For higher concentrations, other models such as the Martin equation or the Fuoss 
equation might be more appropriate37. However, these models can become quite 
complex. So in this experiment, in order to have the results as accurate as possible, the 
measurement procedure and results at low concentrations were used. 
 
2.2 Membrane preparation and reinforcement  
2.2.1 Casting Method for Membrane Preparation 
Following the completion of the viscosity measurement, three methods were employed 
to prepare the membranes. The first and second methods are the traditional casting 
method, which is a commonly used technique for membrane preparation. This involves 
uniformly coating a substrate with a polymer solution, followed by solvent evaporation 
to form a homogeneous, continuous membrane. This method is a common approach to 
the preparation of various membrane materials, including anion exchange membrane 
(AEM) and proton exchange membrane(PEM)38. 
 
==PAGE:39==
The casting method is divided into the following steps: 
 
The preparation of the solution is the initial step in the casting process. The polymer 
material is dissolved in a suitable solvent. The solvents for the PSU and PVP is 
dimethylacetamide(DMAc). 
 
Casting: 
The casting process can be achieved through either simple solution coating or more 
precise casting equipment. The thickness and uniformity of the coating have a 
significant impact of the properties of the final membrane. The thickness of the 
membrane is controlled using a squeegee or casting equipment, typically between tens 
and hundreds of microns. This step will be carried out separately both using a solution 
poured directly onto a surface dish with diameters of 5.5cm and a squeegee. 
 
Solvent evaporation: The casting substrate is subjected to controlled conditions (e.g., 
room temperature or a heated environment) to facilitate solvent evaporation. In order 
to ensure standardization, a temperature of 80℃ was employed in this experiment for 
the evaporation of the solvent. It is essential to regulate the rate of solvent evaporation 
to prevent membrane shrinkage or cracking. In this experiment, a layer of filter paper 
was placed on the surface of the dish. The filter paper maintains a high concentration 
of solvent in the air above the surface of the casting solution, thereby slowing down the 
rate of solvent evaporation and facilitating the formation of a homogeneous and dense 
membrane. The oven employed in this experiment is: UN 55 plus. The platform within 
the oven can be adjusted to a horizontal height, thus ensuring uniform thickness of the 
membrane. The solvent was evaporated for a period of at least 16 hours to ensure 
complete evaporation of the solvent. 
 
Peeling and processing:  
After the membrane is formed, it is peeled off from the surface dish. In this experiment, 
the surface dish containing the membrane was immersed in water and left to stand for 
==PAGE:40==
a period exceeding 48 hours. It was observed during the experiments that the processing 
temperature has a significant impact of the performance of the membranes, which will 
be discussed in greater detail in subsequent chapters. 
 
2.3 Membrane characterization 
2.3.1 Electrolyte uptake  
The uptake of electrolyte by PSU and PVP blend ion-solventing membranes represents 
a significant aspect of this study. A total of four parameters were required for 
measurement.  
 
The first parameter to be measured is the net weight of the membrane, M1, which 
contains only the PSU and PVP components. The second parameter is the total weight 
of the membrane after stabilization in water and absorption of water, designated as M2. 
The third parameter M3 is the total weight of the membrane at steady state following 
the absorption of the electrolyte in various concentrations of alkali. The fourth 
parameter M4 to be measured is the weight of water evaporated from the membrane 
following the absorption of alkali31. 
M1=MPSU+PVP 
M2=MPSU+MH20 
M3=MPSU+PVP+MH2O+MKOH 
M4= MPSU+PVP+MKOH 
So when the blend membrane is doped with KOH electrolyte, the content for each 
species can be calculated as: 
xKOH=(M4-M1)/M3 
xH2O=(M3-M4)/M3 
xpolymer=M1/M3 
The quality of M1 is determined by subjecting the membrane to an oven treatment after 
it had been stabilized by standing in water for 48 hours. The temperature was then 
adjusted to 60℃for a further 48 hours to ensure that the water had completely 
==PAGE:41==
evaporated. 
 
The quality of M2 is then tested after the membrane has been stabilized in water for 48 
hours, after water is removed and the surface is dried. 
 
The quality of M3 is evaluated after the membrane has been stabilized in a base solution 
for 72 hours, removed the surface lye. 
 
The quality of M4 is evaluated by putting the membrane to an oven at a temperature of 
60 ℃ for a period of 48 hours. This process ensures that the water has completely 
evaporated, following the stabilization of the membrane in KOH for 72 hours and the 
removal and drying of the base solution from the surface. 
 
The four samples were subjected to a high-precision weight test. The balance's accuracy 
is 0.1 mg. The balance is tested in an enclosed environment, surrounded by glass panels, 
in order to minimize the potential for external interference. All measurements are 
weighed with three separate sample in order to ensure the accuracy of the experiment. 
 
The uptake of electrolyte can also be described as KOH doping36: 
𝐾𝑂𝐻'()*+, = (𝑀! −𝑀-)/56
𝑀-𝛼/111
 
While αis the weight content of PVP in the membrane. 56 and 111 is the molecule 
weight of KOH and PVP monomer. 
 
The concentrations and volumes of the three blends utilized in the casting process were 
as follows: 20wt% PSU+PVP W10 (4 ml), 20wt% PSU+PVP W40 (4 ml), and 10wt% 
PSU+PVP K90 (8 ml). This was due to the viscosity of the 20% PSU+PVP K90 solution 
being too high to get uniform thickness control by the casting process. The coating 
quality of the three recipes was maintained consistently throughout the experiments. In 
the subsequent experiments, the solutions and volumes employed in the casting method 
==PAGE:42==
were 10wt% PSU+PVP W10 (8 ml), 10wt% PSU+PVP W40 (8 ml), and 10wt% 
PSU+PVP K90 (8 ml). The following experiments demonstrated that the varying 
concentrations of the blends had minimal or no impact of the final performance of ion-
solvating membranes when the weight was controlled. 
 
The resulting co-casting membranes were cut to a size of 3 cm x 3 cm and immersed in 
5wt%, 10wt%, 20wt%, and 30wt% alkaline solution for at least 72 hours until a steady 
state was reached. In the initial measurement, time series of tests were carried out for 
the blend membranes using PVP W10, W40, and K90, respectively. The impact of 
varying molecular weights of PVP on the process was evaluated by immersing cut 
samples of the blend membranes in different concentration base solutions and 
monitoring their volume and weight changes after 0 hours, 0.25 hours, 0.50 hours, 1 
hour and 1.5 hours from the commencement of the experiment. 
 
2.3.2 Ionic conductivity test 
The ionic conductivity of ion-solvating membranes is a crucial indicator for evaluating 
their performance. It is typically tested by an electrochemical workstation from Gamry. 
The electrochemical workstation employs the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy 
(EIS) technique to quantify the ionic conductivity of membranes. The method is based 
on analyzing the response of the ionic motion within the membrane under an applied 
alternating current (AC) electric field to obtain its resistance and conductivity 
characteristics. Impedance signifies the comprehensive resistance encountered by 
current in an electrical circuit, consisting of resistors (R), capacitors (C), and inductors 
(L)with different response to the frequency change. 
 
An equivalent circuit model, such as a resistor-capacitor parallel circuit, is typically 
employed to fit the experimental data, thereby isolating the resistive component of the 
membrane shown in the figure below. The ohmic loss on the left of figure a can be 
presented as the resistance of membrane. 
==PAGE:43==
 
Fig 2.2 Typical Nyquist plot observed for an electrolyser. (b) Equivalent circuit model 
for a single AEM electrolyser. Rm membrane resistance, Ra anode resistance, Rc 
cathode resistance, CPEa and CPEc constant phase elements of anode and cathode39. 
 
The calculation of ionic conductivity is as follows: The ionic conductivity (σ) is 
calculated from the measured membrane resistance (R), in conjunction with the 
membrane thickness (d) and active area (A). 
𝜎=
𝑑
𝑅· 𝐴 
And the area resistanceε is calculated as  
𝜀= 𝑅· 𝐴 
The test was conducted using a compact electrolyser with a sandwich structure and a 
membrane area of 2.5 cm x 2.5 cm. The electrode for the test was a nickel plate 
electrode with 50% of the surface area comprising small circular holes. The active area 
of the test electrode was 2 cm × 2 cm, and the model of the electrochemical workstation 
equipment used for the test was Gamry Potentiostat. The initial frequency of the test 
was 150,000 Hz, with the final frequency being 1,000 Hz. The amplitude of the 
alternating current (AC) voltage was 10 mV. 
 
2.3.3 SEM 
The scanning electron microscope (SEM) using Zeiss Ultra is a high-resolution 
microscopic imaging technique employed to observe the surface morphology and 
microstructure of ion-solvating membrane samples40. 
The instrument comprises the following principal components: 
==PAGE:44==
u Electron gun: The components of an electron microscope include an electron gun, 
which generates an electron beam. This beam can be produced by a tungsten 
filament, a LaB6 filament, or a field emission gun (FEG). 
u The lens system comprises: The apparatus includes a spotting lens and objective 
lens, which are used to focus and control the electron beam. 
u Scanning coil: The scanning coil is a component of the scanning electron 
microscope (SEM) that generates a magnetic field. The control system is 
responsible for regulating the scanning path of the electron beam on the sample 
surface. 
u Sample chamber: The sample chamber is responsible for holding the sample and 
adjusting the tilt and movement of the sample. 
u Detector: The detector is capable of detecting secondary electrons, backscattered 
electrons, and X-ray signals. 
u Vacuum system: The vacuum system is designed to maintain a high vacuum in the 
sample chamber, thereby preventing the electron beam from interacting with air 
molecules. 
 
The fundamental stages of the experiment are as follows: 
a. The preparation of the samples is the initial step in the experiment. 
b. The ion-solvating membrane samples to be tested were subjected to thorough drying 
in an oven, then cut into 4mm x 4mm squares with scissors and affixed to conductive 
adhesive. The platform for fixing the sample is a 3 cm diameter circle plate with 
conductive adhesive. The samples were positioned in a circle along the entire edge, in 
order to facilitate their identification, and a total of 10 samples were attached. 
c. The samples were subjected to a conductive treatment. In order to prevent charging 
effects, it is necessary to top the samples in a vacuum sputtering machine: Leica 
spraying box, in which a layer of conductive metallic gold with a 5nm thickness is 
sprayed. The spraying process is initiated when the negative vacuum pressure is less 
than 8×e-8 pa. It is therefore of great importance to ensure that the samples are 
sufficiently dry, as moisture will significantly prolong the vacuum time. The following 
==PAGE:45==
image depicts the sample following the application of the gold coating. 
 
Fig 2.3 Sample after gold spraying 
d.The sample should be fixed in position on the sample stage, placed into the sample 
chamber, and the height and tilt angle of the sample adjusted accordingly. 
e.The vacuum system was initiated to evacuate the sample chamber to a high vacuum. 
The process was conducted for a period of one hour. 
f.The electron gun voltage and current must be adjusted and the appropriate accelerating 
voltage (typically 1-30 kV) set. 
g.Scanning imaging: The electron beam scanning parameters (e.g., scanning speed, 
magnification) can be adjusted through the control system. A detector is employed to 
receive the signal and generate a high-resolution image of the sample surface. 
 
2.3.4 NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance imaging) 
The phenomenon of atomic nuclei resonating and absorbing radio frequency energy in 
an applied magnetic field forms the basis of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
technology. The resonance frequencies of different nuclei (e.g., the hydrogen nucleus, 
¹H, and the carbon nucleus, ¹³C) vary in different chemical environments. By analyzing 
these frequencies, molecular structure information can be obtained41.  
 
The phenomenon of chemical shift is defined as the change in the resonance frequency 
of an atomic nucleus in a given chemical environment. This reflects the change in the 
electronic environment around the nucleus in parts per million (ppm). The chemical 
shift provides information about the specific position of the nucleus in the molecule and 
==PAGE:46==
the chemical environment. 
 
Spin-spin coupling (spin-spin coupling) is the splitting phenomenon between atomic 
nuclei produced by bonded electron interactions, which provides information about the 
distances and interactions between nuclei. 
 
The 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) spectra were recorded on Spinsolve 80 
from magritek. The spectrum of pure PVP appeared as a series of multiplets at 1.3–4.1 
ppm42. The peak integral ratios of the PSU and PVP signals42 were used to calculate the 
PVP content in the polymer blends after the work-up in water. The calculation was 
based on the relative peak integrals of the signals at 7.85 ppm for PSU (4H) and the 
multiplet of PVP at 1.3–2.5 ppm(6H, position a,d,e)31. 
 
Fig 2.4 1 H NMR spectra of the PVP samples42 
 
2.3.5 TGA 
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) is a quantitative analytical technique used to 
measure the change in mass of a material over time or temperature under controlled 
==PAGE:47==
conditions. It can provide information on the thermal stability, decomposition 
temperature, adsorption/desorption properties, and composition of the material43. TGA 
tests were done for the sample blow. 
 
Table 2.3 List of testing samples 
 
2.3.6 Tensile strength 
The tensile test machine (Mecmesin) is used to test the mechanical strength of the 
membrane. Test samples were prepared using a cutting machine and a fixed mold. The 
specifications of the mold are shown in the figure below. 
 
Fig 2.5 Scheme of mold 
The tensile tester records the applied force F and the corresponding displacement ΔL 
in real time. 
The tensile stress is calculated as: 
𝜎= 𝐹
𝐴 
==PAGE:48==
The tensile strain is calculated as: 
𝜀= 𝛥𝐿
𝐿 
A is the cutting area(3mm × thickness of each membrane) and L is the length of 
sample(2cm). These steps allow for accurate measurement and analysis of the stress-
strain curve of the membranes and comparison of the mechanical properties between 
membranes. 
 
The measurement was carried out by clamping the square area on both sides tightly, 
exposing only the middle strip of the sample. The correct test result should be a 
sample that breaks in the center, so this test was done with several experiments and 
only the data from the middle broken sample was taken. 
 
Fig 2.6 Sample breaks in the middle 
 
2.4 Cell test 
The cell performance of the membranes was evaluated utilizing DTU Energy's self-
developed alkaline electrolysis test system (No. Rig 318). The apparatus comprises an 
electrolyser containing the membrane under test (56mm in diameter) sandwiched 
between a pair of electrodes (36mm in diameter). The two electrodes and the membrane 
are sealed in a sandwich structure by PTFE sealing sheets, which are then clamped by 
end plates on both sides and then fastened by means of eight bolts.  
==PAGE:49==
 
The electrolyzer is equipped with connections for the supply of power and the detection 
of voltage, as well as for the monitoring of temperature and the incorporation of a 
heating rod. The heating rods are directly coupled to the electrolyzer, allowing for rapid 
and precise temperature regulation. Concurrently, the cathode and anode are directly 
connected to the reference electrode and the related detection interface. The reference 
electrode of the anode is a mercury electrode. The reference electrode enables the user 
to analyze the voltage of the HER and OER individually. 
 
The gases generated in the electrolyser are directed into the gas-liquid separator, where 
they are purged with nitrogen and subsequently transferred to the subsequent gas 
treatment unit. In the gas treatment cycle system, the hydrogen-oxygen gas mixture is 
detected by the oxygen sensor after passing through the drying chamber. By calibrating 
the nitrogen flow and the hydroxide gas flow, the hydrogen content in the oxygen can 
be measured with greater precision. 
 
The entire system and the sensors are integrated and controlled via a control board. It 
is possible to perform tests such as polarization curves directly from the operator 
interface. 
 
The anode electrode utilized in this experiment was a nickel foam with a thickness of 
500 μm. The cathode was initially nickel foam with a thickness of 500 μm. Subsequent 
experiments were conducted using a Ni-Mo catalyst (350 μm in thickness) supplied by 
Thu in Oluf’s group as the cathode electrode for the tests, in order to study the 
performance under high current densities. 
 
The flow rate was maintained at 150 ml/min throughout the experiment to ensure that 
weight transfer would not affect the results. 
==PAGE:50==
 
Fig 2.7 Cell system for test32 
The Polarization Curve Test is a method of evaluating the polarization characteristics 
of a material. Once the set temperature has been reached, the entire system is operated 
continuously for a minimum of one hour at a current density of 100mA/cm2 in order to 
stabilize the voltage and thus ensure that the system enters a steady state.  
 
During the test phase, the current is cycled in the order of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 
30, 40, 50, 60, 75, 100, 150, 200, 250, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800 mA/cm2, and the 
current density is recorded. The voltage limit was set to a maximum of 2.6 volts. The 
system recorded the voltage value at each current density node at regular intervals, 
namely once every minute. The temperature range of the test was 50℃ to 90℃. 
Concurrently, the surface resistance and ionic conductivity for the membrane in the cell 
were evaluated using an electrochemical workstation following the completion of the 
polarization curves testing. The test parameters were identical to those previously tested 
individually. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER   3 
Result and discussion 
 
3.1 Viscosity measurement of solutions  
The figure below illustrates the viscosity of the solution in centipoise following the test. 
The curve by fitting is also consistent with Huggins Equation. It can be observed that 
the change in viscosity is in general agreement with the fitted curves discussed earlier. 
It is derived that PVP K90 has the maximum viscosity at all concentrations. In contrast, 
PVP W10 exhibits a lower viscosity at all concentrations. This is due to the fact that 
polymers with a higher molecular weight have longer molecular chains. Longer chain 
molecules are more likely to become entangled and occupy more space in solution. 
These entanglements significantly increase the internal friction of the solution, thereby 
increasing viscosity. Moreover, the entangled molecular chains are easier to form a 
mesh-like structure that restricts the movement of solvent molecules, resulting in a 
reduction in solution fluidity and an increase in viscosity as shown in Fig 3.1.  
 
This is of significant benefit in the utilization of the squeegee for membrane casting. If 
the viscosity of the blending solution is too high, it will seldom flow on the glass plate, 
and it will be difficult to ensure the uniform thickness of the membrane produced by 
the squeegee at all times. Conversely, if the viscosity of the blending solution is too low, 
it will be difficult to maintain the membrane morphology and the thickness. A good 
viscosity control allows the solution to remain stable in its original position. Following 
a series of trials conducted to ascertain the optimal blending ratio of PSU with PVP 
K90 using a squeegee (150 μm in height), it was determined that the squeegee exhibited 
the greatest efficacy within the concentration range of 5% to 10%. 
==PAGE:52==
 
 
Fig 3.1 Viscosity of PVP PSU blended solutions with different PVP molecular weights 
at different concentrations(up). Schematic picture for the entangled molecular 
chains(middle). Membrane casting process for industry.(down)44 
 
==PAGE:53==
3.2 The impact of varying molecular weight PVP on this ion-solvating 
membrane 
A series of comparative tests were conducted on different types of ion-solvating 
membranes of the same weight. The following solutions were prepared: 20wt% 
PSU+PVP W10 (4 ml), 20wt% PSU+PVP W40 (4 ml), and 10wt% PSU+PVP K90 (8 
ml). These were poured into a 5.5 cm diameter surface dish.  
 
A syringe with a filter port Whatmean from cytiva was employed for the decanting 
process. The 10wt% concentration was employed for the K90 solution, rather than the 
20wt% concentration, due to the fact that the 20wt% concentration of the PSU+PVP 
K90 copolymer was highly viscous and could not be spread uniformly across the 
surface dish by gravity.  
 
In the case of normal processes, the membranes must be dried again in an oven and 
washed in water twice so that all solvents can be considered to have been removed, for 
example, for experimental operations with pure m-PBI and nafion membranes38. 
However, it should be noted that PSU and PVP blended membranes become particularly 
susceptible to damage after drying. Upon reintroduction of the dried and fragile 
membrane into water or an alkaline solution, the membrane's shape remains unaltered, 
and no reabsorption of water occurs. 
 
Fig 3.2 Comparison of membrane drying before and after 
==PAGE:54==
 
This phenomenon may led to the conclusion that PVP may be a hydrophilic material 
that absorbs water readily. During the drying process, the removal of moisture will 
result in shrinkage and hardening of PVP. While PSU and PVP exhibit significant 
differences in molecular structure and properties, with PSU being a hydrophobic 
material, this may indicate that they are not fully compatible during the blending 
process. Nevertheless, subsequent SEM tests have demonstrated that PSU and PVP can 
be effectively bonded to be a homogenous membrane.  
 
Another possible explanation is that during the drying process, the water within the 
membrane evaporates, resulting in a volume contraction. This may subsequently lead 
to the generation of internal stress. If the shrinkage rates of PSU and PVP are disparate, 
the internal stress will intensify, resulting in an augmented brittleness of the membrane, 
which may result in irreversible morphological changes. 
 
A visual assessment indicates that the higher molecular weight PVP blended with PSU 
results in a stronger membrane upon drying. The lower molecular weight PVP blended 
membrane is more brittle. Additionally, pure PVP membranes were produced via the 
casting method, with a comparison between pure PVP K90 and PVP W40. It was 
observed that the former membrane could be removed intact with high mechanical 
strength, whereas the latter could not be removed from the surface dish, and numerous 
cracks appeared on the surface of the membrane. This may be due to the fact that low 
molecular weight polymers are more likely to form highly crystalline regions and thus 
become more brittle as shown in Fig 3.3. 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
Fig 3.3 Pure PVP K90 membrane on the left, PVP W40 membrane on the right 
Scheme for morphology of polymers(Down) 
 
The compatibility between the PSU and PVP unit can be enhanced by the addition of 
compatibilizers or chemical modification, which serves to circumvent the phase 
separation phenomenon. An alternative approach is to add an appropriate quantity of 
plasticizer, such as glycerol or polyethylene glycol (PEG), to the blend membrane. This 
can enhance the flexibility of the membrane and reduce its brittleness. Due to time 
constraints, this strategy was not fully implemented and validated in this project. 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:56==
Electrolyte uptake： 
For the blend membranes of PSU with three different types of PVP, electrolyte uptake 
experiments were conducted in time series as shown in Fig 3.4. 
 
Fig 3.4 The results of the ratio of weight loss and volume loss over time for 
membranes obtained from a 10 wt% PSU+PVP W10 8 ml solution by casting, 
whereby the samples were placed from water into different concentrations of alkali. 
==PAGE:57==
 
Fig 3.5 The results of the ratio of weight loss and volume loss over time for 
membranes obtained from a 10 wt% PSU+PVP K90 8 ml solution by casting, 
whereby the samples were placed from water into different concentrations of alkali. 
 
A comparison of the two graphs reveals that at higher lye concentrations, the weight 
loss is more rapid and the equilibrium is reached in a shorter time, which is determined 
by the diffusion of electrolyte as described in Fick’s law45: 
𝐽= −𝐷𝑑𝛹
𝑑𝑥 
Where J is the diffusion flux and D is the diffusion coefficient or diffusivity. And dΨ
/dx is the concentration gradient. 
 
It can be observed that membranes with higher molecular weights exhibit less volume 
shrinkage and weight loss in the same concentration of lye. This phenomenon is 
particularly pronounced at high lye concentrations (30 wt%). Furthermore, subsequent 
measurements revealed a close correlation between the degree of weight loss and the 
change in conductivity. Given that the membrane is homogeneous and dense, it can be 
==PAGE:58==
assumed that the contraction of the membrane in three dimensions should also be 
isotropic. Furthermore, the experiments revealed that the reduction in membrane 
thickness is minimal, as the dimensions in the thickness direction are markedly different 
from those in the length and width. Moreover, the length and width of the membrane 
are essentially shrinking at the same rate. 
 
It can be observed from the Fig 3.5 that the trend and rate of volume contraction and 
weight loss are in alignment with one another. Consequently, subsequent experiments 
may be conducted to describe the process with a more easily measurable and precise 
weight, due to the fact that the membrane shrinkage at high alkali concentration causes 
its morphology to change from a two-dimensional plane to a three-dimensional folded 
state.  
 
This also suggests that it is difficult to apply pure PSU and PVP blended membranes 
directly to electrolyzed water, as the process of moving from water to lye causes the 
membrane to shrink and wrinkle, becoming hard and brittle. During the assembly of 
the electrolyzer, these properties render the membrane highly susceptible to damage. It 
is therefore of great importance to identify strategies to solve the membrane's drastic 
morphological changes in order to enhance its potential applications.  
 
It is a good idea to validate whether it is possible to use the membrane by placing it 
directly into lye after solvent evaporation, thus avoiding membrane shrinkage. This 
option will be investigated further in subsequent experiments. 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
 
Fig 3.6 The weight ratio of each component in the membrane at varying 
concentrations of alkaline solution when PVP of varying molecular weights is 
blended with PSU. 
As illustrated in the above Fig 3.6, the weight of membrane PSU and PVP W40 exhibits 
a smaller percentage than PVP K90 in the hydrated state. However, this percentage 
undergoes a significant change with concentration. Consequently, at higher electrolyte 
concentrations, the membrane's ability to absorb electrolyte is diminished. In contrast, 
the blend membrane with PVP K90 exhibits relatively stable properties. The weight 
ratio of the polymer itself remains essentially stable over a range of alkali 
concentrations from 5% to 30%, indicating that it is more tolerant to fluctuations in 
alkali concentration.  
 
Kim46 similarly found that in the addition of PVP to poly(m-phenylene isophthalamide) 
(PMIA) hollow fibers, the enhanced hydrophilicity increased as the molecular weight 
of PVP increased. This is due to the fact that large MW PVP is more easily trapped in 
the pores, but at the same time it leads to a decrease in water permeability. Therefore, 
in this blend membrane, it can be assumed that the larger molecular weight PVP is not 
easily washed out by water and thus can absorb more electrolyte. 
 
KOH doping level 
==PAGE:60==
 
Table 3.1 KOH doping level for K90 and W40 type in varying KOH concentrations 
 
As the KOH-doping level is defined as the molar ratio of the KOH per pyrrolidone ring, 
the KOH doping level of the PVP K90 membranes in 30wt KOH was estimated to be 
∼3.65 moles of KOH per mole of pyrrolidone ring, while for PVP W40 is 2.61. This 
suggests that at all concentrations, the pyrrolidone ring in K90 blend membranes are 
surrounded by more OH- on average. 
 
However theoretically, the hydrophilicity of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) is 
predominantly influenced by the polar groups (e.g., pyrrolidone groups) present in its 
chemical structure but not the molar mass. 
 
This anomalous result may be attributed to the fact that the longer molecular chain of 
high molecular weight PVP molecules is capable of forming a more extensive network 
structure in the blended membrane, which is more likely to result in the formation of a 
continuous phase or interpenetrating network structure within the PSU matrix. This 
structure increases the exposed area of hydrophilic groups and enhances the interaction 
between water molecules and membrane materials.  
 
Furthermore, the interaction between the long-chain molecules stabilizes the 
microstructure of the membrane, preventing the hydrophilic groups from being hidden, 
washed or insufficiently exposed. But the internal morphology of this polymer is 
difficult to verify experimentally. 
 
==PAGE:61==
Overall comparison of different blend membranes: 
 
Fig 3.7 The weight change of PSU and PVP blend membranes with varying molecular 
weights when immersed from water to different concentrations of alkali, along with 
the corresponding ionic conductivity. 
 
 
Fig 3.8 Specific conductivity of aqueous potassium hydroxide under a wide 
10
20
30
40
0
20
40
60
8 0
1 0 0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Temperature ( oC)
Condutivity (S cm -1)
KOH concentration (wt%)
==PAGE:62==
temperature and concentration range. 
The Fig 3.7 enables the formulation of more intuitive conclusions regarding the impact 
of varying molecular weights of PVP on the blended system in question. Given that the 
molecular weight of PVP K10 is not significantly different from that of PVP K40, their 
performance is relatively similar.  
 
The difference of the weight loss of the three membranes is more obvious at 30wt% 
KOH concentration and is inversely proportional to their own molecular weights. The 
smaller weight loss indicates that the hydrophilicity of the membranes is not 
significantly diminished, and thus the free space within the membranes for ion transport 
is not as greatly destroyed. This conclusion was also reflected in the ionic conductivity 
test results, which demonstrated that the difference in ionic conductivity between K90 
and the other two membranes increased as the alkali concentration changed.  
 
At a concentration of 30%, the difference is more pronounced for the ionic conductivity. 
It can be derived from Fig 3.8 that the ionic conductivity is determined by the KOH 
conductivity itself in low KOH concentration and while in the high concentration of 
KOH solution, the conductivity of the membrane itself becomes particularly important. 
 
Furthermore, it was observed that the ion-solvating membrane underwent a reduction 
in size and weight when placed in varying concentrations of lye relative to water. This 
reduction in size and weight was found to increase in proportion to the increase in lye 
concentration. Concurrently, the membrane's texture undergoes a transition from 
hardness to softness as the alkali concentration increases. Two possible explanations 
may have been proposed for this phenomenon.  
 
The first is that the high concentration of lye breaks down the intermolecular hydrogen 
bonds and other interactions of the PVP, causing an increase in its solubility. It has been 
researched that in a highly concentrated sodium hydroxide solution, OH- will break 
these hydrogen bonds of hydroxyl groups in the cellulose, thus leading the strong fiber 
==PAGE:63==
dissolved33. 
 
The second hypothesis is that when the membrane is transferred from water to lye, the 
water within the membrane is replaced by the lye. The ionic strength and polarity of the 
lye differ from that of water, which results in a change in the solubilization behavior of 
the membrane. The ions present in a high concentration of lye can cause dehydration 
and shrinkage of the membrane material, with this shrinkage effect being more 
pronounced in the case of PVP.  
 
The first hypothesis posits that the dissolution of PVP occurs as a consequence of the 
transfer from water to lye. Conversely, the second hypothesis postulates that the loss of 
water is the result of this transfer. In order to ascertain the veracity of these two 
explanations, they will be subjected to further investigation through the use of nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR) experiments to see if the leakage of PVP happened. 
 
To sum up, the experimental results indicated that the blended ion-solvating membrane 
of PSU and PVP K90 exhibited the highest ionic conductivity. Consequently, this 
combination will be selected as the basis for subsequent studies. 
 
3.3 TGA(thermogravimetric analysis) 
Thermogravimetric analysis was conducted on blended membranes containing three 
distinct molecular weights. Thermogravimetric analysis was also conducted on pure 
PSU and PVP K90 membranes, which were employed as a reference. It was not 
possible to peel the pure PVP W10 and W40 membranes from the surface dish, and 
therefore they could not be tested as a reference. 
==PAGE:64==
 
Fig 3.9 The thermogravimetric analysis data for the blended membrane of PSU and 
PVP W10. 
 
Fig 3.10 The thermogravimetric analysis data for the blended membrane of PSU and 
PVP W40. 
==PAGE:65==
 
Fig 3.11 The thermogravimetric analysis data for the blended membrane of PSU and 
PVP K90.
 
Fig 3.12 The thermogravimetric analysis data for the pure PSU membrane. 
==PAGE:66==
 
Fig 3.13 The graph illustrates the thermogravimetric analysis data for the pure PVP 
K90 membrane. 
 
It can be observed that the blend membrane of PSU and PVP begins to exhibit mass 
loss at temperatures exceeding 200 degrees Celsius, whereas pure PSU and PVP only 
display mass loss at temperatures exceeding 400 degrees Celsius from Fig 3.9-3.13. 
The blend membrane of PSU and PVP results in chemical interactions between the 
polymer chains, including the formation of hydrogen bonds, which should lead to 
increase in the thermal stability of the material, which is the opposite of the 
experimental results.  
 
It can also be observed that the mass loss of the blend membrane of K90 is less than 
that of W10 and W40 in the same temperature range. This may be due to the fact that 
the molecular chains of high molecular weight polymers are more susceptible to 
entanglement, which in turn improves the thermal stability of the material. However, 
in the initial stages of the experiment, several samples exhibited an increase in mass, 
which could not be explained.  
==PAGE:67==
 
The blended membranes with low MW PVP may exhibit the formation of distinct 
crystalline at the microscopic level, which may result a small improvement in thermal 
stability, so it can be seen from Fig.3.9 that PSU+PVP W10 has a wider temperature 
change when losing same percentage of weight. 
 
TGA for membranes with and without doping should be done to see how the doping 
effect the thermal stability. Then it’s possible to evaluate the possibility of using the 
membrane in high temperature fuel cells. But due to booking schedule, I don’t have 
extra time to finish the rest of the tests. 
 
3.4 The impact of solvent removal process following solvent evaporation 
on the ionic conductivity of an ion-solvating membrane 
 
Despite repeated attempts, I was unable to reproduce the high ionic conductivity 
observed by David in my initial experiments with the same recipe. Upon meticulous 
comparison, it was discovered that the only discrepancy between our casting methods 
was the temperature at which the membrane was washed in the water after solvent 
evaporation. While I placed the surface dish in water at room temperature, David 
immersed it at 60°C. Does this operation have a significant impact of the ionic 
conductivity of the membrane? A control test was set up around this one parameter.  
 
The casting solution was evaporated by transferring 4 ml of a mixed solution of PSU 
and PVP K90 into a surface dish with a diameter of 5.5 cm. The resulting surface dish 
was immersed in water at temperatures of 80, 60 and 25 degrees Celsius for a period of 
five days. This was done in order to assess the impact of the processing temperature. 
Subsequently, the membranes were immersed in 5%, 10%, 20%, and 30% potassium 
hydroxide solution to obtain the following data. In parallel, a second batch of samples 
was subjected to the same process, with the exception that the surface dish was directly 
==PAGE:68==
immersed into the alkaline solution after solvent evaporation. This was done for a 
period of seven days. 
 
Fig 3.14 Changes in the weight of the membrane in the lye solution after different 
treatments of the membrane after evaporating the solvent. 
 
Fig 3.15 Ionic conductivity of the membrane in the lye solution after different 
treatments of the membrane after evaporating the solvent. 
A comparison of membrane ionic conductivity at different alkali concentrations after 
different treatments following the evaporation of the solvent is presented in the Fig 3.15. 
At room temperature, if the membrane is immersed in the lye solution for two hours, 
compared with the treatment time of one week, it can be observed from Fig 3.14 that 
==PAGE:69==
there is a greater weight loss in high lye concentration, which indicates that the 
membrane will lose more ion conductive free volume. By comparing the difference in 
high pH KOH doping for the curve 2h and 24×7h in Fig 3.14, it indicates that the blend 
membrane of PVP has a long and continuous stabilization process in water. 
 
 
 
Fig 3.16 The absorption of electrolyte by the membrane after solvent evaporation and 
placing the membrane in water for 2h and then in alkaline solution(left). The the 
absorption of electrolyte by the membrane in alkaline solution after putting the 
membrane in water for 7×24h after solvent evaporation(right). 
Furthermore, from a more obvious perspective, the figure 3.16 illustrates that prolonged 
immersion in water results in the stabilization of the hydrophilic properties of the 
membrane and the doping level. 
 
By comparing the different temperatures in the Fig 3.14, , it can be observed that the 
loss of weight is significantly reduced, with an almost negligible change of 0 following 
the processing of water treatment at 60℃. Even in 30% of the lye, there is an increase 
in weight. This is due to the fact that the density of lye is greater than that of pure water.  
 
Consequently, the weight loss alterations were reflected in the ionic conductivity 
measurements. The three different treatments exhibited minimal differences in 
conductivity at low alkali concentrations in Fig 3.15, which were constrained by the 
conductivity of alkali concentration itself.  
 
==PAGE:70==
At high alkali concentration in Fig 3.15, the ionic conductivity of the three treatments 
is markedly disparate. The ion-solvating membrane treated with 30% alkali at 60°C 
exhibits a robust ionic conductivity comparable to that of pure m-PBI membrane.  
 
Additionally, a second batch of control experiments was conducted where the 
membranes were placed directly into the alkaline solution after the solvent had 
evaporated. It is noteworthy that when the membranes were placed directly into a 30% 
lye concentration, their conductivity was markedly reduced. This indicates that they 
absorbed almost no electrolytes in the lye environment, and there was no free space for 
conducting ions within the membrane. This result is also reflected in their external 
texture and softness. The membrane placed directly into the 30% concentration of lye 
exhibited a high degree of hardness and strength, with minimal hydration. In contrast, 
the other three membranes exhibited a relatively soft texture.  
 
The results of this experiment indicate a significant effect of processing temperature on 
the ion-solvating membrane. This may be attributed to the fact that elevated 
temperatures enhance the mobility of polymer chains, resulting in a reduction in the 
strength of interactions between polymer chain segments and an increase in the 
flexibility of the chain segments, thereby facilitating the formation of more continuous 
ion-conducting channels.  
 
Another possible reason is that the elevated temperature facilitates the alleviation of 
internal stresses between PSU and PVP that may have been formed during solvent 
evaporation, thereby leading to the formation of a more homogeneous and stable 
microporous structure of the membrane.  
 
Furthermore, this phenomenon may be attributed to the solvation effect. When the PSU 
and PVP blended membrane absorbs water at 60°C, water molecules surround the 
hydrophilic groups of the PVP molecules through hydrogen bonding and ion-dipole 
interactions to form a stable solvation shell. This hydration process enhances ion 
==PAGE:71==
mobility and improves ionic conductivity. But it is difficult to explain that even if the 
temperature of this membrane returns to room temperature, its ion-conducting 
properties are retained. This suggests that its internal structure was formed and 
stabilized at high temperatures. 
 
It can be demonstrated that an ion-solvating membrane with enhanced ionic 
conductivity can be produced by washing the surface dish directly into water at 60 
degrees Celsius to remove the solvent following solvent evaporation. 
 
3.5 NMR Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Analysis 
  
Fig 3.17 1H NMR for 25wt%PSU+75wt%PVP W10 
==PAGE:72==
 
Fig 3.18 1H NMR for 25wt%PSU+75wt%PVP W40 
 
Fig 3.19 1H NMR for 25wt%PSU+75wt%PVP K90 
==PAGE:73==
 
Fig 3.20 1H NMR for 25wt%PSU+75wt%PVP K90 with 2×thickness 
 
Table 3.2 PVP weight percentage calculation 
It can be observed that the membrane with twice the thickness exhibits a higher PVP 
content, which can be attributed to the fact that the dissolution of PVP is primarily 
concentrated on the surface of the membrane. Greater thickness means less PVP loss 
on average, so it is possible to enhance the overall hydrophilicity of the membrane by 
increasing its thickness.  
 
The value of PVP was higher than normal for PSU+PVP W40 in Table 3.2, which could 
be caused by the fact that the PSU was not completely dissolved in DMSO. During the 
experiment it was found that the solvent contained turbid tiny particles. 
 
3.6 Impact of the thickness on ion-solvating Membranes  
The present study also sought to investigate the influence of membrane thickness on 
==PAGE:74==
the properties of ion-solvating membranes. Due to time constraints, the experiment only 
verified the difference between single and double thicknesses of PSU+PVP K90. In the 
experiment, the thickness was controlled by controlling the volume of the flow 
extension solution. Two volumes were used: 4 ml and 8 ml of the solution of PSU and 
PVP K90. 
 
 
 
Fig 3.21 The change of the components in the membrane for different thicknesses of 
ion-solvating membranes placed in different concentrations of alkaline solution. 
The single-thickness membrane has a thickness of 80 μm, while the double-thickness 
membrane has a thickness of approximately 160 μm. It can be demonstrated that the 
thicker ion-solvating membrane absorbs a greater weight fraction of electrolyte at the 
same base concentration in Fig 3.21. This indicates a greater hydrophilicity of the 
membrane. This phenomenon could be attributed to the fact that PVP is partially 
dissolved in water with the NMR results in Table 3.2.  
 
 
==PAGE:75==
 
Fig 3.22 Weight loss in different alkali concentrations for membranes of different 
thicknesses and changes in ionic conductivity. 
The graph demonstrates that the ionic conductivity results are in alignment with the 
membrane's capacity to absorb electrolytes. The membranes with a thickness of twice 
that of the control sample exhibited superior conductivity performance in both the 10% 
to 30% concentration of lye and the control sample. In the 5% lye concentration, the 
lye concentration exerts a dominant influence, with the free space for conducting ions 
being similar at low lye concentrations.  
 
The experiment yielded the following results after stabilizing the membrane in room 
temperature water following the evaporation of the solvent. It is unclear whether the 
discrepancy in ionic conductivity between the two would be reduced if the water 
treatment is at a higher temperature, since it has been found that high-temperature 
treatment stabilizes the membrane. 
 
To summarize, the hydrophilicity and ionic conductivity of the blend membranes, as 
well as the ability for electrolyte uptake, are very strongly correlated with the content 
of PVP. 
==PAGE:76==
3.7 The impact of varying reinforcement materials. 
As evidenced by the preceding experiments, the ion-solvating membrane in its hydrated 
state is a soft and susceptible to damage. The embedding of polymer mesh into the 
membrane has been demonstrated to markedly enhance the membrane's overall 
mechanical strength and durability47. This facilitates the maintenance of the 
membrane's structural integrity under high current density and high pressure operating 
conditions, thereby reducing the likelihood of membrane rupture and deformation.  
 
Concomitantly, the incorporation of reinforcement mesh into the blend membrane 
serves to diminish membrane shrinkage and expansion, which provide more strength to 
the change of electrolyte concentration. Then the ionic conductivity of the membrane 
can be increased by reducing the thickness of the membrane with increased durability. 
 
Following the identification of the optimal membrane preparation and process  
conditions through the experiment before, it was determined that embedded physical 
meshes would be employed to enhance the mechanical strength of the membrane. The 
meshes employed are PPS mesh and PEEK mesh. PPS is characterized by its excellent 
mechanical strength and heat resistance. The following table displays the parameters of 
the materials. 
 
Table 3.3 Parameters for meshs 
 
There are several methods of embedding meshes. 
The first method involves flattening the mesh in a 5.5 cm diameter surface dish and 
pouring 4 ml of the co-mingled solution directly into the solution. This method is the 
simplest and quickest, and if the height of the membrane can be fixed accurately, the 
==PAGE:77==
volume of the solution can be controlled so that the mesh is in the center of the 
membrane. 
 
The second method involves the pouring of 2 ml of the casting solution, subsequent 
placement in an oven to evaporate the solvent for 24h. After that, following the laying 
of the mesh on the surface of dish, 2 ml of the casting solution is added. This method 
ensures that the mesh is precisely centered, but it remains to be verified whether the 
two stage of solvent evaporation will affect the performance of the membrane. 
 
The third method entails the placement of the grid on a glass plate and the utilization 
of a doctor blade to transfer the solution onto the mesh. The outcomes of this method 
are comparable to first approach, although it is more suited to large-scale industrial 
production. 
 
The SEM observation and the measurement of ionic conductivity indicate that there is 
minimal distinction between the first and third methods. While the membrane obtained 
in the second case exhibits poor ionic conductivity, this may be attributed to the inability 
of the two discontinuous calendaring processes to effectively bond the two layers of the 
membrane, resulting in the formation of a transmission channel that is prone to 
breakage. 
 
Fig 3.23 The morphology of the surface of the membrane embedded with PPS1. 
 
The figure 3.23 illustrates that when embedded with PPS1, the entire surface of the 
==PAGE:78==
membrane will exhibit openings where the meshes are interwoven. Upon magnification 
of these openings, the longitudinal fiber veins within the membrane will become visible. 
 
Fig 3.24 The SEM shot of the membrane scaled up to the nanometer scale. 
This figure demonstrates that at the nanometer level, the ion-solvating membrane 
remains a continuous, homegenous and dense membrane, with no pores or voids 
observed at the 100 nm level. In contrast, the continuously curved image in the figure 
represents the phenomenon of gold particles clustering together at the nanometer level. 
==PAGE:79==
 
Fig 3.25 The SEM image of the morphology after embedding PPS2 on the 100 μm 
scale. 
 
This figure 3.25 illustrates that the PPS mesh is firmly bonded to the polymer. No 
discernible cracks are evident. 
 
Fig 3.26 Enlarged SEM image of PPS2 enhanced membrane at the boundary between 
the grid and the membrane 
==PAGE:80==
This figure 3.26 demonstrates that the bonding between the membrane and the 
reinforcement mesh is good and that there is no significant separation at the nanometer 
level. This may indicate that both are chemically and physically well bonded. 
 
Fig 3.27 SEM performance of PEEK reinforced membrane 
The figure 3.27 illustrates that the PEEK and polymer appear to be in a distinct state of 
separation following drying, suggesting that the two are not as microscopically bonded 
as the previous PPS1 and PPS2 mesh This phenomenon is likely to result in membrane 
flaking during operation. 
 
The observations made by the SEM indicate that PPS 2 exhibits the most favorable 
bonding with the polymer, while PEEK displays the least favorable bonding with the 
polymer. 
 
The three enhanced membranes were also tested for electrolyte uptake and ionic 
conductivity. 
==PAGE:81==
 
 
Fig 3.28 The results of testing the weight loss and ionic conductivity of different 
reinforced ion-solvating membranes at different alkali concentrations. Also the figure 
below shows the ion-solvating membrane without reinforcing grid after water 
treatment at 60 degree Celsius. 
Following the evaporation of the solvent and the subsequent immersion of the 
membranes in water at 60 ℃ for a period of 7 x 24 hours, the reinforcement 
membranes were subjected to testing for electrolyte uptake and ionic conductivity. It 
can be observed from Fig 3.28 that the weight loss was slightly reduced in comparison 
to the ion-solvating membrane without enhancement. Furthermore, the reinforced 
membrane can maintain its length, width, and position in the 2D plane, regardless of 
==PAGE:82==
the concentration of alkali. This property represents a significant enhancement for 
applications in electrolysis stack. Membranes that are not reinforced will still exhibit 
slight wrinkles even after treatment with high-temperature water, due to the uneven 
stresses within the membrane at high lye concentrations of 30%. 
 
3.8 The effect of mesh reinforcement on the mechanical strength of the 
membrane. 
 
Fig. 3.29 Comparison of stress-strain curves between different reinforced membranes 
The volume of solution casted into the membrane and the size of the membrane were 
controlled in order to alter the membrane reinforcement scheme by varying the type of 
mesh. 
 
From the figure, it can be observed that the membrane without reinforcement exhibits 
a brief initial elastic linear region. At this early stage, the deformation is primarily a 
minor stretching of the molecular chains and a slight displacement of the side chains. 
The hydrogen bonds between the molecular chains remain unchanged. Subsequently, 
the yield zone is entered, at which point the stress reaches a peak. After the yield point, 
the molecular chains commence to slip and rearrange, with some of them breaking, 
==PAGE:83==
resulting in permanent plastic deformation. The second half of the curve is therefore 
characterized by a nearly horizontal straight line. This curve also represents the lowest 
strain before fracture of all the membranes. 
 
The remaining three membranes with reinforced mesh exhibit prolonged elastic 
deformation zones. Furthermore, the elastic deformation curves of these membranes 
are divided into two distinct sections. The initial segment exhibits a higher tensile 
strength due to the combined strength of the membrane and the mesh during the initial 
stage. After the membrane surpasses the elastic deformation region, the mesh remains 
in the elastic deformation region, resulting in a reduction in the slope. 
 
It can be observed that the tensile strength of membranes with reinforced meshes 
depends more on the thickness of the mesh than on the material itself. PEEK and PPS2 
have the same thickness, so the stress-strain curves of both are similar, whereas the 
PPS1 mesh has a stronger thickness and therefore a stronger tensile strength. 
 
 
3.9 Cell test 
From the results of previous experiments, it can be concluded that the optimal 
membrane is the ion-solvating membrane using PPS2 reinforcing mesh, which has been 
well treated in water at 60°C. The thicknesses of the membranes tested on cells in this 
experiment were 85 μm and 160 μm, which were casting using 10% PSU+PVP K90, 
with 4 ml and 8 ml on a 5.5 cm diameter surface dish. The reference membranes 
employed were commercial composite diaphragms, Zirfon UTP 500 and Zirfon UTP 
220 from Agfa, along with unreinforced ion-solvating membranes with a thickness of 
80 μm. 
 
3.9.1 Effect of temperature on ionic conductivity and operational performance of 
ion-solvating membranes. 
==PAGE:84==
 
Fig 3.30 The polarization curves of ion-solvaqting membrane (thickness 85 μm) with 
PPS2 reinforcing mesh at different temperatures. Both cathode and anode electrodes 
were nickel foam. The experiment was tested after the membrane was stabilized in the 
cell for 12h. 
The results of this experiment indicate that an increase in temperature leads to an 
enhancement in the ionic conductivity of the ion-solvating membrane. This can be 
observed in the decrease of the slope of the polarization curve following the 200 
mA/cm2 current density. Moreover, the temperature exerts a more pronounced influence 
on the catalytic activity of nickel foam. As the temperature increases, the polarization 
voltage in the polarization curve decreases. 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
Fig 3.31 The variation polarization curve of ion-solvating membrane (thickness 85 
μm) with PPS2 reinforcing mesh at different temperatures. The cathode and anode 
electrodes are nickel foam. The experiment was tested after the membrane was 
stabilized in the tank for 12h as well as 72h. 
 
The above figure demonstrates that the ion-solvating membrane exhibits a greater 
increase in ionic conductivity following prolonged operation at elevated temperatures. 
Considering the temperature sensitivity of the ion-solvating membrane observed in 
previous experiments, it may be concluded that the hydrophilicity of the ion-solvating 
membrane is further enhanced by high temperatures for extended periods, resulting in 
enhanced ionic conductivity. 
 
3.9.2 Effect of reinforcement mesh on the electrolytic properties of ion-solvating 
membranes 
==PAGE:86==
 
Fig 3.32 The polarization curves of ion-solvating membranes with and without 
reinforcing grids at 80 degrees Celsius in the electrolytic cell. 
The figure demonstrates that the polarization curves of the two are almost superimposed, 
indicating that the reinforcement mesh has no impact on the electrolysis performance 
of the ion-solvating membrane. 
 
3.9.3 Comparison of the performance of reinforced ion-solvating membranes of 
different thicknesses 
 
Fig 3.33 Polarization curve for membrane with different thickness 
==PAGE:87==
It can be observed that an increase in thickness results in an elevated ohmic impedance 
in the polarization curves of the ion-solvating membrane following simultaneous 
enhancement treatment at 60°C. 
 
However, from the analysis of ionic conductivity on Table 3.4,  thicker membranes 
have greater ionic conductivity 
 
3.9.4 Performance with better HER catalysts 
 
Fig 3.34 Comparison of polarization curves of Zirfon and enhanced ion-solvating 
membrane (thickness 80 μm) at 80 °C. The anodic catalysts were all nickel foam. And 
the cathodic catalysts are nickel foam and NiMo alloy, respectively. 
 
The graph illustrates that the ion-solvating membrane has demonstrated an enhanced 
ionic conductivity following a prolonged operational period. Furthermore, the 
electrolysis performance exceeds that of the zirfon UTP 500 with the use of a superior 
HER catalyst.  
 
It can be observed in Fig 3.34 that the catalyst plays a pivotal role throughout the entire 
electrolysis process. A catalyst of sufficient quality can significantly reduce the 
polarization impedance, thereby enhancing the overall performance of the electrolysis 
==PAGE:88==
cell. The utilization of a superior non-noble metal catalyst in the OER reaction will 
result in the performance of ion-solvating membranes in alkaline solution approaching 
that of PEM electrolysis. This represents a significant opportunity for the marketable 
application of ion-solvating membranes. 
 
Fig 3.35 The polarization curves of ion-solvating membranes, Zirfon500, Zirfon220 at 
80°C. Nickel foam was used for both cathode and anode. 
 
The Fig 3.35 illustrates that Zirfon 220 exhibits enhanced ionic conductivity and 
reduced ohmic impedance, attributed to the micro-channels of the composite diaphragm 
at the 0.1 μm level. However, a dense ion-solvating membrane is naturally more 
effective in terms of gas barrier. 
 
The ionic conductivity of the co-blended membrane did not show any drop after 72 
hours of prolonged operation under 200mA/cm2, and no signs of damage or degradation 
for the membrane were found after disassembly. The cathode catalyst electrode 
appeared to be partially peeled off as shown in the Fig 3.36. 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
Fig 3.36 Reinforced membrane and cathode electrode after 72 hours of operation 
 
3.9.5 Conclusion for cell test 
 
Table 3.4 Overall comparison for different membranes at 80 ℃ 
 
From the above test, it can be found that the area resistance of the blend film is at the 
same level as that of zirfon220 in Table 3.4, which means that the blended film has a 
great application potential for industry. At the same time, the 80μm thickness of the 
membrane with reinforcement mesh can also achieve good mechanical strength. Due 
to the time schedule, the durability and gas permeability tests need to be supplemented 
with additional experiments to fully evaluate the performance of the membranes in the 
future. 
 
==PAGE:90==
CHAPTER   4 
Conclusion and Outlook 
 
The present study focuses on the reinforcement strategy for ion-solvating membranes. 
The membrane system in focus is the blend membrane system of PSU and PVP. The 
present study investigated the effects of PVP molecular weight, thickness, and process 
parameters such as temperature on the blend membrane and the optimization through a 
series of experiments.  
 
The sensitivity of the blend membrane to temperature and alkali concentration was 
empirically validated. The optimal treatment after solvent evaporation is water bath in 
60℃ to ‘active’ the membrane.  
 
In parallel, the electrolyte uptake of the ion-solvating membrane, represented by the 
PSU+PVP blended membrane, was investigated in depth. The mechanical properties 
and stability of the ion-solvating membranes were significantly enhanced by the 
incorporation of polymer mesh. Additionally, the optimal mesh choice for the blend 
membrane was identified. The electrolysis test demonstrated that the reinforced blend 
membrane exhibited excellent performance with a better area resistance than Zirfon 
UTP 500 and m-PBI membranes. This research indicates that the neutral hydrophilic 
polymer system is a highly promising direction, with the potential to achieve 
comparable performance at a significantly reduced cost. 
 
The novel concept of ion-solvating membranes represents a significant advancement in 
the field of ion conductive membrane research, particularly in the context of water 
electrolysis, fuel cells and flow batteries. It is possible to use hydrophilic polymers 
==PAGE:91==
without functional groups as seperators, which exhibits excellent performance. 
Furthermore, MMMS(mix matrix membrane) and other similar materials and 
application in ultra filtration and reverse osmosis could also be inspired to be employed 
as separators in these two technologies. Ion-solvating membranes represent a Pandora's 
box of possibilities, opening up new avenues for hydrogen energy and the world's 
carbon neutralization process.
==PAGE:92==
Reference: 
(1) Muradov, N. Z.; Veziroğlu, T. N. “Green” Path from Fossil-Based to Hydrogen Economy: An 
Overview of Carbon-Neutral Technologies. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 2008, 33 (23), 6804–6839. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2008.08.054. 
(2) Pahwa, P. K.; Pahwa, G. K. Hydrogen Economy; The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), 
2014. 
(3) Lee, B.; Chae, H.; Choi, N. H.; Moon, C.; Moon, S.; Lim, H. Economic Evaluation with 
Sensitivity and Profitability Analysis for Hydrogen Production from Water Electrolysis in 
Korea. 
Int. 
J. 
Hydrog. 
Energy 
2017, 
10 
(42), 
6462–6471. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2016.12.153. 
(4) Valera-Medina, A.; Hatem, F.; Azad, A.; Dedoussi, I.; de Joannon, M.; Fernandes, R.; Glarborg, 
P.; Hashemi, H.; He, X.; Mashruk, S.; Mcgowan, J.; Mounaim-Rouselle, C.; Ortiz Prado, A.; 
Ortiz-Valera, A.; Rossetti, I.; Shu, B.; Yehia, M.; Xiao, H.; Costa, M. Review on Ammonia as 
a Potential Fuel: From Synthesis to Economics. Energy Fuels 2021, XXXX. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c03685. 
(5) IRENA. Green Hydrogen Cost Reduction: Scaling up Electrolysers to Meet the 1.5C Climate 
Goal. Int. Renew. Energy Agency Abu Dhabi 2020. 
(6) State-of-the art CAPEX data for water electrolysers, and their impact on renewable hydrogen 
price 
settings 
- 
ScienceDirect. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360319918324157 (accessed 2024-06-16). 
(7) Fabbrizzi, L. The Invention of Volta’s Pile and Its Diffusion in Europe at War in the Year 1800. 
Pure Appl. Chem. 2023, 95 (11), 1141–1157. https://doi.org/10.1515/pac-2023-0504. 
(8) Brauns, J.; Turek, T. Alkaline Water Electrolysis Powered by Renewable Energy: A Review. 
Processes 2020, 8 (2), 248. https://doi.org/10.3390/pr8020248. 
(9) Electrochemical power sources: fundamentals, systems, and applications : hydrogen 
production by water electrolysis / [1&nbsp;ed.] 9780128194256, 0128194251. dokumen.pub. 
https://dokumen.pub/electrochemical-power-sources-fundamentals-systems-and-applications-
hydrogen-production-by-water-electrolysis-1nbsped-9780128194256-0128194251.html 
(accessed 2024-06-16). 
(10) Guo, Z. Alkaline water electrolysis technologies. 
(11) Performance analysis of short-side-chain Aquivion® perfluorosulfonic acid polymer for proton 
exchange 
membrane 
water 
electrolysis 
- 
ScienceDirect. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0376738814003299 (accessed 2024-06-16). 
(12) Klose, C.; Saatkamp, T.; Münchinger, A.; Bohn, L.; Titvinidze, G.; Breitwieser, M.; Kreuer, K.-
D.; Vierrath, S. All-Hydrocarbon MEA for PEM Water Electrolysis Combining Low Hydrogen 
Crossover and High Efficiency. Adv. Energy Mater. 2020, 10 (14), 1903995. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/aenm.201903995. 
(13) Dang, J.; Yang, F.; Li, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Ouyang, M.; Hu, S. Experiments and Microsimulation of 
High-Pressure Single-Cell PEM Electrolyzer. Appl. Energy 2022, 321, 119351. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2022.119351. 
(14) High-performance anion exchange membrane water electrolyzers with a current density of 7.68 
A cm−2 and a durability of 1000 hours - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing). 
https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2021/ee/d1ee02642a (accessed 2024-06-16). 
==PAGE:93==
(15) Pandiyan, A.; Uthayakumar, A.; Subrayan, R.; Cha, S. W.; Krishna Moorthy, S. B. Review of 
Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cells: A Clean Energy Strategy for Hydrogen Generation. Nanomater. 
Energy 2019, 8 (1), 2–22. https://doi.org/10.1680/jnaen.18.00009. 
(16) Technological development of hydrogen production by solid oxide electrolyzer cell (SOEC) - 
ScienceDirect. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360319908002255 
(accessed 2024-06-16). 
(17) Green 
hydrogen 
cost 
reduction. 
https://www.irena.org/publications/2020/Dec/Green-
hydrogen-cost-reduction (accessed 2024-06-16). 
(18) Koponen, J. Review of Water Electrolysis Technologies and Design of Renewable Hydrogen 
Production Systems. Veden elektrolyysiteknologiat ja uusiutuvan vedyn tuotantojärjestelmien 
suunnittelu 2015. 
(19) Huang, D.; Zhong, Z.; Ai, X.; Hu, K.; Xiong, B.; Wen, Q.; Fang, J.; Cheng, S. Size Design 
Strategy for Scaling up Alkaline Water Electrolysis Stack Integrated with Renewable Energy 
Source: A Multiphysics Modeling Approach. Energy Convers. Manag. 2024, 300, 117955. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2023.117955. 
(20) Reyes, 
Á. 
Balance 
of 
Plant 
(BoP) 
of 
an 
Electrolyser 
| 
SynerHy. 
https://synerhy.com/en/2022/02/balance-of-plant-bop-of-an-electrolyser/ (accessed 2024-06-
17). 
(21) Current status, research trends, and challenges in water electrolysis science and technology - 
ScienceDirect. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360319920310715 
(accessed 2024-06-16). 
(22) Yang, F.; Wang, T.; Deng, X.; Dang, J.; Huang, Z.; Hu, S.; Li, Y.; Ouyang, M. Review on 
Hydrogen Safety Issues: Incident Statistics, Hydrogen Diffusion, and Detonation Process. Int. 
J. Hydrog. Energy 2021, 46 (61), 31467–31488. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.07.005. 
(23) Aili, D.; Wright, A. G.; Kraglund, M. R.; Jankova, K.; Holdcroft, S.; Jensen, J. O. Towards a 
Stable Ion-Solvating Polymer Electrolyte for Advanced Alkaline Water Electrolysis. J. Mater. 
Chem. A 2017, 5 (10), 5055–5066. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6TA10680C. 
(24) Olin commits to phasing out asbestos diaphragm cells. https://cen.acs.org/policy/chemical-
regulation/Olin-commits-phasing-asbestos-diaphragm/101/i12 (accessed 2024-06-16). 
(25) Brauns, J.; Schönebeck, J.; Kraglund, M. R.; Aili, D.; Hnát, J.; Žitka, J.; Mues, W.; Jensen, J. 
O.; Bouzek, K.; Turek, T. Evaluation of Diaphragms and Membranes as Separators for Alkaline 
Water Electrolysis. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2021, 168 (1), 014510. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-
7111/abda57. 
(26) Schalenbach, M.; Lueke, W.; Stolten, D. Hydrogen Diffusivity and Electrolyte Permeability of 
the Zirfon PERL Separator for Alkaline Water Electrolysis. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2016, 163 (14), 
F1480. https://doi.org/10.1149/2.1251613jes. 
(27) Vincent, I.; Kruger, A.; Bessarabov, D. Hydrogen Production by Water Electrolysis with an 
Ultrathin Anion-Exchange Membrane (AEM). Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 2018, 13 (12), 11347–
11358. https://doi.org/10.20964/2018.12.84. 
(28) Parrondo, J.; G. Arges, C.; Niedzwiecki, M.; B. Anderson, E.; E. Ayers, K.; Ramani, V. 
Degradation of Anion Exchange Membranes Used for Hydrogen Production by Ultrapure 
Water Electrolysis. RSC Adv. 2014, 4 (19), 9875–9879. https://doi.org/10.1039/C3RA46630B. 
(29) Ion-solvating membranes as a new approach towards high rate alkaline electrolyzers - Energy 
& 
Environmental 
Science 
(RSC 
Publishing) 
DOI:10.1039/C9EE00832B. 
==PAGE:94==
https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2019/ee/c9ee00832b (accessed 2024-06-16). 
(30) Xia, Y. Ion-Solvating Membranes for Alkaline Water Electrolysis. PhD dissertation. Denmark 
technology university 2024. 
(31) David Aili; Kraglund, M. R.; Tavacoli, J.; Chatzichristodoulou, C.; Jensen, J. O. Polysulfone-
Polyvinylpyrrolidone Blend Membranes as Electrolytes in Alkaline Water Electrolysis. J. 
Membr. Sci. 2020, 598, 117674. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2019.117674. 
(32) Kim, J. H.; Min, B. R.; Park, H. C.; Won, J.; Kang, Y. S. Phase Behavior and Morphological 
Studies of Polyimide/PVP/Solvent/Water Systems by Phase Inversion. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
2001, 81 (14), 3481–3488. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.1804. 
(33) Saljoughi, E.; Mohammadi, T. Cellulose Acetate (CA)/Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) Blend 
Asymmetric Membranes: Preparation, Morphology and Performance. Desalination 2009, 249 
(2), 850–854. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.desal.2008.12.066. 
(34) Chakrabarty, B.; Ghoshal, A. K.; Purkait, M. K. Preparation, Characterization and Performance 
Studies of Polysulfone Membranes Using PVP as an Additive. J. Membr. Sci. 2008, 315 (1), 
36–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2008.02.027. 
(35) Zhang, M.; Nguyen, Q. T.; Ping, Z. Hydrophilic Modification of Poly (Vinylidene Fluoride) 
Microporous 
Membrane. 
J. 
Membr. 
Sci. 
2009, 
327 
(1), 
78–86. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2008.11.020. 
(36) Guo, Z.; Xu, X.; Xiang, Y.; Lu, S.; Ping Jiang, S. New Anhydrous Proton Exchange Membranes 
for High-Temperature Fuel Cells Based on PVDF–PVP Blended Polymers. J. Mater. Chem. A 
2015, 3 (1), 148–155. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4TA04952G. 
(37) Reilly, P. M.; Van Der Hoff, B. M. E.; Ziogas, M. Statistical Study of the Application of the 
Huggins Equation to Measure Intrinsic Viscosity. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 1979, 24 (10), 2087–
2100. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.1979.070241002. 
(38) Silva, R. F.; De Francesco, M.; Pozio, A. Solution-Cast Nafion® Ionomer Membranes: 
Preparation and Characterization. Electrochimica Acta 2004, 49 (19), 3211–3219. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2004.02.035. 
(39) Comprehensive impedance investigation of low-cost anion exchange membrane electrolysis for 
large-scale hydrogen production | Scientific Reports. https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-
020-80683-6 (accessed 2024-06-16). 
(40) Kazi, D. R. An Introduction To SEM Techniques: For Beginners. 2011. 
(41) Introduction 
to 
compact 
NMR: 
A 
review 
of 
methods 
- 
ScienceDirect. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165993615301886 (accessed 2024-06-16). 
(42) Loría-Bastarrachea, M. I.; Herrera-Kao, W.; Cauich-Rodríguez, J. V.; Cervantes-Uc, J. M.; 
Vázquez-Torres, H.; Ávila-Ortega, A. A TG/FTIR Study on the Thermal Degradation of 
Poly(Vinyl Pyrrolidone). 2010. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10973-010-1061-9. 
(43) Saadatkhah, N.; Carillo Garcia, A.; Ackermann, S.; Leclerc, P.; Latifi, M.; Samih, S.; Patience, 
G. S.; Chaouki, J. Experimental Methods in Chemical Engineering: Thermogravimetric 
Analysis—TGA. Can. J. Chem. Eng. 2020, 98 (1), 34–43. https://doi.org/10.1002/cjce.23673. 
(44) Film & Membrane Casting Technology. IPCO. https://ipco.com/industries/pharma-
medical/filmcasting/ (accessed 2024-06-17). 
(45) Fick’s Laws of Diffusion. Wikipedia; 2024. 
(46) Kim, D. W.; Jee, M. H.; Baik, D. H. Effects of Polyvinylpyrrolidone Additive on Structures and 
Properties of Poly(m-Phenylene Isophthalamide) Hollow Fiber Membranes -Experiment 
==PAGE:95==
Observation 
and 
Computation 
Approach. 
Polymer 
2024, 
307, 
127259. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2024.127259. 
(47) Anion exchange membranes: The effect of reinforcement in water and electrolyte - 
ScienceDirect. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0376738823006014 
(accessed 2024-06-17). 
 
