==PAGE:1==
A software system for young patient anxiety
recognition in emergency care unit setting
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit
setting
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Maja Sandra Krzeminska
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, DK Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000­0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000­00­0000­000­0] (printed version)
==PAGE:4==
This thesis has been prepared over 5 months at the Cognitive Systems Section, De­
partment of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, at the Technical University of
Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfillment for the degree Master of Science in Engineering, MSc
Eng.
It is assumed that the reader has a basic knowledge in the areas of software engineering.
Maja Sandra Krzeminska ­ s220290
Signature
Date
ii
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
May 31st 2024
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
When pediatric patients are admitted to an emergency room, they are prone to experience
anxiety, which can not only hinder further treatment, but also affect patient’s comfort. To
mitigate that, optimized patient anixety monitoring along with various anxiety interventions
could be employed.
It is quite a challenge to objectively quantify anxiety, thus the data sources can be diverse,
from eye tracking, through physiological data, to tracking VR activity. A software architec­
ture could be employed to efficiently aggregate and synchronize data from heterogenous
stimuli that could be used for anxiety research, or eventually for anxiety monitoring pur­
poses.
This thesis describes the software requirements, system design, solution architecture and
its test evaluation focusing primarily on anxiety data aggregation purpose, and secondarily
on near real­time anxiety monitoring.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
iii
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
Sincere gratitude and appreciation to the following people for their support and guidance
throughout the project:
Per Bækgaard, Associate Professor, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, Technical University of Denmark
Chaudhary Muhammad Aqdus Ilyas, Postdoc, Department of Applied Mathematics and
Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark
Michael Deininger, Associate Professor, Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineer­
ing, Technical University of Denmark
Gitte Maria Flyger Würtz, Researcher and Clinical Nursing Specialist, Herlev Hospital
Department for Children and Young People
iv
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.3
Problem statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
Thesis summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Related work
5
2.1
Related systems on the market ­ data sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Related systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Methodology
9
3.1
Agile approach and plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Software design approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Requirements
13
4.1
Definitions and facts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
Functional requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.3
Compliance requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.4
Performance requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.5
Interoperability requirements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4.6
Monitorability requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.7
Scalability requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
5
Design Documentation
19
5.1
System context diagram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
5.2
Quality attribute breakdown . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
5.3
Overview of reference architectures and technologies
. . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4
Deployability and user manual
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
6
Privacy and research protocol
49
6.1
Research protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
6.2
Privacy and informed consent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7
Testing documentation
51
7.1
Manual testing while prototyping
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.2
Performance
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
7.3
User flow tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
7.4
Overview of the extent of requirement implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
8
Future work
59
8.1
Discussion
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
8.2
Full scope roadmap
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
9
Conclusions
65
9.1
How to synchronize and collect data from multiple health data stimuli in a
configurable way?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
v
==PAGE:8==
9.2
How to maintain proper data security and compliance of the system pro­
cessing? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Bibliography
67
.1
System Requirements Specification (SRS)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
.2
Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
.3
Threat modelling report
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
.4
Rolling wave plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
.5
HCP interview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
.6
GDPR informational letter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
.7
GDPR consent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
.8
User manual
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
.9
Requirement fulfillment overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113
.10
Deployment manual . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 120
vi
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
The American Psychological Association defines anxiety as a tense emotion accompa­
nied by worrying thoughts that also manifests through physical symptoms like sweating
or increased heart rate [1]. Feeling anxious is undeniably common ­ the Eurobarometer
survey conducted in June 2023 has shown that almost half of the total EU population has
experienced emotional or mental issues, such as feeling depressed or anxious, in the
preceding 12 months [2]. While having an anxiety disorder can become a mental health
issue over time, occasional anxiety is a normal part of life, not only as an adult, but also
growing up. An unexpected visit in a hospital, where a child finds themselves separated
from friends and family, surrounded by strangers, out of control, and full of confusion
and misunderstanding about the upcoming procedures, could be such a daily­life anxiety
inducing situation which anyone could have experienced in their childhood [3].
The presence of anxiety in pediatric patients often hinders further treatment, as children
may instinctively react defensively when approached by health care providers. Moreover,
there is a risk of developing medical phobias, like the infamous white coat syndrome. The
younger the patient, the more they are prone to experience anxiety, since their cogni­
tive ability to understand and reason about having to undergo uncomfortable or painful
procedures is still limited, just as their ability to manage their emotions. In order to max­
imize patient comfort and minimize treatment hurdles, anxiety mitigation and recognition
methods could be studied.
There is substantial research effort put into finding ways to mitigate anxiety in pediatric
patients who await further treatment having been previously triaged. The methods can
be categorized into:
• distraction ­ active gamification using popular tablet games like Angry Birds or Fruit
Ninja [4] or virtual reality with Multiple Object Tracking game [5], or more passive
traditional tools such as toys, watching TV and storytelling [6]
• process and people management ­ CARE principle [3], music therapy [7]
• pharmacology ­ administering sedating or anxiety­reducing medications like mida­
zolam [4], or other benzodiazepines
• other techniques such as blowing bubbles or balloons, guided imagery, hypnosis,
or sucrose solutions [6]
However, when administering mitigation methods, one might attempt to assess anxiety
beforehand, so that the method can be adjusted and tailored to the current anxiety level,
and thus optimally effective. It is especially of great importance when faced with a decision
of applying pharmacological solutions like administering medications with possible non­
trivial side effects as opposed to going for a distracting solution like virtual reality games.
The baseline method that health care providers often opt for is behavioral observation or
subjective self­reports. For the latter, a scale tool of a range of faces from really sad to
quite smiling can be used, as the young patient is asked to point to the face that best
resembles how they currently feel (depicted on picture 1.1).
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: Faces scale tool for anxiety self­assessment
However, since the emotion of anxiety is quite difficult to objectively quantify or assess, the
progress of technology makes evaluating anxiety through biometric data analysis more
feasible and promising. There is a plethora of health vitals types that can provide insights
into anxiety levels, like electroencephalography (EEG), electromyography (EMG), blood
pressure or heart rate, galvanic skin conduction and electrodermal activity, eye tracking
movement [8]. Such data could be combined with metadata gathered during gamification
exercises eg. reaction speed, body movement tracking, or facial feature recognition to
recognize emotion while videoing the patient. Some other stimuli could also be consid­
ered, especially significant changes to the patient’s environment like a healthcare profes­
sional attempting to administer painful treatment, or a parent suddenly joining or leaving,
that could pose as event markers. Historical health records and interview data could also
be possibly beneficial to combine with.
The sheer diversity of described anxiety data together with the size of some of the data
streams ­ for example, eye tracking devices can generate around 500 messages per
second when streaming ­ motivates automation and optimization of such data collection,
that could be provided through a scalable and configurable software architecture. Such
facilitated data collection could provide sources for anxiety research and data analysis, or
even near real­time monitoring of anxiety levels.
1.2
Background
This thesis is a part of the Anxiety Detection and Reduction in Children’s Emergency
Care project done by DTU in a collaboration with Herlev Hospital in Herlev, Denmark.
The project aims to develop tools that allow for quick and easy, yet objective assessment
of anxiety in pediatric patients awaiting treatment in an emergency care unit setting. Fol­
lowing this, and based on the assessed level of anxiety, a variety of tools can be designed
2
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:11==
and tested to help medical professionals to intervene and calm patients prior to treatment,
thus improving patient experience and optimizing the workflow of healthcare profession­
als. The project focuses on children aged 5­7, since they are usually the most difficult to
reason with.
When designing and building medical software processing health data, one must con­
sider the compliance requirements imposed by EU’s General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) and Medical Device Regulation (MDR). In order for any such software product
to be released to market for commercial use (and also to stay competitive with other
providers), the software product needs to have compliance evidence documented, typi­
cally in some form of process or software documentation, ready for audit. GDPR is mostly
considered with ensuring proper privacy of sensitive data through means like encryption
or pseudonymization. Since data subjects in the project are underage, GDPR imposes
some extra compliance conditions. MDR, even though it depends on the type of data pro­
cessed, usually requires obtaining a CE marking, which is made possible by running and
properly documenting a clinical trial. Compliance requirements will be described in more
detail under the Requirements section 4. Due to this complexity and the limited timeframe,
the compliance considerations described in this thesis will be minimal and mostly done
theoretically, while the actual focus will be placed on lab­based research purposes.
When it comes to possible health data stimuli, this thesis will focus on making the system
configurable to be able to connect to diverse types of devices or sensors with minimal mod­
ifications. Such devices could include eye trackers or other physilogical data sources like
smart wristbands, with user­provided event marker data to reflect environmental changes.
1.3
Problem statement
Having young patients’ well­being in mind, it is of great importance to leverage the tech­
nology tools and develop more anxiety recognition and mitigation methods that could be
used in an emergency care unit setting. The current status quo in pediatric emergency
units creates an opportunity for new anxiety assessment solutions.
Therefore, this thesis will explore the following problem:
How can we automate heterogenous stimuli data collection in an emergency care
unit setting?
There are also subquestions:
How to synchronize and collect data from multiple health data stimuli in a config­
urable way?
How to maintain proper data security and compliance of the system processing?
1.4
Thesis summary
Insights were collected through literature review, interviews with stakeholders like Herlev
hospital health care professionals or thesis supervisors, brainstorming software architec­
ture and design, and prototyping.
Chapter 2 describes the related work, both similar commercial health data collection sys­
tems, as well as applicable research.
Chapter 3 outlines the methodology, with which the thesis was approached, both organi­
zationally and from the engineering perspective.
Chapter 4 describes the requirements.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
3
==PAGE:12==
Chapter 5 outlines the system design, through quality attribute breakdown visualized
through models and diagrams, to the overview of applicable technologies and available
subsystems to be used in the design, concluded by the choice of minimum viable product
(MVP) system setup design.
Chapter 5 outlines the testing performed on the developed prototype
Chapter 6 describes the future steps for extending the system past thesis MVP function­
ality, considering scaling, security and compliance.
Chapter 7 contains conclusions.
The appendix includes documents like:
• System Requirements Specification
• Data Protection Impact Assessment
• Privacy policy, research protocol and GDPR consent contents
• Threat modelling report
• Rolling wave plan
• HCP interview
• User guide
4
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:13==
2
Related work
2.1
Related systems on the market ­ data sources
When it comes to existing systems that collect or analyze patients vitals or other stimuli,
there are two main categories of software in use ­ real­time monitoring systems used
in intensive care units or mobile health applications for remote vital data tracking and
collection.
2.1.1
Intensive care unit vitals monitoring systems
In intensive care units, there is a natural need for monitoring various patient vitals like heart
rate, blood pressure, temperature, respiration rate, and more, not only to enable health
care providers to make diagnostics and treatment decisions, but also to warn about unex­
pected changes. There is a plethora of software+hardware systems that make it possible,
for example Philips Healthcare or GE Centricity Critical Care. Since the primary focus of
these systems is to monitor and oftentimes visualizing only snapshots of data is deemed
sufficient for the health care providers (HCPs), they do not usually provide much of a
robust data storing functionality [9]. Data processing and analysis functionality is thus
limited as well, although there is some research effort into designing pattern recognition
monitoring software [10]. Another great challenge is the interoperability, as most mon­
itoring devices are designed to work in a standalone mode. There are medical device
standards to improve interoperability being developed, like ISO/IEEE 11073 and ASTM
F­2761 (Integrated Clinical Environment, ICE), although they are not too widely adopted
yet [9].
2.1.2
Mobile health apps
The increased popularity of smart devices, like phones or watches, has created an oppor­
tunity for mobile application growth, especially for healthcare purposes. From electronic
patient record management, to emergency telemedicine, teleradiology, and home moni­
toring, such distributed systems can facilitate periodic patient vitals monitoring, or provide
quicker HCP access. A lot of times, they aim to facilitate disease management, eg. when
patients are physically at home while under treatment [11]. They are usually designed to
be standalone systems with a specific objective, eg. facilitating diabetes management,
by providing an interface for a general practitioner to view daily sugar levels, chat with a
patient, adjust insulin dosage etc.
2.1.3
Comparison
While mobile systems are naturally wireless and distributed, ICU monitoring systems are
based on wired connections. Many mobile systems do aim to store or analyze some
limited amount of vitals data, whereas ICU monitoring systems usually do not have that
funcitonality. Both types of systems are usually designed to work in a standalone mode,
which points to the great challenge of interoperability of medical devices [9]. It also ap­
plies to the challenge of detecting anxiety data trends, which has a chance to be more
accurate when combined with past health record or interview data, according to HCPs
(HCP interviews appended .5).
2.2
Related systems
The related research papers were found with the following search queries:
• time series data streaming software
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
5
==PAGE:14==
• streaming data synchronization software (hospital)
• distributed time series health data messaging
The raw set of about 200 was filtered through title and abstract evaluation, with the fol­
lowing papers being particularly relevant.
Neubert et al in [12] propose a configurable mobile, cloud and web server based archi­
tecture able to acquire data from heterogeneous sources like the Fitbit Blaze, Nokia BPM
cloud­based devices or Bluetooth wireless sensors like Mio Alpha, some with their own
SDKs provided by the vendors. The system focuses on configurability, rather than real­
time messaging. The communication is synchronous, where one module requests data
for a given time range, which is then pre­processed and stored in a cloud. There are no
compliance considerations, however there are some security measures like using HTTPS
for data transfer, data anonymization and access control.
The Lab Streaming Layer (LSL) is an open­source software framework for multimodal
data recording, which has become a popular software to use in experimental trials and
research context. It can interface with heterogeneous data sources like eye tracking,
electrophysiology, video motion capture, and AR/VR. A lot of these devices come with their
own SDKs that can be enriched with an LSL plugin ­ there is a plethora of existing plugins
for various devices, code available on Github [13]. LSL streams data asynchronously
over a local area network (LAN), it also offers data collection through its LabRecorder and
there are plenty of compatible visualizers. It can also scale to complex setups, recording
from over 40 LSL data streams for multiple hours [14].
It could be argued that LSL, especially its LabRecorder, imposes some limitations. LSL
recording sessions do not allow reconfiguration, like removing some devices or adding
new ones. Moreover, it does not offer any standard database connectors while working on
a file system and does not really allow for other types of input, like test markers. Therefore,
there has been some optimization effort in designing LSRec [15]. It is a system based
on LSL that can additionally maintain synchronization with experimental test markers with
low delay, providing 3 different sync modes.
The Lab Streaming Layer seems to be popularly used in the research community, be­
ing integrable with so many heterogeneous data sources. With proper synchronization
levels, it is a messaging system with message queues called streams at its core. Com­
mercially, Kafka is such a popular messaging platform that has become almost a standard
middleware solution for distributed, scalable software systems streaming big amounts of
data. There seems to be a great opportunity in combining these two systems into one,
to leverage LSL’s great source device interoperability and Kafka’s sea of popular data
processing, storing and visualizing integrations. Such a concept is utilized by Maninder
Pal Singh in [16]. The architecture suggested focuses on creating a unified streaming and
non­streaming data flow pipeline, from data acquisition, through processing and storing,
to visualization. It is done from a functional and performance perspective, to deliver a
real­time visualization and analysis framework to work in an isolated setting.
Another notable research­aimed set of open­source software components and frame­
works is DTU’s Copenhagen Research Platform (CARP). It aims at helping researchers
build mHealth applications for digital phenotyping by providing various software compo­
nents, all of them based on the common domain model. Cloud server­side, there is a web
services component running the infrastructure to manage users, studies and data, along
with a web portal UI for a user to provide it with input, and a Gardener Service that can
collect data in a server­to­server setup. For the mobile and wearable sensing, CARP Mo­
6
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:15==
bile Sensing component provides a framework to build cross­platform mobile applications
for mobile health. There are also frameworks for collecting user­generated data, like the
CARP Research Package, which supports creation and collection of the informed consent
on a smartphone [17].
Related technologies and platforms are investigated further in section 5.3.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
7
==PAGE:16==
8
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:17==
3
Methodology
3.1
Agile approach and plan
Agile development and project management methodology, its roots stemming from the
IT industry, has become the baseline software engineering approach in the recent years
­ according to Direct.ai [18], software development industry has a leading agile adoption
rate of 86%. Agile development emphasizes maximizing delivered value through reg­
ular reprioritization based on evaluating solution increments with stakeholders. On the
organizational side, agile planning is often realized by utilizing the rolling wave concept
­ immediate increments are planned with greater detail than the later uncertain ones to
minimize waste and reduce work in progress. This thesis was also planned using the
aforementioned concept, defining the increments as sprints, as suggested by the widely
adopted agile Scrum framework, with each task defined together with its definition of done
(the rolling wave plan is attached as the appendix .4). The definition of done is important
from the work­in­progress perspective, since it clearly determines when a task can be
deemed as done improving transparency. It also helps to enforce regular testing, as pro­
totype increments are always to be verified with a minimal unit or integration test.
The tasks can be categorized into the following:
• requirements and constraints
• research
• design
• documentation
• prototype
• test
• report
Naturally, first sprints contain most requirements and constraints tasks, in order to in­
formatively scope the solution, like interviewing HCPs or researching GDPR and MDR
implications. Tasks within the prototype or report categories are less defined and placed
in the latter sprints, as their definitions depend on the preceding design tasks.
The plan is complemented by a Double Diamond milestone roadmap diagram depicted
at the following figure.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 3.1: Double Diamond milestone roadmap for the thesis project
The Double Diamond milestone roadmap is the reference timeframe for the emerging
rolling wave plan and its sprints organized based on the Double Diamond design process
model.
Agile approach has been chosen for the sake of this thesis, not only because of its popu­
larity and familiarity, but also to maximize the thesis’s usability for the sake of the Anxiety
Detection and Reduction in Children’s Emergency Care project and its data collection
needs, within the thesis time frame.
Methods used in the problem phase are as follows:
• compliance research
• a system requirements specification (SRS) document
• Easy Approach to Requirements Syntax (EARS) requirement syntax framework
• researching similar technologies and systems
• attribute­driven design
• threat modeling
• diagramming and modeling to document the design
Methods used in the solution phase are as follows:
• prototyping
• manual verification testing
• performance testing
• user flow testing
10
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:19==
3.2
Software design approach
The approach to designing the architecture of the software system was based on the
popular Software Architecture in Practice [19] textbook. It uses attribute­driven design to
gradually put together a software architecture basing on the quality attribute requirements
and their implications. The quality attributes of interest for this thesis include:
• functionality
• performance
• availability
• interoperability
• modifiability
• security
• scalability
• modifiability
• usability
• testability
Each quality attribute can be analyzed by coming up with general scenarios that the sys­
tem should support ­ a scenario describes a stimulus coming out of a source acting upon
an artifact within a specific environment and causing some system response. For exam­
ple,
Table 3.1: Example interoperability scenario ­ eye tracking glasses being plugged into the
system
Scenario part
Description
source
eye tracking glasses
stimulus
user defines and requests a compatible listener
artifact
system
environment
normal operation
system response
a proper listener process is started
system response measure
user is informed about listener starting
Next, architectural patterns and tactiques that can facilitate found scenarios can be ana­
lyzed and trade­offs between some quality attributes, like security vs. performance, can
be reasoned about. Supported by diagramming, a modular system architecture is being
drawn starting from high level architectural pattern diagrams to lower level allocation or
component and connector diagrams.
Naturally, one can argue that the modular design produces some overhead work of set­
ting up separate modules or servers, each with their own resources, while it hypotheti­
cally should be enough for a minimal prototype to use a simpler, eg. 3 tier architecture
model. Nevertheless, modular architecture is a great way to implement separation of
concern through a concise design that can be modified and scaled easily. It was chosen
in this thesis to better address the configurability mentioned in the problem statement in
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
11
==PAGE:20==
section 1.3, to cater for the complexity of the domain requiring some security, compli­
ance measures, great stimuli source interoperability, as well as both synchronous and
asynchronous communication, and to facilitate the future work of adding data processing,
searching and visualizing functionalities on top of the MVP described in this thesis.
Initially, requirement gathering and analysis is a complement to the architecture design
process. Having decided on the MVP requirement set, however, prototyping becomes
a new such complement to validate design assumptions and check what works best to
satisfy stakeholder objectives.
Along the entire process, thought experiments and discussions with the supervisors as
stakeholders have been held to ensure proper thesis prioritization and to reason about
design decisions.
12
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:21==
4
Requirements
When engineering system requirements, one must acknowledge the imprecision of the
natural language, which is usually used to brainstorm and document requirements, for
example in a system requirements specification (SRS) .1. Minimizing error propagation at
the requirement analysis stage is of vital importance from a project risk management per­
spective, since the cost of changes grows gradually as the system development process
progresses. It is also very important from the quality perspective, as it directly influences
the design process.
In an effort to improve requirement precision, requirement frameworks could provide a
way to unify requirement syntax and phrasing. One such framework is called The Easy
Approach to Requirements Syntax (EARS) developed by Rolls­Royce PLC in 2009 and
adopted by many organizations worldwide, like eg. NASA, ever since. EARS has an easy
and lightweight requirement syntax described here [20] and it has been used in this thesis.
The requirements have been elicited while interviewing HCPs or discussing and having
thought experiments with the supervisors of the thesis and they have been organized
into quality attribute sections below. Complete SRS including both MVP and post­MVP
requirements has been appended .1.
4.1
Definitions and facts
Aforementioned SRS .1 is a main requirements document. Good SRS requirements are
unique, objective, concise, transparent, and trackable to manage change requests and
define the scope of the solution as good as possible. For greater clarity, it is a good
practice to include explanations of specific terms or phrases used in the requirement text.
Some of the facts and definitions relevant for this thesis project are defined as follows:
• The primary user of the system is a researcher or an HCP
• From GDPR perspective, a patient or parent whose health data is streamed by the
system is a data subject, whereas DTU is the data controller and processor
• CE marking certifies safety and performance of a device is adequate enough for it
to be compliant with EU medical device requirements (MDR)
• In Denmark, the GDPR consent for a child patient to be a part of a clinical trial needs
to come from both parents
• The sessionID field will be used as a unique recording session identifier and will be
the key to retrieve data and manage recording
• Stimuli refers not only to data sources like physiological data sensors eg. eye track­
ing sensors, but also sporadic trial marker events, eg. a painful procedure started.
It could also imply a combination of different variables, like eg. a patient watching a
video while their eye being tracked and related to what they are looking at
To make the requirements trackable, each requirement taken into the thesis MVP scope
will be assigned a unique identifier consisting of a first letter of its quality attribute followed
by its index number.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
13
==PAGE:22==
4.2
Functional requirements
The following functional requirements have been identified:
• F1. The system shall be able to store aggregated data for future research purposes
• F2. Where the system is developed post MVP, the system shall be able to store
aggregated data for near real­time monitoring
• F3. The system shall be able to import and synchronize data post­factum
• F4. The system shall be able to process data coming from a periodic or sporadic
stimuli
• F5. The system shall synchronize the data from all plugged­in stimuli for relevant
sessions
• F6. The system shall be able to process data both from a parent and patient per
session
• F7. The system shall allow user to start a new recording session
There is a clear distinction between MVP and post­MVP purposes of the system ­ for
MVP, which is considering the scope of this thesis, it is data collection for offline analy­
sis, whereas for post­MVP it is data collection for near real­time monitoring. Since the
general aim of designing the system is anxiety detection at a hospital setting, the system
eventually would aim to support not only data collection, but also analysis, search and
visualization of helpful anxiety data patterns to facilitate reducing patients’ anxiety. From
modifiability, interoperability or scalability perspective, it is important to keep that in mind
when designing the MVP, to be able to minimize the refactoring or developing effort after
MVP.
Due to the great choice of stimuli, the system should not only have asynchronous data
streaming, but also synchronous data import functionality, as streaming is not supported
by all devices or can be problematic due to network discovery issues. It would provide
greater flexibility when running recording sessions with various types of devices.
4.3
Compliance requirements
Compliance refers to the state of being in accordance with established guidelines or spec­
ifications. When it comes to medical software, there is plenty to be compliant with. The
baseline in the EU is GDPR and MDR, but there are also others like ISO 27001 and 9001
standards or codes of conduct. For the sake of this thesis, GDPR and MDR compliance
are described, while every other compliance aspect is deemed out of scope.
4.3.1
GDPR
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) applies to processing all personal data in
relation to the offering of goods or services to individuals in the EU or monitoring the
behavior of individuals within the EU. Heavy­loaded with patient data, medical software
very much lies within GDPR power, especially since it uses a lot of sensitive personal
data like brain activity, heart sugar level, heart rate and such. It very much applies to this
thesis as well.
The following GDPR­compliance requirements have been defined:
• G1. The system shall have a Data Protection Impact Assessment documented and
maintained
14
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:23==
• G2. The system shall have a clearly­defined privacy policy
• G3. The system shall request a data processing consent before recording starts
• G4. The system shall inform data subject about the privacy policy and the process­
ing protocol before asking for consent
• G5. The system shall keep all sensitive data pseudonymised
The Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) is a new requirement under the GDPR
as part of the “protection by design” principle and it is one of the most important ways to
demonstrate to authorities that all system processing activities comply with the GDPR.
The DPIA for this thesis has been appended .2.
From GDPR perspective, it is legally required to obtain informed consent from data sub­
jects, ie. patients or their parents. Such consent can be only requested after getting
familiar with the processing protocol and privacy policy of the system.
GDPR places most importance on data pseudonymization when Privacy by design is
considered. It also mentions encryption, authentication, technical implementation of the
right to object, or ISO standards, but these have been deemed either out of scope for the
MVP in this thesis or are mentioned in section 4.3.3.
4.3.2
MDR
Medical devices are products which are used to diagnose, prevent, relieve or treat a dis­
ease, disability, injury, etc [21]. They can be classified by risk as depicted below:
Figure 4.1: Medical device risk classes
Medical software, and thus this thesis, typically falls under the IIA class. As Regulation
(EU) 2017/745 [22] implies, any product that facilitates decision making while treating
patients is in class IIA, as depicted on Figure 4.1. All products in classes higher than
I require a CE marking certification by a notified body (EU notified bodies list can be
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
15
==PAGE:24==
searched by country here [23]) to be obtained before rolling out to market. The notified
body assesses if the documentation for the product’s safety and performance is sufficient
for the product to be CE marked.
Obtaining a CE marking is a process of obtaining proper compliance documentation prov­
ing the characteristics of the product based on an assessment of the product’s quality,
safety and performance. Such documentation must contain a clinical evaluation, which in
terms of medical software, can be obtained through running and documenting a clinical
trial. It is to establish that the risks associated with the use of the device are acceptable
when weighed against the expected benefits of the device [21]. Another core document
is the risk analysis describing the risks associated with the intended use of the medi­
cal device. It must be maintained and updated to continually facilitate an assessment of
whether the risks associated with the use of the product are acceptable in relation to the
benefit achieved by the individual user or patient. Having obtained such documentation,
a manufacturer signs a declaration of conformity to certify that the product complies with
the requirements [21]. Only then the device is eligible to be CE marked.
Another important aspect of the MDR compliance is an existing post­market clinical follow­
up process, where a manufacturer must proactively collect and evaluate clinical data from
the use of the device after the device has obtained CE marking and has been placed on the
market in order to confirm the safety and performance of the device throughout its lifetime
and to make sure that any risks associated with using the device are still acceptable.
Based on such MDR compliance deliberations, MDR compliance requirements for MVP
have been chosen as follows:
• M1. The system shall have a plan for obtaining a CE marking outlined
• M2. The system shall have a plan for a clinical evaluation, whose results would be
gathered into an evaluation report
• M3. The system shall have a post­market clinical follow­up functionality
M1 and M2 are deemed as post­MVP and will thus be addressed mostly in the Future
work 8 chapter of this thesis, while M3 is seen as a nice­to­have MVP one.
4.3.3
Security requirements implied by compliance
As mentioned in subsection 4.3.1, there are certain security implications of compliance
regulations, which aim to protect data privacy. These are security measures such as en­
cryption, authentication, or ISO standards (pseudonymization has already been indicated
in subsection 4.3.1). However, in this thesis there is only one requirement chosen within
the area:
• C1. The system shall implement authentication and access control to make sure
proper access for researchers and patients
It is a rather minimal set of compliance­induced security requirements for the MVP of the
system due to the time constraints of the thesis. Naturally, were the system to be fully
developed after MVP and deployed in some hospital setting, it would need to leverage
a proper implementation of the entire Confidentiality, Integrity, Availability (CIA) triad. It
would need to have proper end­to­end encryption, regular backups and recovery plans,
robust logging with its own security measures, regular security vulnerability audit of the
code, and such.
16
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:25==
4.3.4
Remaining security requirements
However, the MVP scope of the thesis is aiming at research purposes in an isolated en­
vironment, with one more important security requirement:
• S1. The system shall run over a local standalone network
It is needed for the Anxiety Detection and Reduction in Children’s Emergency Care project
that the MVP prototype of the system is to be set up using local servers in a DTU lab and
to run on a DTU LAN network. This implies a possibility of discoverability issues arising,
since naturally most networks are by default configured to disable mutual discoverability
of their devices for security reasons. However, it also provides a security opportunity,
since the entire system would not need to communicate much with the Internet outside
of its network, which is a great use case for deploying measures like a gateway firewall
or an intrusion detection system that could somehow balance the lack of eg. end­to­end
encryption within the MVP prototype.
4.4
Performance requirements
From the perspective of scalability that the system shall be designed to support, it is of vital
importance to analyze performance requirements. These have been defined as follows:
• P1. The system shall have jitter less than 0.3 of the maximum sampling rate of
currently plugged­in stimuli
• P2. The system shall have less than 1 sec latency in storing the data
While the MVP of this thesis is not expected to support handling multiple recording ses­
sions in a distributed setup, the full version of the system would need to, if it were to be
deployed at a hospital ward with multiple patients to serve at the same time. In an effort to
ensure proper integrity of data coming from multiple stimuli, there is a need for minimizing
jitter and latency, which should be tested with a variable amount of stimuli or types of data.
4.5
Interoperability requirements
Since the system depends on various stimuli acting as data sources, it must be able to
connect to various types of devices. Therefore the following interoperability needs have
been identified:
• I1. The system shall be placed in an environment, where stimuli devices are easily
discoverable
• I2. While starting a recording session, the system shall enable user to specify a
unique sessionID
• I3. While running a recording session, the system shall associate all the data col­
lected with its unique sessionID
• I4. The system shall interoperate only with the accepted stimuli
• I5. While running a recording session, the system shall allow user to stop and re­
sume stimuli listeners
The baseline for interoperability of the system is the device discoverability, already men­
tioned in the security requirements section 4.3.4, since the system is so heavily reliant on
the data sources.
Due to the amount of data and for the sake of its integrity for the future analysis or vi­
sualization use, all data associated with a specific patient, and maybe also his parent,
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
17
==PAGE:26==
has to be marked with a unique user­provided sessionID. Since the system is aiming for
reconfigurability, it should be possible for the user to stop and restart data sources during
a recording session as desired.
4.6
Monitorability requirements
To be able to debug or use the system easier, there should be some sort of monitoring
functionality that would indicate if the data created by the stimuli is actually streamed or
stored. The following requirements within the area of interest have been identified:
• M1. The system shall visualize the current status of connected stimuli listeners to
users
• M2. The system shall visualize current status of sync storage processing to users
• M3. While connected stimuli listeners or sync storage processing are not working
correctly, the system shall notify users
4.7
Scalability requirements
Even though the scope of the thesis MVP is relatively small, it is important to think about
the scalability from the very beginning, to cater for it within the design itself. One scalability
requirement has been defined:
• A1. The system shall be scalable by design
It is a somewhat vague requirement, as there are probably multiple ways to define what
scalable by design means. For the sake of this thesis however, it has a very minimal
meaning of being able to handle multiple data sources in one recording session or en­
suring some horizontal or vertical scaling functionality within the syncing and storing pro­
cessing of the system to easier accommodate possible future distributed scenarios.
18
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:27==
5
Design Documentation
A software design process started with analyzing a system context diagram. Then, as in­
troduced in section 3.2, quality attribute analysis of system architecture design was started
by brainstorming various scenarios within each important quality attribute. The scenarios
are needed to reason about design patterns and tactics that can be useful to optimize the
design of the thesis use case. These are synthesized through diagramming in order to
reason about different trade­offs, like robust security often hindering performance.
5.1
System context diagram
At this point, having become acquainted with the requirements, it is a good practice to
think about the system scope, context and boundaries. Since the system shall provide
streaming, synchronization and data collection functionalities and is constrained by com­
pliance and data security, an initial high level system context diagram could look in the
following way:
Figure 5.1: High­level system context diagram with modules
The data from patient or parent stimuli will be passed through the system to produce useful
insights for the HCPs or researchers. As depicted on the diagram 5.1 above, it is important
to note that the patient or parent stimuli like eye tracking glasses or wristbands sampling
data are not direct parts of the system. However, the system will expose interfaces to
aggregate data from such stimuli efficiently. Therefore, there needs to be some sort of
configurability functionality, so that the system can aggregate data from different types of
stimuli at different times, along with providing interoperability to actually connect to the
stimuli. Naturally, there is also a need for synchronization, since data will be coming from
different sources that each possibly run their own system clock, along with data storing
and extraction capabilities for basic usability. The nature of data streamed being health
sensitive data implies a need for a GDPR functionality, that will minimally enable getting
informed consents from patients or their parents.
The different functionalities are depicted as separate modules on diagram 5.1, which sug­
gests a modular architecture design. Naturally, as already mentioned in section 3.2, one
might argue that for the sake of an MVP prototype, it could be easier to have more of a
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
19
==PAGE:28==
monolithic or layered architecture, due to its minimal scope. Nevertheless, modular de­
sign provides advantages, when a possible need for dynamic scaling is expected, which
would eventually be the case for such a system recording data from multiple stimuli at
once or multiple patients at once. Moreover, it provides more flexibility when it comes
to technology choices, which creates an opportunity to leverage advantages of multiple
different technologies by combining them into one system. It can also be a nod towards
the microservices architecture, a system of loosely coupled, concise services, communi­
cating through lightweight protocols, which has become a very popular web development
architecture used in software engineering nowadays.
The diagram 5.1 also implies that not only young patients can be a source of stimuli, but
also their parents. The Anxiety Detection and Reduction in Children’s Emergency Care
project recognizes that children’s anxiety can be tightly correlated to parents’ well­being,
thus the system designed in this thesis will anticipate collection of both patient and parent
data.
5.2
Quality attribute breakdown
This section describes the most important quality attributes identified for the scope of
thesis MVP.
5.2.1
Functionality
Functionality is the ability of the system to work the way it is intended to. By itself, it
does not determine software architecture ­ if only functionality is taken into account, then
a single monolithic design could probably be good enough. Functionality is achieved by
assigning responsibilities to architectural elements, which, in a modular or microservice
context, implies having designated modules or services handling different types of func­
tionality (as depicted on diagram 5.1). However, it is vital to consider other purposes like
performance or interoperability to ensure delivering actual value and be able to accomo­
date changes in an iterative development process in such a complex and constrained
domain.
The closest quality attribute to functionality is usability described in subsection 5.2.6.
5.2.2
Performance
Performance is the system’s ability to meet its timing requirements. As Mae West has
said, ”An ounce of performance is worth pounds of promises”, it is a very important quality
attribute, as it is heavily correlated with usability ­ for example, if an automation system
is too slow, is it really automating anything? Since reasoning about quality attributes can
be subjective and a lot of them overlap, one could argue that usability itself implies good
performance, interoperability, scalability, etc., as otherwise a system is not objectively
usable. While it is true, the division of different subproblems into different quality attributes
for this thesis is done aiming to maximize transparency and include as many different
perspectives on the problem as possible, in order to maximize the value brought through
this thesis.
A performance scenario is about the system’s response efficiency to an incoming event,
which usually requires some resources to be consumed, while possibly serving other re­
quests or services at the same time. While the events can be of stochastic nature, there
are other stimuli, like eye tracking glasses, that can generate periodic events at a cer­
tain rate, or sporadic stimuli like event markers. The most important response measures
are chosen to be latency, that is the time difference between event arrival and its han­
dling, and jitter, which is assumed to be a time difference in handling of data coming from
different sources.
20
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:29==
Table 5.1: Performance Event data handling scenario along with the general one for ref­
erence
Scenario part/scenario title
General
Event data handling
source
Internal or external to the sys­
tem
External stimuli of periodic or
sporadic nature
stimulus
Arrival of a periodic, sporadic,
or stochastic event
A new sample has been gener­
ated and published by a stimu­
lus
artifact
System or one or more compo­
nents in the system
system or its synchronization
and storage modules
environment
Operational
mode:
normal,
emergency, peak load, over­
load
normal
system response
Process events, change level
of service
Persists data in the system
system response measure
Latency, deadline. throughput,
jitter, miss rate
Regardless of the event type,
the system shall have less than
1 second average latency and
shall minimize jitter between
different data streams
Since the main goal of the MVP system is assumed to be data collection, a near real­time
latency is good enough. However, if the system were to be developed further past MVP
aiming at real­time visualization, there would need to be some design and development
effort going into minimizing the latency further. When it comes to jitter, it very much de­
pends on the types of stimuli currently connected to the system ­ for instance, if a patient
is looking at 2 pictures aiming to choose one of them, the jitter between their eye tracking
data and the video/picture data would need to be less than 10 milliseconds to be able to
reason about what they actually looked at. That is why, the jitter performance require­
ment, described in subsection 4.4, is formulated with regards to sampling rates of the
stimuli currently streaming to the system.
Relevant tactics for performance have been indicated below:
• control resource demand
– reduce overhead ­ minimize the number of intermediaries that hand off data
from one to another within the system. This tactic is a classic modifiability
vs performance trade­off, where modularity is at a disadvantage. It can be
achieved through co­location of system submodules or executing single­threaded
servers and splitting the workload between them, thus it is tied to scalability
• manage resources
– increase resources ­ faster network, faster processors, additional memory, etc.
In this thesis, one can think of splitting the MVP prototype into 2 servers, so
that one can run the listeners and acquire data through one server, whereas the
other will be dedicated to persisting, thus providing more resources for each
of these processes. However, that also implies the servers will communicate
over a network, which can add latency
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
21
==PAGE:30==
– introduce concurrency ­ in this thesis, there is a need for a listening manage­
ment process, that would start, stop and resume multiple stimuli listening pro­
cesses at the same time, and also for optimized persisting, that could have
multiple processes persisting data in parallel. This indirectly implies a need for
either vertical or horizontal scalability, since the system is aimed to be config­
urable when it comes to number and types of stimuli it simultaneously listens
to.
5.2.3
Scalability
Since scalability is so tightly correlated with performance, it seems valuable to consider
how the system might need to be scaled both manually and automatically. Manual scaling
can be seen rather as a modifiability problem, whereas automatic scaling seems to be an
easy win, as a lot of existing technologies, like Kafka, have in­built scalability mechanisms.
The following scaling stages have been identified for the problem in the thesis:
1. single patient and parent with only 1 data generating stimulus each
2. single patient and parent with multiple data generating stimuli each
3. many patients and parents with multiple data generating stimuli each
The scope considered in this thesis does not go past stage 2 described above. However, it
is a good practice to design for scalability from the start, especially since the system aims
to support multiple data streams (ie. stage 2 above) in its MVP scope. Nevertheless,
were the system to be developed further and deployed in a hospital setting, it would need
to be scaled to handle multiple recording sessions simultaneously (ie. stage 3 above).
5.2.4
Interoperability
Interoperability focuses on how multiple systems can efficiently exchange data through
their interfaces. For the sake of this thesis, it is of great importance for the system to be
able to connect to various stimuli.
22
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:31==
Table 5.2: Interoperability A stimulus initiates connection scenario along with the general
one for reference
Scenario part/scenario title
General
A stimuli initiates connection
source
A system initiates a request to
interoperate with another sys­
tem
User
stimulus
A request to exchange Informa­
tion among system(s)
Triggered by user trying to
plug in a new device, queries
for information to construct the
stream properly
artifact
The systems that wish to intem­
perate
the system and an external
stimuli device
environment
System(s) willing to interoper­
ate are discovered at runtime
or known prior to runtime
at runtime
system response
One or more of the following:
• The request is (appropriately)
rejected and appropriate enti­
ties (people or systems) are no­
tified.
• The request is (ap­
propriately) accepted and infor­
mation is exchanged success­
fully.
• The request is logged
by one or more of the involved
systems
if the device replies in a timely
manner, the system constructs
a stream and starts listening
system response measure
One or more of the following:
• Percentage of information ex­
changes correctly processed •
Percentage of Information ex­
changes correctly rejected
The system informs user about
the listening status
From interoperability tactics mentioned in [19], the orchestrate tactic could be chosen.
For the sake of this system, there is a need for some sort of orchestration logic that would
enable a user to start, stop and resume listening for different stimuli. Initiating a stimuli
listener has been depicted on the following activity diagram:
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 5.2: Initiate listener for given stimuli activity diagram
The orchestration will not only require user input (as depicted on diagram 5.2), but also a
non­trivial service that would be able to orchestrate and run multiple listening processes
at a time. For the sake of future development, it is important to design for horizontal
or vertical scalability within the orchestrating logic, were the system to be deployed in a
multiple patient with multiple stimuli context.
There are also other aspects to consider when it comes to interoperability. For systems
exposing interfaces to multiple stimuli, networking discoverability can be an issue, since
most networks by default disable any sort of discoverability out of security purposes, to
protect from untrusted devices connection attempts. This raises a question of designing a
designated standalone network, or a VLAN, just for the purposes of the system. However,
24
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:33==
for the sake of the thesis MVP prototype, an existing LAN in a DTU lab will be used without
network modification efforts planned.
One can also wonder about the interoperability within the system ­ there are various inter­
operability protocols that can be used to enable communication between different system
modules, like Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) and Representation State Transfer
(REST). Even though SOAP is typically used for distributed systems, due to uncertainty
in streamed data formats and also for the sake of simplicity, REST will be in focus for the
synchronous communication between system modules.
5.2.5
Modifiability
Changes within software engineering are ubiquitous. A change request can deal with
adding new features, fixing defects, tightening security, etc, aiming to enhance user ex­
perience or embrace some new technology or new standards. Since many studies have
shown that most cost occurs after initial release of software, it is definitely worth to ana­
lyze architecture from modifiability perspective, as an attempt to minimize possible future
modification costs.
Even though no modifiability scenarios have been identified, one can reason about mod­
ifiability tactics, especially within the Reduce coupling modifiability tactic type.
• encapsulate ­ introduce an explicit interface to a module, so that the change to one
module will not propagate to other modules. The design will opt to maximize the
cohesiveness within all modules to minimize codependencies
• use an intermediary ­ this system will be designed to use messaging queues where
needed to facilitate timely and fault­tolerant communication between the modules
• restrict dependencies ­ this system shall minimize dependency on types of sensor
stimuli and expose generic interfaces for the stimuli to be plugged into
5.2.6
Usability
Usability is a measure of how easy it is for a user to use the system, thus it is very much
tied to the perception of system quality.
The following usability scenarios have been identified.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 5.3: Usability A user manages an ongoing patient session scenario along with the
general one for reference
Scenario part/scenario title
General
A user manages an ongoing
patient session
source
End user, possibly in a special­
ized role
An
end
user,
HCP
or
re­
searcher
stimulus
End user tries to use a system
efficiently, learn to use the sys­
tem, minimize the impact of er­
rors, adapt the system, or con­
figure the system
Manages the use of stimuli dur­
ing the session
artifact
System or the specific portion
of the system with which the
user is Interacting
stimuli listeners
environment
Runtime or configuration time
at runtime
system response
The system should either pro­
vide the user with the features
needed or anticipate the user’s
needs.
Whenever the user wants to
pause
data
measuring,
the
storing should stop, but should
enable to resume listening on
the streams for more measure­
ments to come.
system response measure
One or more of the following:
task time, number of errors,
number of tasks accomplished,
user satisfaction, gain of user
knowledge, ratio of successful
operations to total operations,
or amount of time or data lost
when an error occurs
Vital for the user to customize
their measurement sessions
The remaining usability scenarios have been depicted as activity diagrams instead, be­
cause of how important they are for the overall functionality of the system and to facilitate
future user flow testing.
26
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:35==
Figure 5.3: Create a new recording session activity diagram
For the sake of basic data integrability, it is significant for the user and the system to
perform all data collection regarding a single patient (or its parent) in a uniquely identifiable
way. Therefore, when the data regarding patient X has to be extracted, all of it will be
available by searching for its unique sessionID. Within the MVP scope that is this thesis,
it is up to the user to provide and remember a proper sessionID, while accepting the risk
of errors arising through that. Diagram 5.3 assumes that a user (an HCP or a researcher)
has already authenticated and their access range has been validated successfully. Trivial
creating an account and logging in activities are thus implied.
It also implies requesting a GDPR consent right after creating a new session before any
data streaming can happen, as depicted on a diagram below.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 5.4: Getting GDPR consent activity diagram
The 2 remaining functionally important flows are depicted on the common diagram below.
28
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:37==
Figure 5.5: Configure new stimulus and export data activity diagram
Since the system shall be able to acquire data from various stimuli, the system shall enable
the user to specify stimulus details or configuration to be persisted, so that a user does
not need to input it again multiple times. It is also of great importance to design for the
actual export of acquired data.
Useful tactics identified within usability can be categorized into the following
• Support the user
• Support the system
While all the scenarios and activities described in the usability subsection so far lie within
the Support the user tactic, it is also important to consider how the system can support
its own initiative.
• maintain task model ­ used to determine context of what the user is attempting to
provide proper assistance. When it comes to this thesis, the system should persist
a privacy policy and research protocol to provide to the user before asking for their
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
29
==PAGE:38==
GDPR consent.
• maintain user model ­ a system is tracking all aspects specific to a user or a group
of users. This system shall maintain user model by using a unique user­provided
sessionID to identify all acquired data for a given session
• maintain system model ­ a system is maintaining the model of itself. The system in
this thesis should provide some monitoring functionality to reflect the status of data
streaming and thus enable debugging if needed
5.2.7
Availability
When it comes to availability, the MVP of the system is not aimed to be a real­time mon­
itoring system as much as a data collection one, thus one might argue that availability
is not too important. It is also not aimed to be a safety­critical system and technically it
only needs to be working when there are patients willing to test their anxiety levels, which
never lasts more than a few hours of recording per session, and on average might take
less than an hour according to HCPs (.5).
However, data integrity is very important for the multi stimuli data collection purposes, in
order for the data to be properly correlated and thus be able to reflect some behaviors or
patterns. Therefore, it seems worth to consider what can happen to data being sent to
the system while it is being overloaded, which is described through a scenario below.
30
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:39==
Table 5.4: Availability The system fails to store event data right away scenario along with
the general one for reference
Scenario part/scenario title
General
The system fails to store event
data right away
source
internal/external
Internal
­
the
synchroniza­
tion/persistence module
stimulus
omission, crash, inc­orrect tim­
ing, incorrect response
omission
artifact
Processors,
communication
channels, persistent storage,
processes
persistent storage
environment
Normal
operation,
startup,
shutdown,
repair mode,
de­
graded operation, overloaded
operation
overloaded operation
system response
Prevent the fault from becom­
ing a failure Detect the fault: •
Log the fault • Notify appropri­
ate entities (people or systems)
Recover from the fault: • Dis­
able source of events causing
the fault • Be temporarily un­
available while repair is being
effected • Fix or mask the fault/­
failure or contain the damage it
causes • Operate in a degraded
mode while repair Is being ef­
fected
system persists data it cannot
store currently in some sort of
backup
system response measure
Time or time interval when
the system must be available
Measure Availability percent­
age (e.g., 99.999%) Time to
detect the fault Time to repair
the fault Time or time interval
in which system can be in de­
graded mode Proportion e.g.,
99%) or rate (e.g., up to 100
per second) of a certain class of
faults that the system prevents,
or handles without failing
when the system returns to nor­
mal operation and normal data
persisting process is again pos­
sible to run, the system inte­
grates all omitted data to its
designated storage
The following tactics have been identified for availability:
• detect faults
– echo/ping ­ when a stimuli or a listener is connected to does not respond for a
long time, the system shall time out and end such connection to save resources
– monitor ­ the system shall provide a way to monitor the status of stimuli listeners
and the persisting module
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
31
==PAGE:40==
– timestamp ­ for proper synchronization and to reason about data integrity all
messages need to be timestamped
• recover from faults
– active redundancy ­ the system shall have an active spare(s) for the persisting
module to maintain synchronous state with active nodes and be able to take
over while overloaded
5.2.8
Testability
From a testability perspective, the 2 most important aspects are the performance mea­
sures of latency and jitter. Such 2 types of tests are to be performed on the prototype set
up and described in further detail in chapter 7. Therefore it has been deemed duplicate
to describe testability scenarios here.
Another very important testing aspect is the fact that while prototyping, all code merged to
the main or master branch of any prototype repository has to pass a manual integration
test of a proportional scope to the change being implemented. For example, when proto­
typing the listener status monitoring functionality, it is to be manually tested that whatever
the monitoring functionality provides actually reflects the status of listeners, ie. if there
is a stimulus connected and producing data, a listener forwards its data to the persisting
module, otherwise it waits. This practice is also connected to the agile organization and
the concept of definition of done, where such manual integration tests can determine that
an implementation task is deemed to be done.
It is quite reasonable to test the user flows, mostly defined in subsection 5.2.6, to confirm
that the system does enable user to eg. create a new recording session or start specific
listeners. Such documented through the appended user guide .8, which describes all the
necessary steps to record data with screenshots coming from the prototype.
The prototype code test coverage is expected to be minimal within this thesis MVP scope.
5.2.9
Security
Security measures how well a system can protect its assets from unauthorized access
while still providing access to the so authorized users. It is usually characterized through
confidentiality, integrity and availability supported by authentication, non­repudiation and
authorization. Naturally, one of the first security measures usually being implemented is
authentication and access control, which is vital to manage different user session access
and data with a least privilege approach in a trackable way. This measure will be included
and prototyped within the thesis MVP, along with ensuring data pseudonymization.
Due to constrained timeframe of the thesis, the rest of the security analysis will be done
only in theory, ie. found security measures will not be prototyped within the thesis MVP.
Attack threats are usually what system security analysis revolves around. The following
threat scenarios have been identified:
32
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:41==
Table 5.5: Security An attacker gets unauthorized access to data produced by the system
and An attacker intercepts data in transfer scenario
Scenario part/scenario title
An attacker gets unauthorized
access to data produced by the
system
An attacker intercepts data in
transfer
source
External attacker
External attacker
stimulus
Unauthorized access to data
storage
Unauthorized attempt Is made
to display data,
change or
delete data while in transfer
artifact
Data produced and stored by
the system
Data produced while in transfer
environment
Online, fully operational
Online, fully operational
system response
Protect data from unauthorized
access, Parties to a transaction
are identified with assurance.
The parties to the transaction
cannot repudiate their Involve­
ments, The system tracks ac­
tivities within it by • ’Record­
ing access or modification •
Recording attempts to access
data, resources. or services
Data or services are protected
from unauthorized access.
•
Data or services are not being
manipulated without authoriza­
tion, The system tracks activi­
ties within it by • ’Recording ac­
cess or modification • Record­
ing attempts to access data, re­
sources. or services
system response measure
Access
control
(HCP/re­
searcher
role)
with
authen­
tication only can read, write
the data, storage encryption,
detection system, firewalls
all communication should be
encrypted (eg.
with TLS) to
protect data in transfer, mes­
sages should contain (almost)
zero ID data (eg. patient1), any
“ID’ like data will be sent only
once per session, firewalls
In case of any security issues, like data breaches, it is desirable for any system to log
activities and accesses in a secure way that also enables audit. It can serve as a minimal
intrusion detection system by providing data on who accessed the system, when, through
what IP, etc. While the importance of secure logging is acknowledged, the logging within
the thesis MVP scope will be minimal and with no designated security measures.
When it comes to security tactics, several have been chosen to be of importance (reacting
and recovering from attacks has been deemed out of scope):
• detect attacks
– detect intrusion ­ have an active log analysis process that would compare net­
work traffic patterns to malicious ones, could be facilitated through making an
intrusion detection system (IDS) one of the system modules and naturally se­
cure logging
– verify message integrity ­ use checksums or hash values, could be facilitated
through using encrypting the data transfer with TLS
• resist attacks
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
33
==PAGE:42==
– identify, authenticate and authorize actors ­ done through proper authentication
and access control, where each user has a unique identity with which all its data
and activities are associated, often kept confidential from being accessed by
other users
As a complement, a basic threat modeling has been performed using the Microsoft Threat
Modelling Tool (documentation available at [24]) and is attached to this thesis .3. It has
identified the following issues:
• unauthorized database access including denying the actions
• unauthorized access to stimuli device including tampering with its OS or extracting
cryptographic keys from it
• abusing known technology vulnerabilities
• SQL injection
Considering this security analysis together with the fact that the system prototype is re­
quired to be set up at a separate network, the following security implementation stages
have been identified:
1. pseudonymization with authentication, authorization and access control
2. firewalls to leverage the advantage of placing the entire system in a designated
network that needs little communication with the outside Internet
3. storage encryption
4. transit encryption
The scope of the thesis MVP will not get past point 1 described above, ie. the prototype
setup will not consider firewalls or encryption.
5.2.10
High level architectural patterns and tactics diagram
The ideas gathered through scenarios and tactics analysis can be synthesized and thus
converged through brainstorming architectural patterns:
• interceptor ­ to allow new types of stimuli being connected to the system and ob­
tain resources without changing the source code, it would be an intermediary that
constructs proper listener processes having prompted for stimulus details
• publish­subscribe ­ to allow multiple listener processes publish gathered data to a
data persisting queue
• process pool ­ to manage listener processes in an optimal way
• microservices ­ to enable concise and modular development and leverage different
web technologies
These patterns were further converged to a common architectural pattern system diagram
provided below:
34
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:43==
Figure 5.6: Architectural pattern system diagram
The diagram 5.6 separates the system into synchronous and asynchronous activity sub­
systems. While the synchronous flow is more self­explanatory and also described thor­
oughly in 5.2.6, the asynchronous flow is to be split in listening, synchronization with
storage management, and the data storage itself. It places the interceptor, most likely
realized together with a process pool for scalability and availability, at the listening stage,
which is a forefront of the stimuli integration to handle both known and unknown stimuli
types for interoperability. while scalability and performance will be addressed through us­
ing messaging queues, like pub­sub. The synchronization and storage module might turn
into a bottleneck, since all stimuli data has to go through it to be properly persisted, thus
it is of vital importance to employ vertical or horizontal scaling to that module. Therefore,
this module needs a monitoring and managing process to not only enable debugging, but
properly manage its resources, eg. automatically scale up or down. It will also require
some sort of queueing mechanism to provide basic fault­tolerance and thus data integrity.
Such convergence realized through diagram 5.6 has been deemed enough to reason
about existing technologies and solutions to be used in prototype implementation, de­
scribed in the upcoming section.
5.3
Overview of reference architectures and technologies
5.3.1
Existing recorder systems
There are quite a lot of generic data processing frameworks for handling huge amounts
of incoming data at a high rate. From dedicated IoT platforms, like Amazon AWS IoT or
Carp mobile sensing, to systems like Twitter data streams or Apache’s Spark Streaming
providing some data analysis capabilities, there is one that has almost become a standard
within messaging and streaming web applications ­ Kafka, described in more detail in
subsection 5.3.3.
There is a number of domain­specific signal recording systems, especially within the brain­
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
35
==PAGE:44==
computer interfaces. However, they are usually rather monolithic and do not allow for
streaming data from multiple stimuli concurrently, like BCI++ or BCI2000. Other systems,
like Opensignals (r)Evolution or BioStream, are only compatible with a few input stimuli
types or are hard to modify to develop custom applications with [15].
Therefore, there is an opportunity for enigneering a more reconfigurable, modifiable or
scalable solution, candidate technologies for which are investigated in two following sub­
sections.
5.3.2
Data acquisition technologies
LSL, mostly popular within the research community, has a primary purpose of facilitating
human­subject experiments that involve multi­modal data acquisition. It has a number of
advantages from the thesis MVP perspective:
• compatible with multiple stimuli, including eye trackers like Tobii or PupilLabs, and
VR, which is a prominent anxiety distractant. A lot of stimuli devices come with
existing LSL plugins further optimizing LSL streaming integration
• synchronization capabilities realized through time correction data provided by LSL
streams
• a unified interface to record data with several different programming languages
While LSL seems like a great choice for data acquisition and synchronization from various
stimuli sources, there is an opportunity for more sink integrations that are less code heavy
­ integrations with C++, Java, Android applications are possible, but there is no common
interface. The Lab Recorder, which is a default LSL sink, seems to be quite constrained,
as it does not allow to pause and resume recording from some (but not all) streams at the
same time.
When it comes to brain­computer interface systems, BrainFlow is a framework that pro­
vides a uniform data acquisition API to obtain, parse and analyze EEG, EMG, ECG and
other kinds of data from biosensors. However, Brainflow is constrained to mostly brain
stimuli, seems to be compatible with less stimuli types than LSL, and does not provide as
robust data synchronization capabilities as LSL does.
Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) is a publish­subscribe queue­based mes­
saging protocol that could be applicable to the thesis use case. However, since it is pri­
marily designed for IoT systems, it is not well­suited for real­time applications that require
low latency and high throughput, as its publish­subscribe model can result in a high degree
of message overhead and delay.
ZeroMQ is a high performance communication library, providing other communication
patterns apart from publish­subscribe. However, just like MQTT, it’s primarily a network­
ing technology that does not provide any synchronization capabilities, like LSL does by
design.
Since LSL primarily works over TCP/IP, there is an opportunity for other stimuli integration,
for example when it comes to devices that connect over Bluetooth (BT). This could be
realized through the use of PyBluez, which is a Python library to access host machine’s
BT devices. However, this would require custom synchronization logic to be implemented
and some BT devices come with their own SDKs or even existing LSL plugins, that serve
as the missing link between a device and LSL.
One could also think of integrating with the CARP mobile sensing platform [17], which is
designed to collect research­quality sensor data from smartphone on­board sensors and
36
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:45==
attached off­board wearable devices. However, since the thesis MVP setup is to be over
a wired DTU lab network, integrating with CARP mobile sensing, that is primarily based
on wireless connections, will remain categorized as future work.
Considering interoperability and synchronization capabilities, no better data acquisition
technology has been found than Lab Streaming Layer. However, due to Lab Recorder’s
limitations and for the sake of modifiability or data recording, it might be useful to combine
it with some other data processing technology.
5.3.3
Data processing technologies
Kafka, just like LSL, is a streaming technology based on the queuing concept, but it has
a much different primary purpose ­ to facilitate building event streaming applications in
a scalable and reliable way. Its scalability and reliability seem very applicable to thesis
MVP use case, which anticipates the future need of scaling to handle multiple patient
recording sessions at the same time and recognizes the importance of data integrity for
future optimal anxiety pattern recognition. Moreover, there are a lot of easy integrations
with other popular commercial systems like elasticsearch, BigQuery, Amazon Spark or
Hadoop, thanks to a common kafka connect interface. Within these integrations, we can
choose from non­relational databases, data analysis, indexing or visualization platforms,
which can definitely facilitate future development of the system past the thesis MVP scope.
Another advantage of Kafka is the fact that it is much closer in architecture to a distributed
file system or database rather than to a traditional message queue. Since its queues,
called topics, persist data, Kafka can be used as (unencrypted by default) data storage
as well.
Naturally, there are many more choices apart form Kafka, compared in the table 5.6 below.
Table 5.6: Comparison of data processing technologies, with Kafka standing out as the
best
Technology
High
perfor­
mance
Scalability
Stream
pro­
cessing
Message or­
dering
Integrability
Kafka
X
X
X
X
X
Amazon
Simple
Queue
Service
(SQS)
X
X
Apache
Active
MQ
X
X
X
X
Redis
X
X
Amazon Kinesis
X
X
X
X
RabbitMQ
X
X
X
X
ApacheSpark
X
X
X
X
ApachePulsar
X
X
X
X
As table 5.6 shows, Kafka seems to be the best data processing technology, even though
it is only used for data recording, for the sake of this thesis MVP scope.
5.3.4
Asynchronous setup choice
While LSL seems to be a great data acquisition candidate and Kafka could be its sink and
perform data recording, both of these technologies are based on message queuing at their
core. Nevertheless, these 2 technologies have been chosen as the best candidates for
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
37
==PAGE:46==
the system. In the table below, possible LSL and Kafka asynchronous flow setup variants
are compared:
Table 5.7: Comparison of possible LSL and Kafka setups, with LSL+Kafka standing out
as the best
Characteristic/Setup
LSL only
Kafka only
LSL+Kafka
robust interoperability
with stimuli devices
X
X
built­in
synchroniza­
tion capabilities
X
X
minimal
number
of
message queues
X
X
data persistence ca­
pabilites
X
X
easy
interoperability
with
data
analyz­
ing,
indexing
and
visualizing platforms
X
X
Even though it complicates the system by introducing multiple message queues, the setup
of using both LSL and Kafka has been chosen for the sake of this thesis MVP, to not only
leverage the advantages of different stimuli and technologies LSL and Kafka integrate
with, but also to ensure maximum modifiability in future work, while developing some
data processing or visualizing capabilities.
The technology overview of the setup has been visualized on the diagram below:
38
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:47==
Figure 5.7: Crucial technology overview of the asynchronous system flow ­ blue modules
included in thesis MVP prototype, dashed are deemed post MVP future work
As visualized on diagram 5.7, data sampled by various stimuli will be passed to LSL
(usually facilitated by device­specific SDKs and/or their designated LSL plugins which
are not considered parts of the system, but rather parts of stimuli), from where it will be
produced to Kafka topics. Both LSL and Kafka modules are marked in blue to indicate
that they will be included in this thesis MVP prototype, with Kafka acting as unencrypted
data storage. The use of Kafka is to facilitate adding on secure data storage, processing,
indexing and visualization modules within future work, thus these modules are dashed.
Some of the processed and aggregated data could be fed back to Kafka, to minimize the
processing and visualizing modules’ codependency.
The whole thesis MVP prototype is set up over DTU lab wired network, that is why, as
indicated in the security design subsection 5.2.9, implementing a secure network gateway
would be the first step of tightening system’s security post MVP, while the prototype will
implement basic pseudonymization with authentication, authorization and access control.
Implementing a secure network gateway could mean tightening the firewall at the network
router to only allow traffic necessary for the system to work.
The synchronous flow is excluded from diagram 5.7, as the choice of its technologies is
not as performance­significant for the system. It is described in more detail in subsection
5.3.6.
The diagram does resemble the architectural setup presented in paper [16]. Mentioned
paper was encountered while already researching LSL and Kafka in combination.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
39
==PAGE:48==
5.3.5
Other asynchronous flow technologies
Databases
Even though this thesis MVP prototype relies on Kafka for data recording, it is worthy to
analyze other data storing possibilities for the sake of future work. Different databases
are compared in a table below:
Table 5.8: Comparison of possible databases
Characteristic/Database
InfluxDB
MongoDB
Elasticsearch
kdb+
schema flexibility
X
X
open source
X
X
X
scalability
X
X
X
X
Even though both MongoDB and Elasticsearch are popular relatable technologies, Mon­
goDB is said to perform better in high write and update throughput systems and is gener­
ally better suited to manage NoSQL (CRUD) operations, whereas Elasticsearch is more
optimized towards full­text search providing search support like tokenizers or analyzers.
For general purposes, MongoDB seems like the best post MVP data storage candidate,
unless robust search functionality will be needed, then Elasticsearch is a better choice.
If applicable, Elasticsearch can be provided as a secondary search­optimizing database
in combination with a main database, where write and update operations can be done
faster.
Visualization
When it comes to open source visualization tools, Grafana and Kibana could be taken into
consideration. Kibana’s primary purpose is data querying and analysis, popularly used
for log monitoring and mostly operating with Elasticsearch. Grafana, on the other hand,
presents better interoperability with other data stores as well, like InluxDB or MongoDB,
and focuses on facilitating dashboard creation. For the system’s future near real­time
monitoring purposes, Grafana could be a reasonable main visualization tool for browsing
and querying anxiety data, while Kibana could be potentially used for logs and, for that
matter, their audit.
5.3.6
Synchronous flow and other relatable technologies
Security
The security aspect of the solution will be implemented in a very minimal scope in this
thesis MVP, covering pseudonymization with authentication, authorization and access
control. The proper firewall configuration, followed by storage and transit encryption im­
plementation, is to be a part of future work.
In this thesis MVP prototype, the OS (Windows) firewalls on each node machine will be
fully disabled, thus post MVP one of the crucial tasks would be to reconfigure the OS
firewalls on each nodes to only let through specific traffic required by the system. Similar
changes could be also applied to the network gateway firewall. This could be facilitated by
using a cloud­based solution like AWS Web Application Firewall (WAF), that would then
filter all traffic between the outside world and the system, which is a reasonable solution
if the system is expected to work in a standalone mode.
When it comes to cloud­based single pass of control systems, Cloudflare offers a lot more
solutions apart from web application firewalls, like DDoS protection, bot management or
rate limiting, although it is subscription based. Nevertheless, were the system to be even­
tually deployed in a hospital setting and integrated with its local IT system, it would make
40
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:49==
tools like AWS WAF or Cloudflare irrelevant and would impose all sorts of modification
tasks that are out of scope of this thesis.
Apart from firewall configuration efforts, it could be useful to analyze the problem of en­
cryption. In this thesis MVP prototype, Kafka topics are used as a data storage, which is
by default unencrypted, and does not provide much encryption support, which might re­
quire some security tightening effort in the future. Were the system be extended to have a
different database, like eg. MongoDB, then it would be valuable to look into encryption at
rest, and also investigate transit encryption possibilities. Since LSL was designed to work
over TCP, replacing TCP with TLS might require a great modification effort, and come at
a detriment to performance. It is left as a future work consideration.
Compliance
Similar to security, compliance aspect will be implemented in a minimal scope within this
thesis MVP prototype. While there are plenty of off­the­shelf or consulting solutions that
can be integrated with an existing web system, the most important aspect in such data
collection experiments, is obtaining and storing an informed GDPR, if in EU, consent. In
this thesis MVP prototype, such functionality will be implemented very minimally, by a
user filling a web form with a consent identifier, that is later being stored in the database,
and links to its consent, or its photo or scan, that is being stored outside of the system. A
good next step for providing GDPR consent functionality, could be using such a framework
like Carpnet Research Package, which provides Flutter mobile functionality, for building
mobile consent flows, and integrate that as a system module.
When it comes to exercising other GDPR rights, like right to have the data removed, this
thesis MVP prototype will not implement any supporting logic, thus such rights will have
to be exercised through manual modifications.
Stimuli overview
As it was mentioned in section 1.2, this thesis focuses on eye tracking and heart rate data
complemented by custom event or trial markers, when it comes to possible system stimuli.
The types and sampling rates of stimuli influence the performance and interoperability
requirements of the system.
Considering eye tracking, Tobii and PupilLabs eye trackers were used for the sake of
the thesis. PupilLabs was used at the very beginning for integration tests ­ the actual
PupilLabs eye tracking glasses were never tested with the system, but PupilLabs SDK
along with PupilLabs LSL plugin were used to generate some dummy data to be sent
to system’s Kafka topics. Tobii eye tracking, specifically Tobii IS4 Large Peripheral eye
tracker, has been used to a much bigger extent, especially for the sake of latency tests,
described in chapter 7. Both Tobii and PupilLabs devices need to run with a computer
and can connect over USB.
The typical sampling frequency for eye tracking is around 100Hz and more, which imposes
limits on system performance ­ for example, if the system displays a video and intends
to track what user is currently looking at and it allows too much latency or jitter between
two streams, then it might be inconclusive, and thus useless, to try to correlate the eye
tracking and video streams. To do it correctly, the system shall minimize jitter to 10ms or
even 1ms.
When it comes to physiological data like heart rate, the sampling frequencies of desig­
nated devices are usually smaller. Taking the Empatica E4 wristband into consideration,
it can stream heart rate data at 64Hz, along with skin temperature and electrothermal ac­
tivity at 4Hz. Moreover, Empatica E4 wristband is a Bluetooth device, while LSL operates
over TCP. Therefore it not only requires its own SDK and a LSL plugin running, but also
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
41
==PAGE:50==
a designated E4 streaming server and a Bluetooth dongle, that make the sampled data
visible.
Other Bluetooth wearable tracking devices were investigated as well, like Shimmer or
Polar. While both types of devices have some existing LSL integrations, they also re­
quire more additional resources to stream data, just like the Empatica E4 wristband will
not stream data without a Bluetooth dongle or its designated streaming server. Shim­
mer devices seem to come with streaming functionalities, while Polar usually stream to a
mobile application, from which data can be exported manually in a big chunk rather than
streamed.
Due to the variability of stimuli sampling frequency, it is difficult to pin point a specific
required maximum value for jitter, thus in system requirements in chapter 4 it is stated that
the system shall minimize jitter without committing to any particular value. Even though
latency influences jitter, the required maximum latency is 1 second, which is a relatively big
value in the context. It is acceptable, however, since the thesis MVP prototype’s primary
purpose is data collection, and not monitoring.
The individual data types and formats various stimuli can produce is not the core focus of
the thesis. It is acknowledged, however, and is the main reason why the thesis focuses
much more on equipping the system with reconfigurable generic stimuli interfaces. This
is mostly enabled through LSL ­ LSL data model is described along the system’s data
model in subsection 5.3.8.
The choice of 2 aforementioned eye tracking devices was made due to their availability
and easy access at DTU, similarly regarding the wristband.
Synchronous flow technologies
When it comes to synchronous flow technologies, they were chosen per author’s famil­
iarity and experience. The user interface is a ReactTS service, there is a Java Spring
backend for frontend and an H2 database for user account and compliance consent data
storage.
5.3.7
Thesis MVP prototype technology and allocation diagram
The technology deliberations included in this section 5.3 converge on the following dia­
gram of this thesis MVP prototype proof of concept setup:
42
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:51==
Figure 5.8: MVP prototype technology and proof of concept allocation diagram
As the diagram 5.8 shows, the setup is split into two Windows machines (orange vs. green
area) connected to the same existing DTU lab network. To enable LSL communication
over TCP and UDP, a minimal solution has been chosen to disable both OS firewalls on
both machines, but it is only required when the system actively streams data over LSL.
The first (orange) machine provides interfaces for users and stimuli ­ there is a locally
running ReactTS minimal frontend application to manage data recording, start new LSL
listeners, or save a GDPR consent ID, along with all the stimuli­related processes ,that are
deemed external to the system itself, like their designated SDKs, additional middleware
eg. for Bluetooth devices, or LSL plugins producing data to LSL. The LSL plugins that
push data samples into LSL stream outlets can be run using Anaconda, as they are often
written in Python.
All HTTP requests coming from the frontend application are redirected through a Java
Spring backend for frontend running locally on the first (orange) machine, saving session
data like GDPR consent IDs in a minimal H2 database. The backend for frontend service
handles the synchronous H2 database connection, whereas it relays all the LSL listener
traffic, including passing custom event messages or trial markers through an LSL outlet,
to the LSL listener manager server in the other (green) machine.
The LSL listener manager server provides a link between data produced to LSL by man­
aging user­requested LSL listener processes and relaying the LSL data to its Kafka pro­
ducer. It has been written in the Python Flask framework, due to heavy Python use within
the LSL realm, and can also be run in an Anaconda environment.
The Kafka cluster is run locally on the green machine in a container by Docker Desktop
with Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) with a Confluent’s Kafka + Zookeeper image
[25]. Kafka and Zookeeper are run as separate services on their default ports 9092 and
2181 ­ Zookeeper is a controlling mechanism that keeps track of the state of Kafka topics,
partitions, and brokers.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
43
==PAGE:52==
As mentioned before in this section 5.3, the Kafka cluster in this MVP setup is treated
as an insecure database, as data in Kafka topics is persisted. When it comes to data
extraction, it can be done through running Kafka console commands, usually located in
the bin folder on the Kafka container, for example by using a following command:
kafka-console-producer --bootstrap-server
localhost:9092 --topic {topicName}
Arguments like --property print.timestamp=true or --from-beginning can be ap­
pended to the aforementioned command if needed.
When it comes to security within this setup, it is indeed minimal. The frontend, backend
for frontend and LSL listener all run as development servers, which means they are not
the most efficient, stable, or secure, with possibly many known vulnerabilities ready to be
abused. The LSL listener server runs on the 0.0.0.0 IP address to be able to communi­
cate with both localhost services on the green machine and LSL plugins running on the
orange machine. Running on 0.0.0.0, which listens for connections on every available
network interface, adds to security risk, however the server will not be accessible from
outside DTU lab 10.52.x.x network, providing that network’s gateway firewall is set up
properly. Moreover, there is no service­to­service authentication and both machines run
with diabled OS firewalls while streaming over LSL.
All these security risks have been accepted for the sake of thesis MVP ­ implementing
more robust mitigations and measures is deemed part of future work described in chapter
8.
Testing was performed on this proof of concept MVP setup, which is described in detail in
chapter 7.
5.3.8
Data model and data transformations
Asynchronous flow
For the asynchronous part of the system, the data model is based on LSL’s data model
[26], since LSL handles all possible streaming stimuli connected to the system. The most
important classes and objects used by the asynchronous part of the system are presented
on the diagram below:
44
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:53==
Figure 5.9: Asynchronous classes and objects diagram
When data is to be produced to an LSL stream, one needs to initialize a StreamOutlet
with StreamInfo data that contains stimulus details like number of channels or sampling
rate. Afterwards it pushes every acquired sample to the stream using the pushSample
method.
When an LSL listener process is started, it uses the resolve_stream method to identify a
stream using the type parameter coming from StreamInfo. The resolve_stream method
could be configured to consider more parameters, especially when streaming from mul­
tiple stimuli of the same type. Then it initializes a KafkaProducer object with the Kafka
bootstrap server address localhost:9092 and a generic ascii encoder for the data serial­
ization.
It produces the FirstMessage, as depicted on diagram 5.9, which contains the Stream
type as its outletName, full StreamInfo as info, and two timestamps: timestampLSL and
timestampSystem. They are calculated as follows:
1
timestampLSL1=local_clock()
2
timestampSystem = time.time()
3
timestampLSL2=local_clock()
4
timestampLSL=(timestampLSL1+timestampLSL2)/2
The LSL’s local_clock() function returns a steady clock float value in seconds from the
running machine’s last reboot. Since it is a relative timestamp, one needs to identify
some sort of absolute streaming start time that can be correlated with the LSL timestamps
of samples for the sake of data integrity and synchronization. The code snippet above
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
45
==PAGE:54==
accomplishes that by taking an average of two LSL timestamps from before and after
obtaining the timestampSystem. This piece of logic aims to minimize the actual difference
between timestampSystem and timestampLSL.
When a stimulus starts producing actual data samples to the LSL, they go through the
Stream, are pulled from the StreamInlet along with their timestamp and the current timeCor­
rection value of the Stream. Such a message is instantaneously produced to its desig­
nated Kafka topic. To calculate its absolute timestamp, one needs to use the following
formula:
1
absoluteSampleTimestamp = timestampSystem + sample["timestamp"] + sample["
timeCorrection"]-timestampLSL
timeCorrection is a current estimate of LSL Stream inaccuracy, to account for the dis­
tributed nature of the processing and the clock synchronization differences between ma­
chines. Thus, the timestamp on a data sample is corrected with timeCorrection while both
being in the same format as timestampLSL (float value of elapsed seconds since running
machine’s last reboot). When timestampLSL is subtracted, we end up with a time dif­
ference in seconds between when the Stream was initialized and when the data sample
was pushed to a StreamOutlet. Then, the absolute timestampSystem marking the Stream
initialization time can be added to get the actual absolute timestamp of the data sample.
The Sample entity is dynamic and depends on the stimulus producing the data. It is
generally a collection of type T of length channelCount, ie. T[], where T can be a numerical
data format, defaults to float32.
Synchronous flow
When it comes to the synchronous flow, there are 2 main entities reflected in their dedi­
cated tables in the H2 database.
Figure 5.10: Synchronous entities
In thesis MVP scope, user passwords are kept in plain text in database, acknowledging
the security risk and postponing the mitigation of it to further work 8. Entities User and
Consent are not related to each other, since they serve 2 separate modules, ie. access
control with authentication and compliance. Later on, another entity Feedback was added
to store user feedback, mostly for the sake of the post­market clinical follow­up process.
An important synchronous data aspect, however, is topic name generation. Its logic is
depicted on the following diagram:
46
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:55==
Figure 5.11: Topic name generation logic
Each topic name contains today’s date and the user­provided sessionID. Depending on
whether it is a stimulus topic or event marker topic, it will either contain the LSL stream
type with and information if the data is coming from a patient or parent, or it would contain a
keyword ”markers”. When starting LSL listeners user is prompted for an LSL stream type
for each stimulus, which is then used to differentiate between concurrent LSL streams,
and to check whether the marker stream should also be started or not.
Such a topic name can be used to retrieve its persisted data eg. by using the kafka­
console­consumer command explained in subsection 5.3.7.
5.4
Deployability and user manual
5.4.1
Deployability
There are 3 code repositories:
• UI application (ReactTS) available at https://github.com/krzeminskamaja/thesisFrontend
• Backend for frontend (Java Spring) available at https://github.com/krzeminskamaja/
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
47
==PAGE:56==
backendForFrontendAndKafka
• LSL listener server (Python flask) available at https://github.com/krzeminskamaja/
pythonLSLInletKafkaProducerServer
UI repository contains a production build created with npm, contained within the build
folder. Backend for frontend repository also contains a production build in target folder,
including a .jar file. The LSL listener server can be run in a Python Anaconda environment.
Each repository contains a README file explaining how to run its application.
A step­by­step deployment manual has been appended .10 describing how to set up the
prototype from scratch.
5.4.2
User manual
The user manual appended .8 assumes that the system is set up and running as described
in the previous subsection 5.4.1. It walks the user through the entire flow of how the
system would be used to record data from a patient and/or their parent. It described the
following activities:
• user, that is a researcher or HCP, log in
• welcome page and starting a new session
• obtaining GDPR consents
• start LSL listeners
• current session listening and managing
• data extraction
• log out
48
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:57==
6
Privacy and research protocol
6.1
Research protocol
Since the MVP scope of the system delivered through this thesis is minimal, and the
GDPR consent handlings will be mostly done manually, each recording session per each
patient (with or without their parent) is treated as a single data recording experiment, and
thus requires a GDPR consent. Each such experiment would comprise of the following:
1. Make sure the system is up and running
2. Inform the patient and parent(s) about the nature of the experiment and data pro­
cessing
3. Obtain informed consent from patient:
• if patient is a minor, a consent from each parent is required.
• if patient is an adult, they are reasoned with and provide the consent for them­
selved
4. Should a parent themself participate in the experiment, obtain a consent from them
as well
5. Specify the session identifier, types of stimuli and choose whether recording from a
parent or patient for the system to start listening
6. While user interface shows all required listeners as active, start streaming (through
stimuli or their SDKs)
7. If needed, stop and resume a listener
8. When done, stop all the listeners
9. To print data, go to the kafka cluster and run the default kafka­console­consumer
Such flow is also described in the appended user manual .8.
6.2
Privacy and informed consent
Before running any user­involved experiments collecting EU citizen sensitive personal
data, one must obtain an informed consent from the data subject, in this case a patient
or parent, according to GDPR. Were it to be only standard personal data (without any
sensitive data), a privacy notice (often also referred to as privacy policy) could be suffi­
cient, often found in a website footer or accompanying a cookie consent banner for users
to familiarize with. Such consent is then to be stored, as an official legal basis for data
processing, implying a need for some security storage measures. It should be auditable
and retractable to maintain GDPR compliance.
Since sharing the processing information and obtaining a consent adds on some overhead
effort, it would be beneficial to account for it in the system. Post MVP, it could be a
separate flow triggered when a new recording session is to be started, eg. developed
using the Carpent Research Package mentioned in subsection 5.3.6. Within this thesis
MVP scope, however, the consent functionality will be very minimal, providing an interface
to store a unique consent ID (containing a session ID) ­ its design is described in more
detail in subsection 5.3.8 while the functionality tests are described in section 7.3.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
49
==PAGE:58==
The consent is required by GDPR to be informed ­ it happens when an organisation en­
sures that the individual is properly and clearly informed about how their personal infor­
mation will be handled. This can be accomplished through a transparently written infor­
mational letter that is communicated to a data subject in a written or spoken form as part
of the system or manually presented by a system user, before ever asking for consent.
Such informational letter should contain at least the following information:
• the purpose for which the data is being processed
• the type of data to be processed
• the possibility to withdraw consent
• the identity of the organisation processing data
The informational letter for this thesis has been appended under .6.
When it comes to the consent itself, it should be unambiguous, free and specific. It should
clearly state that the data subject has been satisfactorily informed (through the informa­
tional letter) about the nature of data processing with an opportunity to ask questions and
that they freely decide to participate, while acknowledging all their GDPR rights. The con­
sent is not a valid legal basis until it is signed and kept as a proof in case of a compliance
audit. The consent form for this thesis has been appended under .7.
50
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:59==
7
Testing documentation
7.1
Manual testing while prototyping
As mentioned in the 5.2.8 subsection, no code was merged to any main branch of any
of the prototype code repositories without passing a basic manual integration test during
prototype development. LSL actually comes with vanilla StreamOutlet mock, that can
be configured to produce data to LSL at different sampling rates or for different stimulus
types, which was especially used when prototyping the LSL listener managing server, to
see if it can indeed handle multiple LSL streams the way it is required to. When it comes
to testing if and how the data is being stored to Kafka topics, Kafka console commands
(already mentioned in 5.3.7) have been used directly through a Kafka container terminal.
Such iterative manual tests were done to prove that added changes work with the rest of
the code well enough to send data from end to end of the system.
7.2
Performance
However, to check what kind of data is actually sent around the system and how effi­
ciently it actually happens, performance tests were done on the proof of concept setup
(described in subsection 5.3.7), described in two following subsections. Latency and jit­
ter were deemed to be the most applicable types of performance tests for this thesis.
Their values can be helpful for potential future users, while deciding if the system is good
enough for their own use case based on eg. the sampling rate of their stimuli. More­
over, these values and their characteristics could also guide some future development
and improvements.
7.2.1
Latency tests
In this context, latency is a measure of how long it takes for the system to record a data
sample to a Kafka topic. The LSL sample creation timestamp will be compared to its
Kafka record creation timestamp.
This test was run using the Tobii IS4 Large Peripheral eye tracker as a single stimulus
with the proof of concept setup described in subsection 5.3.7, varying the sampling rate
(in Hz) to the following arbitrary values [10, 90, 180, 300, 500], where 90Hz is the default
sampling frequency for the stimulus.
Firstly, regardless of the sampling rate, all tests showed increasing latency with some
initial offset, like at the following figure:
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
51
==PAGE:60==
Figure 7.1: First latency tests ­ increasing latency with non­zero initial offset implies issues
to be debugged
The figure 7.1 above, plotting latency in milliseconds per each sample, shows that the first
sample already comes with an 800ms latency, which grows at a rate of about 5ms per
sample. While inspecting the prototype code, it turned out that LSL’s time_correction()
method, which might take a longer time when being called for the first time, was causing
the initial delay, while the increasing tendency was coming from the fact that for each sam­
ple being passed from LSL to Kafka, the KafkaProducer object was being unnecessarily
reinitialized.
When the aforementioned issues were fixed, the latency began to look much more as
expected:
52
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:61==
Figure 7.2: Fixed latency issues ­ average latency between 20­30ms, at 90Hz stimulus
sampling rate
The system is not accumulating delay anymore, as the latency is constant averaging
between 15 and 30 ms for varying sampling rates. It does not, however, change propor­
tionally with a sampling rate ­ for example, for the sampling rate of 500Hz, in two separate
attempts, the average latency was around 18ms and 32ms respectively. On figure 7.2,
one cannot help but notice some outliers, with the last very low value being disregarded,
as the LSL plugin used seems to always append an extra empty sample when it is stop­
ping.
When it comes to outliers, very few of the testing attempts presented a following behavior:
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
53
==PAGE:62==
Figure 7.3: Fixed latency issues, with an outlier spike, at 300Hz stimulus sampling rate
While it is certainly an undesirable situation to get a relatively big latency all of a sudden,
it also shows that the system can recover and get back to the initial reasonable latency
within the next 100 samples, which at 300 Hz sampling rate means it takes around 300ms.
Such saturation capacity suggests that around 800 Hz sampling rate should saturate the
system channel. The fact that the system can recover to regular latency without loosing
data (which is deduced by investigating the differences between consecutive timestamps
in subsection 7.2.2) fulfills the availability scenario described in subsection 5.2.7.
This hypothesis was validated using analogous tests with sampling rates in [800, 1200, 1800].
While mean latency remains within [16, 28] ms, the standard deviation is much bigger, sug­
gesting the channel not being as stable as for sampling rates greater than 800 Hz ­ see
table 7.1 for details.
Another interesting aspect to inspect is the amount of such big spikes, as on figure 7.3,
when sampling data for a longer period, eg. an hour, which is within the typical range of
how long the data would be recorded in practice. At this point it has been suspected that
the big spikes in latency might be correlated to moments when the patient (or the person
whose eyes are being tracked for that matter) moves out of the eye tracker recording
frame. When they do not look directly into the eye tracking camera, but are still within
the recording frame, the eye tracker generates NaN data. Thus, an 20­minute­long run
with the same stimulus at 90Hz sampling rate is presented below, with the person being
tracked trying to remain within the recording frame as much as possible:
54
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:63==
Figure 7.4: Tobii eyetracking 20­minute­long run at 90Hz, with the subject aiming to stay
within the recording frame ­ average around 20 ms, with outliers < 100 ms
For this run, the mean latency was 18.56 ms, while the standard deviation 2.99. The la­
tency never exceeds 100ms, however the standard deviation and a lot of values around
80ms still implies quite a variability, which is unfortunately worse than in the case of previ­
ous shorter tests. It does not make sense that the latency spikes are caused by too much
movement when the person whose eyes are being tracked moves out of the Tobii record­
ing frame, because then the sample itself would be delayed, thus it should not affect the
difference between the LSL and Kafka timestamps, as they both would be expected to
be equally delayed. The characteristics of diagram 7.4 suggest the existance of some
instability in the system, cause of which are left to be investigated in further work.
For the sake of completeness and transparency, the following table contains the mean
and standard deviation of latency, depending on the sampling rate, for a Tobii IS4 Large
Peripheral eye tracker:
Table 7.1: Mean and standard deviation for latency per sampling rate for a single stimulus
Tobii IS4 Large Peripheral eye tracker setup, around 4000 samples
Sampling rate/Measure
Mean latency [ms]
Standard deviation latency
[ms]
10Hz
17.68
1.11
90Hz
20.5
1.21
180Hz
27.42
1.1
300Hz
25.74
1.08
500Hz
17.89
1.05
800Hz
18.16
5.56
1200Hz
18.35
4.32
1800Hz
19.52
7.29
The standard deviation of latency also gives an insight about jitter, which is a variation in
the delay of message delivery between different nodes or components within the system.
7.2.2
Jitter tests
When it comes to jitter, the testing approach assumed streaming similar signals that are
expected to be easy to visualize together, to facilitate noticing mutual variations. Thus,
mock LSL sample generators producing a sine function value of current local_clock()
shifted by i ∗π/2, where i = 0, 1, 2 is generator index, were run in parallel, and passed
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
55
==PAGE:64==
through the proof of concept system. Then, all the samples were graphed together against
their LSL timestamps:
Figure 7.5: Jitter test, 3 sine functions, at 10Hz stimulus sampling rate
Judging by the diagram 7.5, the sine functions seem to be quite accurate, always cross­
ing exactly at (­)0.707 and 0. To inspect the jitter further, the time differences between
subsequent sample timestamps were investigated, expecting to be around 100ms, since
the sampling rate is 10Hz, and are visualized at the following graph:
Figure 7.6: Jitter test, time differences in seconds between consecutive samples per LSL
sample timestamp
In an ideal system, the graph 7.6 would contain only constant functions at 100ms. While
it seems to average around 100.8ms, there are some variations. In order to learn more
about these variations, a Poincare graph has been drawn, treating the consecutive differ­
ences between sample timestamps as a time series.
56
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:65==
Figure 7.7: Poincare graph of the jitter test, time differences in seconds between consec­
utive samples, at 10Hz stimulus sampling rate ­ jitter variability is bound by 3 ms
Generally, the most points on graph 7.7 seem to lie in the identity function area, suggesting
that there is little variance in timestamp differences from sample to sample. However, it is
intriguing that the sin(x + π) (in blue) seems to vary more than its accompanying sin(x)
(in red) and sin(x + π/2) (in green). This behavior is assumed to be random though.
Judging by graph 7.7, the jitter in time difference between when consecutive samples are
produced to LSL is never greater than 3ms. This could suggest that even though the
latency of storing data from LSL to Kafka can be as big as 80ms, the jitter or variability
of the LSL sampling rate is around 3ms, thus if the system is aimed to just store data for
offline analysis, the latency is not too problematic. If we were to use the system for near
real­time monitoring though, it would be.
7.3
User flow tests
While there are plenty of different types of software tests one might choose to perform,
like acceptance, smoke, regression, functional, etc., for the sake of this thesis it has been
chosen to perform one end­to­end user flow test of this thesis MVP prototype. This test
was indirectly run and documented while preparing the appended user manual .8.
7.4
Overview of the extent of requirement implementation
Out of a total of 28 MVP requirements described in chapter 4, there were:
• 13 done
• 13 partially done
• 2 undone
The detailed overview of each requirement with their status of implementation and de­
scription is appended in .9.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
57
==PAGE:66==
Due to the complexity of the domain, this thesis has delivered an initial minimal scope
of the desired system. An overall high­level roadmap for delivering the full scope is dis­
cussed in chapter 8.
58
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:67==
8
Future work
8.1
Discussion
This thesis aimed to take on a comprehensive approach when tackling the problem of
designing a software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit
setting by looking at not only the technical and performance aspects, but also considering
other practical subdomains like compliance, security or medical device interoperability.
Such approach was chosen aiming to learn as much about the domain as a whole and
use that knowledge to optimize the design. Naturally, the amount of subdomains being
taken into account also means that some of them were not investigated in great depth ­
the most investigated aspect is performance, while other subdomains are implemented
in a minimal scope and/or considered only theoretically. This is also intentional, as it was
deemed essential to verify and quantify performance of the system first, to thus prove that
the system is worth putting in more effort, eg. within compliance.
Investigating the values put forth in the testing chapter 7, the latency of 20 ms is concluded
to be good enough for a lot of various stimuli, however it is being acknowledged that it
might be too slow for some cases, like eg. tracking eye movement while watching a video,
especially since the latency can get up to around 80 ms when streaming for longer periods
of time. In such case, due to the sheer occurance of non­zero latency, it is valuable to
investigate and quantify the stability of the system streaming in as much detail as possible
through performance tests, which were described in chapter 7, in order for a future user
to be able to use this data to reason more precisely and decide whether the system is
good enough for their specific use case. Such approach was chosen in order to increase
the usability of the system and also to facilitate future development if any. As part of
future work, it would be valuable to investigate all possible causes for such relatively high
latency, candidates for which are listed in subsection 9.1.
Naturally, other solutions, ie. not basing on a combination of LSL and Kafka, could be also
investigated further, through, for example, prototyping and running similar performance
tests, however that is deemed out of scope of this thesis.
One can also notice that a lot of the methods described in the book [19], like utility trees
or quality attribute checklists, were not used for the sake of this thesis. It is an intentional
action, as with little software architecture design experience, it can turn out to be more
effective to do more prototyping to empirically validate what works and what does not, as
a complement to design efforts.
8.2
Full scope roadmap
As mentioned in chapter 9, it is valuable to consider and plan for delivering the full scope
of the desired system, since the thesis has delivered no more than an initial minimal
subset of it. The roadmap from this minimal research­aimed data recording prototype to
its hospital­deployable near real­time anxiety monitoring system could looks as follows:
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 8.1: High­level roadmap for delivering the full scope of the system
Each stage from diagram 8.1 is described in the subsections below.
8.2.1
Latency and prototype optimization
Having delivered the proof­of­concept prototype architecture for this thesis, the first task
that comes to mind is investigating the potential causes of the latency issue (ie. latency of
data recording averaging around 20ms, with some outliers up to 80ms when streaming for
longer periods of time), already listed in chapter 9. It is of great importance to minimize the
latency, in order to make the system more usable for recording eye tracking or gamification
activity data. To conclude the latency optimization phase, the performance tests should
be rerun. Should their results be deemed unsatisfactory, it could be decided to pivot and
explore different and possibly better performing architecture set­ups.
Otherwise, one would continue with prototype optimization phase. It should be started with
developing a more robust compliance module, that will facilitate GDPR consents collection
and, for that matter, excersizing the rest of data subject’s GDPR rights in a secure enough
way. Security­wise, a great deal of effort would be required, starting with implementing
service­to­service authentication, using HTTPS over HTTP, improving code coverage,
robust input validation and error handling, robust access control and authentication, or
firewalls configuration. It would also be very beneficial to add some microservices around
the Kafka cluster to facilitate data extraction from Kafka topics and logging. Moreover,
a secure and auditable logging module should be added to track user activity within the
system, especially due to GDPR and MDR compliance.
At this point, there are two design questions to answer:
• Would it improve latency and simplify the architecture, were Linux servers to be
used, instead of Windows ones, for the sake of running deployment containers?
(Since most containers run on Linux servers anyways)
• In order to interoperate with non­LSL devices, would it be beneficial to implement
listening for stimuli data through some LSL alternatives?
Refactoring to run on Linux servers instead of Windows ones might be beneficial to at­
tempt before developing a scaled version of the system, coming in the next phase, to
minimize waste of refactoring a scaled set up with more servers to change. Having done
such refactor, performance tests would have to be rerun to see if it improved the latency.
When it comes to enabling the system to listen to non­LSL stimuli, the synchronization
would have to be considered. LSL provides time correction and other synchronization
data for its streams, thus if one wanted to synchronize with other non­LSL sources, a
custom implementation would need to be provided. This can be achieved in a couple of
ways:
60
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:69==
• use an extra hardware to feed its digital pulse to both LSL and non­LSL streams,
then cross­correlate data offline
• write an LSL plugin for the specific stimulus from scratch, that could pass data from
the stimulus to LSL
• feed the other clock data to an LSL stream, where each sample would contain the
other clock value and an LSL timetsamp, that could be then correlated eg. using
linear regression
This phase should be concluded with rerunning performance tests to confirm the new
version of the system is still applicable. Should their results be deemed unsatisfactory, it
could be decided to pivot and explore different and possibly better performing architecture
setups.
8.2.2
Scaled data analysis and monitoring development
In the final version of the system, its aim will be to monitor anxiety levels of multiple patients
at a time. Therefore, the current set­up will have to be scaled to handled such increased
load.
Before jumping into scaling, it might be beneficial to start with a user testing phase record­
ing actual patients and/or parents data in a lab environment. The findings from such tests
would help validate the usability of the system, which would be easier to improve before
any scaling efforts. This testing could overlap with the scaling development efforts for
better testibility.
A design question to ask at this point could be:
• Should the system be made compliant with any other standards, like ISO, guidelines,
or codes of conduct?
• What are the compliance implications for the organization?
ISO/IEC 27000 family is the most known and widely employed, when it comes to security
standards, with ISO 9001 often mention as its equivalent for quality. ISO 27001 and 9001
are oftentimes essential to remain competitive, especially concerning a medical device
realm, and are obtained through certifications.
There are also some organizational aspects of compliance that would have to be con­
sidered, were the system to be developed for a clincal trial. GDPR­wise, an organization
would need to appoint a data protection officer, maintain documentation for GDPR compli­
ance ready for audit, and have a clear process in place for informing the authorities about
potential data breaches. Hence the importance of secure and auditable logs mentioned
in the previous subsection.
Then, one faces the big task of developing the rest of the data pipeline, ie. adding data
processing with visualization. To achieve this, it might be useful to perform some offline
data mining on the data gathered in user tests by now, to inverstigate anxiety data corre­
lations if any. This information would be then used to optimize the data processing and
visualization, once it is determined what data relationships might be valuable to visual­
ize. When it comes to technology choices, section 5.3 mentions possible chocies for data
processing and visualization, that could be Apache Spark and Grafana respectively, with
a robust database like MongoDB. This will imply quite a development effort to implement
and pose a performance question.
After such full pipeline setup is verified to work with a verification test, a scaling effort is to
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
61
==PAGE:70==
be thought out. Design­wise, one must choose between horizontal and vertical scaling,
and rethink the whole networking set­up, especially where would the system be hosted.
Cloud hosting definitely could provide some elasticity in resource consumption and sim­
plify deployment, but it might slow the system down, when it is being hosted off­premises.
Conversely, should the system be hosted locally at some hospital servers, the config­
urability and maintainability of it might become an issue. Any such networking changes
would also have implications on the system security, especially when hosted in a cloud,
which impose extra risks to be accounted for.
Another great challenge at this point would be to make the system integrate with the rest
of the hospital IT systems. For now, all data is pseudonymized by the system. However,
if it were to be used for patient monitoring purposes, it would be necessary to link the
system data to patient data to easily recognize which patient is currently struggling. Not
only does it imply some integration effort, but also can create new data security risks,
which should be mitigated in order to remain compliant and thus competitive.
Having such a scaled set­up ready, robust performance testing should be done, in order
to confirm that the added on processing time still allows for near real­time monitoring in a
hospital setting, which could be enriched with some user testing as well.
Depending on the test results, one might decide to pivot ­ if the full data pipeline system
is too slow for near real­time monitoring, the questions to be asked can be:
• Is there any technological/architectureal debt, or any other need for refactoring? Is
it affordable?
• Can the current system be used for some other purpose, eg. research data collec­
tion?
Otherwise, one might continue with preparing and running a clinical trial.
8.2.3
Clinical trial
A clinical trial is a research experiment involving people to test health­related interventions
and see how they work. Running a clinical trial is essential to obtain a CE marking and
thus enable the product to be deployed and used in its designated environment.
Much clinical research takes place in collaboration between public research institutions,
like universities or hospital research departments, and private companies. When assem­
bling a team, the collaborative relationship must be formalized in legal contracts prior
to sending the trial protocol to the approving authorities, which implies quite some legal
overhead. It might be also beneficial to consider obtaining insurance for the clinical trial
sponsor and the patients that would participate.
As explained in the Danish Medicines Agency guideline [27], clinical trials of medical de­
vices must only be conducted in Denmark when a scientific ethical committee and the
Danish Medicines Agency has given its authorisation. The sponsor can apply for it hav­
ing paid a tens­of­thousands DKK fee. Since this is not the only cost, it would be required
to raise enough funds beforehand to have some sort of a budget ­ one can see a clinical
trial as a project of its own, with its budget, scope, schedule and a team.
The Danish Medicines Agency authorization application needs to contain (not only) the
following:
• trial protocol
• product documentation
62
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:71==
• patient information
• scientific ethical committee authorization ­ built around the four scientific ethical prin­
ciples, that is beneficence, non­harm, autonomy and justice, and the assessment
of scientific quality
• clear responsibility assignment ­ trial investigator responsible for the practical im­
plementation, a sponsor for leading the trial, a data controller to manage GDPR
compliance of the trial proceedings, data processors
Apart from authorities, there are two databases to which a clinical trial should be reported
­ clincaltrials.gov and EudraCT.
Since a clinical trial is research, it bases on hypothesis or a research question, answer
to which is to prove that the value brought by the system is worth the risk of using it.
Therefore, it is of vital importance to document measures of how well the system performs
in real setting or how helpful the monitoring system is in daily work.
It is also important to document any unwanted patient reactions ­ suspected unexpected
serious adverse reactions (SUSARs), which need to be reported to the Danish Medicines
Agency.
Such data can be then aggregated and used as evidence to justify a positive (or negative)
outcome of a trial in a clinical trial report. At the end of the trial, such report must be
submitted both to the scientific ethical committee and the Danish Medicines Agency.
Such report, together with system’s quality, safety and performance documentation based
on risk analysis, and a signed declaration of conformity, can be used to apply to the Danish
Medicines Agency for a CE marking, which is to be audited every 5 years.
8.2.4
Going to market
Naturally, were the system to go to market, there would be a lot of organizational consid­
erations. Human resources would be needed to maintain the system, manage client rela­
tions, fix vulnerabilities etc. Moreover, there would be some substantial effort in maintain­
ing GDPR and MDR compliance, by not only maintaining proper system documentation
ready for audit and monitoring for data breaches, but also having in place a post­market
clinical follow­up (PMCF) process, which can be seen as a follow­up to a clinical trial.
Such process is to proactively collect and evaluate clinical data from the use of the device
after the device has obtained CE marking and has been placed on the market to confirm
the safety and performance of the device throughout its lifetime and to make sure that
any risks associated with using the device are still acceptable. It could be accomplished
through:
• keeping abreast of new clinical experience
• explicitly collecting feedback from users (like the feedback form in the prorotype)
• using user activity data to infer patterns and trends
• PMCF clinical trial
The results and evaluation must be analysed and documented in a PMCF evaluation
report.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
63
==PAGE:72==
64
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:73==
9
Conclusions
When brainstorming conclusions, it might be useful to try to correlate them to the problem
statement 1.3 to reason about the problem­solution fit provided through the thesis. For
better clarity, the problem question split into two subquestions will be answered in the
following subsections.
9.1
How to synchronize and collect data from multiple health
data stimuli in a configurable way?
LSL and scalable by design Kafka with the developed LSL listener server complemented
by the synchronous modules, like UI, create a solution architecture that can be an answer
to this problem statement subquestion. To quantify how good of an answer it is, the
performance tests were executed (chapter 7), showing some latency issues for higher
sampling rate data sources. The root cause could lie within:
• an implementation bug, similar to the ones mentioned at the beginning of section
7.1
• an inaccurate Kafka cluster configuration, which could be investigated and futher
developed within future work
• the quality of implementation of the LSL listener server, which might become a bot­
tleneck, as it is a single pass from LSL to Kafka, and also exhibits a bug with freeing
up memory (mentioned before and in the appended user manual .8)
• the stability of scaled LSL, which has not been designed to stop and resume streams
while recording
• the overhead of using Windows servers for running service containers, like Kafka
cluster, which run on a Windows Susbsystem for Linux (WSL) anyways, refactoring
to Linux servers could be considered as mitigation
and it should be the first task of the future work 8.
Another practical challenge would be medical device interoperability, already mentioned in
chapter 2. The current standalone version of the system would require substantial effort,
if it were to be deployed in a hospital setting, to ensure it works well with the rest of the
existing software and hardware infrastructure. It would also imply some compliance and
security tightening, since the system would most likely also operate on some personal
data that cannot be simply pseudonymized, if it were to be used for real­time patient
monitoring.
9.2
How to maintain proper data security and compliance of
the system processing?
Security and compliance pose quite a development challenge, especially being faced with
strict performance requirements within highly­constrained medical technology realm. This
complexity is best reflected in the fact that medical technology development projects can
take years in duration, where running a clinical trial itself can add on months of work.
Design­wise, the fact that both LSL and Kafka run over TCP, together with the fact that
data stored in Kafka topics is also unencrypted and generally that the security measures
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
65
==PAGE:74==
implemented so far have been very minimal, makes the current version of the system
uncompliant to being used in an actual hospital setting. Since the current version of the
system is aimed more at research purposes than being deployed in a hospital, the fact
that it can be set up over its designated network requiring little outside world communi­
cation has been deemed as a decent initial mitigation, along with authentication, access
control and psuedonymization. It would have to be then investigated as a part of future
work, if implementing further security measures, as suggested in subsection 5.2.9, for an
LSL+Kafka architecture could still perform satisfactorily. Otherwise, other architectures
should be investigated.
66
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:75==
Bibliography
[1]
Anxiety. 2024. URL: https://www.apa.org/topics/anxiety.
[2]
EU ­ mental health consilium. 2023. URL: https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/
policies/mental-health/.
[3]
Lerwick JL. Minimizing pediatric healthcare­induced anxiety and trauma. 2016. URL:
https://doi.org/10.5409%2Fwjcp.v5.i2.143.
[4]
Samuel C. Seiden et al. Tablet­based Interactive Distraction (TBID) vs oral midazo­
lam to minimize perioperative anxiety in pediatric patients: a noninferiority random­
ized trial. 2014. URL: https://doi-org.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/10.1111/pan.12475.
[5]
Joanna Piskorz and Czub Marcin. Effectiveness of a virtual reality intervention to
minimize pediatric stress and pain intensity during venipuncture. 2018. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1111/jspn.12201.
[6]
Amy Williams and Paul Ishimine. Non­pharmacologic Management of Pain and
Anxiety in the Pediatric Patient. 2016. URL: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40138 -
016-0090-5.
[7]
María Consuelo del Cabral­Gallo et al. Anxiety management in pediatric oncology
patients and their caregivers during hospitalization through music therapy. 2014.
URL: https://doi.org/10.5209/rev_PSIC.2014.v11.n2-3.47386.
[8]
Jennifer G Tichon et al. Physiological measurement of anxiety to evaluate perfor­
mance in simulation training. 2013. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10111-013-
0257-8.
[9]
Michael A. De Georgia et al. Information Technology in Critical Care: Review of
Monitoring and Data Acquisition Systems for Patient Care and Research. 2015.
URL: https://doi.org/10.1155%2F2015%2F727694.
[10]
Janet Pigueiras­del­Real et al. NRP: A Multi­Source, Heterogeneous, Automatic
Data Collection System for Infants in Neonatal Intensive Care Units. 2024. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2023.3306477.
[11]
S. Voskarides et al. Mobile health systems: A brief overview. 2002. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1117/12.472960.
[12]
Neubert Sebastian et al. Multi­Sensor­Fusion Approach for a Data­Science­Oriented
Preventive Health Management System: Concept and Development of a Decentral­
ized Data Collection Approach for Heterogeneous Data Sources. 2019. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1155/2019/9864246.
[13]
Supported Devices and Tools. URL: https://labstreaminglayer.readthedocs.io/info/
supported_devices.html.
[14]
Christian Kothe et al. The Lab Streaming Layer for Synchronized Multimodal Record­
ing. 2024. URL: https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.13.580071.
[15]
Merino­Monge Manuel et al. An Easy­to­Use Multi­Source Recording and Synchro­
nization Software for Experimental Trials. 2020. URL: https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2020.3034770.
[16]
Maninder Pal Singh. Distributed approach to analyze physiological time series sig­
nals in medical telemetry. 2016. URL: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/78561459.
pdf.
[17]
The Copenhagen Research Platform ­ About. URL: https://carp.cachet.dk/about/.
[18]
15th State of Agile Report Shows Notable Rise in Agile Adoption Across the Enter­
prise. URL: https://digital.ai/press-releases/15th-state-of-agile-report-shows-notable-
rise-in-agile-adoption-across-the/.
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
67
==PAGE:76==
[19]
Len Bass, Paul Clements, and RickKazman. Software Architecture in Practice. 3rd
and 4th. 2012 and 2019.
[20]
EARS. URL: https://alistairmavin.com/ears/.
[21]
Medical devices in Denmark. URL: https://laegemiddelstyrelsen.dk/en/devices/.
[22]
Regulation (EU) 2017/745. URL: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/
PDF/?uri=CELEX:32017R0745.
[23]
EU notifies bodies by country. URL: https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/single-market-
compliance-space/#/notified-bodies/by-country.
[24]
Microsoft Threat Modeling Tool. URL: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/
security/develop/threat-modeling-tool.
[25]
Kafka + Zookeeper image on Docker Hub. URL: https : / / hub . docker . com / r /
confluentinc/cp-zookeeper.
[26]
LSL documentation. URL: https://labstreaminglayer.readthedocs.io/projects/liblsl/
index.html.
[27]
KOM GODT I GANG MED KLINISK FORSKNING. URL: https://sum.dk/Media/8/
1/Kom-godt-igang-med-klinisk-forskning-marts-2017.pdf.
68
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:77==
.1
System Requirements Specification (SRS)
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
69
==PAGE:78==
Thesis System Requirements Specification
(MVP is bold, post MVP is regular)
1.
Functional
a.
The system shall be able to store aggregated data for future research
purposes
b.
The system shall be able to store aggregated data for future near real-time
monitoring
c.
The system shall be able to import and synchronize data post-factum
d. The system shall be able to process data coming from a periodic or
sporadic stimuli
e.
The system shall synchronize the data from all plugged-in stimuli for
relevant sessions
f.
The system shall be able to process data both from a parent and patient per
session
g. The system shall allow user to start a new patient session
h.
The system shall enable the user to monitor the measured data in real-time
2.
Non-functional
a.
Compliance GDPR (based on https://gdpr.eu/checklist/ excluding the
organizational aspect)
i.
The system shall allow patient to exercise all their GDPR rights by
providing a proper interface, including easy withdrawing of a consent
ii.
The system shall have a Data Protection Impact Assessment proved
and documented
iii.
The system shall have a clearly-defined privacy policy
iv.
The system shall request a data subject consent before processing
starts
v.
The system shall inform data subject about the privacy policy and
the processing protocol before asking for consent
vi.
The system shall encrypt all data in transfer and at rest
vii.
The system shall keep all sensitive data pseudo-anonymised
viii.
The system shall have a process of notifying authorities and data subjects
about a data breach (The Danish Data Protection Agency)
b.
Compliance MDR
i.
The system shall be tested to document the performance and safety of it
and show that the benefits of using it outweigh any potential risks
ii.
The system shall have a plan for obtaining a CE marking outlined
iii.
The system shall be ready to have its CE marking documentation
managed and ready for reinspection at least every 5 years
iv.
The system shall have a plan for a clinical evaluation, whose results
would be gathered into an evaluation report
v.
The system shall have a plan for post-market clinical follow-up
process*
==PAGE:79==
vi.
The system shall have a subsystem for assessing MDR complaints
and reporting serious incidents to relevant competent authorities
c.
Compliance -> security
i.
The system shall keep logs in a secure and auditable way
ii.
The system shall have a properly configured network gateway firewall
iii.
The system shall be available whenever a data recording is required
iv.
The system shall implement authentication and access control to
make sure proper access for users and patients data subjects
v.
The system shall apply the CIA triad in a balanced manner
d.
Remaining security
i.
The system shall run on a designated wired network
e.
Performance
i.
The system shall have a monitoring process for its sync module and
devices to track if they are consuming/producing
ii.
The system shall minimize jitter between different data streams
iii.
The system shall have less than 1 sec latency in storing the data
iv.
Latency etc
f.
Interoperability
i.
The system shall interoperate only with the accepted sensors
ii.
The system shall be placed in an environment, where stimuli devices
are easily discoverable
iii.
The system shall contain a list of identifiable patient locations in
accordance with the hospital
iv.
While starting a recording session, the system shall enable user to
specify a unique sessionID*
v.
While running a recording session, the system shall associate all the
data collected with its unique sessionID
vi.
While running a recording session, the system shall allow user to
manipulate stimuli listeners
g.
Monitorability
i.
The system shall visualize the current status of connected stimuli
listeners to users
ii.
The system shall visualize current status of sync storage module to
users
iii.
While connected stimuli listeners or sync storage module are not
working correctly, the system shall notify users
iv.
The system shall visualize the data in real-time
h.
Scalability
i.
The system shall have robust syncing and storing module that can handle
multiple recording sessions at a time
3.
Definitions & facts
a.
the measurements within last 3-4 minutes have a growing tendency when each
minute compared with a previous minute has a growing tendency (monotonous
growth)
==PAGE:80==
b.
The primary user is an hcp, most likely a nurse, or a researcher
c.
The patient (or their parent) is a data source and a data subject from gdpr
perspective
d.
The system will be in medical device risk class IIa, which implies that the CE
marking has to be obtained with an authorized third party involved
e.
CE marking certifies safety and performance of a device is adequate enough for
it to be compliant with EU MDR
f.
In Denmark, the GDPR consent for a child patient to be a part of a clinical trial
needs to come from both parents
g.
The sessionID field will be used as a unique recording session identifier and will
be the key to retrieve measurement data, GDPR consents and logs
h.
The clinical evaluation must show that the risks associated with using the device
are acceptable relative to the performance of the device
i.
Stimuli refers to not only data sources like health data or eye tracking sensors,
but also sporadic custom events like a nurse came in with a needle, or that a
patient is watching a video and we want to know what they are looking at
j.
Post-market clinical follow-up (PMCF) process implies that the manufacturer
must proactively collect and evaluate clinical data from the use of the device after
the device has obtained CE marking and has been placed on the market. The
PMCF process is to confirm the safety and performance of the device throughout
its lifetime and to make sure that any risks associated with using the device are
still acceptable.
==PAGE:81==
.2
Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA)
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
73
==PAGE:82==
 
 
DPIA template 
20180209 
v0.3 
 
1 
Sample DPIA template 
 
 
This template is an example of how you can record your DPIA process and 
outcome. It follows the process set out in our DPIA guidance, and should be read 
alongside that guidance and the Criteria for an acceptable DPIA set out in European 
guidelines on DPIAs.  
 
You should start to fill out the template at the start of any major project involving 
the use of personal data, or if you are making a significant change to an existing 
process. The final outcomes should be integrated back into your project plan. 
 
Step 1: Identify the need for a DPIA 
Explain broadly what project aims to achieve and what type of processing it 
involves. You may find it helpful to refer or link to other documents, such as a 
project proposal. Summarise why you identified the need for a DPIA. 
 
 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
DPIA template 
20180209 
v0.3 
 
2 
Step 2: Describe the processing 
Describe the nature of the processing: how will you collect, use, store and 
delete data? What is the source of the data? Will you be sharing data with anyone? 
You might find it useful to refer to a flow diagram or other way of describing data 
flows. What types of processing identified as likely high risk are involved? 
 
 
Describe the scope of the processing: what is the nature of the data, and does 
it include special category or criminal offence data? How much data will you be 
collecting and using? How often? How long will you keep it? How many individuals 
are affected? What geographical area does it cover? 
 
 
designated wired network, which provides some security wheb a network gateway firewall is properly configured. 
infrastructure until a clinical trial is performed. 
The system in question will not share data with any other system, nor will it be integrated with existing hospital IT 
The entire end-to-end process is identified as likely high risk.
such data will be also the basis for data analysis, indexing or visualization 
Within the MVP scope, the recorded data can only be exported or manually d, but within the post MVP scope, 
Within the MVP scope, the data storage and transmission will be unencrypted, but the system will be running on its 
to a data recording module of the system. 
The source of the data are various stimuli that sample patients' physiological data, track their eye movements, or 
track their activity while gaming or using VR. Some of these stimuli are periodic with a constant sampling rate, while 
others include random event generation like trial markers. Such data will be exposed and transmitted over a network 
only) real-time measurements performed on young patients or their parents. 
The amount of data collected and used per patient depends on the amount of chosen stimuli
The system will be used for monitoring only after a young patient has been triaged and before they have been 
administered further treatment, ie. while they wait in a hospital bed, thus it is expected to monitor a patient for no longer 
than a couple of hours per emergency care unit visit. 
The MVP scope will not be able to handle more than 1 recording session at a time, which can record from up to 4 stimuli, 
thus the MVP scope cannot handle recording data from more than 2 people at a time. 
The data will be kept as long as it is needed for anxiety research purposes or a request for deletion is made.Your text here 
3
It’s sensitive personal data, subcategory health data, subclass data concerning health, coming from physiological (and not 
==PAGE:84==
 
 
DPIA template 
20180209 
v0.3 
 
3 
Describe the context of the processing: what is the nature of your relationship 
with the individuals? How much control will they have? Would they expect you to 
use their data in this way? Do they include children or other vulnerable groups? Are 
there prior concerns over this type of processing or security flaws? Is it novel in any 
way? What is the current state of technology in this area? Are there any current 
issues of public concern that you should factor in? Are you signed up to any 
approved code of conduct or certification scheme (once any have been approved)? 
 
 
Describe the purposes of the processing: what do you want to achieve? What is 
the intended effect on individuals? What are the benefits of the processing – for  
you, and more broadly?  
 
provide by design.
details of the processing and thus be able to provide consent to the processing. Naturally, the children themselves 
The MVP system will only be used in a lab context, mostly with adult individuals. If a system is further developed post 
The data subjects, who are mostly children, will be able to exercize all their GDPR laws through a system interface - 
all remaining GDPR rights will be facilitated by the system.
Specifically, before monitoring commences, the guardian will need to become familiar with the privacy policy and the 
within the MVP scope, they can sign an informed GDPR consent and request a manual data deletion, while post MVP 
might not understand the extent and repercussions of such processing, thus the legal guardians will have to be 
reasoned with in detail. In Denmark, it is required that both parents sign a GDPR consent before processing starts
MVP, it would have to be scaled to perform multiple recording sessions at a time and it would also have to go through 
a full clinical trial, to obtain a CE marking, that would certify that it's safe enough to use it a hospital setting. 
The concern of processing of children data concerning health calls for robust security, which the system will aim to 
in younger patients while facilitating their treatment management by informing HCPs in real-time about their 
lead to behavioral outbursts or have other consequences, which make administering further treatment harder and 
anxiety-reflecting vitals tendencies.
more time-consuming. The system described here aims to minimize the discomfort of unrecognized anxiety feelings 
for analysis and searching for anxiety patterns. When such patterns or trends are studied in great detail, then the 
system can be enriched with data analysis and near real-time visualization functionalities, and thus get a new primary 
purpose of making it easier for HCPs in emergency care units to manage stress in young patients. 
In an emergency care unit setting, there is an omnipresent issue with the lack of time, context switching, and urgency, 
which imposes extra difficulties on managing young patients' anxiety, which is already hard to recognize in children, 
due to their different developmental levels, family dynamics, constrained reasoning etc. Unrecognized anxiety can 
Within the MVP scope, since the system is recording anxiety data, it mainly has a research purpose of providing data 
==PAGE:85==
 
 
DPIA template 
20180209 
v0.3 
 
4 
Step 3: Consultation process 
Consider how to consult with relevant stakeholders: describe when and how 
you will seek individuals’ views – or justify why it’s not appropriate to do so. Who 
else do you need to involve within your organisation? Do you need to ask your 
processors to assist? Do you plan to consult information security experts, or any 
other experts? 
 
 
Step 4: Assess necessity and proportionality 
Describe compliance and proportionality measures, in particular: what is 
your lawful basis for processing? Does the processing actually achieve your 
purpose? Is there another way to achieve the same outcome? How will you prevent 
function creep? How will you ensure data quality and data minimisation? What 
information will you give individuals? How will you help to support their rights? 
What measures do you take to ensure processors comply? How do you safeguard 
any international transfers? 
 
compliance aspects.
supervisors will be consulted regularly, who are considered a software engineering expert, including security and 
familiarity with the privacy policy and consent for processing. Since the project is a master thesis project, thesis 
irrelevant sensitive data. The patients/guardians will not be consulted until a clinical trial/testing requires their 
users, in order to gain more insight into what data might be useful to record, and thus minimize the risk of processing 
To design the processing, it will start with interviewing the researchers or HCPs (the processors), who are the primary 
then real-time monitoring performed by the system is allowed.
proper authentication. The function creep will be prevented, as no other processing purpose than first data collection, 
where a user can exersize their GDPR rights. The processors access will be regulated by use of access control and 
There will be no international transfers allowed. 
to a real human being. The data subjects or their legal guardians will become familiar with the nature of processing by 
synchronization and data minimisation will be ensured by never using any data that can be used to link anxiety data 
the same outcome, especially since the system will provide synchronization. Data quality will be ensured by proper 
anxiety management in younger patients (post MVP). Without similar automation, it would be really hard to achieve 
The consent obtained from patients/their legal guardians is the lawful basis for processing. The processing, when 
reading the privacy policy/research protocol prior to giving their consent. The system will provide a separate module 
implemented efficiently, will achieve the aim of either providing data for anxiety analysis (MVP) or facilitating the 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
DPIA template 
20180209 
v0.3 
 
5 
Step 5: Identify and assess risks 
Describe source of risk and nature of 
potential impact on individuals. Include 
associated compliance and corporate risks as 
necessary.  
Likelihood 
of harm 
Severity 
of harm 
Overall 
risk  
 
Remote, 
possible or 
probable 
Minimal, 
significant 
or severe 
Low, 
medium 
or high 
1.Access to sensitive data by someone else than a subject or processor
2.The data subject is unable to exercize their GDPR rights
3.The alerts generated by the system are inaccurate (eg. too many 
distress)
false positives indicating distress when patients are not actually in 
4.The data coming into the system is incorrect
possible
possible
remote
remote
severe
severe
significant
significant
high
medium
medium
low
==PAGE:87==
 
 
DPIA template 
20180209 
v0.3 
 
6 
Step 6: Identify measures to reduce risk 
Identify additional measures you could take to reduce or eliminate risks 
identified as medium or high risk in step 5 
Risk  
Options to reduce or 
eliminate risk 
Effect on 
risk 
Residual 
risk 
Measure 
approved 
 
 
Eliminated 
reduced 
accepted 
Low 
medium 
high 
Yes/no 
 
1
2
3
access control, etc
pseudoanonymization, authentication and 
encryption at rest and in transfer, 
implement proper security measures like 
exersize all GDPR rights
a robust GDPR module allowing to 
proper synchronization
reduced
reduced
accepted
medium
medium
low
yes
yes
yes
==PAGE:88==
 
 
DPIA template 
20180209 
v0.3 
 
7 
Step 7: Sign off and record outcomes 
Item  
Name/date 
Notes 
Measures approved by:  
Integrate actions back into 
project plan, with date and 
responsibility for completion 
Residual risks 
approved by: 
 
If accepting any residual high 
risk, consult the ICO before going 
ahead 
DPO advice provided: 
 
DPO should advise on 
compliance, step 6 measures and 
whether processing can proceed 
Summary of DPO advice: 
DPO advice accepted 
or overruled by: 
 
If overruled, you must explain 
your reasons 
Comments: 
Consultation responses 
reviewed by: 
 
If your decision departs from 
individuals’ views, you must 
explain your reasons 
Comments: 
This DPIA will kept 
under review by: 
 
The DPO should also review 
ongoing compliance with DPIA 
 
==PAGE:89==
.3
Threat modelling report
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
81
==PAGE:90==
Threat Modeling Report
Created on 10.03.2024 15:49:31
Threat Model Name:
Owner:
Reviewer:
Contributors:
Description:
Assumptions:
External Dependencies:
Threat Model Summary:
Not Started
26
Not Applicable
0
Needs Investigation
0
Mitigation Implemented 0
Total
26
Total Migrated
0
Diagram: Diagram 1
==PAGE:91==
Diagram 1 Diagram Summary:
Not Started
26
Not Applicable
0
Needs Investigation
0
Mitigation Implemented 0
Total
26
Total Migrated
0
Interaction: Generic Data Flow
1. An adversary can gain unauthorized access to database due to lack of network access protection
  [State: Not
Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Elevation of Privileges
Description:
If there is no restriction at network or host firewall level, to access the database then anyone can attempt to 
connect to the database from an unauthorized location
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Configure a Windows Firewall for Database Engine Access. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#firewall-db">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#firewall-db</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
2. An adversary can gain unauthorized access to database due to loose authorization rules
  [State: Not Started] 
[Priority: High] 
Category:
Elevation of Privileges
Description:
Database access should be configured with roles and privilege based on least privilege and need to know 
principle.
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that least-privileged accounts are used to connect to Database server. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#privileged-server">https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#privileged-server</a> Implement Row
Level Security RLS to prevent tenants from accessing each others data. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#rls-tenants">https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#rls-tenants</a> Sysadmin role should only
have valid necessary users . Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#sysadmin-
users">https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#sysadmin-users</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
3. An adversary can gain access to sensitive PII or HBI data in database
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
==PAGE:92==
Category:
Information Disclosure
Description:
Additional controls like Transparent Data Encryption, Column Level Encryption, EKM etc. provide additional 
protection mechanism to high value PII or HBI data.
Justification: <no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Use strong encryption algorithms to encrypt data in the database. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#strong-db">https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#strong-db</a> Ensure that sensitive data in
database columns is encrypted. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtdata#db-
encrypted">https://aka.ms/tmtdata#db-encrypted</a> Ensure that database-level encryption (TDE) is enabled.
Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtdata#tde-enabled">https://aka.ms/tmtdata#tde-enabled</a> Ensure that
database backups are encrypted. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtdata#backup">https://aka.ms/tmtdata#backup</a> Use SQL server EKM to protect
encryption keys. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#ekm-keys">https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#ekm-keys</a>
Use AlwaysEncrypted feature if encryption keys should not be revealed to Database engine. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#keys-engine">https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#keys-engine</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
4. An adversary can gain access to sensitive data by performing SQL injection
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Information Disclosure
Description:
SQL injection is an attack in which malicious code is inserted into strings that are later passed to an instance of 
SQL Server for parsing and execution. The primary form of SQL injection consists of direct insertion of code into 
user-input variables that are concatenated with SQL commands and executed. A less direct attack injects 
malicious code into strings that are destined for storage in a table or as metadata. When the stored strings are 
subsequently concatenated into a dynamic SQL command, the malicious code is executed.
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that login auditing is enabled on SQL Server. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#identify-
sensitive-entities">https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#identify-sensitive-entities</a> Ensure that least-privileged
accounts are used to connect to Database server. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#privileged-
server">https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#privileged-server</a> Enable Threat detection on Azure SQL database. Refer:
<a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#threat-detection">https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#threat-detection</a> Do not
use dynamic queries in stored procedures. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtinputval#stored-
proc">https://aka.ms/tmtinputval#stored-proc</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
5. An adversary can deny actions on database due to lack of auditing
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: Medium] 
Category:
Repudiation
Description:
Proper logging of all security events and user actions builds traceability in a system and denies any possible 
repudiation issues. In the absence of proper auditing and logging controls, it would become impossible to 
implement any accountability in a system.
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that login auditing is enabled on SQL Server. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#identify-
sensitive-entities">https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#identify-sensitive-entities</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
6. An adversary can tamper critical database securables and deny the action
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Tampering
Description:
An adversary can tamper critical database securables and deny the action
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Add digital signature to critical database securables. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#securables-
db">https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#securables-db</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
7. An adversary may leverage the lack of monitoring systems and trigger anomalous traffic to database
  [State: Not
Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Tampering
==PAGE:93==
Description:
An adversary may leverage the lack of intrusion detection and prevention  of anomalous database activities 
and  trigger anomalous traffic to database
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Enable Threat detection on Azure SQL database. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#threat-
detection">https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#threat-detection</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
Interaction: Generic Data Flow
8. An adversary can gain unauthorized access to database due to lack of network access protection
  [State: Not
Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Elevation of Privileges
Description:
If there is no restriction at network or host firewall level, to access the database then anyone can attempt to 
connect to the database from an unauthorized location
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Configure a Windows Firewall for Database Engine Access. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#firewall-db">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#firewall-db</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
9. An adversary can gain unauthorized access to database due to loose authorization rules
  [State: Not Started] 
[Priority: High] 
Category:
Elevation of Privileges
Description:
Database access should be configured with roles and privilege based on least privilege and need to know 
principle.
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that least-privileged accounts are used to connect to Database server. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#privileged-server">https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#privileged-server</a> Implement Row
Level Security RLS to prevent tenants from accessing each others data. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#rls-tenants">https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#rls-tenants</a> Sysadmin role should only
have valid necessary users . Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#sysadmin-
users">https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#sysadmin-users</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
10. An adversary can gain access to sensitive PII or HBI data in database
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Information Disclosure
Description:
Additional controls like Transparent Data Encryption, Column Level Encryption, EKM etc. provide additional 
protection mechanism to high value PII or HBI data.
Justification: <no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Use strong encryption algorithms to encrypt data in the database. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#strong-db">https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#strong-db</a> Ensure that sensitive data in
database columns is encrypted. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtdata#db-
==PAGE:94==
encrypted">https://aka.ms/tmtdata#db-encrypted</a> Ensure that database-level encryption (TDE) is enabled.
Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtdata#tde-enabled">https://aka.ms/tmtdata#tde-enabled</a> Ensure that
database backups are encrypted. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtdata#backup">https://aka.ms/tmtdata#backup</a> Use SQL server EKM to protect
encryption keys. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#ekm-keys">https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#ekm-keys</a>
Use AlwaysEncrypted feature if encryption keys should not be revealed to Database engine. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#keys-engine">https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#keys-engine</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
11. An adversary can gain access to sensitive data by performing SQL injection
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Information Disclosure
Description:
SQL injection is an attack in which malicious code is inserted into strings that are later passed to an instance of 
SQL Server for parsing and execution. The primary form of SQL injection consists of direct insertion of code into 
user-input variables that are concatenated with SQL commands and executed. A less direct attack injects 
malicious code into strings that are destined for storage in a table or as metadata. When the stored strings are 
subsequently concatenated into a dynamic SQL command, the malicious code is executed.
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that login auditing is enabled on SQL Server. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#identify-
sensitive-entities">https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#identify-sensitive-entities</a> Ensure that least-privileged
accounts are used to connect to Database server. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#privileged-
server">https://aka.ms/tmtauthz#privileged-server</a> Enable Threat detection on Azure SQL database. Refer:
<a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#threat-detection">https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#threat-detection</a> Do not
use dynamic queries in stored procedures. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtinputval#stored-
proc">https://aka.ms/tmtinputval#stored-proc</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
12. An adversary can deny actions on database due to lack of auditing
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: Medium] 
Category:
Repudiation
Description:
Proper logging of all security events and user actions builds traceability in a system and denies any possible 
repudiation issues. In the absence of proper auditing and logging controls, it would become impossible to 
implement any accountability in a system.
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that login auditing is enabled on SQL Server. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#identify-
sensitive-entities">https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#identify-sensitive-entities</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
13. An adversary can tamper critical database securables and deny the action
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Tampering
Description:
An adversary can tamper critical database securables and deny the action
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Add digital signature to critical database securables. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#securables-
db">https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#securables-db</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
14. An adversary may leverage the lack of monitoring systems and trigger anomalous traffic to database
  [State: Not
Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Tampering
Description:
An adversary may leverage the lack of intrusion detection and prevention  of anomalous database activities 
and  trigger anomalous traffic to database
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Enable Threat detection on Azure SQL database. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#threat-
detection">https://aka.ms/tmtauditlog#threat-detection</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
==PAGE:95==
Interaction: Generic Data Flow
15. An adversary may gain unauthorized access to privileged features on IoT Device
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority:
High] 
Category:
Elevation of Privileges
Description:
An adversary may get access to admin interface or privileged services like WiFi, SSH, File shares, FTP etc., 
on a device
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that all admin interfaces are secured with strong credentials. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#admin-strong">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#admin-strong</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
16. An adversary may exploit unused services or features in Lab Streaming Layer
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Elevation of Privileges
Description:
An adversary may use unused features or services on Lab Streaming Layer such as UI, USB port etc. 
Unused features increase the attack surface and serve as additional entry points for the adversary
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that only the minimum services/features are enabled on devices. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#min-enable">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#min-enable</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
17. An adversary may exploit known vulnerabilities in unpatched devices
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Tampering
Description:
An adversary may leverage known vulnerabilities and exploit a device if the firmware of the device is not 
updated
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that the Cloud Gateway implements a process to keep the connected devices firmware up to date.
Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#cloud-firmware">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#cloud-
firmware</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
18. An adversary may tamper IoT Device and extract cryptographic key material from it
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority:
High] 
Category:
Tampering
Description:
An adversary may partially or wholly replace the software running on Lab Streaming Layer, potentially allowing 
the replaced software to leverage the genuine identity of the device if the key material or the cryptographic 
facilities holding key materials were available to the illicit program. For example an attacker may leverage 
extracted key material to intercept and suppress data from the device on the communication path and replace it 
with false data that is authenticated with the stolen key material.
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Store Cryptographic Keys securely on IoT Device. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#keys-
iot">https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#keys-iot</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
19. An adversary may tamper the OS of a device and launch offline attacks
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
==PAGE:96==
Category:
Tampering
Description:
An adversary may launch offline attacks made by disabling or circumventing the installed operating system, 
or made by physically separating the storage media from the device in order to attack the data separately.
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Encrypt OS and additional partitions of IoT Device with Bitlocker. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#partition-iot">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#partition-iot</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
Interaction: Generic Data Flow
20. An adversary may execute unknown code on IoT Device
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Tampering
Description:
An adversary may launch malicious code into IoT Device and execute it
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that unknown code cannot execute on devices. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#unknown-exe">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#unknown-exe</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
Interaction: Generic Data Flow
21. An adversary may gain unauthorized access to privileged features on IoT Device
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority:
High] 
Category:
Elevation of Privileges
Description:
An adversary may get access to admin interface or privileged services like WiFi, SSH, File shares, FTP etc., 
on a device
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that all admin interfaces are secured with strong credentials. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#admin-strong">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#admin-strong</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
22. An adversary may exploit unused services or features in Kafka
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Elevation of Privileges
==PAGE:97==
Description:
An adversary may use unused features or services on Kafka such as UI, USB port etc. Unused features 
increase the attack surface and serve as additional entry points for the adversary
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that only the minimum services/features are enabled on devices. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#min-enable">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#min-enable</a>
SDL Phase:
Implementation
23. An adversary may exploit known vulnerabilities in unpatched devices
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Tampering
Description:
An adversary may leverage known vulnerabilities and exploit a device if the firmware of the device is not 
updated
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that the Cloud Gateway implements a process to keep the connected devices firmware up to date.
Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#cloud-firmware">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#cloud-
firmware</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
24. An adversary may tamper IoT Device and extract cryptographic key material from it
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority:
High] 
Category:
Tampering
Description:
An adversary may partially or wholly replace the software running on Kafka, potentially allowing the replaced 
software to leverage the genuine identity of the device if the key material or the cryptographic facilities holding 
key materials were available to the illicit program. For example an attacker may leverage extracted key material 
to intercept and suppress data from the device on the communication path and replace it with false data that is 
authenticated with the stolen key material.
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Store Cryptographic Keys securely on IoT Device. Refer: <a href="https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#keys-
iot">https://aka.ms/tmtcrypto#keys-iot</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
25. An adversary may tamper the OS of a device and launch offline attacks
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
Category:
Tampering
Description:
An adversary may launch offline attacks made by disabling or circumventing the installed operating system, 
or made by physically separating the storage media from the device in order to attack the data separately.
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Encrypt OS and additional partitions of IoT Device with Bitlocker. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#partition-iot">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#partition-iot</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
Interaction: Generic Data Flow
26. An adversary may execute unknown code on IoT Device
  [State: Not Started]  [Priority: High] 
==PAGE:98==
Category:
Tampering
Description:
An adversary may launch malicious code into IoT Device and execute it
Justification:
<no mitigation provided>
Possible
Mitigation(s):
Ensure that unknown code cannot execute on devices. Refer: <a
href="https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#unknown-exe">https://aka.ms/tmtconfigmgmt#unknown-exe</a>
SDL Phase:
Design
==PAGE:99==
.4
Rolling wave plan
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
91
==PAGE:100==
Time period
Task description
Definition of Done
Sprint 1: 1-14.02.2024
Decide what to implement
within GDPR & MDR
(considering potential
differences in regulations
between Denmark vs UE)
An initial set of compliance
requirements I will design and
prototype for
A theoretical
consideration/plan on how to
handle remaining ones
A list of sota products I can
consider using within
compliance
Talk to the HCPs in the
hospital
Answer the following
questions:
-What do the hcps want to
see?(eg. Is a “score” per
room/bed number ok? Do
they want to see all “scores”
at once?)
-How many patients min/max
at the same time?
-Ultimately, on what kind of
device should the monitoring
be able to run?
-Who will be the primary
user?
-How do they ensure GDPR
compliance in the hospital, do
patients sign any forms?
Could I possibly “attach” a
consent to my system to
that?
-How often does the “score”
have to get updated for it to
make sense? (make sense
Ie. enable the HCPs to
==PAGE:101==
recognize a patient is in
distress in a timely manner)
Define the scope of the
system with some initial
constraints
Have a system context
diagram
Decide if the input devices
are considered part of the
system or not (or to what
extent)
Define an acceptable (and
feasible) “score” update
frequency range based on
HCPs answers -> main
performance constraint!
List the initial implications of
the input devices usage
(need for connectivity, data
format etc. analyze for
bandwidth, limited
connectivity handling,
security)
Sprint 2: 15-28.02.2024
Use attribute-driven design
for other QAs than security,
starting with performance
Draw up a utility tree with at
least performance (including
concurrency), security with
availability, usability,
scalability, compliance
The scenarios should have
concrete numbers for
frequencies/rates etc
The scenarios should be
rated (risk,value)
Security analysis,
emphasizing availability (as
confidentiality/integrity are
implied by compliance)
Threat model (eg. using
Microsoft’s threat model tool)
Use attribute-driven design
A prioritized list of security
requirements
Browse architectural patterns
and tactics for the compliance
(with security) vs
performance trade-offs
A list of patterns and tactics
with early design concepts
and reference architectures
==PAGE:102==
Sprint 3: 29.02-13.03.2024
Browse architectural patterns
and tactics for other classes
of requirements
A list of patterns and tactics
with early design concepts
and reference architectures
Browse existing systems
A list of systems/components
I could use for different QA
reqs
Draw up some initial
architectural views: c&c, data
model
Well-enough defined views
Pair up the found subsystems
into full architectures
Have a couple of different
architectures
Sprint 4: 14-27.03.2024
Analyze the architectures
For each, indicate pros and
cons
Confirm the extent to which
each architecture fulfills the
requirements
Choose the best on to
prototype
Prototype the data collection
module + come up with a
data sensor mock
functionality
Test OK with 1 or more
devices
Prototype the synchronization
module
Tested OK with more devices,
use mock if needed
The remaining time:
28.03-31.05.2024
Prototype the rest of the
system
Some running version of the
system tests OK in an
isolated environment
Start writing the actual text of
the thesis
Start with describing the
compliance, then move on to
the architecture
Define a privacy policy and a
processing protocol
description
(If needed) Pivot/change the
ASRs
Updated list of ASRs with
some justification for change
Document
Create/update all necessary
views or other elements in
==PAGE:103==
the documentation
(If possible)Test the system in
a hospital
System proves to work in real
time
Some user satisfaction
indicators
System complies with GDPR
(consent functionality etc)
==PAGE:104==
.5
HCP interview
96
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:105==
Note: This interview considers the post MVP primary purpose of the system, ie. when the
system would be deployed and running in an actual emergency care unit setting in a hospital
Answer the following questions:
-What data would be useful for HCPs to see when handling the patients?
HCP: we should look at a tendency over eg. 3-4 minutes rather than at a singular score and
alarm when it keeps growing, all scores combined into one graph
-How could the system identify patients? Is room+bed number ok?
HCP: to some extent, but some kids don’t even get in the rooms, they’re in the waiting areas
-How many patients min/max at the same time?
HCP: max 10 rooms, each with a bed + however many kids in the waiting room
-Ultimately, on what kind of device should the monitoring be able to run?
HCP: patient management system accessed through a Windows PC in the nurses station
shows a number of how bad the pain is from the face scale device, but nothing for anxiety. The
nurse gives the child a device, they point, and then the nurse inputs it manually.
-Who will be the primary user?
HCP: nurses
-How do they ensure GDPR compliance in the hospital, do patients sign any forms? Could I
possibly “attach” a consent to my system to that? What happens with the gdpr consent when a
child under 18 comes without a parent?
HCP: Only if the hospital needs to send their data to a 3rd party, then they acquire consent.
Were the system to be deployed in a hospital setting, it would require obtaining an informed
GDPR consent from both parents, if the patient is under age, before any processing can
happen.
-How often does the “score” have to get updated for it to make sense?
HCP: Patients will not wear the eye tracking glasses for the whole time, but when they do, they
sample data at around 100Hz. When it comes to heart rate, Apple Watch is not approved to
measure the pulse, in intensive care they do it already, for the emergency care setting it doesn’t
really make sense, as children are not that ill to be on an observation scale all the time, so we
only measure the pulse once per 24 hours. It could be beneficial if we compare both the parent
and child data.
-Sensors might stress or excite the kids which will make the measurements harder, should we
use some other sensors than an Apple Watch or eye tracking glasses like eg. gamification or
movement sensors, thermodermal activity?
==PAGE:106==
HCP: We might need to integrate the system with interview data for the monitoring to be
accurate, no matter the sensors. Skin conduction data is not suitable to children 4-7 age, as
they simply do not sweat much yet. We want to focus on children aged 4-7, because they’re the
smallest children you can interact with. I think the glasses are a pretty normal daily thing, so
they shouldn’t be too excited or stressed about that. So they have the Apple Watch for the
whole time and then they would wear glasses for only some period of time
-How to correlate anxiety data together? Say we have a pulse rate and the eye tracking
movement data, if the eye tracking detects abnormally fast movements, but pulse is ok, should
we alarm?
HCP: The plan for a clinical trial would be as follows: first study with 5-10 healthy children
outside of the hospital setting, then in an emergency setting in a pilot study 25 kids (waiting for
acceptance of Herlev hospital’s ethics committee). Both parents and children will wear watches,
only child will wear glasses tracking eye movements and also a front facing camera.
==PAGE:107==
.6
GDPR informational letter
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
99
==PAGE:108==
Dear participant,
In this letter you will be informed about the purpose of the research project and its procedures. It
is important that you read the letter carefully, as at the end of it you are asked for consent to
participate. If you have any questions, do not hesitate to contact Maja Krzeminska
s220290@dtu.dk for clarification.
Your rights as participant
Your participation in this experiment is voluntary. This means that should you agree to
participate, you can freely leave the experiment at any point in time and without having to give a
reason. We will ask you for your consent to participate after you have been informed about the
experiment. Should you wish to retract your consent, please contact Maja Krzeminska
s220290@dtu.dk
Purpose of the research project
In this research project, we are testing a software system for anxiety recognition in young
emergency care unit patients. The following stimuli will be used to aggregate your physiological
data:
Stimulus name
Type of data
[to be filled out by experimenter before the
experiment]
[to be filled out by experimenter before the
experiment]
[to be filled out by experimenter before the
experiment]
[to be filled out by experimenter before the
experiment]
…
…
This data will be pseudonymized and stored for anxiety research purposes, like data mining or
searching for anxiety patterns or trends the be able to understand and thus manage anxiety
better. Should you wish to have your data deleted or extracted, please contact Maja Krzeminska
s220290@dtu.dk
Data storage and handling
In this research project, data acquired by the tested system is processed and controlled by DTU
as a part of Anxiety Detection and Reduction in Childrens’ Emergency Care project done in
collaboration with Herlev Hospital, Herlev, Denmark. All data recorded through the stimuli
specified in the table above, like your heart rate, eye movements, gaming/VR activity, will be
stored by the tested system under a pseudonym, ie. without any connection to your name,
address, CPR number, or any other information that would allow to identify you. No other
personal information will not be stored. Your data will not be shared with any third party.
==PAGE:109==
Information for the participants
In this experiment, all the stimuli specified in the table above will be enabled and used to sample
your anxiety data for a certain period of time. The person running the experiment will provide
you with more details, like exactly how long the data will be recorded, through what stimuli, and
will help you use them, depending on stimulus specifics. Once you have been informed about
the nature of processing through this letter and given your consent, they will start, manage, and
finish the data recording session. If you need a break at any time, please inform the person
running the experiment.
If you have any questions about the experiment, the methods or your safety and rights, do not
hesitate to contact Maja Krzeminska s220290@dtu.dk.
With kind regards,
Maja Krzeminska
==PAGE:110==
.7
GDPR consent
102
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:111==
GDPR consent form
For the purpose of an experiment with sessionID: [to be filled out by experimenter before the
experiment]
Using stimuli: [to be filled out by experimenter before the experiment]
I confirm that I was satisfactorily informed about the experiment both verbally and in writing by
means of an informational letter. I was given an opportunity to put forward questions regarding
the experiment and its data processing activity, which have been answered satisfactorily.
I have carefully considered my participation in the experiment. I choose to participate of my own
free will.
I understand my privacy is protected according to Danish law and European guidelines (GDPR;
EU 2016/679). Thus, my participation is voluntary, and I have the right to withdraw from the
experiment at any time without having to give a reason.
I give my consent to take part in this experiment.
Full name
Date, Place
Signature
==PAGE:112==
.8
User manual
104
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:113==
This manual assumes that the system is set up as described in Deployment manual
Log in
Go to localhost:3000 on your data recording machine to log in
if you dont have an account you can create one
Welcome page and starting a new session
After successfully logging in, you see the welcome page
==PAGE:114==
SRS
with button Start new session and listeners and Provide feedback
The latter button leads you to a feedback form where you can provide your opinion on how the
system works, while if you click the former, you’re asked to provide a unique sessionID. This is a
piece of text which will be associated with all data recorded in this session.
GDPR consents
You are also asked to provide GDPR consent IDs. In this version of the prototype, you need to
physically get all relevant GDPR consents (if recording underage patient data, get consent from
both parents. If recording parent data, just get their consent) from patients and parents and
store them somewhere outside the system under a consent ID you provide in this form.
==PAGE:115==
The system will store all your consent IDs for your current session in a database so they can be
correlated with actual physical consents in the future.
Start LSL listeners
When consent references are provided, you can start LSL listeners. You can choose up to 3
types of stimuli listeners + if you want to start an event marker stream
==PAGE:116==
For each listener you can also specify whether it’s a patient or their parent. When listeners are
started, you are taken to the current session view, including the sessionId you provided before
and session status.
Current session listening
==PAGE:117==
Session status STARTED means that all requested listeners are listening. To refresh the listener
status, click Get listener process status . Then you can see a list of listeners underneath, each
accompanied with either active or inactive status. Each listener name is also the name of the
Kafka topic the process writes to. For the stimuli listeners, it has the following format:
‘{todaysDate}_{sessionID}_{patient/parent}_{streamType}’. For the event marker listener, it has
the following format:
‘{todaysDate}_{sessionID}__markers’
==PAGE:118==
Use the Stop listener button under each listener to stop the chosen listener. Its status should be
changed to inactive when you hit Get listener process status now
And its designated button to Start listener - you can use that button to restart the listener if
needed
==PAGE:119==
Currently the system has a bug, where it does not fully remove thus stopped listener, hence
both the original now inactive and the new one active are visible.
When data is streaming
==PAGE:120==
Now, if you start streaming data into LSL, you will be able to view it in kafka cluster terminal on
the receiving machine. In Docker Desktop, hit Show container actions on the kafka container
and choose Open in terminal, navigate to the bin folder (cd ../../bin)
Then, to inspect data persisted to a topic, you can use the following command executed:
kafka-console-consumer –bootstrap-server localhost:9092 –topic {topicName}
If you want to see kafka timestamps, append to the above command:
–property print.timestamp=true
If you want to make sure you see all the data sent to the topic from the very beginning, you can
also append:
–from-begining
For now, using the kafka-console-consumer command is the only way to extract data from a
given Kafka topic.
You can also send an event marker, whenever an important (from anxiety data recording
perspective) event happens, like a nurse came in with a needle. You can use the event marker
form at the bottom of the current session view page for that purpose. Then you can retrieve your
data from the marker topic in an analogous fashion as from a stimulus topic.
Log out and refresh
When you are done with the current session, or want to log out and log in again, hit Stop all
listeners and refresh the page. If you want to log in again, go to localhost:3000
==PAGE:121==
.9
Requirement fulfillment overview
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
113
==PAGE:122==
Requirement fulfillment overview
Requirement
Status [done, partially done,
undone]
Description
F1. The system shall be able
to store aggregated data for
future research purposes
done
The system stores data
acquired through LSL in
Kafka topics. The occurrence
of non-zero latency, which
can affect data integrity
especially for high sampling
rates, has been investigated
through testing, which can be
the basis for future
optimization efforts
F2. The system shall be
able to import and
synchronize data
post-factum
undone
The current prototype does
not have any such
functionality, as during the
course of the thesis it turned
out to be of secondary
priority, and more effort was
put in other aspects like
performance tests
F3. The system shall be
able to process data
coming from a periodic or
sporadic stimuli
done
The generic interface of LSL
used by the system is
compatible with various
stimuli and their SDKs.
Specifically, an LSL stream
can be configured to have
either regular or irregular
sampling rate
F4. The system shall
synchronize the data from
all plugged-in stimuli for
relevant sessions
done
The current system is
configured to handle only one
recording session at a time,
thus synchronization also
happens within one recording
session. It is handled by LSL,
where streams contain time
correction data to adjust data
sample timestamps. All this
data is persisted to a Kafka
stream, with a one-to-one
relation between LSL streams
and Kafka streams
F5. The system shall be
done
When a user is prompted to
==PAGE:123==
able to process data both
from a parent and patient
per session
start LSL listeners, for each
listener they can choose
whether it is a parent or
patient. The current
implementation has a
limitation of differentiating
between the streams by their
type only, which means that it
cannot handle two data
streams of the same type
from both patient and a
parent. However, that can be
refactored in future work,
which LSL facilitates by
exposing the resolve_stream
function
F6. The system shall allow
user to start a new patient
session
done
After logging in, user can
start a new session
G1. The system shall have
a Data Protection Impact
Assessment proved and
documented
done
A DPIA for the thesis has
been appended. Where the
system to be further
developed, it shall be
maintained and updated as
needed, especially if running
a clinical trial
G2: The system shall have
a clearly-defined privacy
policy
Done
Actually, obtaining informed
consent is used instead of
just viewing the privacy
policy, is implemented by the
system. The informational
letter presented before asking
for consent is appended
G3. The system shall
request a data subject
consent before processing
starts
done
Before the UI flow gets to
starting a recording session,
a user is prompted to provide
unique consent IDs, which
are then stored in an H2
database, while the actual
consents the ID links to are to
be stored manually by a user
outside of the system.
G4. The system shall
inform data subject about
the privacy policy and the
undone
The prototype does not
implement any such
functionality, thus it has to be
==PAGE:124==
processing protocol before
asking for consent
manually handled by a user.
The informational letter
explaining how the data
privacy is kept and the flow of
recording with the system is
explained in the informational
letter appended
G5. The system shall keep
all sensitive data
pseudonymised
done
All data regarding data
subjects is stored under a
user-provided sessionID, with
no data that could enable
identifying the users.
M1. The system shall have
a plan for obtaining a CE
marking outlined
Partially done
Considered theoretically and
described as a part of the
Future work chapter
M2. The system shall have
a plan for a clinical
evaluation, whose results
would be gathered into an
evaluation report
Partially done
Considered theoretically and
described as a part of the
Future work chapter
M3. The system shall have
a plan for post-market
clinical follow-up process*
Partially done
Considered theoretically and
described as a part of the
Future work chapter
M4. The system shall have
a subsystem for assessing
MDR complaints
Partially done
As a minimal solution, system
exposes a feedback form
C1. The system shall
implement authentication
and access control to make
sure proper access for
users and patients data
subjects
Partially done
The UI minimally implements
access control and
authentication. No recording
can be started, unless a user
is logged in to their account.
However, the data retrieval
from Kafka topics, which
minimally happens through
console commands, does not
require any authentication. It
was left for future work, due
to uncertainty of
non-relational database
choice
S1. The system shall run on
a designated wired network
Partially done
The proof-of-concept setup is
located on two machines in a
DTU lab using the lab’s wired
LAN, since no new network
==PAGE:125==
has been set up specifically
for the sake of this system
P1. The system shall
minimize jitter between
different data streams
Partially done
Jitter tests that looked into
comparing consecutive LSL
timestamps (described in
chapter 7) have showed that
majority of samples come in
equal intervals with 1 ms
variance
P2. The system shall have
less than 1 sec latency in
storing the data
Done
The latency of the system
averages around 20 ms,
however if streaming for
longer periods of time, it can
grow up to 80 ms for some
samples. Even though this is
much less than 1 sec, it is too
big of a latency to use the
system for recording high
sampling rate data like eye
tracking. It would be valuable
to investigate the causes for
such latency as part of the
future work
I1. The system shall be
placed in an environment,
where stimuli devices are
easily discoverable
Partially done
Since the system runs over
wired network, it is not
compatible to use for
streaming from mobile
devices. However, a lot of the
stimuli need to be connected
to a computer if streaming
anyway, (while mobile data
export often happens
synchronously in one big
chunk), thus the system has
been split into 2 machines,
one of which is used for data
acquisition with the system,
but also connecting to the
stimuli, usually through
running their SDKs. This is,
however, considered to be
external to the system
I2. While starting a recording
session, the system shall
enable user to specify a
unique sessionID
Done
n/a
==PAGE:126==
I3. While running a recording
session, the system shall
associate all the data
collected with its unique
sessionID
Done
All data acquired during one
session is recorded to Kafka
topics. Each of these topics
contains the sessionID in its
name
I4. The system shall
interoperate only with the
accepted stimuli
Partially done
A user is queried for an LSL
stream type, however there is
no device authentication, so
any LSL outlet of a given type
can be picked up by a listener
I5. While running a recording
session, the system shall
allow user to manipulate
stimuli listeners
Partially done
A user can stop and resume
the listeners during the
session. There is a significant
bug, however, that causes
the stopped processes to be
still visible in the system UI,
even when they are already
inactive. Within future work, it
would be valuable to fix this
bug, especially since
improper memory
management can influence
the latency issues.
M1. The system shall
visualize the current status of
connected stimuli listeners to
users
Done
Available in current session
view
M2. The system shall
visualize current status of
sync storage processing to
users
Partially done
The only way to visualize the
current status of data storing
is to inspect the Kafka cluster
running through Docker,
where console commands
can be run to display data
from a given topic. If data is
being written to a topic, it
would then be displayed in a
real-time through such
console, as described in the
appended user manual
M3. While connected stimuli
listeners or sync storage
processing are not working
correctly, the system shall
notify users
Partially done
If listeners are not working,
due to the aforementioned
bug, they will still be
displayed as inactive, just as
a Kafka console command
would not display any data.
==PAGE:127==
Proper error handling is left
for future work
A1. The system shall be
scalable by design
Partially done
Kafka, as a data storing
system, is horizontally
scalable by design, with 3
brokers that can concurrently
write to different topics.
However, the LSL listener
server, which was written
using Python flask and
Python multiprocessing
library, might be too unstable,
and, for that matter, justify the
latency issues. The stability
of LSL, at least judging by the
jitter tests, seems enough.
==PAGE:128==
.10
Deployment manual
120
A software system for young patient anxiety recognition in emergency care unit setting
==PAGE:129==
Deployment manual
To set up the system, two Windows machines connected to the same network are required.
Both of the machines need to have their OS firewalls disabled for LSL to work over the network.
Data acquiring machine:
UI:
1) Download node.js which contains npm from version 10.5.2
2) Clone https://github.com/krzeminskamaja/thesisFrontend repository
3) If in need of a production build containing a current packaged application, start with the
following commands:
a) run "npm install -g serve"
b) run "serve -s build"
4) If in need of a development build, use:
a) run "npm install" which will install all the dependencies from package-lock.json
b) run "npm run"
In both cases, the application is started at localhost:3000
Backend-for-frontend:
1) Download and install the H2 database from
https://www.h2database.com/html/download.html
2) Install java
3) Clone https://github.com/krzeminskamaja/backendForFrontendAndKafka repository
4) It contains a target folder with compiled dependencies and a .jar file
==PAGE:130==
5) Run H2 console and log in
6) Run “java -jar {jarFIleName}” to run the current production build
The application will run on localhost:8080
Stimuli & SDKs:
This part of setup depends on the type of stimulus to be used. To be able to stream to
the system, SDKs used need to include an LSL outlet, that could be possibly run in an
Anaconda environment. The rest of the stimuli setup, like calibration before streaming, is to be
manually done by the user.
Data recording machine:
LSL listener server:
1) Open Anaconda
2) Create a Python (version 3.11.9) environment
3) Clone https://github.com/krzeminskamaja/backendForFrontendAndKafka
4) When environment is created, open the terminal, move to the
backendforfrontendandkafka folder, and run pip install -r requirements.txt
5) Run flask run –host=0.0.0.0
Kafka cluster:
1) Install Docker desktop
2) Copy the docker-compose file from the
https://github.com/krzeminskamaja/backendForFrontendAndKafka repository, save
locally on the machine in a location of your choice. Then in that location, open a
command line window and run docker compose -up
==PAGE:131==
3) Then, in Docker desktop the Container view should look like this {cotainerView.png} with
a backendforfrontendandkafka container running two services of kafka and zookeeper
with confluentinc images
==PAGE:132==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Build. 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, DK
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
