==PAGE:1==
Technical University of Denmark
Fatima Sheraz s220010
June 2024
A Method for Estimating Energy
Consumption in Mobile Network
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Lyngby, Copenhagen 2024
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
With the deployment of new generations of mobile technology, energy
consumption has significantly increased to meet the exponential growth
of the users. Hence, energy efficient networks are critical to address this
challenge. The current and the froth coming generations of cellular net-
work are made on the basis of this concern.
This report, provides a model that shows the power consumption
within the components of network, highlighting variations in some key
parameters of network such as load, transmission power and coverage
area, focusing on Radio Access segment of the network. With these vari-
ations the impact of power consumption is being modeled to optimize
the network. In addition to this, the report outlines the existing strate-
gies used for energy efficiency in the current generations such as Cell
Discontinuous Transmission (DTX), Adaptive Sectorization and Antenna
Muting for Long Term Evolution (LTE). For 5G, the report elaborates
the Hardware and Software based energy-saving methods, Artificial Intel-
ligence (AI) based energy-saving methods, along with the strategies using
Multiple input multiple output (MIMO) techniques to save energy in the
network. Furthermore, it also presents the potential strategies and tech-
nologies that can be employed in future mobile network to make them
energy efficient such as Zero Touch Networks, Rate splitting, Intelligent
Reflecting Surfaces, Sampling and Energy Harvesting .
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Mobile Network and the Evolution
3
2.1
First Generation (1G) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Second Generation (2G) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Third Generation (3G) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Fourth Generation (4G) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.5
Fifth Generation (5G) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.6
Sixth Generation (6G)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
2.7
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3
The modified RAN structures
11
3.1
C-RAN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2
V-RAN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3
O-RAN
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
3.4
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4
Energy Consumption in Mobile Network
16
4.1
Overview of a Base Station (BS): . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.2
Power consumption in BS: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.3
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5
Initialization of Energy Consumption Model:
20
5.1
Assumptions for the Model: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Relationship of Power Consumption with Load: . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Load Impact on the Components of BS: . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.4
Range Calculation for the BS:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.5
Cell Coverage Area of the BS: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.6
Effect of Transmission power on Power Consumption:
. . . . . .
31
5.7
Analysis using different frequency spectrum . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.8
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6
Energy-Saving Techniques for Mobile networks:
36
6.1
Energy-Saving techniques in LTE:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.1.1
Cell discontinuous transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.1.2
Adaptive Sectorization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.1.3
Antenna Muting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Summary: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3
Energy-Saving Techniques in 5G: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.3.1
Traditional Energy-saving Technology of 5G . . . . . . . .
40
6.3.2
AI-Based Energy-Saving Technology of 5G: . . . . . . . .
42
6.4
MIMO based Energy-Saving technology of 5G:
. . . . . . . . . .
43
6.5
Summary: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
ii
==PAGE:4==
7
Energy-Saving Techniques beyond 5G
46
7.1
Zero touch networks: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
7.2
Rate Splitting: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
7.3
Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces (IRS): . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
7.4
Sampling: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.5
Energy Harvesting: . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
7.6
Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
8
Conclusion:
52
9
Appendix
60
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acronyms
ICT Information and Communication Technology
RAN Radio Access Network
BS Base Station
MBH Mobile Backhaul
BBU Base-band Unit
RU Radio Unit
3GPP The 3rd Generation Partnership Project
AMPS Advanced Mobile Phone System
GSM Global System for Mobile Communications
EDGE Enhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution
FDMA Frequency Division Multiple Access
TDMA Time Division Multiple Access
UMTS Universal Mobile Telecommunication System
CDMA Code Division Multiple Access
SC-FDMA Single Carrier Frequency Division Multiple Access
LTE Long Term Evolution
NOMA Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access
OMA Orthogonal Multiple Access
IoE Internet of Everything
C-RAN Cloud or Centralize RAN
DU Distributed Unit
CU Centralized Unit
NGMN The Next Generation Mobile Networks Alliance
CPRI Common Public Radio Interface
OFDMA Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access
MIMO Multiple input multiple output
NSA Non-Stand Alone
iv
==PAGE:6==
SA Stand Alone
CoMP Cooperative Multi Points
V-RAN Virtual RAN
VNF
Virtual network functions
COTS Commercial off-the-shelf
O-RAN Open RAN
GSMA Global System for Mobile Communication Association
PA Power Amplifier
DSP Digital Signal Processing
OFDM Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing
EIRP Effective Isotropic Radiated Power
ISD Inter Site Distance
DTX Discontinuous transmission
AI Artificial Intelligence
ML Machine learning
DL Deep learning
RF Radio frequency
KPI Key Performance Indicators
QoS Quality of Services
SCMA Spares Code Multiple Access
mMIMO massive Multiple Input Multiple Output
SDN Software Defined Networking
NFV Network Functions Virtualization
IRS Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces
WET Wireless Energy Transfer
IoT Internet of Things
RF-EH
Radio Frequency Energy Harvesting
SWIPT Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power
TS Time Switching
PS Power Splitting
v
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
The world is getting interconnected through mobile technology which demands
seamless connectivity in a very short span of time. However, this connectivity
comes at a cost of energy consumption that significantly impact the environ-
ment. The phone call made, the message sent, the video streamed, the appli-
cation downloaded, require power.
This power contributes to environmental
impact in terms of carbon emission. Earlier generations had no energy issues
as the infrastructure was simpler and there was only voice services and short
messages that were needed to be transmit. Thus, there was no energy efficiency
challenges in the network. This issue of efficiency started with the need of high
data rates and demand in increasing services by the subscribers which ultimately
led to complex network architectures and hence, high energy consumption in the
networks .
With the roll out of current generation, 5G, the wireless connectivity con-
tinues to grow exponentially, in addition to it, the research on 6G has already
started. [14]This shows a definite increase of the mobile network data traffic, as
being predicted by the increasing graph of mobile by Ericsson report of Mobile
data traffic outlook. [37]
Figure 1: Global Mobile Network Data Traffic. .
The graph reflects, that among different generations, 5G has the highest
data traffic, this emphasizes the the importance of energy efficiency of 5G and
as well as for the coming generation.
The increase in data traffic leads to higher energy consumption, as pre-
1
==PAGE:8==
dicted by energy consumption scenarios for mobile network, however some of
energy consumption scenarios, outlined linear rise and some predicted expo-
nential growth.[14] The following figure from Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) sector shows the comparison of the expected rate of energy
consumption growth in 2030 with 2020, within cellular networks.[19]
Figure 2: Energy Consumption prediction by ICT [19]
Although the energy consumption is growing with the new generations, net-
work operators are already working on limiting this energy consumption and
are putting their efforts to minimize the environmental effects caused by cel-
lular networks.
Therefore, operators are highly concerned about the energy
efficiency of these networks. With this concern, the ICT(Information and Com-
munication Technology) and many operators are focusing towards the strategies
that could provide sustainable solution in terms of energy efficiency. As, it is
promised to achieve carbon neutrality (net zero) by 2050. [29].
The main idea of the report is to present a method for estimating energy
consumption in mobile networks. To address the topic, it was decided to divide
the report into several chapters that could gradually lead to the main topic.
Therefore, these chapters were structured to develop a systematic approach to
the proposed topic to make an ease for the reader to understand.
After this introduction, the next chapter reviews the literature part of mobile
network and the generations, which evolved with architectural and infrastruc-
tural change of the network, starting from 1G, 2G to upcoming 6G network.
The third chapter delves into the evolved Radio Access Network (RAN) archi-
tecture tailored to meet the emerging performances and requirements in various
use cases such as low latency, high throughput and energy efficiency. In the
fourth section of the report, the methodology of forming a predictive model
for energy consumption in these mobile network is presented. The subsequent
chapters discuss the existing strategies and potential methods that are used for
reducing energy consumption in the cellular networks. Finally, chapter 7 ex-
plores the innovative and potential approaches that could be further used to
2
==PAGE:9==
optimize the energy consumption in future mobile networks. The report ends
with a contextual conclusion.
2
Mobile Network and the Evolution
In today’s world, communication is becoming faster, easier and smarter com-
pared to previously years, passed in the history of mobile communication. This
wireless mobile network system has evolved over the span of time, adapting to
the needs and demands of the users. It does not only focus on the efficiency
and speed of the network but it’s impact can be seen in various sectors, such as
education, business and healthcare.
This mobile network consists of three segments which are as follows:
• RAN (Radio Access Network)
• MBH (Mobile Backhaul) and
• Core Network
The RAN is the major part of mobile network which consist of BSs, deployed
to provide services, these BSs cover a specific geographical area known as cell.
The cells facilitate network coverage for services like voice calls, video calls and
other type of data which can be transmitted via the BS. Each BS is typically
responsible for three cells. To avoid interference among the neighbouring BSs
and to guarantee Quality of Services (QoS), different sets of frequencies are used
by the BSs. The driven object in the network is to provide maximum through-
out and spectral efficiency along with QoS. [22] Mobile Backhaul (MBH)is the
part of network which connects the RAN and the core network. The cell towers
are linked to the network elements which enables the transport of user data and
the signalling traffic across the network. It consists of devices such as routers
and switches which are responsible for transmitting data traffic between the BS
and the core network. Different technologies such as copper, fiber and wireless
are used in MBH for data transportation between its own components and also
from RAN to core network. [64]
The mobile core network is an essential part of mobile network that sits
between the RAN and external network (Internet, Public Switched Telephone
Networks), performing the switching functions for all the services used by the
subscribers. It has critical information such as the profile of the subscriber,
location, service authentication and necessary switching tasks. [61]
3
==PAGE:10==
The basic architecture of mobile network can be illustrated as under:
Figure 3: Architecture of Mobile Network
The architectural innovation of mobile network plays a vital and revolution-
ist role, as every technology is directed by the different requirements of mobile
communication services.
The following sections define the evolution of mobile generation from 1G
to 5G. Beside these technologies 6G is also envisioned and is expected to be
officially launch in 2030.[5] The need of the evolution of generations, felt with
the increase in number of mobile users who require enough coverage and ca-
pacity. Each mobile generation is distinct from its prior generation, in terms of
technologies used which evolved as per the demand of the communication era.
However, the general architecture has remained unchanged throughout the gen-
erations having the three basic parts Radio Access Network, Mobile backhaul
and the Core network. [64]
2.1
First Generation (1G)
Back in 1980s, the First Generation(1G) for wireless mobile network was
introduced which was based on analog signalling system featured with the Ad-
vanced Mobile Phone System (AMPS). Circuit-switched technology was used
primarily for these analog systems, and only voice call was possible using the
first-generation with a speed of 24 Kbps. The voice call got modulated to higher
frequencies and was transmitted between the radio towers using the Frequency
Division Multiple Access technique. The concept of roaming was not in existence
and the efficient use of frequency spectrum was not possible. This generation
lasted until the growth of second generation. [10]
4
==PAGE:11==
2.2
Second Generation (2G)
The second generation of mobile network, 2G was launched in 1991, under
the standard of Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM). The main
function of 2G was to provide the services like SMS (Short message service) and
MMS (Multimedia message) and better voice quality. The data speed increased
up to 64 Kbps with a bandwidth of 30 to 200 KHz. However, the video call was
not still possible in GSM.[10] The radio waves in GSM use digital technologies
for transmitting the data. Frequency Division Multiple Access (FDMA) and
Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) are the two technologies used in GSM.
TDMA is technique that is used for digital communication, in which distinct
time slots are allocated to various users on a shared channel whereas FDMA is
a access techniques that allows the simultaneous and continuous data transfer
from various users by allocating different set of frequencies from the available
frequency spectrum. [25] Further developments in 2G introduced EDGE (En-
hanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution) which brings a significant rise in data
rate (theoretical data rate was up to 500 Kbps).[26]
These improvements were considered critical for the expanding capabilities
of the of the mobile data communication during that time. This made 2G a
popular choice in the world of telecommunication.
2.3
Third Generation (3G)
Later in 2000s, the
Third Generation (3G) of mobile technology was in-
troduced, which is also called Universal Mobile Telecommunication System
(UMTS). It uses both integrated circuit switching and packet switching do-
main for voice call and data packets respectively. 3G uses an advanced radio
access method called CDMA (Code Division Multiple Access) that allows mul-
tiple users to transmit data, using same frequency band by allocating unique
codes. This technique allowed, the increase data rate up to 384 Kbps and made
the efficient use of frequency band.
The main components of UMTS included User entity (UE), UTRAN and
Core network. User entity refereed to the mobile station along with SIM (sub-
scriber identity module) card whereas UTRAN stands for UMTS-Terrestrial
Radio Access Network which consist of a UMTS base station, in the case of
3G it is named as nodeB. The core network of 3G deals with various functions
like the mobility management, routing, packet switching that were controlled
by different modules, located in the core network. These components are owned
by the service provider who offers different mobile services in this generation.
2.4
Fourth Generation (4G)
Unfortunately, the existing 3G UMTS could not scaled up well with the trans-
mission speed of the data, hence within ten years of span, there felt the need of
5
==PAGE:12==
change in radio network and core of the mobile network. The new technology
was evolved and named as Long Term Evolution (LTE).[34]
The main components of this technology include eNodeB,
EPC-Evolved
Packet Core, and IMS, IP multimedia Subsystem. The updated hardware and
processing capabilities, made it possible to achieve the higher data rates in LTE
with the use of increased bandwidth. Therefore, LTE has variable bandwidth,
ranging from 1.25 MHZ to 20 MHz.
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) is used in down-
link direction with maximum data-rate of 300 Mbps and for up-link Single Car-
rier Frequency Division Multiple Access SC-FDMA is used with the maximum
data-rate of 75 Mbps as per The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP)
standards. In order to achieve the desirable bit rate, higher modulation schemes
are used such as 64-QAM and 256-QAM (Quadrant Amplitude modulation),
besides this, allocation of more sub-carriers, within the available spectrum, is
another option to increase the data rate. In addition to this, 3GPP Release 8,
also mentioned the use of multiple antenna technique, in the down-link direction
for the first time which is referred as MIMO (Multiple input multiple output).
The basic idea is to send different independent streams using the same air inter-
face channel. During that time, the two or four streams were specified.[34] The
following figure shows the network architecture of LTE, which is simpler than
that of previous generations, comprising of only two main nodes for connecting
the users to the Internet. This structure focuses on the data plane, while com-
bining the functionalities of control plane within these nodes, thereby resulting
in intelligent and efficient data transmission. [2]
Figure 4: Architecture of LTE
The performance of LTE was further improved as it still lacked to meet
the expected demands, thus in 2010 December, the compatible version of LTE,
6
==PAGE:13==
named as LTE-A (LTE-Advance) was released [35].
The UEs from LTE could easily operate LTE-A networks, as it was a com-
patible version. This LTE-Advance supports a peak data rate of 1 Gbps for
down-link direction and 0.5 Gbps for up-link direction by increasing the band-
width (carrier aggregation) upto 100 MHz in chunks of 20 MHz LTE carrier. So
carrier aggregation is also implemented to extend the bandwidth. Moreover, dif-
ferent number of antennas are also used for down-link (8 MIMO antennas) and
up-link(4 MIMO antennas) directions allowing higher data rates. The mobility
for this version, supports up-to 350 km/h (in some cases 500km/h), ensuring
high speed communications. [35]
2.5
Fifth Generation (5G)
The relentless pace of mobile network continued to evolved further and the need
of transferring more data with faster speeds, low latency and reduced congestion
lead to new mobile network technology and within ten years of span from 4G,
Fifth generation technology was launched. [1]
There are defined two different developments and deployments modes for
5G the first is Non-Stand Alone (NSA) and second is Stand-Alone(SA). In
Non-Stand Alone (NSA) mode, which is the earlier architecture of 5G, the ex-
isting core network of 4G is used for the functionalities such as signaling and
management. Rather, the Stand Alone (SA) mode took full advantage of newly
deployed core network for the execution of 5G services.[62]
A new radio (NR) system was defined by the 3GPP, an air interface standard
for 5G, that includes two frequency ranges. The first frequency range is from
410 MHz to 7125 MHz (Frequency range 1) and the second frequency ranges is
from 24.25 GHz to 71.0 GHz (Frequency range 2). Frequency range 2, is the
new range of spectrum, which is utilized for the first time in 5G and also called
millimetre wave spectrum. This offers high data rates, however the range is
limited, therefore it is used in urban areas where the environment is crowded
and the capacity of network is dense.[9] The above mentioned frequency ranges
support both Frequency Division Duplexing (FDD) and Tine Division Duplexing
(TDD). The ITU defined the key requirements for 5G IMT-2020 network which
are specified as following: [3]
• provides higher data rates - over 100 Mbps
• high capacity - 10 Tbps per km2
• low energy consumption - 10 years of battery life
• Ultra-high density - 1 million nodes per km2
• low latency - 1ms end-to end latency
7
==PAGE:14==
5G also supports various use cases which are divided into three groups
namely Extreme Mobile BroadBand (xMBB): promises to provide enhanced mo-
bile broadband experiences as the data is increasing that requires low latency
and improved coverage, Massive Machine–Type Communications (mMTC): aims
to exchange low volumes of traffic Ultra–Reliable and Low–Latency Communica-
tion (URLLC): The main characteristics of this case is to provide high availabil-
ity and reliability with low latency for example in critical mission applications,
or self driven cars. [3]
Figure 5: Application Scenarios for each Use Case
[24]
As 5G in meant to boost the coverage of the network and also to coop with
the demanding capacity of the users, some advanced technologies are introduced
in it that helps in the efficient utilization of the spectrum . The most important
technologies used in 5G are massive MIMO with beam forming and NOMA
(Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access).
MIMO refers to the use of multiply antennas on the base stations, so the
multiple data streams can be received and send simultaneously which improves
spectral efficiency, performance and helps is reduced power consumption. Beam
forming is another key component of massive MIMO which plays a vital role in
establishing mmWaves. Narrow beams are used in specific direction to improve
the signal strength and to focus on certain level of power. This helps in reduc-
tion of interference, as each beam is aimed to target a specific device. [3]
Since the spectrum is the limited resource in a mobile network, therefore
different Multiple Access schemes are used for its efficient usage, since the
8
==PAGE:15==
beginning of the mobile generations.
By these schemes the subscribers get
to, simultaneously use the available bandwidth hence increasing the spectral
efficiency.[6] The multiple access systems are divided into Orthogonal Multiple
Access (OMA) and Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access (NOMA). OMA schemes
require deliberate planning to reduce inter-cell interference, however they have
advantage of reduced intra-cell interference. Inter-cell interference can be de-
creased by ensuring enough distance b/w the reused channels, though this can
result in low spectral efficiency. On the other side, NOMA, are the schemes
that are prone to high intra-cell interference but are strong and robust against
fading and inter-cell interference.[6] In OMA each user uses the available re-
sources (specific frequency band or any time slot) in an orthogonal manner
whereas in NOMA several users can use the available resources simultaneously
in a non-orthogonal manner, thus improving the performance of 5G. [3]
2.6
Sixth Generation (6G)
The research and standardization beyond 5G, have already started in the recent
years, defining the road map for the next generation of mobile network i.e 6G.[62]
It is intended that, 6G will enable Internet of Everything (IoE), which is the
extended version of internet of things, IoE includes things, data, and process.
The basic idea of IoE is to use various sensing devices and integrate them, which
then can be related to everything such as identifying, monitoring the status and
decision making in efficient manner to create new likeliness and aspect.[55]
Moreover, 6G will revolutionize the wireless networks, from connected things to
connected intelligent with more demanding requirements such as follows: [52]
• Data rates-very high up to 1 Tbps.
• Ability of supporting battery-free Internet of Things (IoT) devices-hence
very high energy efficiency.
• Reliable global connectivity.
• Extreme Low-latency control (end-to-end latency of less than 1 msec)
• Usage of broad frequency band (73 GHz-140 GHz and 1 THz-3 THz)
• Always available broadband worldwide network coverage by involving ter-
restrial wireless and satellite systems.
• Combined intelligence of AI and Machine learning (ML) capabilities.
Thus, 6G will provide the services with higher throughput with ultra re-
liability, massive connectivity, heterogeneous quality of services, localization,
computing and control.[49] Therefore, 6G requires a more efficient use of wire-
less resources and more powerful ways to manage interference, which can be
brought in, by rethinking and redesigning of the physical layers and multiple
access techniques for wireless communication. [49]In the last chapter the en-
ergy efficiency techniques which can be used in 6G are defined, whose potential
implementation can help in making 6G an energy efficient network.
9
==PAGE:16==
2.7
Summary
In the above section the evolution of mobile network is presented starting
from First Generation (1G), which introduced Advanced Mobile Phone Sys-
tem (AMPS) for voice calls, with a data speed of 24 Kbps using FDMA. In
1991, the Second Generation (2G) also called GSM, was deployed with en-
hanced features of SMS and MMS and improved voice quality with a data speed
up to 64 Kbps. 2G used the digital technologies FDMA and TDMA. Later,
the data rate was significantly improved with the implementation of Enhanced
Data Rates for GSM Evolution (EDGE) technology. The Third Generation was
launched in 2000s, which utilizes Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) tech-
nology to provide even higher data rates up to 384 Kbps, with more efficient
usage of spectrum.
Next is fourth Generation 4G or LTE, which addressed
the increasing demand for high-speed data transmission rate. Technologies like
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) and Single Carrier
Frequency Division Multiple Access (SC-FDMA) are used to enhances the data
rates, a new technique called MIMO was also introduced in LTE to increase the
data rates.
The Fifth Generation (5G) was launched in 2019, which aimed to meet the
need of higher date rates and low latency by introducing the new frequency
ranges such as millimeter waves for providing higher data rates. To improve
the network performance and efficiency, advanced technologies such as massive
Multiple Input Multiple Output (mMIMO) and beam forming is introduced.
The research on up-coming generation i.e 6G ha begun which aims to enable
Internet of Everything providing the data rates with ultra reliability, massive
connectivity and heterogeneous quality of services.
The expected data rates
for 6G is over 1 Tbps. These on-going evolution in the generations of mobile
network points towards the advancement in technologies aimed to meet the
increasing demands of data transmission and connectivity.
10
==PAGE:17==
3
The modified RAN structures
The critical part of the wireless communication is RAN, which connects the user
equipment(UE) to the core network by means of radio links.
The primary function of RAN is to manage the radio resource. Hence it
involves two major units namely Radio Unit (RU) and Processing Unit(PU) .
Radio Unit: It is responsible for transmission and reception of signals as it
contains transceiver antennas.
Processing Unit The task like radio management, resource utilization and
operations like (pre-coding, encryption etc) are performed by processing unit of
RAN. [23] The processing unit is now termed as Baseband Unit.
There is a cabinet near the tower that holds the Base-band Unit (BBU) and
a backup power source, along with power supply and a cooling system. The
following figure illustrates the basic elements of RAN.
Figure 6: Basic elemnts of RAN (inspired by [57])
Due to the above mentioned operations, the RAN part of the mobile network
is responsible for the significant amount of energy consumption. An increasing
number of users are aggregating this, as the demand for higher data rates to
support the required services and the coverage area. Consequently, consider-
able efforts and researches have been made in this part of cellular network to
enhances it’s energy efficiency. In this chapter of the report, the modifications
in traditional RAN are considered which lead to energy saving architectures.
These architectures are deployed independently of each other. The following
are the names of derived RAN architecture:
• C-RAN (Cloud or Centralized RAN)
11
==PAGE:18==
• V-RAN (Virtual RAN)
• O-RAN (Open RAN)
Before diving into the description of the above architectures, the basic struc-
ture of Traditional RAN is described in the following lines.
In traditional RAN architecture (also called Distributed RAN ), the small
numbers of base stations were enough to fulfil the demand of the available users.
There were only some of the restricted cellular services, such as voice calls and
text messages, for this reason the data requirement was less and also the number
of users were limited. This traditional RAN was equipped with the integrated
radio unit and base-band unit with aBS that was sufficient to cover a large area
with minimal requirement of computation in order to avoid the interference.
[23]In a BS the BBU were associated with the dedicated Radio Unit (RU), due
to this the unused resource of BBU (when the users were not/less active ) could
not be used the RUs of other BSs, hence all the BBUs remained active which
resulted in wastage of energy during the less active time. This was needed to
be investigated, which pointed towards the enhanced architecture of RAN. [18]
3.1
C-RAN
The evolved architecture to address the aforementioned problem was named
as called Cloud RAN (C-RAN) or Centralized RAN. In Cloud or Centralize
RAN (C-RAN) the BBUs are centralized in a single location whereas as the
RUs are kept at the cell sites. This leads to cost savings, less power consump-
tion and shared infrastructure in the cloud as the resources can be assigned
when they are needed and can be kept de-activated when not needed.[57] The
BBU are in-cooperated in a centralized location, often described as ’pooling’ or
’hoteling’. This type of configuration allows each BBU to connect individually
to multiple RUs, helping in improved flexibility an reduction of redundancy in
the network resources. [18] In many cases this pooling of BBUs reduces the air
conditioning almost to 50% which helps in reduction of overall energy consump-
tion of mobile network energy consumption. However, the point to be noted
is that in many regions of the world the air conditioning does not have same
amount of power consumption. This is due to the different climates and weather
conditions, hence at such places the use of C-RAN will not improve the power
consumption of the mobile network.[57]
Moreover, by separating the BBU the sharing and turning off resources be-
come easy which reduce the cost of maintaining the network as well. [43] C-RAN
also allows the use of cooperative radio techniques and cooperative multi points
(CoMP) which results in reduction of the interference between different radio
transmission and in addition to it the overall performance is also enhanced. [43]
The support of Cooperative Multi Points (CoMP) improves the signal to noise
ratio in C-RAN which lowers the transmission power of the network. [40]
12
==PAGE:19==
The organisations such as The Next Generation Mobile Networks Alliance
(NGMN), IEEE and O-RAN Alliance divided the existing C-RAN architec-
tures into two units Distributed Unit and Centralized Unit.
The signal pro-
cessing of remote radio heads are performed at the Central Office by the help
of Centralized Unit (CU).[4] The network that exists between the Distributed
Unit (DU) and CU is called midhaul network and the network between the RU
and DU is refereed as fronthaul network.[58] The fronthaul is a high capacity
access network which transmit digitized signals using the Common Public Ra-
dio Interface (CPRI).[18] CPRI contributes for providing an interface for the
interconnection of RU and BBU by the means of fronthaul network. [43].
C-RAN has many benefits over the traditional/distributed RAN as the main-
tenance, network operations and upgrading is simplified because of the single
location of RAN processing and co-ordination improvements. Thus it can be
said that is does not only reduce the power consumption but also gives a slight
increase in customer experience due to higher degree of transmission coordina-
tion. The architecture of C-RAN with virtual baseband processing can be seen
in the given figure. (inspired by [40]):
Figure 7: Baseband virtualization Processing in C-RAN
3.2
V-RAN
The Virtualised Radio Access network is a network architecture which com-
bines RAN disaggregation, virtualization and cloudification. [16] Virtual RAN
(V-RAN) refers to the implementation of virtualized network functions (VNFs)
13
==PAGE:20==
on a generic hardware thus moving away from the proprietary, hardware-dependent
system.
Virtual network functions (VNF) are software applications that deliver
network functions, deployed as virtual machine. [59]V-RAN aims to reduce cost
and increase flexibility and scalability within the network architecture by the
usage of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) server .[53]
The use of Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) server refers to the use of such
hardware that is delivered by the vendors who specialise in developing the most
energy efficient hardware. There are many researches in which the energy saving
in network has been experienced with the usage of COTS server. For example
in [28] 15% of increased in energy efficiency is experienced by using the newest
generation COTS system, however it is not mentioned that how this power
saving is achieved. Similar to C-RAN, V-RAN also allows the hardware to be
powered down when not in use. In this architecture, the basedband software
is run by the selected hardware, which does not allow RU to be connected
to single BBU. Instead the data is sent by RU to that hardware which has
greatest resource utilisation.
Thus when the hardware is not use it can be
occasionally turned-off. Additionally, hardware sleep states can be introduced
during low network traffic periods which will allow the hardware to gradually
shut down. One of the mode to reduce the energy consumption in V-RAN is
that the processing can be done using server from any location in the world
(must not be limited by latency), thus the processing can be run on the server
where the utilization of resource is at the most top most level.[57].
3.3
O-RAN
This architecture also disaggregate hardware and software to open the interfaces
and reduce the costs. This allows the operators to run the software network
functions on COTS server. Open RAN (O-RAN) enables the use of radios from
one suppliers and processor from other vendor, for the very first time, with non-
proprietary, open interfaces, which was previously impossible. [41] This mix and
match equipment from different vendors open an opportunity to the operator
to select the network equipment based on its energy consumption. In [28] the
NGMN (New Generation Mobile Network) emphasis that at equipment-level
energy-saving technology, the focus should also be on small signal and digital
intermediate frequency module’s power consumption rather then only focusing
on the main power consumer i.e Power Amplifier (PA).
This stands as the
reason for O-RAN where the specialized vendors have tried to improved the
small sub parts of the network. As this architecture is also evolved to bring
energy efficiency in the mobile network therefore a set of Key Performance
Indicators (KPI)s are released by O-RAN contributors in the OpenRAN group
which is a part of Telecom Infra Project, a few are as under [42]
• Use of energy efficient hardware: For example, it would be ideal for COTS
servers that depends on General Purpose Processor (GPP) for enabling
CU/DU tasks to be deployed with low voltage and power-efficient hard-
14
==PAGE:21==
ware.
• Improvements in radio features: Allowing RU to be moved to sleep mode,
by switching off PAs and other transceiver components using Orthogonal
Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) symbol granularity .
• Use of intelligent control: By using AI and ML inside the radio intelligent
controller (RICs), the traffic can be forecasted that can allow the resource
allocation in an intelligent energy saving manner.
The following figure shows the overview of multi-vendor Open RAN archi-
tecture
Figure 8: Components of Base Station .
3.4
Summary
This chapter of the report, explores the RAN of the wireless communication
network briefly describing its main components which are involved in radio re-
source management. This makes RAN, the most energy consuming part of the
mobile network. Hence energy efficient architectural modifications are made to
coop with this power consumption issue. Since, in the traditional RAN BBUs
and RUs were integrated together within a BS, this introduced energy wastage,
especially when there was low activity on the network. This aimed for develop-
ment of new RAN architectures that could reduce and enhance the performance
of the network.
The first is Cloud RAN or C-RAN, which centralizes all the BBU in a single
location, often referred as pooling or hoteling. This setup allows for reduced
15
==PAGE:22==
power consumption and lower air conditioning needs.
Furthermore, the sig-
nal quality is enhanced and the interference is also reduced by the use of new
techniques known as cooperative radio and multi point transmission. Hence, re-
sulting in reduced transmission power requirements. Next is Virtualized RAN or
V-RAN which utilizes disaggregation, virtualization and cloudification. COTS
servers are used to run the virtualized network, improving scalability and flex-
ibility while increasing the energy efficiency by powering down the hardware
when not in use. The processing in V-RAN can be performed using servers at
any location around the globe, further reducing energy consumption. Finally,
the Open RAN (O-RAN) architecture further disaggregates hardware and soft-
ware, allowing a mix-and-match approach for equipment from different vendors.
Additionally, it opens interfaces to reduce the cost. It also ensures equipment
level energy efficiency for network performance. O-RAN uses AI and ML for
managing resource allocation and energy usage intelligently.
Thus, these evolved architectures of radio access network aimed to reduces
the energy footprints of mobile network with improved user experience through
intelligent network operations and maintenance.
4
Energy Consumption in Mobile Network
The mobile network consists of many components that consume different amount
of energy to perform various tasks. The main parts of mobile network are briefly
described in 2. Among all parts of the cellular network, RAN consumes most
of the energy of the mobile network. According to GSMA (Global System for
Mobile Communication Association) it accounts for 73% of the total energy of a
typical operator. When considering only the cellular network components, this
energy consumption increases up to 77%. The following figure shows the energy
consumption breakdown of a mobile operator’s network. [28]
Figure 9: Energy consumption breakdown as per GSMA 2021
[28]
16
==PAGE:23==
4.1
Overview of a BS:
A BS is the main component of RAN which communicates with the mobile
station (user equipment) and the MBH.
It consists of several components
that consume energy. These components include PA, Digital Signal Process-
ing (DSP) responsible for system processing and coding, a transceiver, a sig-
nal generator-responsible for generating the signal, an AC-DC converter, active
cooling system and microwave link (responsible for communicating with back-
haul network). Among these components the PA and transceiver are one per
transmitting antenna.[31]
The components of base station are divided into two groups: those that occur
per sector (thus appear ’n’ times for all sectors) and those that occur only once.
The component that occur per sector are, DSP(which is responsible for system
processing and coding), PA, Transceiver (which is responsible for receiving and
sending of signals to and from the mobile stations), signal generators and AC-
DC converter. The components that occur only once include air conditioning
and the microwave. [46] This microwave link is nowadays replaced with fiber
link. [47] The components are further classified into two categories, the first
includes the components whose power consumption is not load dependent such
as rectifiers, air conditioning system and microwave link. The power consump-
tion of these load independent components is constant throughout the time.
However, there should be made some distinction in air conditioning. As the
power consumption of this component is dependent of the internal and ambient
temperature of BS cabinet. A temperature of 25 degree centigrade is assumed
that results in consistent power consumption of air conditioning system. [47]
.
The second category involves the components whose power consumption is
load dependent such as PA, DSP and transceivers. Load
on a BS refers to the
number of users and the services they are using in the BS’s cell. The higher
the number of users and the services they use, the higher is the load on the BS.
Thus, the power consumption of these load dependent components step-up with
the load factor.[47]
.
4.2
Power consumption in BS:
The above mentioned components of BS account for significant amount of energy
consumption of a mobile network. [48] In the following figure (inspired by [38]),
the components of BS are presented along with the different notations for the
power consumption of each component of the BS.
17
==PAGE:24==
Figure 10: Components of Base Station
The total power of the BS is the sum of power consumed by each of the com-
ponent. The following equation can be used to calculate the power consumption
of the entire BS .
Pel = nsector ·
 nTx · Pel/amp + Pel/pr + Pel/trans + Pel/con + Pel/gen

+ Pel/aircon + Pel/mic
(1)
where
nsector is the number of sectors for a cell, Pel/amp , Pel/pr , Pel/trans Pel/con,
Pel/gen , Pel/aircon , Pel/mic is the power consumption of PA, DSP, transceiver,
AC-DC converter, signal generator, air conditioning and microwave link respec-
tively. As mentioned above that some components occur per sector, therefore
it is required to multiply them by the total numbers of sector present in the cell.
According to [32] the PA, which is located in the antenna unit, is responsible
for the maximum amount of energy consumption i.e is 40%. According to [47]
the power consumption Pel/amp of power amplifier also depends on the input
power of the antenna PTx and can be calculated in Watt as follows:
Pel/amp = PTx
η
η is the efficiency of power amplifier.
The power consumption of DSP raeches to 32%, the transceiver is respon-
sible for 20% of energy consumption.[32] Additionally, the rest contribute to
less amount of energy hence a small number is given to accommodate 100%
18
==PAGE:25==
of power consumption in the concerned part. The AC-DC converter and the
signal generator are also considered in analyzing the energy consumption, with
4% of energy being consumed by them. Once the power consumption of each
of the component is known, the total power consumption of the BS can be then
calculated by using 1.
In addition to it, the power consumption of a base station can be modeled
as the sum of two powers i.e static power consumption and dynamic power
consumption. The power that is consumed by the BS, under no load condition
is termed as static power whereas, the dynamic power consumption is refereed
to the power that is additional consumed by the BS when there is traffic load
on it. This power can be approximated by the linear function of traffic load.
[48]
4.3
Summary
This chapter focuses on the energy consumption of RAN within the mobile net-
works, highlighting the components of BS. As per Global System for Mobile
Communication Association (GSMA), RAN consumes most of the energy in a
mobile operator’s network, accounting for up to 77% of the energy consumption.
The BS, comprises of many components, each contribute differently to the total
energy consumption. The component include PA, DSP, transceiver, signal gen-
erator, AC-DC converter, air conditioning and microwave link. Among them,
PA is high energy consuming component. The power consumed by BS is divided
as static and dynamic category; static power reflects to power when there is no
load on BS whereas the power consumption with load, is referred as dynamic
power. Further, the components of BS are classified as load dependent and load
in-dependent component.
19
==PAGE:26==
5
Initialization of Energy Consumption Model:
A model for energy consumption is crucial for understanding and optimizing the
energy efficiency (EE) of mobile network. The energy efficiency can be defined
as the number of data bits transferred per Joule of energy consumption, it can
be stated as: [13]
EE =
Average throughput [bit/cell/s]
Power consumption [Joule/cell/s]
(2)
The initial goal of this model is to provide a framework which can help to
estimate the energy consumption of the mobile network particularly the RAN
components of the mobile network. There are several factors that effect the
power consumption of a mobile network, a few of these include the architecture
of the network, it’s configuration, the traffic load on the network, the coverage
area of the BS. Thus, in the model, the important factors are in-cooperated
which can help in planning of a mobile network that could lead towards energy
efficiency in the cellular network.
5.1
Assumptions for the Model:
To begin with the model on energy consumption for RAN, some assumption
are made to make the progress, due to the lack of the actual data. All the
assumptions made are based on the existing available papers.
A typical macrocell base station is assumed with a sector number of three
(thus in equation 1, nsector is considered to be 3), with azimutnal spacing of 120
degrees. Each sector has its own transmitting antenna (Directional Antenna).
For simplicity, SISO (single input single output) is considered, in which the BS
and the mobile station use single antenna each for transmitting and receiving
the signals (which makes ntx to be 1, in equation 1). This can be changed if
the system uses MIMO where there are two transmitting antennas at the BS
and one or two antennas at the mobile station. There is one PA for each trans-
mitting antenna, this accounts to take the power consumption of PA multiple
times depending on the number transmitting antennas per sector.[46]
The calculation is started by considering the percentages of each component.
As there was no actual data available, therefore, from the article [47] the resul-
tant for total power consumption for a macrocell base station is taken, which
was 1673 Watt. This value of power consumption is divided into the components
based on their percentages of energy consumption to get an idea of the ratio of
power consumption in each component. In the following figure (screenshot) the
calculation can be seen
20
==PAGE:27==
Figure 11: BS Components with percentages of Power Consumption
5.2
Relationship of Power Consumption with Load:
The power consumption of BS varies with the traffic load which ultimately
changes the power consumption of each module of the RAN. In relation to the
load on a BS, when analyzing the power consumption of BS, it can be seen
that mostly PA scales with the load.[30] Ideally, the PA works efficiently when
it is operating close to it’s maximum output, near the saturation point. Un-
fortunately, the problem arises due toOFDMA modulation with non-constant
envelope signals (the signal strength varies), if the PA is forced to operate near
saturation then it causes interference with the nearby channels. These interfer-
ence are the result of non-linear behaviour of the PA. To avoid this issue, it
is set to operate in low power level (below it’s maximum capacity ). However
this setting of interference makes PA in efficient in terms of power usage. It can
be said that it requires more power to give the same impact, hence resulting in
more power consumption.[8]
Under the full load condition the PA is responsible for highest consumption
of power that reaches about 59%, whereas under no load condition the digital
intermediate frequency (digital signal processing) part contributes to the high-
est consumption of energy, i.e about 46%. [14]
5.3
Load Impact on the Components of BS:
In the model, the effect of load on the components is observed. For this purpose
different criterion is set to be as low, medium and high. The load is set to be low
when it is up to 20% of it’s maximum capacity. This could be the time during
off-peak hours in an urban area or in a less populated area. Within low load
condition, the components operate below their efficiencies. The load is assumed
to be medium when it lies in between 21% to 70% where the normal operational
conditions of the components are met and they perform at their best, within
their spectrum of performance. Thus a general operational state of a cellular
network lies during this type of load. The high load is assumed when it lies
between 71% to 100%, the situation where the components are reaching to their
maximum operational limit and thus result in increased energy for the transmis-
sion of data in order to maintain the required quality of services. With theses
21
==PAGE:28==
assumptions the components are analyzed with respect to energy consumption.
The first and the most power consuming component is Power Amplifier as
mentioned in 4. The transmission power of the BS is considered to be 43 dBm.
This is the average output power of the PA and the efficiency of this PA is
assumed to be to 12.8%. [38] The efficiency is written as η. This efficiency is
the ratio of output power (in Watt) to the electrical power input power of the
PA(in Watt). [46]
η = Pout
Pel
(3)
The taken average power is in dBm, which is a logarithmic unit of power,
defined as, the power level in decibels (dB) relative to one milliwatt (mW). To
make the calculation simple the assumed average power of the power amplifier
is converted from dbm to Watt using the following formula
P(W) = 1 mW × 10
p(dBm)
10
(4)
By using this formula the value 43 dBm gives a value of 19.95 Watt which
is used for further calculations. Now this value is divided in the defined load
scenarios as low, medium and high. For the simplification of the calculation,
the medium load is supposed to be 50% from the assumed range whereas the
high load is supposed to be 85%. The table given below shows the calculation
of load at different level.
Figure 12: Power Consumption at different loads in Power Amplifier
The second component is Digital Signal processing which is responsible of
consuming 32% of the total power consumption of the RAN.
This, further
consists of intermediate frequency and baseband module.[32] The digital inter-
mediate frequency is a sub part for the processing of the received signal. This
digital intermediate frequency part, is a stage in processing of radio signals,
in which the signal is moved to lower frequency so that the filters inside the
antenna can easily use these narrow frequency band which helps in the ease of
signal processing. In order to calculate the energy consumption of this part, the
same load percentages are considered as in the case of power amplifier.
It is assumed that the ideal capacity of the DSP to handle the data requires
a power consumption of 100W from the article [38]. It is also assumed that the
22
==PAGE:29==
efficiency of the DSP is not effected by the load. As the low load case is to be
20%, hence at this load, the power consumption is 20% within the DSP which
corresponds to 20 W and for medium load it was assumed to be 50% which
showed that the power consumption is also 50% (50 W) and 85 W is calculated
when 85% load was considered as the high load .
Figure 13: Power Consumption at different loads in Digital Signal Processor
Hence, from the calculation it is observed that the power consumption of
DSP, increases directly with an increase in the load. This can be further justi-
fied with the real data that can be achieved from any network operator.
The next component is Transceiver, responsible for energy consumption in
the network. When the transmitter is in transmit state the electronics in it
consumes large amount of power in order to transmit the data.[36] Hence, it
is also an important component to consider for RAN total power consumption.
There are in between 1 - 16 transceivers in a BS, depending upon the the
demand of services and the geographical area. [39] In the model, the energy
consumption of the transceiver is assumed to be 100W from the same article
[38]. As the effect of load is to be considered so the load scenarios give the same
percentage as that of the digital signal processor i.e at low load it consumes 20
W. At medium load case transceiver consumes 50 W and at high load it reaches
85 W. In the below table the energy consumption can be seen at different load
levels.
Figure 14: Power Consumption at different loads in a Transceiver
The remaining components are AC-DC converters and the signal generator
which contribute less in the over all power consumption of the RAN. In some
networks, the operators combine the signal generators with the transceiver which
helps in simplifying the network architecture and also improves processing of
signals. Additionally, the cost is also reduced as the number of devices will be
23
==PAGE:30==
comparatively less. For this reason the calculation is shown only for the AC-
DC converter.
Figure 15: Power Consumption at different loads in an AC-DC Converter
It can be seen that the load effects the power consumption of each of the
component (load dependent component) of BS. As per [45], the power consumed
by the network, rises with the increase in the traffic load because the components
of BS perform their function while consuming a specific amount of energy at the
maximum load. The network performs adequately within the capacity limits of
it’s components as in the figure given below. The figure shows the values of the
throughput under different load levels. However if the load exceeds these limit
then it ultimately consumes more energy.
Figure 16: Total Sum of different Load Levels
To show, the effect of exceeded load on the system, a 20% of extra load
is considered to visualize the difference between the normal performance of
the network and the increased load. The total load for each load scenario is
multiplied by a load factor of 1.2. The following figure (screenshot) shows the
increased power consumption by the network with multiplied load.
Figure 17: Power Consumption with increased Load Factor
The graph below illustrates the power consumption of a cellular network
24
==PAGE:31==
under the different load scenarios, with a comparison of standard operational
performance and an increased load factor of 20%.
Figure 18: Power consumption graph b/w standard and increased operational
load
5.4
Range Calculation for the BS:
In this part of the report, a comprehensive analysis of the wireless range of
base station is conducted. In the next sections other parameters such as cov-
erage area and transmission power are also analysed with respect to the power
consumption for the network ( in this case LTE ). The range, is an important
parameter to be considered for mobile network with respect to energy consump-
tion. It can be defined as the geographical area of the BS, where the users can
connect to the BS for reliable communication with enough signal strength.
During the transmission of the signals between the BS and the mobile de-
vices there are various hindrances which causes attenuation in the signals, along
the path. Therefore, the cell size (radius) or the range of the BS depends on
the transmitted power, the required power at the receiver and the power loss in
the transit (called path loss). To estimated these factors, a link budget needs
to be setup. This link budget is used to calculate a rough estimate of the cell
size. It takes in account, all the losses and gains of the transmitter, through the
medium to the receiver. [46]
As the BS covers a hexagonal shaped area, it is considered to be present at
the center to determine the area that can be covered by the BS. First, the max-
imum path loss (in dB) is calculated, to which the received signal is subjected
during transmission. This path loss determines the attenuation of the signal,
which is the ratio of the radiated power to the received power of the signal. It is
important to examine the attenuation of the signal as the network performances
25
==PAGE:32==
such as QoS and the effective range are depends on it. Along with path loss the
other basic components that are considered to calculate the link budget for the
analysis are defined as under:
Transmit Power (PT), Antenna gain of base station (GT), Antenna gain
of mobile station (GR), Feeder loss of base station (FL), Feeder loss of mobile
station (FL). The research article [47] is consulted for all those values that are
needed for the link budget.
Parameters
Macro Base station(LTE)
Frequency (MHz)
2600
Max. power of Base station (dBm)
43
Antenna gain of base station (dBi)
18
Antenna gain of mobile station (dBi)
0
Feeder loss of base station(dB)
2
Feeder loss of mobile station(dB)
0
Table 1: Link budget table for a macro cell base station for LTE
[47]
From the mentioned research article, the maximum power of BS (PT) is
assumed to be 43 dBm (as in the log domain PT is given in dBm), based on the
typical values of urban macro cells for LTE technology. The antenna gain (GT)
of base station is taken as 18 dBi, this value reflects the general capabilities of
a common macro cell antenna. As the antenna capabilities of a typical mobile
station is limited therefore the antenna gain of mobile station (GR) is zero 0
dBi. The transmission loss from the antenna to the receiver is assumed to be 2
dB. Since the BS power is (PT) with an antenna gain of (GT). Then the entire
radio link budget which describes the aggregate gain and attenuation of signal
can be given as under [54]
The received power is calculated by using this formula
PR = PT + GT + GR −PL
(5)
where
• PT is transmitter power
• GT is the antenna gain of base station
• GR is the antenna gain of mobile station
• PL is the path loss
To determine the path loss in a mobile network, there are various path loss
models, each with different specifications. These models predict the propagation
26
==PAGE:33==
loss for a mobile.[44] Hence, are crucial in planning the mobile network. With
the specifications from the [47], the modified Okumura-Hata model, which is
also known as Ericsson model is used. This model can be stated as[44]
L = 36.2 + 30.2 log10(d) + 12 log10(hb) −3.2 (log10 (11.75 · hr))2 + g(f),
(6)
g(f) = 44.4910 −4.78 (log10(f))2
(7)
where:
• L is the total path loss in decibels (dB).
• d is the distance between the transmitter and receiver in kilometers.
• hb is the height of the base station antenna in meters.
• hr is the height of the receiver antenna in meters.
• f is the frequency of the signal in megahertz (MHz).
The following assumption are made to be used in the equation: 6
Figure 19: Assumption made for Ericsson Model
The values for the heights of BS and mobile station are 30m and 1.5m respec-
tively. These are common values that are used in mobile networks. In addition
to this for the values of d three distances are assumed 0.5km, 2km, 5km. By
using all the values in 6, three values of pathloss are calculated. Across these
values three different values of power received (PR) are obtained by using the
equation 5.4. The following table can be seen for the calculated values .
Distance (km)
PL (dB)
PR (dBm)
0.5
136.01
-77.01
2
154.28
-95.28
5
166.36
-107.36
Table 2: Calculated Path Loss and Received Power values at different Distances
27
==PAGE:34==
The three different values are considered in order to determine the range of
the BS. The maximum range of BS is achieved where the received power falls
the level of just acceptable quality for the communication. This level is called as
receiver sensitivity. [44] If the input signal is below this level then the received
signal will not be detected. The values for receiver sensitivity ranges around
-100 dBm. [63] The values to calculate the permissible path loss is also taken
from the same document.[63] The permissible path loss can be calculated using
the given formula:
Permissible Path loss = EIRP - Receiver Sensitivity
Here EIRP is Effective Isotropic Radiated Power. Effective Isotropic Radi-
ated Power (EIRP) is the radiated power with which the transmitter, transmits
the signal. It is the product of transmitter power and the antenna gain. [54]The
values of EIRP and receiver sensitivity is 54 dBm and -103 dBm respectively.
[63]By using these values the Permissible Path Loss is calculated to be 157 dB.
It can be seen that the calculated path loss values for distances of 0.5 km and 2
km are within the permissible range. Therefore, the maximum range for the BS
with a frequency band of 2600 MHz is assumed to be around 2.1 km as the val-
ues are 136.01 dB and 154.28 dB are calculated for 0.5 km and 2 km respectively.
5.5
Cell Coverage Area of the BS:
As mentioned in the above section that the area covered by the BS is typically
considered to be hexagonal in shape. This consideration of hexagonal shape is
due to its efficiently to cover a geographical area with minimum overlap and
gaps among the cells. The coverage of the cell is further optimized by the use of
antennas. There are two fundamental types of antennas used for the coverage
of a BS.
• Directional Antenna
• Omni-directional Antenna
Directional antennas are the antennas which transmit the radio signal in
a specific direction. This type of antenna is used to cover the specific sector of
cell. Typically, a cell in divided into three sectors, each covering 120 degrees,
hence dividing the hexagonal cell into three sectors. This enhances the signal
strength and reduce interference within the sectors. For this reason it is assumed
to have directional antenna in the section. 5.1
.
Omni-directional antennas are the antennas which transmit the radio
signal uniformly in all directions. Hence providing the coverage of 360 degrees
around the antenna. These are used to cover small cells or to cover an area that
requires uniform coverage.
28
==PAGE:35==
Since, the coverage area is considered to be hexagonal in the model, therefore
the formula for area of hexagon is used to calculate the total coverage area: This
formula is given as under
Coverage area (Hexagonal cell) = 3
√
3R2
2
(8)
where R is the radius of the hexagonal cell.
By using the above formula the calculated area is to be 11.45 sq.km
Additionally, a term called Inter Site Distance (ISD) or site-to-site distance
is used to characterize the cell sizes in a hexagonal tessellation. It is define as
the Euclidean distance between two adjacent sites in the symmetrical structure
which is an important parameter in network planning. Thus, it can be said that
ISD is the measure of cellular density. In the real world, mobile networks are
not perfectly hexagonal; therefore to obtain accurate values of ISD, the actual
distances between the sites need to be measured. [60] The formula to calculate
the ISD for a hexagonal cell is given as[12]
ISD =
√
3 × R
(9)
where R is the radius of the cell.
The formula gives an ISD of 3,63km or 3630m. A hexagonal cell structure can
be seen in the following figure where a single BS is covering three cells.
Figure 20: The Hexagonal Cell Structure
The total network area to be covered is initially assumed to be 50 sq.km,
although this can be adjusted based on requirements. For the purpose of pro-
posed model, it is assumed to remain 50 sq.km. Since the coverage area of single
29
==PAGE:36==
BS is already calculated to be 11.45 sq.km, the total number of sites required
to cover this area can be calculated using the formula:[46]
# of sites =
total covered area
coverage area per site
(10)
By using the above formula, the number of sites are calculated to be 4.3. As
the number of sites can not be in fractions, therefore rounding-off the figure to
4. Hence four sites are required for the network to cover 50 sq.km area.
As per, power consumption data for the components one site consumes a
total of 1368 watts of energy. The power consumption of each component can
be seen in the table 34 in 9. The values are taken from article [38]. The total
power consumption of the component is multiplied by factor of 3, as each site has
3 sectors. This gives a values of 1368 W. If the number of sites are increased the
power consumption value is also increased with the same factor. The following
table and figure show the the calculation for power consumption and number of
sites along with the corresponding graph.
No of sites
Power Consumed (W)
1
1368
2
2736
3
4104
4
5472
5
6840
6
8208
Table 3: Increased Power consumption with number of sites
Figure 21: Graph showing increase in power consumption with no. of sites
The graph above demonstrates a linear increase in power consumption as the
number of the sites in the network increases. This requires more components on
30
==PAGE:37==
each site, for an adequate coverage. The components are deployed which lead to
an increase in power consumption across the sites. For the analysis, consistent
operational conditions are assumed over the locations.
Since the number of sites and the power consumption per site is being cal-
culated, this can help in finding out the total area power consumption of the
network. The obtained value of total area power consumption is 5969,88 Watt.
In addition to it, the annual power consumption is also calculated which gives
a value of 52296,151 kWh.
As for the calculation of the model, the macro cell base station is considered
with three sectors so the number of RUs will be the product of the number of
sites and the number of sector. This gives a total number of 12 RUs for this
setup. The number of sites and number of BBU are assumed to be same in
number for this model.
5.6
Effect of Transmission power on Power Consumption:
While considering cell coverage area ,transmission power is also an important
factor to be considered. Transmission power significantly varies with the cell
sizes. For smaller cell size, the transmission power is reduced, as the BS doesn’t
require as much power to transmit the signal across shorter distances and hence
resulting in less path loss in the air. [21] The transmission power increase with
an increase in power consumption of a BS. The reason is that, more electrical
energy is needed to transmit signals at high power, hence this inherently in-
crease the transmission power of BS. To see how the transmission power varies
with the power consumption, a few values are considered across the initial value
of the transmitted power (43 dBm) of the BS. The considered values are 30
dBm, 35 dBm, 40 dBm, 45 dBm and 50 dBm 4 .These values are converted to
Watt using the equation 4.
From the table, a value of transmission power can be taken such as 45
dBm. Across this values the total power consumed by one site is calculated
to be 1641W (multiplying total power consumption at 45 dBm 4by number of
sectors). The values of power consumption for the components vary with the
change in power transmission values. Hence effecting the total power consump-
tion of site. The calculation for conversion from dBm to Watt can be seen in 9
in figure 33
Across each value, the power consumption is calculated using the equation
3. The following table shows the values of both transmission power and power
consumption.
31
==PAGE:38==
Transmission Power
(dBm)
Total Power
Consumption of
components (Watt)
Transmission Power
(Watt)
30
307.81
1
35
324.71
3.16
40
378.13
10
45
547.05
31.62
50
1081.125
100
Table 4: Power Consumption vs. Transmission Power
With the obtained values of power consumption across different transmission
power levels, the graph has been plotted as shown in the given figure below.
The graph demonstrates that an increase in transmission power corresponds
to a relative increases in power consumption in a liner manner .However after
reaching 40 dBm, the curve steepens, indicating a higher increase in power
consumption with the increased transmission power values. This could be due
to the in-efficiency of power amplifier with the high output levels which tends
to consume more power.
Figure 22: Graph between Power Consumption and Transmission Power
5.7
Analysis using different frequency spectrum
In order to expand the exposure of this model, different frequencies are also
analysed to see the impact on the network. The considered frequencies are 900
32
==PAGE:39==
MHz and 1800 MHz which have distinct impact on the network performances,
design and power consumption.
The Cost-231 Hata Model is used for the frequency band of 1800 MHz as it
uses the frequency band of 500MHz to 2000MHz. This model can be stated as
[44]
L = 46.3+33.9 log(f)−13.82 log(hb)+cm −a(hm)+(44.9 −6.55 log(hb)) log(d)
(11)
where a(hm) is defined as:
a(hm) = 3.2 (log(11.75hr))2 −4.97
(12)
• L is the total path loss in decibels (dB).
• d is the distance between the transmitter and receiver in kilometers.
• hb is the height of the base station antenna in meters (30m).
• hr is the height of the receiver antenna in meters (1.5m).
• f is the frequency of the signal in megahertz (1800MHz) .
• cm is taken 3dB for urban environment.
The same steps are repeated for frequency band of 1800MHz. The calcu-
lated values of path loss values for are beyond 2km but less then 5kn so an
estimated value of 4.8km is assumed to be the range of the BS. The calculation
can be see in the 9 in 40. The coverage area is calculated using 8 which turned
out to be 59,85sq.km. The calculated sites for the coverage area of 50sq.km is
approximated to 1 using the equation 10. For this, the total area power con-
sumption and power consumption per year is calculated to be 1142,672408 Watt
and 10009,81 kWh respectively.
Whereas the Hata-Okumura Model is used for 900MHz, as this model is
valid for the frequency range of 150MHz to 1500MHz. The model can be stated
as:[44]
L(urban) = 69.55+26.16 log(f)−13.82 log(hte)−a(hre)+(44.9 −6.55 log(hte)) log(d)
(13)
where a(hre) is defined as:
a(hre) = (1.1 log(f) −0.7)hre −(1.56 log(f) −0.8)
(14)
It is a correction factor for the mobile unit for it’s effective height and is a
function of the size of the area of coverage . [44]
33
==PAGE:40==
• L is the total path loss in decibels (dB).
• d is the distance between the transmitter and receiver in kilometers.
• hb is the height of the base station antenna in meters (30m).
• hr is the height of the receiver antenna in meters (1.5m).
• f is the frequency of the signal in megahertz (900MHz) .
Using the permissible path loss value of 157 dB (due to unavailability of
data, the same receiver sensitivity is used i.e -103dBm ). The calculated values
of path loss are within the distances that are assumed to calculated PL (0.5km,
2km and 5km). This shows that the 900MHz frequency band has higher effec-
tive coverage area. The calculation can be see in the 9 in 41. For the frequency
of 900MHz the range is calculated to be 5km across which the coverage area
is calculated using 8 which turned out to be 64.95sq.km. Calculated ISD is
8.66sq.km by using the equation 9. The calculated sites for the coverage area
of 50sq.km is approximated to 1 using the equation 10.
The following graph shows the the relationship between the distance (0.5km
,2km and 5km) and pathloss variations of different frequencies(900MHz, 1800MHz
and 260MHz). From the figure, it can be seen that as the distance increases from
0.5km to 5km the path loss for the given frequencies also increase. Further it
can be seen that this pathloss is highest in case of the frequency band 2600MHz
which illustrates that higher frequencies are attenuated high as compared to
lower frequencies, hence they have stronger pathloss while transmitting from
the BS to the mobile station.
Figure 23: Pathloss Over different frequencies
34
==PAGE:41==
5.8
Summary
The above section provides the detail analysis of the energy consumption dy-
namic of the mobile network, starting with the varying load conditions- Low,
medium and high on the components of BS. At low level of load (up to 20%
capacity), the PA and DSP, operate below their efficiencies,which typically hap-
pens when there is low load or the area is less dense. The medium load level
(21% to 70%) represents the operational conditions in which the components are
efficiently active. Whereas the high load level (71% to 100%), the components
are consuming more energy to perform their operational tasks.
Furthermore, the effective ranges of the BS are calculated to be 2.1km, 4.8
and 5km, using the frequency spectrum of 2600MHz, 1800 MHz and 900MHz
along with the other necessary data required for calculation. The cell area is
assumed to be hexagonal to optimize the number of base stations required to
cover the network area (50sq.km).Using the calculated range values the required
theoretical ISD is figured out to be 3.64, 8.31 and 8.66km for the frequencies.
The number of sites is determined to be 4, 1 and 1 along with 12, 3 and 3 RU
for the frequencies 2600MHz, 1800MHz and 900MHz respectively. In addition
to it for these bands the area power consumption along with the annual power
consumption is also calculated. Additionally, the correlation between the trans-
mission power and power consumption is also considered and the plotted graph
22 demonstrates that at higher power levels, the power consumption increase.
35
==PAGE:42==
6
Energy-Saving Techniques for Mobile networks:
As mentioned earlier that this digital era is not facilitating the global communi-
cation, in terms of mobile network but it is also among the significant consumers
of energy. The energy efficiency has become more pronounced with the digital
demand from the users and also with the environmental sustainability issues.
The speed, capacity and user experience has been significantly improved by the
advancements of each generation of mobile network.
However these benefits
often come with the cost of increased energy demands. For instance it can be
seen that, wide-area wireless voice telephony, mobile internet access, video calls
were introduced in 3G, which required more energy than the preceding 2G. This
energy consumption increased in 4G with even higher data speeds and digital
mobility, which led to adoption of smart gadgets with numbers of mobile ap-
plications. Now, the 5G is revolutionizing the industry with ultra-high speed
data and huge connectivity, which requires deployment strategies with complex
management in terms of energy consumption. The telecommunication industry
is also mapping towards the 6G. Hence this rapid evolution of telecom industry
is accompanied by massive increase of energy consumption of mobile networks.
This forced the operators to further exploit the potential of network designs so
to reduce the energy consumption caused by this sector of industry specially in
the new mobile generations. [15]
This following section delves into the strategies that are being applied and
used by the network operators, in LTE. These techniques help to minimize the
energy consumption while maintaining the same service quality of their network.
6.1
Energy-Saving techniques in LTE:
There are multiple methods which the network operators use to save energy in
the cellular networks. With each generation, more efficient ways of energy-saving
are being introduced. The following are some of the energy-saving methods that
have been developed as energy saving techniques in LTE technology.
6.1.1
Cell discontinuous transmission
In order to achieve long battery life, Discontinuous transmission ( DTX ) is a
well-known technique that is being used in mobile terminals. Here the idea to
put the transmitter in a low power state with there is no transmission. It is
termed as Cell Discontinuous transmission (DTX), at the network side. Even
when there is no activity in the base station ( no user data), still there is
some minimum amount of transmission is done in terms of some basic signals
like the pilot channel and the control channel.
[51] Pilot channel helps the
mobile device to locate and synchronize with the cell whereas control channel is
used to carry the essential information. Particularly in LTE, there still occurs
some short periods when there is no transmission even with these continuous
36
==PAGE:43==
signals. During these short intervals the base station can still save some energy
by shutting down some of the components by using this method of cell DTX.
By the usage of adaptive hardware this process is made possible, such hardware
can turn on and off quickly, without effecting the network performance, thus
saving the energy.[20]
6.1.2
Adaptive Sectorization
The mobile networks are deployed to deal the peak traffic during the busy hours.
This results in unnecessary energy consumption during the off-peak times (for
example at night time). Adaptive sectorization is a technique that deals with
issues, by re-configuring the BSs to operate with few larger sectors during the
low traffic hours.
This methods helps in saving the energy by lowering the
number of active transceivers without effecting the coverage and service level
provided to the users. [20] One of the possible implementation for this could be
the traditional three sector sites whose antennas can be connected to a common
transceiver via power splitter and thus switching into omni-sites. This could be
an excellent energy saving method, spent on underutilized sector whenever the
traffic load is low. [20]
6.1.3
Antenna Muting
Today’s wireless system is commonly using MIMO, where antennas are mounted
at transmitter and receivers, for example in LTE MIMO is used to increase the
capacity and data rates of the network, in addition to it, this is also beneficial
from an energy efficiency point, as it facilitates more DTX. Since the antenna
is typically served by a separate PA therefore in certain situations for example
when the traffic is low, then down scaling of antennas transmission will be more
beneficial in terms of power saving. The fast deactivation of antenna and the
related transceiver components in situation of reduced traffic is termed as An-
tenna muting. The optimization timescale must be at the millisecond level as
the traffic load varies quickly in the mobile network. The method enables the
BSs designed for maximum throughput to run energy efficiently, even during
the period of decreased traffic situations.[20]
37
==PAGE:44==
6.2
Summary:
The above chapter addresses the strategies that operators use in LTE to miti-
gate energy issues arising from high power consumption of the network. One of
the technologies used in LTE is Cell Discontinuous Transmission in which the
energy consumption is reduced by turning down the transmitter during inactive
periods. Another method, called Adaptive Sectorization is also used in LTE in
which the energy is conserved by adjusting the configuration of the BS when
there is low traffic, hence operating fewer BS with larger sectors. The third is
antenna muting in which the unneeded components are deactivated and the an-
tenna transmission is scaled down during low traffic, however this optimization
time is at millisecond level as the traffic in a network varies quickly.
6.3
Energy-Saving Techniques in 5G:
This part of the section discusses some primary principles of energy-saving used
for 5G RAN’s, which serve as the basis for researching and evaluating the energy-
saving technologies. Generally, there are three principles that are used as energy
saving guidelines. They are classified as scenario-based demand principle, trade-
off principle, and dynamic scaling principle.[32]
A. Demand Principle based on Scenario: The energy-savings of 5G
RAN differ, depending upon the design limitation of various scenarios and the
user experience guarantee. Hence it is mandatory to set scenario specific energy-
savings designs, analyzing the core technology of each scenario and offering a
scenario performance guarantee. The earlier energy-saving scenarios were rel-
atively simple, but with the development of networks, the scenarios are also
getting complex. There exists different characteristic scenarios for example out-
door scenario, indoor scenario, and so on. Distinctive features are often reflected
by different scenario types, these features even becomes challenging in terms of
energy saving constrain, however intelligent utilization and focused research will
also be the crucial technologies for energy-saving of 5G RAN. [32]
B. Trade-Off Principle: Following are some of the main trade-off issues
which exists while considering the energy-savings is 5G’s RAN:[32]
i. Performance and energy-saving trade-off
ii. Trade-off in 5G RAN and terminal’s energy-saving trade-off
i) Performance and Energy-saving Trade-off: There is a strong rela-
tionship between the network resources and the performance of network. The
reduction in the resources conserves the energy savings of the network, but also
affects the performance of the network. Therefore the trade-off between energy-
saving gain and network performance can not be neglected. In the leisure time
such as night or other low-usage periods, there is a certain margin in the network
38
==PAGE:45==
performance. Moderately utilizing the margin will have a minimum impact on
the users experience. This is termed as Performance on Demand. Effective
management of this margin requires both qualitative and quantitative analy-
sis of how different energy-saving technologies influence the performance across
various scenarios. The consequence of exact modelling analysis in many sce-
narios poses significant difficulties, though. At such point, introduction of AI
methods is crucial. With AI models and learning, a mapping link between the
energy-saving effect and influence of KPI is developed aiming to determine the
optimal balance between the two points, while making sure that the primary
network coverage remains unaffected.[32]
ii) Trade-off in 5G RAN and terminal’s Energy-saving Trade-off
The energy-saving strategies in 5G RAN and terminals are often uncoupled,
however trade-off can still occur in some situations. For instance, to reduce the
terminal’s power consumption, 5G RAN has altered the architecture of public
signaling interaction between them network and the terminal. However these
adjustments come at the expense of increased overhead of 5G RAN. A lot of
research has been made by 3GPP, on the energy-saving of 5G RAN. However,
considering the end-to-end communication, the terminal always takes the dom-
inant position. The terminal always prioritizes the battery life enhancement
and reducing the power consumption, which affects the 5GRAN capacity to
save energy. There need some modification that must be done by 5G in the
signaling interaction with the terminal. The terminal must be able to comply
with the changes, or else it may affect the regular operations of the terminal.[32]
C. Dynamic Scaling Principle: Following are the two dimension for the
dynamic scaling principle [58]
i. Service-based resource scaling
ii. Power consumption scaling with resources
i) Service-based resource scaling The system allocates the on-demand
resources such as time, frequency, spatial, and power domain to accomplish the
real-time dynamic scaling based on the scenario based network’s KPI and QoS.
One of the important parameter to save energy is to reduce resource overhead
by logical scheduling under medium and low load period of time.
ii) Power consumption scaling with resources: The 5G RAN’s power
consumption should be reduced in accordance with the reduction in the used
resources. The used resources involve bandwidth, number of carriers, number
of channels, transmit power and so on.
There are two main types of Energy-saving technologies used in 5G net-
work.They are named as following :
• Traditional Energy-Saving Technology of 5GRAN
• AI Based Energy-Saving Technology of 5GRAN
39
==PAGE:46==
6.3.1
Traditional Energy-saving Technology of 5G
There are two main schemes that are included in the traditional energy-saving
scheme of 5GRAN. They are Hardware Energy-Saving technology of 5GRAN
and Software Energy-Saving technology of 5GRAN. The hardware energy-saving
methods focuses on the reduction of the basic power consumption of 5GRAN
whereas the software energy-saving considers business operations into account
and logically distributes the resources to guarantee efficient operation of 5G.
A. Hardware Energy-Saving Technology of 5GRAN:
In hardware energy-saving technology the fundamental power consumption
of 5G’s RAN is reduced. Moreover the energy utilization of it’s RAN is also
improved by optimizing the RAN’s hardware design and the equipment inte-
gration more effectively along with advanced production technology. [32]The
main component is PA whose improvements play a vital role in the reduction
of energy consumption of the network.[57]
There are different ways of improving the PA’s hardware. One way of ac-
celerating the technology innovation is the use of new semi conductor material
Gallium Nitride (GaN). This material optimizes the efficiency of PA of the an-
tenna unit.[32]Another solution could be the usage of same amplifier to support
multiple bands. The power consumption of the PA is then optimized since single
PA can support these bands. In this way the the energy efficiency of system can
be improved. Wide band technology is being used in multi-band radio, in which
these bands are served by the same amplifier, thereby reducing the number of to-
tal amplifiers.[57] Furthermore, the use of new semiconductor processes such as
the recent 5 or 7 nm technology can be implemented to optimize the integrated
circuit (IC) design. This can significantly improve the 5GRAN performance and
thus help in the reduction of power consumption of the radio access network.[32]
B. Software Energy-Saving technology of 5GRAN:
By modifying the software configuration of 5GRAN, the system resources
are reasonably allocated in order to accomplish the goal of energy-saving and
reduction in 5GRAN while ensuring no harm to the performance of the system.
This is based on the characteristics of communication services and the changes
in the network load. At present, following are the main software energy-saving
technology of 5GRAN
i. Symbol shutdown
ii. Channel shutdown
iii. Carrier shutdown
i) Symbol shutdown: The basic principle of symbol shutdown is that
when there is no data in the down-link symbol, it turns off the PA and other
40
==PAGE:47==
Radio frequency (RF) components in the RF module, thereby reducing the
power consumption of the network. [28] When the 5GRAN identifies that there
is data on downlink symbols, the PA and the parallel components in the RF
module can be resumed instantly to meet the data transmission needs. The
real time data transmission and the network performance are not affected by
the symbol-level shutdown. The schematic diagram of symbol shutdown can be
seen in the figure.[32]
Figure 24: Schematic diagram of Symbol Shutdown
Up to 30% reduction in power consumption is achieved when the load is
relatively low. [28]
ii) Channel shutdown: With the initiation of Massive MIMO technol-
ogy, the capacity of 5G has been effectively improved. In order to reduce the
power consumption of RF and meet the real-time capacity requirements, some
downlink transmission channels can be shut down during the leisure periods,
for instance, the night time. In particular, if during a specified period of time
the load in the cell is lower than the present threshold, some of the transmit
channels are automatically shut down by the 5G RAN. At the same instant of
time, the transmit power in the cell of the common channels, is automatically
adjusted by 5G RAN. This is done to make sure that the QoS and the coverage
of 5G RAN is not affected.[32]
The closing of some uplink and downlink receiving channels can reduce power
consumption, whenever there is a margin for uplink coverage. However, the re-
covery time is long, which affects the uplink coverage. The decision of shutting
down an uplink receiving channel depends on whether the uplink performance
loss produced by the shutdown can be accepted. The uplink and downlink shut-
down function can be considered independently and adjusted with the specific
application scenario to improve energy saving and KPIs. [32]
iii) Carrier shutdown: In multi-frequency co-coverage networks, some
carriers are designated as fundamental cells, while the others are deployed as
capacity cell. These cells, altogether form a group with equal coverage. During
the leisure period of time such as night, some carriers can be turned off to reduce
the energy consumption whereas the fundamental cell remain operational.[32].
The figure below shows an overview of carrier shutdown (inspired by [57] for
41
==PAGE:48==
the figure).
Figure 25: An overview of Carrier Shutdown
The service load on multiple carriers is being periodically checked by the
feature of carrier shutdown, within the specified energy saving period set by the
operator. If, this load is less than the specified threshold, the capacity-layers
are dynamically close down and the users are migrated to the fundamental cell
which potentially increases latency due to the higher load on the remaining
cells.[28] In addition to it, if there exists various frequency bands within the
same coverage, then priority of the close down can be set for these bands, as
per their energy-saving gains and capacity loss caused by the closing down.[32]
When the service load of the co-coverage cell group is higher than the preset
shutdown-exit threshold, the capacity cell can be restarted. Thus the capacity
of the entire network moves back to the level before the shutdown.[32]
.
6.3.2
AI-Based Energy-Saving Technology of 5G:
AI is refereed as an area of computer science, focused on establishing machines
that are able to perform behaviors which are considered intelligent by the hu-
mans. Hence, in networking, the AI can make decision based on the predictions
and real time measurements, replacing human decisions.[57]
AI consists of three principle
• Big data
• Automation
• Artificial intelligence
42
==PAGE:49==
where big data performs the examination of large dataset, pre-programmed
rules are used in automation, and the cognitive functions are applied using the
AI.[57]. AI plays a central role in optimizing various aspects of 5G including
energy efficiency. However, in wireless communication channels, such as mobile
network, the complexity of AI increases because of the variation in the condition
of the channel. Some of the use cases of 5G based on AI are as under: [57]
• Traffic load forecast
• Threshold optimisation
• Service awareness
• Energy harvesting optimization
• Signal propagation prediction models
• Energy optimisation
It is not expected by AI alone, to bring any change in the energy savings,
however the energy consumption can be reduced by the combination of AI, net-
work virtualization and sleep modes or enhanced spectral efficiency .
ML is the sub field of AI where machines learn on the basis of the training
they receive. It is widely applicable, including in areas within mobile network
prediction. Statistical techniques are used by ML to perform specific tasks which
typically require less amount of data and shorter training time. The energy and
the traffic prediction can be provide by the algorithms used in ML, which en-
ables the utilisation of renewable energy sources. Additionally, the coding and
encoding of the transmission can also be performed by ML which leads to in-
crease in spectral efficiency up to 20%. The enhancements in 5G make it easier
to use the ML to derive idea and network wide energy efficient operation strate-
gies through centralized data collection and processing.[57]
A sub field of ML is Deep Learning, which addresses the problem that are not
handled by ML. The artificial neural networks are used by Deep learning (DL)
which require a more significant amount of data to train models which allows the
processing of unlabeled data and solve end-to-end problems. In [11] uses deep
reinforcement learning, which is a DL method. This method processes high-
dimensional input data and learning actions interactively from the surroundings,
which results in energy saving up to 27% .
6.4
MIMO based Energy-Saving technology of 5G:
There are few more energy-saving methods that are used in 5G RAN which
include massive MIMO [57]
i. Spectral efficiency
43
==PAGE:50==
ii. MIMO sleep mode
iii. mMIMO muting
i) Spectral Efficiency:
Increased spectral efficiency is vitally important for an efficient spectrum use
in 5G technologies, which allows the same amount of information to be trans-
mitted along with less power. There are several advanced techniques to achieve
this efficiency, which include filtered Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplex-
ing (OFDM) which reduce out-of-band emissions and polar codes that provides
vigorous error correction capabilities. In addition to these, Spares Code Multi-
ple Access (SCMA) and mMIMO are also among the techniques of increasing
the efficiency. mMIMO refers to addition of number of antennas at the base
station to serve multiple users simultaneously over the same time and same fre-
quency resource, which enhances the 5G transmission by improving multiplexing
and array gain. This set up not only helps in the simplification of precoding
but it also reduces the power consumption for signal processing. Furthermore,
mMIMO also helps in reducing the loses of PA, which also contribute in saving
of over all energy of the network. However the increased number of Analog-
to-Digital converter in mMIMO system add complexity and raise power usage.
In order to compensate this, hybrid analog to digital precoders are considered
to decrease the complexity of the system and manage the energy consumption
effectively. [57]
ii) MIMO Sleep Mode:
During the low traffic periods, the number of the antenna branches are de-
activated which is termed as MIMO Sleep Mode. For instance, when the traffic
is low, an 8 * 8 MIMO or 4 * 4 MIMO in the RU can be reconfigured as 2 * 2
MIMO. Thus, the capacity of cell is being reduced in periods.
Figure 26: MIMO sleep mode and MIMO muting (inspired by [57])
44
==PAGE:51==
iii) mMIMO Muting:
During the low traffic period, the mMIMO muting shuts down the channel
which results in the reduction of antenna gain and coverage loss. In addition
to it, the capacity of the cell is also reduced during the muting period. The
shut-off the channels using mMIMO can save upto 20% of the energy citeGreen-
Fut49:online. The article does not explain in which components of the network
the energy is being saved. It is expected to be in the RU of the radio access
network. [57]
6.5
Summary:
In this chapter the techniques used in 5G to deal energy issues arising from the
demands of the computational era were discussed.For 5G, three fundamentals
principles for energy-saving are described; the scenario-based demand princi-
ple, the trade-off principle and the dynamic scaling principle. In demand based
scenario principle, the energy-saving techniques are deployed as per the specific
scenarios such as indoor, outdoor an so on. However it is made sure that the user
experiences is not effected. In trade-off principle, a balance is tried to maintain,
between the network performance and energy consumption. It focuses on how
reduction of resource can decrease energy consumption without impacting the
user experience. Whereas in dynamic scaling principle, the real time adjustment
of network resources is performed, based on services and demands conditions
hence enhancing the energy consumption. There are two key aspects of the
principle; Service-based resource scaling and Power consumption scaling with
resources. In Service-based resource scaling, the resources like frequency, time
and so on are allocated dynamically to meet the network performance which
enhance the QoS. In power consumption scaling, the power usage is adjusted
as per change in the resource allocation such as bandwidth, number of channels
and so on, maintaining energy efficiency even if the load varies.
With respect to technology the energy-saving in 5G are divided into two
categories; traditional and AI-based approaches.
Traditional method is fur-
ther divided as hardware and software strategies, hardware focuses on the im-
provements of components such as efficiency of PA is enhanced by using semi-
conductor such as Gallium Nitride, whereas the software strategies involves
symbol, channel and carrier shutdowns, in which some of network elements are
deactivated during the low usage time. AI based technologies uses algorithms
based on ML to predict the traffic load and also for optimization of network
operations as well as energy usage. In addition to these methods, enhancing
spectral efficiency is a key point to improve the energy efficiency of the mobile
network. Techniques such as OFDMA, polar codesSpares Code Multiple Ac-
cess (SCMA) and mMIMO optimize resource use and help in reduction of power
consumption. Further MIMO sleep mode and MIMO muting deactivate unused
components during the time of low traffic. All these techniques illustrates how
the energy is optimize in 5G network.
45
==PAGE:52==
7
Energy-Saving Techniques beyond 5G
As the mobile network is moving to the next revolutionary technology, it is crit-
ical to address the sustainability challenges, which are posed by the increasing
demands from the users. Therefore, it is critically essential to develop potential
energy-saving techniques for the forthcoming mobile generation i.e 6G, which
promises to deliver even greater speeds and higher connectivity. This section fo-
cuses on the future methods of energy management strategies for the up-coming
generation as this technology brings significant development in energy efficiency.
These developments are linked with various innovative areas which are as under:
• Zero touch networks
• Rate Splitting
• Intelligent reflecting surfaces
• Improved sampling techniques
• Energy Harvesting
7.1
Zero touch networks:
Future network operations are expected to be greatly simplified with the advent
of the zero touch networks, which will be fully automated and will require no
human interface. Since future intelligent network management will depend on
the collaboration between the design, deployment and operational phase, var-
ious kind of AI techniques will make the use of zero touch networks possible.
Self-Organising Network (SON) is an AI which is used to forecast network be-
havior and also manages the network based on these forecast; illustrating one
of the network automation technique. Thus, zero touch networking allows an
autonomous network system that can self-configure, self-monitor, self-healing
and self-optimization based on service-level policies and rules, without human
interface.[57]
Future intelligent network management not only depends on AI techniques
however, they also rely in advance programmable network technologies such
as Software Defined Networking (SDN) and Network Functions Virtualization
(NFV). SDN works by separating the network management and traffic routing
functions, the network services are managed by abstraction of lower-level func-
tionalities. In NFV, the network functions are decoupled from the dedicated
hardware devices which enables them to be run on virtual machines. These
technologies play an important role in the zero touch network by providing op-
timization, automated deployments and maintenance of the network.[56]
In [7], a completely automated framework is introduced that can optimize
and manage the cellular networks and requires negligible human interaction
(i.e ”zero touch”), this is named as CellOS. A variety of different scenarios
46
==PAGE:53==
are considered with various BS and users to demonstrate how CellOS optimize
the performance of the network to different network configurations and settings.
The results of these experiments claims [7] that improvement in energy efficiency
reaches up to 84%. However, there is a need of special security since these types
of network become less resilient to human eye, therefore the security must be
taken in account. Some of the potential security attacks include AI/ML - based
attack, open API security attacks, the attacks due to the use of programmable
network technologies (such as SDN and NFV).[56]
7.2
Rate Splitting:
The multiple access technology intended for 6G is termed as rate splitting which
efficiently mitigate interference by splitting the user’s message into two part
’private part’ and a common part. The user message is split into non-orthogonal
transmission, where common part of the message is decoded by number of users
and the private message is decoded by its intended user. The concept of rate
splitting is illustrated in the figure below [57]
Figure 27: Rate Splitting showing the split of user’s message into two parts
(inspired by [57])
Rate splitting does the partial decoding of the interference and treats it
as noise, hence performing good at all levels of interference. Initially, in the
RU’s transmitter part the common messages from all the users are combined
in a single stream.
This combined stream also contains each user’s private
message, which is then transmitted to all the users. The common part of the
message is decoded first as it is shared among all the users. After this each user
can decode his private message stream. By decoding the common part first, all
users are synchronized which helps in the performance of the network. Moreover
the improvements in interference is achieved with rate splitting which leads
47
==PAGE:54==
to continuous improvement of spectral efficiency that results in improvement
of energy efficiency of the network.
However, the transmitter only has the
information about the users statistical Channel State Information (CSI) which
brings uncertainty of channel conditions due to which the effective management
of signal interference and optimization becomes complicated. Despite of these
challenges rate splitting brings robust solution for enhancing the overall network
efficiency. The article [50] shows how the accurate alignment of rate allocation
in the rate splitting process enhances both the spectral and energy efficiency,
surpassing the NOMA. By finely tuning the balance between the common and
private stream, it efficiently manages the interference which leads to improve
energy efficiency and thereby saving energy. [57]
7.3
Intelligent Reflecting Surfaces (IRS):
An intelligent reflecting surface, is a flat surface with numerous passive reflecting
elements that can independently alter the amplitude and/or the phase to an
incident signal.[33] The figure below shows the concept of Intelligent Reflecting
Surfaces (IRS) where the signals from an antenna are reflected on the IRS in a
different directions.
Figure 28: Concept of Intelligent Reflecting Surface
Practically, an IRS consist of bulk of reflecting diode units which are ca-
pable of reflecting any electromagnetic signals with an adjustable phase shift.
Therefore, the signal is not only reflected in the angle of incidence but also in
other angles.[57] These reflecting surfaces are elements with two-dimensional
structures; they have length of multiple wavelengths yet they are a fraction of
wavelength deep. Since each reflecting element can be adjusted individually, this
enables passive beam steering (a process of altering the direction of the signal
without using any active electronic component is called Beam steering) which
48
==PAGE:55==
ultimately results in increased efficiency of the network. However, the use of
passive beam steering can increase the interference, specially in multi-user sce-
nario. Since, IRS does not use PA to amplify and forward the signal, hence
it consumes much less energy when compared to a regular relay transceiver.
Furthermore, the phase shifts and transmit power are also optimized in IRS by
using mathematical techniques such as gradient descent and fractional program-
ming.
In [17], the study shows that IRS improves energy efficiency, however it also
demonstrates that increasing the number of reflecting elements do not guar-
antee continuous improvements in the energy efficiency. This study highlights
the complexity of such system, where configuration may not always be straight-
forward and requires consideration on factors such as the number of reflecting
elements.
7.4
Sampling:
Sampling is a crucial part of modern digital signal processing and it stands as
a bridge between the analog (physical) and digital world.
The introduction of compressive sensing techniques will optimize the sam-
pling in the future mobile networks.
Compressive sensing allows for the re-
construction of the signal by taking the samples at a rate lower than what is
needed by the Nyquist theorem. With the increased transmission bandwidth in
5G and future 6G mobile networks, the continued use of Nyquist sampling tech-
niques will results in numerous challenges for instance large complexity, high
power consumption, large overheads. [55] In this regard, Compressive sensing
is a techniques that has potential to overcome the limits that are impose by the
traditional sampling. Hence the improved sampling has envisioned to have a
relative impact on the energy savings in the mobile networks.[57]
7.5
Energy Harvesting:
Energy harvesting aims to increase the range and standby times of mobile net-
works by using the energy from the surrounding environment to power the
devices and the sensors rather than using the traditional methods of powering.
There are two main sources of energy harvesting:[55]
• Natural Sources
• Mam-made sources
Natural sources of energy harvesting include renewable energy sources like so-
lar, wind, thermal and microbial fuel cell whereas man-made energy harvesting
includes Wireless Energy Transfer (WET), where energy transfer from source
49
==PAGE:56==
to a dedicated power beacon occurs. Since natural sources of energy are unpre-
dictable, they can not provide guaranteed QoS, making Wireless Energy Trans-
fer (WET) to be a dominant area of research.[55] These man-made sources are
generating the energy supplies on micro level such as micro watt µW and milli
watt mW. Hence making it feasible for use in IoT. [57]
As a vast number of connected devices are to be expected to be in future
network of mobile such as 6G, therefore, traditional battery-powered methods
become impractical due to many reasons for example cost, inconvenience and
the potential risks, especially for the devices that are used inside the body. By
use of energy harvesting methods the service life on rely devices can be also
prolonged, since a wireless signal can carry and transmit both energy and infor-
mation at the same time. This is named as Radio Frequency Energy Harvesting
Radio Frequency Energy Harvesting (RF-EH)[55]. RF-EH describes how the
energy can be harvested from RF waves to extend the lifetime of the network
by using the RF range between 300 GHz to 3 KHz. [57]A combination of co-
operative spectrum sharing and Simultaneous Wireless Information and Power
transfer (SWIPT) technique is used to improve the spectral and energy efficiency
of IoT devices in the 6G era. [55]Thus, Simultaneous Wireless Information and
Power (SWIPT) encounters two objectives maximizing the amount of informa-
tion transfer and maximizing the amount of energy transfer. There exists two
primary modes in SWIPT : Power Splitting (PS) and Time Switching (TS).[57]
At the receiver, the signal is divided into two parts: an information part and an
energy part, which means the receiver simultaneously receives both the informa-
tion and energy. In Time Switching (TS) mode, the receiver node separates the
time, for processing the information and harvesting energy. Whereas, in Power
Splitting (PS) mode, the receiver node breaks the received signal, partially for
processing the information and partially for energy harvesting.
[57]
For the practical implementation of RF-EH, an optimal balance between
the harvested energy and the achievable transmission rate is required. This is
possible by two approaches: [57]
• The received signal is divided into two parts, one for energy supply gained
through energy harvesting and the other for information decoding.
• The other could involve splitting the transmission time for energy har-
vesting and information transmission: firstly, harvesting energy from the
received signal and then performing wireless transmission .
It can be said that, WET can be used for energizing the connected devices
in a network to transmit, both energy and information.[55] Although, energy
harvesting will not directly impact the customer experience or the energy con-
sumption, however, it will play a critical role towards the journey of carbon
neutrality.[57]
50
==PAGE:57==
7.6
Summary
In this chapter, potential energy-saving techniques for 6G are discussed, which
highlights the importance of sustainability in context of dramatic growth of users
demand. The techniques such Zero touch Networks, Rate splitting, Intelligent
Reflecting Surface, Improved Sampling techniques and Energy Harvesting are
explored as the feasible solution for up-coming generation of mobile network.
The aim of Zero Touch Networks is to fully automate the network functions by
utilizing the AI’s self managing capabilities, which can increase energy efficiency
up to 84%. However, due to reduced human eye, security in such techniques
must be considered strictly. In Rate Splitting, interference is managed efficiently
by splitting the user’s message into two parts, a common part and a private part.
This setup reinforces both the spectral efficiency as well as the energy efficiency
in the network across various level of interference. Intelligent Reflecting Surface
are considered for their ability to change the phase and amplitude of the signal
without any active components. This method requires careful configuration to
optimize the network performance, as increasing the number of reflecting ele-
ments do not guarantee continues improvements in energy efficiency. It also
covers sampling techniques, such as compressive sampling, by introducing com-
pressive sampling, the challenges which might be faced while using traditional
sampling can be over come including large overheads and power consumption.
Finally, Energy Harvesting method is described, which uses natural and
man-made resource to power the devices to support sustainability in the cellular
networks. The man-made resources are generating the energy supplies at micro
and milli level making it feasible to be used in IoT. Techniques such as SWIPT
is used to increase the amount of energy and information transfer in IoT devices.
Overall, these strategies can be beneficial in terms of energy savings in 6G,
resulting in efficiency in the network and also reduction of environmental im-
pacts caused by this sector.
51
==PAGE:58==
8
Conclusion:
Since the beginning of the era of telecommunication, this technology is highly
integrating into every aspect of human life. Starting from 1G, to the up-coming
6G generation, these mobile communications has become a part of almost every
industry, including thousands of applications and services - continuing to ex-
pand. The forecast for the year 2025 predicts 100 billion connections, including
40 billion smart devices. [28] This exponential growth and the use of advanced
technologies, have significantly highlighted the issue of energy consumption,
thereby increasing the cost of operations and carbon dioxide emissions. For this
reason, the energy efficiency in mobile networks has become a hot topic among
the telecom operators.
The study and analysis conducted by GSMA at a global level shows that
73% of energy is consumed by RAN, 13% by the network core, and 9% by data
centers, whereas the remaining 5% of the total power consumption is used by
other operations.[27] Hence, the studies show that the focus should be on RAN.
With this concern, the RAN architecture has become crucial. Traditional RAN
is considered to be more energy consuming as each RU had a dedicated BBU.
During period of less activity, the resources remain underutilized, leading to
energy wastage. In contrast, in C-RAN, V-RAN and O-RAN, the RUs and
BBUs are disaggregated to make the network efficient. Placing the BBUs at
a centralized location and are virtually controlled over the COTS server. An
advancement in O-RAN includes open interfaces, which allows the operator to
choose BBUs and RUs from different vendors.
A model for estimating the power consumption in mobile network has been
developed in this report. The analysis focused on RAN part, in which the com-
ponents were investigated with the amount of energy they consumed within the
network. The impact of different loads were observed on the components which
showed increased power consumption with load. Load factor was increased by
1.2, and power consumption of components were analysed which illustrated an
increased power consumption when compared to the standard operational case.
The resultant graph in figure 18 demonstrated the difference in power con-
sumption for both cases. The energy consumption was inspected with respect
to the pathloss for different frequencies which showed that frequency dependent
pathloss impacts the efficiency of cellular networks.
Moreover the effects of
power transmission was also analysed with respect to the power consumption.4
In addition to this, other parameters were considered as well, such has number
of sites, ISD, number of RUs and number of BBUs and amount of power con-
sumption per year is observed.
The last sections of report identify the existing and future strategies for
energy efficiency in mobile generations. In LTE the methods like Cell DTX,
adaptive sectorization and antenna muting are used in which some parts of BS
can be turned off to save energy, or the BS is configured to cover a larger area
52
==PAGE:59==
during less activity timings. For 5G, some traditional techniques are defined,
such as hardware energy-saving and software energy saving, in which new tech-
nologies such as nanometer technology is used for designing hardware chips.
Whereas, the software methods deal with the carrier, symbol and channel shut-
down. Additionally, MIMO techniques are implemented for the same purpose.
AI and ML are already introduced in 5G, which along with network virtualiza-
tion and sleep modes are benefiting the networks in terms of energy efficiency.
Eventually, the techniques for up-coming generation were defined which in-
volved zero touch networks along with programmable technologies such as SDN
and NFV. They help in optimization, deployments and maintenance of zero
touch networks. Rate splitting is another techniques in which the message of
the user is splitted into two parts a private part and a common part to mitigate
the interference. By this the spectral energy and energy efficiency is improved.
IRS has different passive elements which alter the phase and the angle of the
incident signal independently. This enables passive beam steering which ulti-
mately helps in increasing the efficiency of the network. Some advance sampling
methods such as compressive sampling will relatively helpful in energy-savings
of the future mobile generations. Energy harvesting is a method in which the
natural and man-made sources are used to power the devices. WET, is gen-
erating energy on micro and milli levels which make it feasible to be used in
6G. SWIPT helps in increasing the spectral efficiency and as well as the energy
efficiency of the future generation.
It can be said that integration and implementation of potential energy-saving
techniques in 6G are mandatory for ensuring the sustainability challenges posed
by the mobile generations.
This will ultimately pave the way for a greener
environment where the connections are energy efficient.
53
==PAGE:60==
References
[1] 4g and 5g technologies:
A comparative study - dtu findit.
https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5fce2b72d9001d022a1b2fcc. (Accessed on
02/27/2024).
[2] 5g mobile network architectures - dtu findit. https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/59b7be985010df28b56063e1. (Accessed on 06/01/2024).
[3] 5g mobile network architectures - dtu findit. https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/5d65100cd9001d452b768545. (Accessed on 03/05/2024).
[4] Adaptive
transceiver
design
for
c-ran
in
mmwave
communi-
cations
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
5aa185ff5010df14646fae17. (Accessed on 04/29/2024).
[5] A baseline roadmap for advanced wireless research beyond 5g - dtu findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5e67a95dd9001d01f22613c1?
single_revert=%2Fen%2Fcatalog%3Fq%3DA%2BBaseline%2BRoadmap%
2Bfor%2BAdvanced%2BWireless%2BResearch%2BBeyond%2B5G%26show_
single%3Doff%26utf8%3D%25E2%259C%2593. (Accessed on 03/14/2024).
[6] Capacity dimensioning for 5g mobile heterogeneous networks - dtu findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5abfd0a65010df35cc3eeb3b. (Ac-
cessed on 03/12/2024).
[7] Cellos:
Zero-touch
softwarized
open
cellular
networks
-
sciencedi-
rect.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S138912862030503X. (Accessed on 05/11/2024).
[8] Cellular energy efficiency evaluation framework - dtu findit.
https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5441ea67acc4e2154d3935ab. (Accessed on
05/05/2024).
[9] Chapter 35 5g.
https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/
978-3-031-33386-6_35.pdf. (Accessed on 03/05/2024).
[10] Comparative study of different generations of mobile network - dtu findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/653f1354272a86062a9d542f. (Ac-
cessed on 03/11/2024).
[11] Deep
reinforcement
learning
for
cell
on/off
energy
sav-
ing
on
wireless
networks
—
ieee
conference
publication
—
ieee
xplore.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/
document/9685279?casa_token=91Z87S4BNEsAAAAA:OdC2DV_
27fPiy1KDEAqCe4WCllxsAnVJPMEk4J0hfkaG6CfBK6vXxcp2LPEhDUOJvwpYKBhQeg.
(Accessed on 05/10/2024).
[12] Energy
efficiency
and
cell
coverage
area
analysis
for
macrocell
networks
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
569e9b70a409e89e590336d1. (Accessed on 05/24/2024).
54
==PAGE:61==
[13] Energy efficiency in 5g cellular network systems - dtu findit. https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5e05a6d3d9001d57c54638b6. (Accessed on
05/22/2024).
[14] Energy
efficiency
of
radio
units
in
next-generation
open
radio
access
networks
—
keysight.
https://www.
keysight.com/us/en/assets/7123-1087/white-papers/
Energy-Efficiency-of-Radio-Units-in-Next-Generation-Open-Radio-Access-Networks.
pdf. (Accessed on 03/14/2024).
[15] Energy-efficient mobile network design and planning - dtu findit. https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/590b33c45010df65bd7a147e. (Accessed on
04/30/2024).
[16] Energy-efficient
orchestration
of
metro-scale
5g
radio
access
networks
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
611a62efd9001d01cc3f7c90?single_revert=%2Fen%2Fcatalog%3Fq%
3DEnergy-Efficient%2BOrchestration%2Bof%2BMetro-Scale%2B5G%
2BRadio%2BAccess%2BNetworks%26show_single%3Doff%26utf8%3D%
25E2%259C%2593. (Accessed on 04/23/2024).
[17] Energy
efficient
resource
allocation
for
irs
assisted
comp
sys-
tems
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
62011d2a96f6001b34b5e851. (Accessed on 05/12/2024).
[18] Energy-efficient
virtual
base
station
formation
in
optical-access-
enabled cloud-ran - dtu findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
5784e2e9ef120e364c003265. (Accessed on 03/11/2024).
[19] Energy policies in the hyperconnected era — meer. https://www.meer.
com/en/67085-energy-policies-in-the-hyperconnected-era.
(Ac-
cessed on 05/21/2024).
[20] Energy
saving
techniques
for
lte:
Integration
and
system
level
results
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
544a8b59e44c7a866724816e. (Accessed on 04/30/2024).
[21] Energy-efficient mobile network design and planning - green communi-
cations - wiley online library. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
abs/10.1002/9781118759257.ch6. (Accessed on 05/24/2024).
[22] Evaluation of energy efficiency in mobile cellular networks using a fluid
modeling framework.
https://theses.hal.science/tel-03137600v1/
document. (Accessed on 03/03/2024).
[23] The evolution of radio access network towards open-ran:
Challenges
and opportunities - dtu findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
5f1ec6d4d9001d01e62ae476. (Accessed on 03/11/2024).
55
==PAGE:62==
[24] Evolving
and
complementing
lte
to
fit
the
5g
future.
https://www.ericsson.com/en/
reports-and-papers/ericsson-technology-review/articles/
evolving-lte-to-fit-the-5g-future. (Accessed on 05/22/2024).
[25] From
2g
to
4g
mobile
network:
Architecture
and
key
perfor-
mance indicators - dtu findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
633cc97bcb790033f9b5b920. (Accessed on 05/15/2024).
[26] From gsm to lte-advanced pro and 5g:
An introduction to mo-
bile
networks
and
...
-
martin
sauter
-
google
books.
https:
//books.google.dk/books?hl=en&lr=&id=_EkzDwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=
PR13&dq=From+GSM+to+LTE-Advanced+Pro+and+5G&ots=stb4etmgLu&
sig=JtXeEzgMCFR81OHu-aWIFt9FRfM&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=From%
20GSM%20to%20LTE-Advanced%20Pro%20and%205G&f=false.
(Accessed
on 01/23/2024).
[27] Going green: benchmarking the energy efficiency of mobile.
https://
data.gsmaintelligence.com/api-web/v2/research-file-download?
id=60621137&file=300621-Going-Green-efficiency-mobile.pdf.
(Accessed on 05/29/2024).
[28] Green
future
networks
-
network
energy
effi-
ciency.
https://www.ngmn.org/wp-content/uploads/
211009-GFN-Network-Energy-Efficiency-1.0.pdf.
(Accessed
on
04/29/2024).
[29] Green future networks: Sustainability challenges and initiatives in mobile
networks.
https://www.ngmn.org/wp-content/uploads/210719_NGMN_
GFN_Sustainability-Challenges-and-Initiatives_v1.0.pdf.
(Ac-
cessed on 01/31/2024).
[30] Ieee
xplore
search
results.
https://ieeexplore-ieee-org.
proxy.findit.cvt.dk/search/searchresult.jsp?searchWithin=
%22Publication%20Number%22:5477033&searchWithin=%22Document%
20Title%22:Power%20consumption%20in%20wireless%20access%
20network. (Accessed on 05/05/2024).
[31] Ijisrt20jun611.pdf.
https://ijisrt.com/assets/upload/files/
IJISRT20JUN611.pdf. (Accessed on 04/09/2024).
[32] Intelligent energy saving technology and strategy of 5g ran — ieee
conference publication — ieee xplore.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/9828681. (Accessed on 03/18/2024).
[33] Intelligent
reflecting
surface-aided
wireless
communications:
A
tutorial
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
601801b9d9001d01fd599a43. (Accessed on 05/11/2024).
56
==PAGE:63==
[34] Long
term
evolution
(lte)
and
lte-advanced
pro.
https:
//onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/epdf/10.
1002/9781119346913.ch4. (Accessed on 02/19/2024).
[35] Lte advanced versus lte.
https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.
findit.cvt.dk/doi/epdf/10.1002/9781119954705.ch15. (Accessed on
02/27/2024).
[36] Microsoft word - 02 transceiver energy model finals.
https://ijcset.
net/docs/Volumes/volume3issue4/ijcset2013030402.pdf.
(Accessed
on 03/21/2024).
[37] Mobile data traffic forecast – mobility report - ericsson.
https:
//www.ericsson.com/en/reports-and-papers/mobility-report/
dataforecasts/mobile-traffic-forecast. (Accessed on 05/19/2024).
[38] Modelling
and
optimization
of
power
consumption
in
wireless
ac-
cess
networks
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
5399b5667cd1b1b97100bd25. (Accessed on 05/22/2024).
[39] Modelling
of
power
consumption
in
two
base
stations,...
-
google
scholar.
https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%
2C5&q=Modelling+of+Power+Consumption+in+Two+Base+Stations%2C+
Using+Ugbor+Station+and+Benson+Idahosa+University+Station+in+
Benin+City+as+a+Case+Study&btnG=. (Accessed on 04/17/2024).
[40] On energy efficient resource allocation in shared rans:
Survey and
qualitative analysis - dtu findit. https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
5f5f579dd9001d01f91ea735. (Accessed on 04/29/2024).
[41] Open ran overview - dtu findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
6535c976da41b43eb4ca8374. (Accessed on 04/29/2024).
[42] Open ran technical priorities - energy efficiency - fv.pdf.
https://cdn.mediavalet.com/usva/telecominfraproject/
f9v9-fBeoki8KlWSHblauQ/0Nl6HS1oAUW5s7pgNGfzxQ/Original/Open_
RAN_Technical_Priorities_-_Energy_Efficiency_-_FV.pdf.
(Ac-
cessed on 04/30/2024).
[43] An overview of the cpri specification and its application to c-ran-
based lte scenarios - dtu findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
571f51e2438c225f0500d248?single_revert=%2Fen%2Fcatalog%3Fq%
3DAn%2Boverview%2Bof%2Bthe%2BCPRI%2Bspecification%2Band%
2Bits%2Bapplication%2Bto%2BC-RAN-based%2BLTE%2Bscenarios%
26show_single%3Doff%26utf8%3D%25E2%259C%2593.
(Accessed
on
03/25/2024).
[44] An
overview
of
various
propagation
model
for
mobile
commu-
nication
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
580f5548b303fb750e009cbd. (Accessed on 04/18/2024).
57
==PAGE:64==
[45] Power consumption analysis of access network in 5g mobile commu-
nication infrastructures — an analytical quantification model - sci-
encedirect.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/
pii/S1574119222000049. (Accessed on 03/26/2024).
[46] Power consumption in wireless access networks - dtu findit.
https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/54416316acc4e2154d08b64d. (Accessed on
03/07/2024).
[47] Power consumption model for macrocell and microcell base stations -
deruyck - 2014 - transactions on emerging telecommunications technolo-
gies - wiley online library. https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.
findit.cvt.dk/doi/full/10.1002/ett.2565. (Accessed on 03/18/2024).
[48] Powering mobile networks with green energy - dtu findit.
https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/544b484ae44c7a866729c864. (Accessed on
03/14/2024).
[49] Rate-splitting multiple access:
Fundamentals, survey, and future re-
search
trends
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
62f5aaaa98062e03a1162db5. (Accessed on 05/11/2024).
[50] Rate
splitting
multiple
access
in
c-ran:
A
scalable
and
ro-
bust
design
—
ieee
journals
&
magazine
—
ieee
xplore.
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9445019?
casa_token=d5L5Liylg3MAAAAA:QC50GIDdxDeg4d7--CyZw5brIB_
7-Q3lPvoN3VoojIn0KW5c2v8XyNWpoOtwiK2bzFEdYRX87A.
(Accessed
on 05/12/2024).
[51] Reducing energy consumption in lte with cell dtx - dtu findit. https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5441ea9aacc4e2154d3948b3. (Accessed on
04/30/2024).
[52] The roadmap to 6g: Ai empowered wireless networks - dtu findit. https://
findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/5d612508d9001d0986526425. (Accessed on
06/01/2024).
[53] Service
based
virtual
ran
architecture
for
next
generation
cellu-
lar
systems
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
6220c00839cf6754d8caa1d3. (Accessed on 04/29/2024).
[54] A
survey
of
wireless
path
loss
prediction
and
coverage
map-
ping
methods
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/
5442beceacc4e2154d7d0158. (Accessed on 04/16/2024).
[55] Survey
on
6g
frontiers:
Trends,
applications,
requirements,
tech-
nologies and future research – doaj.
https://doaj.org/article/
554ddaff3e8f4bd7998fb15c53779061. (Accessed on 06/01/2024).
58
==PAGE:65==
[56] A survey on zero touch network and service management (zsm) for 5g
and beyond networks - sciencedirect. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1084804522000297. (Accessed on 05/11/2024).
[57] Toward greener 5g and beyond radio access networks - a survey - dtu findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/645adffcaae58f2a9a7fafb2. (Ac-
cessed on 04/29/2024).
[58] Toward greener 5g and beyond radio access networks - a survey - dtu findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/catalog/645adffcaae58f2a9a7fafb2?
single_revert=%2Fen%2Fcatalog%3Fq%3DToward%2BGreener%2B5G%
2Band%2BBeyond%2BRadio%2BAccess%2BNetworks%2B-%2BA%2BSurvey%
26show_single%3Doff%26utf8%3D%25E2%259C%2593.
(Accessed
on
03/12/2024).
[59] Vnf and cnf, what’s the difference?
https://www.redhat.com/en/
topics/cloud-native-apps/vnf-and-cnf-whats-the-difference.
(Accessed on 04/29/2024).
[60] Voronoi-based
isd
and
site
density
characteristics
for
mo-
bile
networks
-
dtu
findit.
https://findit.dtu.dk/en/
catalog/569e2b39a409e89e59007190?single_revert=%2Fen%
2Fcatalog%3Fq%3DVoronoi-Based%2BISD%2Band%2BSite%2BDensity%
2BCharacteristics%2B%2Bfor%2BMobile%2BNetworks%26show_single%
3Doff%26utf8%3D%25E2%259C%2593. (Accessed on 05/24/2024).
[61] What is a mobile core network? – commsbrief. https://commsbrief.com/
what-is-a-mobile-core-network/. (Accessed on 05/20/2024).
[62] Wireless
5g
(the
5g
mobile
network
standard).
https://
onlinelibrary-wiley-com.proxy.findit.cvt.dk/doi/epdf/10.1002/
9781119987635.ch14. (Accessed on 03/05/2024).
[63] Henrik Christiansen. Mobile network planning. Technical report, October
2019. Email: hlch@fotonik.dtu.dk.
[64] Simon Friis. Sustainable communication network with focus on cellular and
iot networks. Technical report, Technical Universty of Denmark, 2023.
59
==PAGE:66==
9
Appendix
The following figures are the calculation for the frequency of 2600MHz
Figure 29: Coverage Area of the cell f=2600MHz
Figure 30: Calculated ISD of the Cell for f=2600MHz
Figure 31: Number of Sites Required for f=2600MHz
Figure 32: Number of RUs Required for f=2600MHz
60
==PAGE:67==
Figure 33: Conversion of values from dBm to Watt
Figure 34: Power Consumption of each Component
Figure 35: Permissible Path Loss Calculation
61
==PAGE:68==
The following figures show the parameters for frequency of 1800MHz.
Figure 36: Calculated Area of the Cell
Figure 37: Calculated ISD of the Cell
Figure 38: Number of Sites Required
Figure 39: Number of RUs Required
The figure given below refers to the path loss model used to calculate the
values for the frequency band of 1800 MHZ. Along with the calculated receiver
power values of the signal.
62
==PAGE:69==
Figure 40: PL and PR values of 1800MHz frequency
63
==PAGE:70==
The figure given below refers to the path loss model used to calculate the
values for the frequency band of 900 MHZ. Along with the calculated receiver
power values of the signal.
Figure 41: PL and PR values of 900MHz frequency
64
