==PAGE:1==
 
 
 
 
 
 
Waste Streams in Danish Drinking Water Supply  - 
Backwash Sludge and its Recycling Applications 
 
June 2024 
Thea Schjær Hummelshøj 
DTU Sustain 
 
==PAGE:2==
 
 
ii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Waste Streams in Danish Drinking Water Supply - Backwash Sludge and its Recycling 
Application 
 
Master Thesis 
M.Sc. Environmental Engineering, DTU Sustain 
Thea Schjær Hummelshøj (s1617155), June 2024 
This thesis amounted to 35 ETCS credits and was completed from January 2nd to June 27th, 2024. 
Supervisors: 
Hans Jørgen Albrechtsen (DTU) 
Vibeke Nørgaard (Krüger, Veolia) 
Rasmus Boe-Hansen (Krüger, Veolia) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photos front page: 
Backwash sludge Bassin Sjælsø Waterwork (photo by Hans-Jørgen Albrechtsen) 
Filter material from Jyllinge Waterwork (photo by Thea Hummelshøj) 
Water Baffles (photo from Krüger A/S) 
Calcite pellets (Frederiksberg Forsyning, https://www.frb-forsyning.dk/forside/vand/fakta-om-
vand/kalkpellets )  
==PAGE:3==
 
 
iii 
 
Abstract 
Over the past decades, there has been an increased focus on sustainability in Danish drinking 
water production. The circular economy principles have gained traction and contributed to the 
sustainability agenda. The circular economy provides a holistic systems approach, emphasising the 
minimisation of waste and the retention of resources in circulation for as long as possible. In the 
production of clean and safe drinking water, waste is also generated. This project has investigated 
waste streams in Danish drinking water production and explored potential reuse and recycling 
applications, focusing on backwash sludge. This project gathered data from 20 Danish utilities and 
multiple companies, municipalities, and experts. In total, 15 types of waste streams were 
identified, with four being reused or recycled to a small extent, including backwash water, 
backwash sludge, granular activated carbon, and filter material. Backwash sludge, generated from 
the filtration step, is one of the largest waste streams in Danish drinking water production. The 
annual amount of backwash sludge produced from 18 utilities was mapped with a total of 6432 
tons/year. 63% of the mapped backwash sludge ended up in landfills and stockpiling, whereas 37% 
was reused in biogas plants (19%) and wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) (18%), where it 
binds phosphorus and sulphur. Disposal of backwash sludge in landfills costs utilities 
approximately 2,900,000 DKK/year and results in resource loss. This project examined the 
chemical composition of Danish backwash sludge and identified resources and problematic 
elements concerning recycling based on 64 backwash sludge analyses from 44 waterworks and 11 
utilities across Denmark. The average chemical composition of Danish backwash sludge was: Fe2O3 
(50%), organic matter (16%), CaO (7%), P2O5 (4.4%), MnO (2.9%), MgO (1%), N (0.4%), SrO, Na2O, 
K2O combined (0.4%), As2O3 (0.50%), and heavy metals combined (0.01%). The high levels of 
iron(hydr)oxide, phosphate, and manganese make backwash sludge ideal as a sorption material or 
for application in agriculture. However, the low reuse rate of backwash sludge is primarily due to a 
high level of arsenic (average of 382 mg As/kg DM) and regulatory disparities between 
municipalities. Three new applications for backwash sludge were introduced in this project: 1) 
Production of powdered ferric oxide and pellets for use in biogas plants and WWTPs, 2) Use in 
fertiliser production, and 3) Recovery of elements, including EU Critical Raw Materials. Quality 
criteria for reusing and recycling backwash sludge in these applications, including direct reuse in 
biogas plants and WWTPs, were identified. The applications were evaluated based on resource 
utilisation, maturity, arsenic limitations, economic aspects, CO2 emissions, regulations, and stable 
supply chains. Direct reuse of backwash sludge in WWTPs and biogas plants scored highest in most 
parameters, except for regulations and stable supply chains. However, it is crucial to ensure that 
backwash sludge is optimally dosed to replace as many chemicals as possible rather than serving 
merely as an economical disposal option. Despite introducing new applications, 53% of Danish 
waterworks still produce backwash sludge with arsenic levels (>100 and <1000 mg As/kg DM), 
complicating recycling efforts. Future strategies discussed in this project include regulation 
adjustments, centralised collection of backwash sludge, and a holistic approach to minimising or 
reducing the amount of backwash sludge with high arsenic levels that complicates recycling.  
 
 
==PAGE:4==
 
 
iv 
 
Acknowledgements 
I want to thank my supervisor, Hans-Jørgen Albrechtsen from DTU Sustain, for our invaluable 
discussions, motivation, and always finding time for supervision. Your expertise and work in 
Danish drinking water production have inspired me throughout my education.  
Thanks to Vibeke Nørgaard from Krüger A/S for taking me under supervision, sharing your 
extensive knowledge, and for the enjoyable days at the office. I also want to thank Rasmus Boe-
Hansen from Krüger A/S for your insightful inputs, innovative ideas, and motivating drive. 
Additionally, I would like to thank all the professionals at Krüger A/S who have dedicated their 
time to assist me and provided valuable input to this interdisciplinary project. 
A special thanks to all the utilities that contributed indispensable insights and provided analysis of 
backwash sludge. Your trust, openness, and positive approach were crucial to the success of this 
project. Furthermore, I am grateful to experts and companies that have shared their knowledge, 
greatly enhancing this project. The overwhelming support from all of you has been truly 
appreciated. 
Lastly, I would like to thank my Husband, Gustav Schjær Hummelshøj, for your endless support. I 
am also grateful to my family and in-laws for taking care of my children during weekends and 
vacations, which allowed me to focus on my project.  
 
 
==PAGE:5==
 
 
v 
 
Contents 
 
1 Introduction 
1 
1.1 Aim 
2 
1.2 Thesis Outline 
2 
2 Materials and Methods 
4 
2.1 Literature Review 
4 
2.2 Data Collection 
4 
2.3 AI-tools 
5 
3 Circular Economy in Danish Drinking Water Production 
6 
3.1 Circular Economy Principles 
6 
3.2 Applying the Waste Hierarchy for Sustainable Waste Management 
7 
3.3 Sustainable Waste Management in Drinking Water Production 
8 
4 Waste Streams in Danish Drinking Water Production 
9 
4.1 Waste Streams from Traditional Water Treatment 
9 
4.2 Waste Streams from Advanced Water Treatment Processes 
9 
4.3 Table: Mapping of Waste Streams in Danish Drinking Water Production 
10 
4.4 Discussion of Waste Streams from Drinking Water Production 
13 
4.5 Conclusion 
15 
5 Introduction to Backwash Sludge Production in Denmark 
17 
5.1 Managing Backwash- Water and Sludge in Denmark 
17 
5.2 Dewatering Technologies 
18 
5.2 Characteristics and Chemical Composition of Danish Backwash Sludge 
19 
5.3 Introduction to Selected Chemical Elements in Backwash Sludge 
19 
5.4 State of The Art – Literature Review of Reusing Water Treatments Sludge 
22 
6 Danish Backwash Sludge - Data Analysis and Influence of Treatment Processes 
26 
6.1 Procedure for Backwash Sludge Analyses at Waterworks 
26 
6.2 Dataset 
27 
6.3 Chemical Composition of Danish Backwash Sludge 
29 
6.4 Influence of Treatment Processes on Backwash Sludge Quality 
39 
6.4.4 Influence of Membrane Unit for Recycling of Backwash Water on Backwash Sludge 
42 
7 Fate of Backwash Sludge in Denmark 
44 
==PAGE:6==
 
 
vi 
 
7.1 Current Disposal Practices 
44 
7.2 Mass Balance of Danish Backwash Sludge 
44 
7.3 Fate of Backwash Sludge at Waste Management Facilities 
45 
7.4 Backwash Sludge in Wastewater Treatment 
46 
7.5 Backwash Sludge in Biogas Plants 
51 
7.6 Expenses Related to Handling of Backwash Sludge 
52 
7.7 Discussion of the Fate of Backwash Sludge in Denmark 
53 
7.8 Conclusion on Fate of Backwash Sludge 
55 
8 Potential Applications of Backwash Sludge 
57 
8.1 Powdered Ferric(oxide) and Pellets from Backwash Sludge 
58 
8.2 Fertiliser production - Agro Trade 
59 
8.3 Recovery of elements 
61 
8.4 Table: Quality Criteria for Backwash Sludge in Application Areas 
62 
8.5 Conclusion on Potential Application for Backwash Sludge 
65 
9 Discussion of Application for Danish Backwash Sludge 
66 
9.1 Risk of Arsenic Contamination in the Application Areas 
66 
9.2 Evaluation of Applications 
68 
9.3 Conclusion on Discussion of Application 
72 
10 Strategies to Increase the Recycling of Backwash Sludge in Denmark 
73 
10.1 Regulation and Arsenic Levels 
73 
10.2 Collection of Leftover Backwash Sludge 
73 
10.3 Holistic Approach 
74 
11 Conclusion 
76 
12 Perspectives and Future Works 
77 
12.1 Increase in Arsenic-Loaded Waste 
77 
12.2 Future Work 
78 
13 References 
80 
14 Appendix 
87 
14.1 Appendix A – Investigation of Influence of Ceramic Membrane for Recycling of Backwash 
Water on Backwash Sludge 
87 
14.2 Appendix B - Excel Sheet (CONFIDENTIAL) 
91 
==PAGE:7==
 
 
1 
 
1 Introduction  
Drinking water production is not only producing safe and clean drinking water. The production also 
generates waste residual streams during the treatment processes of raw water. In Denmark, raw water is 
mainly processed by simple treatment steps, including aeration and filtration, before the water is 
distributed. When raw water gets oxygenated, metals such as iron and manganese precipitate and are 
retained in sand filters. After flushing the filters, the backwash water is often transferred to a sludge bed or 
tank where concentrated backwash water remains as backwash sludge (Kristensen et al. 2014). In 
Denmark, around 2500 tons of backwash sludge are produced yearly, and worldwide, the quantity of 
sludge from waterworks is approximately 10,000 tons per day (Symbiosis center 2014; Babatunde and 
Zhao 2007). Backwash sludge is typically stored at the waterworks or transported by truck to a waste 
management facility, where the sludge is deposited in a landfill or stockpiled, resulting in the accumulation 
of contaminants and loss of resources. The high expenses of backwash sludge disposal, combined with 
increasingly stringent regulations for disposal, have been driving the investigation of new reuse 
opportunities of backwash sludge for more than 10 years (Symbiosis center 2014). However, backwash 
sludge often contains high levels of arsenic, limiting the reuse potential. 
In Denmark, backwash sludge has been used in wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) for the 
precipitation of phosphorous and reducing the formation of hydrogen sulphide in wastewater lines and 
sulphide in biogas production (Sharma et al. 2013). These solutions are often local agreements between 
the drinking water treatment plants and nearby wastewater treatment plants as an economical way to 
handle backwash sludge. Other application areas include backwash sludge as a sorbent for contaminated 
soil, restoration of aquatic environments, and incorporation into materials in the building industry. 
However, there are still several challenges related to reusing backwash sludge in these areas, and a 
common practice for handling backwash sludge in Denmark has not been established.  
Recently, there has been an increased focus on sustainability and many Danish water supplies have 
incorporated Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in their work. In 2023, the EU Commission adopted 
new standards for the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD), which include reporting about 
Resource use and Circular Economy (CE) (Erhvervsstyrelsen 2023) increasing the pressure on sustainability. 
As a result, the request for establishing long-term sustainable practices for handling and recycling waste 
residuals, including backwash sludge, in the Danish water supply has increased. 
So far, the traditional disposal strategies for backwash sludge have often focused on dewatering the sludge 
to minimise volume and reduce transport costs. New approaches should be considered to comply with the 
demand for more resource recovery and waste recycling (United Nations 2015). This could include prior 
treatment steps of the sludge, recovering elements, recycling in new applications, or reducing compounds 
that limit the application potential. Furthermore, the impact of the different treatment steps on the quality 
and amount of the sludge should be considered, as well as the potential to reduce the amount of produced 
sludge by rethinking the production line.  
At the same time, other drinking water residuals like granular activated carbon, calcite pellets, brine 
streams, and reject water from membrane processes are expected to grow due to the demand for more 
advanced water treatment processes capable of handling the increase in environmentally hazardous 
compounds and softening of water. Additionally, there is an expected increase in water demand due to 
Power to X and the growing biotech and pharma industries. The future of the Danish water sector will 
include handling new types of waste streams and a general increase in residuals, which requires adaptation 
of CE to increase the focus on minimising and reusing waste streams. 
==PAGE:8==
 
 
2 
 
Backwash sludge has the potential to become a valuable resource due to its high content of iron and other 
macro- and micro compounds, making recycling of waterwork sludge a key step towards a more 
economically and environmentally sustainable drinking water production (Albrektiene, Karaliunas, and 
Baziene 2019;Babatunde and Zhao 2007).  
1.1 Aim 
The project has two primary aims: 
1) To investigate waste production in the Danish drinking water supply 
2) To investigate the potential for recycling waste streams in the Danish drinking water supply, primarily 
focusing on backwash sludge. This includes considering waste as a resource and incorporating CE principles 
to benefit the water sector and the environment.  
The objectives of the project are: 
 Mapping of waste streams generated in Danish drinking water production and the treatment 
processes from which they originate. 
 Collect and analyse data on backwash sludge from across Denmark to examine its chemical 
composition and quality variations.  
 Mapping of amounts and disposal practices of Danish backwash sludge to investigate the current 
recycling rate and identify parameters affecting the recycling of backwash sludge 
 Investigate new applications for Danish backwash sludge based on identified resources in backwash 
sludge. 
 Determine the quality criteria for backwash sludge to be reused or recycled within the different 
application areas, discuss its application, and assess problematic elements hindering its reuse. 
 Explore potential strategies for increasing the recycling of backwash sludge in Denmark. 
The outcomes of this project are intended to enhance the understanding and management of waste 
streams in Danish drinking water production, focusing on backwash sludge, circular economy, 
sustainability, and new practices.  
1.2 Thesis Outline  
This report includes topics, data, and experiences relevant to water supply, wastewater treatment, biogas 
production, and resource utilisation within the water sector. 
The first three chapters introduce the subject and theory of circular economy. The report is then divided 
into two main parts (Figure 1).  
Part 1 presents the mapping of waste streams and data collected regarding the current reuse and recycling 
of these waste streams. 
Part 2 focuses on backwash sludge, providing an in-depth analysis of its reuse and recycling potential. This 
includes collected backwash sludge analysis data and information from utilities on the quantities and fate 
of backwash sludge. Additionally, potential applications for recycling backwash sludge are introduced and 
discussed. 
==PAGE:9==
 
 
3 
 
The report concludes on the project aims and gives perspectives on future work in Chapters 11 and 12. 
 
Figure 1 Report outline. Chapter 1-3 (blue): Introduction of subject and theory of circular economy. Part 1 (red): 
Mapping of waste streams and currently reuse and recycling state. Part 2 (purple): focuses on Backwash sludge 
including data analysis of backwash sludge samples, knowledge of amounts and fate of backwash sludge, 
introduction of potential applications for recycling of backwash and discussion of applications. Chapter 11-12 
(green): Conclusion summarising the aims and perspective and future works. 
==PAGE:10==
 
 
4 
 
2 Materials and Methods 
The study obtained data from various sources, including literature reviews, desk research, and direct 
communication, to collect backwash sludge analysis and knowledge about general practices for handling 
backwash water from Danish utilities. Additionally, meetings with stakeholders, site visits to the company 
Agro Trade, and sampling and analysis of backwash sludge from a membrane unit at Birkerød Waterworks 
were conducted. 
2.1 Literature Review 
A comprehensive literature review was conducted from January 2024 to April 2024 to explore the recycling 
potential of drinking water treatment residuals, focusing on backwash sludge. The literature search was 
performed by applying the DTU Find it database, which includes Web of Science, employing keywords such 
as "Drinking water treatment residual," "Groundwater treatment residuals," "Drinking water treatment 
sludge," "Waterwork sludge," "iron hydroxide sludge," "Waste streams in drinking water production," 
combined with "Circular economy," "Recycling," and "reuse." Danish literature and relevant companies 
were identified using Google searches with keywords: “okkerslam”, “returskylleslam”, “jernslam”, and 
“restprodukt vandværk”. 
2.2 Data Collection 
In January 2024, relevant utilities, companies, and experts were identified for initial contact based on 
preliminary research. As the project progressed, additional relevant contacts were identified, driven by 
information from ongoing communications. An overview of contacts made from January 2024 to May 2024 
is provided in Table 1. Contacts that did not respond are not included. 
Table 1 Overview of contacts facilitated within different fields during data collection of the project from January 2024 to May 
2024.  
Utilities 
(WW) 
Utilities 
(WWTP) 
Biogas 
companies 
Waste facilities, logistics and 
transport companies 
Municipalities, companies 
and experts 
20 
7 
4 
5 
7 
The preferred contact method was phone calls; if unsuccessful, emails were sent. In some cases, meetings 
were arranged to better understand procedures, experiences, and challenges.  
Direct communication was used to gain insights into backwash sludge management, associated challenges, 
and disposal methods and to collect backwash sludge analysis data. This approach provided detailed 
information on challenges, strategies, and future outlooks, contributing to a comprehensive understanding 
of waste management in Danish waterworks. However, relying solely on direct contact has limitations, 
including restricted coverage and time consumption. 
Professionals from Krüger Veolia were involved in providing expertise in wastewater treatment, biogas 
plants, adsorption theory, and sustainability. 
Utilities were initially selected based on size, targeting the 10 largest utilities first, anticipating they would 
have established procedures for handling and analysing backwash sludge. To ensure regional 
==PAGE:11==
 
 
5 
 
representation, utilities in peripheral areas and those expected to have high arsenic or iron concentrations 
were also contacted. The response rate was notably high, with 20 out of 22 utilities responding. 
Feedback from 20 utilities was categorised and discussed in this report, focusing on: 
 Management of backwash water and sludge 
 Production quantities of backwash sludge 
 End disposal methods 
 Costs associated with sludge disposal 
 Procedures for sludge analysis 
2.2.1 Backwash Sludge Analysis 
This report includes backwash sludge analysis data provided by 12 Danish Water Utilities (Table 2). 
Accessing backwash sludge data proved to be more time-consuming than anticipated, as nearly half of the 
contacted utilities did not have any available backwash sludge analysis data.  
Table 2 Overview of data collection: The number of Danish utilities contacted, the response frequency, and the count of utilities 
with available backwash sludge analysis.  
Utilities contacted 
Utilities responded 
Utilities with available analysis 
22 
20 
12 
To maximise participation, utilities were assured that all data would be anonymised. All received analysis 
data were manually entered into an Excel spreadsheet for further data treatment and calculations.  
2.2.2 Membrane Filtration of Backwash Water 
A small part of the project investigated how membrane filtration of backwash water affects backwash 
sludge quality. Sampling from the membrane unit at Birkerød Waterworks was conducted on March 21st, 
2024. The procedure for sampling and analysis is described in Appendix A. 
2.2.3 New Applications for Backwash Sludge Recycling 
Identified companies from the desk research were contacted to explore potential recycling applications in 
Denmark (Including AquaMinerals B.V., Agro Trade ApS, BioCycling – Veolia, and HJ. Hansen Recycling 
Group). 
A visit to Argo Trade ApS was conducted on April 29th, 2024, attended by representatives from HOFOR, 
Frederiksberg Forsyning, and Nordic Group. The visit provided insights into facilities at Køge Havn, quality 
criteria for backwash sludge, and potential application in fertiliser production. 
2.3 AI-tools  
ChatGPT and Copilot were used to check grammar, rephrase sentences, translate Dutch reports, and 
identify keywords for literature searches. These AI tools were essential for quickly obtaining knowledge 
across the various fields covered in this project. 
==PAGE:12==
 
 
6 
 
3 Circular Economy in Danish Drinking Water Production 
Over the past decades, the focus on sustainability and the United Nations' Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) has dominated the Danish water sector. Sustainability includes environmental, social, and economic 
aspects. In 2022, Aarhus Vand became the first Danish water supply certified in the SDGs (Feilberg 2022) 
and in 2023, "Danske Vandværker" published a guide for Danish waterworks on strategic SDG 
implementation (Danske Vandværker; 2023). SDGs are prominently featured on websites for major Danish 
utilities, annual reports, and Danish Water conferences, highlighting the sector's commitment to 
sustainability. 
In addition to sustainability, circular economy (CE) concepts increasingly appear in the water sector. This 
chapter introduces CE in the water sector and the waste hierarchy, which are critical for managing waste 
streams from drinking water production. 
3.1 Circular Economy Principles 
Circular economy (CE) is a distinct concept within environmental and economic systems, differing from 
sustainability. CE opposes the linear economy with the extraction of raw materials, production, usage, and 
disposal of non-recyclable waste (Figure 2). CE focuses on material and resource efficiency within 
production and consumption cycles and is based on three principles: 1) Eliminate waste and pollution, 2) 
Circulate products and materials, and 3) Regenerate nature (Ellen MacArthur Foundation 2024). CE 
provides a holistic systems approach but must be assessed by sustainability parameters, such as economic, 
environmental, and social aspects, to ensure truly sustainable outcomes (Blum, Haupt, and Bening 2020). 
CE has gained traction in recent decades across various industries, including drinking water production 
(Nguyen et al. 2022;Ahmad, Ahmad, and Alam 2016). In 2020, the European Commission adopted a new CE 
action plan to accelerate this transition (European Commission, 2024a). The Danish government's climate 
partnership aims for the water sector to be energy- and climate-neutral by 2030 and to lead globally in CE. 
This includes phasing out waste through design, new business models, and maintaining materials in a cycle 
(Klimapartnerskabet 2020). 
Figure 2 Linear economy in the context of drinking water. Abstraction of raw water, 
production of drinking water, distribution of drinking water and disposal of waste.  
==PAGE:13==
 
 
7 
 
In the water sector, CE approaches often 
focus on recycling water resources and 
reducing CO2 emissions from water 
production (Rambau, Mativenga, and 
Marewick 2022). However, CE is also essential 
for sustainable waste management in drinking 
water production, including recovering, 
reusing, and recycling resources to reduce 
emissions. From a CE perspective, raw 
materials extracted along with drinking water, 
or raw materials used in the process of 
drinking water production, should be kept in a 
closed loop, and non-recyclable waste should 
be avoided (Figure 3).  
CE approaches in waste management 
contribute to SDG 12: “Ensure sustainable 
consumption and production patterns.” 
Both sustainability and CE are essential for 
transitioning to a green water sector. While 
they operate at different levels, they often 
complement each other (Klimapartnerskabet 
2020).  
3.2 Applying the Waste Hierarchy for 
Sustainable Waste Management 
In a circular economy, the aim is to continuously reduce waste production with zero waste production as 
the goal. The 5-step waste hierarchy helps achieve this (Figure 4). Established in the EU Waste Framework 
Directive, the waste hierarchy prioritises waste prevention and management policies. It is depicted as an 
inverted pyramid, with waste prevention at the top and disposal at the bottom (European Commison 2024) 
(Figure 4). 
Implementing CE and the waste hierarchy in Danish drinking water production aims to reduce waste 
generation, recycle waste, and eliminate landfill disposal (Smol, Adam, and Preisner 2020). 
Figure 3 Circular Economy in the context of drinking water. 
Abstraction of raw water, production of drinking water, distribution 
of drinking water, and recycling of waste and resources to eliminate 
waste disposal. 
Figure 4 Waste hierarchy with 
five steps from the EU Waste 
Framework that preferences 
the order of managing and 
disposing of waste. 
Preventing waste at the top 
of the hierarchy is highly 
prioritised, and at the 
bottom, disposal in landfills 
should be avoided (European 
Commison 2024).  
==PAGE:14==
 
 
8 
 
3.3 Sustainable Waste Management in Drinking Water Production 
Increased focus on sustainability in drinking water supply has shifted the perspective on waste. In 2022, 
the Danish water supply industry association, "Danske Vandværker", emphasised the use of backwash 
sludge as a resource (Danske Vandværker 2022). By 2023, they highlighted that achieving an energy- and 
climate-neutral water sector by 2030 involves reducing waste and material usage (Danske Vandværker; 
2023). Although reducing, reusing, and recycling waste are smaller components of broader sustainability 
initiatives, they are essential to circular thinking and contribute to the overall goal. 
Furthermore, the Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive (CSRD) implemented in 2024 requires larger 
utilities to report on special sustainability standards in the coming years, increasing the awareness of 
sustainability in the water sector (Erhvervsstyrelsen; 2024) Increased attention to circularity and 
sustainability drives the shift from an economic focus to a more sustainable perspective. This shift 
promotes sustainable waste management solutions; even if they are initially more expensive, their 
implementation will contribute positively to the CO2 footprint and overall image of larger utilities. 
==PAGE:15==
 
 
9 
 
4 Waste Streams in Danish Drinking Water Production 
In Denmark, all groundwater undergoes treatment to comply with regulation (BEK nr 1023, 
Drikkevandsbekendgørelsen). All treatment steps in drinking water production can, in theory, generate a 
waste stream. This chapter introduces the types of waste streams generated during drinking water 
production and discusses the current stage of reuse and recycling of the mapped waste streams.  
4.1 Waste Streams from Traditional Water Treatment  
During traditional water treatment, raw water is aerated and subsequently filtered. This treatment 
removes iron, manganese, and ammonium from the raw water. Additionally, extended pretreatment steps 
may be included, such as stripping dissolved gases, often associated with raw water containing high levels 
of methane (CH4) and hydrogen sulphide (H2S), or neutralising aggressive carbon dioxide (CO2).  
During the aeration and gas stripping processes, the generated waste streams consist of gasses (CH4, H2S 
and CO2). If Coplater system, an alternative to the traditional aeration system, is used for aeration, it would 
create waste in the form of the water baffles, which are large Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) plates 
inside the aerator (Figure 5).  
Waste streams related to the filtration step include backwash water from cleaning the filters, backwash 
sludge, and old filter materials (Figure 5).  
4.2 Waste Streams from Advanced Water Treatment Processes 
When the limit of one or more quality parameters is exceeded after traditional water treatment, additional 
water treatment processes can be implemented, often referred to as advanced treatment. Advanced 
treatment steps implemented in Danish drinking water productions include water softening techniques, 
such as pellet softening and ion exchange beds, Granular Activated Carbon (GAC) for the removal of 
Figure 5 Waste streams (red) from traditional drinking water treatment with aeration and filtration including water 
baffles, gasses (CH4, H2S, CO2), backwash water, backwash sludge, and filter material.
==PAGE:16==
 
 
10 
 
chlorinated compounds and environmentally harmful substances, resins for the removal of contaminants 
like PFAS, air strippers to remove gasses and chlorinated compounds, and Granular Ferric Hydroxide (GFH) 
filters for the removal of arsenic and heavy metals. A small membrane unit is also implemented in 
Denmark to reduce salt concentration in raw water (Figure 6).  
Membranes and advanced oxidising processes (AOP) are potential future treatment processes in drinking 
water production. The mapping in this project (cf. section 4.3) also includes waste streams related to these 
processes. The waste streams considered in this project also encompass water used for the start-up 
implementation of new processes, where sand filters, GAC filters, etc., are flushed before they are ready. 
Additionally, obsolete waste, such as valves, pumps, pipes, measurement equipment, diffusers, bottom 
aerators, etc., are also waste products from drinking water production.  
4.3 Table: Mapping of Waste Streams in Danish Drinking Water Production 
Based on findings in this project, 15 types of waste streams from Danish drinking water production were 
identified and the treatment processes from which they originate (gasses are assumed as one waste 
stream along with the water used for flushing during the implementation of new processes). In addition, 
the extent, future perspective and elements in the waste stream were identified and estimated (Table 3).  
 
 
Figure 6 Waste streams (red) from advanced treatment processes including pellets softening, GAC filters, resins, 
softening with ion-exchange bed, GFH filter, and membrane unit.  
==PAGE:17==
 
 
11 
 
Table 3  Waste streams from traditional and advanced treatment processes in Danish drinking water production include process description, estimated 
extent/amount, future perspectives, and relevant compounds for disposal and recycling options.  
Type of waste 
stream/residual 
Process/Unit operation 
Extend/Amount 
Future 
Perspective 
Relevant Compounds/Material 
Filter backwash 
water 
Filtration - From the backwash of sand filters 
National represented. Generated daily in most treatment plants 
in Denmark. ~ 4% of the water produced at waterworks is used 
for backwashing 
→↑* 
Iron(hydr)oxides, manganese, 
calcium, arsenic, heavy metals 
Filter backwash 
sludge 
Filtration- Concentrated backwash water from the 
backwash of sand filters 
National represented. Generated daily in most treatment plants 
in Denmark. Estimated around 2500 tons DM/year (>10 years 
ago) (Symbiosis center 2014) 
→↑* 
Iron(hydr)oxides, manganese, 
calcium, arsenic, heavy metals 
Filter gravel 
Filtration – Change of filter material. Lifetime 10-30 
years 
National represented. Rarely generated 
→↑* 
Manganese, iron, heavy metals 
Flushing water – 
Filter gravel 
Filtration. Water for flushing new filter material. 
Duration of flushing up to 3 weeks  
National represented. Rarely generated 
→↑* 
 
Granular activated 
carbon (GAC) 
GAC filtration - Removal of chlorinated compounds, H2S 
from aeration, and environmentally harmful substances. 
Lifetime: Depends on water quality. From <1 year to >10 
years 
Local represented across Denmark. Bagsværd, Frederiksberg 
Sjælsø, Hvidovre, Strøby ladeplads, Hjørring, (Solhøj) – 
waterwork 
↑ 
Environmentally harmful 
substances (DMS, PFAS, 
metabolites etc.) Chlorinated 
compounds 
Flushing water - GAC 
column 
GAC filtration - Water is used to flush a new GAC column 
Local represented across Denmark 
↑ 
 
Calcite pellets 
Pellet reactor for softening 
Local represented in East Zealand. 
Brøndby, Marbjerg, Søndersø, Thorsbro, Frederiksberg Store 
heddinge- waterworks. Future waterworks: Gevninge, 
Regnmark, Gørløse, Islev, Lejre. 
Amount: >2000 tons/year** 
↑ 
Calcium (iron, manganese) 
Brine streams 
Softening with ion-exchange 
Regeneration of resins 
 (CARIX technology – ion exchange with CO2).  
Local represented in Zealand. 
Tårnby, Greve, Jyllinge, Strøby Egede -waterwork. 
CARIX: Solrød and Køge waterwork 
↑ 
Chloride, calcium 
CARIX: Water with CO2 and 
calcium 
==PAGE:18==
 
 
12 
 
Water baffles 
COPLATOR - Aeration (originally used for CO2 stripping) 
Estimated number of baffles in operation: ~1350** 
Lifetime: 9 months to 10 years 
↑ 
PET, iron, CaCO3 
CH4 
Stripping of methane 
Depends on raw water quality. Estimated 10% of raw water 
with elevated CH4 levels  
→↑* 
CH4 
H2S 
Stripping of hydrogen sulphide 
Depends on raw water quality  
→↑* 
H2S 
CO2 
Stripping of CO2 
 
→↑* 
CO2 
Resins 
Ion exchange to remove environmentally harmful 
substances (PFAS). Lifetime 10-15 years. 
Fanø waterwork 
↑ 
Target compounds, e.g. PFAS, 
pesticide metabolites 
Granular Ferric 
Hydroxide (GFH) 
Removal of arsenic and heavy metal with granular Ferric 
Hydroxide as adsorption material  
Located across Denmark. It depends on the arsenic level of raw 
water. 6 waterworks with adsorption filter. 3 waterworks with 
granulates in the top of the filter bed (Jeppesen, Thomsen, and 
Albrechtsen 2023) 
↑ 
Arsenic  
(heavy metals) 
Filter cake (backwash 
sludge) 
Reuse of backwash water - Ceramic membrane filtration 
of backwash water 
Birkerød waterwork 
↑ 
Iron(hydr)oxides, manganese, 
calcium, arsenic, heavy metals 
Reject water 
Membrane processes 
Small facility Sejerø 
Not implemented in full-scale in Denmark 
↑ 
PFAS, pesticide metabolites 
CIP liquids 
Cleaning of membrane 
Small facility Sejerø 
Not implemented in full-scale in Denmark  
↑ 
 
Diverse solid waste 
Membrane, AOP, aeration, distribution etc. 
Used membranes, UV lamps, broken pipes and parts 
from membrane plant/AOP plant.  
Valves, pumps, pipes, measurement equipment, 
diffusers, bottom aerators 
AOP and membrane: Not implemented in full-scale 
 
Valves, pumps, distribution pipes, bottom aerators: National 
represented.  
↑ 
 
↑ 
 
* Increases if the water production for industries such as pharma, biotech, power to X, agriculture, and horticulture in Denmark increases (Foss-pedersen et al. 2023; Niras 2024).  
**Estimates are based on data from Krüger A/S. 
==PAGE:19==
 
 
13 
 
4.4 Discussion of Waste Streams from Drinking Water Production 
The identified waste streams in Danish drinking water production cover an extensive range of 
streams with diverse characteristics and properties, making reuse and recycling complex. 
Backwash sludge has traditionally been the most voluminous and abundant waste stream. 
However, the recent increase in pellet softening at major Danish waterworks suggests that pellets 
will soon become the predominant waste stream if this shift has not already occurred. This trend 
displays the dynamic nature of the water sector and how waste streams rely on future water 
technology implementations. 
Historically, it was estimated that approximately 2500 tons of dry mass backwash sludge were 
produced annually in Denmark (Symbiosis center 2014). With pellet softening, the production of 
backwash sludge is expected to decrease, as pellet waste increases (cf. Chapter 6.4.3). Currently, it 
is estimated that more than 2000 tons of pellets are produced annually in Denmark, with 
projections indicating that HOFOR will produce 15,000 tons of calcite in the form of pellets per 
year by 2028 (HOFOR 2024).  
4.4.1 Disposal Practices of Waste Streams from Drinking Water Production  
Denmark has no standardised procedure for the disposal of the waste streams generated in 
drinking water production. Most waste streams fall under the purview of the Danish Waste 
Regulation (Bekendtgørelse om affald 2019), which mandates municipal responsibility for 
categorising the waste. The generated waste is typically categorised as suitable for disposal and 
often ends up in landfills or incinerated, with some exceptions. This project's scope did not extend 
to a detailed investigation of the fate of these waste streams. Table 4 provides an overview of 
current disposal practices based on communication with utilities and municipalities. 
Only a few waste streams from drinking water production are reused or recycled. Based on the 
findings in this study, four out of the fifteen identified waste streams are reused or recycled to 
some extent: Backwash water, backwash sludge, GAC, and filter gravel. Recycling of pellets from 
softening is expected to be implemented in the near future (Personal communication, HOFOR and 
Frederiksberg Forsyning, April 2024). 
There are several reasons why utilities consider the reusing of backwash water: 
1. To save water in areas where many water sources are contaminated. 
2. To avoid discharge into recipients, as backwash water often does not comply with 
regulations. 
3. To reduce discharge fees associated with the sewage system. 
Utilities indicated that stricter future quality criteria for discharge into recipients might necessitate 
the recycling of backwash water (Personal communication, FORS, TREFOR, and Vestforsyning, 
February 2024).  
 
==PAGE:20==
 
 
14 
 
Table 4 Disposal practices of identified waste streams from Danish drinking water production (personal communication, municipalities). UN = Unknown practices 
Type of Waste Stream 
Disposal Practices 
Comments 
Filter backwash water 
Discharge into the sewage system, recipient, reuse for drinking water or 
send to sludge basin for sedimentation 
Quality is often not suitable for direct discharge to a recipient; high-cost related sewage 
system discharge 
Filter backwash sludge 
Landfill or recycling in WWTPs/Biogas plant 
 
Filter gravel 
Often landfills; one case, used in concrete block production for 
agriculture  
May contain high levels of iron, arsenic, and heavy metals. 
(personal communication, HedeDanmark, February 2024) 
Granular activated carbon (GAC) 
Regeneration or disposal 
Regeneration can be challenging particulate for GAC containing PFAS 
Flushing water – Filter gravel/GAC  
Discharge to recipient/sewage system 
Permission may be challenging to obtain; high water usage 
Calcite pellets 
Disposal/landfill 
Utilities are currently investigating recycling applications 
Brine streams 
Discharge to recipient/sewage system 
May require treatment before discharge 
Water baffles 
Landfill or incineration 
May contain iron, arsenic and other elements that make recycling difficult.  
CH4 
Removed in GAC filters or a Closed Loop Methane Oxidation (CLMO) 
CLMO has been tested at Aasted Waterwork (Henrik; Aktor 2014) 
H2S 
Removed in GAC filters 
 
CO2 
- 
 
Resins 
UN 
 
Granular Ferric Hydroxide (GFH) 
UN 
 
Filter cake (backwash sludge) 
Sewage system 
May be sent to the sludge basin for backwash sludge production 
Reject water 
Sejerø Waterwork: Discharge to Sejerøbugten 
(Personal communication, Kalundborg Forsyning, March 2024) 
CIP liquids and diverse solid waste 
UN 
 
==PAGE:21==
 
 
15 
 
GAC is also reused, to some extent, by shipment to Germany or Belgium for regeneration 
(Personal communication, Hjørring Vandselskab and Frederiksberg Forsyning, February 2024). 
However, regeneration can lead to capacity loss, and logistical delays can cause utilities to 
purchase new GAC instead of awaiting regeneration (Personal communication, Hjørring 
Vandselskab and Novafos, February 2024). 
In one case, filter material was recycled, crushed, and used in concrete block production for 
agriculture (personal communication, HedeDanmark, February 2024). The recycling of backwash 
sludge will be discussed in detail in Chapters 7 and 8. 
The reuse of water used for the implementation of new processes is under investigation by 
utilities and process engineers (Personal communication, Krüger A/S, May 2024). This water is 
often challenging to discharge due to volume and quality issues, suggesting that future solutions 
might include mobile filtration units to repurpose this water for drinking. 
4.4.2 Future Perspective of Waste Streams in Danish Drinking Water Supply 
Even though the water demand in Demark, in general, has been decreasing over the last years 
(Foss-pedersen et al. 2023), waste streams from drinking water production could increase due to 
two scenarios: 
1. Growing water demand from industries such as Power to X, the expanding pharma and 
biotech industries, agriculture and horticulture (Foss-pedersen et al. 2023; Niras 2024). 
2. A need for more advanced treatment processes to comply with drinking water quality 
standards due to increased pollution of groundwater sources. 
Reducing waste production is complex, as future drinking water production will likely generate 
more waste. However, it is crucial to minimise waste and ensure a waste quality that allows 
recycling. Technologies generating non-recyclable waste should be evaluated for alternative 
treatment methods. The goal should be to minimise all types of waste streams, although some 
may be difficult to reduce. In such cases, producing recyclable-quality waste is the objective. 
Some waste streams are easier to reuse after cleaning or regeneration (e.g., activated carbon), 
while others may be more suitable for recycling in different industries. Each waste stream should 
be individually assessed to find the best application, with a broader focus on waste streams 
potentially driving the water sector toward minimisation of waste and recycling solutions. 
Given the large volume of backwash sludge produced across Denmark, this project will focus on 
this waste stream and address the challenges related to recycling. 
4.5 Conclusion 
 Fifteen waste streams have been identified from traditional and advanced water treatment 
processes, each with varying chemical and physical properties. 
 Four out of fifteen waste streams are currently reused or recycled to some extent: 
Backwash water, backwash sludge, GAC, and filter material. 
 Municipalities categorise waste, typically ending in landfills or incinerated. 
==PAGE:22==
 
 
16 
 
 Waste streams in Danish drinking water production are expected to increase, highlighting 
the importance of minimising waste and ensuring recyclable waste quality. 
 Backwash sludge and pellets from softening are the most voluminous waste streams, with 
backwash sludge being more widely produced across Denmark, whereas pellet production 
is concentrated in East Zealand. 
 By 2028, pellets are expected to become the largest waste stream in Denmark, with a 
yearly production of more than 15.000 tons. 
 
==PAGE:23==
 
 
17 
 
5 Introduction to Backwash Sludge Production in Denmark  
Today, the most abundant waste stream in the Danish water supply is backwash sludge, with an 
estimated production of 2500 tons of dry matter every year (Symbiosis center 2014).  
This chapter introduces backwash sludge, its management, and its composition. Additional 
background information is provided regarding elements in backwash sludge relevant to recycling 
applications and a state-of-the-art literature review.  
5.1 Managing Backwash- Water and Sludge in Denmark 
Backwash sludge is produced from the sedimentaƟon of backwash water aŌer ﬂushing of sand 
ﬁlters. During the backwash of the ﬁlters, parƟculates on the surface of the grains and in the pore 
volume are removed to ensure the funcƟonality of the ﬁlter (Kristensen et al. 2014). Several ways 
exist to handle the backwash water (Figure 7). For smaller waterworks, the most common method 
is to discharge the backwash water directly into the sewer system or, in a few cases, into the 
aquatic environment.  
For new waterworks or waterworks located in areas where many of the groundwater magazines 
are contaminated, the backwash water is recycled back to reduce water loss. Reusing backwash 
water can be done by implementing additional settling tanks for the backwash water along with 
UV disinfection before recycling back into the filtration step. Alternatively, membrane filtration 
can clean the backwash water before re-entering the process line.  
Figure 7 After backwashing of filters, the applied water (backwash water) can be managed in the following 
ways at Danish Waterworks 1) Recycled back into the treatment process. 2) Directed into the sewer system or 
aquatic environment. 3) Directed to a settling tank for 18-24 hours, and subsequently send to a backwash 
sludge storage basin, or tank, to dewater the sludge. The sludge basin is emptied, often with a sludge gulper, 
when capacity is reached (months to >10 years).  
==PAGE:24==
 
 
18 
 
The most common way in Denmark to 
handle backwashed water is by sending the 
backwash water to a settling tank (18-24 
hours) and in some cases, the sedimented 
backwash water is further sent to a basin or 
tank for additional dewatering. The recipient 
water is sent to a nearby aquatic 
environment or sewer system (Kristensen et 
al. 2014).  The backwash sludge basin can be 
an open basin located outside (Figure 8) or, 
in more modern waterworks, closed tanks. 
The sludge basin is emptied regularly (6-12 
months) with a sludge gulper at larger 
waterworks (Kristensen et al. 2014). In 
waterworks with little backwash sludge 
production, the backwash sludge basin can be emptied within ten-year intervals. Removing the 
sludge with a mini digger can be necessary when the backwash sludge obtains high dry matter 
content, often making the empty process difficult. The final disposal practice of the backwash 
sludge after emptying the sludge basin will be discussed in Chapter 7.  
5.2 Dewatering Technologies 
Dewatering technologies are interesting in cases where waterworks want to recycle backwash 
water, reduce the amount of recipient water, increase the dry matter content in backwash sludge 
to save transport costs or decrease the storage capacity requirements for the backwash sludge.  
Multiple of the contacted utilities in this project had investigated dewatering technologies. 
Overall, there are three types of technologies for dewatering sludge: Screw pressing, sludge 
pressing/chamber filter pressing, and centrifugation (Table 5).  
Table 5 Dewatering technologies for backwash sludge, including screw pressing, sludge pressing, and centrifugation, 
based on information gathered from utilities (Personal communication, TREFOR, Frederiksberg Forsyning and Aarhus 
Vand). 
Technology 
Inlet  
DM (%) 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Screw 
pressing 
Backwash 
sludge 
15-30 
(30*) 
Simple and effective solution. Low 
space consumption. Relative low 
energy consumption. Low in 
operation and cost.  
Often, chemicals are added to 
obtain high DM content. Recipient 
water 
Sludge 
pressing 
Backwash 
sludge 
>40 
(60*) 
Effective for maximal dewatering. 
Obtain the highest DM content.  
Moderate energy consumption. 
High in operation. Space consuming. 
Recipient water. 
Centrifugation 
Backwash 
water 
20-35 
(30*) 
Effective and suitable for large sludge 
production. Backwash water can be 
utilised.  
Relative high energy consumption. 
Moderate space-consuming. No 
recipient water. 
Figure 8 Open backwash sludge settling basins at Sjælsø 
Waterwork. Photo by Hans-Jørgen Albrechtsen, 2024.
==PAGE:25==
 
 
19 
 
*Dry matter content obtained in test experiments performed by the utilities 
One utility had performed testing with mixing of backwash sludge and wastewater treatment 
sludge to obtain higher dry matter content. From a recycling perspective, this is not ideal since the 
quality of the sludge will be reduced.  
Dewatering technologies often require more operational work at the waterworks and can be 
challenging to install at existing waterworks. The cost related to installation and operation will, in 
some cases, exceed the cost that is saved, requiring the main driver for the utility to be more than 
reducing cost. As an alternative, some waterworks have also installed a two-step settling basin to 
increase the dry matter content and reduce the amount of sludge by 50 %. 
5.2 Characteristics and Chemical Composition of Danish Backwash Sludge 
The components in the backwash sludge depend on the concentration of compounds in the raw 
water and the type of water treatment process it undergoes.  
In Denmark, raw water typically contains high levels of iron, manganese, and ammonium, 
exceeding the quality criteria for drinking water. Iron and manganese precipitated during aeration 
in sand filtration are physically removed and end up in the backwash sludge after the filters are 
backwashed. Furthermore, calcite in groundwater precipitates when the pH increases during 
treatment and ends up in the backwash sludge.  
Backwash sludge contains iron complexes, including iron oxides (Fe2O3) and Iron hydroxide 
(Fe(OH)3), and calcium carbonate (CaCO3), which can contain various other compounds. 
Iron(hydr)oxide may contain cations, such as cobber (Cu2+), lead (Pb2+), zinc (Zn2+), cadmium (Cd2+), 
nickel (Ni2+), and anions such as phosphate (PO43-) and arsenate ion (AsO43-). The ions may bind to 
the surface or be incorporated into the crystal structure of the hydroxide. Calcium carbonate may 
have smaller divalent ions, such as magnesium, strontium, and barium, that replace calcium in the 
complex (Henrik Aktor 1990).  
The particles in backwash sludge are heterogeneous mixed and mesoporous, with a large specific 
surface area and a high adsorption property, especially for metalloids and heavy metals (Likus et 
al. 2021).  
The report uses the term "iron(hydr)oxides" to encompass iron oxides and iron hydroxides. 
5.3 Introduction to Selected Chemical Elements in Backwash Sludge 
This section discusses the chemical elements relevant to recycling backwash sludge. Background 
knowledge is provided on the origin of these elements and their positive or negative impact on 
society and the environment.  
5.3.1 Iron 
Iron (Fe) is one of the most widely distributed elements essential for biology and human activities. 
It is a natural mineral typically mined from the earth's crust and is a crucial raw material used in 
steel production. During drinking water treatment, Fe2+ is oxidised to Fe3+ and forms iron oxides, 
iron hydroxide (Figure 9) and other amorphous iron compounds.  
==PAGE:26==
 
 
20 
 
Iron removal happens during the filtration step, which can 
either be homogeneous, heterogeneous, or, in some cases, 
biological (Müller et al. 2024). Iron(hydr)oxides have a very 
reactive surface, resulting in backwash sludge's high sorption 
capacity. This makes backwash sludge valuable as a sorbent 
for different applications.  
5.3.2 Arsenic 
Arsenic (As) is a metalloid that occurs naturally in the 
environment and is often found bound to minerals. It is 
widely used in various industries, including semiconductors, 
glass, pigments, textiles, paper, ammunition, pesticides, and 
pharmaceuticals.  
Arsenic is highly poisonous and is classified as a Group 1 
human carcinogenic substance (International Agent For 
Research on Cancer 2004). It can accumulate in the 
environment and the food chain, leading to exposure 
through drinking water, food sources such as fish, meat, and 
rice, and contaminated air. Environmental arsenic 
contamination is a global issue that needs urgent attention 
(Patel et al. 2023) (Reid et al. 2020). 
Arsenic exists in different forms, and its toxicity varies (Figure 
10). The most toxic form is the inorganic form of arsenite 
(As(III)), followed by inorganic arsenate (As(V)). The organic 
forms, monomethylarsonic acid (MMA) and dimethylarsenic 
acid (DMA) are less toxic (Jain and Ali 2000). As(III) and As(V) 
exist in groundwater as dissolved anions. As(III) is oxidised to 
As(V) when oxygen is present, and As(V) is the most 
abundant form in reduced groundwater (Kjøller and Larsen 
2007). 
High levels of arsenic in groundwater are a growing concern 
worldwide. The WHO and EU guideline for arsenic in drinking 
water is 10 μg/L, but this level does not necessarily prevent 
health risks (WHO 2011). The Danish drinking water guideline 
for arsenic is 5 μg/L, one of the lowest quality criteria for 
arsenic worldwide. In most European countries, the guideline 
is 10 μg/L. The average natural concentration of arsenic in 
Danish raw water is 3 μg/L, and about 16 % of Danish 
groundwater wells exceed 5 μg/L (Kristiansen, Nørnberg, and 
Ramsay 2004). 
Figure 10 Structure of the most common 
arsenic species. As(V): inorganic 
arsenate, As(III): inorganic arsenite, 
DMA: dimethylarsenic acid and MMA: 
monomethylarsonic acid (Reid et al. 
2020) 
Figure 9 Chemical structure of Iron (III) 
hydroxide ((Fe(OH)3). Structure from 
PubChem. 
==PAGE:27==
 
 
21 
 
Arsenic is removed from water during traditional water treatment, and the amount of removal is 
closely related to the concentration of iron in raw water (Nonboe Andersen and Stamer 1999). 
When iron gets oxidised, arsenic co-precipitates and binds to the iron complexes (Kristensen et al. 
2014).  
In Denmark, certain groundwater 
magazines contain high levels of 
arsenic due to natural geochemical 
groundwater processes. High arsenic 
levels are expected in groundwater 
east of Jutland, on Fyn, west and 
south of Zealand, and Lolland and are 
related to either limestone magazines 
or groundwater magazines of 
meltwater sand (Figure 11) (Kjøller 
and Larsen 2007). 
The natural concentration of arsenic 
in soil can range from 0.1 to 40 mg 
As/kg, with an average concentration 
of 5 mg As/kg (Punshon et al. 2017).  
5.3.3 Heavy Metals  
Heavy metals are a natural part of 
ecosystems and occur in varying 
concentrations in soil and water due 
to physical, chemical, and biological 
processes. Heavy metals are toxic to 
humans and the environment, and anthropogenic activities have resulted in a global spread of 
heavy metals in the terrestrial environment (J. Jensen, Bak, and Larsen 1996). The most discussed 
heavy metals related to human health and environmental concerns which occur in soil, 
groundwater, and waste are mercury (Hg), cadmium (Cd), lead (Pb), zinc (Zn), chrome (Cr), cobber 
(Cu) and nickel (Ni). The main challenge with heavy metals is that they cannot be degraded and 
accumulate over time. Increasing environmental concentrations of heavy metals over time leads 
to increased exposure to humans and organisms. Heavy metals are often a limiting factor in 
recycling resources like wastewater treatment (WWT) sludge or fly ash (Thomsen et al. 2002).  
In most cases, heavy metals in the drinking water are naturally removed during traditional water 
treatment and do not require additional treatments (Nonboe Andersen and Stamer 1999). Heavy 
metals bind to iron(hydr)oxides and end up in backwash sludge, and heavy metals in waste 
streams can pollute the environment. 
5.3.4 Phosphorous  
Phosphorus is essential in food production, fertilisers, household items, solar panels, and human 
and plant health (Jupp et al. 2021; Swart 2019). However, the excessive use of phosphorus has 
caused contamination of water bodies worldwide, where discharge of effluent water or run-off 
Figure 11 - Geographic distribution of arsenic in Danish groundwater in the 
period 1993-2003 and geological conditions (Kristiansen, Nørnberg, and 
Ramsay 2004) 
==PAGE:28==
 
 
22 
 
water containing high levels of phosphorus ends up in the environment (Elser and Haygarth 
2021;Bouwman et al. 2017). 
Phosphorus is naturally present in groundwater, and the phosphorus concentration is generally 
higher in deeply reduced groundwater magazines compared to the oxidised upper layer. 
Phosphorus is usually not a problem in drinking water treatment and is removed during the 
filtration step as it binds strongly to iron(hydr)oxide (Blandfort 2007). 
5.3.5 Manganese 
After iron, manganese (Mn) is the second most abundant trace element in the crust of the earth. It 
is used in steelmaking and batteries (Hagelstein 2009). Furthermore, manganese is an essential 
spore mineral for plants and humans and is used in fertilisers and vitamins. The levels of 
manganese in soil are typically around 0.5 g/kg (Miljøstyrelsen 1996).  
In groundwater, manganese is present as Mg2+ and is oxidised chemically during aeration and 
biologically by manganese-oxidising bacteria in the filters (Kristensen et al. 2014). Insoluble 
manganese oxide can participate in redox reactions with inorganic and organic compounds. 
Manganese oxides, like iron(hydr)oxide, have a reactive surface and are known for their potential 
to bind heavy metals. The concentration levels of manganese in drinking water in Denmark are 
measured between 1 and 500 µg/l (Miljøstyrelsen 1996).   
5.4 State of The Art – Literature Review of Reusing Water Treatments Sludge  
For more than 30 years, research has been investigating the reuse of water treatment plant sludge 
(Bustamante and Waite 1995; Babatunde and Zhao 2007; Turner et al. 2019). 
On an international scale, there is a substantial amount of literature concerning the reuse of water 
residuals from drinking water production, especially backwash sludge and other waste streams 
generated during filtration (Albrektiene, Karaliunas, and Baziene 2019; Nguyen et al. 2022; Ahmad, 
Ahmad, and Alam 2016; Likus et al. 2021; Zeng et al. 2022; Bourgeois, Walsh, and Gagnon 2004).  
However, it is important to distinguish between Danish backwash sludge and backwash sludge 
generated internationally. One major difference is that typical conventional drinking water 
treatment outside Denmark includes surface and groundwater treatment and often consists of 
more treatment steps and coagulants, affecting the sludge's quality. The general steps in 
international drinking water treatment are coagulation, flocculation, sedimentation, filtration, and 
disinfection (Figure 12).  
Coagulants sludge and spent filter backwash sludge (SFBW) from backwashing filters compromise 
the majority of waste residuals produced internationally (Bourgeois, Walsh, and Gagnon 2004). 
Coagulants are often based on aluminium or iron, and residuals are referred to as alum- and ferric 
sludge. 
The main differences between Danish and international drinking water treatment sludge (DWTS) 
are listed in Table 6. 
==PAGE:29==
 
 
23 
 
Table 6 Comparison of backwash sludge from international and Danish drinking water production, including water 
source, characteristics and reference. DWTS = Drinking water treatment sludge. 
Type of sludge 
Water source 
Characteristics 
Literature 
Alum- and ferric 
sludge 
Groundwater- 
and surface 
water 
Relative high concentration of coagulants 
(aluminium or iron) and high organic matter. DWTS 
from surface water does not contain arsenic and 
seasonal quality variation  
Babatunde and Zhao 
2007;Zeng et al. 
2022;Ahmad, Ahmad, and 
Alam 2016 
Danish backwash 
sludge 
Groundwater 
Relative high concentrations of iron and arsenic. 
There is no seasonal variation in quality. 
Henrik Aktor 1990 
 
The challenges related to recycling potential and the type of recycling application vary between 
Danish and international backwash sludge. Environmental concerns regarding sludge from 
international plants often revolve around aluminium. Additionally, recycling potential is often 
associated with technologies that aim to recover aluminium for reuse as a coagulant, thereby 
reducing the amount of chemical dosing (Nguyen et al. 2022). In Denmark, sludge does not contain 
aluminium, but high levels of arsenic constitute environmental concerns and hinder recycling. 
Furthermore, due to the addition of coagulants, more sludge is often generated in international 
drinking water treatment.  
Despite numerous international publications on the recycling of drinking DWTS, it is essential to 
focus on Danish research to explore how more backwash sludge can be utilised in Denmark. The 
following section presents an overview of Danish research on backwash sludge and addresses 
some of the remaining questions. 
Figure 12  Conventional drinking water treatment with addition of coagulants. Illustration from  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Drinking-water-treatment-process-6-638.jpg and subsequently edit 
to include all processes and waste streams. 
==PAGE:30==
 
 
24 
 
5.4.1 State of The Art – Danish Literature Review   
Research on the recycling of backwash sludge has been conducted in Denmark for more than 
30 years (Table 7) 
Table 7 State of the art - Danish research and literature about backwash sludge and its recycling potential during the 
last 30 years. 
Research area and notes 
Year 
Type of references 
References 
Comprehensive mapping of the composition of backwash sludge in 
Denmark to identify future recycling potential. Did not address 
challenges related to arsenic levels 
1990 
Article 
Aktor 1990 
In-situ coating of calcite medium (DPF-6) with backwash sludge from 
Sjælsø II waterwork to retain chrome during filtration of rainwater 
2007-
209 
Report 
M. B. Jensen 2009 
Stabilisation of arsenic, chrome, and copper in contaminated soil 
with backwash sludge 
2011 
Ph.D. project 
Nielsen 2011 
Investigating the potential of using backwash sludge for phosphorus 
removal in Holbæk WWTP. Lab- and full scale. 
2013 
Report from VTU 
project 
Sharma et al. 2013 
Facilitating industrial symbiosis with backwash sludge to gain 
economic- and environmental value.  Apply backwash sludge with 
lower arsenic levels in wastewater treatment or biogas plants.  
2014 
Report 
Symbiosis center 
2014 
Guide to the waterworks for handling and disposing of backwash 
sludge. Focused on high arsenic levels in Danish backwash sludge 
(>1000 mg As/kg DM) and how to ensure safe disposal.  
2014 
Report 
DANVA 2014 
Investigating the reduction of H2S in wastewater pressure lines using 
backwash sludge 
2022 
Bachelor project 
Hvolby and 
Thomassen 2022 
Fate of arsenic in landfills from drinking water treatment sludge  
2023 
Article  
Van Genuchten et al. 
2022 
Few new publications on this topic have been published in the past decade, indicating 
obstacles hindering the increased recycling of Danish backwash sludge or other priorities in 
the water sector since recycling backwash sludge is still not implemented in most Danish 
waterworks. Based on the literature review, unexplored research questions were identified 
(Figure 13). 
 
 
==PAGE:31==
 
 
25 
 
 
Figure 13 Unexplored research areas and questions identified based on a Danish literature review about recycling of 
backwash sludge 
 
Has the chemical composition of Danish backwash sludge changed in the last 30 years?  
 
How do various treatment processes affect the quality and characteristics of backwash sludge? 
 
What is the fate of backwash sludge in Denmark? 
 
What are the environmental impacts of backwash sludge disposal and fates of arsenic in the context 
of WWTPs and biogas plants? 
 
What is the quantity of Danish backwash sludge with low, medium, and high arsenic levels? 
 
What are the challenges of recycling backwash sludge with intermediate arsenic levels and regulatory 
compliance? 
 
What are the experiences of WWTPs and biogas plants that have utilised backwash sludge, and what 
benefits and challenges have they encountered? 
 
What are potential new applications for backwash sludge beyond its current recycling in WWTPs and 
biogas plants? 
==PAGE:32==
 
 
26 
 
6 Danish Backwash Sludge - Data Analysis and Influence of 
Treatment Processes 
Using backwash sludge as a resource presents challenges and opportunities in sustainable waste 
management practices in drinking water production. Understanding the composition of backwash 
sludge is essential for optimising resource utilisation and assessing environmental impacts.  
This chapter aims to provide updated insight into the chemical composition of backwash sludge 
across Denmark based on comprehensive data collection of backwash sludge analysis provided by 
a range of Danish Water utilities. Only data on the chemical composition of the sludge was 
available, and the variety in physical properties of Danish backwash sludge will not be discussed. 
The influence of treatment processes on the quality of backwash sludge will be addressed. 
6.1 Procedure for Backwash Sludge Analyses at Waterworks  
The procedure for backwash sludge analysis in the Danish water supply is unregulated and has no 
specific guidelines. The waterworks are not required to analyse backwash sludge, and only half of 
the contacted utilities have backwash sludge data available. The smallest of the contacted utilities 
typically do not conduct backwash sludge analysis. The waterworks often analyse the backwash 
sludge when the sludge is sent to WWTPs or biogas plants. In cases where the backwash sludge is 
sent to waste facility management, the facility often performs the analysis.  
6.1.1 Sampling and Analysis Procedure 
No standard sampling procedure for sampling backwash sludge was implemented by the 
contacted utilities. Some utilities took samples from four locations within the same sludge basin, 
while others sampled during the emptying process of the basin. Details regarding the analysis 
procedure of the backwash sludge samples are unknown. This includes the type of analysis 
instrument applied and pre-treatment procedures, such as acid addition, to facilitate iron and 
tightly bound element complexation. Nevertheless, most analyses were conducted by the same 
company, Eurofins, assuming a standardised procedure was followed.  
6.1.2 Analysis Parameters 
Analysis parameters to be included in backwash sludge analysis are often determined based on 
the final disposal practices. When sludge is sent to biogas or WWTPs, analysis of seven heavy 
metals (Pb, Cd, Cr, Hg, Zn, Cu and Ni) is mandatory, not including analysis of arsenic and iron. 
Arsenic, dry matter content and the seven heavy metals are highly represented in the dataset, 
followed by iron concentration (Chapter 6.3).  
Nitrogen, phosphorus, and manganese are analysed to a lesser extent, leading to increased 
uncertainty regarding the general concentration levels of these and other parameters than 
arsenic, iron, and heavy metals concentration.  
Some analysis includes pH, loss of ignition, calcium, and magnesium levels. A few samples are 
extensively analysed, including hydrocarbons (pentane-extractable) (1), detergents (LAS) (2), PAH 
compounds (2), softeners (2), alkylphenols, ethoxylates, and PFAS.  
==PAGE:33==
 
 
27 
 
6.1.3 Data Uncertainty  
The collected dataset inherently carries uncertainties due to variations in sampling procedures, 
analysis methods, and parameter selection. However, this project aims to provide insight into the 
elements present in Danish backwash sludge and offer estimations of concentration levels to 
facilitate discussions on recycling potential.  
6.2 Dataset 
The dataset comprises 64 analyses from 44 waterworks across Denmark (Table 8). Data from three 
Danish waterworks in the dataset were extracted from the literature and included in the analysis 
(K. Wang et al. 2023). 
Table 8 Overview of collected data: Illustrating the number of waterworks from each utility (U1-U12) where backwash 
sludge analyses were conducted and the total number of analyses from each utility. 
*Backwash sludge analysis is a mix of backwash sludge from multiple local waterworks (up to 16), consolidated and 
stored together before final disposal. 
**Backwash sludge analysis from two waterworks (2013) that no longer exist in 2023. 
Values below the detection limit in the analysis sheets were treated as equal to the detection 
limits during data processing (e.g. x: <0.01 mg/kg DM then x = 0.01 mg/kg DM).   
6.2.1 Representativeness of the Backwash Sludge Dataset 
The dataset comprises backwash sludge analyses from 2011 to 2023. Despite some analyses being 
over a decade old, the data remain representative due to the presumed uniformity in backwash 
sludge composition, which predominantly depends on the raw water quality expected to remain 
stable over time. 
The dataset predominantly covers major waterworks in Denmark, and the utilities that owned 
smaller waterworks informed that the smaller waterworks do not generate backwash sludge. 
Instead, the backwash water is discharged into the sewer system.  
The data represents 44 out of around 2,500 waterworks in Denmark. However, the dataset 
predominantly includes analyses from the largest waterworks, which produce around 127 million 
m3 of water per year (data from 10 utilises in Appendix B) and are collectively responsible for 
approximately 33% of the total water production in Denmark (383 million m3 per year in 
2022)(Danmarks Statistik 2023). 
While acknowledging variations in geological layers across Denmark, certain elements in backwash 
sludge, such as arsenic, nickel, iron, and manganese, are geologically determined. Geographically, 
there is an overrepresentation of analyses from waterworks in Western Denmark (Table 9). 
Water Utility 
U1 
U2 
U3 
U4 
U5 
U6 
U7 
U8 
U9 
U10 
U11 
U12 
Total 
No. of waterworks 
7 
1 (16)* 
1 
8 (6)** 
8 
3 
4 
1 
4 
3 
3 
1 
44 
No. of analysis 
7 
5 
3 
13 
10 
5 
4 
1 
4 
3 
8 
1 
64 
==PAGE:34==
 
 
28 
 
Table 9  The distribution of represented water utilities, waterworks, the number of analyses, and analysis levels of 
arsenic (As) and iron (Fe) across the two main regions, Western and Eastern Denmark. 
Geographical Region 
No. of water 
utilities 
No. of 
waterworks 
No. of analysis  
Analysis 
including As 
Analysis 
including Fe 
Western Denmark 
6 
31 
38 
37 
22 
Eastern Denmark 
6 
13 
26 
19 
15 
Despite not covering all local variations in groundwater composition, the dataset still captures a 
significant portion of Denmark's area, especially around major cities where a high water demand 
drives backwash production. Moreover, the dataset does represent variations in arsenic and iron 
concentrations in raw water (Figure 14).  
It's worth noting that not all analyses include arsenic and iron concentrations. This means that 
even though there are data from areas with high or low arsenic or iron concentrations, the 
performed analysis does not necessarily represent the level of arsenic or iron in the given area, 
potentially impacting the dataset's representativeness.  
In northern Jutland, where the iron concentration in groundwater approaches zero, no backwash 
sludge is generated. (Personal communication, Vandmiljø Randers, Marts 2024). Consequently, no 
samples from this region are represented (marked with blue in Figure 14). 
A 
B 
Figure 14 Distribution of collected data and raw water concentrations of arsenic (A) and iron (B).  
A) Raw water sources with arsenic concentrations exceeding 5 µg/l (red dots). B) Raw water sources with iron concentrations exceeding 
10 mg/l (red dots). Blue dots represent no backwash sludge due to no iron in raw water. The distribution of collected data is represented 
by green circles on the map. The size of each green circle corresponds to the number of waterworks represented in the dataset, with 
larger circles indicating multiple waterworks. The raw water data is sourced from GEUS' national database, Jupiter, accessible at 
https://data.geus.dk/geusmap  
A 
==PAGE:35==
 
 
29 
 
In conclusion, despite its limitations, the dataset represents Danish backwash sludge, enabling 
insights into its composition and facilitating a nuanced discussion on related topics. 
6.3 Chemical Composition of Danish Backwash Sludge  
The primary chemical elements detected in Danish backwash sludge include iron, calcium, 
manganese, phosphorous, magnesium, and nitrogen (Table 10).  
Table 10 The average content of chemical elements and properties of backwash sludge from 44 Danish waterworks. 
Number of analyses (No. of analysis), standard derivation (SD), relative standard derivation in percentage (%RSD), and 
minimum (min) and maximum (max) value across the data set.  
Elements 
No. of analysis 
Average 
SD 
%RSD 
Min 
Max 
Dry Matter 
% 
60 
14 
12 
86 
1 
54 
Fe  
g/kg DM 
37 
351 
77 
22 
135 
135 
P  
19 
19 
8 
44 
2 
2 
N  
24 
4 
6 
169 
1 
32 
Mn  
10 
19 
24 
125 
1 
79 
Ca  
4 
50 
14 
27 
41 
70 
Mg  
1 
6 
0 
 0 
6 
6 
As  
mg/kg DM 
56 
382 
581 
152 
2 
2800 
Pb  
54 
11 
14 
122 
0.15 
60 
Cd  
53 
1 
2 
231 
0.01 
14 
Cr  
53 
6 
6 
117 
0.17 
26 
Hg  
49 
0 
0 
193 
0.002 
0.5 
Zn  
54 
99 
166 
168 
1.95 
990 
Cu  
54 
7 
12 
183 
0.76 
81 
Ni  
53 
79 
309 
392 
0.43 
2000 
Sr  
1 
1600 
0 
0 
1600 
1600 
K  
1 
180 
0 
0 
180 
180 
Na  
1 
1300 
0 
0 
1300 
1300 
pH 
 
6 
7.4 
0 
2 
7 
8 
Loss of ignition  
% DM 
2 
16 
5 
32 
12 
19 
SUM of PFAS  
μg/kg DM 
1 
0.88 
0 
0 
0.88 
0.88 
The data exhibits high variations, particularly for heavy metal concentrations. The variability 
reflects the diverse quality of raw water sources across Denmark, where certain heavy metals, 
such as nickel, may be present at elevated levels in specific groundwater sources due to 
geochemical factors. For cadmium and nickel, a limited number of analyses with very high 
concentrations contributed to high derivations. 
==PAGE:36==
 
 
30 
 
The variability in dry matter (DM) content, ranging from 1% to 54 %, is presumed to reflect the 
duration of sludge storage in the settling basins or storage tanks and post-dewatering steps. 
A substantial portion of chemical elements in backwash sludge are likely bound to oxygen. The 
average percentage composition of chemical elements in Danish backwash sludge after accounting 
for oxygen is listed in Table 11 in decreasing order (Calculations can be found in Appendix B).  
Table 11 Average chemical elements as % of dry matter when accounting for oxygen.  
Chemical 
elements 
Fe2O3 
Organic 
matter 
CaO 
P2O5 
MnO 
MgO 
N 
Sum of SrO, 
Na2O, K2O 
As2O3 
Heavy 
metals 
In total 
Average % 
of DM 
50% 
16% 
7.00% 
4.40% 
2.90% 
1.00% 
0.40% 
0.40% 
0.05% 
0.01% 
~82 % 
 
Given the general low organic content in Danish raw water, the organic material level was 
anticipated to be low. However, two samples measured loss of ignition (% DM), a method used to 
determine organic matter (OM) content. The average % OM in backwash sludge is 16%, with a 
portion likely attributed to biomass from bacteria in the sand filters.  
Approximately 82 % of the content in backwash sludge can be determined after accounting for 
oxygen. Notably, none of the analyses measured silicic oxide (SiO2), which is expected to 
constitute 10-30 % of backwash sludge. Additionally, sulphur (~0.1 %), barium (~0.1 %), fluoride 
and chloride are also anticipated constituents of backwash sludge (Likus et al. 2021)(Henrik Aktor 
1990). Overall, the collected dataset provides a comprehensive insight into Danish backwash 
sludge composition.   
6.3.1 Iron(hydr)oxides 
Iron (hydr)oxide emerges as the primary component in Danish Backwash sludge, with an average 
concentration of 351 g Fe/kg DM. The variation in iron concentration between waterworks and 
utilities across Denmark remains relatively low. However, one utility exhibiting concentrations 
below 200 g Fe/kg DM and another exceeding 400 g Fe/kg DM (Figure 15). The variations in iron 
concentration within waterworks from the same utility were overall small (Figure 15B).  
The iron concentrations in backwash sludge mirror the iron content in raw water, given that nearly 
all iron is removed during filtration.  
==PAGE:37==
 
 
31 
 
An earlier study from 1988, reported very similar average iron levels in Danish backwash sludge, 
around 374 g Fe/kg DM (Henrik Aktor 1990). The consistency in iron concentration over the years 
is caused by the stability of iron levels in raw water. 
Comparatively, the overall iron content in Danish backwash sludge (351 g Fe/kg DM) aligns with 
the range reported for Dutch backwash sludge, which falls between 310 g Fe/kg DM and 530 g 
Fe/kg DM  (Hofman-Caris et al. 2017). However, Danish backwash sludge exhibits higher iron 
content than what is typically observed in international drinking water residuals, ranging from 1.1 
to 277 g/kg DM (Babatunde et al. 2019). 
6.3.2 Macro- and Microelements 
Analyses in the dataset also measured macronutrients phosphate (P), nitrogen (N) and calcium 
(Ca) along with the micronutrient manganese (Table 12). Three utilities (U7, U9, U12) did not 
analyse these elements, and the overall number of analyses remains limited. Therefore, average 
values should be interpreted with caution, given the small sample size.  
Concentration levels of phosphorous and manganese in Danish backwash sludge appear higher 
than reported levels in literature (Table 12). High variations in manganese levels within the same 
utility (U10 and U11) suggest either significant fluctuations in manganese concentrations within 
small regions of raw water sources or potential impacts of the filtration process on the sludge 
concentrations.  
High calcium levels in Danish backwash sludge are especially seen in water treatment sourced 
from groundwater. Compared to levels in the literature, Danish backwash sludge calcium content 
falls within the middle to high range. Assessing nitrogen levels is a challenge due to the limited 
number of studies that have measured nitrogen concentration, and conclusions regarding nitrogen 
levels in Danish backwash sludge remain difficult.  
Figure 15 Iron concentrations (g/kg DM) in Danish backwash sludge from collected data. Colours indicate data from the same utility.  A) 
Average Fe concentrations in backwash sludge from 31 waterworks in Denmark. B) Average Fe concentration in backwash sludge with 
standard derivation from 10 utilities in Denmark (no Fe data available from U9 and U12). 
A 
B 
==PAGE:38==
 
 
32 
 
Overall, the discussed macro- and microelements are present at relatively high levels in Danish 
backwash sludge. This emphasises the potential significance of the elements in agriculture 
applications or where manganese is a key element. 
Table 12 Average phosphorous (P), nitrogen (N), calcium (Ca) and manganese (Mn) concentration (g/kg DW), with 
standard deviation, in backwash sludge from Danish utilities (U1-U12) and the number of analyses. Concentration 
levels in water treatment sludge (WTS) reported in literature across the world (Hofman-Caris et al. 2017;K. Wang et al. 
2023;Babatunde and Zhao 2007;Babatunde et al. 2019;Zeng et al. 2022) 
Utility 
P (g/kg DW) 
N (g/kg DW) 
Ca (g/kg DW) 
Mn (g/kg DW) 
No. of analysis 
U1 
24 ±3.6 
4.1 ± 2.8 
N/A 
N/A 
7/7/0/0 
U2 
15.5 
32 
N/A 
N/A 
1/1/0/0 
U3 
27 ± 5.2 
3.0 ±0.5 
N/A 
N/A 
3/3/0/0 
U4 
9.9 ± 5.7 
2.1 ± 0.5 
N/A 
34 ± 4.9 
4/4/0/2 
U5 
N/A 
1.1 ± 0.2 
N/A 
N/A 
0/7/0/0 
U6 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
5.0 ± 1.6 
0/0/0/2 
U7 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
0/0/0/0 
U8 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
9.2 
0/0/0/1 
U9 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
0/0/0/0 
U10 
17± 2.8 
N/A 
51 ± 16 
31 ±42 
3/0/3/3 
U11 
2.8 
2.0 
48 
7.0 ± 8.5 
1/1/1/2 
U12 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
0/0/0/0 
AVR 
16 ± 8.1 
7.3 ± 10.9 
49.5 ±1.5 
17.1 ± 12.4 
  
WTS - The Netherlands 
- 
- 
49.0 
3.6 
  
WTS - Belgium, India, and USA 
4.9-16.5 
- 
4.9-94.6 
0.31-1.01 
Ferric sludge 
3.6 
- 
80.32 ± 90.5 
- 
WTS - Surface water/groundwater 
- Reported in literature 
0.2-10 
- 
0.18-32 
0.4-31.6 
 
WTS - Surface water China  
1.2 
1.5 
8.0 
- 
6.3.3 Arsenic Levels in Danish Backwash Sludge 
The average arsenic level is 382 mg/kg DM, with a considerable variation in arsenic levels in Danish 
backwash sludge, spanning from 2 mg As/kg DM to 2700 mg As/kg DM (Figure 16A). Furthermore, 
variations within the same utility are substantial compared to iron concentrations (Figure 16B).  
==PAGE:39==
 
 
33 
 
The ratio between iron and arsenic levels in raw water determines the arsenic level in the 
backwash sludge (Nonboe Andersen and Stamer 1999). Since the iron concentrations are not 
expected to vary substantially, the large variation in arsenic concentrations reflects the large 
variety of arsenic in groundwater magazine.  
6.3.4 Iron-Arsenic and Arsenic-Phosphorous Relationship 
Given the superior adsorption capacity of iron(hydr)oxides for compounds like arsenic and 
phosphorous, the correlation between iron and arsenic levels in the backwash sludge dataset was 
investigated (Figure 17). Since the amount 
of arsenic bound to iron(hydr)oxides is 
strongly affected by the presence of 
phosphorous, which competitively desorbs 
arsenate from the sorption site on the 
surface of iron(hydr)oxide (Hongshao and 
Stanforth 2001;Hingston, Posner, and Quirk 
1971). The relationship between arsenic and 
phosphorous concentration was also 
investigated (Figure 18). 
No significant relationship between iron and 
arsenic (R2 value around 0.1, indicating 
minimal influence) or between arsenic and 
phosphorous (R2 value around 0.04) was 
observed.  
Figure 17 Arsenic concentrations (mg/kg DM) against Fe 
concentrations (g/kg DW) in backwash sludge samples and linear 
regression trendline with equation and R-squared value at 0.107.
Figure 16 Arsenic concentrations (mg/kg DM) in Danish backwash sludge from collected data. Colours indicate data from the same 
utility A) Average arsenic concentrations in backwash sludge from 46 waterworks in Denmark. B) Average arsenic concentration in 
backwash sludge with standard derivation from 12 utilities in Denmark (no arsenic data available from U9). 
B 
A 
==PAGE:40==
 
 
34 
 
This finding suggests that the arsenic 
concentration in backwash sludge 
depends more on the ratio of iron to 
arsenic in raw water. A high 
concentration of iron in raw water is 
likely to cause a lower concentration 
of arsenic in backwash sludge, as iron 
is the predominant component, 
resulting in arsenic dilution. High 
phosphate concentrations did not lead 
to low arsenic concentrations. The 
significant variation in arsenic levels 
within the dataset is thus expected to 
primarily reflect geographical 
variations in the iron-to-arsenic ratio 
in raw water.  
6.3.5 Arsenic levels in Backwash Sludge from Literature 
The arsenic levels observed in the dataset are similar to concentration levels in Danish backwash 
sludge previously reported in the literature and higher than international arsenic levels (Table 13) 
Table 13 Arsenic levels were reported in this project, as well as Danish and international groundwater treatment 
sludge (GWTS).  
Literature 
This study 
Aktor 1990 
DANVA 2014 
K. Wang et al. 2023 
Likus et al. 2021 
Arsenic level 
reported  
 
Mean value of 382 
mg/kg DW. 
Ranging from 2 to 
2800 mg/kg DM 
Mean value of 282 
mg/kg DW. 
Ranging from 2 to 
1480 mg/kg DM 
Ranging between 
18 to 3200 mg/kg 
DM 
Ranging between 563 
and 864 mg/kg DM 
Ranging 
between 0.7 
and 4.2 mg/kg 
DM 
Notes 
Danish backwash 
sludge  
Danish backwash 
sludge  
Danish backwash 
sludge  
GWTS from Belgium, 
India, and the USA 
GWTS from 
Poland 
Finding data on arsenic levels in backwash sludge in literature international studies has been 
challenging. Studies discussing recycling applications of water treatment sludge often omit data on 
arsenic (Babatunde and Zhao 2007;Hofman-Caris et al. 2017;Babatunde et al. 2019;Zeng et al. 
2022;Ahmad, Ahmad, and Alam 2016;Nguyen et al. 2022). The scarcity of literature may be 
attributed to: Differences in raw water composition compared to Denmark and varying regulatory 
standards allowing higher levels in drinking water Internationally. The absence of literature on 
arsenic in WTS may also indicate an unexplored aspect of arsenic management in WTS  
6.3.6 Heavy Metals Levels in Danish Backwash Sludge 
Heavy metals present another concern in Danish backwash sludge. Concentration levels of 7 heavy 
metals from 9 utilities in Denmark are shown in Table 14. Cadmium and nickel stand out as both 
occur in concentrations above limit values for heavy metals in waste used for agricultural 
purposes. 
Figure 18 Arsenic concentrations (mg/kg DM) against P 
concentrations (g/kg DW) in backwash sludge samples and linear 
regression trendline with equation and R-squared value at 0.04. 
==PAGE:41==
 
 
35 
 
Table 14 Average hazardous metalloid and heavy metal content (mg/kg DW), ± standard deviation, in backwash sludge from 12 utilities in Denmark and limit values 
from the "Use of Waste for Agriculture Purposes" - Directive BEK 1001 - 27/06/2018. Numbers in bold and italics represent backwash sludge from the respective 
utility above the limiting values for waste used in agriculture purposes. N/A – Non-available data. 
 
 
Chemical 
elements 
 
Utility 
 
 
U1 
U2 
U3 
U4 
U5 
U6 
U7 
U8 
U9 
U10 
U11 
U12 
AVR 
Limit values - 
“Waste 
Agriculture 
 Purposes” 
As  
mg/kg DM 
202 ± 145 
2 
350 ± 69 
37 ± 36 
866 ± 781 
66 ± 6.2 
930 ± 425 
24 
93 ± 74 
776 ± 525 
57 ± 27 
940 
362 ± 394 
- 
Pb  
3.0 ± 1.9 
34 ± 14 
11 ± 7.8 
21 ± 9.8 
0.7 ± 0.5 
10 ± 3.2 
1.3 ± 1.6 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
8.7 ± 14 
N/A 
11.4 ± 11.2 
120 
Cd  
0.7 ± 0.3 
0.03 ± 0.01 
1.0 ± 1.0 
1.9 ±2.9 
0.09 ± 0.15 
1.2 ± 0.4 
0.12 ± 0.16 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
0.18 ± 0.10 
N/A 
0.64 ± 0.67 
0.8 
Cr 
4.4 ± 1.2 
3.2 ± 4.4 
6.6 ± 1.2 
13 ± 8.3 
1.2 ± 0.6 
2.8 ± 1.3 
0.8 ± 0.5 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
5.9 ± 5.8 
N/A 
4.7 ± 3.8 
100 
Hg 
0.03 ± 0.03 
0.03 ± 0.02 
0.01 ± 0.01 
0.06 ± 0.1 
0.05 
0.01 
0.05 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
0.04 ± 0.01 
N/A 
0.040 ± 0.02 
0.8 
Zn 
18 ± 19 
56 ± 38 
37 ± 8.5 
190 ± 229 
53 ± 49 
8 ± 4 
55 ± 65 
51 
N/A 
N/A 
108 ± 27 
N/A 
64 ± 55 
4000 
Cu 
3.1 ± 0.2 
9 ± 14 
3.4 ± 0.6 
12 ± 18 
3.0 ± 2.5 
4.5 ± 1.3 
1.4 ± 1.0 
8.2 
N/A 
N/A 
6.7 ± 5.5 
N/A 
5.7 ± 3.5 
1000 
Ni 
6.2 ± 9.6 
4.8 ± 5.7 
15 ± 9.1 
172 ± 408 
3.8 ± 2.4 
5.1 ± 6.0 
3.4 ± 2.4 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
32 ± 14 
N/A 
30 ± 58 
30 
No. of 
analysis 
7/7 
1/5 
3/3 
8/8 
8/8 
2/3 
1/3 
1/1 
4/0 
3/0 
3/3 
1/0 
 
 
==PAGE:42==
 
 
36 
 
Cadmium and nickel have similar affinities for binding to iron(hydr)oxides in sludge. The 
relationship between the iron concentration in the sludge and the presence of the two heavy 
metals was investigated, but no relationship was observed (Figures in Appendix B). High levels in 
backwash sludge are likely related to local geological conditions.  
6.3.7 Heavy Metal Levels in Backwash Sludge from Literature 
Data from 1988 shows the same elevated values for cadmium and nickel in Danish backwash 
sludge, with average concentrations of 4 mg Cd/kg DM and 41 mg Ni/kg DM, respectively, 
exceeding  today (Henrik Aktor 1990). While cadmium, nickel, and mercury are frequently 
reported above limits value for WWTS  disposed in Danish agriculture (Miljøstyrelsen; 2009), no 
literature mentions issues related to concentrations of cadmium or nickel in Danish backwash 
sludge from drinking water treatment.  
Nickel levels in the literature on WTS are reported to be between 10.9 and 60 mg/kg DM, whereas 
data in this study falls within the middle of this range (33 mg/kg DM). In general, heavy metal 
concentrations in this study are in the lower end compared to concentrations reported in the 
literature (Babatunde et al. 2019;Zeng et al. 2022). Suppose the utility (U4) data, which contains a 
high level of cadmium and nickel, is omitted from the data analyses. Then, the average 
concentrations of heavy metals in backwash sludge are all within regulation limits.  
Concerning heavy metals, Danish backwash sludge is not expected to constitute a general 
environmental risk.  
6.3.8 Environmental Harmful Compounds in Backwash Sludge 
Over the last 40 years, Danish groundwater has been contaminated with various substances due 
to human activity on land surfaces. The contaminants include pesticides, pesticide metabolites, 
and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) (GEUS 2024). PFAS contamination in drinking water 
is an emerging concern in the Danish water supply. However, the investigation of PFAS in Danish 
backwash sludge is still unexplored.  
One utility has analysed 22 PFAS (PFAS22) in the backwash sludge samples from seven waterworks. 
None of the 22 PFAS concentrations were detected, except for one sample where the sum of PFAS 
was 0.88 μg/kg DM. This finding suggests that if PFAS are present in raw water, they can be found 
in backwash sludge.  
Literature confirms that iron(hydr)oxides can bind PFAS and theoretically be present in backwash 
sludge (Campos-pereira et al. 2020). However, optimal binding conditions occur at pH ≤ 5 and 
competitors such as arsenic and phosphate should be present in low concentrations.  This 
contrasts with Danish backwash sludge production, where pH is around 7.5 and arsenic and 
phosphate are often present in raw water. 
The limit values for PFAS in WWT sludge for agriculture are listed in Table 15 along with 
concentration levels of PFAS from literature and this study. 
 
 
 
==PAGE:43==
 
 
37 
 
Table 15 Concentrations (µg/kg DM) of PFAS in drinking water treatment sludge from this study and from the US, 
wastewater treatment sludge and limit values for waste used in agriculture. 
 
Backwash 
sludge (DK) 
DWTS (US) 
Danish WWTS 
WWTS (US) 
Limit 
values 
PFAS4 (µg/kg DM) 
- 
- 
10 
- 
10 
PFAS22 (µg/kg DM) 
0.88 
0-3.3 
15.3 
34 
400 
References 
This study 
(Gravesen et al. 2023) 
(Miljøministriet 2023) 
(Gravesen et al. 2023) 
 
 
From literature insights, PFAS from backwash sludge does not pose a risk to the environment and 
is relatively small compared to the PFAS concentrations from WWTS. Moreover, the production 
volume of backwash sludge in Denmark is anticipated to be less than 40 times that of WWTS 
(Miljøministriet 2023).  
PFAS molecules differ from other pesticides and their metabolite by having a  
hydrophile and hydro- and oleo-phobic parts, often being larger molecules (Z. Wang et al. 2017). 
This characteristic suggests that PFAS are more likely to end up bound in iron(hydr)oxide sludge 
than pesticide metabolites. However, this cannot be concluded due to the dataset's absence of 
analysis for pesticide metabolites.  
In summary, PFAS and other environmentally harmful substances in backwash sludge theoretically 
pose no significant environmental risk. However, further research is necessary to confirm their 
presence and concentration levels. 
6.3.9 Comparison of Drinking Water Treatment Sludge and Wastewater Treatment Sludge 
WWTS is commonly used as a bio-fertiliser in agriculture, with sludge being directly spread in 
fields for phosphorus utilisation. In Denmark, a significant portion of WWTS is recycled in 
agriculture, highlighting its importance in soil enrichment (Miljøministriet 2023). Comparing DWTS 
with WWTS indicates perspectives on concentration levels in DWTS related to potential 
contamination and recycling applications. However, Danish DWTS and WWTS exhibit notable 
differences in composition and quality (Table 16). DWTS typically contains high levels of iron (Fe), 
manganese, calcium, and arsenic, whereas it has low levels of organic matter, nitrogen, and heavy 
metals. 
DWTS is expected to contain minimal or no microplastic. Additionally, DWTS from modern 
waterworks, where treatment processes are contained within closed units and backwash sludge is 
stored in closed tanks, may have higher hygiene levels than WWTS, enhancing its suitability for 
recycling applications.  
 
 
==PAGE:44==
 
 
38 
 
Table 16 Average (AVR) concentrations in Danish backwash sludge from this study, wastewater treatment sludge 
(WWTS) from two studies in DK, and limit values for waste used in agriculture (Miljøministriet 2023; Kirkeby et al. 
2013; Danish Ministry of Environment 2018) 
 
AVR concentration 
backwash sludge 
AVR concentrations 
WWTS (DK1) 
AVR concentrations in 
WWTS (DK2) 
Limit values “Waste 
to agriculture” 
Fe (g/kg DW) 
351 
- 
- 
- 
P (g/kg DW) 
19 
28.0 
28.9 
- 
Organic matter 
16 
- 
63 
- 
N (g/kg DW) 
4 
55.7 
49.9 
- 
Mn (g/kg DW) 
19 
0.61 
- 
- 
Ca (g/kg DW) 
50 
25.4 
- 
- 
K (g/kg DW) 
- 
4.0 
4.5 
- 
As (mg/kg DW) 
371 
- 
5.3 
25* 
Pb (mg/kg TS) 
7.8 
25.2 
28.0 
120 
Cd (mg/kg TS) 
0.44 
0.8 
0.92 
0.8 
Cr (mg/kg TS) 
2.7 
22 
21.2 
100 
Hg (mg/kg TS) 
0.03 
0.7 
0.74 
0.8 
Zn (mg/kg TS) 
103 
730 
584 
4000 
Cu (mg/kg TS) 
3.4 
243 
223 
1000 
Ni (mg/kg TS) 
11 
20.7 
19.8 
30 
*Limit value apply for private garden use 
6.3.10 Conclusion from Danish Backwash Sludge Data Analysis 
 Regulation did not require the waterworks to analyse backwash sludge. Half of the 
contacted utilities had available backwash sludge data available. 
 The final disposal practices often determined which analysis parameters were included 
in the backwash sludge analysis. Arsenic, dry matter content, and seven heavy metals 
(Pb, Cd, Cr, Hg, Zn, Cu and Ni) are highly represented in the dataset, followed by iron 
concentration. 
 The dataset comprises 64 analyses from 44 waterworks and 12 utilities across 
Denmark. The average percentage of chemical elements was Fe2O3 (50%), organic 
matter (16 %), CaO (7 %), P2O5 (4.4%), MnO (2.9%), MgO (1%), N (0.4%), the sum of 
SrO, Na2O, and K2O (0.4%), As2O3 (0.50 %), and the sum of heavy metals (0.01 %). 
 Dry matter content ranges from 1% to 54%, reflecting variations in storage and 
dewatering processes. 
 Iron (hydr)oxide was the primary component, with an average concentration of 351 g 
Fe/kg DM and low variation across the utilities.  
==PAGE:45==
 
 
39 
 
 Average concentration levels of P (19 ± 8 g P/kg DM) and Mn (19 ± 24 g Mn/kg DM) in 
Danish backwash sludge were higher than the reported levels in international 
literature. 
 Average arsenic concentration in Danish sludge was 382 mg As/kg DM and varies 
widely (2-2800 mg As/kg DM), influenced by the relation between iron and arsenic in 
raw water. 
 There is limited international literature on arsenic in water treatment sludge. 
 There was no significant correlation between iron and arsenic levels in the backwash 
sludge. 
 Heavy metal concentrations varied greatly between waterworks, reflecting the 
variation in raw water quality. The overall heavy metal concentrations in Danish 
backwash sludge were generally lower than the literature and are not expected to pose 
a general environmental risk. 
 Cadmium and nickel levels occasionally exceed limit values for waste used in 
agriculture. 
 PFAS was detected in backwash sludge. However, not at high levels compared to 
WWTS.  
 There were no similarities between backwash sludge and WWTS. Backwash sludge had 
higher iron, manganese, calcium, and arsenic levels but lower heavy metal loads and 
organic matter content. 
6.4 Influence of Treatment Processes on Backwash Sludge Quality  
The treatment process influences the quality of backwash sludge; however, most advanced 
treatment processes are implanted after the filtration step and do not affect the quality or 
quantity of backwash sludge. Four treatment processes that potentially affect the sludge quality 
and quantity are: 
1. Iron removal process in sand filtration 
2. Addition of iron chloride up-stream filtration step for arsenic removal 
3. Pellet softening 
4. Membrane filtration of backwash water 
6.4.1 Iron Removal Process in the Filtration Step   
Groundwater often contains naturally dissolved iron (Fe2+). The iron I is removed by oxidation of 
dissolved iron to insoluble Fe3+ (form as FeOx), which is separated in the filtration step (Müller et 
al. 2024). There are three main oxidation pathways (Figure 19): 1. Homogenous oxidation, which 
occurs in the water phase, 2) heterogeneous oxidation, catalysed by FeOx on the surface of the 
filter grains and/or 3) biological oxidation by microorganisms on the filter grains. Depending on 
the oxidation pathway, the morphology of the FeOx is different and can either be in the pore 
water or at the sand grains.  
==PAGE:46==
 
 
40 
 
This project has not investigated how the different morphologies affect the adsorption potential of 
the iron(hydr)oxides in the backwash sludge. However, theoretically, FeOx from biological 
oxidation could have fewer binding sites due to its more compact form.  In cases where the 
primary pathway is homogenous iron precipitation, more iron is bound to the filter grain and does 
not end up in the backwash sludge, resulting in less backwash sludge produced. In that case the 
waste stream is filter grains with high iron concentrations instead of backwash sludge.  
Additionally, iron complexation in groundwater treatment is very complex and raw water quality 
also influences the type of iron precipitation (Blandfort 2007). Further research could investigate 
how the iron removal process and the raw water quality affect the final quality and quantity of the 
backwash sludge.  
6.4.2 Addition of Iron for Arsenic Removal   
Iron dosing for arsenic removal in drinking water production will result in increased backwash 
sludge produced containing arsenic. This can either result in more backwash sludge unsuitable for 
recycling due to high arsenic concentration or more backwash sludge with lower arsenic 
concentration due to the dilution effect from continuous iron addition. Ultimately, the 
concentration of arsenic in backwash sludge depends on the ratio of iron and arsenic in raw water 
along with the amount of iron dosed. The addition of iron works against the circular economy goal 
of minimising waste and producing waste suitable for recycling. However, arsenic removal from 
drinking water is extremely important due to arsenic toxicity, and iron dosing is a cheap and 
simple procedure for arsenic removal (Jeppesen, Thomsen, and Albrechtsen 2023).  
6.4.3 Influence of Pellet Softening on Backwash Sludge  
In Denmark, pellet softening has been implemented before the aeration step. During pellet 
softening, it is expected that 89-99 % of the iron and manganese in the raw water will be removed 
before the filtration step.  Additionally, heavy metals are removed in varying amounts, whereas 
nickel is removed by 35 % (Hedegaard et al. 2020). Arsenic is not expected to be removed during 
Figure 19 The three main 
pathways for iron (Fe2+) 
oxidation and removal during 
filtration. 1). Homogeneous 
oxidation in the pore water, 2) 
Heterogeneous oxidation on 
FeOx on the filter grain, 3) 
Biological oxidation by 
microorganisms on the filter 
grains (Müller et al. 2024). 
==PAGE:47==
 
 
41 
 
pellet softening since the raw water is still anaerobic, and arsenic is As(III) and has not yet been 
oxidised to As(V), the primary form that binds to iron(hydr)oxide.  
Furthermore, As(V) adsorption to iron(hydr)oxide is highly dependent on pH(Gude 2018) and 
adding sodium hydroxide increases the pH during pellet softening, reducing arsenic adsorption 
(Gude 2018) (Figure 20). 
It has previously been investigated how pellet softening affects the filters, and it was documented 
that the coating on the filter material was low on iron manganese. The nickel and arsenic levels in 
the filter were ≤0.01 mg/g and ≤0.001 mg/g. However, the arsenic in raw water was also very low 
(Hedegaard et al. 2020). 
Full-scale experiments showed that 0% of the nickel was removed in the filtration steps after 240 
days (Hedegaard et al. 2020). Nerveless, backwash sludge data from three waterworks with pellet 
softening in this project shows some of the highest nickel concentrations found in the project. 
Suppose the nickel is not removed during the filtration step. A high level of nickel could occur in 
the backwash sludge only if the water applied for backwashing contains nickel, which then binds 
to the iron and manganese oxides in the backwash water during sedimentation. The same can be 
expected for arsenic. The arsenic level in backwash sludge data from waterworks with pellet 
softening was some of the lowest in the study. However, the raw water that the waterworks treat 
is not expected to have high arsenic levels.  
To summarise, the higher concentration of metals in the treated water due to a less effective 
filtration step is expected to lead to a higher metal concentration in the backwash sludge. 
However, data on raw water has not been included to compare with the concentration detected in 
backwash sludge. It has not been a part of this project to investigate in-depth how pellet softening 
affects the composition of elements in backwash sludge. 
Based on the theoretical discussion, pellet softening can lead to elevated concentrations of heavy 
metals and arsenic in the backwash sludge, which could limit recycling potential. In that case, it 
should be considered whether the concentration levels can be reduced by, for example, using 
backwash water without heavy metals and arsenic.  
Figure 20 Water treatment process with pellet softening and the expected influence on the quality of the backwash 
sludge. Black arrows represent the flow of waste streams, and blue arrows represent the water flow. ↑ indicating 
higher relative concentrations of Ni and As than water treatment processes without pellet softening. 
==PAGE:48==
 
 
42 
 
The high percentage of iron removed during pellet softening results in less backwash of filters. The 
backwash interval of the filters is prolonged, and less backwash sludge is produced (Hedegaard et 
al. 2020). Quantifying the actual reduction in backwash sludge production has not been possible, 
but it is generally favourable to minimise the waste stream. Nevertheless, the process generates 
another type of waste stream (pellets). If the pellets obtain a higher recycling value than the 
produced backwash sludge, less production of backwash sludge can be considered a positive 
impact.  
There is still no final application in Denmark to recycle calcite pellets. Therefore, it cannot be 
evaluated whether the minimisation of backwash sludge is preferred against the production of 
pellets.  
6.4.4 Influence of Membrane Unit for Recycling of Backwash Water on Backwash Sludge 
Approximately 4% of water is used for backwashing ﬁlters, and the backwashing water is usually 
not reused. However, due to the growing pressure on clean water resources and stricter discharge 
permits for recipient water, more waterworks are exploring the possibility of recycling backwash 
water (Figure 21). 
 
Currently, ceramic membrane ﬁltraƟon for recycling backwash water is only applied in one 
waterwork in Denmark (Birkerød Waterwork). However, more membranes are expected to be 
implemented over the next few years. No sampling has been conducted on the sludge generated 
from the membrane process. The sampling procedure and analysis of backwash sludge from the 
membrane unit at Birkerød Waterwork was conducted 21st of Marts. The aim was to idenƟfy if 
there were any diﬀerences between sludge generated from the membrane process and 
tradiƟonally generated backwash sludge (A full report about the sampling procedure and data 
analysis is found in Appendix A). 
Figure 21 Water treatment process with membrane process to clean backwash water. Black arrows represent flow of 
waste streams and blue arrows represents flow of water. 
==PAGE:49==
 
 
43 
 
The data analysis revealed that backwash sludge contains silicon (Si) (3%) and two transition 
metals vanadium (V) and cobalt (Co). These elements have not previously been measured in the 
dataset in this project-  
Furthermore, the chemical composiƟon of the backwash sludge from the membrane unit and the 
regular backwash sludge sedimented in the storage tank of backwash water was the same.   
In summary, using the membrane process to recycle backwash water does not affect the quality of 
the backwash sludge. Backwash sludge can be reused in the same applications as the rest of the 
backwash sludge produced in Denmark. 
6.4.5 Conclusion on the Influence of Treatment Process on Backwash Sludge Quality 
 Heterogenous iron removal can affect the quantity of backwash sludge, while biological 
iron removal processes can affect the quality of the backwash sludge. 
 The addition of iron for arsenic removal increases the backwash sludge production, 
resulting in either more backwash sludge that cannot be utilised due to elevated arsenic 
levels or more backwash sludge with lower arsenic levels due to the dilution effect.  
 Pellet softening may lead to elevated heavy metals and arsenic concentrations in the 
backwash sludge, potentially limiting its applications and affecting quality.  
 The pellet softening process will likely impact the backwash sludge produced, as the pellets 
absorb a significant portion of the iron. However, pellet softening also generates a new 
type of waste (pellets), and it is unclear how this waste can be utilised. Therefore, it is 
difficult to determine whether the reduction in backwash sludge production is a positive or 
negative outcome. 
 Membrane filtration of backwash water does not affect the chemical composition in the 
produced backwash sludge, and recycling applications are the same as backwash sludge 
generated traditionally.  
 
 
 
==PAGE:50==
 
 
44 
 
7 Fate of Backwash Sludge in Denmark 
In Denmark, backwash sludge ends in three primary areas: landfills (including stockpiling), WWTPs, 
and biogas plants. Due to its low organic matter content, backwash sludge is unsuitable for 
incineration. In rare cases, it can also be stored at waterworks facilities or directly applied in 
agriculture, though these practices are considered outdated. 
This chapter aims to: 
 Present the results of mapping the mass balance of backwash sludge from 18 Danish 
utilities 
 Describe the fate and use of backwash sludge in the three areas 
 Systematise knowledge gained from previous experiences with backwash sludge in 
WWTPs and biogas plants. 
 Give an overview of expenses related to handling of backwash sludge 
 Identify factors influencing the fate of backwash sludge 
7.1 Current Disposal Practices 
The disposal practices of backwash sludge from 18 Danish utilities were classified into four 
categories, where the most common one was landfill (Table 17). 
Table 17 Current disposal practices of backwash sludge from 18 utilities in Denmark are classified into four disposal 
categories: Landfill, WWTP, biogas plant, and a combination of disposal practices 
Some utilities manage sludge disposal in multiple ways due to varying sludge quality. For instance, 
one utility sends sludge with low contaminant levels to biogas plants or WWTPs, while sludge with 
high levels of arsenic or heavy metals is disposed of in landfills. Similarly, two utilities prefer 
sending sludge to WWTPs, but due to limited capacity, the sludge often ends up in landfills. Two 
utilities have recently begun sending backwash sludge to WWTPs, whereas previously, they 
disposed of it in landfills. 
7.2 Mass Balance of Danish Backwash Sludge 
Based on information from 18 utilities, 6432 tons/year of backwash sludge were mapped (Figure 
22). The distribution is as follows: 4084 tons/year (63%) ends up in waste facilities, while 1251 
tons/year is utilised in biogas plants (19%) and 1133 tons/year (18%) in WWTPs. 
When backwash sludge is disposed of in a landfill, its resources are not utilised. However, when it 
ends up in WWTPs and biogas plants, it is assumed to be utilised; however, in some cases, where 
the sludge is not used optimally, it may have the character of a landfill, as it is then just another 
way of disposing of the waterworks waste.  
Disposal Practices 
Landfill 
WWTP 
Biogas plant 
Landfill/WWTP/Biogas plant 
Number of Utilities 
7 
2 
4 
5 
==PAGE:51==
 
 
45 
 
The quantity of backwash sludge was calculated based on an approximate quantity given by the 
utility. In cases where the amounts of backwash sludge were unavailable, public information on 
water production from the utility websites was used. using the relation that, on average, 0.0047 kg 
of dry matter of backwash sludge is produced per m³ of water (Symbiosis center 2014), multiplied 
by this study's average dry matter content (14% DM). Detailed calculations are provided in 
Appendix B. 
Previous estimates suggested that Denmark produces 2500 tons of dry matter (DM) backwash 
sludge per year (Symbiosis center 2014). This study mapped approximately 900 tons of DM per 
year (6400 tons/year with 14% DM), accounting for less than half of the previous estimate. The 
method for the previous estimate is unspecified but likely based on average iron concentrations in 
raw water relative to national water production. Many smaller and medium-sized waterworks do 
not necessarily generate backwash sludge since they direct the backwash water into the sewage 
system, which may account for the discrepancy. The mapped backwash sludge in this project 
comes from 18 utilities that produce more than half of Denmark's drinking water, suggesting that 
the mapped amount covers a significant portion of the actual production. 
This mapping provides a rough estimate intended to offer a general overview of the distribution of 
disposal practices for backwash sludge in Denmark and indicates the extent of its reuse. 
7.3 Fate of Backwash Sludge at Waste Management Facilities 
This study found no standard procedure for how the waste facility handles deposit backwash 
sludge. According to RGS Nordic (personal communication, February 2024), the backwash sludge is 
Figure 22 Distribution of backwash sludge (tons/year) from 18 Danish utilities, showing 
disposal in landfill (63%), biogas production (19%), and WWTPs (18%).  
==PAGE:52==
 
 
46 
 
dried and treated as a soil-like material mixed with deposit soil. This slightly contaminated soil 
creates noise barriers along roads and constructs new harbours. 
No waste facilities in Denmark possess a technology to remove arsenic from backwash sludge, and 
the dried backwash sludge can be deposited indefinitely in landfills or used for construction sites 
(DGE, personal communication, May 2024). A significant concern is that arsenic in backwash 
sludge may contribute to secondary pollution and pose environmental risks. Arsenic is strongly 
bound to iron; if released into the soil, it is likely to bind strongly to soil particles. Therefore, 
transport to groundwater is rare and unlikely. However, arsenic's mobility is highly pH-dependent. 
In reducing environments lacking oxygen, arsenic exists as As(III), which is more mobile and likely 
to be found in the water phase, potentially distributing arsenic into the environment during 
precipitation events. 
From a larger perspective, the annual amount of backwashed sludge disposed of in waste facilities 
(approximately 4000 tons in this project) constitutes a small fraction of the general amount of 
contaminated soil sent to landfills. For example, the Danish waste facility Nordic Waste received 
up to 7.2 million tons of slightly contaminated soil and 100,000 tons of hazardous waste annually 
(DGE, personal communication, May 2024). This project will not discuss the details of whether 
backlash sludge is a large contributor to environmental contamination or not. However, backwash 
sludge contains important resources that are not utilised when deposited in landfills or stockpiled.  
7.4 Backwash Sludge in Wastewater Treatment 
In 2020, Denmark had 701 WWTPs, with 50% of all wastewater being treated at the 31 largest 
facilities (Miljøstyrelsen 2024). These large WWTPs are fully developed with mechanical, 
biological, and chemical treatment (secondary clarification) and biogas production through 
anaerobic digestion of sewage sludge (Figure 23). 
Figure 23 Schematic 
Illustration of a fully 
developed wastewater 
treatment plant in 
Denmark with anaerobic 
sludge digestion and 
biogas production. 
Chemicals for phosphor 
removal can be added in 
the 1) biological 
treatment step, 2) 
before secondary 
clarification (chemical 
treatment step, 3) In the 
sludge digester.  
==PAGE:53==
 
 
47 
 
7.4.1 Chemical Dosing for Phosphorus Removal 
Phosphorus removal is crucial to prevent negative impacts on aquatic environments, with a 
maximum allowable concentration in wastewater discharge of 1.5 mg/L (Danish Ministry of the 
Environment 2007). Most phosphorus is removed biologically, but chemicals like FeCl3 and AlCl3 
are often added to support this process. Chemicals are typically added at various stages in 
wastewater treatment, depending on the specific plant (Winter et al. 2004)(Figure 23).   
7.4.2 Utilisation of Backwash Sludge in Wastewater Treatment 
Backwash sludge from drinking water treatment, rich in iron(hydr)oxide, can also bind 
phosphorus, making it a potential chemical alternative. However, its adsorption process is slower 
than traditional chemicals, and the backwash sludge is often added to the biological tank or 
anaerobic digester, where the residence time is around 20 days. This addition reduces the rejected 
water's phosphorus concentration and lowers the system's internal phosphorus load. 
Furthermore, the anaerobic conditions in the digester tank can enhance the utilisation of iron in 
the sludge, improving phosphorus binding (Sharma et al. 2013). Backwash sludge also binds 
sulphur compounds, reducing the production of hydrogen sulphide (H2S), which is important in 
biogas production (discussed in Chapter 7.5).  
Additionally, microorganisms in the digestion tank require macro and micronutrients for growth. 
Key nutrients include nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and micronutrients such as barium, iron, 
calcium, cobalt, magnesium, molybdenum, and nickel. Based on project data analysis, Danish 
backwash sludge is assumed to contain these essential nutrients. Thus, adding backwash sludge 
can stimulate bacterial growth and, where certain nutrients are lacking, potentially increase biogas 
production yield.  
Moreover, in cases where the digested sludge ends up in fields, the macro and micronutrients in 
the backwash sludge are also expected to improve the soil. Iron, manganese, calcium, and 
phosphor are used in that case.  
7.4.3 Reduction of Hydrogen Sulphide in Pipes 
Backwash sludge can reduce H2S production in pipes by binding sulphur in the wastewater. Studies 
by Silkeborg Forsyning and Skanderborg Forsyning show that while effective, the quantity of 
backwash sludge required is much higher than that of FeCl3. Notably, the iron concentration in the 
backwash sludge from one of the utilities was relatively low (<200 mg/kg DM), which likely 
influenced the observed effectiveness of the backwash sludge. Different results might be obtained 
with sludge having a higher iron content (<400 mg/kg DM).  
Additionally, dosing backwash sludge across multiple pipes is impractical and requires significant 
equipment and logistical efforts (Personal communication, Silkeborg Forsyning, April 2024). Based 
on initial results and calculations, the utilities have yet to continue testing backwash sludge in 
pipes. Instead, they are exploring applications of backwash sludge in the context of wastewater 
treatment. 
7.4.4 Utilisation of Backwash Water in the Sewage System 
Many smaller waterworks report distributing backwash water directly into the sewer system for a 
discharge fee. This backwash water, containing high levels of iron(hydr)oxides, is expected to 
==PAGE:54==
 
 
48 
 
positively impact the sewage system by reducing hydrogen sulphide production and binding 
phosphorus. However, backwash sludge can also cause corrosion in pipes. Coordinating the 
addition of backwash sludge with iron chloride at the treatment facility can be challenging, 
potentially causing fluctuations in iron concentration and phosphorus removal efficiency. Facilities 
prefer controlled dosing to maintain consistent flow and phosphorus removal. Nordkysten WWTP 
is an example of a WWTP that receives backwash water instead of backwash sludge, which has 
good results and notably reduces the use of aluminium chloride.  
7.4.5 Experiences in Denmark 
More Danish WWTPs have tested using backwash sludge to replace chemicals with different 
effects (Table 18). However, knowledge sharing among the WWTPs was often omitted when 
talking with the utilities. Therefore, the experiences gained from the utilities in this project were 
collected. Successful WWTPs could inspire others, while those encountering challenges could 
prevent others from repeating the same mistake 
==PAGE:55==
 
 
49 
 
Table 18 Experiences from WWTPs in Denmark tested or applied backwash sludge in wastewater treatment. 
Utility 
Calculations, test set-
up/full-scale experiences 
Results 
Year 
Notes 
References 
Silkeborg Forsyning 
1) Directly apply 
backwash sludge into the 
anaerobic digestion tank 
2) Calculations: Reduction 
of H2S in pipes 
1) 34% of phosphate 
reduction in the 
aerobic digestion. 
Variation in 
effectiveness due to 
seasonal temperature 
changes.  
 
2) Not expected to be 
effective enough.  
2023-2024 (Still 
testing) 
Motivation: economy related to disposal. Has tested 
around 400 tons of backwash sludge.  
1) Pre-calculations estimated 6 % phosphor removal 
when directly applied in the process tank and 40% in the 
anaerobic digestion tank.  
Backwash sludge was frozen during winter. Do not 
analyse the sludge for arsenic. The next step is to get 
permanent permission from the municipality by 
validating that backwash sludge is a resource.   
2) Unsure if they can cover the demand by only using 
backwash sludge. Many practicalities.   
Personal communication, 
J. Madsen, April 2024 
Skanderborg 
Forsyning 
Test of backwash sludge 
for reduction of H2S in 
pipes 
Not as effective as 
FeCl3. Demands high 
amounts of backwash 
sludge.  
2022 (2024) 
Bachelor project.  Fe concentration in tested backwash 
sludge was low (<200 g/kg DM). Not continue testing 
backwash sludge in pipes.  
Planning to test the use of backwash sludge in WWTP in 
2024 
Hvolby and Thomassen 
2022, 
Personal communication, 
K. Larsen, Skanderborg 
Forsyning, Feb 2024 
Slagelse WWTP 
Apply backwash sludge in 
full scale. Practised for 
many years. Receive 
backwash sludge in a 
concrete storage basin, 
where a dosing system 
doses the sludge.  
A daily dose of 
backwash sludge 
results in a 2/3 
reduction of phosphate 
in the anaerobic 
digestion tank and 
rejects water. Also, it 
contributes positively 
to controlling sulphur 
levels. 
2017-today 
Has paused receiving backwash sludge but expects to 
start up in 2024. The WWTP's capacity for backwash 
sludge is relatively low compared to the amount of 
backwash sludge produced from nearby utilities, and 
often, the WW is necessitated to landfill. Receives 250-
300 m3 backwash sludge annually. Measures arsenic in 
digested sludge (5-20 mg As/kg DM). Leaves, branches, 
sand, etc., in backwash sludge, challenge the pumping 
system and result in the clogging of pipes 
 
Personal communication, 
L. Wismann, Envafors, 
Marts 2024 
==PAGE:56==
 
 
50 
 
Helsingør 
Forsyning, 
Nordkysten WWTP 
1) Test of backwash 
sludge as a replacement 
for aluminium chloride 
2) Receiving 270 m3 of 
backwash water directly 
distributed in the sewage 
system every second day 
from a nearby 
waterwork.  
1) Notable reduction in the 
use of AlCl3, but 
experienced challenges 
related to filamentous 
bacteria and black coating 
on pipes and pumps 
2) Notable reduction in the 
use of AlCl3.  
1) 2014-2019 
2) 2019-
today  
1) Applied directly in the process tank. Uncertainty was 
found about what caused the black coating (arsenic or 
manganese). The driving force was to get rid of the 
waterworks backwash sludge and reduce the use of 
AlCl3  
2) Spend less than 2 tons of AlCl3 since 2017.  
Personal communication, 
K. Rasmussen, May 2024 
Hillerød Forsyning 
Receiving backwash 
sludge from own 
waterworks 
Good results (no 
additional comments)  
2024 
 
Personal communication, 
Hillerød Forsyning, Marts 
2024 
FORS A/S – Holbæk 
WWTP 
1) Laboratory test - test 
the effectiveness of 
acidified backwash sludge 
compared to FeCl3 
2) Full-scale test facility 
for acidification of 
backwash and dosing in 
WWTP 
 
1) No significant 
difference in 
phosphate removal 
when using backwash 
sludge compared to 
FeCl3.  
2) Operation 
challenges.  
1) 2013-2015 
2) 2013-2015 
1) VTU Project.  Additional backwash sludge was 
effectively a precipitant 
2) VTU Project.  Did not finish the full-scale test due to 
the economy. 
Followed up on experiments at WWTP in 2018 without 
success, backwash sludge is still not utilised in WWTP in 
Holbæk.  
Sharma et al. 2013, 
Personal communication, 
H. Jakobsen, FORS A/S, 
Feb 2024 
Tønder, Sønderborg and Arrows (Aabenraa) WWTP are also expected to have experience with using backwash sludge in wastewater treatment (Hvolby and 
Thomassen 2022). Tønder and Sønderborg WWTPs have not been contacted in this project. Arrows WWTP was contacted in February 2024 but did not respond. 
Lolland Forsyning has not tested backwash sludge in WWTPs based on an assessment of the expected elevated arsenic concentrations (Personal communication, 
Lolland Forsyning, March 2024). 
 
 
==PAGE:57==
 
 
51 
 
7.5 Backwash Sludge in Biogas Plants  
There are approximately 190 biogas plants 
in Denmark (Energistyrelsen 2023)(Figure 
24). Biogas is produced through the 
anaerobic digestion of organic waste, 
resulting in methane and carbon dioxide. 
One of the major challenges in biogas 
production is the removal of sulphur 
species.  When sulfate is present during 
anaerobic digestion, hydrogen sulfide (H2S) 
can be produced, which can convert to 
hazardous gases (Stams, Oude Elferink, and 
Westermann 2003; Abatzoglou and Boivin 
2009). Controlling sulfide in biogas is a 
primary concern, especially in livestock 
manure plants (Miljøstyrelsen 2015). Most 
biogas plants use FeCl3 or iron oxides to 
control sulfide concentrations. Backwash 
sludge can replace or reduce the amount 
of chemicals due to its high adsorption properties for sulphide. The addition of backwash sludge in 
biogas plants has been a known practice for more than 30 years (Personal communication, E. 
Lundsgaard Bigadan, March 2024). Advantages and disadvantages of the different iron dosing are 
listed in Table 19 
Table 19 Advantages and disadvantages of the addition of FeCl3, iron oxides in bags, and backwash sludge in biogas 
plants  
7.5.1 Experiences with Backwash Sludge in Biogas Plant 
In general, all biogas plants involved in this project have expressed positive views about reusing 
backwash sludge in biogas production, with more considering utilising more backwash sludge in 
the future. 
Chemical/Additive 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
FeCl3 
Easy to handle and apply (pumpable, often dosed from 
a dosing module) 
High cost. Potential equipment and crop damage, 
especially potatoes, from chloride 
Iron Oxides 
(powder in bags) 
Cost is relatively low compared to FeCl3. 
Often more difficult to dose and handle due to 
the powder form 
Backwash Sludge 
No cost. Reduces the need for external chemical 
additions. Supply of essential macro- and 
micronutrients to microorganisms. In some cases, it 
increases biogas yield (reported up to 20%) 
It can be difficult to dose. Variability in 
effectiveness. Temperature differences may 
affect bacterial activity. High arsenic 
concentrations could be toxic to bacteria 
Figure 24 Map of the location of biogas plants in Denmark in 2023 
(Energistyrelsen 2023).
==PAGE:58==
 
 
52 
 
Feedback from biogas plants about the efficacy of backwash sludge versus FeCl3 varies, likely due 
to differences in biomass and iron content of Danish backwash sludge (135-450 mg Fe/kg DM) 
Table 20 Experiences with applying backwash sludge in biogas plants from Danish biogas companies. 
Biogas company 
Experiences 
Notes 
References 
Bioman 
Many years of experience. The 
effectiveness of backwash 
sludge and FeCl3 is close to 1:1.  
The only reason for not utilising more is that 
some municipalities are not allowing it. Import 
FeCl3 from Sweeden. 
Personal 
communication, J. 
Wagner, Marts 2024 
Bigadan  
Solrød, Kalundborg and Nysted 
biogas plants receive 200-400 
tons of backwash sludge 
annually. In some cases, 
increase in biogas yield.  
The arsenic limit is <15 mg, which is often the 
reason for not utilising more backwash sludge. 
It could, in theory, replace chemical dosing; 
however, it should be dosed continuously to 
avoid H2S fluctuations.  
Personal 
communication, E. 
Lundsgaard, Marts 
2024 
Nature Energy 
Biogas 
Have one biogas plant that 
utilises backwash sludge with 
good effect. All backwash 
sludge is dosed at once, and 
meanwhile, FeCl3 dosing is 
adjusted down  
They want to apply backwash sludge to more of 
their plants in the future.  
Previously, 1:10 was experienced with FeCl3 
and backwash sludge. Planning to start test in 
2024 to compare the effects of different iron 
products.0.3 % of the total biomass is 
backwash sludge, and arsenic levels above 50 
mg/kg could theoretically be applied.  
Personal 
communication, M. 
Hansen, Marts 2024 
Grøngas A/S 
Backwash sludge is less 
effective and valuable than the 
regular chemicals used for 
sulphur binding.  
Not analysing the backwash sludge.  
Limited capacity. Receives 60-70 tons annually.  
Personal 
communication, A. 
Olesen, Feb. 2024 
Södra Hallands 
Kraft Biogas AB 
(Sweeden) 
Increased yield of biogas up to 
20% 
Not confirmed by the biogas plant 
Personal 
communication, I. 
Ambrosiusen Novafos, 
Feb. 2024 
7.6 Expenses Related to Handling of Backwash Sludge 
Most of the 18 utilities provided the costs associated with the current handling of backwash 
sludge. These costs vary significantly, ranging from no cost to 1500 DKK per ton of backwash 
sludge (Table 21). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:59==
 
 
53 
 
Table 21 The cost associated with various disposal practices for backwash sludge from 18 Danish utilities varies widely, 
with specific factors influencing the cost for each method. 
Disposal practice 
Cost for waterworks 
Notes 
Disposal Facility 
450-1500 DKK/ton 
(Average 829 DKK/ton) 
Price variation between different waste management facilities.  
Price variation due to individual agreements.  
Higher costs for hazardous waste (>1000 mg As/kg DM) 
Biogas 
0 DKK/ton 
Biogas plants receive backwash sludge for free. Some biogas plants 
also offer free transportation. Transport/logistic companies charge 
400-626 DKK/ton to manage backwash sludge ending in biogas 
production. 
WWTP 
0-60 DKK/ton 
No cost related to when WWTPs and waterwork are within the same 
utility.  
WWTP receiving backwash sludge from other utilities charges a fee 
of 60 DKK/ton, with the waterwork responsible for transport cost 
Disposal in biogas plants and WWTPs is generally low-cost or free. Some biogas plants even offer 
free transport. When Waterworks hires transport or logistics companies to manage all 
practicalities and transport, the cost is like the cheapest disposal facility (400-600 DKK/ton). 
WWTPs receive backwash sludge for free if the waterworks are within the same utility; otherwise, 
a 60 DKK/ton fee is charged. 
Disposal at waste facilities costs between 450 and 1500 DKK/ton, with higher costs often 
associated with high arsenic levels. Providing free pickup by some biogas plants suggests that 
backwash sludge has value in biogas production. The value of backwash sludge in WWTPs is less 
clear, as the primary goal is often to reduce the operating costs of the waterworks, facilitating the 
use of backwash sludge in the WWTP. The fee charged by WWTPs receiving sludge from other 
utilities indicates that backwash sludge may not be a valuable resource in these cases. 
It is important to distinguish between the two types of facilities. Biogas plants are often private 
companies with a strong incentive to reduce operational costs, including chemical usage. 
Therefore, backwash sludge could be considered a more valuable resource for biogas plants than 
WWTPs. Additionally, the biogas industry is more competitive than the WWTP sector, which is 
typically municipally owned. 
The mapped backwash sludge in disposal facilities (4084 tons) costs Danish waterworks 
approximately 2,900,000 DKK per year (calculations in Appendix B). For some waterworks, the 
disposal of backwash sludge represents a significant financial burden, costing between 5000 and 
1,100,000 DKK annually, depending on the amount of backwash sludge produced. 
7.7 Discussion of the Fate of Backwash Sludge in Denmark  
Despite more than 30 years of research, 63% of backwash sludge in Denmark still ends up in 
landfills. This section examines some reasons behind the continued underutilisation of backwash 
sludge and its fate at waste management facilities. 
==PAGE:60==
 
 
54 
 
Discussions with utilities revealed that four of the utilities previously sent backwash sludge to 
biogas plants or WWTPs but now dispose of it at waste facilities. Quantifying the previously 
utilised amounts is not possible, but the trend indicates a decline in the use of backwash sludge in 
biogas plants and WWTPs. 
7.7.1 Factors Affecting Recycling of Backwash Sludge 
Based on data and feedback from municipalities, biogas plants, WWTPs and waterworks, the 
following factors were identified: 
1. Regulations 
2. High levels of arsenic and heavy metal 
3. No alternative applications 
4. Regional and local conditions 
5. Convenience of disposal at waste facilities 
6. Prioritization of other challenges over waste recycling 
7.7.2 Regulations - Regional Disparities 
The Executive Order on waste for agricultural purposes regulates waste that can be used in 
agriculture without affecting the environment, humans, or living organisms. Backwash sludge is 
not included in the list of permitted wastes for biogas and WWTPs. Additionally, there are no limit 
values for arsenic in these applications (Bekendtgørelse om anvendelse af affald til 
jordbrugsformål 2018). 
The municipality where the backwash sludge is produced can evaluate if the waste stream is 
suitable for utilisation and then allow its application if it complies with limit values.  
The disposal of backwash sludge is regulated by individual municipalities, leading to varied 
interpretations and practices. The scenarios identified in this study include:  
1. Prohibition of recycling backwash sludge unless special permission is obtained - If biogas 
plants or wastewater facilities want to apply backwash sludge, they can get permission 
(§19, Bekendtgørelse om anvendelse af affald til jordbrugsformål), which is resource-
demanding and not a realistic option for the facilities  
2. Default disposal at waste facilities, with potential for reuse upon municipal approval – If 
the waterworks wants to reuse the backwash sludge, they should perform an analysis of 
arsenic in the sludge, and the municipality is open to changing practice  
3. Recycling without analysis requirements – the backwash sludge is recycled in a biogas 
plant without any measurements.  
4. Recycling if the arsenic concentration is below 20 mg/kg – The quality parameters for 
arsenic in soil is 20 mg/kg dry matter (not contaminated soil) (Miljøstyrelsen; 2002).  
5. Recycling if arsenic concentration is below 1000 mg/kg - Concentrations above this level 
classify the waste as hazardous. 
These disparities hinder equitable recycling opportunities. Uniform regulations based on scientific 
evidence are needed to ensure consistent guidelines across Denmark. 
==PAGE:61==
 
 
55 
 
7.7.3 Arsenic and heavy metal level concentrations 
Backwash sludge with arsenic levels above 1000 mg/kg DM or high concentrations of heavy 
metals, particularly nickel and copper, is unsuitable for current applications. This category is 
roughly estimated to account for 20% of the sludge disposed of at waste facilities. Until new 
applications or recycling methods are developed, some sludge will inevitably end up in waste 
facilities. 
7.7.4 No alternative applications 
In Denmark, the only reuse options for backwash sludge are additions in biogas plants and 
WWTPs. The absence of alternative applications with different quality criteria limits the potential 
for recycling. 
7.7.5 Regional and local conditions 
Geographical factors also impact recycling rates. Waterworks in eastern Denmark are often far 
from biogas plants, most of which are in the west. Additionally, limited capacity at WWTPs outside 
the utility's jurisdiction often necessitates disposal at waste facilities in the east of Denmark. 
7.7.6 Convenience of Disposal at Waste Facilities  
Waste facilities offer an unlimited capacity for disposal and handling of all practicalities and 
sampling, making this option more convenient. 
7.7.7 Utilities prioritise other challenges than waste recycling 
Danish waterworks prioritise handling environmentally harmful substances, softening, and 
securing groundwater reserves over waste recycling. Municipalities typically guide waterworks to 
dispose of waste at facilities, leading to a default practice that is rarely questioned. Economic 
incentives or a stronger focus on sustainability could drive future alternative solutions. 
7.8 Conclusion on Fate of Backwash Sludge  
The analysis of backwash sludge management in Denmark and existing recycling applications 
revealed the following key findings: 
 6432 tons per year of backwash sludge were mapped based on data from 18 
municipalities, producing more than half of Denmark's drinking water.  
 Disposal methods for backwash sludge include 63% in landfills, 19% in biogas plants, and 
18% in WWTPs. 
 In waste management facilities, arsenic from backwash sludge ends up indefinitely in 
landfills or mixed with slightly contaminated soil used in construction sites, potentially 
posing environmental risks. 
 Six WWTPs were identified as having experience using backwash sludge for phosphorus 
removal and H2S control in pipes. The most effective results were achieved by adding the 
sludge to the anaerobic digestion tank, where up to 40% of phosphorus was removed. 
==PAGE:62==
 
 
56 
 
 One WWTP reported better results when using backwash water instead of backwash 
sludge. 
 Currently, two utilities practice the reuse of backwash sludge, while two others are still in 
the testing phase. 
 Challenges associated with applying backwash sludge include storage issues (such as 
freezing during winter and the need for stirring) and dosing difficulties (which demand 
operational resources). 
 Five biogas companies were identified, with some having over 30 years of experience 
applying backwash sludge. Most companies had positive experiences and desired to use 
more backwash sludge in the future. 
 In biogas plants, backwash sludge is generally added directly into the digestion tank all at 
once. The effectiveness of backwash sludge compared to FeCl3 varies significantly (ranging 
from 1:1 to 10:1) and depends on the type of biomass used. In some plants, adding 
backwash sludge can also increase biogas yield. 
 Disposal costs vary significantly, ranging from no cost to 1500 DKK per ton of backwash 
sludge. 
 Disposal in biogas plants is free, and transportation is sometimes included at no cost, 
indicating the value of backwash sludge in biogas production. 
 Disposal in WWTPs is free if the waterworks and the WWTP are within the same utility, 
driven by the goal of reducing the waterworks' operating costs. 
 Disposal in WWTPs from a different utility incurs a fee of 60 DKK per ton, suggesting that 
backwash sludge may not be considered a valuable resource in these cases. 
 The disposal of backwash sludge at landfills (63%) costs Danish waterworks approximately 
2.9 million DKK annually. 
 Several factors influencing the recycling rate of backwash sludge were identified, including 
regulatory constraints, concentrations of arsenic and heavy metals, lack of alternative 
applications for backwash sludge, regional and local conditions, and the convenience of 
disposal at waste facilities. Additionally, utilities often prioritise other challenges over 
waste recycling. 
 
==PAGE:63==
 
 
57 
 
8 Potential Applications of Backwash Sludge 
This chapter provides an overview of potential applications for backwash sludge, focusing on those 
relevant to the Danish context based on the composition of Danish backwash sludge quantified in 
the previous chapter. Furthermore, the backwash sludge quality parameters for the identified 
applications are discussed.  
Identified applications are illustrated in Figure 25 (Nguyen et al. 2022; Ahmad, Ahmad, and Alam 
2016; Zeng et al. 2022; Turner et al. 2019; Babatunde and Zhao 2007; Nielsen 2011).This project's 
scope does not include a comprehensive evaluation and discussion of all possible recycling 
applications for backwash sludge. 
The applications are categorised into two main types: 1) Direct reuse without pretreatment 
(green) and 2) Applications involving a treatment step before recycling (yellow). Application areas 
marked in grey are not further discussed in this project. 
Direct reuse includes adding backwash sludge directly into wastewater treatment plants, sewage 
systems, or biogas plants (green, Figure 25).  
Recycling with pretreatment involves a treatment step before recycling the backwash sludge. 
These applications have not been previously discussed in Danish literature and will be introduced 
in this chapter (yellow, Figure 25). 
Backwash sludge
Wastewater treatment
Biogas production
Agriculture - Fertilizer product
Garden
Adsorbent products for the wastewater and 
biogas industry
Sorbent for contaminated soil
Water treatment
Restoration of aquatic environment
Building industry
Production of stell
Recovery of elements
Figure 25 Identified backwash sludge 
applications. Direct recycling (green), 
applications involving treatment (yellow), 
applications not further discussed in this 
project (grey). 
==PAGE:64==
 
 
58 
 
8.1 Powdered Ferric(oxide) and Pellets from Backwash Sludge 
Based on data in this project, around 50% of the Danish backwash sludge is iron(hydr)oxides. To 
utilise the adsorption properties of the iron(hydr)oxide, the backwash sludge can be pretreated to 
form different products that can be used in biogas plants, for surface water, and WWTPs to bind 
sulphur, phosphorous, etc. The backwash sludge can be pretreated into different forms of solid 
materials: 
 Pellets  
 Granulate 
 Powder   
The main difference between the forms is size. Powder is typically small and fine particles, 
granulates are larger particles, and pellets are small solid particles, often including a polymer to 
form the pellets. Each of the three forms has advantages and disadvantages and depends on the 
industry's handling and application needs. All forms require energy to dry the backwash sludge.  
Theoretically, the pellets or granulates could be used in all 
industries as adsorption media. Challenges using it for drinking 
water are that the pellets can release substances that are not 
strongly bound to iron along the way, e.g. manganese (Hofman-
Caris et al. 2017).  
To my knowledge, no company in Denmark collects and pretreats 
backwash sludge, so international solutions were investigated. 
The Dutch company AquaMinerals have done a lot of research, i.a., 
in pelletised backwash sludge and has two commercialised 
products (Figure 26):  
1. liquid- and dewatered aquafer consisting of Feric(hydr)oxide 
(Aquaminerals 2024) 
2. Pelletised/granular Feric(hydr)oxide (Hofman-Caris et al. 
2017)  
Aquaminerals was contacted to learn more about the products and how they counter the 
challenges with arsenic in the waste residuals (Personal communication, W. Bouma, April 2024). 
However, they were not interested in sharing information, so similar concepts were investigated.  
BioCycling GmbH, a part of Veolia, specialises in collecting and recycling commercial food and 
dining waste for biogas production. They are planning, next year, to use leftover heat from 6 
biogas plants in Hamburg to dry backwash sludge and make a commercial product for biogas 
plants. Today, they are testing the concept, collaborating with a partner, where they heat up the 
backwash sludge (600 degrees) and subsequently send it through a woodchipper, ending up as 
ferric(hydr)oxide powder in big bags (Figure 27). Capacity for backwash water storage is not a 
challenge, and utilities can always supply backwash sludge. 
Figure 26 Commercialised products 
with Feric(hydr)oxide from the Dutch 
company Aquaminerals: 
Pellets/granulates and aquifer 
(Aquaminerals 2024) 
==PAGE:65==
 
 
59 
 
A concern when drying the backwash sludge is that at a certain temperature, the sludge could 
oxidise and potentially lose its positive binding properties. However, tests have shown that the 
binding ability of the iron(hydr)oxide is not impaired by drying at 600 degrees and would not be 
expected to account for lower temperatures when leftover heat is used for drying (personal 
communication, D. Steiner, Veolia, May 24). 
Arsenic levels in Danish Backwash sludge are limited when producing iron(hydr)oxide compounds 
for the biogas industry. Backwash sludge with concentration levels below 40 mg/kg is preferred 
(the allowed concentration level of arsenic in biomass used in biogas plants in Germany). 
However, there is no defined level for allowed arsenic levels, and tests should be done to specify 
the maximum concentration. Backwash sludge with arsenic concentrations >100 mg As/kg is 
unsuitable for this application.  
BioCycling GmbH is interested in receiving backwash sludge from Danish waterworks, and this 
application could be a practice for recycling Danish backwash sludge within a short time. 
8.2 Fertiliser production - Agro Trade  
Backwash sludge data in this project showed relatively high concentrations of calcium (50 g Ca/kg 
DM), phosphorous (16 g P/kg DM), and manganese (17 g Mn/kg DM), which are all essential 
elements in agriculture. During the initial research phase, Agro Trade was identified as a potential 
solution for recycling Danish Backwash sludge. Therefore, a meeting was set up to see their 
facilities and to hear more about the process (29th April 2024 at Køge Havn).  
Agro Trade produces a range of fertiliser products for agriculture based on biomass ash, a waste 
product from power plants. The ash is moistened with water and transported by ship to a fertiliser 
production facility in Poland for final processing (Figure 28).  
Figure 27 Facilities to store 
and pretreat backwash 
sludge collected from 
waterworks in Germany 
(BioCycling GmbH – 
Veolia). Pictures sent by D. 
Steiner, BioCycling GmbH. 
==PAGE:66==
 
 
60 
 
Due to the concentration levels of manganese, phosphor and calcium in backwash sludge, Agro 
Trade is interested in mixing ash with backwash sludge to produce new types of products.  
The final process step to utilise backwash is still not mature. Agro Trade has tested backwash 
sludge from a large Danish utility, and the overall results were positive. Agro Trade is waiting to 
get permission from the municipality to receive backwash sludge. Additionally, a silo should be 
installed, where backwash sludge can be mixed with process water to obtain the optimal dry 
matter context since the backwash sludge is pumped into the process.  
Agro Trade handles all documentation and is responsible for complying with regulations across 
borders. The capacity of backwash sludge storage is not assumed to be a challenge, and from the 
utility's perspective, they can always deliver the backwash.  
High levels of iron, heavy metals, and arsenic are unsuitable for fertiliser production due to EU 
standards for fertiliser. The iron content in Danish backwash sludge is not expected to affect the 
quality of the fertiliser, as backwash sludge only accounts for 5 % of the total mass. High levels of 
cadmium could become challenging since the applied fly ash often exceeds EU standards, and data 
from this study shows backwash sludge with high Cd levels (0.01-14 mg Cd/kg DM). Moreover, the 
high levels of arsenic in backwash sludge pose a limitation, and Agro Trade anticipates using 
backwash sludge with arsenic levels below 100 mg As/kg DM. In addition, the presence of PFAS in 
backwash sludge could pose a potential limitation. 
At this point, Agro Trade plans to collaborate with two Danish utilities to ensure uniform product 
quality. Backwash sludge in fertiliser production is expected to be practised in Denmark within the 
next year.  
Figure 28 Agro Trade 
facilities at Køge Havn. 
A) Moistening of ash. B) 
Silos for storage of ash 
and, in the future, 
backwash sludge. C) 
Final product before 
shipping to Poland. 
A
B
C
==PAGE:67==
 
 
61 
 
8.3 Recovery of elements  
Resource pressure is increasing, and the global demand for materials is expected to double by 
2060, intensifying competition for resources and emphasising the need to reduce dependence on 
critical raw materials. The EU’s list of critical raw materials is updated every three years, 
identifying materials with high economic importance and supply risk. The EU relies on imports for 
many CRMs, with China being the largest global supplier of critical materials (Figure 29). 
Danish backwash sludge contains relatively high concentrations of arsenic (382 mg As/kg DM), 
manganese (19 g Mn/kg DM), and, to some extent, phosphorous (19 g P/kg DM) (cf. Chapter 6). In 
2023, arsenic and manganese were added to the EU's list, whereas phosphorous was already on. 
Seeking alternative solutions to traditional CRM mining has become increasingly discussed and 
includes mining from wastewater, the bottom of lakes, and the deep sea (Naturvidenskabernes 
Hus 2022; Cronan 2024; Valchev et al. 2024; Varennes et al. 2023).  
8.3.1 Arsenic  
Due to the functionality of arsenic in electronics, the demand for arsenic worldwide is expected to 
increase. Mining arsenic is critical to the environment, and the supply chain is also extremely 
critical. From an economic viewpoint, the recovery of arsenic from WTP residual has become more 
attractive after it has been stated as a critical raw material (Grohol and Veeh 2023).  
As a part of the research in this project, a Danish scientist, C. M. van Genuchten, who is 
researching resource recovery methods for As-rich waste, was contacted to get some perspective 
on the potential of arsenic recovery from Danish backwash sludge. The concentration of arsenic in 
Figure 29 Map of countries that supplies critical raw material in 2023 (Grohol and Veeh 2023) 
==PAGE:68==
 
 
62 
 
a large part of Danish drinking water sludge is expected to be high enough to become relevant for 
recovery. However, only metallic arsenic As(0) is interesting for trading, which is not a structure 
naturally occurring in the environment. The goal is to take arsenic-loaded waste streams, such as 
backwash sludge, and directly transform arsenic into As(0) (Personal communication, C. M. 
Genuchten, Feb 2024).  
8.3.2 Phosphor 
The future phosphorus supply is a potential limit, and for many years, phosphor recovery from 
waste streams has been explored (Jupp et al. 2021;Elser and Haygarth 2021;Grohol and Veeh 
2023). Despite promising technologies, the question of whether to adopt phosphorus recovery in 
industries such as wastewater treatment has not been settled. In Europe, Germany has taken a 
leading role in phosphorus recovery and made a regulatory framework that includes that all 
sewage sludge containing at least 20 g P/kg DM must undergo phosphorus recovery (Transphor et 
al. 2021)(Roskosch and Heidecke 2019). In Switzerland, recovering phosphorus in wastewater has 
been mandatory since 2026, and more countries are expected to follow. Denmark has also 
investigated phosphorous recovery. However, several obstacles were found (Miljøstyrelsen; 
2015a). 
The phosphorous content in this dataset was between 10 and 27 g P/kg DM, and phosphorous 
recovery could, in some cases, also be relevant to drinking water treatment sludge.  
8.3.3 Iron 
The demand for steel drives the iron market. Due to an expected increase in infrastructure 
projects, the demand for steel and iron will also increase (Fortune Business Insights 2024). Even 
though iron is the most abundant material, the potential for recycling iron in Danish backwash 
sludge was investigated since iron mining is not sustainable (HK and Hossiney 2022). The Danish 
company HJ Hansen Recycling was contacted to get its perspective on iron recovery from 
backwash sludge. Due to some restrictions in HJ Hansen Recycling's environmental permission, 
they have no experience receiving sludge. However, if the iron(hydr)oxides are in clean and dry 
fractions, the possibility of recycling could be investigated (Personal communication, J. Pedersen, 
May 2024).  
Based on insights into Danish backwash sludge composition from this project, it is not assumed 
that other elements in backwash sludge could be relevant for recovery. Most heavy metals on the 
CRM list are in wastewater, fly ash, and waste streams from other industries at higher 
concentration levels (Thomsen et al. 2002).  
Many unknowns relate to technology and economics regarding recovering elements from 
backwash sludge. This area is still in the early research stage, and more knowledge is expected 
within the next decade.  The recovery of elements from Danish backwash sludge is not expected 
to be possible within the next couple of years.  
8.4 Table: Quality Criteria for Backwash Sludge in Application Areas 
Based on the interviews and findings in this project, the quality criteria for backwash sludge in the 
discussed application area were identified (Table 22). 
==PAGE:69==
 
 
63 
 
Table 22 Quality criteria for backwash sludge applications include dry matter content, impurities and iron levels, arsenic, heavy metals, 
and other relevant elements. PFH = pelletised Ferric hydroxide. UN = Unknown. 
*Anticipated maximum future upper limit - not tested/quantified.  
**Theoretically, manganese hydroxide in backwash sludge also constitutes good adsorption properties and contributes to a better adsorption capacity of the 
backwash sludge.  
Application 
Dry matter content 
Impurities  
(sand, leaves, etc.) 
Iron levels 
Arsenic levels 
Heavy metals 
Other relevant elements 
WWTP 
10-15% (pumpable) 
No 
High content of iron is preferable 
(<350 mg/kg DM) 
<1000 mg/kg DM* 
Comply with limit values in 
“Waste to agriculture” 
High levels of Manganese** 
Ideally, low phosphorus conc. 
Biogas plant 
10-15% 
(pumpable) 
No 
High content of iron is preferable 
(<400 mg/kg DM) 
<40 mg/kg DM* 
Comply with limit values in 
“Waste to agriculture” 
High levels of Manganese** 
Fertiliser 
production  
Not of importance 
(ideal low DM) 
Ok - No influence 
Not of importance (ideally low 
content of iron) 
<100 mg/kg DM* 
In general, low 
concentrations 
Manganese, Calcium, 
Phosphor 
PFH 
Not of importance 
(ideal high DM) 
Ok - No influence 
A high content of iron is 
preferable 
>40 mg/kg DM 
(<100 mg/kg DM*) 
In general, low 
concentrations 
High levels of Manganese** 
Recovery 
UN 
UN 
UN 
High levels (>200 
mg/kg DM**) 
UN 
Manganese, Phosphorous 
==PAGE:70==
 
 
64 
 
The different quality criteria within the identified applications increase the potential for recycling 
more backwash sludge by combining applications since the quality of Danish backwash sludge 
varies.  
Backwash sludges with low iron content (<200 g/kg DM) should not be used as adsorption media 
and instead be used in fertiliser production. Furthermore, sludge with impurities that cannot be 
utilised directly in biogas plants or WWTPs could be converted into an adsorption product that, 
after pretreatment, can be used in these applications.  
In cases where backwash sludge cannot be directly reused in WWTPs or biogas plants due to 
elevated heavy metal concentration, the alternative identified applications are relevant: fertiliser 
production and PFH. These applications do not need to comply with limit values in “Waste to 
agriculture”. Based on data from this study, 10 waterworks and four utilities (U3, U4, U6, U11) 
produced backwash sludge with an average concentration of cadmium or nickel above the limit 
value (Bekendtgørelse om affald 2019). Backwash sludge from these waterworks requires disposal 
at a waste management facility; however, resources in backwash sludge from these 10 
waterworks could be utilised in the future.  
Generally, WWTP plants seemed to accept higher arsenic levels in the backwash sludge and did 
not have a standard range for acceptable arsenic levels. One WWTP applied backwash sludge with 
arsenic levels up to 1000 mg/kg DM. However, none of the biogas plants contacted in this project 
received backwash sludge with arsenic levels >40 mg/kg DM, and often <20 mg As /kg DM was the 
limit.  
8.4.1 Limitations 
Even though more application areas for recycling backwash sludge have been identified, arsenic 
concentration in Danish backwash sludge is still expected to be a limitation for recycling.  
Approximately 7 % of the waterworks in the dataset produce backwash sludge with arsenic 
concentrations surpassing 1000 mg/kg DM, classifying the backwash sludge as hazardous waste 
(Figure 30). For these waterworks, disposal must adhere to strict regulations outlined by the 
authorities (Bekendtgørelse om affald 2019). The proportion of samples exceeding 1000 mg/kg 
DW is lower than initially 
expected, based on 
previous estimations 
suggesting that 20 % of all 
produced backwash sludge 
in Denmark falls under the 
”hazardous waste” category 
(Symbiosis center 2014).  
On the other hand, 26 % of 
Danish waterworks 
generate backwash sludge 
with arsenic levels below 40 
mg As/kg DM, which is 
generally anticipated to be 
Figure 30 Distribution of arsenic levels in backwash sludge from 43 waterworks 
across Denmark. 
==PAGE:71==
 
 
65 
 
reused in all applications. Introducing two new applications could increase the recycling of 
backwash sludge by 14 %. 
However, most waterworks (53 %) produce backwash sludge with arsenic levels ranging between 
100 and 1000 mg/kg DM, where reuse in WWTPs is the only theoretical option. However, it still 
requires that the municipality approve the reuse in WWTPs and that a local WWTP receives 
backwash sludge in this concentration level and has capacity.  
These findings underscore the significant barrier posed by arsenic levels in Danish backwash 
sludge, affecting how much backwash sludge can be recycled. Moreover, this challenge is not 
confined to specific regions but a nationwide concern. 
The only application where the arsenic level is not a challenge is the recovery of arsenic from 
backwash sludge. This technology would be highly relevant for utilising backwash sludge with high 
arsenic levels that today end at landfills.  
8.5 Conclusion on Potential Application for Backwash Sludge 
 Three new applications for backwash sludge were identified: Use in fertiliser production, 
transformation into Powdered Ferric(oxide) and Pellets, and recovery of elements. 
 Recycling backwash sludge in fertiliser production and transformation into powdered ferric 
(oxide) and pellets are applications that are expected to be practised in Denmark within a 
few years.  
 The applications have different quality criteria, which increases the potential for recycling 
more backwash sludge by combining applications. Backwash sludge containing impurities 
such as leaves or sand or exceeding the limit values for heavy metal levels (especially Cd 
and Ni) in backwash sludge used in WWTP or biogas plants is not necessarily a limitation in 
fertiliser production and transformation into Powdered Ferric(oxide) and Pellets.  
 Generally, WWTPs seemed to accept higher arsenic levels in the backwash sludge (up to 
1000 mg As/kg DM) compared to biogas plants (up to 40 mg As/kg DM). 
 Even though more application areas for recycling backwash sludge have been identified, 
arsenic concentration in Danish backwash sludge is still a limitation for recycling. 
 7 % of the waterworks in Denmark produce backwash sludge classified as hazardous waste, 
26 % of the waterworks produce backwash sludge that theoretically can be applied in all 
applications in respect to arsenic levels, and 53 % of the waterworks produce backwash 
sludge for which the only application is WWTPs. This requires the municipality's approval 
and a local WWTP to reuse backwash sludge with an arsenic level of up to 1000 mg As/kg 
DM and capacity.    
 Introducing the two new applications could theoretically increase recycling by 14 % 
concerning arsenic levels.  
 Recovery of arsenic from backwash sludge is the only application where the arsenic level is 
not a challenge. However, the recovery of arsenic from Danish backwash sludge is not 
expected to be possible within the next couple of years. 
==PAGE:72==
 
 
66 
 
9 Discussion of Application for Danish Backwash Sludge 
The most optimal applications for Danish backwash sludge are where most resources in the sludge 
are utilised with the lowest environmental impact. This chapter evaluates the applications of 
backwash sludge, including perspectives from the utilities, the receiver of the backwash sludge, 
and the environmental impact.   
9.1 Risk of Arsenic Contamination in the Application Areas 
Arsenic contamination is a potential risk when recycling backwash sludge. It has not been part of 
this project's scope to conduct an actual risk assessment of the various applications of backwash 
sludge. When assessing risk related to arsenic, the form of arsenic in backwash sludge is important 
(cf. Chapter 5.3.2). Due to oxidation, most of the arsenic in backwash sludge is expected to be 
arsenate, which is generally assumed to be stable. However, the form of arsenic changes along 
with changes in environmental conditions, potentially transforming into arsenite, which is more 
toxic and mobile.  
9.1.1 Arsenic in Wastewater Treatment and Biogas Production 
Arsenic contamination is the major concern when recycling backwash sludge in WWT and biogas 
production. Around 55 % of arsenic is assumed to be removed during wastewater treatment 
(Kjølholt et al. 2021). When arsenic enters a WWTP, there are assumed to be two pathways that 
arsenic can take: 1) In the recipient water, it ends up in the aquatic environment. 2) In the 
Figure 31 The fate of arsenic from backwash sludge in a fully developed WWTP. 1) Addition of 
backwash sludge directly into the digestion tank.  
1
==PAGE:73==
 
 
67 
 
dewatered sludge, it is often used in agriculture as fertiliser (Figure 31). Assuming no arsenic is 
transformed into biomass or evaporates during anaerobic digestion (the boiling point of arsenic is 
613 °C (Wikipidea 2024) and the maximum temperature in anaerobic digestion tanks is 65 °C 
(Rashidian, Mahmoudimehr, and Atashkari 2022)). 
When arsenic-loaded backwash sludge is added to a wastewater treatment system with a high 
phosphorus load, the phosphorus competes with iron(hydr)oxides in the sludge, releasing bound 
arsenic into the water and ending in the recipient water (DANVA 2014). 
Arsenic in wastewater treatment in Denmark is usually not a concern, and arsenic is often not 
monitored in the recipient water or sludge, leading to a potential undiscovered contamination. If 
WWTPs receiving backwash sludge decide to measure for arsenic, measurements of arsenic in the 
recipient water are omitted because the WWTPs are unaware of the potential risk. One WWTP 
receiving backwash sludge with high arsenic levels (up to 1000 mg As/kg DM) has measured 
arsenic concentration in the digested sludge (5-20 mg/kg DM) below the limit for contaminated 
soil (>20 mg As/kg DM) and around the same level as commercial fertiliser (1-14.6 mg As/kg) 
(Petersen, Østergaard, and Christensen 2009).  
Despite the relatively low arsenic concentration in the sludge, arsenic will accumulate in the 
cultivated soil over time and potentially end up in crops used in food production for livestock and 
humans.  
9.1.2 Arsenic in Fertiliser and Crops 
Due to arsenic toxicity, it is important to evaluate the fate of arsenic when it ends up in 
agriculture. A study from 2009-2012 found no link between commercial fertiliser use with arsenic 
and arsenic levels in crops. Most tested crops had arsenic levels below detection limits. The study 
concluded that regular commercial fertiliser is not expected to pose any risk over a longer period. 
However, the historical and current supply of heavy metals and arsenic to the soil cannot be used 
to predict the content in crops. Different compounds have varying mobility and accessibility for 
plants, influenced by natural and cultivation-derived conditions (Christensen and Elsgaard 2013). 
It is important to note that backwash sludge often only constitutes a small amount compared to 
the total treated wastewater or feed stream in biogas production (Personal communication, 
Nature Energy, Marts 2024). The risk of arsenic should always be included in a risk assessment, 
regardless of the mass fraction, and contamination would be unique to each plant and should be 
assessed individually.  
9.1.3 Arsenic in Pyrolysis  
Pyrolysis is expected to have a high impact on 
reducing global CO2 emissions. Where biomass, 
e.g. from anaerobic digestion at WWTPs, is 
converted into pyrolysis- oil and gas and by-
product is biochar (Danish Business Authority 
2024). If biochar is applied in agriculture, 
backwash sludge with high arsenic levels would 
still constitute a potential risk since 70 % of the 
arsenic in the biomass would end up in the 
Figure 32 Fate of arsenic in wastewater treatment sludge 
(WWTS) during pyrolysis. Data from Aquagreen. 
(Personal communication H. Hasselby, Lolland Forsyning, 
Feb 2024). 
==PAGE:74==
 
 
68 
 
biochar and thereby in the fields (Figure 32) (data from Aquagreen, Personal communication H. 
Hasselby, Lolland Forsyning, Feb 2024).  
Recovery of Arsenic 
Arsenic recovery from backwash sludge could prevent the negative cycle of arsenic being 
abstracted from the groundwater and distributed in the environment through backwash sludge, 
where it accumulates and poses a potential contamination risk.  
9.2 Evaluation of Applications 
The application was evaluated on the following criteria: Resource utilisation, Maturity of the 
application, arsenic limitations, economic aspects, CO2 emission, regulation, stable supply chain, 
and resources utilised in Denmark (Table 23). 
Table 23 Evaluation of applications for reusing and recycling of backwash sludge. ++: high, +: medium, -: low. WW: 
Water Work. UN: Unknown. Regulation: Waste used in agriculture (Bekendtgørelse om anvendelse af affald til 
jordbrugsformål 2018). 
Application 
Elements 
utilised 
Maturity of 
application  
Arsenic 
limitation 
Economic 
aspects 
(WW) 
CO2 
emissions 
Regulation 
(“waste in 
agriculture”) 
Stable supply 
chain (WW) 
Resources 
utilised in 
DK 
WWTP 
Iron(hydr)
oxides 
++ 
+ 
-/+ 
- 
yes 
+ 
++ 
Biogas 
Iron(hydr)
oxides 
++ 
++ 
- 
- 
yes 
+ 
++ 
Fertiliser - 
Agro Trade 
Mn, P, Ca 
+ 
++ 
+ 
+ 
no 
++ 
- 
Ferric 
hydroxide 
products 
Iron(hydr)
oxides 
++ 
++ 
+ 
+ 
no 
++ 
- 
Recovery of 
elements 
As, P, Mn, 
(Fe) 
- 
- 
UN 
UN 
no 
++ 
UN 
9.2.1 Resource Utilisation 
None of the applications fully utilise all resources contained in backwash sludge. When 
iron(hydr)oxides are used for their binding properties, chemical elements like manganese, 
phosphorus, and calcium are less optimally used, and when applied in fertiliser production, a large 
amount of iron is lost.  
Applying backwash sludge in fertiliser production constitutes a challenge due to the variable 
concentration of elements, which can lead to imbalances in fertiliser composition. Mixing 
backwash sludge with other waste streams to produce fertiliser can result in non-optimal ratios of 
essential nutrients. This variability complicates the precise control of nutrient levels, potentially 
causing issues like overdosing and subsequent eutrophication of nearby aquatic environments due 
to excess phosphorus.  
==PAGE:75==
 
 
69 
 
In contrast, ensuring optimal use of resources like phosphorus and manganese involves recovering 
these elements from the sludge in a more purified form. This approach allows precise control over 
nutrient concentrations, enhancing their value and utility in agricultural applications. Furthermore, 
to achieve higher resource utilisation, manganese recovery from backwash sludge could expand its 
application beyond agriculture by using manganese in steel production, which serves as a valuable 
element. However, since most of the removed manganese during water treatment is expected to 
remain in the filter material, investigating the recovery of manganese from secondary filter 
material might be more effective. This could provide a more concentrated source of manganese, 
making its recovery more efficient and economically viable for industrial applications. 
Iron(hydr)oxide from backwash sludge can replace chemical coagulants like FeCl3 in WWTPs and 
biogas plants. Assuming an equivalent effect between FeCl3 and backwash sludge, it is estimated 
that utilising iron(hydr)oxide from backwash sludge could replace up to 12% of the total annual 
FeCl3 usage in Denmark (Table 24).  
Table 24 If all the mapped backwash sludge in this project were utilised, the estimated percentage of FeCl3 could be 
replaced in Danish WWTPs and biogas plants. Calculations are in Appendix B. 
Total use of FeCl3 in Danish WWTPs and biogas plants  
53.000 tons/year 
Total mapped backwash sludge in this project 
6432 tons/year 
Replacement of FeCl3 by backwash sludge pr. year * 
12% 
*Assuming the 1:1 effect of backwash sludge and FeCl3 
Evaluating whether using iron(hydr)oxide, using backwash sludge in fertiliser production, or 
extracting essential elements is more beneficial is beyond the scope of this project. All applications 
contribute to a circular economy by keeping resources in use for as long as possible and reducing 
the need for new resource extractions. 
9.2.2 Maturity of Application  
Both biogas plants and WWTPs have experience in utilising backwash sludge, particularly in biogas 
production, where it has been applied for over 30 years (cf. Chapter 7). This long-standing usage 
indicates that both applications are mature, even though there are still opportunities for 
optimising the processes of utilising backwash sludge. Furthermore, processing backwash sludge 
into a ferric hydroxide product is a fully developed and mature application. In contrast, using 
backwash sludge in fertiliser production has not yet been fully tested at scale and is not 
considered a fully mature application. 
9.2.3 Arsenic Limitations  
High arsenic levels in backwash sludge are expected to pose limitations in all applications, whereas 
WWTPs are expected to be able to handle higher levels (cf. Chapter 8.4.1) 
9.2.4 Economic Aspects 
Reusing backwash sludge directly in WWTPs and biogas plants is generally considered the most 
economical option from the waterworks perspective, especially when transportation costs are 
factored in. Recycling backwash sludge in fertiliser production currently incurs a minor receiving 
==PAGE:76==
 
 
70 
 
fee, which is competitive with the costs associated with reuse in WWTPs (0-60 DKK per ton). 
Delivering backwash sludge for recycling into pellets incurs no fee. However, transportation costs 
are a substantial factor, mainly since the current processing facility is in Germany. 
9.2.5 CO2 Emission 
The CO2 emissions associated with different applications of backwash sludge vary based on factors 
such as pretreatment requirements, transportation distances, and end application. Solutions that 
require pretreatment before reuse generally have a higher CO2 footprint due to the energy 
needed for processing. 
Producing fertiliser from backwash sludge instead of synthetic processes can reduce CO2 emissions 
and promote resource circularity. The full lifecycle of fertiliser production accounts for 
approximately 4% of total greenhouse gas emissions, with one-third of these emissions arising 
from production processes, primarily ammonia synthesis (Gao and Cabrera Serrenho 2023). Since 
backwash sludge contains relatively low nitrogen levels (7.3 g N/kg DM), its impact on CO2 
emissions related to nitrogen processes is minimal. 
However, the potential CO2 savings and environmental benefits of using backwash sludge in 
fertiliser production remain unclear. Agro Trade was contacted to compare the CO2 footprint of 
their fertiliser products with commercial fertilisers and to determine whether incorporating 
backwash sludge would reduce the CO2 footprint or create a superior product. Unfortunately, no 
response was received (mail, K. Birkedal, Agro Trade, May 2024). 
Reusing backwash sludge directly in WWTPs is a highly promising approach for reducing CO2 
emissions. If the reuse of all mapped backwash sludge (6,400 tons/year) in WWTPs achieves the 
same effect as FeCl3, it could save approximately 527 tons of CO2 annually. This calculation is 
based on an emission factor of 0.0820 t CO2 per ton of FeCl3 (DANVA 2012). Although this is a 
rough estimate assuming ideal conditions, it provides a useful indication of the potential 
environmental benefits. 
Recovery technologies for valuable elements such as manganese, phosphorus, arsenic, and iron 
from backwash sludge are typically energy-intensive, potentially offsetting some environmental 
benefits. Evaluating the CO2 emissions associated with mining 1 kg of these elements compared to 
recovering them from backwash sludge would provide a more comprehensive understanding of 
the environmental trade-offs. However, such detailed comparisons are beyond the current scope. 
Transportation plays a significant role in the CO2 emissions associated with reusing and recycling 
backwash sludge. Transporting backwash sludge to recycling facilities in Germany or Poland 
significantly increases CO2 emissions. 
Overall, reusing backwash sludge directly in local WWTPs and biogas plants is expected to have 
the lowest CO2 emissions. This approach minimises transportation distances, replaces chemicals, 
and does not require additional pretreatment processes. However, these assumptions are only 
valid if backwash sludge is utilised optimally in these applications.  
9.2.6 Regulation 
The reuse of backwash sludge in WWTPs and biogas plants is governed by regulation (cf. Chapter 
7). When delivering backwash sludge to WWTPs and biogas plants, each batch must comply with 
==PAGE:77==
 
 
71 
 
the limit values for seven heavy metals as stipulated in the "Waste to Use in Agriculture" 
regulation. In contrast, backwash sludge used in fertiliser production or processed into ferric 
hydroxide products is subject to different regulatory requirements. These applications involve 
mixing backwash sludge with other waste streams, which can alter the concentrations of various 
elements. Consequently, the final products must comply with regulations related to their specific 
application areas rather than the initial heavy metal content of the backwash sludge. 
9.2.7 Stable Supply Chain and Practicalities  
A stable supply chain is essential for water utilities and receiving facilities such as WWTPs and 
biogas plants. From the perspective of water utilities, the primary concern is to have a reliable 
solution that ensures the receiving facilities can accept backwash sludge whenever necessary. For 
WWTPs and biogas plants, the consistent quality and manageable quantity of received backwash 
sludge are critical to avoid sulphide fluctuations. Backwash sludge often arrives in large quantities 
at intervals of six months to a year. This irregular delivery can pose storage and handling 
challenges, potentially leading to incorrect dosing and reduced iron(hydr)oxide efficacy. Large 
biogas plants require a continuous and predictable supply of backwash sludge to meet their daily 
operational needs. Not all biogas plants are assumed to be suitable for directly reusing backwash 
sludge.   
9.2.8 Resources Utilised in Denmark 
From a national perspective, it is preferable to recycle Danish backwash sludge within national 
borders to ensure that valuable elements extracted from Danish groundwater are recycled back 
into Danish agriculture or are used to reduce the chemical demand in Denmark. In the future, the 
most optimal scenario would involve establishing facilities within Denmark to process and produce 
fertilisers and iron(hydr)oxide sorption materials from backwash sludge. 
9.2.9 Summarising Evaluation of Applications 
Determining the best application for backwash sludge recycling is inherently complex due to the 
diverse and sometimes conflicting priorities of waterworks, receivers, and environmental 
considerations. Each parameter has been evaluated on resource utilisation, application maturity, 
arsenic limitations, economic aspects, CO2 emissions, regulation, stable supply chain, and local 
resource utilisation. An optimal application must consider operational needs, economics and long-
term sustainability goals. 
Reusing backwash sludge directly in biogas plants and WWTPs is generally considered a 
sustainable and economically advantageous option. However, it should be ensured that the 
backwash sludge is utilised optimally and not just applied because it is the most economical 
solution. Feedback from biogas plants, especially, highlights the importance of having a safe and 
stable supply chain with consistent quality. This can be achieved through systematic collection and 
pretreatment of backwash sludge. Although this approach may incur higher costs, the benefits of 
uniformity and reliability are highly valued. Ensuring a consistent quality of adsorbent can help 
replace as many chemicals as possible, thus enhancing the overall effectiveness of the treatment 
processes. However, pretreatment and long-term backwash sludge storage can affect its sorption 
capacity.  
==PAGE:78==
 
 
72 
 
Additionally, economic considerations are not always the primary factor. Waterworks aim to 
enhance sustainability, and WWTPs and biogas plants prioritise ease of operation and consistent 
quality. Therefore, while direct reuse of backwash sludge is promising, addressing these challenges 
through systematic collection and pretreatment could be essential for achieving the best 
outcomes for the facilities and the environment. 
9.3 Conclusion on Discussion of Application 
 Applying backwash sludge with elevated arsenic levels in WWTPs with high phosphorus 
loads and in biogas plants where digested sludge is used on fields posed potential 
contamination risks to nearby aquatic environments and crops. Each case is unique and 
requires individual assessment. 
 The applications were evaluated based on resource utilisation, maturity, arsenic 
limitations, economic aspects, CO2 emissions, regulation, supply chain stability, and 
resource utilisation within Denmark. Reuse of backwash sludge in WWTPs and biogas 
plants overall scored the best, except in terms of regulations and stable supply chain. 
 Direct reuse of backwash sludge proved promising but systematic collection and 
pretreatment are essential to ensure a safe, stable supply chain with consistent quality. 
 Recovery of elements, including arsenic, was the only application where arsenic was not a 
limiting factor, resources were optimally utilised, and the risk of environmental 
contamination was eliminated. However, this technology is not yet mature and has a lot of 
uncertainties.  
==PAGE:79==
 
 
73 
 
10 Strategies to Increase the Recycling of Backwash Sludge 
in Denmark 
Data from this study show that the current recycling rate of Danish Backwash sludge is 37%, 
meaning that 63% is deposited at waste management facilities. This results in high sludge disposal 
costs, loss of important resources, and risk of secondary pollution due to elevated levels of 
arsenic. Based on the findings in this project, it is assumed that more backwash sludge could be 
utilised. This chapter discusses approaches to enhance resource utilisation and contribute to a 
more sustainable drinking water supply.  
10.1 Regulation and Arsenic Levels 
Future legislation focusing on reuse guidelines for backwash sludge could enhance its recycling. To 
prevent inconsistencies between municipalities, the reuse of backwash sludge in WWTPs and 
biogas plants should be clearly defined in regulations, eliminating any ambiguity in interpretation. 
To achieve this, backwash sludge should either be included in Appendix 1 of the "Waste in 
Agriculture" regulation with arsenic added to Appendix 2 (Bekendtgørelse om anvendelse af affald 
til jordbrugsformål 2018). Alternatively, clear guidelines for reusing backwash sludge should be 
incorporated into a separate regulation. 
A scientifically determined limit for arsenic levels in backwash sludge applied in WWTPs and 
biogas plants is essential. This limit should ensure that the maximum amount of backwash sludge 
is recycled without compromising environmental safety. If all WWTPs in Denmark could use 
backwash sludge with arsenic levels <1000 mg As/kg without risking arsenic contamination of the 
aquatic environment and crops, arsenic would no longer be a limiting factor. 
Additionally, regulation could drive the implementation of a circular economy in the Danish waste 
sector by accelerating technological advancements and promoting new business models. This 
could include mandates for the recovery of specific elements, as seen in Germany and Switzerland 
(cf. Chapter 8.3.1), or regulations stating that no backwash sludge should be disposed of in landfills 
by 2030. 
10.2 Collection of Leftover Backwash Sludge  
Approximately 53% of the waterworks in this project produce backwash sludge with arsenic levels 
exceeding 100 mg/kg DM, posing a challenge for recycling (cf. Chapter 8.4). One potential solution 
is to collect and store the leftover backwash sludge until new applications and technologies are 
developed (Figure 33).  
Additionally, it could be investigated if the arsenic in the backwash sludge could be washed out. 
Theoretically, decreasing the pH by applying NaOH could result in the arsenic being released into 
the water phase, which could then be washed out (Personal communication, T. Christensen, 
Krüger Veolia, April 2024). However, this process would generate a new waste stream that must 
be managed appropriately. 
==PAGE:80==
 
 
74 
 
 
10.3 Holistic Approach 
Despite new applications, arsenic levels in Danish backwash sludge remain a significant barrier to 
recycling. Adopting a holistic approach that incorporates the principles of the circular economy 
(CE) and the waste hierarchy (cf. Chapter 3), the primary goal is to minimise waste. Given that 
most Danish groundwater contains high levels of iron and that backwash sludge is predominantly 
composed of iron, reducing the quantity of backwash sludge produced in Denmark is challenging. 
If waste cannot be minimised, it should be of a quality that allows for recycling. Solutions should 
not only focus on the final quality and quantity of backwash sludge but also consider upstream 
processes in drinking water production. This includes exploring methods to generate backwash 
sludge with lower arsenic levels, such as adjusting groundwater abstraction and the treatment 
process. 
10.3.1 Groundwater Abstraction Level 
When evaluating new abstraction wells, it is often preferable for raw water to have low 
concentrations of iron and arsenic, as this reduces the need for extensive treatment. However, the 
quality of backwash sludge depends heavily on the iron-to-arsenic ratio. Therefore, criteria for 
good raw water should include an optimal Fe:As a ratio to a minimum to avoid producing 
hazardous waste (>1000 mg As/kg DM) and, in general, generate backwash sludge with lower 
arsenic levels to facilitate recycling. 
Figure 33 Application areas of Danish backwash sludge discussed in this project with arsenic limits for each 
application.   
==PAGE:81==
 
 
75 
 
10.3.2 Arsenic and Iron Separation During Treatment Process 
Investigating the separation of iron and arsenic during drinking water production by dividing the 
waste stream into two parts: one containing iron and the other containing high levels of arsenic. 
The German company GEH Wasserchemie GmbH was consulted about using GEH filters under 
anaerobic conditions to remove arsenic (Personal communication, C. Bahr, Feb 2024). While GEH 
filters can absorb both As(III) and As(V), they are unstable under reduced conditions, leading to 
potential operational issues. Furthermore, it was consulted if pH change during sand filtration 
could control the precipitation of first iron and then arsenic. However, this was assessed not to be 
viable (Personal communication, T. Christensen, Krüger Veolia, April 2024). 
In the Netherlands, a novel method for iron removal involves anaerobic conditions before 
filtration, precipitating iron and phosphate as vivianite, which has market value (Goedhart et al. 
2022). This method aligns with CE principles by producing a valuable product and reducing 
backwash sludge. However, it is not sustainable if phosphorus, a CRM, is mined for this purpose. 
Additionally, it is unclear how arsenic behaves in this process. If arsenic precipitates with iron, the 
same recycling challenges persist. If it remains in the water, compliance with drinking water 
arsenic levels may be problematic. 
Overall, separating iron and arsenic during treatment poses significant challenges and may not be 
feasible. 
10.3.3 Planning in Waterworks Design  
The holistic approach in CE also includes all production steps and the construction phase of new 
facilities. When designing new waterworks, the following considerations could be made (Figure 
34): What type of waste will be generated by the processes included? Can the amount of waste be 
reduced? What is the quality of the waste concerning recycling? Could nearby industries use some 
of the waste streams generated? 
 
Figure 34 Implementing CE 
during planning in waterworks 
design where following 
considerations could be made: 
1) What type of waste will be 
generated by the processes 
included? 2) Can the amount of 
waste be reduced? 3) What is 
the quality of the waste in 
relation to recycling? 4) Are 
there nearby industries that 
could use some of the waste 
streams generated? 
==PAGE:82==
 
 
76 
 
11 Conclusion 
This project aimed to investigate waste production in Danish drinking water production and 
mapped 15 types of waste streams. Four waste streams were partially reused or recycled: 
backwash sludge, water, GAC, and filter material. The major waste streams are backwash sludge 
and calcite pellets.  
Furthermore, the project aimed to investigate the potential for recycling backwash sludge in 
Denmark. Analysis of 64 samples of backwash sludge from 44 waterworks and 12 utilities revealed 
the following average chemical composition: Fe2O3 (50%), organic matter (16 %), CaO (7 %), P2O5 
(4.4%), MnO (2.9%), MgO (1%), N (0.4%), the sum of SrO, Na2O, K2O (0.4%), As2O3 (0.50 %), and 
the sum of heavy metals (0.01 %). The iron concentration across Denmark was relatively stable 
(351 ± 77 g Fe/kg DM). In contrast, arsenic (382 ± 581 mg As/kg DM) and heavy metal 
concentrations varied substantially between and within utilities, reflecting the variety in raw water 
quality. 
Annual production of 6432 tons of backwash sludge was mapped from 18 Danish utilities, whereas 
4084 tons/year (63 %) was deposited at the landfill or stockpiled.1252 tons/year (19%) and 1133 
tons/year (18%) were utilised in biogas plants and WWTPs for binding sulphur and phosphorus. 
This project has outlined the complexity of increasing the recycling rate of backwash sludge in 
Denmark. Currently, 37% of backwash sludge is recycled in WWTPs and biogas plants. Factors 
influencing this rate include arsenic levels, regulations, elevated cadmium and nickel 
concentrations, impurities like leaves and sand, and limited capacity at WWTPs. 
Danish backwash sludge contains relatively high levels of iron, arsenic, manganese (19 ± 24 g/kg 
DM), and phosphorus (19 ± 8 g/kg DM), making it a potential resource. Three new applications for 
recycling backwash sludge were identified: iron(hydr)oxide pellets, fertiliser production, and CRM 
recovery. Despite exploring new recycling applications, no universal solution has been identified, 
and arsenic levels remain an extensive limitation. 7 % of the waterworks produced backwash 
sludge categorised as hazardous waste, and 54% produced sludge with arsenic levels (>100 mg 
As/kg DM) that currently lack recycling applications. This necessitates regulatory changes based on 
scientific evidence for arsenic limits to increase recycling or ensure less backwash sludge is applied 
in WWTPs and biogas plants to minimise arsenic contamination. 
Quality criteria were determined for each application, covering dry matter content, impurities, 
iron, arsenic, and heavy metal concentrations in backwash sludge. Additionally, the applications 
were evaluated based on resource utilisation, maturity, arsenic limitations, economic aspects, CO2 
emissions, regulations, and stable supply chains. Direct reuse of backwash sludge in WWTPs and 
biogas plants scored highest in most parameters, except for regulations and stable supply chains. 
However, this does not necessarily result in optimal resource utilisation, and it is crucial to ensure 
that backwash sludge is optimally dosed to replace as many chemicals as possible. Alternatively, 
overcoming regulatory limitations and ensuring a stable supply chain could involve collecting 
backwash sludge for fertiliser production or processing it into ferric hydroxide products. Future 
strategies to enhance the recycling of backwash sludge include regulation as a driver or a holistic 
approach, including adjustment of groundwater abstraction criteria to avoid waste streams 
unsuitable for recycling. 
==PAGE:83==
 
 
77 
 
12 Perspectives and Future Works 
In future scenarios, new types of waste streams will emerge alongside increased waste streams 
from drinking water production. This underscores the need to implement circular economy 
principles in the water sector to minimise and reuse waste streams, thereby contributing to a 
more sustainable water sector. A particular concern is the anticipated rise in arsenic-loaded waste, 
which could present significant challenges. The demand for sustainable solutions to replace FeCl3 
is also expected to grow. 
12.1 Increase in Arsenic-Loaded Waste 
Future regulations could lower the acceptable levels of arsenic in drinking water, as the current 
guideline of 10 µg/L is not deemed sufficient to protect human health. A study has recommended 
that water supply companies worldwide optimise their arsenic removal processes to achieve a 
level of 1 µg/L, which is technically feasible (Van Halem et al. 2009). Should Denmark adopt 
stricter guidelines, this could generate more backwash sludge, as more waterworks might need to 
dose iron chloride to meet the new standards. Alternatively, the increased use of granular ferric 
hydroxide (GFH) filters, often not designed for regeneration, could lead to a scenario where 
significant quantities of arsenic-loaded solid waste must be managed. This potential future 
emphasises the need for a holistic approach in evaluating new treatment methods, with waste 
generation being a critical parameter. 
12.1.1 Increase in Demand for Sustainable Alternatives to FeCl3  
From a future perspective, the demand for FeCl3, and consequently for more sustainable 
alternatives such as backwash sludge, is expected to increase due to two main factors:  
1. The anticipated lowering of phosphorus limit values in recipient water from wastewater 
treatment plants, which will require increased chemical dosing to achieve compliance 
(Fischer 2024) 
2. Anticipated increase in Biogas production in Denmark (Klima- Energi- og 
Forsyningsminesteriet 2023) 
12.1.2 Business Potential for Iron(hydroxide) Products 
Some WWTPs and biogas plants contacted were asked if they could see the potential in a product 
based on backwash sludge from drinking water production that could be used as a sustainable 
solution for replacing FeCl3. Four said yes, and one biogas plant did not believe it could compete 
on cost. One utility mentioned using many chemicals and seeking alternative, sustainable 
solutions.  
Iron chloride is listed as an iron price of 10-24 DKK/kg (Miljøstyrelsen; 2015b) and the price is 
expected to be even higher today since the price of FeCl3 has increased during the last decade 
(Personal communication, M. Hansen, Marts 2024). Assuming the average price is 15 DDK/kg Fe, 
the total amount of backwash sludge mapped in this project contains 316 tons of iron (average Fe 
concentration of 351 g/kg), corresponding to around 4.700.000 DKK/year.  
==PAGE:84==
 
 
78 
 
If an adsorbent product based on backwash sludge was effective, easy to dose and handle, 
backwash sludge could become a resource with economic and environmental value. Besides 
having an economic benefit compared to FeCl3, a product like this could also ensure continuous 
supply and uniform quality and be better for the employees at the plants since FeCl3 has a pH of 1 
and contributes to a work environment risk (Roth GmbH 2016).    
From a future perspective, a product made for regeneration could be a solution. This could be 
pellets or granulates made of backwash sludge and could be applied in several industries before 
regenerating (Figure 35). The pellets are first used for binding phosphorous in aquatic 
environments and then sent to biogas production, where the phosphor-loaded material is used for 
sulphur control before being sent to regeneration. Regenerating the granulates or pellets could be 
ideal to ensure that most possible chemicals could be replaced by a sustainable solution.   
12.2 Future Work 
Increasing the focus on recycling backwash sludge enhances resource utilisation, reduces utility 
operating costs, strengthens competitiveness, and paves the way for recycling other waste 
products from the water supply. 
12.2.1 Further Research for Optimal Resource Utilisation of Backwash Sludge  
Based on the findings in this project, the following research could contribute to a better evaluation 
of resource utilisation and the potential consequences of applying backwash sludge in the 
identified areas. These investigations aim to improve and evaluate the resource utilisation of 
backwash sludge: 
Figure 35 Iron(hydr)oxide 
product made for 
regeneration. 
Iron(hydr)oxide from 
drinking water sludge is 
collected and treated to 
produce granulates/pellets 
that first can be applied for 
phosphorus removal in an 
aquatic system and then 
used in biogas for sulphur 
control before being 
regenerated.  
==PAGE:85==
 
 
79 
 
 Assess arsenic's Environmental impact: Investigate arsenic's fate in WWTPs and biogas 
sludge, estimating the arsenic levels that can be applied in these facilities without affecting 
the environment. This includes determining the arsenic levels in recipient water, sludge 
applied in agriculture, and crops. This includes conducting comparative analyses of arsenic 
in digested sludge from biogas plants or WWTPs and in the soil where the sludge is applied. 
This will help evaluate the actual risk of elevated arsenic levels over time. 
 Evaluate the effectiveness of iron(hydr)oxides: Investigate the factors influencing the 
effectiveness of backwash sludge compared to FeCl3 in different conditions. Explore 
pretreatment methods, such as acidification, to increase the adsorption potential of 
backwash sludge. 
 Optimise dosing: Develop methods for optimising the dosing of backwash sludge for 
optimal dosing, considering its dry matter content. This includes designing a dosage tank 
and storage tank. 
 Study Iron Complexes: Investigate the structure of iron complexes in backwash water, 
newly produced backwash sludge, old backwash sludge, dried and treated backwash 
sludge, and their correlated binding affinity.  
 Discharge Feasibility: Explore the effects and potential consequences of discharging 
backwash water directly into the sewage system. This approach could benefit both 
waterworks and WWTPs by potentially abolishing the discharge fee and saving transport 
costs. However, it requires monitoring arsenic levels in the backwash water and is only 
feasible for waterworks connected to a sewer system. 
 Life Cycle Assessment (LCA): Include an LCA to identify the best solution for Danish 
backwash sludge, considering economic, social, and environmental perspectives. This 
assessment could help determine whether applying backwash sludge directly in biogas 
plants or WWTPs, collecting and pre-treating the sludge for other uses, or avoiding the 
production of backwash sludge with high arsenic levels is optimal.  
Increasing the recycling of backwash sludge in Denmark primarily requires time. It necessitates 
adequate data, experience, new technologies, new knowledge, interdisciplinary collaboration, 
involvement of ministries and agencies, competencies, resources, and knowledge sharing. 
Hopefully, this project can serve as a stepping stone towards recycling more backwash sludge in 
Denmark and inspire companies, utilities, and other professionals to adopt a more circular 
approach to the Danish water supply. As long as waterworks produce drinking water, they will also 
generate waste that needs to be managed appropriately. 
 
==PAGE:86==
 
 
80 
 
13 References 
Ahmad, T., K. Ahmad, and M. Alam. 2016. “Sustainable Management of Water Treatment Sludge 
through 3’R’ Concept.” Journal of Cleaner Production 124: 1–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.02.073. 
Aktor, Henrik; 2014. “CLMO – Fjernelse Af Metan Fra Grundvandet i En Katalysator.” DanskVAND, 
2014. 
Aktor, Henrik. 1990. “Okkerslam et Naturprodukt Eller Kemisk Affald.” 
Albrektiene, Ramune, Karolis Karaliunas, and Kristina Baziene. 2019. “Sustainable Reuse of 
Groundwater Treatment Iron Sludge for Organic Matter Removal from River Neris Water.” 
Sustainability (Switzerland) 11 (3). https://doi.org/10.3390/su11030639. 
Aquaminerals. 2024. “Ferric (Hydr)Oxide.” 2024. https://aquaminerals.com/ferric-hydroxide/. 
Babatunde, A. O., and Y. Q. Zhao. 2007. “Constructive Approaches toward Water Treatment Works 
Sludge Management: An International Review of Beneficial Reuses.” Critical Reviews in 
Environmental Science and Technology 37 (2): 129–64. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10643380600776239. 
Babatunde, A. O., Y. Q. Zhao, Tomi Turner, Rebecca Wheeler, Adam Stone, and Ian Oliver. 2019. 
“Potential Alternative Reuse Pathways for Water Treatment Residuals: Remaining Barriers 
and Questions - a Review.” Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology 37 (9): 
129–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-019-4272-0. 
Bekendtgørelse om affald. 2019. “Danish Ministry of the Environment” BEK nr 130 (224): 1–62. 
Bekendtgørelse om anvendelse af affald til jordbrugsformål. 2018. “Danish Ministry of 
Environment.” Retsinformation 2018 (1001): 1–18. 
Blandfort, J C. 2007. “Jernforbindelser i Grundvand.” Geologisk Nyt. 
Blum, N. U., M. Haupt, and C. R. Bening. 2020. “Why ‘Circular’ Doesn’t Always Mean ‘Sustainable.’” 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.105042. 
Bourgeois, J. C., M. E. Walsh, and G. A. Gagnon. 2004. “Comparison of Process Options for 
Treatment of Water Treatment Residual Streams.” Journal of Environmental Engineering and 
Science 3 (6): 477–84. https://doi.org/10.1139/S04-017. 
Bouwman, A. F., A. H.W. Beusen, L. Lassaletta, D. F. Van Apeldoorn, H. J.M. Van Grinsven, J. Zhang, 
and M. K. Ittersum Van. 2017. “Lessons from Temporal and Spatial Patterns in Global Use of N 
and P Fertilizer on Cropland.” Scientific Reports 7 (January): 1–11. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep40366. 
Bustamante, H.A, and T.D. Waite. 1995. “New Possibilities for Dewatering and Recycling Water 
Treatment Plant Residuals.” In Modern Techniques in Water and Wastewater Treatment, 
Original, 163–70. CSIRO Publishing. 
Campos-pereira, Hugo, Dan B Kleja, Carin Sjo, Lutz Ahrens, Wantana Klysubun, and Jon Petter 
Gustafsson. 2020. “The Adsorption of Per- and Poly Fl Uoroalkyl Substances (PFASs) onto 
Ferrihydrite Is Governed by Surface Charge.” https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.0c01646. 
==PAGE:87==
 
 
81 
 
Christensen, Bent T, and Lars Elsgaard. 2013. Handelsgødnings Indflydelse På Afgrøders Indhold Af 
Arsen, Bly, Cadmiun, Krom, Kviksølv Og Nikkel. Aarhus Universitet DCA - Nationalt center for 
fødevarer og jorbrug. 
Cronan, David S. 2024. “Activities on Manganese Nodules During the Post-War Boom.” Deep-Sea 
Minerals Developments in the 20th Century, 17–42. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-
52342-7_2. 
Danish Business Authority. 2024. “Udvikling Af Brun Bioraffinering Som Fx Pyrolyse.” 2024. 
https://udviklingidanmark.erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/pyrolyse. 
Danish Ministry of the Environment. 2007. “Bekendtgørelse Om Spildevandstilladelser m.v. 
Miljøbeskyttelseslovens Kapitel 3 Og 4 , BEK Nr 1448 Af 11/12/2007” 2007 (1448): 1–18. 
Danmarks Statistik. 2023. “Vandforbruget Faldt i 2022,” no. 395: 2022–24. 
Danske Vandværker; 2023. “Det Bæredygtige Vandværk - En Guide Til Det Strategiske Arbejde 
Med FN’s Verdensmål På Vandværket.” 
Danske Vandværker. 2022. “Godt Drikkevand - Sådan Sikrer vi Drikkevandsressourcen Til 
Kommende Generationer.” 
DANVA. 2012. CO2-Regnskab for Forsyninger - En Guide. DANVA VEJLEDNING NR. 88. 
https://www.danva.dk/media/2687/2012-0806-vejledning-co2-regnskab-for-forsyninger-en-
guide-ds.pdf%0A. 
DANVA. 2014. “Vejledning i Håndtering Af Okkerslam". DANVA vejledning nr. 84: 29. 
http://www.google.dk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&frm=1&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact
=8&ved=0CCAQFjAAahUKEwi_nff6lO7GAhUGZ3IKHWQEA2g&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.danv
a.dk%2FAdmin%2FPublic%2FDWSDownload.aspx%3FFile%3D%252FFiles%252FFiler%252FUd
givelser%252F2011.05.06-V. 
Ellen MacArthur Foundation. 2024. “The Circular Economy in Detail.” 2024. 
https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/the-circular-economy-in-detail-deep-dive. 
Elser, James J., and Philip Haygarth. 2021. Phosphorus: Past and Future. Oxford University Press. 
Energistyrelsen. 2023. “Kort over Biogasproducenter i Danmark.” 2023. 
https://ens.dk/sites/ens.dk/files/Bioenergi/kort_over_biogasproducenter_i_danmark_2023.p
df. 
Erhvervsstyrelsen; 2024. “Virksomheder Omfattet Af Reglerne for Bæredygtighedsrapportering.” 
Erhvervsstyrelsen. 2024. https://erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/vejledning-virksomheder-omfattet-af-
CSRD. 
Erhvervsstyrelsen. 2023. “CSRD Og Europæiske Bæredygtighedsstandarder.” Erhversstyrelsen.Dk. 
2023. https://erhvervsstyrelsen.dk/europaeiske-baeredygtighedsstandarder. 
European Commison. 2024. “Waste Framework Directive.” 2024. 
https://environment.ec.europa.eu/topics/waste-and-recycling/waste-framework-
directive_en. 
Feilberg, Miriam. 2022. “Endnu et Skridt På Vej Mod Bæredygtig Vandforsyning.” DANVA. 2022. 
https://www.danva.dk/viden/vandsektoren-og-verdensmaal/endnu-et-skridt-paa-vej-mod-
==PAGE:88==
 
 
82 
 
baeredygtig-vandforsyning/. 
Fischer, Lars. 2024. “Udkast Til Byspildevandsdirektiv Åbner Allerede Nu for 4. Rensetrin.” DANVA. 
2024. https://www.danva.dk/nyheder/2024/udkast-til-byspildevandsdirektiv-aabner-
allerede-nu-for-4-rensetrin/. 
Fortune Business Insights. 2024. “Iron Ore Market Size, Share and Industry Analysis, By Type, By 
Application, and Regional Forecast 2024-2032.” 
https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/iron-ore-market-108698. 
Foss-pedersen, Katrine, Nanna Thekla Grønbæk-skovborg, Hans Peter, and Birk Hansen. 2023. 
Forvaltning Af Fremtidens Drikkevandsressource Afrapportering Af Projekt under 
Drikkevandsfonden. 
Gao, Yunhu;, and André Cabrera Serrenho. 2023. “Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Nitrogen 
Fertilizers Could Be Reduced by up to One-Fifth of Current Levels by 2050 with Combined 
Interventions.” Nature Food 4 (2): 170–78. 
Genuchten, C. M. Van, T. R. Etmannski, S. Jessen, and H. M. Breunig. 2022. “LCA of Disposal 
Practices for Arsenic-Bearing Iron Oxides Reveals the Need for Advanced Arsenic Recovery.” 
Environmental Science and Technology 56 (19): 14109–19. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.2c05417. 
GEUS. 2024. Grundvandsovervågning 1989-2022. 
Goedhart, Roos, Simon Müller, Mark C.M. van Loosdrecht, and Doris van Halem. 2022. “Vivianite 
Precipitation for Iron Recovery from Anaerobic Groundwater.” Water Research 217 (March): 
118345. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2022.118345. 
Grohol, Milan, and Constanze Veeh. 2023. “Study on the Critical Raw Materials for the EU 2023.” 
Gude, Jink. 2018. Arsenic Removal in Rapid Sandfilters. 
Hagelstein, Karen. 2009. “Globally Sustainable Manganese Metal Production and Use.” Journal of 
Environmental Management 90 (12): 3736–40. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2008.05.025. 
Halem, D. Van, S. A. Bakker, G. L. Amy, and J. C. Van Dijk. 2009. “Arsenic in Drinking Water: A 
Worldwide Water Quality Concern for Water Supply Companies.” Drinking Water Engineering 
and Science 2 (1): 29–34. https://doi.org/10.5194/dwes-2-29-2009. 
Hedegaard, Mathilde J., Carson O. Lee, Anne Holm Thomsen, Sarah C.B. Christensen, Tove Beyer, 
Ann-Katrin Pedersen, Florian B. Wagner, et al. 2020. “Påvirkning Af Sandfiltre Ved Etablering 
Af Blødgøringskolonner.” 
Hingston, F. J., A. M. Posner, and J. P. Quirk. 1971. “Competitive Adsorption of Negatively Charged 
Ligands on Oxide Surfaces,” 334–42. 
HK, Thejas, and Nabil Hossiney. 2022. “A Short Review on Environmental Impacts and Application 
of Iron Ore Tailings in Development of Sustainable Eco-Friendly Bricks.” Materials Today: 
Proceedings 61: 327–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2021.09.522. 
Hofman-Caris, Roberta, Arslan Ahmad, Wolter Siegers, Sabine Rahn, Jan Willem Voort, and Olaf 
van der Kolk. 2017. “Pelletized Drinking Water Treatment Residuals for the Removal of 
==PAGE:89==
 
 
83 
 
Arsenic and Phosphate.” 
HOFOR. 2024. “Kan Du Eller Din Virksomhed Bruge Kalk?” 2024. 
https://www.hofor.dk/baeredygtige-byer/udviklingsprojekter/bloedere-vand-3/kan-du-eller-
din-virksomhed-bruge-kalk/. 
Hongshao, Zhao, and Robert Stanforth. 2001. “Competitive Adsorption of Phosphate and Arsenate 
on Goethite.” Environmental Science and Technology 35. 
Hvolby, Christian, and Kim Thomassen. 2022. “Svovlbrintebekæmpelse Hos Skanderborg Forsyning 
A/S.” 
International Agent For Research on Cancer, IARC. 2004. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of 
Carcinogenic: Risks to Humans. Vol. 84. World Health Organization. 
Jain, C. K., and I. Ali. 2000. “Arsenic: Occurrence, Toxicity and Speciation Techniques.” Water 
Research 34 (17): 4304–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1354(00)00182-2. 
Jensen, John, Jesper Bak, and Martin M. Larsen. 1996. “Tungmetaller i Danske Jorde.Pdf.” 
Jensen, Marina Bergen. 2009. “Tillægsrapport Til Livscyklusvurdering Af Dobbeltporøs Filtrering Af 
Regnvand.” 
Jeppesen, Frederik Tinus, Anne Holm Thomsen, and Hans-Jørgen Albrechtsen. 2023. Vurdering Af 
Renseteknologier Til at Fjerne Arsen Fra Drikkevand. Danish Ministry of Environment. 
Jupp, Andrew R., Steven Beijer, Ganesha C. Narain, Willem Schipper, and J. Chris Slootweg. 2021. 
“Phosphorus Recovery and Recycling-Closing the Loop.” Chemical Society Reviews 50 (1): 87–
101. https://doi.org/10.1039/d0cs01150a. 
Kjølholt, Jesper, Line Schmidt Froskov, Karsten Arnbjerg-Nielsen, and Anne Gade Holm. 2021. 
Nøgletal for Miljøfarlige Forurenende Stoffer i Spildevand Fra Renseanlæg Opdatering På 
Baggrund Af Data Fra Det Nationale. 
https://www2.mst.dk/Udgiv/publikationer/2021/03/978-87-7038-287-8.pdf. 
Kjøller, C, and F Larsen. 2007. “Årsager Til Arsen I Grundvandsressourcen.” ATV Jord Og 
Grundvand: Arsen i Grundvand Og Drikkevand, 13–26. 
https://pub.geus.dk/da/publications/årsager-til-arsen-i-grundvandsressourcen. 
Klima- Energi- og Forsyningsminesteriet. 2023. “Danmarks Gassystem Opgraderes Til Mere Grøn 
Gas.” Klima- Energi- Og Forsyningsminesteriet. 2023. 
https://www.kefm.dk/aktuelt/nyheder/2023/jan/danmarks-gassystem-opgraderes-til-mere-
groen-gas. 
Klimapartnerskabet. 2020. “Regeringens Klimapartnerskaber - Affald Og Vand, Cirkulær Økonomi.” 
Kristensen, Anders Hahn, Kurt Ellemose, Werner Bai, Erik Karlsen, Henning Karlby, Mikael 
Jørgensen, Peter Roslev, et al. 2014. Vandforsyning. 3rd ed. Nyt Teknisk Forlag. 
Kristiansen, Søren M., Per Nørnberg, and Loren Ramsay. 2004. “Arsen i Dansk Drikkevand - et 
Undervurderet Sporstof.” Geologisk Nyt. 
Likus, Magdalena, Małgorzata Komorowska-Kaufman, Alina Pruss, Łukasz Zych, and Tomasz Bajda. 
2021. “Iron-Based Water Treatment Residuals: Phase, Physicochemical Characterization, and 
Textural Properties.” Materials 14 (14). https://doi.org/10.3390/ma14143938. 
==PAGE:90==
 
 
84 
 
Miljøministriet. 2023. “Gennemførelse Og Anvendelse Af Slam- Direktivet Afrapportering,” no. 64. 
Miljøstyrelsen; 2002. “Arsen - Jordkvalitetskriterium 20 Mg/Kg Jord.” 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02423065. 
Miljøstyrelsen. 2009. “Spildevandsslam Fra Kommunale Og Private Renseanlæg i 2005.” 
Miljøstyrelsen. 2015a. “Fra Spildevand Til Fosforholdige Produkter.” 
Miljøstyrelsen. 2015b. “Svovlemissioner Fra Anvendelse Af Biogas.” www.mst.dk. 
Miljøstyrelsen. 1996. “Mangan B-Værdi: 0,001 Mg Mn/M3. Grundlag for B-Værdi Miljømæssige 
Forhold Sundhedsmæssige Effekter,” no. August. 
Miljøstyrelsen. 2024. “Kilder Til Spildevandsforurening.” Miljøstyrelsen. 2024. 
https://mst.dk/erhverv/rent-miljoe-og-sikker-forsyning/spildevand/kilder-til-
spildevandsforurening. 
Müller, Simon, Francesc Corbera-Rubio, Frank Schoonenberg-Kegel, Michele Laureni, Mark C.M. 
van Loosdrecht, and Doris van Halem. 2024. “Shifting to Biology Promotes Highly Efficient 
Iron Removal in Groundwater Filters.” BioRxiv, 2024.02.14.580244. 
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.02.14.580244v1%0Ahttps://www.biorxiv.org
/content/10.1101/2024.02.14.580244v1.abstract%0Ahttps://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.11
01/2024.02.14.580244v1%0Ahttps://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.02.14.580244v
1. 
Naturvidenskabernes Hus. 2022. “Søer Som Fosforminer - Undervisningsmateriale Om Ormstrup 
Sø.” 
Nguyen, Minh Duc, Michael Thomas, Aravind Surapaneni, Ellen M. Moon, and Nicholas A. Milne. 
2022. “Beneficial Reuse of Water Treatment Sludge in the Context of Circular Economy.” 
Environmental Technology and Innovation 28: 102651. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eti.2022.102651. 
Nielsen, Sanne Skov. 2011. “Kemisk Stabilisering Af As, Cr Og Cu Forurenet Jord Med Okkerslam 
Fra Vandværker.” 
Niras. 2024. “Processpildevandsbehandling - Rensning Af Processpildevand Fra Rentvandsfabrikker 
Til Power-to-X.” 
Nonboe Andersen, Jens, and Kristian Stamer. 1999. “Fjernelse Af Metaller Fra Grundvand Ved 
Traditionel Vandbehandling På Danske Vandværker.” Miljøstyrelsen. 
Patel, Khageshwar Singh, Piyush Kant Pandey, Pablo Martín-Ramos, Warren T. Corns, Simge Varol, 
Prosun Bhattacharya, and Yanbei Zhu. 2023. “A Review on Arsenic in the Environment: 
Contamination, Mobility, Sources, and Exposure.” RSC Advances 13 (13): 8803–21. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ra00789h. 
Petersen, J, L F Østergaard, and B T Christensen. 2009. Miljøbelastende Urenheder i 
Handelsgødning. Vol. 144. internal-pdf://0497693505/østergaard2009.pdf. 
Punshon, Tracy, Brian P. Jackson, Andrew A. Meharg, Todd Warczack, Kirk Scheckel, and Mary Lou 
Guerinot. 2017. “Understanding Arsenic Dynamics in Agronomic Systems to Predict and 
Prevent Uptake by Crop Plants.” Science of the Total Environment. 
==PAGE:91==
 
 
85 
 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.12.111. 
Rambau, Lutendo D., Paul T. Mativenga, and Annlizé L. Marewick. 2022. “A Framework to Assess 
Circularity of Potable Water through Its Lifecycle.” Procedia CIRP 105 (March): 501–6. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2022.02.083. 
Rashidian, Parastoo, Javad Mahmoudimehr, and Kazem Atashkari. 2022. “An Underground 
Anaerobic Digester with Permissible Temperature Fluctuations: A Parametric Study.” Cleaner 
Energy Systems 2 (March): 100007. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cles.2022.100007. 
Reid, Michael S., Karen S. Hoy, Jordan R.M. Schofield, Jagdeesh S. Uppal, Yanwen Lin, Xiufen Lu, 
Hanyong Peng, and X. Chris Le. 2020. “Arsenic Speciation Analysis: A Review with an Emphasis 
on Chromatographic Separations.” TrAC - Trends in Analytical Chemistry 123. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2019.115770. 
Roskosch, Andrea, and Patric Heidecke. 2019. “Sewage Sludge Disposal in the Federal Republic of 
Germany.” Umweltbundesamt 200: 104. 
https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/en/publikationen/sewage-sludge-disposal-in-the-federal-
republic-of. 
Roth GmbH, Carl. 2016. “Sikkerhedsdatablad - Jern(III) Klorid ≥98,5 %, Ekstra Ren, Vandfrit.” 
Sharma, Anitha K., Peter B. Nielsen, Henrik Correll, and Henrik R. Andersen. 2013. “Udnyttelse Af 
Okkerslam Fra Vandværker Som Fældningsmiddel På Rensningsanlæg.” 
Smol, Marzena, Christian Adam, and Michał Preisner. 2020. “Circular Economy Model Framework 
in the European Water and Wastewater Sector.” Journal of Material Cycles and Waste 
Management 22 (3): 682–97. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10163-019-00960-z. 
Swart, Hendrik. 2019. “Lanthanide Activated Phosphors for Solar Cell Applications” 11043: 40. 
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2501533. 
Symbiosis center. 2014. “Okkerslam - Generisk Case,” 1–7. 
Thomsen, Claus Dahl, Carsten Lassen, Elisabeth Holst, Benedikte Hauge, Miljøstyrelsen, Erik 
Rasmussen, Jesper Kjølholt, et al. 2002. “Tungmetaller i Affald.” Applied Geochemistry 17 
(1207): 517–68. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0883-2927(02)00018-5. 
Transphor, Transfer Project, Project Management, Circular Economy, Thu Nguyen, and Circular 
Economy. 2021. “Regional Phosphorus Recycling ( RePhoR ).” 
Turner, Tomi, Rebecca Wheeler, Adam Stone, and Ian Oliver. 2019. “Potential Alternative Reuse 
Pathways for Water Treatment Residuals: Remaining Barriers and Questions—a Review.” 
Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 230 (9). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-019-4272-0. 
United Nations. 2015. “Resolution Adopted by the General Assembly on 1 September 2015.” 
International Organization 21 (3): 634–750. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818300013345. 
Valchev, Dobril, Irina Ribarova, Boyan Borisov, Viden Radovanov, Valentina Lyubomirova, Irina 
Kostova, Galina Dimova, Orhideya Karpuzova, and Svetlana Lazarova. 2024. “Valuable 
Elements in Sludge from Eight Municipal Wastewater Treatment Plants in Relation to Their 
Recovery Potential.” Environmental Sciences Europe 36 (1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s12302-
023-00837-x. 
==PAGE:92==
 
 
86 
 
Varennes, Elodie, Denise Blanc, Antonin Azaïs, and Jean Marc Choubert. 2023. “Upgrading 
Wastewater Treatment Plants to Urban Mines: Are Metals Worth It?” Resources, 
Conservation and Recycling 189 (October 2022). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2022.106738. 
Wang, K., P. E. Holm, U. Brinkmann Trettenes, S. R.S. Bandaru, D. van Halem, and C. M. van 
Genuchten. 2023. “Molecular-Scale Characterization of Groundwater Treatment Sludge from 
around the World: Implications for Potential Arsenic Recovery.” Water Research 245 (June): 
120561. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2023.120561. 
Wang, Zhanyun, Jamie C. Dewitt, Christopher P. Higgins, and Ian T. Cousins. 2017. “A Never-Ending 
Story of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs)?” Environmental Science and Technology 
51 (5): 2508–18. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b04806. 
WHO. 2011. “Arsenic in Drinking-Water. Background Document for Development of WHO 
Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality. WHO/SDE/WSH/03.04/75/Rev/1 Arsenic.” WHO 
Guidelines for Drinking-Water Quality, 24. 
Wikipidea. 2024. “Arsenic.” 2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arsenic. 
Winter, Leif, Mogens Henze, Jens Jørgen Linde, and H Thorkilde Jensen. 2004. Spildevandsteknik. 
3rd ed. Polyteknisk Forlag. 
Zeng, Huiping, Chengbo Liu, Fanshuo Wang, Jie Zhang, and Dong Li. 2022. “Disposal of Iron-
Manganese Sludge from Waterworks and Its Potential for Arsenic Removal.” Journal of 
Environmental Chemical Engineering 10 (5): 108480. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2022.108480. 
 
==PAGE:93==
 
 
87 
 
14 Appendix 
14.1 Appendix A – Investigation of Influence of Ceramic Membrane for Recycling of 
Backwash Water on Backwash Sludge 
Approximately 4% of water is used for backwashing ﬁlters, and the backwashing water is usually 
not reused. However, due to the growing pressure on clean water resources and stricter discharge 
permits for recipient water, more waterworks are exploring the possibility of recycling backwash 
water (Figure 21). 
Currently, membrane ﬁltraƟon for recycling backwash water is only applied in one waterwork in 
Denmark. However, more membranes are expected to be implemented over the next few years. 
No sampling has been conducted on the sludge generated from the membrane process. The 
sampling aims to idenƟfy if there are any diﬀerences between sludge generated from the 
membrane process and tradiƟonally generated backwash sludge. 
14.1.1 Membrane Filtration of Backwash Water at Birkerød Waterwork 
Birkerød Waterworks supplies approximately 1.1 million m3 of water annually. The waterwork 
comprises two lines, each with three primary and three secondary filters (Figure 37). After 
backwashing, the water is temporarily directed to a storage tank before proceeding to the 
membrane process unit. During this interim storage, a sedimentation process initiates, 
accumulating sludge in the tank's bottom over time. During the membrane process, the backwash 
water undergoes microfiltration, with 95 % of the backwash water recycled back into the filtration 
cycle for water production (Figure 21).  
Figure 36 Water treatment process with membrane process to clean backwash water. Black arrows represent 
flow of waste streams and blue arrows represents flow of water. 
==PAGE:94==
 
 
88 
 
Within the membrane unit, iron, manganese, and other 
elements in the backwash water progressively settle on 
the membranes and at the base of the unit (Figure 38B). 
The membranes undergo backwashing when the sludge 
reaches a predetermined level to prevent clogging. The 
backwashing process utilises backwash water, resulting 
in a mixture of backwash water and sludge in the outlet 
of the membrane unit (Figure 38C).  
The waste stream from the membrane process is 
directed to the sewer since the waste management 
facility's disposal cost is higher than the discharge tax.  
 
 
Figure 37 Open sand filters at Birkerød Waterworks. 
Left: Secondary filter with a black colouration due to 
the presence of manganese. Right: Primary filter with 
an orange/brown colouration due to the presence of 
iron.  
A 
B 
C
D 
Figure 38 A) Membrane unit from Split Water Nordic at Birkerød Waterworks. B) Interior of the 
membrane unit before membrane cleaning. C) Outlet from the membrane unit after membrane 
backwashing. D) Samples collected from inside the membrane unit (left) and from the outlet (right) at 
Birkerød Waterworks. 
==PAGE:95==
 
 
89 
 
14.1.2 Sampling Procedure and Analysis  
Sampling necessitated emptying the unit of backwash water to 
access the bottom and manually scraping sludge from the 
bottom using a plastic container affixed to a disinfected stick, 
accessed by crawling into the facility.  
Despite the procedural complexity, samples of approximately 
two times 50 ml of sludge were obtained. After sludge sampling, 
a brief membrane backwash was conducted, and two samples 
(250 ml each) of the outlet water, a mixture of sludge and 
backwash water used for cleaning, were collected (Figure 38D). 
Samples from the bottom of the backwash water storage tank 
were handed over by the waterworks (Figure 39).  
Samples were stored at 5 °C until analysis. Samples were 
acidified with 65% HNO3 to a final concentration of 2% and 30% 
HCl to a final concentration of 1% to open the complexation of 
bound elements. Each sample was analysed thrice using ICP-MS 
analysis performed at DTU (building 113). 
14.1.3  Data Analysis  
The composition of elements in the backwash sludge samples from Birkerød Waterwork did not 
differ from the backwash sludge data discussed in this project (Table 25). The samples confirmed 
that backwash sludge contains silicon (Si) and constitutes around 3%. Additionally, two transition 
metals, vanadium (V) and cobalt (Co), that were not previously measured in the dataset were 
detected in backwash sludge from Birkerød.  
There were no substantial differences in concentration levels among the three types of samples, 
except for higher dry matter content and manganese levels found in sludge from the bottom of 
the storage tank. The concentration of cobber was higher in the sample from the outlet of the 
membrane unit. This could be due to contamination from certain parts of the membrane process 
units that contain cobber.  
In summary, using the membrane process to recycle backwash water does not affect the quality of 
the backwash sludge. Furthermore, backwash sludge can be reused in the same applications as the 
rest of the backwash sludge produced in Denmark. 
At Birkerød Waterwork, the backwash sludge from the bottom of the backwash water storage 
tank is currently disposed of in a landfill. However, the sludge has high-quality properties due to its 
high iron content and low arsenic and heavy metals levels, and the utility was encouraged to 
explore recycling options.  
 
 
Figure 39 Backwash sludge sample from 
the bottom of backwash water storage 
tank at Birkerød waterwork. 
==PAGE:96==
 
 
90 
 
 
Table 25 Dry matter content and concentration level of chemical elements in backwash sludge from the bottom of the 
water storage tank, the bottom of the membrane unit, and the outlet of the membrane unit from Birkerød 
Waterwork. Remarkable higher values are marked in bold.  
Sample 
Sludge - bottom of backwash water 
storage tank 
Sludge - Bottom of 
membrane 
Water and sludge from the 
backwash of the membrane 
Dry matter content 
(% DM) 
18% 
8.9% 
1.6% 
Fe (g/kg DM) 
459 
439 
410 
Si (g/kg DM) 
29 
28 
30 
Ca (g/kg DM) 
48 
45 
50 
P (g/kg DM) 
5.8 
5.8 
6.5 
K (g/kg DM) 
0.3 
0.2 
0.3 
Mn (g/kg DM) 
6.8 
2.7 
2.0 
Mg (g/kg DM) 
1.0 
1.0 
1.7 
S (g/kg DM) 
< 3 
< 3 
< 3 
As (mg/kg DM) 
3.2 
2.0 
2.5 
Pb (mg/kg DM) 
0.1 
0.1 
0.2 
Cd (mg/kg DM) 
<0,5 
<0,5 
<0,5 
Cr (mg/kg DM) 
1.3 
1.8 
2.4 
Hg (mg/kg DM) 
0.1 
<0,5 
0.1 
Zn (mg/kg DM) 
1.5 
2.5 
3.0 
Cu (mg/kg DM) 
0.9 
3.9 
6.7 
Ni (mg/kg DM) 
1.1 
0.6 
0.9 
V (mg/kg DM) 
3.2 
3.2 
3.5 
Co (mg/kg DM) 
0.5 
0.2 
0.3 
Sr (mg/kg DM) 
952.5 
874.7 
927.9 
 
 
 
 
==PAGE:97==
 
 
91 
 
14.2 Appendix B - Excel Sheet (CONFIDENTIAL) 
Please note that Appendix B contains confidential information and is not to be shared or 
distributed without prior authorisation. 
14.2.1 Calculation of Chemicals (FeCl3) Applied in Danish WWTPs 
In 2015, 33,000 tons of chemicals corresponding to FeCl3 were used in Danish WWTPs 
(Miljøstyrelsen 2015a). Additionally, most Danish biogas plants also use FeCl3 or other chemicals. It 
has not been able to quantify the total amounts of FeCl3 used in biogas production. Assuming 100 
biogas plants in Denmark use the same amounts of FeCl3 as a small biogas plant in Denmark 
(Dansk Biogasrådgivning A/S 2019), 20,000 tons of FeCl3 are applied in biogas plants annually, and 
a total of 53.000 tons of FeCl3 is estimated to be applied annually in Denmark. 
14.2.2 All Data (AD) 
14.2.3 Average Data Waterworks and Utilities (WU) 
Average concentration levels of chemical elements from individual waterwork and utilities 
14.2.4 Arsenic and Iron Levels Data (As and Fe LEV) 
14.2.5 Correlation Between As and Fe and As and P Levels in Backwash Sludge Data (As Fe and P 
COR) 
14.2.6 Heavy Metals Data (HV) 
14.2.7 Including Oxygen in Chemical Composition of Backwash Sludge (OE) 
Example of calculation for average percentage of Fe2O3 in backwash sludge dataset: 
Mole ratio of Fe and O in Fe2O3 is 0.67 molFe/molO. MWFe is 55.84 g/mol, MWO is 16 g/mol and mFe 
is 351 g/kg DM (Average Fe in dataset).  
𝑚𝑜𝑙ி௘= 𝑚ி௘
𝑀𝑊ி௘
=
351
𝑔
𝑘𝑔 𝐷𝑀
55.84 𝑔
𝑚𝑜𝑙
= 𝟔. 𝟑𝒎𝒐𝒍𝑭𝒆
𝒌𝒈 𝑫𝑴 
𝑚𝑜𝑙ை= 𝑚𝑜𝑙ி௘
𝑚𝑜𝑙ி௘
𝑚𝑜𝑙ை
=
6.3 𝑚𝑜𝑙ி௘
𝑘𝑔 𝐷𝑀
0.67 𝑚𝑜𝑙ி௘
𝑚𝑜𝑙ை
= 𝟗. 𝟒𝒎𝒐𝒍𝑶
𝒌𝒈 𝑫𝑴 
𝑀𝑎𝑠𝑠 𝑜𝑓 𝑂 (𝑚ை) = 𝑚𝑜𝑙ை ⋅ 𝑀𝑊ை= 9.4 𝑚𝑜𝑙ை
𝑘𝑔 𝐷𝑀⋅  16
𝑔
𝑚𝑜𝑙ை
= 𝟏𝟓𝟎. 𝟗
𝒈𝑶
𝒌𝒈 𝑫𝑴 
𝑚ை[
𝑔
𝑘𝑔 𝐷𝑀] + 𝑚ி௘[
𝑔
𝑘𝑔 𝐷𝑀]
1000 [
𝑔
𝑘𝑔 𝐷𝑀]
⋅ 100 = 𝟓𝟎. 𝟐 % 𝑭𝒆𝟐𝑶𝟑  
14.2.8 Estimated Annual Water Production of 10 Utilities represented in the data (WP) 
The total annual water production from 10 out of the 12 utilities represented in the dataset was 
estimated (127 million m3) based on publicly available data (e.g. information from the utilities 
==PAGE:98==
 
 
92 
 
webpages), which accounts for around 33 % of the total water abstracted in Denmark in 2022 (383 
million m3) (Danmarks Statistik 2023).  
14.2.9 Mass Balance of Backwash Sludge and Economy (MAS and ECO) 
The mass balance of Danish backwash sludge from 18 utilities was calculated as follows: 
 The utility provided the annual backwash sludge production, either as an estimation or 
listed in transportation papers. 
 In cases without data, the backwash sludge amount was estimated based on the utility’s 
annual water production. It was calculated using the relation that for every 1000 m3 of 
water produced, 4.7 kg of dry matter of backwash sludge is produced (Symbiosis center 
2014).  
When backwash sludge amounts were given in dry matter, the average dry matter content (14 %) 
from the dataset was applied to calculate the amount in tons.  
14.2.10 Estimated Annual Water Production of 10 Utilities represented in the data (WP) 
The total annual water production from 10 out of the 12 utilities represented in the dataset was 
estimated (127 million m3) based on publicly available data (e.g. information from the utility 
webpages), which accounts for around 33 % of the total water abstracted in Denmark in 2022 (383 
million m3) (Danmarks Statistik 2023).  
14.2.11 List of Contacted Utilities (CU) 
14.2.12 Spiderwebs (SW) – Correlation between iron, arsenic, cadmium, and nickel levels in 
backwash sludge  
Cadmium is multiplied by a factor of 100, nickel by a factor of 10, and iron is divided by a factor of 
1000 to compare all concentrations in the same plot.  
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
WW1
WW2WW3
WW4
WW5
WW6
WW7
WW8
WW9
WW10
WW11
WW12
WW14
WW15
WW16
WW17
WW18
WW19
WW20
WW21
WW22
WW23
WW24
WW25
WW26
WW27
WW28
WW29
WW30
WW31
WW32WW33
Fe
As
Cd
Ni
==PAGE:99==
 
 
93 
 
 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
WW1
WW2
WW3
WW4
WW5
WW6
WW7
WW8
WW9
WW10
WW11
WW12
WW14
WW15
WW16
WW17
WW18
WW19
WW20
WW21
WW22
WW23
WW24
WW25
WW26
WW27
WW28
WW29
WW30
WW31
WW32
WW33
Fe
As
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
WW1
WW2
WW3
WW4
WW5
WW6
WW7
WW8
WW9
WW10
WW11
WW12
WW14
WW15
WW16
WW17
WW18
WW19
WW20
WW21
WW22
WW23
WW24
WW25
WW26
WW27
WW28
WW29
WW30
WW31
WW32
WW33
As
Cd
Ni
==PAGE:100==
 
 
94 
 
 
 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
WW1
WW2
WW3
WW4
WW5
WW6
WW7
WW8
WW9
WW10
WW11
WW12
WW14
WW15
WW16
WW17
WW18
WW19
WW20
WW21
WW22
WW23
WW24
WW25
WW26
WW27
WW28
WW29
WW30
WW31
WW32
WW33
Fe
Ni
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
WW1
WW2
WW3
WW4
WW5
WW6
WW7
WW8
WW9
WW10
WW11
WW12
WW14
WW15
WW16
WW17
WW18
WW19
WW20
WW21
WW22
WW23
WW24
WW25
WW26
WW27
WW28
WW29
WW30
WW31
WW32
WW33
Cd
Ni
