==PAGE:1==
Arial NeoSansPro-Medium.otf NeoSansPro-Regular.otf NeoSansPro-Medium.otf
i
==PAGE:2==
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis inter-
face that allows volume change
Master Thesis
==PAGE:3==
==PAGE:4==
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume
change
Master Thesis
2023
By
Dea Bajo
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title,
etc.
Cover photo:
Vibeke Hempler, 2012
Published by:
DTU, , , Denmark
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (electronic version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (electronic version)
ISSN:
[0000-0000] (printed version)
ISBN:
[000-00-0000-000-0] (printed version)
==PAGE:5==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared over six months.
Dea Bajo - s232105
Signature
Date
ii
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
The aim of the project it to create a new technology to solve the volume fluctuation
problem, overcoming the limitations of current solutions by developing a method that is
easy, economical, adaptable, and fast. To achieve this goal, a single-layer printable socket
was designed using SLS (Selective Laser Sintering) 3D printing technology with PA 2200
powder. The idea was based on incorporating flexible structures into the socket design,
taking inspiration by compliant mechanism and stent - strut.
To validate the idea and determine if the application of flexible patterns would still ensure
stability, the socket was tested under the assumption of no support system. The tests for
model validation were conducted referencing to e DS/EN ISO 10328:2016 , evaluating Von
Mises Stress and displacement:at first the test applied to a socket modeled as a truncated
cone and aftetwords the same tests were applied to a socket modeled on the stump shape.
To obtain comparable results with the literature, the behavior of the limb inside the socket
under standing conditions was evaluated using a socket-thigh-femur model.
The results demonstrated the stability of the defined pattern, with limited, yet present,
flexibility in compression. This outcome was later confirmed through the printing of the
model. We can conclude that it is possible to incorporate flexible parts while ensuring
a adequate rigidity. Additionally, with the hypothesis of using a lacing system to ensure
overall stability, the compressibility of the springs can be increased to higher levels.
Hello, here is some text without a meaning. This text should show what a printed text will
look like at this place. If you read this text, you will get no information. Really? Is there
no information? Is there a difference between this text and some nonsense like “Huardest
gefburn”? Kjift – not at all! A blind text like this gives you information about the selected
font, how the letters are written and an impression of the look. This text should contain
all letters of the alphabet and it should be written in of the original language. There is
no need for special content, but the length of words should match the language.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
iii
==PAGE:7==
Acknowledgements
Dea Bajo, MSc Health and Technology, DTU
Niels Leergaard Pedersen
Supervisor
Laura Gastaldi
Supervisor
Snapform ApS
Start-up
iv
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:8==
Contents
Preface
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction and background
1
1.1
Anatomy
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Transfemoral amputation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
Socket . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.4
Volume fluctuation problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
1.5
Gait Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2
Idea design
26
2.1
General shape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
2.2
Thickness, Layers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
2.3
Material and Laces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
2.4
Ideas volume accomodation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
2.5
Ideas sitting accommodation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
2.6
Final idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
3
Idea design implementation
47
3.1
Testing method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
3.2
Material and Workflow
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
3.3
Springs design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
3.4
Socket design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
4
Testing and results
70
4.1
Mesh and material properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.2
Boundary condition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
4.3
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
5
Real limb
77
5.1
Limb scanning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.2
Data acquisition
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
5.3
Volume editing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
5.4
Socket building . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
5.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
6
Body Weigth comparison
87
6.1
Assembly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
6.2
Mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
6.3
Boundary conditions and constrains
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
6.4
Material properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
v
==PAGE:9==
6.5
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
7
Printing and future work
95
7.1
Assembly
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
95
8
Conclusion
102
Bibliography
103
A Title
107
vi
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 1
Introduction and background
This section provides some general and background knowledges that were necessary to
consider for the development of the work.
1.1
Anatomy
This section initially provides a general overview of the terminology used in medicine to
refer to anatomical compartments, followed by a brief description of the specific anatomical
part this work is focused on.
1.1.1
Nomenclature
Reference planes
In anatomy, three main reference planes are used (fig.1.1) to describe the body:
1. Sagittal plane: It is perpendicular to the ground and divides the body into left and
right, it is also known as the longitudinal plane.
The midsagittal or median plane passes through medial structures, while all other
sagittal planes (also called parasagittal planes) are parallel to it.
2. Coronal or frontal plane: It is perpendicular to the ground and divides the body
into dorsal (back) and ventral (front) parts.
3. Transverse plane: It is parallel to the ground, thus separating in humans the upper
part from the lower part, or in other words, the head from the feet, more precisely,
it divides the body into cranial (head) and caudal (tail) portions, it is also known
as the axial plane or cross-section.
Reference positional terms
1. Distal and Proximal: These terms are primarily used to describe parts of the limbs.
• Distal: Indicates a part that is farther from the trunk of the body.
• Proximal: Refers to a part closer to the trunk.
2. Superior and Inferior:
• Superior (cranial): Indicates a position closer to the head.
• Inferior (caudal): Refers to a position closer to the feet.
3. Anterior and Posterior:
• Anterior (ventral): Refers to the front of the body.
• Posterior (dorsal): Refers to the back of the body.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
1
==PAGE:11==
Figure 1.1: Reference planes and axis description
Reference axes
1. Sagittal: It passes horizontally from back to front and is formed by the intersection
of the sagittal and transverse planes.
2. Frontal: passes horizontally from left to right and is formed by the intersection of
the frontal and transverse planes.
3. Vertical: passes vertically from bottom to top and is formed by the intersection of
the sagittal and frontal planes.
[1] [2]:
2
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:12==
1.1.2
Femur
Structure and function
Figure 1.2: Femur
The femur is the longest, heaviest, and strongest bone in the human body. There are two
notable bony bumps, the greater and lesser trochanter, which are connected to muscles
that help move the hip and knee. The angle between the neck and the shaft (inclination
angle) is about 128 degrees in an average adult but decreases with age. [3] The femur is
a key part of two important joints, essential for locomotion:
1. Hip joint: It is a ball-and-socket joint where the socket part of the pelvis holds the
ball-shaped head of the femur [3]. Its crucial functions it to constrain translation
between the femur and acetabulum while allowing rotational and planar movements
[4]
2. Knee joint: It is a sliding hinge joint and consists of the medial tibiofemoral joint,
the lateral tibiofemoral joint, the patellofemoral joint, and the proximal tibiofibular
joint. Numerous ligaments provide passive stability in all directions to the knee joint
(the medial and lateral condyles that join the femur to the tibia [3]). In our daily
activities, the knee carries much of our body weight, allowing for a wide range of
flexion-extension and internal-external rotation movements. The fundamental prin-
ciples of knee joint kinematics are rolling, gliding, and rotating allowing for a range
of motion of six degrees of freedom. The rotational movement consists of flexion-
extension, internal-external and varus-valgus. Translational movement is possible
in the anteroposterior and medial-lateral directions, as well as by compression and
distraction of the knee joint. [5]
Both the hip and knee joints are covered with cartilage to reduce friction and allow smooth
movement (sinovial joints) [3].
The femur plays a crucial role in bearing the weight of the upper body and ensuring
stability during walking, working in conjunction with the main joints.
As is show is highly relevant the presence of the knee joint, indeed this it’s absence is one
one the most relevant issue that trasfemoral prosthestics occurs. [3] [6]
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
3
==PAGE:13==
1.1.3
Thigh muscles
The thigh muscles are grouped into four compartments: anterior, medial, posterior, and
gluteal and the femur is contained in the anterior compartment [7],but it is more common
to divide them into three main compartments relying on the movement they provide (thus,
muscles in the same compartment have similar functions). [3] Muscles primarily produce
movement but also stabilize the knee by keeping tension on the tendons and bones.
1. Anterior compartment: The anterior or extensor compartment contains the muscles
that flex the hip and extend the knee.
• Tensor fascia lata: Attaches from the iliac crest to the outer side of the thigh.
It can vary in length and can be absent or present in duplicate.
• Sartorius: Can be absent, partially absent, or duplicated.
• Pectineus.
• Iliopsoas.
• Psoas minor.
• Iliacus.
• Quadriceps.
2. Medial compartment:The medial or adductor compartment contains the thigh ad-
ductors .
• Pectineus: Can be divided into superficial and deep layers.
• Adductor longus and brevis: Can be divided into multiple parts or fused with
other muscles, such as the adductor magnus.
• Obturator externus.
• Gracilis.
3. Posterior compartment: The posterior or flexor compartment houses the prime hip
extensors and knee flexors.
• Biceps femoris.
• Semitendinosus and semimembranosus.
[3] [7] [6]
4
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:14==
(a) Thigh muscles compartments: anterior, pos-
terior, medial
(b) Leg movement
Figure 1.3: Thigh and leg images
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
5
==PAGE:15==
1.2
Transfemoral amputation
The term amputation refers to the total removal of a limb or part of it, in medical settings,
it can sometimes also refer to the removal of other organs. Furthermore, another form of
amputation is spontaneous amputation, which occurs when an extremity or part of it falls
off due to dry gangrene or other pathological processes.[8]
Limb amputation can be broadly divided into upper and lower limb amputations, with
further classifications depending on the specific part of the body involved, such as the
hand, forearm [9] , foot, or leg [10].
Losing a limb presents numerous physical, psychological, and social challenges, signifi-
cantly impacting overall health and quality of life [11]. This necessitates the development
of new strategies to manage daily life and social interactions.
Of the approximately 40 million people with amputations worldwide, about 36 million
(90%) are lower limb amputees, with an estimated 26% being trasfemoral, these individuals
face additional challenges due to the absence of the natural knee joint compared to those
with transtibial amputations.
[12] [13]
In 2005, an estimated 1.6 million people in the United States were living with the loss of
a limb, this number is expected to more than double, reaching 3.6 million by 2050. [14]
1.2.1
Causes lower limb loss
• Disvascular disorders
Peripheral Arterial Disease (PAD): Ischemia due to PAD is a primary cause of ampu-
tations, as it reduces blood flow to the limbs, resulting in chronic wounds, infections,
and tissue death. Diabetes mellitus (DM), closely associated with ischemia, was iden-
tified as the main predisposing factor for amputation. Major amputations, which
involve removal of the limb through or above the ankle or wrist, are often necessary
due to severe ischemia and chronic infections that cannot be managed with minor
interventions. On the other hand, minor amputations, which involve removal be-
low the ankle or wrist, are sometimes performed to manage localized ischemia and
preserve as much function of the limb as possible. [15]
• Diabetes
Diabetes involves a vascular deficit, i.e., a decrease in blood flow to the lower limbs
caused by the alteration of the vessels themselves due to the high and prolonged
concentration of glucose in the blood. This determines a greater risk of ischemia of
the lower extremities with the formation of diabetic ulcers, which, if not correctly
treated, can lead to gangrene and necrosis. Diabetes can be divided into two different
categories: type I diabetes mellitus, when the β cells of the pancreas do not produce
suﬀicient insulin to regulate the concentration of glucose in the blood, and type II
diabetes mellitus, which manifests itself with insulin resistance, the body’s inability
to respond correctly to insulin production. Type II occurs predominantly in elderly
subjects and represents 90% of cases. [16]
• Traumas
Amputations due to trauma are another significant cause of limb loss. Common
causes include workplace accidents, automobile accidents, and combat injuries in
war veterans.
6
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:16==
The majority of traumatic amputations involve the upper limbs, representing 68.6%
of the total.
Traumatic amputations in war veterans are particularly relevant, with many soldiers
suffering multiple amputations and other complex injuries, including head trauma
and mental health problems. [17]
• Cancer
The main tumors that lead to amputation are osteosarcoma and Ewing’s sarcoma,
which mainly affect children and young adults. Most cancer-related amputations oc-
cur in the lower extremities, with no significant differences between races or genders.
In recent years, rates of amputation for cancer have decreased due to advances
in early diagnosis and treatment, allowing limb-saving interventions rather than
amputations.
Surgical resection techniques and the use of bone prostheses have
improved limb preservation.
Although amputations for cancer are less common,
they remain crucial in the management of bone malignancies.
Medical advances
have reduced the need for amputations, improving the chances of limb preservation
and patients’ quality of life. [15]
Focusing on the lower limb amputations, the stump (the residual limb after amputation)
can be classified in [ISO STANDARD 8549-2]:
• Partial foot amputation: Amputation of the lower limb distal to the ankle joint.
• Toe phalangeal amputation: Amputation of one or more toe phalanges.
• Metatarsophalangeal disarticulation: Amputation of one or more toes.
• Metatarsal amputation: Amputation of a part of the foot through one or more
metatarsals.
• Tarsometatarsal disarticulation: Amputation of part of the foot at one or more of
the tarsometatarsal joints.
• Tarsal amputation: Amputation of a part of the foot through any of the tarsal bones
and/or joints.
• Ankle disarticulation: Amputation of the lower limb at the ankle joint.
• Transtibial Amputation - TA or (Below Knee Amputation - BKA): Amputation of
the lower limb between the knee joint and the ankle joint.
• Knee disarticulation: Amputation of the lower limb at the knee joint.
• Transfemoral Amputation - TF or (Above Knee Amputation - AKA): Amputation
of the lower limb between the hip joint and the knee joint.
• Hip Disarticulation: Amputation of the lower limb at the hip joint.
• Transpelvic Amputation (Hindquarter Amputation): Amputation of the whole lower
limb together with all or part of the hemipelvis.
[18]
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
7
==PAGE:17==
Figure 1.4: Main amputation levels: (b) transfemoral, (c) knee disarticulation, (d) trastib-
ial, (e) anke disarticulation, (f) transmetatarsal
8
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:18==
1.2.2
Tranfemoral amputation levels
The procedure involves amputating through the femur, the surgeon makes an incision
through the skin to isolate and ligate the nerves and blood vessels.
To minimize the
risk of neuropathic pain, the nerves are dissected under tension so their ends retract into
the tissues where they can heal away from the stump end. The femur is cut along its
perpendicular axis using an oscillating saw.
The optimal length of the residual bone is approximately 7.5-10 cm proximal to the su-
perior border of the patella. Very short transfemoral stumps often end up in abduction
due to an imbalance between the adductor and abductor muscles. Amputees experience
significantly higher energy expenditure, varying between 60% and 110%, leading to lower
expected levels of activity and mobility.
In a transfemoral amputation, the distal attachments of the thigh muscles are lost.
To preserve their function and length, a myodesis may be performed to anchor the adductor
muscles to the bone. The hamstrings and quadriceps may then be sutured together over the
distal end of the femur in a technique called myoplasty. This myoplasty of the antagonist
muscles helps pad the stump end to perform a Gottchaltk myodesis (adductor magnus
transosseously) fixed and covering the distal femoral end).
1. Long stump
• Provides the best leverage.
• Maintains better muscular balance by preserving the strength of the adductor
muscles.
• More energy eﬀicient.
2. Medium-length stump
• Reduced strength of the adductor muscles.
• Increased tendency for flexion and abduction.
• Higher energy expenditure.
3. Short stump
• Weakened adductor muscles, leading to significant imbalance.
• Results in a substantial increase in energy expenditure and can make the pros-
thesis feel heavy.
Figure 1.5: Illustration of different stump lengths: (a)-(1) long, (b)-(2)medium, (c)-(3)
short
[19]
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
9
==PAGE:19==
1.3
Socket
A TF prosthesis replaces a missing anatomical segments from below the hip to the foot.
[20]
Without going into the details of the entire leg prosthesis, we provide a quick description
of the components that make up a complete leg prosthesis for TF amputees. It can be
divided, fig.1.6 into four major components:
• Socket.
• Knee prosthesis.
• Pylon.
• Foot
[21]
Figure 1.6: Schematic subdivision component of a prosthesis leg
The main focus is on the socket component, as we said it is the main connection be-
tween the residual limb and the prosthesis and must distribute the forces through the
residual limb. The more intimate the socket the better the function and comfort of the
prosthesis[20].They are designed to be able to enclose the skin, tissue, muscle, and bone
of the residual limb and serve as an eﬀicient interface between the residual limb and the
prosthetic components. [22]
1.3.1
Socket shape types
Below are listed some of the most commonly used socket designs, however, it is important
to remember that a newer design may not be best for every amputee. Prosthetists adapt
their techniques to meet the needs and comfort of each amputee. There is no one grip
style that is best for all amputees or all situations. Some amputees may use different
styles throughout their lives, but as their needs and preferences change.
The fit and
appropriateness of a socket depend primarily on the individual making the prosthesis and
the satisfaction of the amputee. [21]
• SUB-ISCHIAL: socket featured by ischial weight bearing [23].
– Quadrilateral (QUAD):
The QUAD socket, developed in the 1950s, is also known as a quad socket
and has four walls, each with a specific function. The back wall, or seat, is the
10
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:20==
Figure 1.7: Ischial containment, Quadrilateral, Subischial
primary weight bearing area, supporting the ischial tuberosity and gluteal mus-
cles. This wall is thicker in the medial area to better support these anatomical
structures, and thinner in the lateral area where less support is needed.
Traditional QUAD sockets have a lateral wall the same height as the ante-
rior wall, but a prosthetist may choose to extend this wall beyond the greater
trochanter to increase lateral stability of the trunk. The medial wall is vertical
and parallel to the sagittal plane and serves to prevent lateral movement of
the socket during the stance phase. Typically, the medial and posterior walls
are the same height, but the medial wall can be lowered if necessary to relieve
pressure or discomfort on the pubic ramus.
Quadrangular sockets are generally designed to be in total contact with the
residual limb, thus preventing distal edema or inappropriate fluid retention in
the residual limb. Prolonged lack of total contact can cause significant skin
breakdown, discoloration and thickening of the skin.[21]
More recently, the QUAD design was mostly replaced by Ischial Containment
Sockets (ICS). [23]
– Hi-Fi: The Hi-Fi socket is based on a frame of 3-4 struts that extend longitu-
dinally and compress the limb. The fenestrations allow tissues to slightly stick
out. The compression areas stabilize the bone, reduce the motion with respect
to the bone and lock the skin. [23]
– Sub-ischial Northwestern + VAS
• ISCHIAL CONTAINMENT SOCKET (ICS)
– Narrow Medio-Lateral
ML socket was developed in the early 1980s to provide total contact with the
residual limb and full-surface weight distribution. This type of socket offers
greater comfort during loading and weight support, a more natural swing phase
and greater control of the pelvis during the stance phase. The narrow ML socket
envelops the entire residual limb, as well as the ischium and pubic ramus, which
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
11
==PAGE:21==
Figure 1.8: Schematic subdivision of socket shape types
are contained within the socket rather than resting on a ”seat”, as occurs in
the quadrangular socket. The narrow ML socket is believed to provide greater
rotational stability in the frontal plane than the quadrangular socket.
The
lateral wall of the narrow ML socket extends above the greater trochanter to
provide stability to the pelvis during the stance phase [21].
– Marlo Anatomical Socket (MAS): MAS combines greater containment (i.e. con-
tact) of the ischial ramus medially with lower anterior and posterior trim lines.
The MAS allows increasedmhip range of motion compared to either ICS or
quadrilateral sockets,providing suﬀicient control and stability for walking with-
out loss of passive suction suspension. [24]
– NSNA.
– Northwestern ICS.
– CAT-CAM.
• VARIATION:
Variations in the design of TF prostheses also exist include styles that incorporate
flexible internal liners or malleable thermoplastic materials supported by a smaller
or specific region-specific rigid frame. These types of prosthetics are usually used by
amputees who are more active and can better accommodate individual needs than
standard styles [21].
12
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:22==
The main components the socket comes into direct contact with are the:
• Suspension component.
• Attaching knee component (It will not be treated because it does not influence the
various phases for this stage of the work, what is interesting is the alignment of the
connection with respect to the socket).
1.3.2
Suspension methods
Suspension is the mechanism by which the prosthesis is kept fixed to the leg. When a
prosthesis is perfectly suspended there is no relative movement between the socket and
stump, when this movement is present (pistoning) the limb is subject to a loading pattern
different from what you expect and this can cause pain, breaking of the skin and reduction
of check of the prosthesis coupling [25].
• Suction suspension: Uses a slightly smaller socket than the stump, creating direct
contact between the skin and the socket material, with no room for air. This creates
a negative pressure that holds the denture securely. If air gets in, the denture will
not stay in place properly, causing blisters and sores. The user inserts the stump
into the socket and a valve at the distal end is removed and then replaced to create
the necessary negative pressure [21].
Figure 1.9: Suction
• Pin lock: This method uses a roll-on liner made of silicone or other elastomers,
with a pin mounted on the distal end that locks into the socket. The liner provides a
comfortable and secure interface, but may cause discomfort at the end of the residual
limb due to the up and down movement of the prosthesis, which may cause swelling,
pain, or blistering [21].
Figure 1.10: Pin lock system
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
13
==PAGE:23==
• Lanyard: The lanyard is a strap attached to the end of the cover that passes through
a slot in the socket and attaches with Velcro to the outside of the socket. This method
is easy to put on and remove, and some users report that it reduces discomfort when
walking [21].
Figure 1.11: Layarad
• Silesian belt: The Silesian belt is a belt that wraps around the waist and attaches to
the prosthesis via Velcro or buckle. It can be used when vacuum or liner systems are
not an option, or as an auxiliary suspension system to improve transverse rotation
control[21].
Figure 1.12: Silensian belt
14
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:24==
1.3.3
Alignment
An interesting aspect that could be useful in defining the testing, rather than the types
of connections between the socket and the knee prosthesis, is the definition of how it is
positioned to allow correct alignment.
The alignment of the prosthesis can be divided into two parts[21]:
• Static alignment: The prosthetist assembles them e goal is to provide the user
with the most natural, stable, and energy-eﬀicient gait possible.
– Bench alignment: The prosthetist assemble the prosthetic components without
the patient present. Usually, manufacturers of prosthetic components such as
knees and legs give recommendations for connecting them to the prosthetic
socket. [21].
– Static alignment: It is performed when the patient is standing in the prosthesis
and the body weight is evenly distributed on both limbs. The correct posi-
tioning of the entire prosthesis depends on the load line, which is a theoretical
vertical line that should pass through some anatomical points to ensure optimal
balance of the weights. The load line should run from the back of the hip joint,
the front of the knee, and even further away from the front of the ankle.
Generally speaking, the further the center of the knee is behind the reference
line, the more stable the prosthesis is. However, the further the knee is be-
hind the reference line, the more diﬀicult it will be to bend it into the final
position[26].
• Dynamic alignment: This alignment is based on monitoring the amputee’s gait
while wearing the prosthesis so that it is indicative of how the amputee uses and
controls the prosthetic limb as such during rehabilitation activities, the physical
therapist can perform an alignment assessment and provide feedback to the pros-
thetist for dynamic orientation. The position and direction of the knee, foot, and
pylon are adjusted in order to achive a normal gait, and limit the deviation from the
normal movement. This adjustment is often performed when the amputee is able
to ambulate for long periods of time and has established a ”normal” prosthetic gait
since may take several sessions and should include overcoming community obstacles
such as uneven terrain, stairs, and slopes [21].
1.3.4
Socket alignment
Focusing on the alignment of the socket itself, even in this case the adjustment values are
very different and there are no standards that define them.
This variation is extremely diﬀicult to quantify and standardize because it is very patient-
related and therefore it is customary to repeat the alignment of the prosthesis to the
patient several times and measure its orientation.
In this sense, the prosthetist plays a crucial role in alignment, since the same patient can
be assigned different alignment configurations. Target areas vary based on AP (antero-
posterior) and ML (mediolateral) views and by prosthetist [26] [27] [26].
However, there are different acceptable settings for each patient, which indicates that there
is no single ”optimal alignment”, but rather different settings that may be individually
satisfactory. In patients with ABK amputation, a linear relationship between the AP slope
of the socket and the AP displacement of the knee was generally observed. Tolerance
of different bulb alignments is clearly related to their prosthetic control based on each
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
15
==PAGE:25==
patient’s unique region configuration, in particular TF amputees showed greater sensitivity
to AP slope than ML slope[28].
Parameter
Range
Mean
Standard Devi-
ation (SD)
Socket AP Shift
-50 to 85 mm
11
6.3
Socket ML Shift
0 to 25 mm
8
5.2
Socket AP Tilt
-1 to 9 degrees
2.43
3.92
Socket ML Tilt
-1 to 7 degrees
3.67
5.42
Table 1.1: Acceptable average values of acceptable on a non-elderly patient group - socket
alignement.
Figure 1.13: Acceptable average values of for socket alignment
16
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:26==
Below are listed some of the alignment values used in other studies that have proven
effective.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
17
==PAGE:27==
Sagittal view
Alignment
Reference
Table 1.2: Alignment 1
Knee joint is aligned in order
to have the mechanical axis
that falls 15 mm posterior to
the vertical reference line.
[26]
Table 1.3: Alignment 2
The
vertical
reference
line
dropped from the bisector of
the medial brim (the BMB
point) should pass a minimum
of 6 mm ahead of a single-axis
knee centre as viewed from
the medial side.
[27]
Table 1.4: Alignment 3
Alignment performed using 3-
5° with respect to the con-
struction line.
[26]
Table 1.5: Alignment prosthetic leg - sagital view
18
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:28==
Frontal view
Alignment
Reference
Table 1.6: Alignment 1
Anatomical alignment: Three
alignment groups differenti-
ated by alignment as in range
(−2.5° and 7.4° valgus), varus
(more than −2.5°) and valgus
(more than 7.4°).
[29]
Table 1.7: Alignment 2
Lateral external shift of 2 cm
with respect to the knee pros-
thetics.
[26]
Table 1.8: Alignment prosthetic leg- frontal view
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
19
==PAGE:29==
1.4
Volume fluctuation problem
Changes in residual limb volume and shape lead to problems creating and maintaining
an accurate and comfortable fit of the prosthetic socket. These problems are particularly
severe for the immature residual limb (defined as <12 months post amputation) [30]
because edema and muscle atrophy occur post amputation causing various pain[31]. Thus,
during the first few months postamputation, socket fit must be adjusted frequently.
Shape and volume changes in the residual limb are believed important to change in limb-
socket interface pressure and shear stress distributions, which may in turn lead to socket
fit problems, including gait instability and skin break. [32]
Diurnal volume changes in mature residual limbs are the result of three interrelated mech-
anisms:
• Pooling of blood in the venous compartment.
• Arterial vasodilatation.
• Changes in the interstitial fluid volume.
Fluid movement in the residual limb is complex but in a basic sense it follows this mech-
anism: blood and plasma enter the residual limb through the arterial vasculature and
exit through the venous vasculature. The interstitial fluid system transports fluid through
tissue external to the venous or arterial systems. Interstitial fluid emerges from the arte-
rial vasculature and moves across arterial vessels into the interstitial space. The velocity
with which interstitial fluid moves is slow compared with arterial or venous blood flow
velocities. However, this interstitial fluid is likely very important to prosthetic socket fit.
When the volume of interstitial fluid moving from the arteries into the interstitial space is
out of balance with that moving from the interstitial space into the lymphatics or veins,
the residual limb change in volume. [30]
As in shown in table 1.9 the availability of data relating to the volume change for TF is
not as high as that of the TT, nevertheless the reference value that we will keep in mind
to define the volume change is that of 6
Subsequently, in order to solve the volume fluctuation problem some TF socket different
solutions have been developed, fig,1.14, such:
• Varus by Ottobock [36]
• Visit by Össur [37]
which offer advanced and highly effective solutions, divided into standardized sizes that
can be adjusted with a wheel and a lace system.
Moreover, also new TF socket solutions, fig.1.15 that offer a more economical and cus-
tomizable options are avilable:
• Socketless Socket by Martin Bionics [38]: The open socket designs dissipate heat
and keep the limb cool, which eliminates sweating issues for most users.
• RevoFit™by Ottobock [39]: It llows prosthetic users to micro-adjust socket fit
throughout the day to accommodate fluctuations in limb shape, and uses a custom
in silicone.
• Infinite Socket™by LIM Innovations [40]: Carbon-Fiber Struts. Each thermoplastic
carbon-fiber strut is custom-molded to the contours of the user’s limb and allows
the prosthetist to make modifications in response to shape and volume change.
20
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:30==
Table 1.9: Residual lower limb volume changes % range values
Amputation
type
Descriptions
Volume Change
Reference
TT
Postoperative + Af-
ter doﬀing + Initial
5 mins
0.2% – 17.0%
[33]
TT
12
weeks
post-
amputation
+
12
weeks
7.3% ± 10.6%
[30]
TT
post-amputation
+
23 weeks
17% – 35%
[30]
TT
New
amputees
+
14.2
weeks
–
28.5
weeks
5%
[30]
TT-TF
28.5
weeks
–
85.7
weeks
10%
[30]
TF
mature limb + don-
ning
-1.25 - +3.09%
[34]
TF
—
• total range (max val-
ues): -4.2 - +5.9 %
• within a day: -4.2 -
+2.6 %
• physical activity:
-
1.4 - +3.2 %
[35]
Existing volume accommodation systems include designs with open areas, to better adapt
to the shape of the residual limb and distribute pressure to provide volume accommodation
and improve the socket’s stability and comfort. The general limitations of these current
sockets are: costs, production times, requires an expert person for assembly, maintenance.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
21
==PAGE:31==
Figure 1.14: 1) Varus Socket, 2) One Visit
Figure 1.15: 1) Infinte socket 2) RevoFit 3) Socketless
22
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:32==
1.5
Gait Analysis
Walking is characterized by body control, the flexion of the trunk, head, and arms, and
the use of the legs, human walking uses the ”double pendulum” strategy 1.16.
The walking dynamics is described in fig. 1.16, its describes how the center of movement
(COM) follows a passive trajectory during the single support phase, similar to an inverted
pendulum [26] [41].
Figure 1.16: Double pendulum
A walking cycle begins with the heel touching the ground and ends when the same heel
touches the ground again. Each step is divided into two phases: support and swing.
Support Phase
In the support phase, one foot touches the ground and occupies about 60% of the cycle.
The supporting leg transfers the body’s weight forward and protects the center of gravity
from dropping too low, subsequently, the push begins when the heel lifts off the ground
thanks to the leg muscles, then, the support phase ends when one foot leaves the ground.
• Initial Contact (0%): This phase comprises the moment when the foot touches the
floor. The joint postures presented at this time determine the limb’s loading response
pattern [42] (Active muscles: gluteus maximus, gluteus medius, and peroneus).
• Loading Response (0-10%): The foot touches the ground until the other foot lifts
off for a step. Body weight transfers to the support leg, absorbing shock, transferring
weight, and moving the body forward. (Active muscles: quadriceps femoris and the
anterior tibial muscle).
• Midstance (10-30%): Begins with the elevation of the opposite leg and continues
until the full body weight is on the support leg. (Active muscles: posterior muscles).
• Terminal Stance (30-50%): The heel of the support leg lifts off the ground until
the opposite heel touches the ground.
• Preswing (50-60%): Ends with the toe-off. After the opposite foot touches the
ground, plantar flexion of the ankle and knee flexion increase, and hip extension
decreases.
Swing phase
The swing phase begins at the end of the support phase and occupies 40% of the cycle.
In this phase,(the leg swings back and forth, passing the vertical axis).
• Initial swing (60-70%): Begins with the foot lifting off the ground and ends when
the swinging leg is opposite the support leg.
• Midswing (70-85%): The swinging leg continues to move forward until it is in
front of the body and the tibia is vertical.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
23
==PAGE:33==
• Terminal swing (85-100%): Begins when the tibia is vertical and ends when the
foot touches the ground.
Many articles have been found in the literature which compare the normal gait to that of
an amputee [43] [44] but our aim is to recreate a normal situation for which they will not
be treated, it is instead important to underline the development of forces and moments
during walking. [26] [45]
Figure 1.17: Gait analysis
1.5.1
Moment involved during gait
During gait analysis is important to note that in the various phases the leg is subject to
different forces and moments due to the leg movement and muscular contraction. [46]
This observation is in fact made to underline how in the ISO standard that is used for
testing in Chapter 3, tries undergo this behaviour by recreating bending, twisting moment
and pressure load.
Figure 1.18: Normalized dynamic loads applied at the socket base on a patiant. Each line
represents forces in the three anatomical directions (medial-lateral, anterior-posterior, and
proximal-distal) with magnitude in Newtons (N).
24
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:34==
Figure 1.19: Normalized dynamic loads applied at the socket base on a patient. Each
line represents moments in the three anatomical directions (fexion-extension, abduction-
adduction and intro-extra rotation) with magnitude in Newtons per meter (N.m)
In the study evaluated [46] it is shown how during the various phases of the step the thigh
is subject to different force actions and moments. Each line represents the magnitude of
the force in an anatomical direction (anterior-posterior, medial-lateral and proximal-distal)
for the femoral extension segment, with reference to fig. 1.18 fig. 1.19
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
25
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 2
Idea design
Having given an introduction to the field of TF prosthetics, including considerations that
serve to justify some of the choices made during the work, having also introduced the
problem of volume fluctuation in TF amputees with related limitations in current solutions,
the aim of the project is to design a volume adjustable TF socket that overcomes the
limitations of current technologies.
The approach followed in all phases of the work carried out was set in order to break
down the problem into sub-problems and find the solution, this will be explained with
flow diagrams to simplify the treatment, avoiding the inclusion of all the intermediate
steps.
Thus, to effectively design the orthopedic socket, all the characteristics, problems to solve,
and relevant aspects are listed to provide an overview and were used as starting point to
divide and simplify the problem, fig. 2.1.
Figure 2.1: Workflow to define the most relevat socket features
As such, they are split into main categories such as functionality, comfort and safety,
customization, and production. Here is a detailed breakdown of the characteristics divide
into categories:
Functional and performance characteristics:
• Volume accommodation: Solutions to adapt the socket to changes in the limb’s
volume.
• Regulation for proper alignment: Ensuring precise alignment.
• Function as a rigid connection: The socket must act as a solid and secure connection.
• Suspension system: Implementing a suspension system that evenly distributes the
load.
26
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:36==
• Compatibility with physical activity: Ensuring that the socket can support various
physical activities without compromising functionality.
• Ease of adjustment and repair: Design that allows for simple and quick adjustments
and repairs.
Comfort and safety:
• Lightweight: Creating a lightweight socket to increase comfort.
• Proper anatomical fit: Design shaped to perfectly conform to the user’s physiology.
• Comfort: Materials and design focused on maximizing comfort during prolonged
use.
• Stability: Structure that ensures stability during movement.
• Ventilation and moisture control: Should guarantee a good ventilation.
• Ease of donning and doﬀing: Must be easy to donning and doﬀing.
• Resistance to external agents: Materials resistant to adverse external conditions.
Personalization and adaptability:
• Adaptability: Ability to modify the socket based on the user’s needs and changes.
• Interface with other components: Compatibility with various prosthetic components.
• Easy maintenance: Simple access to components for straightforward routine main-
tenance.
• Customization: Options for customization to meet the aesthetic or functional desires
of the user.
Production:
• Cost-Effectiveness: Approaches to reduce production costs without compromising
quality.
• Ease and speed of production: Production methods should be quick and eﬀicient.
These characteristics pertain to the entire socket, indeed there are several specific aspects
to consider. Among these, the shape of the socket itself and its connection to the knee
stand out, which includes considerations on the position and type of connection, as well
as the type of laces used to accommodate volume changes.
For our design, we focus exclusively on the shape of the socket, highlighting and delving
into only those aspects directly related to it; thus only marking those aspects previously
mentioned strictly correlated to the socket.
Hence, referring exclusively to the socket and keeping in mind the different criteria, various
aspects and parameters that need to be addressed and defined are evaluated.
These
include:
• General shape: Focus on the overall contour and design of the socket.
• Thickness (layers): Determination of the optimal thickness for functionality and
comfort.
• Laces: system used to compress the structure.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
27
==PAGE:37==
Figure 2.2: socket features
• Ideas to solve volume accommodation: Proposals for solutions to adapt the socket
to changes in limb volume.
• Ideas to solve the sitting problem: Development of strategies to enhance comfort
and functionality when the user is seated.
For the rest, as a first experimental approach, the same designs already in use for the TT
socket that the startup possesses will be used.
• Suspension: A liner with pin-lock closure that allows for the use of a high vacuum
suspension system. This enables the lowering of the socket edges, offering better
comfort and greater freedom of movement.
Figure 2.3: Pin lock system.
• Proximal attachment component : The same design for the transtibial socket previ-
ously developed, which consists of the connection between the socket and the knee
prosthesis (in the transtibial prostethics the knee component is not used but pros-
thetics industries produce similar attachment component) fig.2.4 .
In table 2 are listed all the criteria and the specific area´s socket are related with.
28
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:38==
Figure 2.4: Schematic illustration of an proximal attachment system.
#
Criteria / Problem to be Solved
Focus
Relevance
1
Volume accommodation
Socket
+++
2
Regulation -> Correct alignment
Connection
+++
3
Stability
Socket
+++
4
Function as rigid connection
Connection
+++
5
Effective suspension system
Connection
+++
6
Compatibility by physical activity
Socket
+++
7
Ease to adjust and repair
All
++
8
Lightweight
All
++
9
Proper anatomical fit
Socket
++
10
Ventilation / moisture control
Socket + Laces
++
11
Ease of donning and doﬀing
Socket + Laces
+++
12
Resistance to external agents
All
+++
13
Interface with other components
Connection
+++
14
Easy to maintenance
All
++
15
Customization
All
+
16
Cheap / Cheaper
All
+++
17
Ease and fast to craft
All
+++
Subsequently, each feature was assigned a degree of importance (high, medium, low), as
shown in table 2
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
29
==PAGE:39==
Afterwords, all the various features and parameters that need to be addressed (general
shape, thickness, volume accommodation, sitting accommodation) are asses and for each
of them ideas are given.
These ideas are compared using morphology tables, where the criteria used are the same
as those selected in the previous steps, to each criteria will be assigned a score, and the
sum of all scores of all criteria for a specific idea will give the total score, to clarify this
aspect are provided the morphology table for the n-layer, thickness, table 2.1 and table
2.2
Each individual score will be multiplied by a ’relevance factor’, table 2:
• 1 if the criteria is of high relevance (+++).
• 0.75 the criteria is of medium relevance (++)
• 0.5 the criteria is of low relevance (+).
In this way, the final score for each idea will reflect not only the scores assigned for each
criteria but also the relevance it.
Is important to notice that this evaluation is a qualitative assignment but based on a
critical evaluation, ensuring that the process of assigning scores and relevance factors
reflects thoughtful and considered judgments about the relevance and importance of the
various criteria.
2.1
General shape
Starting from the macro shape of the socket, using a vacuum suspension system allows for
lowering the edges of the socket, offering better comfort and greater freedom of movement.
This design should avoids pressing on the residual limb for support, instead wrapping
around the thigh and not resting on the ischium.
Hence, the primary intent is to create a subischial design, fig. 2.5shape with an internal
shape that directly adapts to the volume of the limb.
Figure 2.5: Socket shape selected
Figure 2.6: Socket shape selected
30
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:40==
2.2
Thickness, Layers
To define this characteristic is need to evaluate how many layers to use as first step.
Based on various considerations, although the 2-layer structure. 2.7 might ensure better
adherence to the limb, the 1-layer structure offers several advantages, such us the ability
to be entirely 3D printed without the need to add other pieces. For these reasons, a 1-layer
solution will be chosen.
Figure 2.7: 2-layers socket
n-layers
Description
1 layer
2 layers
v.
accommodation
7
8
stability
10
9
physical activity
10
9
adjust and repair
7
10
lightweight
4
8
proper
anatomical fit
10
10
ventilation
0
0
donning and
doﬀing
5
7
external agents
0
0
maintenance
7
10
customization
0
0
cheap / cheaper
8
10
ease and fast to
craft
8
9
final grade
126,5
137,5
Table 2.1: Morphology table: - layers
Subsequently, the thickness distribution is considerate.
We know that, generally speaking, the lateral-posterior proximal area is the one most
subject to pressures during the donning and standing phase [47].
Therefore, it might
make more sense to increase the thickness in the lower area, as this would likely be the
most optimal solution.
However, since we have not yet defined the mechanism to use for volume accommoda-
tion, we will use a homogeneous thickness distribution, this approach will also help us
understand how the entire system behaves.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
31
==PAGE:41==
Thickness
1
2
3
Description
homogeneous
thicker in the
lower part and
thinner going up
thicker in the lower
part and thinner
going up (proximal)
+ % thicker in the
part subjected to
high pressure
. accommodation
7
8
8
stability
10
1
9
physical activity
10
9
10
adjust and repair
10
10
10
lightweight
4
6
5
proper
anatomical fit
10
10
10
ventilation
0
0
0
donning and
doﬀing
0
0
0
external agents
0
0
0
maintenance
10
10
10
customization
0
0
0
cheap / cheaper
5
6
6
ease and fast to
craft
5
6
7
final grade
67.5
62
71.25
Table 2.2: Morphology table: Thickness
32
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:42==
2.3
Material and Laces
Material and laces used are provided by the start up.
Material
As material is used PA 2200 powder:
• Tensile strengh: 48 MPa
• tensile strength modulus: 1650 MPa
• Bending resistance: 41 Mpa
• elongation at break: 20
Laces
Figure 2.8: Different laces types: Boa system, metal hooke, plastic hook, strps, hook hooks
Figure 2.9: Click medical system
CLICK MEDICAL 2333 system is used as laces system, it uses a wheel, strap and guide
configuration to be able to tighten, fig. 2.9.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
33
==PAGE:43==
Figure 2.10: Ideas selected
34
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:44==
2.4
Ideas volume accomodation
The goal is to develop a solution that overcomes the limitations of existing approaches,
considering the advantages and disadvantages of each method already existing, hence, the
basic idea is to incorporate flexible zones that can be compressed as needed throughout
the day.
When incorporating flexible components, we must consider several aspects, including:
• Type of flexible component.
• Position.
• Distribution.
• Flexible component behaviour.
These aspects are crucial to ensure that the flexible components effectively perform their
role, providing both comfort and adequate performance.
2.4.1
Type of flexible component
Regarding the type flexible components, these were identified by taking inspiration from
both existing solutions and new mechanisms and three main ideas were considered:
• Open parts.
• Strut-stent idea based.
• Compliant mechanisms.
Open Parts
One possible strategy is to leave some areas of the socket open, as illustrated in the figure
2.11a; consider introducing openings along the socket itself.
Another idea under exploration involves a socket with a complete opening, which is closed
by a ´lid´ 2.11b . This lid can compress when necessary, providing a more localized and
less uniform compression.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.11: (a) Illustration of an open part solution socket (b) socket with concentrated
compression areas
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
35
==PAGE:45==
Strut - stant idea based
Stents are rigid support devices used in various medical applications to maintain the
patient of a hollow structure or vessel within the body.
The structural support of a stent is provided by the struts, which are the support structures
built as grid or frame of the stent itself, fig.2.12. These struts are essential for providing
the mechanical strength needed to keep a blood vessel or other body channel open after
implantation [48].
Figure 2.12: Different stunt pattern
The design of the stent’s structure is crucial to balance flexibility and rigidity, two fun-
damental characteristics for its effectiveness in various anatomical and pathological con-
ditions.
During implantation, stents must be flexible to navigate through tortuous blood vessels
without damaging the vascular walls. Once in place, the stent must keep the vessel open
and withstand internal pressures, such as blood pressure or the growth of tissue around
the stent. The necessary rigidity for these functions is provided by the mesh structure
and the materials used, such as stainless steel or cobalt-chrome alloys, which offer radial
strength to prevent vessel constriction.
The elements that characterize stents are, fig.2.15 :
• Mesh: Described as the repetitive unit of the stent.
• Strut: Refers to the components of the repetitive unit. These are the main elements
of the stent, which in turn can be defined by:
– Width.
– Thickness.
• Link: The elements that connect the different struts.
[49]
An interesting aspect of stents is that each component of the mesh is specifically designed
to support a particular stress, fig 2.14. This means that the mesh is assembled in such a
way as to resist and adapt to specific types of movement, thus optimizing its effectiveness
and durability over time. This targeted approach allows the stent to provide localized
support where it is most needed, enhancing the functionality and safety of the implant
[50]
An idea for addressing the ”volume accommodation” issue in a prosthetic leg socket in-
volves adopting flexible patterns similar to those used in stents, which can adapt to volume
36
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:46==
Figure 2.13: Stent element
changes while selecting the appropriate movement components in the ’strut’. This solu-
tion would allow the socket to tighten when necessary, adjusting to the residual limb’s
volume changes. Among the various patterns described in the literature, some of which
have been mentioned previously, those that prove to be most effective, considering the
size of the device and the materials used, are those illustrated in the following table 2.3.
Additionally, the integration of these patterns would be limited to certain localized areas
of the socket, not throughout its entirety. However, the limitation of this system is that
achieving compression towards the limb is complicated because it would require finding a
force that can adequately compress the area.
Table 2.3: Stent pattern selected
Pattern 1
Pattern 2
Pattern 3
Moreover, a significant challenges is associated to the materials used. While stents are
typically metallic and designed to remain within a vascular context with specific boundary
conditions, a prosthetic leg socket must consider potentially different materials (in this case
PA 12 SLS). Despite these differences, the basic idea could remain valid: using patterns
that allow circumferential compression of the socket, inspired by the mechanisms of stents,
but adapted to the logic and needs of prosthetic support.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
37
==PAGE:47==
Figure 2.14: Stent functionality
Compliant mechanism idea based
Compliant mechanisms, are devices that achieve force and motion through the elastic
deformation of their components rather than through traditional rigid body joints. These
mechanisms utilize the inherent flexibility of materials to perform their function, reducing
the number of moving parts and potentially decreasing the overall mechanical complexity
and maintenance requirements. This approach to mechanism design is often inspired by
biological systems and is useful in applications where minimizing wear, lubrication, and
backlash are important. Compliant mechanisms can often be manufactured from a single
piece of material, further simplifying assembly and improving reliability . [51]
Figure 2.15: Compliant system example: 1) normal solution 2) compliant solution
In this case, the use of compliant mechanisms is intended to incorporate specific areas
within the socket that can be compressed against the limb, as illustrated in the figure.
However, instead of using a ”lid” that is completely detached from the rest of the structure,
a component is introduced that remains connected to the sosket but can flex towards the
limb. This approach allows for greater flexibility and adaptability of the device, enhancing
comfort and effectiveness without compromising the overall structural integrity.
38
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:48==
The limit of this idea is that you need to find an effective way to compress the component
against the thigh
Some interesting mechanisms that could be useful for us are those shown in the table 2.4.
Compliant idea 1
Compliant idea 2
Table 2.4: Complian mechanism ideas
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
39
==PAGE:49==
2.4.2
Position
Incorporating flexible components into a prosthetic socket, regardless of type, necessitates
consideration of their strategic placement to ensure optimal functionality during everyday
use of the device.
To determine the most suitable positions for the insertion of flexible components, it is
crucial to first analyze the pressure distribution on the stump during gait analysis. This
analysis helps identify areas of higher pressure which can cause pain or discomfort to
the user. Typically, it is observed that the inner areas of the stump experience lower
pressures, making them more favorable for the insertion of flexible elements. These areas,
being less subject to high stress during walking, can benefit from increased flexibility
without compromising the stability of the prosthesis [47] [46].
Conversely, the antero-posterior and lateral areas of the stump tend to be less favorable for
integrating such components due to the high pressures exerted during ambulation. These
areas are crucial for maintaining stability and balance; therefore, preserving a certain
rigidity in these points is essential to prevent alignment problems and to provide the
necessary support during complex movements.
Figure 2.16: Illustration of an transverse view limb (red:critical, green:suitable)
Furthermore, it is important to place flexible components primarily in the proximal part
of the socket because the distal connection to the knee is rigid, prohibiting any flexion
in that area, fig. 2.17. This structural setup implies that achieving uniform compression
throughout the socket is unfeasible; the least compression will inevitably occur in the distal
part of the socket. Despite these constraints, the goal remains to maximize the uniformity
of compression as much as possible while maintaining stability.
2.4.3
Distribution
Another factor to consider is the distribution of the flexible components, this could be an
issue to the ’open part’ and ’stent’ - based ideas.
• Homogeneous distribution:
– Pro: A homogeneous distribution of flexible components can offer uniform com-
pression throughout the socket, contributing to a balanced distribution of pres-
sures on the residual limb. This can help minimize points of high pressure and
reduce the risk of irritation or injury.
– Cons: It can be diﬀicult to achieve because excessive flexibility in areas that
require more support can compromise the stability of the device.
40
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:50==
Figure 2.17: Illustration of sagittal view limb (red:not suitable, green:suitable
Figure 2.18: (a) Homogeneous distribution (b) Concentration in one part (c) Selective
distribution
• Concentration in one part:
– Pro: Concentrating flexibility in a specific area, such as the proximal part of the
socket where the need for adaptability may be greater, could decrease possible
instabilities.
– Cons: This approach can leave other parts of the socket relatively rigid, which
may not be ideal for some users, especially those with sensitivity or particular
skin conditions.
• Selective distribution:
– Pro: Selective distribution allows balancing flexibility and support, placing
flexible components in areas that benefit from greater adaptability (such as less
stressed inner zones) while maintaining rigidity in crucial areas for stability
(such as antero-posterior and lateral areas).
– Cons: Achieving uniform tightening across the socket can be challenging, which
might lead to uneven support and discomfort.
In addition to distribution, it is also important to evaluate the alignment of the flexible
parts. This assessment ensures that the flexible components are properly positioned, in
this stage, inclined flexible components are not insert.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
41
==PAGE:51==
Figure 2.19: (a) compression (b) expansion
2.4.4
Flexible component behaviour
• In expansion:
Laces are used to sustain and stabilize the structure. They are not used to adjust
the volume, as this is done automatically or naturally. However, additional laces can
be added to provide better socket control.
• In compression:
Laces are used to provide the correct volume adjustment, which should be done
manually by the patient when needed.
42
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:52==
Figure 2.20: Workflow: 1) idea to solve volume accommodation problem breakdown in:
2) different features to address, for each are given 3) possible solutions
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
43
==PAGE:53==
2.5
Ideas sitting accommodation
Another issue with sockets is their rigidity, which can cause discomfort for the patient
when sitting. Therefore, it would be advisable to explore solutions that make the socket
adaptable or flexible in certain areas, implementing these modifications could improve
patient comfort, reducing the risk of pressure sores.
To address this issue, the proposed ideas acknowledge that the rigidity of the socket cannot
be compromised too much. If the forces exerted while sitting are enough to deform the
socket, then the socket will not be able to maintain the necessary rigidity during walking,
when it is subjected to even greater forces. Therefore, the solutions must ensure a balance
between flexibility and stability, making sure that the socket remains suﬀiciently rigid
to support the patient while walking, but adaptable enough to provide comfort when the
person is seated. Additionally, since a person sits down multiple times throughout the day,
it is important to find a permanent solution that allows for this accommodation without
requiring the patient to tighten or loosen the socket every time.
Starting from these premises, the ideas to solve this problem focus on the application in
the back part of the socket. The basic idea is to insert ”meshes,” as shown in the fig.
2.21, that allow the back part of the socket to become ”flat” when the person sits down.
These meshes should provide greater adaptability and comfort while sitting, while still
maintaining the necessary rigidity during walking.
Figure 2.21: Different patterns
The insertion of these components should be in the proximal posterior part.
Figure 2.22: Position to insert back patterns
44
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:54==
2.6
Final idea
Figure 2.23: Ideas selected
Idea
After a series of observations and based on the morphology tables, the main advantages and
disadvantages of different socket design solutions have been identified. From this process,
a hybrid approach has emerged that combines the strengths of various technologies.
To select the design idea, a rigorous evaluation process was followed. Initially, open parts
were discarded as they could compromise the stability of the socket, thus undermining
overall safety and reliability. Subsequently, a compromise was found between the stent-
based approach and the compliant mechanisms approach.
The flexibility and adaptability of stents are useful, as these characteristics can significantly
improve patient comfort. However, stents ’patterns’ are too flexible in all directions, which
could lead to a loss of stability. On the other hand, compliant mechanisms are useful for
their ability to deform in specific directions, offering targeted flexibility.
The decision is made to combine both solutions, taking advantage of their benefits while
addressing their limitations.
Thus, the aim is to combine the ability of the compliant mechanism to push towards the
limb and the ability of the stent to be compressed circumferentially.
Specifically, the pattern 1, table 2.3 from the base stent idea was chosen for its general
flexibility, combined with the compliant 2 idea, table 2.4 of the compliant mechanisms,
both shown in table 2.5.
Position
It is decided to use the posterior position to also address the problem of sitting accommo-
dation. By incorporating flexible zones in the posterior part of the socket, both volume
accommodation and compression during sitting could be achieved. This approach would
address two problems with a single solution, improving both patient comfort while seated
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
45
==PAGE:55==
Table 2.5: Pattern selected
Idea stent
Idea compliant
and stability during walking.
Distribution
Regarding the distribution of the flexible components, in line with the previously discussed
positioning, it was decided to concentrate the volume accommodation in the posterior part
of the socket. Although this solution does not ensure completely homogeneous compres-
sion on the stump, it allows for better control of compression since it is more localized.
Additionally, since the compression occurs in a good part posteriorly, efforts are made to
distribute it in the posterior area.
Flexible component behaviour
Subsequently, regarding the type of behavior, a solution was chosen in which the socket
assumes the exact shape of the stump once worn, without being too tight or too loose.
This initial adaptability ensures maximum comfort and perfect alignment.
Laces will then be used to wrap around the flexible part of the socket, which can be
adjusted to further compress the socket when necessary.
Figure 2.24: Ideas selected drawing draft
46
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:56==
Chapter 3
Idea design implementation
Does this idea work?
Before starting to delve into the design phases, the type of testing is defined, this is useful
because it is used to understand the reasons for certain decisions and how the product
was developed. The basic premise is that we will try to find a model of socket shape that
contains flexible parts and that is able to support the loads of the tests without the help
of straps for this phase. Demonstrating this allows us to lay the foundations for being
able to develop sockets in which there are even more flexible springs supported by laces.
Note: all the different structures are made by using CREO parametric [52].
3.1
Testing method
The socket as an extremely personal and patient-related device does not in itself have a
standard to be tested in its form, which is why the start-up provided the use of the DS/EN
ISO 10328:2016 [53] standard for the lower prostetichs test, which is taken as a reference
and cue.
The DS/EN ISO 10328:2016 standard specifies the requirements and test methods neces-
sary to assess the structural integrity of lower limb prostheses. It details methodologies for
both static and cyclic testing, which are critical for evaluating the mechanical durability
and strength of the prostheses.
The main types of tests, load configuration and load levels specification detailed in the
standard are briefly describe as follow.
Test Type
• Proof test Static load representing an occasional severe event, which can be sus-
tained by the prosthetic device/structure and still allow it to function as intended.
– Objective: To verify that the prosthesis can withstand high loads without un-
dergoing significant permanent deformations.
– Method: The prosthesis is subjected to a static test force for a prescribed
duration. The force is applied according to two load configurations: one for the
initial maximum load (load condition I) and the other for the final maximum
load (load condition II).
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
47
==PAGE:57==
– Test forces: Specific forces are defined based on the test load levels (P3, P4,
P5, P6, P7, P8).
• Ultimate strength test Static load representing a gross single event, which can
be sustained by the prosthetic device/structure but which could render it thereafter
unusable.
– Objective: To determine the prosthesis’s capacity to withstand an extreme load
event, which could render it unusable.
– Method: A maximum static force is applied in a manner similar to the proof
test, but at higher values.
– Test forces: The ultimate force is typically 1.5 or 2 times the strength test force.
• Fatigue resistance test Cyclic load which can be sustained by the prosthetic
device/structure for a given number of cycles.
– Objective: To evaluate the prosthesis’s ability to withstand repeated loads that
occur during normal walking.
– Method: The prosthesis is subjected to cyclic loads that simulate walking con-
ditions.
Loads are applied in two load configurations (similar to the static
test).
– Number of Cycles: The standard specifies a prescribed number of load cycles.
Load configurations
• Load condition I:
– Simulates the maximum load that occurs at the start of the stance phase of the
step.
– A static test force is applied to represent the maximum load borne by the
prosthesis during this phase.
• Load condition II:
– Simulates the maximum load that occurs at the end of the stance phase of the
step.
Load levels specifications
• P3: The lowest load level, used for prostheses intended for users with lower body
weight and less intense activities.
• P4 and P5: Intermediate load levels, used for most standard users.
• P6, P7, and P8: Higher load levels, intended for prostheses for users with higher
body weight and more intense activities.
48
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:58==
In our case, the aim of testing is to determine whether the socket can withstand:
• Internal socket pressure.
• Forces producing torque moment.
• Forces producing bending moment.
• Pressure while sitting.
For this type of analysis, fatigue conditions and time-dependent analysis are not taken into
account, while we will focus on time-invariant and static analyses for which the socket will
be defined with Young’s modulus, Poisson’s modulus and density; Cpmparing Von Mieses
Stress which must remain below 45MPa (tensile strength value for the socket material).
To do this, therefore, we consider only proof test and strength test, skipping the cyclic
test. Nevertheless, it would be suﬀicient to do only one type(either proof or strength),
since the material is linear we can simply predict the result of one given the other. For
the sake of completeness, however, the two tests will be subdivided, due to the fact that
in the case of the strength test the socket could fail, while in the case of the proof test the
stress values must be limited and the socket must be able to withstand them.
As for the load conditions, within the limits of replicability, an attempt will be made to
reproduce both conditions.
As last, for what concern the load level specification, we will refer to P4 and P5 levels.
In order to have as consistent an analysis as possible, the values taken into consideration
will be those referring to the knee part.
3.1.1
Pressure
The first type of test involves the application of homogeneous pressure inside the socket to
evaluate its resistance to supporting the body. Three pressure values are considered, which
are calculated from forces under the assumption that the socket in a rigid connection so
the force applied to the knee is the same applied to the overall socket which distribute the
force homogeneously within it.
The pressure value P is calculated using:
P = f
A
where f is the force applied, and A is the internal surface area of the socket.
• Weight force:
f = Body weight (kg) × 9.8 m/s2
According to the DS/EN ISO 10328:2016, the maximum values for this test are predicted
from Table 8 in the DS/EN ISO 10328:2016, applicable regardless of whether it is Case I
or Case II.
• Proof tests force: 4480 N.
• Strength test force: 2240 N.
Since the weight force is smaller than the proof test we will only use the proof force as
a reference, to which we add the strength for the considerations made previously (notice
that strength test force > proof test force, because they have different application points,
however since pressure is defined their names should be swap, for seek of simplicity and
consistency with DS/ISO they are left the same).
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
49
==PAGE:59==
3.1.2
Twisting
The torque experienced in the thigh due to muscular contraction during walking can be
assimilated to a specific torque value taken from standard tables. According to Table 9 in
ISO standard , the moment is specified as:
Moment = 50 N · m
In the simulations, a pair of forces equal to
f = M
b
will be applied, where b is the distance between the axis passing through the upper cir-
cumference of the socket and the edge of the socket. This will be implemented under two
different conditions:
• Point application forces .
• Edge application .
3.1.3
Bending
Figure 3.1: Scheme point application forces: the study refers to knee level 5 ( fkandok)
50
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:60==
The application of forces to create a banding moments as defined by ISO serves to evaluate
the socket’s behavior in two different phases of the gait cycle.
In this case it is referred to the values of the forces referring to P4 and to cases I and II.
The direction of the forcing will in all cases be perpendicular to the ground and the
application points are shown in the fig. 3.2 with reference to fig. 3.1.
Figure 3.2: Offset values used
To keep the simulation simple only the proof test values are used (as the stress values for
the strength value application can be obtain linear from the results obtained by the proof
test)
Module forces:
• Proof test I: 2065 N
• Proof test II: 1811 N
Since a flexible component is also inserted, we carry out the same test with the applica-
tion points mirrored with respect to the socket, so as to also stress the posterior part in
compression. For simplicity all four cases have been summarized in the tables below.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
51
==PAGE:61==
Table 3.1: Application points - anterior
Proof test I
Proof test II
Table 3.2: Application points - posterior
Proof test I
Proof test II
52
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:62==
3.1.4
Sitting pressure
To define the sitting test, a constant pressure is applied to the socket back part (as shown
in the boundary condition) equal to the value of the pressure measured directly between
the thigh and the support surface. However this is an approximate value that relay on
how the person is sitting, the portion of the socket supported, the type of surface etc.
3.1.5
Screening test
In addition to the main tests carried out on the socket, preliminary ’screening’ tests were
also carried out to have a starting point for defining the shape of the springs.
In the first trial, therefore, the length of the springs and their thickness are kept constant.
The preliminary tests on the springs were aimed at discarding designs that were clearly
inadequate and identifying potential candidates for further consideration.
• The first test involved applying a traction or compression force of 5N, a standard
value used to eliminate springs that are too weak under light loads.
Once the spring pass this stage, the second test is done.
• The second test involved applying a specified pressure - 30000 Pa (coherent with the
pressure applied in the Pressure Test).
The attached table provides details on the boundary conditions and loading conditions
used during the tests.
Table 3.3: Boundary conditions - screening test
Description
Test 2
Fixed constrain
Load
Point load normal to
the applied surface
Pressure distribution
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
53
==PAGE:63==
3.2
Material and Workflow
Taking into consideration what has been said about the types of tests to be carried out,
this paragraph defines the materials and methods of how the work was conducted.
3.2.1
Measurements and volume reduction
In order to develop the idea a model cone trunk thigh model is used to approximate the
thigh volume.
Figure 3.3: blu:upper circumference level, red: lower circumference level
Measurements of the thigh were taken on female individual with a height of 1.60 meters
and a weight of 52 kg as demonstrated in the fig. 3.3, and the corresponding data are
displayed in the table 3.4 (values are increased of 2cm to permit wearability after printing).
The shape of the thigh was modeled as a truncated cone, with a uniform thickness of 7mm
throughout.
Table 3.4: Thigh measurements
Measurement
Value (cm)
Upper Circumference
57
Lower Circumference
40
Upper Diameter
18.2
Lower Diameter
12.7
Radius R
9.1
Radius r
6.4
Length
23
Volume (cm3)
4351.566
Considering a volume reduction of 6% the parameters are recalculated.
Table 3.5: Thigh measurements recalculated after 6& reduction
Measurement
Value (cm)
Volume reduction (cm3)
4090.5
Upper Circumference reduction
55.3
Lower Circumference reduction
38.8
Upper Diameter reduction
17.6
Lower Diameter reduction
12.4
R reduction (upper)
8.8
r reduction (lower)
6.2
Therefore the circumferences and the radius must be reduced by the values shown in the
table to guarantee a homogeneous reduction of 6%. As is shown in table 3.6, to guarantee
54
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:64==
a homogeneous reduction, the proximal and distal part must have a different compression
(lower distal, higher proximal), considering that it is complicated to reach a 6% reduction,
these values change and the gap difference decreases. For this reason, the starting idea
involves the spacing between the spring pins being defined as the same for all springs.
Measurement
Value (cm)
Upper circumference reduction
1.7
Lower circumference reduction
1.2
Upper radius reduction
0.4
Lower radius reduction
0.3
Table 3.6: Radius and circumferential to reduce in order to obtain 6% reduction.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
55
==PAGE:65==
3.2.2
Process
For simplicity, all the phases of the work a be summarized with the description adding
why certain choices were made and then only some of the most relevant models in the
various phases are shown.
The general process used for the various phases of the work is shown in fig. 3.4., subse-
quently are detailed the spring design and socket design processes.
Figure 3.4: Worflow: An implemented idea design goes through each test but if it fails in
one, goes back to the beginning point
56
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:66==
3.3
Springs design
The initial design component focused on is the lateral springs. For defining the appropriate
shape and functionality of these springs, several parameters are considered critical, and
each one influances the others:
• Spring’s length
• Width
• Pin’s umber
The initial design idea involves using a two-tier spring system. While keeping the length
fixed, we proceeded by varying the other important parameters.
To ’guess’ the initial length of the pin, the behavior of a beam subjected to pressure and
constrained was considered as first preliminary step.
Figure 3.5: stress in a beam
The specific formula used in the for calculating bending stress in a beam subjected to
pressure application:
σ = M · c
I
where:
• M is the maximum bending moment calculated as M = Fdistributed · L.
– Fdistributed is the total force resulting from the pressure distributed over the
area, defined as Fdistributed = p · Area_pressure, and Area_pressure is the area
of the beam’s surface exposed to the pressure, calculated as L · b.
• c is the distance from the neutral axis to the extreme fiber, which for a rectangular
section is h
2.
• I is the moment of inertia of the cross-section about the neutral axis, calculated for
a rectangular section as I = b·h3
12 .
What is calculated is that for a pressure of 32,000 Pa, the maximum stress value always
remains below the threshold value of 45 MPa.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
57
==PAGE:67==
Figure 3.6: stress vs beam length
Only the back quarter part of the socket is modified. The length is divided and a third
of the height is allocated to mitigate the stress. The upper section is divided into four
transverse areas: the central portion is reserved for the middle part, while the side areas
are designated for the springs.
Figure 3.7: Proximal - distal
subdivision
Figure
3.8:
medial
axis
springs definition
Figure 3.9:
Spring pattern
subdivision
58
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:68==
Figure 3.10: Workflow followed to achieve a suitable spring behaviour. The spring design
goes through the test, if fails, based on the problem, the structure is enhanced.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
59
==PAGE:69==
The general process followed to define the springs is detailed in the fig. 3.10. As already
mentioned, it is a matter of finding the right combination between number of pins, width
and length; below are listed few of the different shapes tested, each of them enhance a
different improved characteristic.
Table 3.7: Test 1 - ’screening’
Von Mises Stress in different spring design
Comment and result
We start with 3 mm width
and 70 mm length of the
spring.
The result shows
that the Von Mises stresses
under this static load are
on the order of 108 Pas-
cals, much higher than the
maximum strength it can
withstand.
Therefore, we
proceed by increasing the
width of the spring.
The
same
considerations
apply to trial 2.
How-
ever,
this time we can-
not increase the thickness,
as it would eliminate the
spacing between the pins.
Therefore, we reduce the
number of pins.
After reducing the number
of pins and increasing the
thickness in the rounded
part,
this spring,
under
these load conditions, ex-
hibits acceptable stress lev-
els. Therefore, we proceed
with this configuration.
60
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:70==
Table 3.8: Test 2 - ’screening’
Von Mises Stress
Comment
Also the test 2 is satisfied,
but as expected the gap
between the pins decrease,
this is necessary to guaran-
tee stability, mantainig the
same central part size.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
61
==PAGE:71==
3.4
Socket design
At this point, this shape was applied to the socket and the tests relating to the socket in
a row are carried out: pressure, twisting, banding and sitting; the workflow in fig. 3.11
shows the method followed; moreover the workflow in fig.3.12 defines the main steps to
build the socket draft, in CREO parametric the main limitation was the impossibility of
defining a solid and then bending it with different curvature radius to create a cone trunk,
for this reason, the illustrated procedure was used.
62
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:72==
Figure 3.11: Workflow socket design: the found spring is implemented in the socket that
goes through all the testes, if fails, based on the failure origin the structure is enhanced.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
63
==PAGE:73==
Figure 3.12: workflow in CREO parametric: 1) shell structure definition, 2) thickthick-
ening, so that the corners can be 3) rounded 4) mirror and twist the solid 5) apply the
pattern to the limb cone surface 6) trim the holes 6) thick the surface.
64
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:74==
Type 1:
Made with just two rows of springs, this socket at a pressure of 16,000 Pa shows stress
levels above the threshold, especially at rounded corners. This is due to the fact that the
spring, in addition to being subjected to pressure, is also pulled from the center, which is
also under pressure.
Figure 3.13: VMS - type 1
Type 2:
As a first attempt to evaluate whether to improve the stability of the central part, the
lower part was joined to the rest of the socket to contain the generation of high stress.
Despite a reduction, the stresses remain high, so the mere addition of a closed component
is not suﬀicient. The most significant stresses are concentrated in the rounded areas, the
connections between the springs and the socket, and inside the socket itself. To reduce
stress, the following techniques were adopted:
• Reduction in the length of the springs.
• Maintenance of the highest possible rounding value, finding a compromise so as not
to allow excessive movement that would still cause high levels of stress.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
65
==PAGE:75==
Figure 3.14: VMS type 2
Type 3:
Using four springs to reduce, the concentration of stress within the rounded areas decreases
but remains high in the hooks. By reducing the hooks, the spring is made less flexible,
which further contributes to stress reduction.
Figure 3.15: VMS - type 3
Type 4:
With this type, the stresses inside the socket are below the threshold, but only just. An in-
crease in pressure would almost double the stress. The tests at 16,000 Pa were satisfactory,
but this type of socket does not seem suitable. However, the stresses were significantly
reduced at the coupling with the outlet, suggesting that these types of couplings could be
acceptable in this design, although it is necessary to resolve the high stresses within the
66
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:76==
springs. It was noted that the stress is concentrated more in the upper part, so it might be
considered to make the upper springs stiffer than the lower ones. Before continuing with
the modification of type 4, the possibility of using five shorter springs, without placing
the coupling in the middle, is evaluated.
Figure 3.16: VMS - type 4
Type 5:
Attempting to significantly stiffen the springs, opting to shorten the springs and use five.
In this case, the springs concentrate more on the upper part, making the upper part that
needs it more rigid. The tests were satisfactory.
Figure 3.17: VMS - type 5
Type 6:
To improve socket type 3, it was chosen to thicken the areas with rounding, thicken the
contact areas with the socket, and instead of creating a concavity in line with the edge,
to recess the socket to maintain the same thickness but increase the radius of curvature
of the rounding.
The entire workflow defined previously led to the selection of socket number 6, the springs
are not symmetrical but each strip was defined differently as they are subject to a different
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
67
==PAGE:77==
Figure 3.18: VMS - type 7
force because the central part tapers distally and therefore the thimble springs are pulled
less from the central part, overall have:
• length: 38 mm
• spacing between pins: 3 mm
• spring corners width: 8 - 12 mm (decreasing proximally).
Figure 3.19: Spring description
A pattern description follows in the fig. 3.21.
68
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:78==
Figure 3.20: Areas most stressed in the presence of different type forcing stress.
Figure 3.21: Socket pattern selected
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
69
==PAGE:79==
Chapter 4
Testing and results
All tests are static tests aimed at guaranteeing the presence of stress below the limit of
45MPa, i.e. the stress limit supported by the material.
4.1
Mesh and material properties
4.1.1
Meh parameters
Element size parameters, fig. 4.1:
• Maximum element size: 0.03 m
• Minimum element size: 0.003 m
• Maximum element growth rate: 1.5
• Curvature factor: 0.5
• Resolution of narrow regions: 0.5
4.1.2
Material definitions
Socket properties
• Density: 900 kg/m3
• Young’s modulus: 1800 MPa
• Poisson’s ratio: 0.35
Metal beam properties
• Density: 2700 kg/m3
• Young’s modulus: 69000 MPa
• Poisson’s ratio: 0.35
4.2
Boundary condition
The general constrain condition was to constrain the extreme lower surface, fig 4.2. Other
boundary condition might be included, depending on the test type.
70
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:80==
Figure 4.1: Mesh
Figure 4.2: Boundary conditions
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
71
==PAGE:81==
4.3
Results
4.3.1
Pressure static load
The pressure was applied in the inner socket surface. The components more subjected to
this type of load are the spring corner attachments and between the pins. To notice that
the higher load gives a stress of 45MPa so at the limit (strength test, proximal springs).
Table 4.1: VMS - pressure test
Strength test
Proof test
4.3.2
Sitting pressure
The pressure measured between the thigh and the support surface is approximately 6000
Pa, with a overall displacement in the central part of less then 0.5mm.
72
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:82==
4.3.3
Twisting
The applied forces were defined in the same and opposite directions at the application
points/edges shown in table 4.2, in order to guarantee a twisting moment of 50nm.
The areas most subject to stress are the bottom corners with peaks of 33.3MPa, as expected
is its been reached in the edge point application where the force is not distributed along
the edge table ??
Table 4.2: boundary condition - twisting test
Point moment
Edge moment
Table 4.3: VMS - twisting
Twisting points
Twisting edge
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
73
==PAGE:83==
4.3.4
Banding
To create the banding moment a metal beam was used rigidly connected to the upper
surface of the socket and a force was applied to it in a direction perpendicular to the surface,
point of application and intensity depend on the type of test case and were previously
shown in the Testing methods section (bending test 1 BT1 , bending test2 BT2 - anterior
and bending test 1 BT1 , bending test2 BT2 - posterior).
Figure 4.3: Banding boundaries
Figure 4.4: Principal stress - anterior BT1
Anterior
Table 4.4: Anterior
VMS - BT 1
VMS - BT 2
74
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:84==
Posterior
Table 4.5: Posterior
VMS - BT1 1
VMS - BT 2
Stress
F test [N]
Stress [107Pa]
F Max [N]
Stress Max [107Pa]
B T1 POSTERIOR
2065
3.5
2655
4.5
B T2 POSTERIOR
1811
3.8
2144
4.5
B T1 ANTERIOR
2065
1.5
6195
4.5
B T2 ANTERIOR
1811
1.6
5093
4.5
Table 4.6: Maximum VMS values that the structure withstands under different forces.
As with twisting, even in bending the area most subject to stress is that of the lower
corners which in this case are stressed in compression and elongation, as highlighted by
the principal stress component fig. 4.5.
4.3.5
Compression evaluation
Since it was diﬀicult to evaluate the behavior of the laces at this stage, as already mentioned
we it is tried to create a pattern that is slightly flexible but which resists the various loads
whithout laces, for this reason to get an idea of the compression a distributed compression
force of 300N was applied on both lateral surfaces of the lateral surfaces, and constrained
to the lower (distal) surface, figures in table 4.7.
Overall, we can say that the draft socket performed as required and withstood the various
applied loads, although it does not provide significant compression in this stage.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
75
==PAGE:85==
Figure 4.5: Principal stress BT1 posterior
Pattern compression evaluation -
VMS and displacement
Result and comment
Max displacement magnitude = 1.5 mm
per side
Figure 4.6: Volume Displacement Magni-
tude (mm)
This measures the maximum
displacement under the specified
conditions.
Max VMS = 38.7 MPa
Figure 4.7:
Volume von Mises Stress
(N/mm2)
This can resist a higher force level,
potentially leading to a higher
displacement depending on the laces.
Table 4.7: VMS and displacement magnitude in speciment pattern
76
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:86==
Chapter 5
Real limb
In this phase of testing, the aim object is to apply the pattern to a real limb shape and
to evaluate how the pattern is applicable and how the socket behave under tests.
To achieve this a normal limb was scanned, this volume was edited and used to create the
shape of the socket with the flexible pattern.
Tests were then carried out on this and the performance was evaluated.
5.1
Limb scanning
5.1.1
Scanner
A 3d scanner was used to obtain the volume of the thigh from the same person operate
on the beginning.
The scanner adopted to take the limb scanning is a portable Shining 3D EINSTAR 3D
scanner that makes high-quality 3D data [54].
Figure 5.1: Shining 3D EINSTAR 3D scanner
5.2
Data acquisition
Few markers were applied on the person in the interested area to help the scanner recon-
struct the 3D image. The scanner was then passed around the thigh for acquisition.
Data are then processed in the Exstar software from where the volume mesh can be
exported as an .obj file.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
77
==PAGE:87==
Specification
Details
Light Source
Infrared VCSEL structured
light
Point Distance
0.1 mm – 3 mm
Effective Working Distance
160 mm – 400 mm
Optimal Working Distance
400 mm
FOV (under optimal work
distance)
434 mm x 379 mm
Scan Rate
Up to 14 fps
Table 5.1: Scanner specification
Figure 5.2:
Applied dots
markers
Figure 5.3: Scaning proce-
dure
Figure 5.4: Data acquisition
5.3
Volume editing
To create a model of an amputated limb, the initial volume of the limb was processed
using the software Meshmixer AutocadMeshmixer. The following steps were taken:
1. The volume was cleansed of any impurities.
2. Both an upper (proximal) and a lower (distal) cut were applied to isolate the shape
of an amputated thigh.
3. The model was then solidified to enhance its structural integrity.
78
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:88==
Figure 5.5: Cleaning volume. Figure 5.6: Mesh solidifica-
tion.
Figure 5.7: Edited limb.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
79
==PAGE:89==
5.4
Socket building
The mesh was then imported into Creo Parametric, fig. 5.8.
To recreate the limb surface in Creo, the lines delineating the volume contour were drawn
and these were then used to delineate the reference surfaces, fig 5.9. In this phase is also
drawn an axis passing trough the center of the upper and lower surface.
Figure 5.8: Imported mesh in Creo
Figure 5.9: Contour lines drawing.
Note that the rear part, i.e. the part where the pattern is applied, has been chamfered
slightly to make it less rough fig. 5.10, fig- 5.11.
Figure 5.10: Modified back part.
Figure 5.11:
Final socket shape
CAD model.
80
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:90==
Since the limb in question has slightly but different dimensions in proximal and distal
circumference, in order to be able to apply the patter, the grade that was modified was
the width of the central part. Although the height of the socket is the same, the pattern
could then be rescaled, i.e. it would determine a scaling that changes the mechanical
properties of the springheads, so the part attached to the springheads remains the same,
only the width of the central part changes.
Figure 5.12: Pattern application.
Figure 5.13: Socket surface with the
applied pattern.
The central part has been reduced so that the whole flexible component can be retracted,
within 1/4 back part.
The way in which the pattern was aligned was done considering the previously created
axis, this allows it to be aligned so that it follows the progress of the leg.
Limits:
• Having an irregular surface when the pattern is applied it creates an ’elongation’
effect in the lower part. What we sought from the beginning was to find a solution
that would allow the springs to be created ’intrinsically’; this functionality was not
available with Creo Parametric.
• Having an irregular surface it was not possible to thicken it up to 7mm, but Creo
allowed a maximum of 6mm.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
81
==PAGE:91==
Figure 5.14: Final socket shape
82
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:92==
5.5
Results
In this phase, the main tests for the defined socket were conducted and the results evalu-
ated.
5.5.1
Mesh
Element size parameters
fig. 5.15:
• Maximum element size: 0.03 m
• Minimum element size: 0.003 m
• Maximum element growth rate: 1.5
• Curvature factor: 0.5
• Resolution of narrow regions: 0.5
Figure 5.15: Mesh
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
83
==PAGE:93==
5.5.2
Pressure
Table 5.2: VMS - pressure test
VMS - Strength test
VMS >MPA - Proof test
The most stressed parts are the springs. This time the socket resists the proof test while
it is fragile in the row of proximal springs, the test that use higher force (proof test for
the pressure) 5.2 shows the area that exceed the stress threshold. Overall, the behavior
is acceptable, since as is said for the higher load the structure could lead to potential
damage.
5.5.3
Twisting
Table 5.3: Twisting - edge constrains
VMS > 45 MPa - clockwise
VMS > 45MPa - anti clockwise
The twisting test since the structure is irregular it is done in both directions: clockwise and
anti-clockwise, so for seek is done only on the edge. Overall, the behavior is acceptable,
and does not show critical behaviour.
84
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:94==
5.5.4
Sitting
Figure 5.16: VMS and max displacement magnitude
In the application of pressure, the stresses are below the threshold and the internal dis-
placement is 0.7mm.
5.5.5
Bending
The create a banding moment the beam was placed so as to be parallel to the top surface
of the socket. In this case the orientation is important since the socket is not symmetrical,
thus, referring to the norma ISO the force are applied on the lateral-internal side only. In
general, the only situation in which stress greater than the threshold occurs is the posterior
I case (not present in the ISO standard). Posterior stress peaks are present in the anterior
I and II table 5.5 cases but these may be due to the roughness of the surfaces and the
attachment zones between them, in itself the structure does not present high stresses apart
from this point, we therefore consider it acceptable.
Bending posterior
Table 5.4: Posterior
VMS - BT 1
VMS > 45MPa - BT 2
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
85
==PAGE:95==
Bending anterior
Table 5.5: Anterior
VMS > 45MPa - BT 1
VMS > 45MPa - BT 2
86
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:96==
Chapter 6
Body Weigth comparison
In this the objective is to evaluate whether the distribution of Von mises stress, pressure
and displacement are coherent within the amputated limb and are consistent with results
found in the literature [47].
This allows us to evaluate whether the if model considered is comparable to models that
have already been developed and whether the forces at play are coherent, at least for this
phase of the study.
Moreover, this is also a testing to evaluate the VM stress distribution within the socket.
Reference is made exclusively to the standing phase procedure.
6.1
Assembly
Consistently with the study with which it is compared, an assembly consisting of socket,
thigh and femur is constructed in Creo Parametric.
As first all the components are built separately.
Figure
6.1:
Socket
CAD
model
Figure
6.2:
Limb
CAD
model
Figure 6.3: Femur simplifica-
tion CAD model
Not having a CT image of the examined person’s thigh available, the positioning of the
femur was approximated using supporting CT images and the indications found in the
literature table. 1.8.
Subsequently, the assembly is built.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
87
==PAGE:97==
Figure 6.4: Assembly: socket + thigh
Figure 6.5: Final assembly: socket + thigh
+ femur
Afterwords,the model was imported into COMSOL.
88
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:98==
6.2
Mesh
For simplicity, all the components have been created without gaps between them, which is
why friction effects are neglected and a rigid connection is applied between the components
(this differs from the comparison model which included a friction contact) This allows you
to create a mesh over the entire model).
Figure 6.6: Mesh
Mesh sizes:
• Maximum element size: 0.03 m
• Minimum element size: 0.003 m
• Maximum element growth rate: 1.5
• Curvature factor: 0.5
• Resolution of narrow regions: 0.5
6.3
Boundary conditions and constrains
The external load was applied to the top of the femur in the vertical downward direction
to simulate the person’s body weight[47]. For a normal stance, half of the amputee’s body
weight (270 N) was supported by the femur, equivalent to a pressure of around 409000
Pa, fig. 6.7.
The sockets was constrained at the bottom surface, fig. 6.8.
6.4
Material properties
All materials were modeled as linear elastic materials , [55]
6.4.1
Socket
• Density: ρ = 900 kg/m3
• Young’s modulus: E = 1.8 MPa
• Poisson’s ratio: ν = 0.35
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
89
==PAGE:99==
Figure 6.7: Boundary load
Figure 6.8: Boundary constrain
6.4.2
Femur
• Density: ρ = 2000 kg/m3
• Young’s modulus: E = 15 MPa
• Poisson’s ratio: ν = 0.3
6.4.3
Thigh
• Density: ρ = 1000 kg/m3
• Young’s modulus: E = 0.2 MPa
• Poisson’s ratio: ν = 0.49
(This differs from the comparison model which use a hyperelastic material for defining the
thigh material).
90
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:100==
6.5
Results
6.5.1
Stress Von Mises
Figure 6.9: VMS - limb
Figure 6.10:
VMS - limb
literature results
The maximum stress recorded in the model is 66 KPa, located in a specific anterior area
of the socket. This stress concentration could result from a noticeable irregularity in the
socket itself. Beyond this peak, the stress distribution in the model tends to concentrate
in the vicinity of the femur and in the areas where the springs are present, particularly in
the more distal springs, where values can reach 30 KPa.
In general, VM stresses in the model remain below 15 KPa, with increases observable
mainly near the distal springs fig. 6.11. Apart from these peaks located near the springs,
which are considered reasonable given the attachment points and forces involved, the model
aligns well with the results of the study fig. 6.10, which highlights a stress concentration
in the distal area with a peak of 14 KPa, but generally homogeneous.
Figure 6.11: VMS>15KPa - limb
Figure 6.12: VMS >30KPa - limb
Moreover, evaluating the VM stresses inside the socket fig. ??, is seen that the stresses
are below the threshold of 45MPa, with a greater concentration of the stresses around the
springs, in agreement with the expected result.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
91
==PAGE:101==
Figure 6.13: VMS - socket
6.5.2
Pressure
The pressure in the bottom part reaches a value between 10 and 20 KPa fig. 6.14 , much
lower than the reference model [84KPa], fig. 6.15, despite this the trend is similar so the
pressures, in accordance with what can be imagined (increase distally). The pressure peaks
also reach 60KPa and the affected areas are those around the springs. The deviation from
the model may be due to the type of model used for the thigh and the contact conditions,
nevertheless the model is consistent with the trends fig. 6.16.
It is also interesting to note how in the socket the pressure increases and the trend that
follows around the springs, fof. 6.17, consistently, with values greater than 60KPa.
92
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:102==
Figure 6.14: Pressure - limb
Figure 6.15:
Pressure -
limb literature
Figure 6.16: Pressure - limb > 10KPa
Figure 6.17: Pressure - limb literature >
10KPa
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
93
==PAGE:103==
6.5.3
Limb displacement
Figure 6.18: Displacement - limb
Figure
6.19:
Displace-
ment - limb literature
The maximum observed displacement is 3.4 mm and is best seen in fig. 6.18 where the
displacement has been rescaled and has a view from the inside. The value obtained is
consistent with the reference one, fig. 6.19, in fact both materials were modeled as linear
elastic and they are the first direct solids to be subjected to forcing. that the maximum
socket displacement is under 1mm so the limb should not float inside (in this phase), fig.
6.21.
Figure 6.20: Displacement - limb (coronal
view)
Figure 6.21: Displacement socket
Concusion
In conclusion we can say that by simulating the standing phase, the results obtained in
the limb are consistent with the results in the literature, and that the deviations occur
in relation to the presence of the springs or the type of thigh material and boundary
condition used. Furthermore, by also evaluating the VM stress values in the socket, these
are below the thresholds, as desired.
94
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:104==
Chapter 7
Printing and future work
The socket was printed with a SLS 3D printer. The objectives of the molding were:
• 1. Concretely improve the design of the socket and make observations on its behavior
• 2.Check the ability of the springs to compress and their effectiveness.
• 3. Evaluate whether the presence of laces may cause discomfort while sitting.
• 4. Determine if the laces are suitable or if you need to use other tightening methods.
7.1
Assembly
The steps to reach the final socket were few and simple:
• Define hook position (approximately 1 inch as shown in table 7.1 (a ), table 7.1 (b).
• Creation of holes for inserting the hooks table 7.1 (b) .
• Application of hooks table 7.1 (c) , table 7.2 (d).
• Application of rotation for screwdriving table 7.2 (d) . table 7.2(e)
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
95
==PAGE:105==
a)
b)
c)
Table 7.1: Socket assembly - part 1
96
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:106==
d)
e)
Table 7.2: Socket assembly - part 2
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
97
==PAGE:107==
1. 2. General
The prototype appears overall rigid and stable and the response of the springs can be
categorized in two distinct ways:
• Upper part - proximal : Characterized by greater rigidity.
• Bottom - distal : Noticeably more flexible.
From these observations, it is clear that the overall flexibility of the socket is limited,
especially in the upper part, while the lower part compresses more easily, thanks to thinner
corners between springs, thus larger diameter.
To further increase flexibility, while maintaining adequate rigidity, could be consider in-
creasing the radius of curvature and enlarging the coupling fig. 7.1. However, it is im-
portant to note that changes of this type may affect the stability of the socket, requiring
greater reliance on the straps to ensure a proper seal.
Figure 7.1: Increasing lateral rounding
It is necessary to increase the rounding to allow for greater spacing of the springs, resulting
in increased flexibility.
Therefore, the initial assumptions change: to ensure stability,
reliance on the presence of laces is essential, which must perform two crucial functions:
• Prevent the movement of the springs.
• Allow the contraction of the springs.
Adopting a design similar to ”socket type 1” could be considered, which must include:
• An increase in the rounding of the springs.
• Strategic use of laces, having fewer springs allows for fewer interlacings.
98
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:108==
This option becomes particularly advantageous because, having only two rows of springs,
a more concentrated and localized lacing system can be implemented at specific points.
3.4. Laces
Figure 7.2: Decreasing spacing between laces
It might be useful to reduce the flexible device component, fig. 7.2, since an excessively
large part allows the laces to slide too much along the socket, thus making tightening more
diﬀicult. By reducing the flexible part, the hooks can be placed closer, ensuring that the
direction of the force exerted by the laces is more tangential to the surface of the socket
and less perpendicular to its center, allowing for optimal use of the force for compression,
fig. 7.3 (b). This change can be achived by reducing the central component, which is also
the parameter that decreases when the limb’s circumference is smaller, suggesting that the
socket works better and adapts more effectively to thinner limbs rather than larger ones.
An alternative consider flatten the socket back part, so that the line of forces lies on a
plane, to implement this solution we can take advantages by the limb irregularity (making
them flatter) fig. 7.3 (a).
However, this change might cause discomfort to the person, as the laces have raised hooks.
Therefore, the available options are:
• Use a boa system, making it flexible enough to tighten properly, though the laces
might not be sturdy enough.
• Switch to a different type of lace, opting for something flatter, like Velcro straps,
and implement one of the two previously mentioned solutions.
In the laboratory, with this setup, the laces and hooks do not cause discomfort during
sitting. However, the central part does not perfectly adapt to the shape of the thigh when
seated and remains rigid, but overall, it allows for better compression compared to other
directions.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
99
==PAGE:109==
Figure 7.3: (a) flatten back part , (b) decresing spacing betweeing laces.
Another important observation to make is that by using these types of laces placed at this
distance the risk is that although compression can be achieved, the central part moves
externally and does not press against the leg fig. 7.4. To overcome this problem can think
of:
1. Arch the central area towards the center 7.4.
2. Use thicker laces to keep everything secure 7.4.
Figure 7.4: (Upper): schematic transversal limb view and problem to face , (Left) :
solution 1, (Right): solution 2
Thus, to summarize the aspects to improve:
• Flexibility: This can be enhanced by increasing the rounding, reducing the central
part, and relying more on the laces.
100
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:110==
• Compression method: This could involve repositioning the hooks or using different
types of laces or placing the hooks closer.
However, it has shown that the applied pattern provides slightly but notable flexibility in
compression and in sitting.. Considering the use of various laces for stability and different
types of hooks, we can enhance its flexibility even further by adopting the methodologies
and criteria previously outlined.
Therefore, there is significant potential to further develop and refine this idea.
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
101
==PAGE:111==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The aim of the project was to create a new technology to solve the volume fluctuation
problem, overcoming the limitations of current solutions by developing a method that is
easy, economical, adaptable, and fast. To achieve this goal, a single-layer printable socket
was designed using SLS (Selective Laser Sintering) 3D printing technology with PA 2200
powder. The idea was based on incorporating flexible structures into the socket design,
taking inspiration from compliant mechanisms and stent strut.
To validate the idea and determine if the application of flexible patterns would still ensure
stability, the socket was tested under the assumption of no support system. The static tests
for model validation were conducted referencing to DS/ENISO 10328:2016 , evaluating
Von Mises Stress and displacement: at first the testwere applied to a socket modeled as
a truncated cone afterwords the same tests were applied to a socket modeled in the limb
shape volume (obtaied by scaning limb). Moreover, to obtain comparable results with
the literature, the behavior of the limb inside the socket under standing conditions was
evaluated using a socket-thigh-femur model.
The results demonstrated the stability of the defined pattern, with limited flexibility in
compression. This outcome was later confirmed through the printing of the model. It can
be inferred that it is possible to incorporate flexible parts while ensuring a level of rigidity,
without any other support. Moreover, with the hypothesis of using a lacing system to
ensure overall stability, the springs compressibility can be enhanced to higher levels (by
following the procedure detailed in the project), and other socket solution like ’socket type
1’ could be taken in consideration for a further implementation.
102
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:112==
Bibliography
[1]
Ken Saladin. Anatomia Umana.
[2]
Agnese De Angelis. “Sviluppo e Validazione Di Un Modello Cinematico Multiseg-
mento Dell’arto Superiore per Microchirurgia Di Nerve Transfer”. Politecnico di
Torino.
[3]
Launico MV et al. “Anatomy, Bony Pelvis and Lower Limb: Femoral Muscles”. In:
().
[4]
John Hewitt et al. “Regional Material Properties of the Human Hip Joint Capsule
Ligaments”. In: Journal of Orthopaedic Research 19.3 (May 2001), pp. 359–364.
issn: 0736-0266, 1554-527X. doi: 10.1016/S0736- 0266(00)00035- 8. url: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1016/S0736-0266%2800%2900035-8 (visited on
06/29/2024).
[5]
Michael T. Hirschmann and Werner Müller. “Complex Function of the Knee Joint:
The Current Understanding of the Knee”. In: Knee Surgery, Sports Traumatology,
Arthroscopy 23.10 (Oct. 2015), pp. 2780–2788. issn: 0942-2056, 1433-7347. doi: 10.
1007/s00167-015-3619-3. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/s00167-015-3619-3
(visited on 06/29/2024).
[6]
Chiara gandolfi. “SVILUPPO DI UN INVASO PROTESICO PER AMPUTATO
TRANSTIBIALE MEDIANTE CAD E ANALISI AGLI ELEMENTI FINITI DELL’INTERAZIONE
TRA MONCONE E INVASATURA”. POlitecnico di Milano. url: https://www.
politesi.polimi.it/handle/10589/164833.
[7]
Maira Du Plessis and Marios Loukas. “Thigh Muscles”. In: Bergman’s Comprehensive
Encyclopedia of Human Anatomic Variation. Ed. by R. Shane Tubbs, Mohammadali
M. Shoja, and Marios Loukas. 1st ed. Wiley, July 5, 2016, pp. 410–420. isbn: 978-
1-118-43035-4 978-1-118-43030-9. doi: 10.1002/9781118430309.ch40. url: https:
//onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781118430309.ch40 (visited on 06/28/2024).
[8]
Treccani. Dictionary.
[9]
Ing Luca Cristofolini and Matteo Pirani. “Studio e sviluppo di un prototipo di un
meccanismo per l’azionamento di una mano protesica cinematica”. In: ().
[10]
Carlo Ferraresi and Rebecca Lo Tauro. “Studio di fattibilità sulle strategie di feed-
back e controllo in un setting interattivo per l’embodiment di un arto inferiore
virtuale”. In: ().
[11]
Mohammed Alessa. The Psychosocial Impact of Lower Limb Amputation on Pa-
tients and Caregivers. url: doi:%2010.7759/cureus.31248.%20PMID:%2036505108;
%20PMCID:%20PMC9731396..
[12]
Chiara Fanciullacci et al. “Survey of Transfemoral Amputee Experience and Priori-
ties for the User-Centered Design of Powered Robotic Transfemoral Prostheses”. In:
Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 18.1 (Dec. 2021), p. 168. issn: 1743-
0003. doi: 10.1186/s12984-021-00944-x. url: https://jneuroengrehab.biomedcentral.
com/articles/10.1186/s12984-021-00944-x (visited on 06/28/2024).
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
103
==PAGE:113==
[13]
B.F. Morrey. “Diabetes- and Nondiabetes-Related Lower Extremity Amputation
Incidence Before and After the Introduction of Better Organized Diabetes Foot Care:
Continuous Longitudinal Monitoring Using a Standard Method”. In: Yearbook of
Orthopedics 2010 (Jan. 2010), p. 172. issn: 02761092. doi: 10.1016/S0276-1092(09)
79623 - 3. url: https : / / linkinghub . elsevier . com / retrieve / pii / S0276109209796233
(visited on 06/28/2024).
[14]
Kathryn Ziegler-Graham et al. “Estimating the Prevalence of Limb Loss in the
United States: 2005 to 2050”. In: Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
89.3 (Mar. 2008), pp. 422–429. issn: 00039993. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2007.11.005.
url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0003999307017480 (visited on
06/29/2024).
[15]
“Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinics of North America Epidemiology of
Limb Loss”. In: (). doi: 10.1016/j.pmr.2013.09.001. url: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/pmc/articles/PMC4533906/.
[16]
“National Diabetes Statistics Report”. In: (). url: https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/
php/data- research/index.html#:~:text=of%20diagnosed%20diabetes- ,Among%
20the%20U.S.%20population%20overall%2C%20crude%20estimates%20for%202021%
20were,304%2C000%20with%20type%201%20diabetes.
[17]
Eric Edison Low. “Complications and Revision Amputation Following Trauma-
related Lower Limb Loss”. In: (). doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2016.11.019.
[18]
Ossur. L’amputazione Dell’arto Inferiore. url: https://www.ossur.com/it-it/protesi/
information/amputazione-dell-arto-inferiore.
[19]
Principles of Amputation. url: https://www.physio- pedia.com/Principles_of_
Amputation.
[20]
Transfemoral (Above Knee). url: http://www.albertaoandp.com/transfemoral-above-
knee.
[21]
Transfemoral Amputation: The Basics and Beyond. Place of publication not identi-
fied: Prosthetics Research Study, 2008. isbn: 978-0-615-26870-5.
[22]
Bradley C Wehe. “An Overview of Transfemoral Socket Designs”. In: ().
[23]
Linda Paterno et al. “Sockets for Limb Prostheses: A Review of Existing Tech-
nologies and Open Challenges”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering
65.9 (Sept. 2018), pp. 1996–2010. issn: 0018-9294, 1558-2531. doi: 10.1109/TBME.
2017.2775100. url: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8267041/ (visited on
06/28/2024).
[24]
Stefania Fantone. “Northwestern University Flexible Subischial Vacuum Socket for
Persons with Transfemoral Amputation-Part 1: Description of Technique”. In: ().
url: 10.1177/0309364616685229.
[25]
“Transtibial Prosthetics”. In: (). doi: 10.1016/B978-0-323-60913-5.00023-4. url:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/346712526_Transtibial_Prosthetics.
[26]
V. Rajťúková et al. “Biomechanics of Lower Limb Prostheses”. In: Procedia Engi-
neering 96 (2014), pp. 382–391. issn: 18777058. doi: 10.1016/j.proeng.2014.12.107.
url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1877705814031580 (visited on
06/28/2024).
[27]
C. W. Radcliffe. “Four-Bar Linkage Prosthetic Knee Mechanisms: Kinematics, Align-
ment and Prescription Criteria”. In: Prosthetics & Orthotics International 18.3 (Dec.
1994), pp. 159–173. issn: 0309-3646. doi: 10.3109/03093649409164401. url: https:
//journals.lww.com/00006479-199418030-00004 (visited on 06/28/2024).
[28]
M S Zahedi. “Alignment of Lower-Limb Prostheses”. In: ().
[29]
Marco Schiraldi et al. “Mechanical and Kinematic Alignment in Total Knee Arthro-
plasty”. In: Annals of Translational Medicine 4.7 (Apr. 2016), pp. 130–130. issn:
104
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:114==
23055839, 23055847. doi: 10.21037/atm.2016.03.31. url: http://atm.amegroups.
com/article/view/9950/10554 (visited on 06/28/2024).
[30]
Joan E. Sanders and Stefania Fatone. “Residual Limb Volume Change: Systematic
Review of Measurement and Management”. In: The Journal of Rehabilitation Re-
search and Development 48.8 (2011), p. 949. issn: 0748-7711. doi: 10.1682/JRRD.
2010.09.0189. url: http://www.rehab.research.va.gov/jour/11/488/pdf/sanders488.
pdf (visited on 06/28/2024).
[31]
Eric Edison Low, Elizabeth Inkellis, and Saam Morshed. “Complications and Revi-
sion Amputation Following Trauma-Related Lower Limb Loss”. In: Injury 48.2 (Feb.
2017), pp. 364–370. issn: 00201383. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2016.11.019. url: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0020138316307586 (visited on 06/28/2024).
[32]
J.E. Sanders et al. “Changes in Interface Pressures and Shear Stresses over Time on
Trans-Tibial Amputee Subjects Ambulating with Prosthetic Limbs: Comparison of
Diurnal and Six-Month Differences”. In: Journal of Biomechanics 38.8 (Aug. 2005),
pp. 1566–1573. issn: 00219290. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2004.08.008. url: https:
//linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0021929004003859 (visited on 06/28/2024).
[33]
B. M. Persson and E. Liedberg. “A Clinical Standard of Stump Measurement and
Classification in Lower Limb Amputees”. In: Prosthetics & Orthotics International
7.1 (Apr. 1983), pp. 17–24. issn: 0309-3646. doi: 10.3109/03093648309146710. url:
https://journals.lww.com/00006479-198307010-00007 (visited on 06/28/2024).
[34]
Linda Paternò et al. “Transfemoral Residual Limb Volume Change Due to Physical
Activity”. In: Converging Clinical and Engineering Research on Neurorehabilitation
III. Ed. by Lorenzo Masia et al. Vol. 21. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2019, pp. 146–150. isbn: 978-3-030-01844-3 978-3-030-01845-0. doi: 10.1007/978-3-
030-01845-0_29. url: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-030-01845-0_29
(visited on 06/28/2024).
[35]
Linda Paternò et al. Residual Limb Volume Changes in Transfemoral Amputees.
Mar. 10, 2021. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-223377/v1. url: https://www.researchsquare.
com/article/rs-223377/v1 (visited on 06/28/2024). Pre-published.
[36]
OTTOBOCK SOCKET. url: https://www.ottobock.com/en-sc/sockets/varos.
[37]
OSSUR SOCKET. url: https://www.ossur.com/en-us/prosthetics/sockets/connect-
tf.
[38]
Martin Bionics. url: https://martinbionics.com/above-knee-socket-less-socket/.
[39]
Ottobock_sol2. url: https://www.ottobockus.com/news-detail-page_63488.html.
[40]
LIM. url: https://www.liminnovations.com/infinite-socket-tf/.
[41]
Lucia Grassi. “Quantification of Postural Stability in Minimally Disabled Multiple
Sclerosis Patients by Means of Dynamic Posturography: An Observational Study”.
In: (). doi: 10.1186/s12984-016-0216-8.
[42]
Weijun Tao et al. “Gait Analysis Using Wearable Sensors”. In: Sensors 12.2 (Feb. 16,
2012), pp. 2255–2283. issn: 1424-8220. doi: 10.3390/s120202255. url: https://www.
mdpi.com/1424-8220/12/2/2255 (visited on 06/29/2024).
[43]
“Atlas of Limb Prosthetics: Surgical, Prosthetic, and Rehabilitation Principles -
Chapter 14”. In: (). url: https://www.oandplibrary.org/alp/chap14-01.asp.
[44]
“Gait Analysis in Lower-Limb Amputation and Prosthetic Rehabilitation”. In: ().
doi: 10.1016/j.pmr.2013.09.006.
[45]
Carlo ferraresi. Notes on Biomechanics of Movement.
[46]
Sofía C. Henao, Camila Orozco, and Juan Ramírez. “Influence of Gait Cycle Loads
on Stress Distribution at The Residual Limb/Socket Interface of Transfemoral Am-
putees: A Finite Element Analysis”. In: Scientific Reports 10.1 (Mar. 19, 2020),
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
105
==PAGE:115==
p. 4985. issn: 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-61915-1. url: https://www.
nature.com/articles/s41598-020-61915-1 (visited on 06/28/2024).
[47]
Rajesh Surapureddy et al. “Predicting Pressure Distribution between Transfemoral
Prosthetic Socket and Residual Limb Using Finite Element Analysis”. In: ().
[48]
Chen Pan, Yafeng Han, and Jiping Lu. “Structural Design of Vascular Stents: A
Review”. In: Micromachines 12.7 (June 29, 2021), p. 770. issn: 2072-666X. doi:
10.3390/mi12070770. url: https://www.mdpi.com/2072-666X/12/7/770 (visited on
06/29/2024).
[49]
Stent - Overview. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/nursing-and-health-
professions/stent.
[50]
Notes Prosthetics Design. url: https://didattica.polito.it/pls/portal30/gap.pkg_
guide.viewGap?p_cod_ins=01NEHMV&p_a_acc=2024&p_header=S&p_lang=IT&
multi=N.
[51]
Larry L. Howell, Spencer P. Magleby, and Brian M. Olsen, eds. Handbook of Com-
pliant Mechanisms. Chichester: Wiley, 2013. 324 pp. isbn: 978-1-119-95345-6.
[52]
Creo. url: https://www.ptc.com/en/products/creo/trial-ppc?utm_source=Google_
Search&utm_medium=cpc&utm_campaign=Creo_Trial_Google_Search_CLC&
utm_content=Creo_Trial_Google_Search_CLC-cpc-Creo_Trial_Pixalione_Nordics-
46969&cl1=Creo_Trial_Google_Search_CLC-cpc-Creo_Trial_Pixalione_Nordics-
46969&cmsrc=Google_Search&cid=7015A000002HGZjQAO&elqCampaignId=16869&
gad_source=1&gclid=CjwKCAjw4f6zBhBVEiwATEHFViUuXS9R-EfGh6YPww7kz2m60QQXen9WmGZqTjY
BwE.
[53]
DS/EN ISO 10328:2016.
[54]
Einstar. url: https://www.einstar.com/.
[55]
Zhaojian Meng et al. “Analysis of Compression/Release Stabilized Transfemoral
Prosthetic Socket by Finite Element Modelling Method”. In: Medical Engineering
& Physics 83 (Sept. 2020), pp. 123–129. issn: 13504533. doi: 10.1016/j.medengphy.
2020.05.007. url: https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1350453320300710
(visited on 06/29/2024).
106
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
==PAGE:116==
Appendix A
Title
Design of an adjustable transfemoral prosthesis interface that allows volume change
107
==PAGE:117==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Tlf. 4525 1700
