==PAGE:1==
Analysis of EMG and EEG Signal from
Children in the Age Range of 0 - 5 years
Josefine Grønset Løken1,3 and Josephine Bøgelund Arnfast1,4
Supervisors: Jens Bo Nielsen1,2
1Department of Neuroscience, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
2Elsass Foundation, Charlottenlund, Denmark
3Master student in biomedical engineering, KU: KNG390 and DTU: s183784
4Master student in biomedical engineering, KU: HDR807 and DTU: s183766
Master thesis June 7, 2024
ABSTRACT
This thesis analyses Electromyography (EMG) and Electroencephalogram (EEG) signals from
children in the age range 0-5 years to gain insight into the early development of the cortex and
the corticospinal tract. Understanding this development can help identify irregularities associated
with abnormal development or brain damage. We hypothesize that significant changes in muscular
coherence and corticomuscular coherence (CMC) will be observed at 6 months of age due to neural
reorganization.
Coherence analysis demonstrated a degree of intermuscular coupling in the neonatal stage, with a
significant increase in CMC above 6 months. Directionality analysis revealed bidirectional commu-
nication between the cortex and muscles from the neonatal stage. However, no significant change
could be reported with age, nor between the ascending and descending pathways. These results
suggest that an early neuronal connection exists between the cortex and muscle. This connection
evolves through infancy, which reflects activity-dependent reorganization of the corticospinal tract
contributing to the maturation of voluntary motor control. The study highlights the complexity
of neural reorganization in infancy. While our findings provide valuable insights, further research
is necessary to fully understand the developmental processes.
==PAGE:2==
1
Acronyms
AUC
Area under the curve
CA
Corrected age
CMC
Corticomuscular coherence
CP
Cerebral palsy
CST
Corticospinal tract
EEG
Electroencephalogram
EMG
Electromyography
FM
Fidgety movements
GM
General movements
LSOL
Left soleus
LTAD
Left tibialis anterior distal
LTAP
Left tibialis anterior proximal
RFE
Right forearm exstensor
RFF
Right forearm flexor
RSOL
Right soleus
RTAD
Right tibialis anterior distal
RTAP
Right tibialis anterior proximal
TMS
Transcranial magnetic stimulation
Introduction
Human infants are born with the ability to move
their body freely.
Within the first months of
life, healthy neonates gain partial motor control
of their extremities [1, 2]. Understanding phys-
iological changes in the brain and the nervous
system in healthy individuals is desired. Insight
into early developmental stages can enable the
identification of irregularities as potential indi-
cators of brain damage [3, 4, 5, 6, 7].
In the first three to five months of life, typi-
cally developing neonates display a characteris-
tic movement pattern known as General move-
ments (GM) [8, 9]. These are spontaneous move-
ments that involve the whole body and last for
a significant period of time [9, 10]. The pattern
is complex, associated with varying degrees of
force, intensity, and speed.
Still, they are de-
scribed as delicate and fluent due to the mix-
ture of subtle movement directions and axial ro-
tations [10]. As the infant ages, both the quality
and quantity of GM change, mirroring matura-
tion of the nervous system [5]. A distinct type
of GM are Fidgety movements (FM) which are
small movements at moderate speed and involve
the neck trunk and limbs. FM has been shown to
peak at 12 weeks and disappear with the emer-
gence of intentional and anti-gravity movements
around 22-25 weeks gestational age [8]. Irregu-
larities in GM such as ridged movements or ab-
sence of movements of fidgety character, can be
used as indicators to predict brain damage, such
as Cerebral palsy (CP) [10].
The Corticospinal tract (CST) is a neural path-
way that connects the cortex to the spinal cord,
enabling movement of the limbs [11]. In animals
like rodents and monkeys, the CST is not fully
developed until after birth, and a similar model
is assumed in humans [12], particularly in terms
of axon refinement and synaptic rearrangements
[7]. In brain development, the subplate is present
as an early-developing layer of the cerebral cor-
tex.
Subplate neurons are important contrib-
utors in creating intracortical and extracortical
circuits [13]. Because it contains an abundance
of signaling molecules, it has been suggested that
the subplate is the main driver of both thalam-
ocortical axon pathfinding and the formation of
the cerebral cortex itself [14]. These neurons are
of the first to mature in humans but are tran-
sient by nature [15], disappearing completely at
around 6 months [14].
There is a correlation
between the presence of the subplate and GM,
==PAGE:3==
2
suggesting that the spontaneous neuron activ-
ity exhibited by the subplate may be responsible
for the spontaneous movement pattern of GM
[7, 14].
This characteristic of neuronal excitation is also
observed in chemical synapses, responsible for
neural communication and information process-
ing.
The evolution of gene expression switch-
ing has recently been studied in post-mortem
subjects, discovering an age-correlation between
synaptic functions and life periods [16]. Synapse
compositions thus regulate plasticity and infor-
mation processing in the brain through differ-
ent developmental stages [16, 17].
The neu-
rotransmitter GABA, known for its inhibitory
functions, exhibits excitatory properties in the
immature cortical systems of rodents, other pri-
mates, and humans [18]. Its excitatory function
is crucial in the generation of the primitive neu-
ral pattern in neonates [17].
It has been documented in human adults and
subhuman primates that the primary motor cor-
tex is responsible for initiating controlled, vol-
untary movements [19]. To investigate the pos-
sibility that neural signals in human neonates
originate in the brain stem as opposed to the
cortex, Eyre et al. [20] conducted a study us-
ing Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
and microelectrode stimulation of the medullary
pyramid. They observed that higher stimuli in-
tensities were needed in the neonate compared
to the adult, which may indicate subcortical
neural activation.
However, a parallel study
on macaque monkeys demonstrated that TMS
evoked signals at 2.5 times the threshold of neu-
ronal firing, supporting the presence of a func-
tional connection from the cortex to spinal cord
[20]. It was argued that the higher intensities re-
quired in human neonates stemmed from physi-
ological characteristics affecting conduction and
thresholds, rather than activation origin.
De-
spite the immature nervous system, they there-
fore concluded that the primary site of neural
activation was indeed the cortex [20].
Special guidance molecules play a role in deter-
mining the path of axons in the CST.
A key
function of these molecules is to decussate ax-
ons to the contralateral side of the spine [6, 21].
This axial pathway reorganization is supported
in a TMS study by Eyre [3], that demonstrated
the differences between ipsilateral and contralat-
eral responses. In the neonates, the TMS sig-
nal evoked similar thresholds and amplitudes in
the contralateral and ipsilateral muscles, sug-
gesting that the neural pathways are randomly
distributed in the body. Further, the ipsilateral
response exhibited a shorter onset latency, con-
sistent with the reduced longitudinal distance,
at this age. At twelve months, the results were
significantly different with the ipsilateral side
demonstrating a higher threshold, lower ampli-
tude, and a longer onset latency. This implies
a reorganization with withdrawal of ipsilateral
neural pathways, while the contralateral projec-
tions increase [3]. A mouse study where guid-
ance molecules in the cortex were blocked, bilat-
eral synchronous movements were demonstrated.
These mirror movements were present in both
exploratory reaching and obstructed locomotion,
which are voluntary movements, implying that
guidance molecules in fact rearrange neuronal
pathways [6].
Alongside genetic factors, activity-dependent re-
finement may also play a role in neural reorgani-
zation by shaping CST projections [6]. This has
been studied in cats, where the GABA receptor
==PAGE:4==
3
was blocked to allow activity from only one hemi-
sphere. This demonstrated a retraction of con-
tralateral axonal projections and generated ipsi-
lateral projections from the unaffected side of the
brain [6]. Another cat study found that proper
connections of corticospinal axons and neurons
are dependent on behavioral experience during a
critical postnatal period [22].
Neural reorganization within the cortex can also
be explained by the neuronal group selection
theory, which highlights goal-specific adaptation
of motor skills [7, 23].
This is prominent in
the development phase after 6 months, notably
when GM disappear [7]. In a study by Ryota et
al. [23], it was hypothesized that neural activ-
ity transitions from a diffuse to a focal pattern
with goal directed experience.
This was later
confirmed as the functional near-infrared spec-
troscopy study showed that brain activity be-
came more refined as early functional skills were
acquired [23]. This finding also supports the the-
ory that more frequently used neural connections
gain a competitive advantage, thereby becoming
stronger and overshadowing less active connec-
tions [6].
Studies on the functional connectivity of the
CST have extensively utilized coherence analy-
sis, notably Corticomuscular coherence (CMC)
[8, 24, 25].
CMC quantifies the level of cor-
tical control over muscle activity by measur-
ing the coherence between the motor cortex
and associated muscles.
Coherence analysis
is typically performed on non-invasive modali-
ties such as Electroencephalogram (EEG) and
Electromyography (EMG), which are ideal for
investigating spontaneous neural activity and al-
low for simultaneous signal acquisition [25, 26,
27].
Coherence analysis provides insights into
both cortical control and the synchronization of
cortical oscillations with muscle activity, which
is crucial for understanding motor control and
coordination [8, 27, 28].
Developmental changes in CMC and EMG -
EMG coherence have been observed in children,
particularly between the ages of 4 and 12 years
[29]. Coherence is reported to increase with age
and shows very limited presence below the age
of 3-4 years [28, 29].
Despite this, studies by
Kanazawa et al. [27] have demonstrated signifi-
cant CMC in the beta frequency band in postna-
tal infants, suggesting early developmental cor-
ticomuscular communication from the neonatal
stage.
Kanazawa et al.
[27] and Ritterband-
Rosenbaum et al.
[8] propose that neonates
may exhibit some degree of CMC, potentially
reflecting activity-dependent reorganization of
the CST, as an indication of increased activity
within the tract. This increase in neural traffic
is additionally hypothesized to be present when
typically developing infants exhibit GM or fid-
gety movements, occurring at the age of 3 to 5
months [8].
Coherence is a quantification of correlation and
thus does not allow analysis of directional in-
teraction between two signals. Limited research
has been performed in the area of signal origin
and contributions from both descending and as-
cending pathways of the CST. In monkeys, di-
rected coherence has been used to demonstrate
greater coherence from cortex to muscle in the
15–30 Hz frequency band compared to coherence
in the reverse direction [30, 31].
In the study
by Witham et al.
[32], it has been suggested
to use Granger causality (directionality coher-
ence analysis) for investigating causal relation-
ships between physiological signals. Kanazawa
==PAGE:5==
4
et al. [27] have demonstrated descending cortical
control of motor activity in human neonates (age
36–42 weeks) using CMC and Granger causality
between EEG and EMG. This suggests that the
development of corticomuscular communication
begins in the neonatal stage of life.
However,
none of theses studies have been able to pro-
vide sufficient evidence of directed causality in
humans [27, 32].
This thesis builds on the study by Anina Ritter-
band et al. [8], which investigated the develop-
ment of functional corticospinal connections in
human infants aged 1–66 weeks. A peak in EMG
- EMG synchronization was observed in infants
aged 9 to 25 weeks and may indicate a sensi-
tive period during which functional connections
between CST fibers and spinal motoneurons un-
dergo activity-dependent reorganization. Based
on this theory, further investigation into CMC
and EMG - EMG coherence is desired to clarify
the relationship between CMC and the develop-
ment of controlled voluntary movements.
We hypothesize that muscular (EMG - EMG)
coherence will undergo developmental changes
around the age of 6 months. This reflects a shift
from the reflex-driven muscle activity pattern
typical of GM to a more voluntarily controlled
and selective muscle activation. We also hypoth-
esize that CMC (EEG - EMG) will increase with
age-dependent neural reorganization, indicating
a greater involvement of the motor cortex in
muscle control. Additionally, the directionality
of CMC is expected to transition from predomi-
nantly ascending to descending pathways.
Method
For this thesis, all data was provided by the El-
sass Foundation in collaboration with the De-
partment of Neuroscience at the University of
Copenhagen. The data originate from a study
designed and performed by Anina Ritterband-
Rosenbaum at the Elsass Foundation [8].
A
description of the experimental setup is pro-
vided here to enhance understanding of the data.
The data provided contain anonymized EEG and
EMG data, along with the age of each subject.
Video recordings of the infants acquired during
data collection have not been available for this
project, to comply with GDPR.
Ethical approval
The study by Ritterband-Rosenbaum et al. [8]
received approval from the local ethics commit-
tee in Denmark, Region H (H-1-2014-006). Prior
to participation, all parents gave written con-
sent. All experimental procedures were in accor-
dance with the most recent version of the Dec-
laration of Helsinki.
Participants
In this study, 49 infants (age range 1−60 months;
mean age 14 months; term-born n = 33, mean
age 18 months, and preterm n = 16, mean age 5
months) participated. Data from three infants
were discarded:
one due to lack of data files
and two due to non-compatible data formats.
Corrected age (CA) was used for all infants. The
preterm infants (n = 16) were all born at a gesta-
tional age of 28+0 to 32+6 weeks. All term-born
infants were neurologically healthy and exhibited
typical development. In the preterm group, two
==PAGE:6==
5
children were later diagnosed with CP. Due to
the data being anonymized, we did not receive
specific information about the cases.
Experimental design and data acquisi-
tion
EEG and EMG data were recorded simultane-
ously for 10–15 minutes while the infants either
lay in a prone position or sat on a mattress, de-
pending on their age. The infant was positioned
comfortably to promote muscle activity in the
targeted muscles. If spontaneous muscle activ-
ity was insufficient, the experimenters encour-
aged movement by tickling the infant’s feet or
making them reach for an object. If the infant
became distressed, they were soothed by a par-
ent and/or given a pacifier. In such cases, the
recording time was extended [8].
Eight EMG electrodes were used to measure
muscle activity.
They were placed on the fol-
lowing muscles: Right forearm exstensor (RFE),
Right forearm flexor (RFF), Right tibialis an-
terior proximal (RTAP), Right tibialis anterior
distal (RTAD), Right soleus (RSOL), Left tib-
ialis anterior proximal (LTAP), Left tibialis an-
terior distal (LTAD), and Left soleus (LSOL).
The electrode placement is illustrated in Figure
1, and it is noted that measurements are per-
formed only on the right arm but symmetrically
on the legs.
The EMG activity was recorded using sets of
custom-made bipolar electrodes with recording
areas of 9 mm2 and an inter-electrode distance of
0.5 cm. Electrodes placed on the tibialis anterior
muscle were positioned at the most proximal and
distal ends of the muscle with a distance of 5 to
10 cm. The placement of electrodes was adjusted
based on the age of the child to ensure optimal
recording conditions.
To prepare the skin for
electrode placement, it was gently brushed with
sandpaper (3M Red Dot; 3M, Glostrup, Den-
mark), and a signal of at least 10–20 µV was
required for data acquisition.
Figure 1: Illustration of the 8 EMG elec-
trodes placement on a subject, 1 = RFE,
2 = RFF, 3 = RTAP, 4 = RTAD, 5 =
RSOL, 6 = LTAP, 7 = LTAD, and 8 =
LSOL. The semi-transparent electrodes in-
dicate their placement on the non-visible
side of the infant’s arm and leg.
Created
with BioRender.com.
EEG recordings were performed using 13 scalp
electrodes with three differently sized infant
EEG caps, chosen according to the infant’s head
circumference. The electrodes were placed and
named according to the standard 10–20 system,
and the channels used were:
Fz, FC5, FC1,
FC2, FC6, C3, Cz, C4, CP5, CP1, CP2, CP6,
and Pz.
Electrode gel was applied to ensure
==PAGE:7==
6
proper conductivity. All signals were sampled by
eemagine EEG 3.3.0.6 (eemagine Medical Imag-
ing Solutions GmbH, Berlin, Germany) at a sam-
pling frequency of 625 Hz and with an electrode
impedance below 5 kΩ[8].
Noise Terminology
In this study, contamination of signals is referred
to as noise, and is divided into three categories:
baseline noise, interference noise, and artifacts.
Baseline noise thus refers to noise originating
from the electronics of the amplification system
(or thermal noise) and electrochemical noise in-
troduced at the skin-electrode interface. This is
also referred to as inherent noise in the litera-
ture, as the baseline noise is equivalent to the
noise from the equipment when the muscle is
not contracted [33, 34]. Interference noise is the
powerline interference (ambient noise at 50 Hz in
Europe), electrocardiogram and crosstalk from
other muscles. Crosstalk is defined as the EMG
signal detected over a non-active muscle and gen-
erated by a nearby muscle [35]. Lastly, artifacts
include the fluctuations due to motion of cables,
movement artifacts and instances when an infant
is crying. More generally, artifacts are character-
ized by sudden peaks or highly increased ampli-
tude in a defined time period.
Data Preprocessing
EMG records a muscle’s electrical activity by
measuring the potential generated during mus-
cle contractions, either voluntary or involuntary
[36]. EMG is detected non-invasively on the sur-
face of the skin.
EEG detects voltage fluctu-
ations in the brain that stem from neuron fir-
ing. This technique has great temporal resolu-
tion but poor spatial resolution [36, 37]. EMG
and EEG data are known to have a significant
amount of noise, requiring preprocessing with
multiple filtering steps to enhance the data qual-
ity [33, 38, 39]. The data preprocessing proce-
dure is illustrated in Figure 2 to facilitate the
reader’s understanding of the process.
Figure 2:
Flowchart illustrating all steps
preformed in the preprocessing of EEG and
EMG data.
==PAGE:8==
7
Initially, all data was loaded into a struct in
MATLAB. All NaN values were converted to 0
for numerical preprocessing and the entire struct
was normalized. A 4th order Butterworth band-
pass filter with a lower cutoff frequency of 3 Hz
and an upper cutoff frequency of 100 Hz was ap-
plied to all data. The bandpass filter was used
with the intent to eliminate inherent noise (base-
line noise), interference noise, and low-frequency
physiological artifacts as well as high-frequency
artifacts, aiming to retain only the relevant sig-
nal frequencies for further analysis. The choice
of cutoff frequencies was based on the litera-
ture, specifically [8, 40]. The narrow bandpass
was selected based on established EEG band
standards in the literature and because relevant
brain activity above 100 Hz is not anticipated
[38, 41].
Furthermore, it has been suggested
that the boundaries for high-frequency oscilla-
tions are lower in infants [41, 39].
Subsequent to the bandpass filter, a notch filter
was applied to all data. The notch filter was de-
signed as a second-order stop-band filter with a
bandwidth of 4 Hz, centered around F0 = 50 Hz.
More specifically, an infinite impulse response
bandstop filter was used.
The purpose of the
notch filter was to remove powerline interference
or ambient noise, which is at 50 Hz in Europe
[33].
The impact of the aforementioned filters on
EMG data is illustrated in Figure 3 and Figure 4.
The time-series signal (Figure 3) is transformed
into the frequency domain via a fast Fourier
transformation, offering an alternative visualiza-
tion approach to inspect the filtering effect (Fig-
ure 4). The y-axis in the frequency plot for raw
data was cut off at 10 because lower frequen-
cies exceeded a thousand Figure 4(a).
Figure
4(b) illustrates how the bandpass filter narrows
the spectrum due to the cutoff frequencies. The
notch filter is shown to remove all data around
50 Hz, as indicated by the sharp dip in Figure
4(c).
(a) Raw data
(b) Bandpass filtered
(c) Notch filtered
Figure 3: Illustration of the changes during
the preprocessing of EMG: (a) raw data, (b)
after applying bandpass filtering to the same
channel, and (c) after the application of the
notch filter. All three plots depict subject 6,
channel 3 (RTAP).
==PAGE:9==
8
(a) Raw data
(b) Bandpass filtered
(c) Notch filtered
Figure 4: Frequency plot of EMG data for subject 6, channel 3 (RTAP), at different stages of data
processing illustrating the impact of the bandpass and notch filters. An upper limit of 10 was
applied to the y-axis for the raw data due to low frequency values exceeding a thousand, which
impairs meaningful visualization.
The time-series and frequency plots were in-
spected to remove low-quality data. EMG chan-
nels with irregularities deviating from the es-
tablished frequency pattern (Figure 4) were re-
moved.
An example of a channel removed by
the visual inspection is Figure 5. The EMG data
for a given channel and subject was removed if:
It only contained vertical line peaks and lacked
physiological signals as seen in Figure 6(a), or
the baseline noise seemed to overpower the sig-
nal as seen in Figure 6(b). To conserve adequate
data, if the channels exhibited a varying degree
of data quality, only the time series intervals in
which the criteria was satisfied were removed.
To maintain the structural integrity, the interval
was removed for all channels retained for the spe-
cific subject. For EEG, channels were removed
if there was a high degree of EMG activity in the
recording, characterized by the channels’ peaks
being synchronized in both time and amplitude,
as pictured in Figure 7(a). Another criteria for
EEG removal was if the channels were contami-
nated with noise. An example of this is shown in
Figure 7(b). When only parts of the signal are
contaminated with noise, the specific affected in-
tervals are removed.
As a final step in the preprocessing, thresholds
were applied to the EMG data to limit baseline
noise and artifacts. Through the visual inspec-
tion, we concluded that the majority of the good
quality data is concentrated below the arbitrary
Figure 5: Example of EMG channel removed
based on visual inspection of the frequency
spectrum.
This is subject 28 channel 8
(RSOL) after notch filtering.
==PAGE:10==
9
(a)
(b)
Figure 6:
Examples of noise on EMG
channels after notch filtering.
(a) depicts
recordings for subject 2, channel 5 (RSOL),
demonstrating alternating periods of no sig-
nal and vertical peaks without physiological
signal. In (b), channel 1 (RFE) for subject
7 shows baseline noise overpowering the sig-
nal. Both of these channels were removed
from the dataset based on the visual inspec-
tion.
value of three; hence, this was chosen as the up-
per cutoff. The lower threshold was calculated
by multiplying the mean of the rectified signal by
0.5, for each channel individually. This step was
performed after applying the upper threshold to
avoid high-value artifacts influencing the signals’
mean calculation when setting the lower thresh-
old. Figure 8 demonstrates this clearly with red
lines as the thresholds in a plot of filtered data.
(a)
(b)
Figure 7: Examples of noise in the EEG data
after notch filtering. (a) Channel FC6 (or-
ange) predominantly exhibits noise, and all
channels for subject 6 are observed to con-
tain a significant amount of EMG signal and
were thus removed from the dataset.
(b)
Extensive contamination is showcased in the
time interval from 1450 to 1600 seconds for
subject 8. All data above 1450 seconds was
removed for subject 8.
Any value that lies outside of the threshold in-
terval was set to 0.
In the literature, thresh-
olds have been applied manually based on the re-
searchers’ expert knowledge [8], or noise removal
has been performed using advanced adaptive fil-
tering and wavelet transform [33, 42]. This was
not within the scope of this thesis, why a novel
approach with simple hard coded thresholding
was chosen.
==PAGE:11==
10
Figure 8: The final step of preprocessing is
applying an upper and a lower threshold,
marked by the red stippled lines here. Any
data values outside of these thresholds are
set to 0. This recording is for subject 4 chan-
nel 3 (RTAP) in a time interval from 600 to
800 seconds. lower threshold = 0.0755.
After preprocessing, 35 of the original 46 sub-
jects still had one or more active EMG channels,
while the remaining 11 subjects lacked suitable
data for analysis. A total of 9.3% of the data
points remained in the dataset, representing the
proportion of non-zero elements that persisted
after the application of filters and thresholds.
For EEG, only 31 subjects had active channels
after preprocessing, yet a larger proportion of the
data was conserved, with 42% of the time-series
points remaining. The channels with the fewest
non-zero elements remaining had totals of 11,377
for EMG and 134,372 for EEG. This corresponds
to 40% and 9% of the channels’ original data
points, respectively. Because burst duration of
GM movements is on the millisecond scale [43],
this was considered a sufficient amount of data.
Data Analysis
The data analysis was performed in MATLAB
version R2023b, and the NeuroSpec packages 2.0
and 2.11, written by David Halliday [44], were
utilized.
The data is structured in a time series format
with a sampling frequency of 625 Hz, one signal
per column and one sample per row. This is a
prerequisite for the data to be compatible with
the NeuroSpec functions [44].
Coherence
Coherence is defined as a measure of synchro-
nization between two signals and ranges from 0
to 1. The coherence function Cxy(f) is defined
as follows:
Cxy(f) =
|Sxy(f)|2
Sxx(f) · Syy(f)
(1)
where Sxy(f) is the cross-spectral density be-
tween x(t) and y(t). Sxx(f) and Syy(f) are the
power spectral densities of x(t) and y(t), respec-
tively. [45]
To perform the spectral analysis, the function
sp2a2 R2 mt from NeuroSpec was used, which
takes two channels as input. In return, the func-
tion outputs f, a frequency domain parameter
matrix, t, a time domain parameter matrix, and
cl, scalar values related to the analysis. These
parameters, estimates, and scalar values are then
quantified or used as inputs for the plotting func-
tion psp2 R2 to visualize coherence.
For in-
stances where at least one channel lacked data,
the corresponding calculation was skipped. This
rule was applied to all subsequent data analysis
as well.
==PAGE:12==
11
Heatmap
A coherence heatmap was generated for both
EMG - EMG and EEG - EMG coherence anal-
yses. The f matrix from the sp2a2 R2 mt func-
tion includes columns for coherence values and
their corresponding frequencies. The interval of
20-40 Hz was extracted to be used for further
analysis. The dataset was divided into two age
groups: 0-6 months and older than 6 months.
The MATLAB function trapz was used to cal-
culate the Area under the curve (AUC) for all
possible channel combinations and repeated for
every subject. The AUC values for each channel
pair were summed, and then divided by the num-
ber of calculations to compute the average AUC
value for each. In the EMG - EMG calculations
involving identical pairs (eg. RFE - RFE) were
omitted.
Pooled coherence
To calculate pooled coherence, the sp2a2 m1
function was used with a type 0 analysis. The
type refers to the segments into which the time
series was divided and analyzed with a discrete
Fourier transform.
The data was divided into
L separate segments, each consisting of T data
points.
Data points that did not fit into the
L segments were disregarded, making the total
number of analyzed points R = L · T [44].
Using the process in sp2 type0 demo1 from the
Neurospec package, the pooling of all available
channels in the given age groups was performed.
Here, the power for segment length was set to 10,
and an eleven-point moving average window was
applied. From this, the data in column one was
filtered, and a third column was calculated as
an average of the filtered versions of column one
and column two. A sine component with a mag-
nitude of 0.2 and a frequency of 10 Hz is added
to the filtered data. Lastly, the data was divided
by the standard deviation to normalize the vari-
ance prior to the pooled analysis. The function
pool scf was utilized for the pooled analysis to
pass the plf1 and plv1 variables as arguments for
further processing of the pooled spectral coeffi-
cients by pool scf out. The function psp2 pool6,
more specifically psp ch1, was used to plot the
pooled coherence.
Age
Coherence as a function of age was plotted
using the aforementioned coherence function,
sp2a2 R2 mt, specifically the f matrix. Coher-
ence values in the frequency interval 20-40 Hz
were extracted and averaged with the MATLAB
mean function.
The resulting value was then
plotted against age.
Directionality coherence
To analyze the directional relationship between
two signals and their strength of interactions, a
directionality analysis was performed. The func-
tion sp2a2 R2 mt was also used here, but with
the f matrix parameters for the spectral esti-
mation routine.
More specifically the forward
(positive lag) coherence component;
cl.R2 p
and reverse (negative lag) coherence component;
cl.R2 n were used. Lastly, the psp2 R2 plotting
function was used to visualize the directionality
coherence.
Statistics
For quantification of the age-related changes in
coherence, a one-way ANOVA was conducted.
The null hypothesis is that there are no differ-
ences between the age groups: 0-6 months and
above 6 months. A significance level of 5% was
applied across all analyses, meaning that differ-
ences are deemed significant when p-values are
==PAGE:13==
12
less than 0.05. The anova1 function, as a part
of the ’Statistics and Machine Learning Toolbox’
in MATLAB, was used to perform this statisti-
cal test for significance. The F-value, which is
the ratio of the variance between group means
to the variance within the groups, was extracted
in addition to the p-value to measure the extent
of mean variance.
Results
EMG - EMG Coherence
A coherence heatmap of subjects aged 0-6
months and one for subjects older than 6 months
is illustrated in Figure 9. Three regions of spe-
cial interest are indicated by boxes: the right
arm, right leg, and left leg. For subjects aged
0-6 months, the RTAD - RTAP channel pair
has a light green color, representing a coherence
value of 0.09. This relatively high value is ex-
pected considering the muscles are on the same
leg. However, the remaining combinations on the
right leg, RSOL - RTAD and RSOL - RTAP, do
not exhibit the same prominent coherence, with
values of 0.06 and 0.05, respectively. In the left
leg, the channel pair LTAP - LTAD has a co-
herence value of 0.08, whereas LTAP - LSOL
and LTAD - LSOL have the highest values of
0.12. The right hand pair RFE - RFF displayed
the least amount of coherence for this age group
with 0.04. A main observation was the lack of
symmetry between the identical channel pairs on
opposite sides of the body. Another observation
was the coherence in the contralateral channel
pairs; LTAD - RTAD of 0.1 and LTAP - RTAP
of 0.09. This was applicable to both age groups.
RFE
RFF
RTAP
RTAD
RSOL
LTAP
LTAD
LSOL
RFE
RFF
RTAP
RTAD
RSOL
LTAP
LTAD
LSOL
RFE
RFF
RTAP
RTAD
RSOL
LTAP
LTAD
LSOL
RFE
RFF
RTAP
RTAD
RSOL
LTAP
LTAD
LSOL
Figure 9: Heatmap of EMG - EMG coher-
ence AUC for all subjects in the frequency
interval 20-40 Hz. The red boxes indicate
channel combinations for muscles within the
same arm or leg.
The pattern of non-symmetry also applies to the
age group of subjects 6 months and older.
In
this case, RTAD - RTAP demonstrates a value
of 0.14, while the two other combinations in the
right leg are 0.06 and 0.08. In the left leg, LTAD
- LTAP and LSOL - LTAP have values of 0.06
and 0.1, significantly different from the right leg.
RFF - RFE, however, has the strongest coher-
ence of 0.15, drastically different from the 0.03
observed in the 0-6 month age category. Com-
paring the two age groups as a whole, a great
==PAGE:14==
13
variance was observed (F = 1.4) and no statis-
tically significant difference in coherence could
be determined (p = 0.24).
All calculations of
coherence values have a different number of sub-
jects, n varying from 2 to 12. We paid special
interest to certain channel pairs, namely the in-
tramuscular channel pairs RTAP - RTAD and
LTAP - LTAD, and the contralateral intermus-
cular channel pairs RTAP - LTAP and RTAD
- LTAD. In this study, we did, in fact see co-
herence between the intramuscular and inter-
muscular channel pairs. However, no significant
change in coherence between the two age groups
was found for intramuscular channel pairs (F =
0.209, p = 0.69) and for the above-mentioned
contralateral channel pairs (F = 2.63, p = 0.24).
Lastly, RFE - RFF was compared, but no evi-
dence of a decrease in coherence for the antago-
nist muscle pair was found (F = 2.01, p = 0.16).
Figure 10 represents pooled coherence. The top
row corresponds to ages 0 to 6 months, while
the bottom row displays subjects older than 6
months. The channel pairs analyzed are the tib-
ialis anterior-distal and proximal-distal for both
the right and the left legs. Peaks that exceed the
stippled line, marking the 95% confidence inter-
val, are statistically significant and thus indicate
coherence across all pooled subjects. In the 0-6
month group, RTAP - RTAD displays a promi-
nent peak at 50 Hz, assumed to be power line
interference. Variations in the sample size may
influence the reliability of the visualization but
overall, the plots display more coherence in the
0-6 month age group.
Figure 11 illustrates the mean coherence values
plotted against age. In this figure, orange points
represent pre-term subjects, and blue points rep-
resent term subjects. Two coherence analyses
Figure 11: Mean coherence plotted against
age.
The blue color indicate term babies
and the orange color indicates pre-term ba-
bies. The squares represent the pair LTAP
- LTAD, and the circles RTAP - RTAD, re-
spectively.
are depicted: LTAP - LTAD, indicated by square
points, and RTAP - RTAD, marked by circular
points. The two channel pairs are identical but
located on opposite sides of the body, and sim-
ilar patterns are expected. The 0-6 month age
group generally exhibits lower coherence values,
centering more towards the lower end of the co-
herence axis. The graph also suggests a slight
increase in muscular coherence with age. This is
supported by quantification, which showed that
the average of the data points in the 0-6 month
age group was 2.0 · 10−4 (n = 18), while for sub-
jects older than 6 months, it was 2.2 · 10−4 (n =
15).
EEG - EMG Coherence
In Figure 12, an overview of CMC coherence
is shown for all channel combinations.
The
heatmaps in Figure 12 have the EEG channels
==PAGE:15==
14
0– 6 months
> 6 months
RTAP/RTAD           LTAP/LTAD
RTAP/LTAP            RTAD/LTAD
Figure 10: Pooled coherence for four channel pairs, divided into age. The top row is the 0-6 month
age group and the bottom row is the older than 6 month age groups. The stippled line indicate
the 95% confidence interval.
vertically and the EMG channels on the hori-
zontal axis. In this study, we found mean CMC
values of 0.04 and 0.07 for the two age groups,
respectively.
Overall, a greater amount of co-
herence was observed in infants above 6 months
compared to the 0-6 month old subjects (p =
0.00078), with great variation within the chan-
nel combinations (F = 11.6). For subjects aged
0-6 months, coherence above 0.1 for all EEG
channel combinations with RSOL has been ob-
served. This was not expected nor representa-
tive of the additional CMC observed in this age
group, which is why it is considered an outlier.
Besides this, the CMC values were below 0.06 for
all channel pairs for subjects aged 0-6 months.
For subjects above 6 months of age, a greater
amount of coherence but also a greater variabil-
ity in coherence values was observed compared
to the 0-6 month group. A tendency for hori-
zontal lines (channel pairs for all EEG and one
EMG channel) to have similar colors was ob-
served. Additionally, no pattern for specific con-
nections was seen, but RFF was deemed an out-
lier due to coherence above 0.1 for 12 out of 13
channel pairs.
Pooled coherence analysis has been conducted
for C3 - RFE and C4 - RFE, with the results
depicted in Figure 14(a). Additionally, pooled
analysis has been performed for CMC between
Cz and the legs (RTAP and LTAP); the result-
ing plots can be found in Figure 14(b). For C3
- RFF and C4 - RFE, a minimal amount of co-
herence was observed above the 95% confidence
interval, and no significant difference was seen
between the two age groups (p = 0.64 and p =
0.94).
==PAGE:16==
15
RFE
RFF
RTAP
RTAD
RSOL
LTAP
LTAD
LSOL
Fz
FC5
FC1
FC2
FC6
C3
Cz
C4
CP5
CP1
CP2
CP6
Pz
RFE
RFF
RTAP
RTAD
RSOL
LTAP
LTAD
LSOL
Fz
FC5
FC1
FC2
FC6
C3
Cz
C4
CP5
CP1
CP2
CP6
Pz
Figure 12: Heatmap of CMC based on AUC
calculations for all subjects in the frequency
interval 20-40 Hz. The analysis is divided
into the two age groups. The top figure is
heatmap for CMC of 0-6 months and below
is older and 6 months.
For the pooled coherence of the legs, no clear
difference was observed between the right and
left leg, and additionally, no significant increase
in CMC with age was observed (p = 0.97 and
0.71). In Figure 14(b), a comparison of RTAP
and LTAP is shown as examples; the same pat-
tern was observed for the other EMG electrodes
on the legs.
Figure 13 shows mean coherence values for CMC
plotted against the age of the subject. The or-
ange color represents pre-term subjects, while
the blue color denotes term subjects. The two
channel combinations in the plot are Cz - RTAP
(circles) and Cz - LTAP (squares). These com-
binations are analyzed together because of their
contralateral symmetry with the central Cz elec-
trode.
The younger age group predominantly
clusters in the lower spectrum of coherence with
an average CMC value of 1.0 · 10−4 (n = 16),
in contrast to the more dispersed values in the
older age group, which average 1.2·10−4 (n = 9).
Unfortunately, the plot lacks data in the 10 to
40 month age range, preventing a proper identi-
fication of patterns.
Figure 13: The mean coherence plotted as
a function of the subjects’ age.
The blue
points indicate term-born infants, and the
orange points indicate pre-term infants. The
squares represent coherence for Cz - RTAP,
and the circles represent coherence for Cz
- LTAP. The vertical dashed line is at 6
months.
==PAGE:17==
16
0-6 months
> 6 months
C3 – RFE 
C4 – RFE 
(a)
Cz – RTAP 
Cz – LTAP 
0-6 months
> 6 months
(b)
Figure 14: Pooled coherence for four channel pairs, divided into two age groups. (a) RFE pooled
with C3 and C4 respectively and (b) for the TA proximal on the right and left leg compared to
Cz. The horizontal dashed line indicate the 95% confidence limit for the coherence estimate based
on the assumption of independence. The number of subjects, n included in each pooled analysis
is shown in the upper right corner of each plot.
Lastly, a directionality analysis was performed
to investigate if there was a change in the di-
rection of CMC with age.
The same channel
combinations were chosen and a quantification
of the coherence in addition to the estimate of
descending (forward) and ascending (reversed)
coherence is shown in Figure 15. The plots are
based on mean values of coherence for on n sub-
jects, and the standard deviation of the mean
calculations is included in the bar chart.
For
infants between 0 and 6 months, coherence was
observed in all channel pairs. No significant dif-
ference between descending and ascending coher-
ence was observed within each of the channel
pairs: Cz - RTAP (p = 0.90), Cz - LTAP (p =
0.84), C3 - RFE (p = 0.26), and C4 - RFE (p =
0.15).
For infants above 6 months of age, the deviation
within the mean coherence values was high (F =
0.58), this is also indicated by the error bars in
Figure 15. Specifically for Cz - LTAP, the error
bars are greater then the values themselves, mak-
ing this calculation statistically unreliable. No
significant difference between descending and as-
cending coherence was observed for infants above
6 months: Cz - RTAP (p = 0.78), Cz - LTAP (p
= 0.91), C3 - RFE (p = 0.55), and C4 - RFE
(p = 0.76). And overall, no significant difference
was observed between the two age groups across
all four channel combinations for coherence (F
= 0.03, p = 0.86), the estimate of ascending co-
herence (F = 0.001, p = 0.97), and the estimate
of descending coherence (F = 0.08, p = 0.78).
Discussion
Research has proposed that a critical period dur-
ing the development of the human cortex and
CST exists [3, 8]. We hypothesize that muscu-
==PAGE:18==
17
n = 9 
   
      n = 7 
                           n = 3 
              
n = 3
n = 5 
   
      n = 4 
                           n = 3 
              
n = 3
Figure 15: Directionality analysis for coherence between Cz and the tibialis anterior muscle in the
right and left legs (first and second columns from the left, respectively), and for the right forearm
(RFE) coherence with C3 and C4. The analysis is divided into two age groups (below and above
6 months), and coherence between the same four combinations of channels is displayed in the bar
chart. n indicates the number of subjects for each directionality analysis. The green bars display
the coherence value, the red bars represent the estimate of coherence in the forward direction
(EEG ←−EMG), and the blue bars represent the estimate of coherence in the reversed direction
(EEG −→EMG). The error bars indicate one standard deviation, calculated individually based
on the n mean values in each group and for each analysis.
==PAGE:19==
18
lar (EMG - EMG) coherence will undergo devel-
opmental changes and that CMC will increase
with age as neural reorganization occurs.
In
this study, we used various coherence analyses
to investigate if there are changes before and
after 6 months of age.
By calculating EMG -
EMG coherence, we demonstrated that a degree
of intermuscular coupling exists in the neona-
tal stage.
A significant increase in coherence
with age was observed for CMC but not for
EMG - EMG coherence. Through directionality
analysis, we demonstrated that both ascending
and descending coherence are present from the
neonatal stage. However, no significant change
from predominantly ascending to descending co-
herence above 6 months could be demonstrated.
The distinction at 6 months was chosen because
research suggests that this age marks important
physiological changes.
At five months, move-
ment patterns evolve from GM [9], and by 6
months, the subplate is no longer present [14].
Hadders-Algra et al.
[7] explore the idea that
the transient nature of GM and the subplate are
correlated, suggesting that GM are a result of
subplate activity. Furthermore, the subplate is
believed to play a fundamental role in influencing
the establishment of cortical circuitries and spe-
cific axon targeting [13]. The reorganization of
neural networks in the neonate is thus expected
to vary before and after 6 months, which is why
we chose to categorize our data into below and
above 6 months for analysis. Additionally, the
choice to group all infants older than 6 months
together was based on the desire to maintain
proportional subject groups. It is acknowledged
that a seven-month-old baby and a five-year-old
child will exhibit different neurological patterns
due to the age gap. However, because our fo-
cus was on overarching developmental trends at
the 6 month mark, we prioritized maintaining
proportional group sizes rather than accounting
for potentially varying characteristics within the
older group.
Intermuscular and Intramuscular Coher-
ence
We paid special interest to certain channel pairs,
namely intramuscular and intermuscular pairs of
identical contralateral muscles.
In this study,
coherence between channel pairs was detected,
but no significant change was evident between
the two age groups. Although not statistically
different as stated in the results, AUC coher-
ence values from the heatmap of intermuscular
pairs, e.g., RTAD - LTAD, decreased in the older
group. Coherence in identical contralateral mus-
cle groups lead to movements that resemble mir-
ror movements, as observed in a mice study when
guidance molecules were blocked in the cortex
[6]. If coherence does in fact decrease, it may in-
dicate that the guidance molecules have not yet
reorganized the neural network before 6 months,
leading to ipsilateral and contralateral activa-
tion with subplate neural firing.
We expected
higher intermuscular coherence for channels like
RTAP - RTAD in the young group because of
the higher oscillatory neural activation related
to the subplate [8]. An explanation for the lack
of significant change may be that the 0-6 month
range was too broad, as GM movements associ-
ated with subplate activity are mainly present
in 3-5 months [7, 14]. This implies that half of
the data in the 0-6 age group lies outside this
crucial time period. Another factor to consider
is the presence of two CP diagnosed children in
the young dataset. The diagnosis is associated
==PAGE:20==
19
with impaired subplate activity and absence of
GM [7, 8], which could potentially decrease the
average values calculated.
The antagonist muscle pairs (e.g., RFE - RFF)
were expected to exhibit greater coherence in the
0-6 month age group because neurons exhibit ex-
citatory properties in neonates [16]. This excita-
tion may cause co-contraction of antagonist mus-
cles, whereas reciprocal activation is expected in
a mature nervous system [46]. However, the op-
posite was observed in this study, as the coher-
ence of the channel pair was lower in 0-6 month
group. A possible explanation for this discrep-
ancy is the small number of subjects in the calcu-
lation, which increases the possible influence of
outliers. The heatmap includes calculations for
three subjects in the 0-6 month group and four
subjects in the above 6-month group for RFE
- RFF.
Introducing a weighted output in the
heatmaps could mitigate the influence of out-
liers, making the results more reliable [47, 48].
In the heatmaps, we generally observe a lack
of symmetry in intramuscular coherence. This
seems unexpected because we would anticipate
genetic programming and neural maturation to
result in symmetrical development [49]. We be-
lieve that data quality could influence this non-
symmetric evolution, rather than true biological
differences.
The pooled coherence analysis generally showed
more coherence in the younger group, but no
consistent frequency pattern surpassed the 95%
confidence interval. The method of pooled co-
herence involves combining data from multiple
subjects [50]. This technique enhances similari-
ties while suppressing differences, increasing sta-
tistical power and sensitivity in detecting small
but significant changes in coherence that might
be missed in single-subject analyses [27]. How-
ever, this approach is also susceptible to bias and
the risk of amplifying artifacts rather than true
physiological signals [50]. The presence of the 50
Hz peak in RTAP - RTAD (Figure 10) is partic-
ularly concerning, as it indicates that the notch
filter did not adequately remove power line noise
from the data. This suggests that the observed
peak is likely due to contamination rather than
true physiological signals.
Artifacts can thus
lead to false positives or overestimation of co-
herence values [51]. The variance in the num-
ber of subjects pooled, ranging from 4 to 12
in our study, can further impact the reliability
of the results.
These limitations highlight the
need for careful data preprocessing and caution
when interpreting results from the pooled coher-
ence analysis. Despite this and the lack of find-
ings in our analysis, pooled coherence remains a
valuable tool in neurophysiological research, of-
fering the potential to detect small but signifi-
cant changes in coherence that might otherwise
be overlooked [27, 51, 50].
Increased CMC with Age
CMC has been reported to increase with age
[28, 29], and the presence of low-level CMC
in neonates has been demonstrated [8, 27]. In
this study, we documented an increase in CMC
from infants aged 0-6 months to those above 6
months. The significant increase is displayed in
the heatmaps (Figure 12), that also shows a ten-
dency for similar coherence values across a hor-
izontal line. This suggests that one EMG chan-
nel exhibited equivalent coherence values inde-
pendently of the EEG channels, indicating the
presence of muscle activity in the EEG data.
==PAGE:21==
20
Furthermore, the expected physiological pattern,
such as the contralateral organization of the
brain, was not observed.
For instance, RTAD
showed a coherence of 0.09 with CP2 for infants
above 6 months, where a high coherence was an-
ticipated.
However, the same coherence value
was seen between RTAD and C4 in the same age
group, which lacks physiological meaning.
C4
is placed laterally on the right hemisphere and
thus, should not conduct brain activity coupled
with leg movement [52, 39]. This lack of differen-
tiation between hemispherical activity was also
observed in both age groups for the right arm
channels (RFE and RFF).
Theoretically, the
C3 electrode should conduct signals related to
the motor control of the right arm when placed
on the left hemisphere of the brain. Similarly,
C4, located on the right hemisphere, should con-
duct signals for the motor control of the left arm
[39]. However, minimal difference was observed
when comparing coherence from C3 and C4 with
RFE. This lack of hemispherical differentiation
suggests that neural reorganization, through the
shaping of CST projections, is not yet fully de-
veloped [3, 6]. This could explain the absence of
contralateral synchronization in the 0-6 month
infants, but not in the older age group.
The
persistence of this pattern could, on the other
hand, be an indication of the lacking temporal
resolution of EEG, as questioned in [37], or sim-
ply poor data quality where noise contaminates
the coherence analysis.
Our results demonstrating the presence of CMC
in infants align with the study by Kanazawa
et al.
[27], which reported low-level CMC in
neonates (significant CMC > 0.005), indicating
early development of corticomuscular connectiv-
ity. Kanazawa et al. accepted coherence peaks
over a broader frequency spectrum (1-55 Hz) as
evidence of significant coherence, potentially in-
flating reported coherence magnitudes compared
to our analysis, which focused on the 20-40 Hz
frequency range.
This discrepancy was high-
lighted in [8], where the stricter frequency cri-
teria of 20-40 Hz assumed to be the cause of
smaller CMC values compared to those reported
by Kanazawa et al. [27].
Age plot
Two channel pairs are included in the plots of
mean coherence against age.
While only ex-
pected in CMC, both age plots (Figures 11 and
Figure 13) exhibit higher average coherence in
the older age group than the 0-6 month group.
Further, EMG coherence as a whole exhibits
greater coherence than CMC. According to our
hypothesis, EMG coherence should decrease and
CMC should increase with neural reorganization
and maturation. This is also seen in [8] where
logarithmic coherence peaks in the time window
where FM are present. While it is possible that
coherence has a positive trend as observed, it
is more likely that the limited number of sub-
jects masks the true profile. The age of subjects
above 6 months in CMC is unevenly distributed
and lacks data in the 8-47 month range. The few
data points above 14 months for EMG - EMG
coherence also obscures the results, as only six
subjects represent this time period.
It would
have been relevant to perform a regression anal-
ysis to investigate an underlying pattern if the
distribution of ages was more uniform.
==PAGE:22==
21
Presence of Ascending and Descending
CMC
Bidirectional communication between the cor-
tex and muscles was investigated by CMC di-
rectionality analysis in infants aged 0-6 months
and above 6 months.
Contrary to initial ex-
pectations, our analysis revealed the presence
of equal amounts of ascending and descending
coherence in both age groups.
No significant
change was observed below or above 6 months,
and no change was detected between ascending
and descending coherence within and between
the age groups.
Kanazawa et al. [27] demonstrated the presence
of descending coherence from cortex to the tib-
ialis anterior muscle in 14 out of 17 infants and
ascending coherence in 9 of the infants (aged
36–42 weeks). They emphasized the finding of
significant CMC in a descending direction, pro-
viding strong physiological evidence that spon-
taneous movements in neonates are under some
degree of cortical control. The presence of as-
cending coherence is interpreted as sensory feed-
back from the muscle to the cortex and is as-
sumed to potentially be an expression of spinal
reflexes [27]. The presence of ascending coher-
ence in our analysis indicates that the trans-
mission of sensory feedback from the muscles to
the cerebral cortex is present from the neonatal
stage. Moreover, the presence of descending co-
herence in both age groups indicates activation
of the muscles by the cortex.
The descending
pathways are thought to play an important role
in activity-dependent development in the CST
[8, 32].
Despite the absence of significant changes in co-
herence patterns across age groups in our study,
the observation of bidirectional communication
from the neonatal stage underscores the com-
plexity of the developing nervous system. The
stability of coherence dynamics over the ob-
served developmental period suggests the estab-
lishment of fundamental neural circuits support-
ing motor control and sensory integration during
infancy [8, 30, 32]. Collectively, the finding of de-
scending and ascending coherence between cor-
tex and sensory feedback in early motor devel-
opment emphasizes the need for further research
of directed CMC and its implications for motor
function development and neural reorganization
in infancy.
Methodological Reproducibility
In this project, we prioritized a simple and re-
producible approach for preprocessing the data.
Our aim was to minimize the complexity of the
filtering methods to enhance transparency. Ad-
ditionally, we focused on achieving reproducible
results by minimizing subjective filtering steps.
A main difference between our study and that
of Ritterband-Rosenbaum et al.
[8] was the
approach to thresholding EMG data.
In their
study, a manual threshold for baseline noise
was applied individually for each subject and
channel.
In contrast, we aimed for an auto-
mated thresholding method to reduce variation
and avoid subjective bias in data assessment,
particularly considering our limited expertise in
EMG signal appearance. Despite implementing
bandpass and notch filters, as well as thresh-
olds for outliers and baseline noise, the analysis
outcomes were unsatisfactory. As a result, we
performed manual visual inspections of all data,
revealing instances of questionable data qual-
ity. The criteria for channel removal are clearly
==PAGE:23==
22
defined, and examples are provided, why it is
believed to be reproducible despite the manual
aspect. However, we recognize that initial im-
plementation of stricter acceptance criteria and
greater selectivity during data recording could
have eliminated the need for this manual pre-
processing step.
Limitations and Future Perspectives
We find the initial hypothesis to be reasonable,
despite the absence of significant findings. While
the hypothesis cannot be directly confirmed, cer-
tain results suggest interesting trends within this
age group. Further studies are required to either
confirm or reject the hypothesis definitively.
Obtaining high-quality EEG and EMG data is
technically demanding [33], and this complexity
increases when working with children under the
age of five. In particular, recording physiological
signals on infants is associated with a great deal
of noise contamination [39].
For further analysis, we suggest new data ac-
quisition using more modern equipment, such
as wireless EMG.
Since infants cannot be in-
structed to stay still and avoid touching the
recording equipment, this approach could be
beneficial in removing noise artifacts believed to
originate from movement of the wires. To ex-
tend analysis to all four extremities, EMG elec-
trodes on the left arm should be added alongside
the original electrodes. Identical placement and
muscle groups should be used in order to con-
duct symmetrical analysis. The electrode place-
ment should be tailored to each child, and op-
timal recording voltage should be tested. The
dataset should consist of only healthy individ-
uals, although this is difficult to determine in
the neonatal period. If the same number of sub-
jects were used, but all channels exhibited good-
quality signals, there would be a great increase
in available data for the analysis, making the re-
sults more reliable.
For future analysis, comparing different fre-
quency bands would be interesting.
Both
broader and multiple narrow frequency bands
should be considered. The gamma range (35–60
Hz) is particularly intriguing as it plays a role
in the activity-regulation of neural reorganiza-
tion [8].
An EEG review indicates that lower
frequencies, especially the alpha band, dominate
the developmental brain, peaking at 3-5 Hz for
3 month olds and 6-7 Hz by 12 months [41],
making these lower frequencies intriguing to in-
vestigate.
Additionally, the beta band (13-35
Hz) and gamma band (40-50 Hz) are distinct
EEG frequencies associated with neural devel-
opmental periods [25]. These bands should be
considered for future studies, as comparing sig-
nificance across different frequency bands could
potentially highlight bands with specific devel-
opmental changes.
Because the primary preprocessing focus has
been on EMG data, there is a need for additional
filtering of the EEG data. As mentioned earlier,
it is believed that muscle activity contamination
persists in the EEG data, affecting the accuracy
of the analyses. More advanced methods, such
as adaptive filtering and wavelet transform, have
proven effective for EEG data [33, 42]. A draw-
back of increased filtering is the potential loss of
physiological signal along with the noise.
==PAGE:24==
23
Conclusion
This study provides in-depth information on the
selected preprocessing protocol used for EMG
and EEG signals from children aged 0 to 5 years,
detailing the methodology and approach for con-
ducting coherence analysis.
No analysis with
significant results could be presented within the
scope of this thesis. However, evidence of intra-
muscular coherence and CMC is provided, with
a higher degree of coherence after the age of
6 months. The directionality analysis indicates
that both descending and ascending signals are
present. Overall, this suggest reorganization in
the CST during the developmental stage of in-
fants, leading to an increased degree of cortex to
muscle connection.
References
[1] A. L. H. van der Meer, F. R. van der Weel,
and D. N. Lee.
The Functional Significance
of Arm Movements in Neonates.
Science,
267(5198):693–695, 2 1995.
[2] Roger N. Lemon. Descending Pathways in Mo-
tor Control.
Annual Review of Neuroscience,
31(1):195–218, 7 2008.
[3] J. A. Eyre. Development and Plasticity of the
Corticospinal System in Man. Neural Plasticity,
10(1-2):93–106, 2003.
[4] J Eyre. Corticospinal tract development and its
plasticity after perinatal injury. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 31(8):1136–1149, 2007.
[5] Mijna Hadders-Algra.
Evaluation of Motor
Function in Young Infants by Means of the As-
sessment of General Movements: A Review. Pe-
diatric Physical Therapy, 13(1):27–36, 2001.
[6] Kathleen M. Friel, Preston T. J. A. Williams,
Najet Serradj, Samit Chakrabarty, and John H.
Martin. Activity-Based Therapies for Repair of
the Corticospinal System Injured during Devel-
opment. Frontiers in Neurology, 5, 11 2014.
[7] Mijna Hadders-Algra. Early human motor de-
velopment: From variation to the ability to vary
and adapt.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Re-
views, 90:411–427, 7 2018.
[8] Anina
Ritterband-Rosenbaum,
Anna
Her-
skind,
Xi
Li,
Maria
Willerslev-Olsen,
Mikkel
Damgaard
Olsen,
Simon
Francis
Farmer, and Jens Bo Nielsen. A critical period
of corticomuscular and EMG–EMG coherence
detection in healthy infants aged 9–25 weeks.
The Journal of Physiology, 595(8):2699–2713, 4
2017.
[9] Hirokazu Doi, Akira Furui, Rena Ueda, Koji
Shimatani, Midori Yamamoto, Kenichi Sakurai,
Chisato Mori, and Toshio Tsuji. Spatiotemporal
patterns of spontaneous movement in neonates
are significantly linked to risk of autism spec-
trum disorders at 18 months old. Scientific Re-
ports, 13(1):13869, 8 2023.
[10] Christa Einspieler and Heinz F. R. Prechtl.
Prechtl’s assessment of general movements: A
diagnostic tool for the functional assessment
of the young nervous system.
Mental Retar-
dation and Developmental Disabilities Research
Reviews, 11(1):61–67, 2 2005.
[11] Adriana L. Natali, Vamsi Reddy, and Bruno
Bordoni.
Neuroanatomy, Corticospinal Cord
Tract. StatPearls Publishing, 2023.
[12] Gavin J. Clowry. The dependence of spinal cord
development on corticospinal input and its sig-
nificance in understanding and treating spastic
cerebral palsy.
Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, 31(8):1114–1124, 2007.
[13] Anna Hoerder-Suabedissen and Zolt´an Moln´ar.
Development, evolution and pathology of neo-
cortical subplate neurons. Nature Reviews Neu-
roscience, 16(3):133–146, 3 2015.
==PAGE:25==
24
[14] Chiaki Ohtaka-Maruyama. Subplate Neurons as
an Organizer of Mammalian Neocortical Devel-
opment. Frontiers in Neuroanatomy, 14, 3 2020.
[15] A. Kimberley McAllister. Subplate neurons: A
missing link among neurotrophins, activity, and
ocular dominance plasticity? Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 96(24):13600–
13602, 11 1999.
[16] Ossnat
Bar-Shira,
Ronnie
Maor,
and
Gal
Chechik.
Gene Expression Switching of Re-
ceptor Subunits in Human Brain Development.
PLOS Computational Biology, 11(12):e1004559,
12 2015.
[17] Guzel Valeeva, Fliza Valiullina, and Roustem
Khazipov. Excitatory actions of GABA in the
intact neonatal rodent hippocampus in vitro.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 7, 2013.
[18] Mijna Hadders-Algra. Early human brain devel-
opment: Starring the subplate. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 92:276–290, 9 2018.
[19] Purves D, Augustine GJ, Fitzpatrick D, and et.
al.
The Primary Motor Cortex:
Upper Mo-
tor Neurons That Initiate Complex Voluntary
Movements. Sinauer Associates, 2. edition, 2001.
[20] J. A. Eyre, S. Miller, G. J. Clowry, E. A. Con-
way, and C. Watts. Functional corticospinal pro-
jections are established prenatally in the human
foetus permitting involvement in the develop-
ment of spinal motor centres. Brain, 123(1):51–
64, 1 2000.
[21] Alisha Vartak, Divya Goyal, and Hemant Ku-
mar. Role of Axon Guidance Molecules in As-
cending and Descending Paths in Spinal Cord
Regeneration. Neuroscience, 533:36–52, 11 2023.
[22] J Martin, K Friel, I Salimi, and S Chakrabarty.
Activity- and use-dependent plasticity of the de-
veloping corticospinal system. Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, 31(8):1125–1135, 2007.
[23] Ryota Nishiyori, Silvia Bisconti, Sean K. Mee-
han, and Beverly D. Ulrich.
Developmental
changes in motor cortex activity as infants de-
velop functional motor skills.
Developmental
Psychobiology, 58(6):773–783, 9 2016.
[24] Eiji Yamanaka, Yuki Horiuchi, and Ippei No-
jima.
EMG-EMG coherence during voluntary
control of human standing tasks: a systematic
scoping review. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 17, 5
2023.
[25] B A Conway, D M Halliday, S F Farmer, U Sha-
hani, P Maas, A I Weir, and J R Rosen-
berg.
Synchronization between motor cortex
and spinal motoneuronal pool during the per-
formance of a maintained motor task in man.
The Journal of Physiology, 489(3):917–924, 12
1995.
[26] David M Halliday, Bernard A Conway, Simon F
Farmer, and Jay R Rosenberg.
Using elec-
troencephalography to study functional coupling
between cortical activity and electromyograms
during voluntary contractions in humans. Neu-
roscience Letters, 241(1):5–8, 1 1998.
[27] Hoshinori
Kanazawa,
Masahiko
Kawai,
Takahiro
Kinai,
Kougorou
Iwanaga,
Tat-
suya Mima, and Toshio Heike. Cortical muscle
control of spontaneous movements in human
neonates.
European Journal of Neuroscience,
40(3):2548–2553, 8 2014.
[28] Sara Graziadio, Anna Basu, Leo Tomasevic, Fil-
ippo Zappasodi, Franca Tecchio, and Janet A.
Eyre.
Developmental Tuning and Decay in
Senescence of Oscillations Linking the Corti-
cospinal System. The Journal of Neuroscience,
30(10):3663–3674, 3 2010.
[29] Simon F. Farmer, John Gibbs, David M. Hal-
liday,
Linda M. Harrison,
Leon M. James,
Margaret J. Mayston, and John A. Stephens.
Changes in EMG coherence between long and
short thumb abductor muscles during human
development.
The
Journal
of
Physiology,
579(2):389–402, 3 2007.
==PAGE:26==
25
[30] Toru Tsujimoto, Tatsuya Mima, Hideki Shi-
mazu, and Yoshikazu Isomura. Directional or-
ganization of sensorimotor oscillatory activity
related to the electromyogram in the monkey.
Clinical Neurophysiology, 120(6):1168–1173, 6
2009.
[31] Witham.
Corticomuscular coherence between
motor cortex, somatosensory areas and forearm
muscles in the monkey.
Frontiers in Systems
Neuroscience, 2010.
[32] Claire L. Witham, C. Nicholas Riddle, Mark R.
Baker, and Stuart N. Baker. Contributions of
descending and ascending pathways to cortico-
muscular coherence in humans. The Journal of
Physiology, 589(15):3789–3800, 8 2011.
[33] Marianne
Boyer,
Laurent
Bouyer,
Jean-
S´ebastien
Roy,
and
Alexandre
Campeau-
Lecours.
Reducing
Noise,
Artifacts
and
Interference in Single-Channel EMG Signals: A
Review. Sensors, 23(6):2927, 3 2023.
[34] Carlo J. De Luca, L. Donald Gilmore, Mikhail
Kuznetsov, and Serge H. Roy. Filtering the sur-
face EMG signal: Movement artifact and base-
line noise contamination. Journal of Biomechan-
ics, 43(8):1573–1579, 5 2010.
[35] Farina D., Merletti R., Indino B., and Graven-
Nielsen T.
Surface EMG crosstalk evaluated
from experimental recordings and simulated
signals. Reflections on crosstalk interpretation,
quantification and reduction. Methods of infor-
mation in medicine, 43(1), 2004.
[36] Margitta Seeck, Laurent Koessler, Thomas Bast,
Frans Leijten,
Christoph Michel,
Christoph
Baumgartner, Bin He, and S´andor Beniczky.
The standardized EEG electrode array of the
IFCN. Clinical Neurophysiology, 128(10):2070–
2077, 10 2017.
[37] Bor´ıs Burle, Laure Spieser, Cl´emence Roger,
Laurence
Casini,
Thierry
Hasbroucq,
and
Franck Vidal. Spatial and temporal resolutions
of EEG: Is it really black and white? A scalp
current density view. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 97(3):210–220, 9 2015.
[38] G. Dumermuth and L. Molinari. Spectral Analy-
sis of the EEG. Neuropsychobiology, 17(1-2):85–
99, 1987.
[39] Erik
K.
St.
Louis,
Lauren
C.
Frey,
Jef-
frey W. Britton, Lauren C. Frey, Jennifer L.
Hopp, Pearce Korb, Mohamad Z. Koubeissi,
William E. Lievens, Elia M. Pestana-Knight,
and Erik K. St. Louis. Electroencephalography:
The Developmental EEG: Premature, Neonatal,
Infant, and Children. 2016.
[40] A. Del Vecchio, F. Sylos-Labini, V. Mond`ı,
P. Paolillo, Y. Ivanenko, F. Lacquaniti, and
D. Farina.
Spinal motoneurons of the hu-
man newborn are highly synchronized during leg
movements. Science Advances, 6(47), 11 2020.
[41] Joni N. Saby and Peter J. Marshall. The Util-
ity of EEG Band Power Analysis in the Study
of Infancy and Early Childhood. Developmental
Neuropsychology, 37(3):253–273, 4 2012.
[42] Lizhe Tan and Jean Jiang. Adaptive Filters and
Applications. In Digital Signal Processing, chap-
ter 9, pages 421–474. Elsevier, 2019.
[43] M. Hadders-Algra, L.A. Van Eykern, A.W.J.
Klip-Van den Nieuwendijk, and H.F.R. Prechtl.
Developmental course of general movements in
early infancy. II. EMG correlates. Early Human
Development, 28(3):231–251, 3 1992.
[44] David M. Halliday. NeuroSpec: MATLAB rou-
tines for multivariate Fourier analysis of time
series and/or point process data., 2016.
[45] Julius S. Bendat and Allan G. Piersol.
Ran-
dom data :
analysis and measurement proce-
dures, volume 4 Edition. 1971.
[46] Wenfei Sheng, Shijue Li, Jiangli Zhao, Yujia
Wang, Zichong Luo, Wai Leung Ambrose Lo,
Minghui Ding, Chuhuai Wang, and Le Li. Upper
Limbs Muscle Co-contraction Changes Corre-
lated With the Impairment of the Corticospinal
==PAGE:27==
26
Tract in Stroke Survivors: Preliminary Evidence
From Electromyography and Motor-Evoked Po-
tential. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 16, 6 2022.
[47] Lambert H. Koopmans. The Distribution The-
ory of Spectral Estimates with Applications to
Statistical Inference.
The Spectral Analysis of
Time Series, pages 257–293, 1 1995.
[48] Vikram Kumar Yeragani, Arindam Barua, Indu
Sattiraju, and Nikhil Mallavarapu.
Weighted
Coherence: A More Effective Measure Than Av-
erage Coherence.
Cardiovascular Engineering,
3(4):141–146, 12 2003.
[49] Silvia Budday, Paul Steinmann, and Ellen Kuhl.
Physical biology of human brain development.
Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience, 9, 7 2015.
[50] Stuart N. Baker. ‘Pooled coherence’ can overes-
timate the significance of coupling in the pres-
ence of inter-experiment variability. Journal of
neuroscience methods, 96(2):171–172, 2000.
[51] D.M. Halliday and J.R. Rosenberg. On the ap-
plication, estimation and interpretation of co-
herence and pooled coherence. Journal of Neu-
roscience Methods, 100(1-2):173–174, 7 2000.
[52] Yunyuan
Gao,
Leilei
Ren,
Rihui
Li,
and
Yingchun
Zhang.
Electroencephalogram-
electromyography coupling analysis in stroke
based on symbolic transfer entropy.
Frontiers
in Neurology, 8(JAN):316725, 1 2018.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the Institute of Neuroscience
at Copenhagen University for the opportunity to
write our thesis here and to the Elsass Founda-
tion, which provided all the data for our study.
We extend our thanks to Anina Ritterband-
Rosenbaum and Mohamed Barad at the El-
sass Foundation for helping us access the data.
Thanks to Anina for providing relevant reading
materials and sharing her knowledge on EMG
data thresholding and the specific data acquisi-
tion process for the project.
A special thanks to Jens for being the kindest su-
pervisor. We value the time you invested in guid-
ing us through this learning process and for wel-
coming us into this project on very short notice.
We know you are a busy man, and we truly value
the discussions and insights you shared with us.
Your support has been crucial to our success.
