==PAGE:1==
Explainable
Image Aesthetics Assessment
Master Thesis
Technical University of Denmark
Spring, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Department of
Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Technical University of Denmark
Anker Engelunds Vej 1
2800 Kongens Lyngby
http://www.dtu.dk/
Title:
Explainable Image Aesthetics Assessment
Theme:
Master Thesis
Program:
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence
Project Period:
Spring Semester 2024
Author:
Martin Karlik
Supervisor:
Georgios Arvanitidis
Number of Pages:
99
Completion Date: June 19, 2024
Abstract:
This work explores the feasibility of an Explainable
and Personalized Image Aesthetics Assessment (IAA).
First, two Image Quality Assessment systems were
implemented: a CNN-based model NIMA and a
Transformer-based model MusiQ, with MusiQ outper-
forming NIMA on a comparative distortion evaluation.
The Personalized framework was then designed and
implemented as a modified Siamese neural network,
using two image inputs and the NIMA model as an im-
age encoder, inspired by how photographers compare
two images at a time. The model was then personal-
ized on four tasks, increasing in complexity: Learning
to discriminate Black-and-White images, Blurry im-
ages, Blob-Overlaid images, and to prefer smiling over
frowning faces. The personalization proved successful,
with higher accuracy rates of all four personalized ver-
sions. The Explainable framework was implemented
using LIME with default and AI-generated pertur-
bations, first tested to explain a simple brightness-
prediction model, then applied onto the two base mod-
els and onto the personalized versions. The interface of
the Explainable Personalized IAA system was imple-
mented into the Capture One photo-editing desktop
application, where it was well-received by participants.
The content of this report is freely available, but publication may only be pursued due to agreement with the author.
==PAGE:3==
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Problem Analysis
3
2.1
Photo Culling as an Application of IAA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
The Puzzle Pieces of Photo Culling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.3
Technical Pipeline for Automated Photo Culling . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Image Aesthetics Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.5
The Need for Explanations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
2.6
Explainable AI in Computer Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
2.7
Explainable Image Aesthetics Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.8
The Need for Personalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.9
Personalized Image Aesthetics Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
3
Design
22
3.1
Design of the User Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
3.2
Design of the Explainable Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3.3
Design of the Personalized Framework
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
4
Methods & Results
27
4.1
The Tools and Frameworks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.2
CNN-based implementation of IQA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
4.3
Transformer-based implementation of IQA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
==PAGE:4==
Contents
1
4.4
Implementation of the Explainable Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
4.5
Implementation of the Personalized Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
5
Evaluation
49
5.1
Evaluation of the Interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
5.2
Evaluation of the Base IAA Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5.3
Evaluation of the Explainable System
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
5.4
Evaluation of the Personalized System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
6
Discussion
59
6.1
Reflection on the Methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
6.2
Limitations and Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
60
7
Conclusion
61
Bibliography
62
A Appendix
68
A.1
User Needs Research: Open Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
A.2
Commentary of LLMs on Image Aesthetics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
70
A.3
User Interface in Capture One . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
A.4
Implementation of the Base Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
72
A.5
Evaluation of MusiQ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
74
A.6
Training Graphs of Personalized Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
A.7
Examples of Inference Comparison by Base and Personalized Models . .
80
A.8
Personal Preference Explained . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
83
A.9
Evaluation of the Explanations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
87
A.10 User Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
==PAGE:5==
1 | Introduction
Ever since the invention of a camera, people enjoyed the ability to capture a slice of time
with their photon-collecting devices, and thus, eternalise the moment. Nowadays, it
is difficult to imagine a world without pictures – to be a photographer is as simple as
having a smartphone. And as the quality and availability of cameras has peaked, this
work turns its focus toward what makes pictures aesthetically pleasing. What makes
us prefer some pictures over others, and what is it really, that is responsible for the
aesthetic feeling we get when looking at a picture.
Image Aesthetics Assessment (IAA) is a difficult computer vision problem, that has
entertained researchers for decades [39; 43; 16; 15]. The emergence of machine learning
solutions, especially Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [25] and later Transformers
[40], has managed to cause a breakthrough in IAA, but the state of the art solutions are
still far from perfect. And the question of how suitable they actually are introduces us
to yet another problem in the field – the explainability (or lack thereof) of IAA.
One thing is to solve a problem, another is to show that the solution actually does the
job. Especially with such a subjective field as image aesthetics, lacking an obvious source
of truth and allowing for wider range of image interpretations, the question of how to
explain the decision of an automated system is not at all obvious. As Valenzise et al. [39]
notices and criticizes, even though a lot of progress has been done in IAA, comparatively
very little has been done in the explainability of image aesthetics. Therefore, alongside
designing an automated IAA system, the explainability of such a system is just as much
the topic of this work.
Initial Problem Statement:
How can Image Aesthetics Assessment be automated, and how can the decisions of such a system
be explained?
2
==PAGE:6==
2 | Problem Analysis
2.1
Photo Culling as an Application of IAA
One of the main applications of IAA is photo culling – a necessary part of a photog-
rapher’s workflow, when after a photo-shoot, the photographer has to go through all
the captured pictures, and discard (or cull) the unwanted ones. It is a very tedious
process and automation of photo culling would save a lot of time in photographers’ busy
schedules. But more than that, with the ever-present popularity of picture-taking, not
only professional photographers would benefit from such a solution, but pretty much
everybody with a smartphone and with an occasional habit to capture a moment. Before
diving deep into the task of automated Image Aesthetics Assessment – which is one es-
sential puzzle piece of automated photo culling – let us unravel what other parts remain
to be solved, in order to have a fully automated, end to end photo culling pipeline.
2.2
The Puzzle Pieces of Photo Culling
Every photography session – whether it is a wedding photo-shoot, or a personal doc-
umentation of a trip home for Easter – has a hierarchical structure, where at the top of
the hierarchy is the story, the abstraction, the meaning of what is captured, and at the
bottom are the individual, specific pieces of evidence – the pictures. But how does a
photographer go from the idea of what story to tell, to the final selection of the pictures?
To answer the question, an informal discussion with experienced photographers was
conducted. It was largely unstructured, in order to learn as much as possible about the
problem, but the initial questions were as follows:
• Before conducting a photo session, how do you go about planning the process?
• Do you do any mental preparation before photo culling, and what does it include?
3
==PAGE:7==
2.2. The Puzzle Pieces of Photo Culling
4
• What is important to you when deciding how and which pictures to deliver from
the overall session?
The discussion conclusions lead to discovering the following pattern, see Figure 2.1.
The same discussion space was at the same time utilized to discuss the task of IAA
specifically, which is detailed later in Section 2.4.5. Verbose notes from this discussion
can be seen in Appendix A.1.
Figure 2.1: A sketch of a mental model of photographer’s thought process while photo culling is shown
on the left side, while the right side demonstrates an example.
This pattern serves as an informed approximation of the process, not necessarily as a
completely true mental model, but it lets us get started on tackling the problem.
2.2.1
The Photographer’s Intention
When a photographer starts a photo culling session, first they envision the end goal,
and these can vary based on many criteria. Perhaps the photographer only needs the
very best picture for the cover of a magazine, or the photographer needs to document
the entire event, thus only caring about removing the duplicates. As another example,
a photographer might be capturing a football match of young children – the intention
could be to deliver the moments that capture each scored goal for the local newspaper,
or alternatively, it could be to capture each player for the players’ parents. And perhaps
the photographer only has one blurry picture of the goalkeeper, but in such a case,
sometimes the objective image quality of a picture is less important than the photog-
rapher’s intention – the blurry picture of the goalkeeper should still be delivered to
the goalkeeper’s parents. There are many possible stories to tell with the same original
set of pictures, and ultimately, it is up to the photographer’s vision. This is difficult to
account for in an automated photo culling system.
2.2.2
The Selection of Groups of Pictures
Once the photographer knows what story to tell, it is time to consider all the material
that he or she has captured. From here on, what follows is the consideration of all the
==PAGE:8==
2.3. Technical Pipeline for Automated Photo Culling
5
"moments" (or groups of pictures) that should be included, where each moment can
be represented by several pictures. However, it can often be ambiguous what counts as
a moment – what pictures are duplicates, and which ones tell a different story. Figure
2.2 shows an example, where it is not obvious whether the four pictures represent one,
two or possibly four "moments".
Figure 2.2: Four pictures of a goat taken seconds apart, demonstrating the group-belonging ambiguity.
The pictures could be reasonably interpreted as belonging to one, two or four groups.
2.2.3
The Selection of Pictures Within Groups
After the photographer gains an idea of what moments should be included, it finally
comes down to the selection of the best picture from a set of similar pictures. And this
is exactly where Image Aesthetics Assessment fits into the picture of automated photo
culling. Using an IAA system, we could score these images, and sort them accordingly.
And ideally, such a system would sort the images based on their aesthetics in the same
way a photographer would. Although Image Aesthetics Assessment by itself is not
enough to automate photo culling, it is a crucial part of the process.
2.3
Technical Pipeline for Automated Photo Culling
The discussed mental model of the photo culling process begs us to translate it into a
technical model. Doing so, we can discover that each of the sub-problems maps to a
technical task, that can be solved in isolation.
The photographer’s intention is perhaps the most difficult one – one solution could
be a textual prompt in the form of "I would like to deliver the best picture of each
football player.". Taking advantage of the recent multi-modal breakthroughs in AI [24],
it might be possible to describe the textual prompts and the photographer’s intentions
in the same latent space, thus understanding the intention, and proceeding with the
automated photo culling accordingly. Or in a more naive sense, by assuming that the
photographers intend to deliver every moment they captured – which is the usual case
==PAGE:9==
2.4. Image Aesthetics Assessment
6
of many photographers – an automated culling system could simply group similar
images together, and choose the best one per each group.
The grouping, or clustering of images can be solved with an algorithm such as K-Means
[6], which clusters similar images together into K groups. To account for the various
photographer’s intentions, the grouping could have a "similarity" setting, mapping to
the variable K. In the more advanced version, with the inclusion of a textual prompt, we
could expand upon the K-Means algorithm and introduce a new variable M, standing for
the Method of grouping. Then, the textual prompt and the variable M could be trained
to be mapped to the same place in a latent space – thus, a prompt such as "I would
like to deliver the best picture of each football player.", could be mapped to the group
representation of "different players". This is, however, only a theoretical speculation, and
given that the core of this work is Image Aesthetic Assessment, further design of the
upgraded clustering solution is considered out of scope of this work.
Assuming that we have ended up with the perfect groups, we can finally turn our focus
at the pictures within the group, and use IAA to choose the best one. Now that the task
of Image Aesthetics Assessment is grounded in the context of photo culling, throughout
this work, the problem of photo culling as such will not be analyzed further, but it will
remain the background and the motivation for a successful IAA system.
All in all, the amount of uncertainty and the likelihood of divergence from the original
photographer’s intention via an automated system only reaffirms the idea that AI
should serve only as an assistant, rather than taking over. An easily adjustable way to
update the automatically grouped images, or to change the preference of the best image
are required for a usable solution.
2.4
Image Aesthetics Assessment
In the formulation of the task, IAA is a simple problem. Given a set of images, the
system should choose the best one. It is the criteria, parameters, and finally the user’s
agreement with this selection that make the task a very difficult problem to tackle. To
get started, let us uncover what lower-level tasks build up the complex task of Image
Aesthetics Assessment.
2.4.1
Image Quality and Image Semantics
Ying et al. [45] notices a distinction between image quality – the objective, photo-
technical analysis of an image, considering attributes such as sharpness or composition;
and image aesthetics – the perceptual, semantic value of an image. In their work, Ying
==PAGE:10==
2.4. Image Aesthetics Assessment
7
et al. point out the need to distinguish the two, and to treat them as different tasks. The
example shown in Figure 2.3 demonstrates the difference between image quality and
image aesthetics, as interpreted by Ying et al.
Figure 2.3: Demonstration of the difference between image quality and image aesthetics; even though the
picture on the left side is sharper, the picture on the right side is still likely to be more visually appealing.
In this work, a similar viewpoint on image aesthetics is adapted, however, varying
slightly in the terminology – instead of merely meaning the perceptual quality of an
image, image aesthetics is seen as the final criterion for a choice of an image, comprising
of both image quality assessment (IQA) and image semantics assessment (ISA), where
ISA covers the analysis of the perceptual, semantic quality of an image. This is visualized
in Figure 2.4
Figure 2.4: This work’s interpretation of the relationship between Image Aesthetics Assessment (IAA),
Image Quality Assessment (IQA) and Image Semantics Assessment (ISA).
2.4.2
The Image Quality Datasets
When it comes to image quality datasets, the AVA (Aesthetics Visual Analysis) dataset
[32] dates back to 2012, and ever since then, it served as the core dataset in the field
of IAA. It consists of around 255,000 images, each scored by 100-120 amateur and
==PAGE:11==
2.4. Image Aesthetics Assessment
8
professional photographers. It also contains tags describing the image category and
photographic style (e.g. "fashion", "wedding" or "fish eye"), and the photographic
challenge under which it was taken (e.g. "12 days of Christmas" or "a single tree"). An
example image, along with its scores (represented as a histogram) is shown in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.5: An example from the AVA dataset, along with its groundtruth user ratings, projected as a
histogram.
Many advances in IAA have been accomplished thanks to the AVA dataset, before the
research "out-grew" this dataset – and that is when the need for more specialized, either
higher quality or more explainable datasets took hold of the image quality dataset scene.
An expansion of the AVA dataset is the EVA dataset [17], which stands for "Explainable
AVA dataset". It is not an expansion in terms of the dataset size, but rather in terms
of the information associated with the images. The researchers took a subset from the
AVA dataset of about 4,000 images, and asked participants to rate the selected four
attributes: "light and colour", "composition", "quality" and "semantics". Additionally,
they asked the participants the following questions: "What is the overall aesthetic quality
of this picture?", "How difficult is it for you to judge this image’s aesthetic quality?",
"Which factor(s) do you think is (are) important in your judgement of this photo?". The
EVA dataset is one of the first and largest explainable image quality datasets, which
collects information regarding different aesthetic attributes, rather than inquiring only
the overall image quality.
The researchers behind the PaQ-2-PiQ dataset [45] collected 4 million subjective human
judgements from 8,000 users, from which, after the filtering of participants and judge-
ments, 1 million judgements were kept as reliable. With their database of 40,000 images,
they collected judgments of not only the overall images, but also 120,000 judgements
of "patches" of image. Thus, with their data collection, they informed the relationship
between local and global image quality – i.e. how the local patches have an influence
on the global picture quality.
Lastly, the SpaQ dataset [14] is another relatively recent image quality dataset of 11,000
==PAGE:12==
2.4. Image Aesthetics Assessment
9
images, annotated by humans for image quality, image attributes (brightness, colorful-
ness, contrast, noisiness, and sharpness) and scene labels. Their focus is on smartphone
photography, recognizing the availability of good quality smartphone cameras for
ordinary people, not only photographers.
The above-mentioned datasets, or combination thereof, are used later in this work to
reproduce, train and evaluate different IAA model architectures. However, there are
many other IQA models that went unmentioned, especially preceding the publication
of the AVA dataset, such as the LIVE IQA dataset [36], or TID-2013 [10]. These are
mostly distortion-augmented datasets, not taking into account human scores, but simply
a preference toward the non-distorted images. These datasets were also the motivation
behind the "ecologically sound" KoniQ-10k dataset – the dataset claiming more realistic
distortions.
2.4.3
The History of Image Quality Assessment
Initial attempts at tackling IQA in the early deep learning era involved extracting a set
of hand-crafted features, such as exposure, depth of field or the rule of thirds, and using
them as inputs into a multi-layer perceptron. In other terms, this meant outsourcing
of the image quality attributes to traditional image-processing algorithms, and training
a relatively simple neural networks to understand which of the hand-crafted photo-
technical features are the most important. Some of the solutions following this approach
include works by Lu et al. [29], Kao et al. [18] or Kong et al. [22].
However, the rise of deep learning, and especially the invention of a Convolution Neural
Network (CNN) [25], has – among many other computer vision domains – revolu-
tionized the field of IAA. It proved that taking a minimally processed image (usually
only resized), and training a CNN to predict the image score outperforms the previous
methods. This allowed for faster and more iterative experimentation with the IAA task,
as most of the pre-processing steps could be omitted.
And as such, the hand-crafting of features slowly became outdated. Nevertheless, Jang
and Lee [16] in their work attempted to analyse the features that are actually learned by
the deep learning approaches in an IAA task. Using transfer learning, they fine-tuned
an image classification neural network on the AVA dataset. Comparing the task of IAA
with traditional image classification, they found out that features learned by the IAA
model are vastly different from the ones learned by an image classification model. The
IAA model mostly focuses on the colour and overall harmony (considering the image
more "globally"), while the image classifier focuses on texture and local information
(considering the image more "locally"). Their conclusions are also uptaken in a study by
Hentschel et al. [15], where they show that CLIP, a multi-modal AI model, performs bet-
==PAGE:13==
2.4. Image Aesthetics Assessment
10
ter in the task of IAA when it is not pre-trained on an image classification dataset. This
approach is relatively novel, and in the vast majority of IAA automation, the researchers
tend to fine-tune a traditional image classification model architecture, especially the
Inception ResNet model [37], often trained on a the ImageNet dataset of 3.2 million of
object-annotated images [11].
Convolutional Neural Network as Image Quality Assessor
Using the AVA dataset, some of the early CNN-based IAA systems chose to predict
the mean human-score of an image [22; 30] or classify low- and high-quality images.
However, in their work, Talebi et al. [38] proposed a different solution, called NIMA
(Neural Image Assessment). Instead of predicting a single score for an image, with
NIMA, they predict a distribution of user scores, i.e. ten values corresponding to the
number of votes per each rating as a histogram of scores. An example of a NIMA
prediction is shown in Figure 2.6. Notice that the prediction format corresponds more
closely with the annotated AVA instance example in Figure 2.5.
Figure 2.6: An example from the AVA dataset, and a prediction format by the NIMA model.
The idea of NIMA is to fine-tune an Inception Resnet model, originally trained on a large
dataset of object-annotated images from ImageNet dataset. Then, the last layer of the
network is removed, and a new fully-connected layer with ten units (corresponding to the
number of user scores) is added. The AVA dataset is then used to train the IAA model,
taking advantage of its understanding of images, but making it learn "the beauty", rather
than the content. The paper tried different base-models: MobileNet, Inception-v2 and
Inception-v3. The choice of the base-model controls the compromise between inference
time and accuracy. MobileNet, being the smallest network, achieves 80.36% accuracy,
while Incpeption-v2 performs best with 81.51% accuracy, measured as classification of
low/high quality images. The NIMA architecture is visualized in Figure 2.7.
To update the learnable parameters, the paper chose the ADAM optimizer [21] and
the architecture used Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) [27] as loss function. Since the
==PAGE:14==
2.4. Image Aesthetics Assessment
11
Figure 2.7: The architecture of the NIMA model. The second part depends on the baseline image classifier
choice – e.g. MobileNet with 3 million trainable parameters or Inception-v2 with 28 million trainable
parameters.
groundtruth and the prediction are histograms, EMD in essence calculates how much
effort is needed to transform one histogram into the other. Or, keeping with name, how
much earth should be moved from one histogram to the other, if their histograms were
piles of earth. In the discrete representation of user votes (as opposed to a continuous
distribution), given the groundtruth distribution G, the predicted distribution P and the
index of the distribution value j ,first the Cumulative Distribution Function (CMD) is
used to calculate the cumulative distance per each bin, as shown in Formula 2.1.
CMDGj =
j
∑
i=1
Gi,j∈<1,10>
CMDPj =
j
∑
i=1
Pi,j∈<1,10>
(2.1)
Then, EMD is calculated as the sum of the distances between the two cumulative
distributions, see Formula 2.2.
EMD(G,P)=
10
∑
i=1
|CMDGi−CMDPi|
(2.2)
This is also visualized in Figure 2.8.
NIMA outperformed all previous IAA solutions at the time in terms of low- and high-
quality classification, and up until today, it is ranked in the top group with any other
competing IAA systems.
Another approach to IAA is proposed in the paper PaQ-2-PiQ (patches to pixels) by
Ying et al. [45], where the researchers – on top of introducing a very relevant image
quality dataset mentioned earlier – exploit their observation that local picture quality
is deeply related to global picture quality. Similarly to NIMA, they use a version of
an Inception ResNet architecture as a baseline, but modify it to predict both global
and local patch quality, using multi-task learning. Then they invent a local-to-global
feedback architecture that produces further-improved global picture quality predictions,
using the local patch predictions.
==PAGE:15==
2.4. Image Aesthetics Assessment
12
Figure 2.8: Visualization of Earth Mover’s Distance loss. The left histogram is the prediction, while the
right one is the ground-truth. The red arrows display the distance per bin, that the first histogram needs
to apply to transform into the second histogram. The final formula considers the sum of the distances
of Cumulative Distribution Function (CMD) values at each bin, of the two distributions.
To prepare the patches, Ying et al. extract three random patches per image of size
relative to the image’s size – 20%, 30% and 40% patch size ratios, respectively. To learn
both the global picture quality and local patch quality, their architecture uses their own
Region of Interest Model, designed similarly as a recurrent Convolution Neural Network
[26]. This architecture includes a feedback signal loop (as in a traditional Recurrent
Neural Network [34]) along with a CNN. The Region of Interest model is designed to
predict both the full-picture and patch quality. It is trained on their own PaQ-2-PiQ
datasets, with user scores for both the full picture quality and separate patches. This
is visualized in Figure 2.9.
Figure 2.9: The architecture of a PaQ-2-PiQ model. Adapted from [45].
Transformer as Image Quality Assessor
The architecture of a CNN (and its derivations) served the field of computer vision for
many years, and is still a very popular architecture choice. But following the introduction
of the attention mechanism by Vaswani et al. [40], a new model architecture was intro-
duced: the Transformer. Initially, Transformer was intended for NLP tasks, but following
its success in the field, it was also applied – with subtle modifications – in computer
==PAGE:16==
2.4. Image Aesthetics Assessment
13
vision with great success. As such, a novel Transformer-based architecture was proposed
also for the task of IAA by Ke et al. called MusiQ [19]. MusiQ, standing for Multi-scale
Image Quality Transformer, allows for variable input image size. One big drawback of
a CNN architecture is the fact, that the images need to be resized prior to training the
model. This means not only lower image quality, as the images are for computational
purposes resized to usually quite a low-dimensional ratio (such as 224x224x3 in NIMA),
but also the aspect ratio of the image – which is very relevant for the overall aesthetics
judgment – is discarded. The way MusiQ allows for multi-scale, multi-orientation image
inputs is by utilizing hash-based 2D spatial embeddings and scale embeddings.
The problem that these embeddings solve is the limitation of a 1D sequence input into
a Transformer, when an image is a 2D structure. First, they introduce a learnable matrix
T of size GxG, where each elements is D-dimensional. After the image is broken into
patches, the paper’s hash-based 2D spatial embeddings transforms the patch at position
(i,j) with the Formulas 2.3.
ti = i∗G
H/P,
tj = j∗G
H/P
(2.3)
where H and W are the dimensions of the image, P is the number of patches and G
is the size of the helper matrix. Finally, (ti,tj) is rounded to the nearest integer, and the
corresponding value at the computed indices is looked up in the helper T matrix. Both
the computation of the indices and lookup are lightweight operations, and they both
happen in O(1) time and O(G∗G) space.
Since the Transformer allows for multi-scale representation, the scale information also
needs to be encoded in the input sequence. Regardless of the scale, the patch locations
from all scales are mapped to the same matrix T. Therefore, to help the model differen-
tiate patches from different scales in a multi-scale image representation, an image with
K-scale variants is given an embedding Q of size KxD, with D being the dimensionality
of the embedding. This embedding is then added element-wise to the original patch
embedding of the native-resolution image. Thus, both the spatial and scale information
is encoded in the Transformer. The architecture of MusiQ is visualized in Figure 2.10.
The compared methodology of the aforementioned IAA systems is shown in Table 2.1.
==PAGE:17==
2.4. Image Aesthetics Assessment
14
Figure 2.10: The architecture of the MusiQ model. Adapted from [19].
Model
Input
Architecture
RAPID (2015) [29]
Extracted image features
Multi-layer perceptron
Kao et al. (2016) [18]
Extracted image features
Multi-layer perceptron
Kong et al. (2016) [22]
Minimally processed image
Convolution Neural Network
NIMA: MobileNet (2018) [38]
Minimally processed image
Convolution Neural Network
NIMA: VGC16 (2018) [38]
Minimally processed image
Convolution Neural Network
NIMA: Inception-v2 (2018) [38]
Minimally processed image
Convolution Neural Network
PaQ-2-PiQ [45]
Minimally processed image
Region of Interest model
MusiQ [19]
Minimally processed image
Transformer
Table 2.1: Comparison of the various feature extraction and deep learning methods for IAA.
2.4.4
The History of Image Semantics Assessment
Compared to IQA, Image Semantics Assessment has historically received less attention
by researchers. Naturally, without a model that could abstract a basic idea of picture
quality, it was comparatively much more ambitious to attempt the understanding of
the contextual and perceptual qualities of an image. But with the recent advances in
IQA, ISA becomes the last piece of puzzle for an ambitious IAA system.
Some of the methods for tackling ISA are rather indirect, taking advantage of already
existing multi-modal AI models that understand text and images. They are not de-
signed with aesthetics in mind, but when applied to the task, they seem to be able to
==PAGE:18==
2.4. Image Aesthetics Assessment
15
reason about the image’s aesthetics. One of such examples is CLIP [15], trained as a
Vision Language Model (VLM) on a large dataset of image-text pairs. In their work,
Hentschel et al. fine-tune CLIP with textual labels, containing the aesthetic critique. The
researchers find out that context-aware labels, such as "a beautiful picture of a dog"
work better than fixed prompts, such as "a beautiful picture" – showing the importance
of image semantics. Their model performs similarly well compared to the previous
SOTA research, and their work also shows that an image classifier as a baseline model –
such as Inception ResNet trained on ImageNet dataset – is not needed for the IAA task,
as they only fine-tune the VLM.
Other VLMs, such as openly available Microsoft’s Copilot, also claim to understand
image aesthetics. Appendix A.2, Figure A.1 shows an example of Microsoft’s Copilot
assessment of aesthetics of a picure containing a puppy. Although the answer sounds
reasonable, it is vague, generic, and it is hard to estimate how truthful and precise it is.
Additionally, these models natively do not have the ability to compare and score images.
Other than multi-modal experiments with the semantics of image aesthetics, other
approaches for ISA are closely tied with the subjectivity of aesthetic preference, and
these are further described in Section 2.8.
2.4.5
The Human Side of Image Aesthetics Assessment
The assessment of image aesthetics is obviously a very human-centered task; with no
objective measurement of the groundtruth and a large room for interpretation, the exact
role of an automated assistant needs to be planned carefully. How is it that we, humans,
assess aesthetics?
Valenzise et al. [39] talk about the elements that build up the aesthetic feeling, when
seeing a beautiful image. First, the interestingness of an image is described as the ability
to attract our attention due to the familiarity of what we know and like. Second is the el-
ement of surprise or amazement – meaning how much the picture contents depart from
our expectation. And lastly is the beauty – to quote the Merriam-Webster dictionary:
"the quality or aggregate of qualities that give pleasure to the senses, or pleasurably
exalt the mind or spirit". This break-down of the image aesthetics assessment experience
is however considering looking at pictures in general – not necessarily in the context
of photo culling, with the task to select a subset of the good ones. The paper also points
out the objectivism and subjectivism dilemma regarding IAA, and criticizes the state
of the art research of IAA for not giving enough attention to the personalization of such
systems. Another interesting point made in the paper is the "general" and "task-specific"
aesthetics challenge – e.g. weighing the judgments of general picture quality, and the
quality of included faces. This is exemplified in Figure 2.11.
==PAGE:19==
2.5. The Need for Explanations
16
Figure 2.11: The problem of general vs task-specific judgment. Although the left picture might arguably
have better lighting and contrast, the face of the girl on the right picture is bright and smiling. It is
ultimately a choice of each individual, which criteria are more important.
To learn a bit more about how people could interact with an IAA system – and therefore
how such a system should be designed – we refer back to the an open discussion
with five photographers, detailed in Appendix A.1. The discussion questions, this time
specific to understand the IAA task were as follows:
• How do you assess the aesthetics of an image?
• Can you describe the thinking process of choosing one picture over another?
• If you were to outsource your work to a human assistant, how would you instruct
them to do your job?
The participants mostly stressed the subjectivity of image aesthetics, and expressed how
they would be doubtful toward a generic solution. They also showed initial distrust
towards an automated solution, and would appreciate interpretable results. These points
are expanded upon in further sections, but the full, verbose notes from the discussion
can be found in Appendix A.1.
2.5
The Need for Explanations
There are two main challenges in the automation of IAA: first is the automation of
IAA itself, and the second is a way to explain how and why the decision was made.
Especially in such a subjective field as image aesthetics, explainable solution is useful for
both the AI researcher – in order to gain insights into the IAA model and understand
==PAGE:20==
2.6. Explainable AI in Computer Vision
17
how it behaves in order to improve it; and the user – in order to decide whether or not
to trust the IAA system.
2.6
Explainable AI in Computer Vision
When it comes to Explainable AI, Xu et al. [44] make the distinction between inter-
pretability and explainability of AI models. An interpretable system – whether it is a
neural network or any other algorithm – is by design transparent, and allows for direct
understanding of its behaviour. On the other hand, explainable system tends to deal
with more complex and opaque models, and aims to explain them independently of
the model in question. As an example, an interpretable system could be a decision tree
– the decision of a decision tree can be followed step-by-step, while an example of an
explainable system could be sentiment analysis of movie reviews, where the explainer
model highlights the contributing positive and negative words of another NLP model.
Although the two terms are often interchangeable, this work sticks to these definitions
of interpretability and explainability.
Schrouff et al. [35] more closely highlight the concept of local and global explanations.
While local explanations explain individual predictions of specific instances, global
explanations aim to provide insights into the model’s behaviour on the entire dataset.
2.6.1
Local Explanations
The most common technique for local explanations is the idea of feature removal. Covert
et al. [9] summarize removal-based methods in their work, and categorize them based on
the removal-method. In Table 2.2, a subset of image-applicable methods is summarized,
and a more detailed explanation of the removal methods is provided further below.
==PAGE:21==
2.6. Explainable AI in Computer Vision
18
Explainability technique
Removal method
LIME (Image)
Default values
SHAP
Marginalize
Occlusion
Zero values
CXPlain
Zero values
Rise
Zero values
MP
Blurring
EP
Blurring
FIDO-CA
Generative model
Table 2.2: Subset of summarized explainability techniques by Covert et al., adapted from [9]. The removal
method is a shorthand for the way each method generates perturbations.
Computer vision is somewhat of a challenging task be be explained via local expla-
nations – as it is not obvious how to generate faithful perturbations of an image. For
example, in a cat/dog classification task, if we want to explain which pixels contributed
the most to the classification of a dog, naively replacing the dog with a black rectangle
might not be a faithful perturbation. Therefore, different explainable techniques perturb
the images differently, although many of them derive their implementation from the
game-theory concept of Shapley Values [42]. The idea of Shapley Values comes from
a scenario, where a group of players form a coallition to achieve a certain goal. The
problem is then, how much does each player contribute to achieving the goal, and how
to calculate it? The Shapley Value is a way to fairly assign the contributions to each
player, considering all possible coallitions.
SHAP segments the image by masking various parts of it, and then uses marginalization
to compute the outputs of the original model, when certain parts of the image are "turned
off". MP (Model-agnostic Post-hoc) and EP (Explanations-by-Perturbation) methods use
local blurring to turn-off parts of images; Occlusion, CXPlain and Rise use Zero values
(black pixels), and FIDO-CA [5] uses a generative model to generate perturbations.
LIME [48], a very popular explainable methods stands for Local Interpretable Model-
Agnostic Explanations. Although initially designed for tabular and textual data, it also
has an image-explainable version. It perturbs the image similarly to SHAP and other
Shapley Value-based implementations. First, LIME divides the image into superpixels
(segments of image) and to "turn-off" the masked-out parts, it sets the pixels to the
mean value of the image (or some other default value). Then, a dataset of perturbed
samples is generated around the original instance. LIME then weights these perturbed
samples based on their similarity to the original instance, and fits a simple, interpretable
model such as a decision tree to fit these samples. This local model approximates the
behaviour of the complex model, and provides insights into the model’s behaviour.
==PAGE:22==
2.7. Explainable Image Aesthetics Assessment
19
2.6.2
Global Explanations
Global explanations in the domain of computer vision aim to provide an overall un-
derstanding of how a model makes its decisions across an entire dataset, rather than
focusing on individual predictions. An example of such of such technique is TCAV (Test-
ing with Concept Activation Vectors) [20]. It is a method that helps in understanding the
model’s decision-making process in terms of concepts that are meaningful to humans.
As an example, given a zebra classifier, TCAV attempt to verify that the important
concepts ("Does it contain black and white stripes?") are captured by the original image,
rather than merely the output. This is valuable for verifying whether the model relies
on expected concepts, and for ensuring that the model is making decisions based on
meaningful, expected features.
Another global technique to gain insights into the model’s behaviour is the t-SNE al-
gorithm [7]. t-SNE is a nonlinear dimensionality reduction technique used primarily for
visualizing high-dimensional data in two or three dimensions. It works by converting
the similarities between data points into joint probabilities, and minimizing the Kullback-
Leibler divergence (a measurement of statistical distance) between these probabilities
in the high-dimensional and low-dimensional spaces. t-SNE preserves local structure
by making sure that similar data points in high-dimensional space remain close in the
low-dimensional representation, which in essence captures the local neighborhoods.
In complex neural networks, t-SNE can be injected prior to the last-few layers of the
network, to visualize how the neural network clusters the dataset prior to classification.
2.7
Explainable Image Aesthetics Assessment
Explainable AI has its roots in domains, where the reason behind the decision is critical
for the user, such as healthcare or finance. After all, if a patient’s tumour is tagged
as malignant, it is fairly crucial to understand why. Similarly, if a bank uses an AI
algorithm to decide that a person is not eligible for a loan, it is understandable that the
person should inquire as to why that is. The field of photography is not necessarily the
first field that comes to mind as needing to be explained, but although the decision of
an automated IAA system has low risk on affecting a person’s life, the mystery of the
decision is that much more inviting to be explained.
Ying et al. [45] choose to use a saliency map, to denote which pixels contribute most to
the good or bad image quality. They employ their Region of Interested model (detailed
in Section 2.4.3) with the local-to-global feedback loop to generate the maps. An example
is shown in Figure 2.12.
==PAGE:23==
2.8. The Need for Personalization
20
Figure 2.12: An example of a saliency map, where red colour denotes good quality and blue colour
denotes poor quality. Adapted from [45].
Wang et al. [41] propose a Neural Image Reviewer model, which can generate a textual
commentary along with the aesthetic score of an image. As such, the output is more
interpretable, although textual descriptions might be vague, generic and imprecise. An
example of the output of their work is shown in Figure 2.13.
Figure 2.13: An example of the prediction by the Neural Image Reviewer model. Adapted from [41].
The problem of a saliency maps as an explanation technique for the task of IAA is
its questionable interpretability – it is not obvious why (and if) a single pixel can be
determined as of good or poor quality. A textual explanation is more interpretable, but
on the other hand it is less precise and less trustworthy.
2.8
The Need for Personalization
"Beauty is in the eye of the beholder" – that’s how the classical saying goes, which hides
in itself the implied personal preference for what we find beautiful. Keeping with this
philosophy, it is natural that in order for an IAA system to be trustworthy, it needs to
try to consider the subjective preference of each individual. The personalization of such
a system is critical, and the following section explores the personalization methods of
IAA systems.
==PAGE:24==
2.9. Personalized Image Aesthetics Assessment
21
2.9
Personalized Image Aesthetics Assessment
As Valenzise et al. [39] conclude in their user study regarding aesthetics: "Modern views
on aesthetics tend to agree that objects considered to be ’beautiful’ have some intrinsic
properties recognized by all observers. However, the final decision about whether the
object is beautiful or not is purely individual." This statement follows their critique, how
most IAA research simplifies the problem of IAA into predicting a generic score for an
image, and assuming that most people will agree with it.
To break this pattern of universal aesthetics, Valenzise et al. explore how to personalize
such a system. They notice that the SOTA methods used for this task often take inspi-
ration from image recommendation and user profiling tasks, such as active learning,
collaborative filtering or residual learning. The idea is to try to learn the personal
preference of a user from the subset of their data, and how they interact with an IAA
system. In the context of photo culling, this data could be extracted by letting the
user interact with the system, and collect their rated/ranked images as a dataset for
fine-tuning the personalized model.
One of the problems these approaches actively face, is the assumption that only a small
subset of user-annotated data will be provided in a real-world scenario. To tackle that,
Ren et al. [33] adopt a residual-based model scheme to learn a scalar offset to the generic
aesthetic score predicted by a generic aesthetic predictor. This system is also extended
to an active learning scenario, where the model is updated while the users evaluate
new images. Their experiments demonstrate that their approach can effectively learn
personalized aesthetics preferences.
How exactly to go about personalizing an IAA system depends on the application
and the user-scenarios, but Ren et al.’s offset method shows promising results. In
combination with the need for explanations, the deviation from a generic score could
perhaps also allow for clearer visual explanations. By using a local explainable method
to generate a saliency map of a generic IAA system, and thereafter of the personalized
IAA system, the difference of the two saliency maps could highlight the features, that
the person finds important.
In conclusion, based on the analysis of the problem area, the following Final Problem
Statement has been defined.
Final Problem Statement:
How well can the decisions of a fully-automated Image Aesthetics Assessment system be explained,
how can such a system be personalised, and how well can the personalised preference be explained?
==PAGE:25==
3 | Design
3.1
Design of the User Interface
To be able to learn more about how users might interact with an Explainable, Person-
alized IAA system, a panel with this purpose was designed and implemented within
the Capture One photo-editing software [2]. Its design adapted to the already existing
Culling Window panel, see Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: The Culling Window in Capture One.
The user interface, prior to any relevant changes made in this work, contains a group-
ing inspector tool, which allows the users to group similar images together with an
adjustable "similarity" slider, as can be seen in the top-left corner in Figure 3.1. Then,
it contains a few image-metadata features, such as Filters (to allow filtering of images
based on their metadata), and File Info (to detail the image information). The panel
also contains a Face-Focus feature, with the purpose of highlighting and detailing any
detected faces – but the only utilized feature for the purpose of this work was the ability
to group similar images together.
The users can navigate between groups by pressing the top and bottom arrows, and
they can navigate between images within a group by pressing the left and right arrows.
But the Culling Window, in its presented state, allows for purely manual culling. It only
22
==PAGE:26==
3.2. Design of the Explainable Framework
23
enables the user to go through the images more quickly, but otherwise it does not allow
for any automated selection of pictures.
To expand upon this, a new "Explainable Assisted Photo Culling" panel was designed
and implemented in the Culling Window, see Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: The Explainable Assisted Photo Culling, implemented into Capture One.
Additionally to the panel, which can be enabled and disabled by clicking its associated
button, the images within the groups are sorted based on "Aesthetics" – as opposed to
"Date" in the previous version. What "Aesthetics" should mean is a subject of a later
user-test, in which different ways to score and rank the images – along with various
associated explanations – are evaluated. Appendix A.3, Figure A.2 shows examples of
the differently presented information, but a coherent evaluation of these will be detailed
more in Section 5.1.
3.2
Design of the Explainable Framework
The explainable framework serves mainly two purposes: A, for the AI developer to
understand how the model behaves; and B, for the user to understand why a decision
was mode. In the first case, the most important feature of an explainable framework
should be precision and consistency – a developer can afford to spend more time
interpreting a decision, in order to truly understand the model’s behaviour. On the
other hand, a user might value the ability to quickly interpret a decision more than the
exact precision of the explanation.
While ideally the explainable framework should be both easily interpretable and precise,
in practice, certain compromises might be necessary – such as in choosing, whether the
explainable framework should provide visual (more precise) explanations, or textual
(more interpretable) explanations.
As shown in Section 2.7, the most popular method for visual explanations in IAA
==PAGE:27==
3.2. Design of the Explainable Framework
24
is a saliency map. Since many explainable frameworks, such as LIME, only provide
binary classification of pixels – as contributing or detracting from the given prediction
– the designed visual explanation uses a green and red overlay, to mark the pixels that
contribute or detract from high aesthetic score. This can be seen in Figure 3.3, where the
green overlay is hand-drawn, symbolizing the importance of Taj Mahal in the picture.
It clearly shows which pixels and which objects contribute to a high aesthetic score, but
it still remains questionable, what exactly it is about Taj Mahal that makes the image
aesthetically pleasing.
Figure 3.3: Original image, and its associated visual explanation. Red overlay marks the pixels that
contribute to high aesthetic score, while red overlay marks the pixels that contribute to neutral or low
aesthetic score.
Taking the "general" and "task-specific" aesthetic challenge into consideration, as dis-
cussed in Section 2.4.5, we might imagine it difficult to explain the general image
features visually. For instance, it is not easy to provide visual explanation for Figure 2.11,
if it is the contrast and the overall brightness that are more important than the person’s
face. Visualizing the task-specific features might be more feasible, as illustrated in Figure
3.4, but this problem nonetheless shows the incompleteness of a visual explanation for
the task of IAA.
As follows from the analyzed problem area, the visual explanation is the traditional way
to explain computer vision tasks, but the "general" and "task-specific" aesthetic challenge
invites us to consider alternatives. Let us look into how a textual explanation could
perform on the task of explaining IAA decisions.
One problem with a textual explanation is the difficulty to prove its faithfulness to the
model. If the model is trained such that the image, its score and the textual commentary
are all mapped to the same point in a latent space – such as in case of the work of Wang
et al. [41] – then the textual commentary could be considered an explanation. Still, their
work showed often only vague or questionable comments, see Figure 2.13.
There are other approaches, where the textual commentary is independent of the model,
and merely considers the image, as illustrated in Figure A.1. In that case, the textual
==PAGE:28==
3.3. Design of the Personalized Framework
25
Figure 3.4: An example of a visual explanation for a task-specific image feature.
commentary might be a useful tool for the user, but not really a faithful explanation
as a developer’s tool – it does not provide any insight into the used IAA model.
To demonstrate how the explanations look like in the software, then panel containing a
visual and textual explanations are shown in Appendix A.3, Figures A.3, A.4 respectively.
Regardless of the explanation type, it is important to remember the purposes of explana-
tions in an IAA task: the model-insights for the developer, and the easily-interpretable
decisions for the user. Therefore, throughout the implementation process, visual ex-
planations are used to understand and improve upon the models, while the textual
explanations are only evaluated in terms of their value to the user.
3.3
Design of the Personalized Framework
The way people generally interact with a photo culling system – whether manual or
automated, whether professionals or amateurs – is by comparing pictures. Along-
side general observations, this has also been stated by participants in the conducted
discussion, see Appendix A.1.
Figure 3.5 shows an example of two images in the same image-group, and the star-rating
==PAGE:29==
3.3. Design of the Personalized Framework
26
as the user-interaction to assess their aesthetics. The example is specific to Capture One,
but the same idea applies in various different photo-editing software.
Figure 3.5: Two images in the same image-group, alongside their star-rating. The star-rating is an
interactive element – the user can press any number of stars to rate the image.
If the user ranks one image with five stars, and the second one with zero stars, we
cannot conclude that the well-rated image is overall the most "aesthetically pleasing"
image, while the poorly-rated image is the least "aesthetically pleasing". What we can
conclude, however, is that there is something about the first image, which outperforms
the second image. The aesthetic difference might be subtle, such as the position of the
sun. It is merely the photographer’s choice to proceed with the first image, and the
aesthetic difference is not necessarily implied in the star-rating difference. Because of
this, it could be argued that the star-rating is not an appropriate user-interaction for the
task of IAA – even though most photo-editing software uses it.
It is, therefore, only natural to design a framework that approaches this problem in the
same way humans do, and learn from the subtle differences between similar images.
How exactly this is approached is described further in Section 4.5.
==PAGE:30==
4 | Methods & Results
4.1
The Tools and Frameworks
Throughout the implementation process, the following tools and frameworks have been
used: Python, along with Tensorflow, Keras, JAX, Flax, Numpy, Pandas and OpenCV
and other libraries for machine learning and image processing; Azure’s Machine
Learning cloud infrastructure for remote training of models. The training of the models
was conducted both locally on a computer’s processing unit (2.3 GHz 8-Core Intel Core
i9) for smaller experiments and training, while a cloud compute’s processing unit (4 cores,
32 GB RAM) was used for longer and heavier training tasks. Lastly, Objective C and Swift
were used for Mac application development to create the user interface – but as the focus
of this work is on the IAA system, the implementation of the user interface is not detailed
further. The implementation of everything discussed in this chapter is accessible at [3].
4.2
CNN-based implementation of IQA
Inspired by the NIMA model of Talebi et al. [38], the first attempt at an IQA system
was the reproduction of their model, see Figure 2.7. As a base model, Inception-v2
was chosen with its parameters already trained on image-classification task, using the
ImageNet dataset. Its last image-classification layer was then removed, and replaced
with a Dropout layer – to prevent overfitting, and Dense layer with 10 units – to predict
the histogram of scores.
The AVA dataset was split into a train and test set, using a standard 80%-20% partition.
The dataframe was then formatted such that each row contains the local path to the
image, and the aesthetic scores as a normalized list of 10 values, such that the values
add up to 1.0.
Using the AVA dataset and the prepared dataframe, the model was trained for 5 epochs
with only the appended Dense layer being trainable, while all parameters of the base
27
==PAGE:31==
4.2. CNN-based implementation of IQA
28
model remained frozen, in order to prevent the base model from updating its parameters
too prematurely. After the 5 epochs, all layers of the entire model architecture were set
to trainable, to give all parameters a chance to learn the aesthetics, and the training ran
for 9 more epochs. As in the paper, Earth Mover’s Distance was used as a loss function,
and ADAM as optimizer. All hyper-parameters used during the training, along with
their rationale, are shown in Appendix A.4, Table A.1.
The Figures 2.5, 2.6 show examples of an image from the AVA dataset, its groundtruth
histograms of scores and the model’s predictions.
The trained model achieved the EMD loss of 0.077 when evaluated on the AVA test set
of 50,000 images, compared to the paper’s result of 0.050. To give a better perspective of
this value, given two random distributions, the expected value of EMD is 0.33 [12]. The
inferior result is likely due to the imperfect following of the paper’s technical details,
such as not utilizing random cropping prior to training, or not enough compute to train
the model for longer.
4.2.1
Evaluation of the CNN-based IQA model
When it comes to the evaluation of an IAA system, it is important how the test data is
designed. The more the image group resembles a real-life situation (an image group of
similar pictures taken moments apart), the more it lacks clear groundtruth. The opposite
is true for artificially created image groups (an image group of distorted versions of the
original image), but it is not as representative of the real world.
To begin gaining insights into the model’s performance, first, a set of distortions was
introduced: blur, blob overlay, underexposure, overexposure, rotation, zoom and shear.
These, applied to the same instance from the AVA dataset, can be seen in Figure 4.1.
Figure 4.1: The original instance from AVA dataset and 7 artificial distortions applied onto it.
Then, the distorted versions of a subset of the AVA test split, consisting of 640 images,
were used to evaluate the model. The entire AVA test set of 50,000 images was not
used to prioritize compute time – both in terms of distortion generation and model
==PAGE:32==
4.2. CNN-based implementation of IQA
29
inference – while 640 instances is still considered a representative sample. Since the
model architecture outputs a histogram for each instance, the mean and mode values
of this histogram were considered respectively, and a histogram of the final scores of
instances was constructed per each distortion. The combined histograms of mean scores
for each distortion are shown in Figure 4.2, while the histograms of mode scores for
each distortion are shown in Appendix A.4, Figure A.5.
Figure 4.2: Histograms of mean values of NIMA-predictions, on the original and distorted variants,
calculated on 640 instances from AVA test set, and its corresponding distorted versions. The dotted red
lines show the lower and upper quartiles, the green line shows the histogram’s mean and the blue line
the histogram’s median.
Finally, the average mean value, the average mode values, the standard deviation and
the comparative evaluation (ratio of times the original image outperforms its distorted
version) are shown in Table 4.1.
Variant
Ratio of Correct Comparisons
Mean
Median
St. Deviation
Original
4.83
4.84
0.38
Blur
65%
4.37
4.34
0.26
Blob Overlay
63%
4.83
4.80
0.36
Overexposure
65%
4.80
4.80
0.33
Underexposure
40%
4.90
4.93
0.35
Rotation
73%
4.77
4.79
0.40
Shear
52%
4.95
5.00
0.41
Zoom
68%
4.69
4.76
0.41
Table 4.1: The evaluation of the NIMA model on all distortions.
We can see that overall, the difference between the original and distorted images is not
so significant. Although there is a slight preference toward the original images in some
cases, the model tends to regress to the mean. The worst performing distortion is the
rotation, while underexposure even outperforms the original set. This could be due to
==PAGE:33==
4.2. CNN-based implementation of IQA
30
the fact, that there are not many distorted instances in the AVA dataset, since the data has
been collected from various photographic challenges by amateur and professional pho-
tographers; and that the "underexposure" distortion was too subtle, often improving the
image instead of distorting it. Therefore, the model did not have a chance to learn to dis-
like the specific distortions, such as a blob overlaying an image. Lastly, a t-SNE graph was
constructed with the original images along with all the distortions, by cutting-off the last
two Dense and Dropout layers, propagating the instances through the model, and extract-
ing the outputs at a Dense layer with 1536 units. These were then input into the t-SNE
algorithm with perplexity value of 30, per each distribution. This is shown in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3: The t-SNE graph of the various distortions propagated through the NIMA model.
The t-SNE shows a big overlay with all the distortions, which also agrees with the
results in Table 4.1. But there can also be spotted isolated islands of instances of the
same distortions. Additionally, the original images, marked as red, are all clustered in
the center, close together, implying that the model does have the ability to differentiate
between the original and distorted images – perhaps just not having learned to prefer
one over another in the last model’s layer.
NIMA, with its CNN-based implementation, was a promising tackle of the image aes-
thetics challenge, but it trails in various aspects. Specifically, its scalability and potential
lacks for the following reasons: Its input is constrained to 224x224x3 pixels. This means
that a lot of details get lost due to the downscaling. On top of that, its input is constrained
to a square aspect ratio. This means that pictures of various aspect ratios – portrait,
landscape, panorama, etc. – all get squished to a square, and the IQA model loses any
chance to assess the aesthetics correctly. For these reasons, it’s tempting to explore the
use of other architectures – such as a Transformer – to improve upon where NIMA lacks.
==PAGE:34==
4.3. Transformer-based implementation of IQA
31
4.3
Transformer-based implementation of IQA
Inspired by the MusiQ model from Ke et al. [19], the second baseline model of this
work uses a Transformer. Its main advantages have to do with the flexible input size,
since thanks to the spatial and scale embeddings, an image of any size can be inferred.
This implementation tries to reproduce the MusiQ model as described in their paper,
but exact reproduction cannot be guaranteed, as the paper does not share the code. The
MusiQ model was pre-trained on ImageNet for 300 epochs, and further fine-tuned on
PaQ-2-PiQ, KonIQ-10k, SPAQ, and AVA datasets for 10, 30, 30 and 20 epoch respectively.
The training was done on all four fine-tuned versions by the researchers, and this work
simply accessed the final weights, stored at [4] to load them into the constructed model
architecture.
The model architecture was implemented using mainly Python, Tensorflow and JAX and
Flax libraries. Following the implementation steps and formulas described in Section
2.4.3, first the spatial and scale embeddings were calculated for each image input. Then,
the input, its spatial and scale embeddings were concatenated during preprocessing,
and partitioned into fixed-size patches. These then served as the input sequence to the
Encoder block of the transformer, with the task to predict the class token [cls]], a learnable
embedding. Depending on the dataset used, either L1 (Mean-Absolute Loss) or EMD
(Earth Mover’s Distance) was used as a loss function and ADAM as the optimizer.
4.3.1
Evaluation of the Transformer-based implementation of IQA
Similarly as with the NIMA approach, the MusiQ model was evaluated using the
same set of distortions. Since the model was trained to output a single score from 0
to 100, this value is used to construct the histograms. Figure 4.4 shows the histogram
results, using the MusiQ model trained on the KoniQ-10k dataset. The t-SNE graph of
MusiQ, illustrating the different distortions propagated through the model is shown
in Appendix A.5, Figure A.6. The histogram results using the MusiQ model trained on
the SpaQ and PaQ-2-PiQ datasets are shown in Appendix A.5, Figures A.7 and A.8.
The average mean, median and standard deviations are shown in Table 4.2.
We can see that the results are improved over the previous CNN-based approach. The
only distortion that MusiQ struggles with is the Blob Overlay – the model has not man-
aged to understand this contextual feature, possible again due to the lack of such data in
the original training set. In practice, this might not necessarily be a big drawback, since it
is unlikely to encounter such distorted data in the real world. Still, this test demonstrates
the behaviour of our IQA system, and its lack of "intuition" regarding aesthetics. This
==PAGE:35==
4.4. Implementation of the Explainable Framework
32
Figure 4.4: Histograms of MusiQ-predictions, on the original and distorted variants.
Variant
Ratio of Correct Comparisons
Mean
Median
St. Deviation
Original
60.60
63.95
12.44
Blur
100%
21.33
20.51
5.23
Blob Overlay
46%
61.13
63.94
11.63
Overexposure
93%
48.97
49.97
11.11
Underexposure
68%
62.30
64.20
10.94
Rotation
83%
56.47
58.70
11,27
Shear
90%
52.74
53.13
12.87
Zoom
79%
55.64
57.84
12.43
Table 4.2: The evaluation of the MusiQ model on all distortions.
brings us back to the need for explainability of an Image Aesthetic Assessment system.
4.4
Implementation of the Explainable Framework
Before diving straight into explaining the task of IAA, we should ensure that the ex-
plainer is trustworthy. Therefore, in order to have a way to evaluate the explainer, a
simple "brightness predictor" neural network was trained first, with the idea to explain
it and see how the explainer behaves on a simple task with clear groundtruth. For this
brightness prediction model, the NIMA architecture was reused with slight modification
– instead of the last layer with ten units and a softmax activation function, a layer with
one unit and sigmoid activation function was used. This task is obviously trivial, and
such a complicated neural network is not needed, but the already existing architecture
served as a good starting point.
Then, the model was trained on the images from the AVA dataset, but instead of using
==PAGE:36==
4.4. Implementation of the Explainable Framework
33
the aesthetic scores as labels, a simple average of the images’ pixels was dynamically
computed and used as labels. ADAM was used an an optimizer, and MSE as a loss
function. After 10 epochs, the model achieved loss of 0.008 on the validation set. As
such, it was time to explain it.
4.4.1
LIME as an Explainer
Once the brightness predictor model was trained, LIME was chosen as the explainable
method, due to its popularity, proven results and easier integration with the set of
tools described in Section 4.1. Since LIME is mainly designed for image classifications
tasks, its usage needed to be adjusted to the task of regression – as the brightness
predictor, and both IAA models have been designed to predict continuous scores. This
was achieved by providing the probability values for both the likelihood of an image
being bright, and the likelihood of an image being dark, as shown in 4.1.
prediction=model.predict(image)
prediction−for−lime=(prediction,1.0−prediction)
(4.1)
The set of formatted predictions was then used for a batch of images, after they were
propagated via the model in question. Finally, the two adjustable variables are number of
samples, meaning the number of perturbed images for an instance being explained, and
number of features, meaning the number of superpixels (image segments) to visualize.
Increasing both values produces more trustworthy and granular results at the cost of
computation time. Finally, it was decided to show both the positively and negatively
contributing pixels, and visualize them as shown in Figure 4.5. The visual format with
the green and red overlay was deemed as the most interpretable, and chosen in further
visual explanations.
Figure 4.5: Progression of visual explanations on the task of brightness prediction. The leftmost image
is the original image, the two following explanations used 500 perturbed samples and 10 features, while
the last one used 500 perturbed samples and 5 features. Otherwise, the explainable framework is the
same for all three explanations, only the mask is differently visualized.
The Figure 4.5 shows that its primarily the pixels of the lamp that contribute the most
to the brightness of the image. This is a sensible result, and a sanity check of the LIME
==PAGE:37==
4.4. Implementation of the Explainable Framework
34
explainer on the brightness predictor. Therefore, the LIME explainer will be used further
to explain the different IAA models.
4.4.2
The Two Baseline Models Explained using LIME
Finally, we can proceed to apply LIME on the predictions made by the NIMA and
MusiQ models. Figure 4.6 shows three instances explained, as assessed by the two
baseline models.
Figure 4.6: LIME applied on the assessments of MusiQ and NIMA models on three instances. The first
row shows the original images, second row LIME explanations of MusiQ and third row LIME explanations
of NIMA.
It is somewhat difficult to interpret the visualization, without reading too much into it.
It is notable, however, that in the third image, where the bottom left corner is covered by
a finger, both models correctly deem that area as aesthetically detracting. MusiQ model
likes the entire flower and the upper background of the image, similarly as in the first
image, where it likes the subjects and the upper background. NIMA model seems to
be more confused about the bigger parts of the images, and is more granular – judging
parts of objects as red or green, rather than the whole objects. In the second image,
neither model seems to confidently assess the overlaying blob as aesthetically detracting.
==PAGE:38==
4.4. Implementation of the Explainable Framework
35
4.4.3
Default and Generative Perturbations
By default, our LIME implementation turns-off the various image segments during the
generation of perturbations by setting the pixels to the average colour of the segmented
part. For example, an original instance, along with its perturbations is shown in Figure
4.7.
Figure 4.7: An example of an image, and its perturbations using default LIME perturbing algorithm.
With the recent advances in image-generative AI [46; 31; 47], it was tempting to use
generative perturbations, in order to create more faithful variants of the original instance.
This was also attempted in the work of Agarwal et al. [5], but ever since their implemen-
tation from 2020, the generative AI landscape has transformed drastically. Therefore,
in the attempt to improve the explainer, the model by 123RF [1] was used to generate
faithful perturbations of instances, instead of the average-value method, as implemented
in the earlier example. Dalle-2 [28] was also tried, but this model failed to generate
variations of image programmatically, and would always return the same original image,
no matter of the prompt. The perturbed instances, using the generative perturbations
are shown in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.8: An example of an image, and its perturbations using AI-generated perturbations by [1].
Both versions of the explainer – with the default and generative perturbations – will be
used later on to provide local explanations for decisions made by the further developed
models. First, however, let us look into how to approach the personalization of an IQA
system.
==PAGE:39==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
36
4.5
Implementation of the Personalized Framework
As discussed in Section 3.3, the basis of an Images Aesthetics Assessment seems to
be a comparison. By utilizing online-learning, the personalized framework can take
advantage of the comparison-based interaction – rather than learning from each user
assessment on its own, the idea is to allow the users to compare images, and learn from
these comparisons. By extracting image pairs in form of "higher-rated image" > "lower-
rated image" from the same group, and using them to update the model parameters, the
model can learn the differences of image pairs more directly, and eventually understand
the personal preference of a user. Finally, if the system is able to compare two images
at a time, it can also sort any number of images.
To formalize the problem, the input to the system should be two images, and the output
should be an indication of a preference for either the first or the second image – such
as predicting a value between 0 and 1, where a value close to 0 indicates a preference
toward the first image, while a value close 1 indicates a preference toward the second
image. The exact value can then signify the intensity of the preference, and values close
to 0.5 would imply the model’s uncertainty. One of the architectures to suit this problem
is the Siamese Neural Network.
4.5.1
Siamese Neural Network as a Comparative Model
A Siamese Neural Network [8] was originally designed to tackle the problem of signa-
ture verification, having a labelled reference sample and a new, unseen instance. In such
a problem, the model needs to be able to tell whether or not the two instances belong
to the same class. The architecture is also commonly used for face verification, and its
ability to quickly learn a pattern makes it a good tool for one-shot learning. A typical
Siamese pipeline is shown in Figure 4.9, where the Poodle and the fried chicken do not
belong to the same class, and the model needs to learn what features are important to
distinguish the two – such as the fur or the eyes of the Poodle.
Figure 4.9: The typical pipeline of a Siamese Neural Network. The example shows an image of a Poodle
and an image a fried chicken, and how the network evaluates if they belong to the same class. If they
do, the euclidean distance is minimized, otherwise (such as in this case) the distance is maximized.
==PAGE:40==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
37
Both images are propagated through the same network, referred to as the image encoder.
This image encoder is commonly constructed by taking an image-classification neural
network, and removing its last classification layer, such that the output is the feature
vector prior to the last layer. Then, typically, the Euclidean distance is computed between
the two feature vectors, or image encodings, and the distance between the two encodings
is either minimized or maximized, depending on whether or not the two images belong
to the same class.
4.5.2
Modified Siamese Neural Network as the Personalized IAA System
We can observe that the problem of Personalized IAA has similarities with the typical
use-case of a Siamese architecture, but it is not quite the same. We also have two images,
a binary output, but instead of predicting whether or not the two images belong to the
same class, we are interested in the aesthetic preference for one or the other image. We
can think of this as a relative classification task, with no predetermined classes, yet the
task to choose one of the two inputs.
To achieve this, the typical Siamese pipeline was modified to fit this need. The NIMA
model was used as the image encoder, and its histogram output was used as the image
encoding. Notice that no layers were removed, since the histogram of ten values already
produces a decent encoding of the image quality prediction. Then, instead of using
the Euclidean distance, a custom layer was constructed, which manually maps the his-
togram outputs to a floating number between 0 and 1, where 0 represent the preference
toward the first image, and 1 the preference toward the second image. When needed,
the output can easily be converted to the index of the preferred image by rounding to
determine the image preference. The custom layer, and the process of arriving at the
final index is visualized in Figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: Comparative mapping of the histogram values to the index of the preferred image.
In a step-by-step description, this process during training is also detailed as follows:
1. Propagate the batches of image-pairs through the image encoder, and store the
histograms of images A, and the histograms of images B.
==PAGE:41==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
38
2. Define a vector [1, 2, ..., length of the histogram].
3. Matrix multiply this vector with both batches of the histograms, to compute the
batches of histograms’ mean values. Using NIMA’s histogram output as the image
encoding, this means that the maximum mean value is 10, and the minimum
mean value is 0.
4. Compute a batch of mean-distances, by subtracting the batch of mean values A,
from the batch of mean values B (the order of subtraction determines which image
is mapped to zero or one)
5. Pass the batch of mean-distances into a sigmoid function, which maps the negative
distances to numbers close to zero, and the positive distances to numbers close
to one.
6. Return the batch of sigmoided mean-distances as the layer’s output.
As the loss function, a modified contrastive loss was used, specified to compute the
difference between the groundtruth output and the predicted output. For this, see
Formula 4.2 below, where y is the groundtruth, and pred is the prediction.
loss=y∗max(1−pred)+(1−y)∗pred
(4.2)
An alternative could be to use binary cross-entropy loss, which would logarithmically map
the maximal error into a theoretically infinitely big number. However, the rationale for
using contrastive loss instead, is that it is important for the network to understand the
distance between the true and predicted value, and the contrastive loss maintains this
linear relationship.
As an optimizer, RMSprop (Root Mean Squared Propagation) [23] was used. This optimizer
is from the family of adaptive learning-rate optimizers, designed for large dataset
mini-batch training, and is commonly used especially in Siamese neural networks.
4.5.3
Personalization of the System using Global and Contextual Image
Information
Having constructed the personalization architecture, it was time to test out the ability
of the IQA model to learn a pattern. For this, four tasks were designed with increasing
levels of complexity, and growing importance of contextual awareness:
1. Learn to prefer coloured images over black-and-white images
==PAGE:42==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
39
2. Learn to prefer sharp images over blurry images
3. Learn to prefer original images over blob-overlaid images
4. Learn to prefer images of people smiling over images of people frowning
Learning Black-and-White Discrimination
The task to discriminate black-and-white images was designed such that the model only
needs to learn per-pixel information. As such, it is one of the simplest features to learn
– there is obviously no need for a neural network to achieve this goal, but it serves as
a good starting point to test the ability of the model to learn a feature.
First, the dataset of original and black-and-white image pairs was constructed, and
annotated such that the original images are preferred by the model. Specifically, the
AVA dataset’s train set was used, and only the paths to the original images were stored
in the training dataframe, since the black-and-white versions were created dynamically
per each batch of images during training. The label was then fixed to 0, indicating
the preference for the first, original image. Since the last custom layer of the model
architecture is not trainable, there was no need to deal with imbalanced data – the
model would not simply learn to predict 0 for any input, since the loss function is tied
to the individual histograms.
The NIMA model was then used as an image encoder and plugged into the comparative
architecture. As such, the model was trained for 10 epochs, and the training graphs,
visualizing epoch loss, epoch accuracy, batch loss and batch accuracy are shown in
Appendix A.6, Figures A.9, A.10, A.11, A.12.
After training, the Black-and-White-trained model achieved accuracy of 85% on the test
set of 640 image pairs, when asked to choose coloured or black-and-white images. In
comparison, the base model achieved accuracy of 23% – showing an inherit preference
for Black-and-White images. The imperfect score of the Black-and-White-trained model
on such simple task is due to the fact, that a significant number of images in the test set
were already black-and-white – therefore yielding the same exact score for both images,
resulting in the output of 0.5, rounded to 1 – the preference of the black-and-white image.
The Figure 4.11 shows the histogram of all predictions made by a base model (NIMA)
on the left, and Black-and-White-trained model on the right, where values closer to 0
indicate the preference for the coloured image. Notice that the scores output by the Black-
and-White-trained are either clearly close to 0 – the correct predictions; or 0.5, i.e. very un-
certain – these are the instances where the original images were already black-and-white.
Comparing specific instances of image-pairs, we see that the network learned to rate
coloured images positively, and black-and-white images negatively. Figure 4.12 shows an
==PAGE:43==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
40
Figure 4.11: The comparison of the performance of base (NIMA) model and Black-and-White-trained
model on the task of preferring coloured images. The image pairs are constructed such that the original
image has the index of 0. Thus, the groundtruth is a single column at the value 0 and the correct
predictions are all predictions round-able to 0.
example of resulting image-pair histograms, as inferred by the base and Black-and-White-
trained model, while additional examples are shown in Appendix A.7, Figure A.25.
Figure 4.12: An example of an assessment of base (NIMA) and Black-and-White-trained model on one
pair of images. The two pairs of histograms show the assessments of base and personalized model on
the corresponding image pair.
Additionally, a t-SNE graph was constructed to visualize instances before and after the
training. Figure 4.13 shows a colour-coded t-SNE with all 640 test instances, both original
and black-and-white versions. Figure 4.14 shows a local neighbourhood of 30 instances
before and after the training. We can see that the Black-and-White training managed
to separate the two classes – this is more visible in the graph with fewer instances, but
patterns of separation in local neighbourhoods are also visible in Figure 4.13.
Learning Blur Discrimination
So far, the personalized IAA model successfully learned to have a preference for images
whose colour-channel values do not equal. Although the result is encouraging, this is
not a ground-breaking accomplishment, so let us now try to test the model’s ability to
also recognize neighbour-pixel information, such as in the task of distinguishing sharp
and blurry images.
In a similar manner as before, the originally trained NIMA model was trained for 10
epochs in the comparative architecture with prepared sharp-blurry image-pairs. The
==PAGE:44==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
41
Figure 4.13: The t-SNE graph visualizing 640 colour-coded instances before and after the personalized
training. The colour-codes show how the instances further away from center shift in the personalized model.
Figure 4.14: The t-SNE graph visualizing the projected local neighbourhood of instances before and after
the personalized training.
==PAGE:45==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
42
epoch loss, epoch accuracy, batch loss and batch accuracy are shown in Appendix A.6,
Figures A.13, A.14, A.15, A.16.
The Blur-trained model achieved accuracy of 100% in preferring the sharper images,
while the base model achieved accuracy of 62%. The histogram of predictions for both
models is shown in Figure 4.15.
Figure 4.15: The comparison of the performance of base (NIMA) model and Blur-trained model on the
task of preferring sharp images.
One image-pair and its histograms produced by the base and Blur-trained model are
shown in Figure 4.16, while additional examples are shown in Appendix A.7, Figure
A.26. Though the histograms are not as clearly skewed as before, there is still a consistent
preference for sharp images, as also supported by the perfect accuracy in predicting the
sharper image among 640 test image-pairs.
Figure 4.16: An example of an assessment of base (NIMA) and Blur-trained model on one pair of images.
The two pairs of histograms show the assessments of base and personalized model on the corresponding
image pair.
Similarly, as before, the t-SNE graph was constructed before and after the Blur-training.
The graph with all test instances is shown in Figure 4.17, while the graph with 30
instances from a local neighbourhood is shown in Figure 4.18.
Learning Blob-Overlay Discrimination
The personalization framework has shown the ability to pick-up global image infor-
mation to prefer one or the other image. Another complication of the task involves
using a contextual feature – such as placing a rectangle of random size and random
colour over the original image. This distortion, called further as Blob-Overlay, is the
==PAGE:46==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
43
Figure 4.17: The t-SNE graph visualizing 640 colour-coded instances before and after the personalized
training. The colour-codes show how the instances further away from center shift in the personalized model.
Figure 4.18: The t-SNE graph visualizing the projected local neighbourhood of instances before and after
the personalized training.
==PAGE:47==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
44
next personalization task. After training for 10 epochs, the training graph visualizing
epoch loss, epoch accuracy, batch loss and batch accuracy are shown in Appendix A.6,
Figures A.17, A.18, A.19, A.20.
The Blob-Overlay-trained model achieved accuracy of 97% in choosing original over
blob-overlaid images, while the base model achieved accuracy of 62% on the same task.
The histogram of predictions for both models is shown in Figure 4.19.
Figure 4.19: The comparison of the performance of base (NIMA) model and Blob-Overlay-trained model
on the task of preferring non-obstructed images.
As before, an image-pair and the histograms produced by the base and Blob-Overlay-
trained model are shown in Figure 4.20, while additional examples are shown in
Appendix A.7, Figure A.27.
Figure 4.20: An example of an assessment of base (NIMA) and Blob-Overlay-trained model on one pair
of images. The two pairs of histograms show the assessments of base and personalized model on the
corresponding image pair.
The t-SNE graph with all image-pair instances, before and after the Blob-Overlay training
is shown in Figure 4.21, and the t-SNE graph of a local neighbourhood with 30 instances
is shown in Figure 4.22.
Learning Smile Preference
Finally, in an attempt to resemble a real-life situation, the final task was to distinguish
images of people smiling over images of people frowning. Due to unavailability of such
a dataset, image-generative AI by SDXL Lighting [13] was used to generate 50 images
of people smiling, and 50 images of people frowning. The used prompt had a form
==PAGE:48==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
45
Figure 4.21: The t-SNE graph visualizing 640 colour-coded instances before and after the personalized
training. The colour-codes show how the instances further away from center shift in the personalized model.
Figure 4.22: The t-SNE graph visualizing the projected local neighbourhood of instances before and after
the personalized training.
==PAGE:49==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
46
of "[smiling/frowning] [nationality] [man/woman/boy/girl], photo-realistic", trying
to iterate over different ages, genders and nationalities. Examples from this generated
dataset are shown in Figure 4.23.
Figure 4.23: Examples of AI-generated faces. The upper row shows the smiling examples, while the
bottom rows shows frowning examples.
The base model was then personalized using the generated dataset, pairing each smiling
face against each frowning face, together resulting in 2500 comparisons. The training
was conducted in the same manner as before, preferring smiling faces over frowning
faces for 10 epochs. The epoch loss, epoch accuracy, batch loss and batch accuracy are
shown in Appendix A.6, Figures A.21, A.22, A.23, A.24.
The Smiles-trained model achieved accuracy of 65%, while the base model achieved
accuracy of 55% on the test of 20 newly generated image-pairs of people smiling and
frowning. The histogram of comparisons is shown in Figure 4.24.
Figure 4.24: The comparison of the performance of base (NIMA) model and Smiles-trained model on
the task of preferring smiling faces.
One image-pair, and its associated histograms are shown in Figure 4.25, and more
examples can be seen in Appendix A.7, Figure A.28.
In both cases, the test set is quite small to conclude anything with confidence, but the
Smiles-trained model seems to have a tendency to prefer a smiling face. This is more
clearly shown in the resulting t-SNE graph, see Figure 4.26, where the images of people
smiling are clearly grouped together. The inability of the Smiles-trained model to have a
==PAGE:50==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
47
Figure 4.25: An example of an assessment of base (NIMA) and Smiles-trained model on one pair of images.
The two pairs of histograms show the assessments of base and personalized model on the corresponding
image pair.
better accuracy, despite the clear t-SNE graph, might be explained by a relatively simple
network from there on, consisting only of a Dropout and a Dense layer.
Figure 4.26: The t-SNE graph visualizing the projected 20 unseen instances before and after the
personalized training.
Overall, it can be noticed that with the increasing level of complexity, the network’s
ability to learn a feature shrinks. Regardless, the results seem promising, proving that
personalization of an IQA system is possible, and even 50 image pairs seem to be enough
to train the network to learn a feature. This agrees with the Siamese architecture, used
commonly for few-shot learning, which would be important in a real-world use-case,
where people do not necessarily have a large dataset of their own image-pair preferences.
==PAGE:51==
4.5. Implementation of the Personalized Framework
48
4.5.4
Explaining the Personalized Preference
Having trained the four personalized IAA models, the task was then to explain the
personal preference using the prepared explainable framework. To start of, LIME was
used to explain the predictions made by the personalized and base models, resulting
in two image masks, and finally, the difference between the two masks was visualized
as the personal preference. The idea for using the base-personalized difference is that
the base model, in theory, should already understand general aesthetics and explain
them as such. Then, what should be explained as the personal preference is not merely
the output of the personalized model, but how the personalized model differs from the
base. As an analogy, if we think of the base model as the "average opinion" on aesthetics,
then what is interesting to visualize is where the "individual opinion" disagrees with the
"average opinion". Lastly, LIME with default-perturbations was used to explain all four
models, while LIME with generative perturbations was also used to attempt explaining
the Smiles-trained model.
The provided explanations for Black-and-White-trained, Blur-trained, Blob-Overlay-
trained and Smiles-trained models are shown in Appendix A.8, Figures A.29, A.30, A.31,
A.32 respectively. Additionally, hand-picked personalized explanations are shown in
Appendix A.8, Figure A.33.
Overall, the explanations are not greatly convincing or precise. In some cases, they are
informative, such as the image of a traffic light in Figure A.33, where the preference for
coloured pixels is explained by highlighting the yellow traffic light, and the imperfect
circling of the light is likely due to rough segmenting of the perturbations. Similarly,
notice the image of the smiling man in Figure A.33, and his green-annotated mouth
and cheeks. In other cases, however, the explanations seem little different from random,
and therefore it is difficult to conclude anything with confidence. The personalized
explanations are further discussed and analysed in Section A.8.
==PAGE:52==
5 | Evaluation
5.1
Evaluation of the Interface
To evaluate the usability of an explainable photo culling system, a user study was
conducted with three inexperienced and three experienced photographers – classified
via self-assessment and their experience with the Capture One software. The test was
designed to evaluate the visual presentation of decisions of an IAA model, integrated
into the photo-editing software Capture One, as presented in Section 3.1. For the user
study, 10 image groups were prepared with varying user-interactions, which were
designed to answer the following uncertainties:
1. Given a set of image groups, how should the interface present the aesthetic order
within the groups?
2. What information should be presented along with the IAA decisions?
3. How usable and interpretable are the visual explanations?
4. How usable and interpretable are the textual explanations?
5. How usable and user-demanding is the personalized framework?
The following sections discuss the summarized participant feedback regarding the
individual topics, but the full, verbose user study notes can be found in Appendix A.10.
5.1.1
Aesthetic Order within Groups
Regarding point 1, the interface was designed to automatically sort the images, based on
scores produced by the MusiQ base model, from left to right, auto-rating the best image
with 5 stars and leaving the rest unrated. This remained the same throughout all 10
image groups prepared for the test. This was graphically noted by the "Aesthetics" sort
49
==PAGE:53==
5.1. Evaluation of the Interface
50
label in the interface, as can be seen in Figure 5.1, in the top right corner. As reported by
the participants, this seemed intuitive – most participants immediately understood this
while interacting with the first image group, and everybody within the first three groups.
Especially the small group of experienced photographers immediately understood the
sorting, being used to other sort types such as "Rating" or "Date".
Figure 5.1: The toolbar of the Explainable Assisted Photo Culling panel. The aesthetics label is shown
in the rightmost position, with "Aesthetics" fixed as the method of sorting.
However, some participants also suggested possible improvements to the presenta-
tion of image ranking: for example a way to see the currently-best image and the
currently-assessed image together, to allow for easier comparison. This strengthens the
idea of a comparative framework, as already up-taken by the personalized framework.
Additionally, one participant suggested that adding numerical ranks to the images could
also ease the decision-making process. All in all, the design of aesthetic order within
groups was well received, but it also leaves room for improvements.
5.1.2
IAA Decision Presentation
As for the second point, mainly two UI modes were tested. Two image groups were de-
signed with only a single aesthetic score per each image (as output by the MusiQ model),
while two other image groups were designed with a break-down of photo-technical
features. The chosen photo-technical features were picked based on the Explainable AVA
Dataset work by Kong et al. [17], where the researchers arrived at the following four
image features as most important: light & colour, composition, quality (the overall assess-
ment of the photo-technical image attributes) and semantics (the perceptual aesthetics
derived from the image content). These four features were picked to comprise the break-
down of the image aesthetics, and two image groups were annotated using the judg-
ments of a professional photographer for the four features. Single score presentation can
be seen in Figure 5.2, while feature break-down presentation can be seen in Figure 5.3.
The participants showed a mix of preferences regarding the two presentation modes.
While some liked the simplicity and efficiency of a single score, others enjoyed the
increased interpretability of the feature break-down. However, most participants agreed
that the chosen features did not differ too much in-between the images in the same
image group – i.e. the images were too similar to vary, for example in composition. In
general, the participants did understand what the four selected features mean, although
the "quality" and "semantics" features were sometimes reported as vague. However, the
participants struggled to suggest photo-technical features that would fit them more – one
==PAGE:54==
5.1. Evaluation of the Interface
51
Figure 5.2: Screenshot of a single score as the presentation of the IAA decision, as shown in the top-left
part of the panel.
Figure 5.3: Screenshot of a break-down of scores as the presentation of the IAA decision, as shown in
the top-left part of the panel.
participant suggested that a dynamic set of features, specific to the context and subjects
of the image group would be more helpful, but also more complex to implement.
These results also motivated the implementation iterations to focus more on the per-
sonalized framework, instead of implementing a feature-specific IAA versions – which
would be possible e.g. by using the EVA dataset and fine-tuning a base model with the
feature-annotated images.
==PAGE:55==
5.1. Evaluation of the Interface
52
When asked if the overall score value mattered to the users, the general feedback was
that the relative rank was much more important. The users inspected the difference
in scores between the images, and wondered about big or small gaps, but the absolute
value – e.g. images ranging from 20 to 30 compared to images ranging from 70 to 80
– brought little value to them. This suggests that merely the rank of images is really
important in an automated photo culling system.
5.1.3
UX of Visual Explanations
The presentation of the visual explanation was tested in two ways: In two image groups,
the visual explanation was shown as produced by the LIME explainer, while in two
other image groups, the explanation was hand-crafted by a photographer. The original
and hand-crafted visual explanations from the test are shown in Appendix A.9, Figures
A.34, A.35 respectively.
The visual explanations were not well received by the users – they described them as
confusing and noisy. The participants, however, did appreciate the idea of providing
an explanation, as long as it was more interpretable and precise. They also did not see
much difference between the original and hand-crafted explanations – not because the
original explanation was close to the photographer’s explanation, but because neither
one of them was particularly useful; the people could understand that it is the object
in Appendix A.9, Figure A.35 that is important, but not why or how.
One additional task that the users were asked to perform in the user interface test was
to choose any image of their liking, and using a green and red brush mark-up what
makes the image aesthetically pleasing or detracting. An example of the participants’
production is shown in Figure 5.4. Their work suggests that they were able to express
their aesthetic opinion visually, using only two brushes, differently than how the pro-
vided visual explanations looked. Instead of filling the entire space, they only circled
around parts of the scene they liked and disliked. Both of the participants were also
explaining why they are circling the certain parts – i.e. using natural language on top of
the visual map. This means that other forms of visual explanations than pixel-weighing
heat-maps might be more suited for the task; although the participants also reported
the difficulty in providing these sketches, and confirmed that language is still the most
convenient form the explanations.
5.1.4
UX of Textual Explanations
Four more image groups were dedicated to testing the textual explanations. In three
cases, the explanation was copied from the Microsoft’s Copilot AI model’s answer to:
==PAGE:56==
5.1. Evaluation of the Interface
53
Figure 5.4: Two examples of manually annotated images by participants, instructed to use the green brush
to mark-up the good parts of the image, and red brush to mark-up the bad parts of the image.
"What do you think about the aesthetics of this picture?", prompting it to give both a
long and a short answer. The fourth explanation was provided by a photographer, but
applied to a different image – i.e. the photographer provided a genuine explanation
for a specific image, but in the image group, his explanation was put to a different
image. This explanation was included to test how participants react to a nonsensical
explanation, yet one containing sound photographic terms. All four textual explanations
with their associated images are shown in Appendix A.9, Figure A.36.
Overall, the textual explanations were received much better than the visual explanations.
The participants liked their native interpretability, which is not surprising – natural lan-
guage being the common tool to communicate image aesthetics between people. When
it comes to the specific explanations, the shorter ones were liked more, as most people
want to go through the pictures as quickly as possible. But interestingly, the nonsensical,
generic textual explanation was noticed only by two out of the six participants – the rest
found it sensible and managed to connect it to the picture they were looking at, even
though there was no subject, as mentioned in the explanation, see Figure A.36. This
shows the easiness of textual deception, and the danger of people trusting the decisions
too much.
Also, as opposed to the visual explanations, the textual explanations were provided only
for the best image, not for the entire group. This was due to the inability of AI models
to compare multiple images textually, and therefore the textual explanations would not
vary much for the similar images. The ability for an AI model to compare multiple
images textually is still unsolved; and once implemented, it would be interesting to
describe only what makes the best image different from the others.
But even though the textual explanations were found much more useful than the visual
==PAGE:57==
5.2. Evaluation of the Base IAA Models
54
explanations, it is important to remember the initial motivation behind the design of each
explanation – as a tool for both the user and the developer. These textual explanations
are only "explanations" from the user’s point of view – they do not know about the IAA
model used; and a more fitting terms might be simply "textual descriptions" or "textual
commentary". Therefore, the less interpretable, yet more reliable visual explanations, are
still very relevant as a developer’s tool to gain insight into the model’s behaviour. Both
explanation types keep a big room for improvements in their respective shortcomings,
which was also the motivation behind the design of the personalized explanations.
These were, however, not evaluated further with participants.
5.1.5
UX of Personalized Framework
The personalized framework was designed such that the data extraction – needed
for the online-learning to fine-tune the base model – is minimally demanding on the
user. As such, studying the photographers’ behaviour lead to noticing the comparative
method, which the photographers use to assess images. The personalized framework
was therefore designed in the same manner – to learn from the comparisons. In the
user test, this was evaluated first indirectly, by observing the participants interact with
the system, and thereafter also having them reflect on the interaction.
Throughout the test, the participants kept going back and forth between two or more
images, and paid attention to the differences between them, evaluating the aesthetics
of these differences. To quote a few of them: "The face of the girl in this image is clearer
and better lit than in the other image", or: "I prefer the perspective on the Taj Mahal
to be like this, rather than how it is in in the other images."
Participants agreed that the designed interaction aligned with the way they already
work, and expressed excitement, when informed that the system can use their decisions
to personalize their own IAA system.
All in all, the user study managed to inform the various UI uncertainties, and validate
the idea of explainable and personalized photo culling system.
5.2
Evaluation of the Base IAA Models
Our implementation of NIMA competes with the reported results in their paper [38],
achieving 0.077 Earth Mover’s Distance loss, as compared to 0.050 Earth Mover’s Dis-
tance reported in the paper, when evaluated on the AVA test set of 50,000 images.
During the implementation of the model, few preprocessing steps were omitted – such
as producing random crops from the input image before the feed-forward step. This, in
==PAGE:58==
5.2. Evaluation of the Base IAA Models
55
combination with fewer computing resources and perhaps incomplete hyper-parameter
search, is likely why this implementation did not manage to reach the performance of
the NIMA reported in Talebi et al.’ work [38]. The model still managed to learn a little
bit about image aesthetics, but also leaves a lot to be improved. On top of evaluating the
model on the AVA test set, the model was evaluated by computing the t-SNE graphs,
histograms of mean and mode predictions and comparative evaluation against the 7
artificial distortions, as shown in Section 4.2.1.
From all the results combined, but especially the histograms of predictions using the
mean and mode values, we can notice the model’s tendency to regress to the mean.
This is not too different from the AVA aesthetic votes, which follow a similar pattern. A
histogram of NIMA-produced scores on a subset of AVA test set, along with a histogram
of user votes for the same images are shown in Figure 5.5. The histogram of groundtruth
shows somewhat higher variation, which the NIMA model did not manage to pick-up,
but overall, the subjectivity of the IAA task makes it difficult for a clear pattern to
emerge – especially when the majority of AVA images are already of decent quality.
Figure 5.5: Histograms left to right: Ground-truth user votes from AVA dataset (mean), NIMA predictions
(mean), MusiQ predictions.
As for the transformer-based MusiQ model, the t-SNE graph, histogram of scores
and comparative evaluation on the 7 distortions have been presented in Section 4.3.1.
The MusiQ model, trained on the KoniQ-10k dataset, shows clearer decisiveness in
preferring original images over most distortions – especially its preference toward sharp
images (100%) is much clearer than in case of the NIMA model (62%). It, however,
struggled with context-dependant information, such as in the case of comparing original
and blob-overlaid images (46%). A histogram of MusiQ-produced scores on a subset
of AVA test set, along with a histogram of user votes for the same images are shown
in the same Figure 5.5. It is visible that on the AVA dataset, MusiQ tends to be overly
praising of the images, perhaps also due to the fact that it has been trained on the
KoniQ-10k dataset, containing more distorted images. Overall, MusiQ demonstrated
its advantages of taking an image of any size as an input, and although not perfect, it
shows a significant improvement over the NIMA model.
All in all, the CNN and the Transformer were both promising architectures, but the
==PAGE:59==
5.3. Evaluation of the Explainable System
56
subjective nature of image aesthetics prevented either of them to master the task. This is
why a lot of this work focused more on the personalization of the model, and designing
for the subjectivity, rather than despite it.
5.3
Evaluation of the Explainable System
The user test revealed that the visual explanations were mostly uninterpretable and
noisy. Following a successful explanation of the simple brightness prediction model, the
explanations of the IAA models on various instances did not produce satisfactory results.
It is however difficult to evaluate the explanations in other ways than visual inspection.
Moreover, we should differentiate between the personalized models that were trained to
pick-up global image information (Black-and-White-trained, Blur-trained models), and
the models that were trained to spot local/contextual image information (Blob-Overlay-
trained, Smiles-trained). In some cases, it is not clear how a perfectly personalized IAA
model should explain its decisions – for instance, the explanations of the Blob-Overlay
trained model should mark the overlaying blob as red, detracting from the aesthetics,
but it is not clear how the rest of the image should be ideally marked. In the case of
Black-and-White model, the explained instance of a traffic light in Figure A.33 highlights
the bright yellow light as the most important in the prediction of coloured image –
agreeing with the model’s task to prefer coloured image; but in other instances this is
not necessarily repeated, and the explanations are confusing, often highlighting black-
and-white image parts. Similar pattern can be noticed in the three remaining models.
The personalized explanation, implemented as the difference of resulting masks pro-
duced by base model explanation and personalized model explanation, was an attempt
at providing only the most relevant information to the user. However, due to the original
explanations being noisy, the final personalized explanation could not be evaluated inde-
pendently. A hand-crafted example of how such an explanation could be useful to a user,
given optimal base- and personalized- model explanations, is shown in Figure 5.6. In this
example, the general opinion is that the face of the girl is important in the assessment,
while the personalized opinion values more the IKEA logo and the shape of the trolley.
As for the textual explanations, they were liked by the participants, but as mentioned
before, in this work they served only as image commentary, rather than trustworthy
explanations. There’s two main points how such explanation could be improved – first,
by training a model to predict the texual commentary along with the image score, as
done in Wang et al.’s work [41]. Second, to develop a model that would specialize
in comparing images, and explain its decision in such comparative way. With this in
mind, perhaps another iteration of the personalized framework could be to include the
==PAGE:60==
5.4. Evaluation of the Personalized System
57
Figure 5.6: Hand-crafted visual explanation of a personal preference. The left-most image is the original
image, the second image is the general-opinion explanation (simulating base model), the third image
is the personal-opinion explanation (simulating personalized model), and the fourth image is the
personal-preference explanation, subtracting the general-opinion explanation from the personal-opinion
explanation. This specific example highlights the person’s preference for the IKEA logo and the shape
of the trolley cart, over the girl’s face.
commentary why one image is preferred over another, and use this textual information
along with the image-pair and the image-pair preference to train a model. This would
introduce some burden on the user, having to describe why they are choosing a specific
image, but alternatively the explanations might not need to be personalized.
5.4
Evaluation of the Personalized System
With the increasing complexity of the personalization tasks, the personalized models
struggled to learn a pattern perfectly, but all models demonstrated that they can do
so. This is demonstrated in the individual results of the four personalized models,
presented in Section 4.5.3.
Additionally to the individually reported results, Table 5.1 shows the results of the
four models, when comparing original and distorted image versions. The Black-and-
White-trained, Blur-trained and Blob-Overlay trained models were evaluated on 640
image-pairs from the AVA test set, and the Smiles-trained model was evaluated on 20
generated image-pairs of smiling and frowning people.
==PAGE:61==
5.4. Evaluation of the Personalized System
58
Task
Model
Accuracy
Black-and-White discrimination
Black-and-White-trained
85%
Black-and-White discrimination
Base (NIMA)
23%
Blur discrimination
Blur-trained
100%
Blur discrimination
Base (NIMA)
62%
Blob-Overlay discrimination
Blob-Overlay-trained
97%
Blob-Overlay discrimination
Base (NIMA)
62%
Smiles preference
Smiles-trained
70%
Smiles preference
Base (NIMA)
55%
Table 5.1: An overview of the performance of the personalized models compared to the base model
on the four specific tasks. The accuracy is assessed as the ratio of correct comparisons in preferring the
original over distorted images on 640 image pairs for the first three tasks, and 20 image pairs for the Smiles
preference task.
Personalization of the base model has been identified throughout this work as one of the
core problems in IAA – it is therefore satisfying to see promising results in this aspect.
If a good personalization framework is in place, the importance of a perfect base model
also diminishes, especially depending on the amount of data needed to learn the user’s
preferences. For instance, in the case of Smiles-trained model, 50 images of smiles and
50 images of frowns – together comprising 2500 smile-frown image-pairs – were enough
for the model to classify the smiles and frowns in the t-SNE graph. All models have
been trained for 10 epochs, but already at the end of the first one, they demonstrated
competitive accuracy. However, even the most complex of the four tasks in this work –
the preference of a smiling person – is not representative of the complexity of the subtle
patterns photographers’ follow in the real life. All in all, these results serve as a proof
of concept, but making personalization work real-time on real images of photographers
is a much more complex endeavour.
==PAGE:62==
6 | Discussion
6.1
Reflection on the Methodology
As for the two base models, NIMA showed tendencies to prefer better quality images,
but the results were not very convincing, and while MusiQ showed more promising
results in the distortion-comparison test, in the user test the participants did not always
agree with its choice either. The personalized framework showed that the base mod-
els can be trained to learn a new pattern without any overhead on the user, but the
explainable framework produced mostly inconclusive explanations.
One thing to reflect upon in the comparative model is the importance of comparing
images from the same group. The most complex of the four personalization tasks
considered smiles and frowns, attempting to simulate a real-life context. But in reality,
the similarity of the images being compared is hard to predict, and depends on the
accuracy and granularity of the image clustering system. In many cases, the images
in the same group are much more similar than faces of people smiling and frowning,
varying only in subtle details. In such cases, the comparative model should suit the
task well, and pick-up on these subtle differences via the contrastive learning. Other
times, however, the compared images might be very different – perhaps misclassified
to belong to the same group. Then, the comparative model might attempt to learn
noisy information, e.g. to prefer a picture of a person over a picture of a mountain, just
because one picture of a mountain was grouped along with many pictures of a person.
In a simplified way, the image encodings produced by the image encoder can be thought
of as a vector of aesthetic criteria that the personalized model considers important.
In case of the base models, the vectors could contain features such as "exposure" or
"contrast", where good values for each of these would result in an high aesthetic score.
On the other hand, the vector of a personalized model of an aerial photographer might
include more personalized features on top the general photo-technical features, such
as "amount of sky in the image", "colour of the sky" or "position of the sun". This is only
an abstraction and not exactly what the personalized model learns, but it can help us
59
==PAGE:63==
6.2. Limitations and Future Work
60
think about how to further improve the personalized framework.
The biggest problem of the visual explanations was the lack of interpretability, and the
biggest problem of the textual commentary was the lack of trustworthiness. The first
one could be improved by designing the visual explanations in a way that agrees with
how users explain their choice, for example how is illustrated in Figure A.35. In this
way, the user’s visual sketch could also be used to more directly personalize the model,
by weighing the highlighted parts of the image more during the training.
6.2
Limitations and Future Work
One of the limitation of the work was that the MusiQ model, although reproduced
locally to infer the aesthetic score of images, was not used as an image encoder in the
modified Siamese neural network. This was due to technical limitations of manipulating
its model architecture and training the model further. Thus, despite its better results
over NIMA, MusiQ was not fully utilized to its potential.
As can be seen in Figure 4.12, the Black-and-White-trained model could clearly distin-
guish the black-and-white and coloured images. However, these histograms would ide-
ally be separated completely, with the means of the coloured-image histogram and black-
and-white image histogram being 10 and 0. The values instead revolved around 8 and
2, likely due to the sigmoid activation function used in the comparison layer, as shown
in Figure 4.10. The sigmoid value of the difference of the two image histogram means is
close to 1 already when the difference of the histograms’ means is 5 (sigmoid(5)=0.993).
This in combination with the linear contrastive loss, see Formula 4.2, means that the
loss of the trained model was essentially 0 when the histogram mean difference was
5, and any improvement over that was not rewarded. This could be improved by using
the tanh activation function, or simply a linear function, mapping the difference of the
histogram means (with minimum of -10 and maximum of 10) to a range from 0 to 1.
Additionally, it would be interesting to consider other comparative architectures with
more than two images – given that the photographers commonly have to choose the best
image from a larger set of similar images. With the efficiency of personalization in mind,
future work could measure and optimize for the minimum amount of instances needed
for the model to learn a pattern, while not forgetting the base photo-technical image
properties – for instance, the importance of a smile should not override the importance
of image sharpness, only add to it. Lastly, the generative perturbations have been
attempted in this work, but the results were unsuccessful, also partly due to the lack
of high-quality generative AI capabilities accessible programmatically. It nonetheless
stays an interesting topic for future work of Explainable, Personalized IAA systems.
==PAGE:64==
7 | Conclusion
This work explored the field of automated Image Aesthetics Assessment, and via a
comprehensive background research and a user needs in context study, the need for
Personalized and Explainable IAA system emerged. Thereafter, two base Image Quality
Assessment systems have been implemented: a CNN-based model NIMA, trained on
the AVA dataset, and the Transformer-based model MusiQ, trained on the KoniQ-10k
dataset. In a head-to-head comparison, the MusiQ model outperformed the NIMA
model in a distortion-comparison test, yet due to a simpler architecture of NIMA, NIMA
was chosen as the base model for further personalization experiments. As such, a Person-
alizable framework was designed and implemented, taking advantage of the observation
that photographers inspect subtle differences between pairs of images to choose the best
one. This was implemented as a modified Siamese neural network, taking two image
inputs at a time, and aiming to predict the more aesthetically pleasing image. The Person-
alized IAA system was evaluated on four different tasks, increasing in complexity, which
proved that the model has the ability to adapt to the photographer’s style. The two base
models and the personalized versions were explained using LIME with default and gen-
erative perturbations, thus creating the complete Explainable, Personalized IAA system.
Although the Explainable framework produced rather uninterpretable results, the system
was generally well-received, when tested with amateur and experienced photographers
in the designed and implemented IAA panel within the Capture One software.
Regardless of the results, Image Aesthetics Assessment still remains a curious problem
to tackle. This work tried to base its design in the way we, humans, assess image
aesthetics, and personalize the model as such. Although this approach was promising,
there is still a lot to be solved, before such a system could privately and efficiently
function on-device to help users assess their images – and the explainability of such as
system should not trail behind. This also begs for a question: What exactly should be
the role of AI in such a subjective topic as the beauty of a picture? Is it perhaps that
the assessment of image aesthetics is not meant to be automated? And what role, if any,
should be left for the photographer?
61
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[1] 123RF, Media Generative AI. URL: https://www.123rf.com.
[2] Capture One photo editing software. URL: https://www.captureone.com/en.
[3] Master Thesis Github Repository.
URL: https://github.com/martinkarlik/
X-IAA.
[4] MusiQ
Checkpoints.
URL:
https://console.cloud.google.
com/storage/browser/gresearch/musiq;tab=objects?prefix=
&forceOnObjectsSortingFiltering=false.
[5] Chirag Agarwal and Anh Nguyen. Explaining image classifiers by removing
input features using generative models. 2020. URL: https://openaccess.thecvf.
com/content/ACCV2020/html/Agarwal_Explaining_image_classifiers_by_
removing_input_features_using_generative_models_ACCV_2020_paper.html.
[6] Mohiuddin Ahmed, Raihan Seraj, and Syed Mohammed Shamsul Islam. The
k-means Algorithm: A Comprehensive Survey and Performance Evaluation.
Electronics, 9(8):1295, August 2020.
Number: 8 Publisher: Multidisciplinary
Digital Publishing Institute. URL: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/9/8/1295,
doi:10.3390/electronics9081295.
[7] Sanjeev Arora, Wei Hu, and Pravesh K. Kothari.
An Analysis of the t-SNE
Algorithm for Data Visualization.
In Proceedings of the 31st Conference On
Learning Theory, pages 1455–1462. PMLR, July 2018.
ISSN: 2640-3498.
URL:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v75/arora18a.html.
[8] Davide Chicco. Siamese Neural Networks: An Overview. In Hugh Cartwright,
editor, Artificial Neural Networks, pages 73–94. Springer US, New York, NY, 2021.
doi:10.1007/978-1-0716-0826-5_3.
[9] Ian C Covert.
Explaining by Removing: A Unified Framework for Model
Explanation.
62
==PAGE:66==
Bibliography
63
[10] Sathya Veera Reddy Dendi, Chander Dev, Narayan Kothari, and Sumohana S.
Channappayya. Generating Image Distortion Maps Using Convolutional Autoen-
coders With Application to No Reference Image Quality Assessment. IEEE Signal
Processing Letters, 26(1):89–93, January 2019. Conference Name: IEEE Signal Process-
ing Letters. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/8521680,
doi:10.1109/LSP.2018.2879518.
[11] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei.
Ima-
geNet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database.
In 2009 IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 248–255, June 2009.
ISSN:
1063-6919.
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/5206848,
doi:10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
[12] William Q. Erickson. A generalization for the expected value of the earth mover’s
distance. Algebraic Statistics, 12(2):139–166, December 2021. Publisher: Mathe-
matical Sciences Publishers. URL: https://msp.org/astat/2021/12-2/p03.xhtml,
doi:10.2140/astat.2021.12.139.
[13] fal.ai. SDXL Lightning - by fal.ai. URL: https://fastsdxl.ai/.
[14] Yuming Fang, Hanwei Zhu, Yan Zeng, Kede Ma, and Zhou Wang. Perceptual
Quality Assessment of Smartphone Photography. In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 3674–3683, Seattle, WA,
USA, June 2020. IEEE. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9156490/,
doi:10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00373.
[15] Simon Hentschel, Konstantin Kobs, and Andreas Hotho. CLIP knows image
aesthetics. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 5, November 2022. Publisher: Frontiers.
URL:
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frai.2022.976235,
doi:10.3389/frai.2022.976235.
[16] Hyeongnam Jang and Jong-Seok Lee.
Analysis of Deep Features for Image
Aesthetic Assessment.
IEEE Access, 9:29850–29861, 2021.
Conference Name:
IEEE Access. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9356612,
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3060171.
[17] Chen Kang, Giuseppe Valenzise, and Frédéric Dufaux. EVA: An Explainable
Visual Aesthetics Dataset.
In Joint Workshop on Aesthetic and Technical Quality
Assessment of Multimedia and Media Analytics for Societal Trends, ATQAM/MAST’20,
pages 5–13, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
doi:10.1145/3423268.3423590.
==PAGE:67==
Bibliography
64
[18] Yueying Kao, Ran He, and Kaiqi Huang. Visual Aesthetic Quality Assessment
with Multi-task Deep Learning. April 2016.
[19] Junjie Ke, Qifei Wang, Yilin Wang, Peyman Milanfar, and Feng Yang. MUSIQ:
Multi-scale Image Quality Transformer, August 2021. arXiv:2108.05997 [cs] version:
1. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.05997.
[20] Been Kim, Martin Wattenberg, Justin Gilmer, Carrie Cai, James Wexler, Fernanda
Viegas, and Rory Sayres. Interpretability Beyond Feature Attribution: Quantitative
Testing with Concept Activation Vectors (TCAV).
In Proceedings of the 35th
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2668–2677. PMLR, July 2018.
ISSN: 2640-3498. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v80/kim18d.html.
[21] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,
January 2017. arXiv:1412.6980 [cs]. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980.
[22] Shu Kong, Xiaohui Shen, Zhe Lin, Radomir Mech, and Charless Fowlkes. Photo
Aesthetics Ranking Network with Attributes and Content Adaptation, July 2016.
arXiv:1606.01621 [cs]. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.01621.
[23] Thomas
Kurbiel
and
Shahrzad
Khaleghian.
Training
of
Deep
Neu-
ral
Networks
based
on
Distance
Measures
using
RMSProp,
August
2017.
arXiv:1708.01911 [cs, stat].
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1708.01911,
doi:10.48550/arXiv.1708.01911.
[24] Chunyuan Li, Zhe Gan, Zhengyuan Yang, Jianwei Yang, Linjie Li, Lijuan
Wang, and Jianfeng Gao.
Multimodal foundation models: From specialists
to general-purpose assistants.
Foundations and Trends® in Computer Graph-
ics and Vision, 16(1-2):1–214, 2024.
Publisher:
Now Publishers, Inc.
URL:
https://www.nowpublishers.com/article/Details/CGV-110.
[25] Zewen Li, Fan Liu, Wenjie Yang, Shouheng Peng, and Jun Zhou. A Survey of
Convolutional Neural Networks: Analysis, Applications, and Prospects. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 33(12):6999–7019, December
2022. Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
Systems.
URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/9451544,
doi:10.1109/TNNLS.2021.3084827.
[26] Ming
Liang
and
Xiaolin
Hu.
Recurrent
Convolutional
Neural
Net-
work for Object Recognition.
pages 3367–3375,
2015.
URL: https:
//openaccess.thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2015/html/Liang_Recurrent_
Convolutional_Neural_2015_CVPR_paper.html.
==PAGE:68==
Bibliography
65
[27] Haibin Ling and Kazunori Okada. An Efficient Earth Mover’s Distance Algorithm
for Robust Histogram Comparison.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 29(5):840–853, May 2007. Conference Name: IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.
org/abstract/document/4135678, doi:10.1109/TPAMI.2007.1058.
[28] Nan Liu, Shuang Li, Yilun Du, Antonio Torralba, and Joshua B. Tenenbaum.
Compositional Visual Generation with Composable Diffusion Models. In Shai
Avidan, Gabriel Brostow, Moustapha Cissé, Giovanni Maria Farinella, and Tal
Hassner, editors, Computer Vision – ECCV 2022, pages 423–439, Cham, 2022.
Springer Nature Switzerland. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-19790-1_26.
[29] Xin Lu, Zhe Lin, Hailin Jin, Jianchao Yang, and James. Z. Wang.
Rating
Image Aesthetics Using Deep Learning.
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia,
17(11):2021–2034, November 2015.
Conference Name: IEEE Transactions on
Multimedia. URL: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7243357,
doi:10.1109/TMM.2015.2477040.
[30] Pei Lv, Meng Wang, Yongbo Xu, Ze Peng, Junyi Sun, Shimei Su, Bing
Zhou, and Mingliang Xu.
USAR: an Interactive User-specific Aesthetic
Ranking Framework for Images, August 2018.
arXiv:1805.01091 [cs].
URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1805.01091.
[31] Lev Manovich. AI image and Generative Media:. 2023.
[32] N. Murray, L. Marchesotti, and F. Perronnin. AVA: A large-scale database for
aesthetic visual analysis. In 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 2408–2415, Providence, RI, June 2012. IEEE.
URL: http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6247954/, doi:10.1109/CVPR.2012.6247954.
[33] Jian
Ren,
Xiaohui
Shen,
Zhe
Lin,
Radomir
Mech,
and
David
J.
Foran.
Personalized Image Aesthetics.
pages 638–647,
2017.
URL:
https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_iccv_2017/html/Ren_Personalized_
Image_Aesthetics_ICCV_2017_paper.html.
[34] Hojjat Salehinejad, Sharan Sankar, Joseph Barfett, Errol Colak, and Shahrokh Valaee.
Recent Advances in Recurrent Neural Networks, February 2018. arXiv:1801.01078
[cs]. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1801.01078, doi:10.48550/arXiv.1801.01078.
[35] Jessica Schrouff, Sebastien Baur, Shaobo Hou, Diana Mincu, Eric Loreaux, Ralph
Blanes, James Wexler, Alan Karthikesalingam, and Been Kim.
Best of both
worlds: local and global explanations with human-understandable concepts,
==PAGE:69==
Bibliography
66
January 2022. arXiv:2106.08641 [cs]. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2106.08641,
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2106.08641.
[36] H.R. Sheikh, M.F. Sabir, and A.C. Bovik.
A Statistical Evaluation of Re-
cent Full Reference Image Quality Assessment Algorithms.
IEEE Transac-
tions on Image Processing, 15(11):3440–3451, November 2006.
URL: http:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/1709988/, doi:10.1109/TIP.2006.881959.
[37] Christian Szegedy, Sergey Ioffe, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Alexander Alemi.
Inception-v4, Inception-ResNet and the Impact of Residual Connections on Learn-
ing. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 31(1), February 2017.
Number: 1. URL: https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/AAAI/article/view/11231,
doi:10.1609/aaai.v31i1.11231.
[38] Hossein Talebi and Peyman Milanfar. NIMA: Neural Image Assessment. IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing, 27(8):3998–4011, August 2018.
URL: https:
//ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8352823/, doi:10.1109/TIP.2018.2831899.
[39] Giuseppe Valenzise, Chen Kang, and Frédéric Dufaux. Advances and Challenges
in Computational Image Aesthetics. In Bogdan Ionescu, Wilma A. Bainbridge,
and Naila Murray, editors, Human Perception of Visual Information: Psychological and
Computational Perspectives, pages 133–181. Springer International Publishing, Cham,
2022. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-81465-6_6.
[40] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N.
Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention Is All You Need. Technical
Report arXiv:1706.03762, arXiv, December 2017. arXiv:1706.03762 [cs] type: article.
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.03762, doi:10.48550/arXiv.1706.03762.
[41] Wenshan Wang, Su Yang, Weishan Zhang, and Jiulong Zhang.
Neural
Aesthetic Image Reviewer, February 2018.
arXiv:1802.10240 [cs].
URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.10240.
[42] Eyal Winter. Chapter 53 The shapley value. In Handbook of Game Theory with
Economic Applications, volume 3, pages 2025–2054. Elsevier, January 2002. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1574000502030163,
doi:10.1016/S1574-0005(02)03016-3.
[43] Adrian S. Wong, Kangbo Hao, Zheng Fang, and Henry D. I. Abarbanel.
Precision Annealing Monte Carlo Methods for Statistical Data Assimilation:
Metropolis-Hastings Procedures, January 2019. arXiv:1901.04598 [physics, stat].
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.04598, doi:10.48550/arXiv.1901.04598.
==PAGE:70==
Bibliography
67
[44] Feiyu Xu, Hans Uszkoreit, Yangzhou Du, Wei Fan, Dongyan Zhao, and Jun Zhu.
Explainable AI: A Brief Survey on History, Research Areas, Approaches and
Challenges. pages 563–574. September 2019. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-32236-6_51.
[45] Zhenqiang Ying, Haoran Niu, Praful Gupta, Dhruv Mahajan, Deepti Ghadiyaram,
and Alan Bovik. From Patches to Pictures (PaQ-2-PiQ): Mapping the Perceptual
Space of Picture Quality, December 2019.
arXiv:1912.10088 [cs, eess].
URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1912.10088.
[46] Chengzhi Zhang, Weijie Wang, Paul Pangaro, Nikolas Martelaro, and Daragh
Byrne.
Generative Image AI Using Design Sketches as input: Opportunities
and Challenges. In Creativity and Cognition, pages 254–261, Virtual Event USA,
June 2023. ACM.
URL: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3591196.3596820,
doi:10.1145/3591196.3596820.
[47] Chenshuang Zhang, Chaoning Zhang, Mengchun Zhang, and In So Kweon. Text-
to-image Diffusion Models in Generative AI: A Survey, April 2023. arXiv:2303.07909
[cs]. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2303.07909.
[48] Yujia Zhang,
Kuangyan Song,
Yiming Sun,
Sarah Tan,
and Madeleine
Udell.
"Why Should You Trust My Explanation?" Understanding Uncer-
tainty in LIME Explanations, June 2019.
arXiv:1904.12991 [cs, stat].
URL:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1904.12991, doi:10.48550/arXiv.1904.12991.
==PAGE:71==
A | Appendix
A.1
User Needs Research: Open Discussion
A.1.1
The Procedure
The discussion was conducted with 5 experienced, though non-professional photogra-
phers: 1 product manager, 1 UX designer and 3 software engineers at a photo-editing
software company Capture One. Apart from prepared initial questions and topics, the
discussion was largely unstructured, in order to learn as much as possible about the
problem, and lasted approximately 30 minutes. The first three initial questions were
designed to learn about the photographer’s process of photo culling, while the last three
questions were designed to learn more specifically about the selection of best pictures
within a group, i.e. the task of IAA.
• Before conducting a photo session, how do you go about planning the process?
• Do you do any mental preparation before photo culling, and what does it include?
• What is important to you when deciding how and which pictures to deliver from
the overall session?
• How do you assess the aesthetics of an image?
• Can you describe the thinking process of choosing one picture over another?
• If you were to outsource your work to a human assistant, how would you instruct
them to do your job?
A.1.2
The Discussion Notes
The following are the post-edited notes of the participants from the discussion.
68
==PAGE:72==
A.1. User Needs Research: Open Discussion
69
• Participant 1 notes that she tries to capture 2-4 pictures of the same moment
during event photography, knowing she’ll have to go through all of them again,
but needs to make sure that she has one good picture.
• Participant 3 adds to it, also noting that he reviews the taken pictures already on
the event, if there’s time for it.
• Most participants agree that photo culling is annoying and would use an auto-
mated IAA system.
• Participant 4 notes that as a landscape photographer, she doesn’t take too many
pictures and photo culling isn’t so annoying.
• Participant 4 corrects herself that considering all her personal pictures – not
landscape pictures taken with her camera – photo culling is also really tedious.
• Participants share their habits while doing photo-culling: most of them dedicate
an hour or two to it, often on weekends with a coffee/tea/listening to music.
Some of them find it harder to focus on this task than e.g. image editing.
• Participant 2 shares that he always has the vision of the delivery in mind when
photo culling – i.e. who are the pictures for, what is he trying to say with the
shared pictures, etc. He says the task is simple if the pictures are for his own
personal collection, but harder when it’s for him and his wife.
• Participants agree that usually how they cull photos really depends on the overall
intention and motive behind taking pictures in the first place. After they clarify for
themselves what the outcome should be, they focus mostly on the photo-technical
quality of the similar images.
• Most participants already use an image-grouping feature to choose the best im-
age from a group, and the ones who don’t are not satisfied with the quality of
grouping.
• Participant 4 says that her pictures within the same group tend to be photo-
technically very similar (equally sharp and exposed, etc.), and where they differ
is usually the facial expressions.
• Participant 5 agrees, adding that as he shoots mostly nature and architecture,
where the pictures differ is not the facial expressions, but the composition of the
buildings, sky and the clouds, lighting, etc. And that is often really just an artistic
choice, which one is the best.
==PAGE:73==
A.2. Commentary of LLMs on Image Aesthetics
70
• Participant 2 notes that he used to do sport and wildlife photography, where
huge amount of pictures needed to be taken to really capture a good moment.
In such cases, he would try to remember the "cool" pictures during the shooting
and simply find them afterwards during culling. For the rest, he would go by
intuition and mostly choose "good-enough" pictures, rather than the best ones.
• Participant 1 notes that she assesses the aesthetics of a picture by comparing it
against all the other similar pictures.
• All other participants agree that they compare images, they don’t assess a single
image in too many details, just where the images differ. They leave the detailed
analysis of a specific picture for the later image editing process.
• If prompted to outsource their work to an assistant, the participants would describe
exactly the intention of the photo-shoot, what should be delivered, and show ex-
amples of previous photo-shoots and the culled results. If there are any important
details, such as what to pay attention to, they instruct the assistant on those.
A.2
Commentary of LLMs on Image Aesthetics
Figure A.1 shows textual commentary of Microsoft’s Copilot model on a picture of a
puppy.
==PAGE:74==
A.3. User Interface in Capture One
71
Figure A.1: Microsoft’s Copilot assessment of the picture’s aesthetics.
A.3
User Interface in Capture One
Figure A.2 shows examples of score and visual explanation presentation in the interface.
Figure A.2: Examples of differently presented score and visual explanations in the Explainable Assisted
Photo Culling panel.
The Figures A.3, A.4 illustrate a visual and a textual explanation in the software.
==PAGE:75==
A.4. Implementation of the Base Models
72
Figure A.3: The Explainable Assisted Photo Culling containing a visual explanation.
Figure A.4: The Explainable Assisted Photo Culling containing a textual explanation.
A.4
Implementation of the Base Models
The Table A.1 shows the used hyper-parameters and their rationale.
Figure A.5 shows the histograms of mode values of NIMA-predictions.
==PAGE:76==
A.4. Implementation of the Base Models
73
Parameter
Value
Rationale
Learning-rate (epochs 1-5)
0.001
A relatively high value, trying
to let the 2 appended layers
optimize faster.
Learning-rate (epochs 6-14)
0.00003
A relatively small value, to
prevent the optimizer from
diverging.
Decay (epochs 1-5)
0.0
The learning rate does not
decay during the first part of
the training – mostly arbitrary
choice.
Decay (epochs 1-5)
0.000023
The learning rate slowly decays
during the second part of the
training —- mostly arbitrary
choice.
Dropout rate (all epochs)
0.75
This parameters is used by the
Dropout layer, which randomly
sets input units to 0 to prevent
overfitting by disconnecting
75% of the neurons.
Table A.1: Overview of selected parameters for training, along with a rationale for using them.
Figure A.5: Histograms of mode values of NIMA-predictions, on the original and distorted variants.
==PAGE:77==
A.5. Evaluation of MusiQ
74
A.5
Evaluation of MusiQ
Figure A.6 shows the t-SNE graph of MusiQ, illustrating the different distortions
propagated through the model.
Figure A.6: The t-SNE graph of the various distortions propagated through the MusiQ model.
The histograms of MusiQ scores, trained on SpaQ and PaQ-2-PiQ datasets respectively,
evaluated on the original and distorted datasets are shown in Figures A.7, A.8.
Figure A.7: Histograms of MusiQ scores, trained on SpaQ dataset, evaluated on the original and distorted
datasets.
==PAGE:78==
A.6. Training Graphs of Personalized Models
75
Figure A.8: Histograms of MusiQ scores, trained on PaQ-2-PiQ dataset, evaluated on the original and
distorted datasets.
A.6
Training Graphs of Personalized Models
The epoch loss, epoch accuracy, batch loss and batch accuracy of the Black-and-White-
trained model are shown in Figures A.9, A.10, A.11, A.12, respectively.
Figure A.9: Graph of the epoch loss on the train (blue) and validation (orange) partition of the
Black-and-White-trained model.
Figure A.10: Graph of the epoch accuracy on the train (blue) and validation (orange) partition of the
Black-and-White-trained model.
==PAGE:79==
A.6. Training Graphs of Personalized Models
76
Figure A.11: Graph of the batch loss of the Black-and-White-trained model.
Figure A.12: Graph of the batch accuracy of the Black-and-White-trained model.
The batch loss, batch accuracy and epoch loss of the Blur-trained model are shown in
Figures A.13, A.14, A.15, A.16, respectively.
Figure A.13: Graph of the epoch loss on the train (blue) and validation (orange) partition of the Blur-trained
model.
==PAGE:80==
A.6. Training Graphs of Personalized Models
77
Figure A.14: Graph of the epoch accuracy on the train (blue) and validation (orange) partition of the Blur
model.
Figure A.15: Graph of the batch loss of the Blur-trained model.
Figure A.16: Graph of the batch accuracy of the Blur-trained model.
The batch loss, batch accuracy and epoch loss of the Blob-Overlay-trained model are
shown in Figures A.17, A.18, A.19, A.20, respectively.
==PAGE:81==
A.6. Training Graphs of Personalized Models
78
Figure A.17: Graph of the epoch loss on the train (blue) and validation (orange) partition of the
Blob-Overlay-trained model.
Figure A.18: Graph of the epoch accuracy on the train (blue) and validation (orange) partition of the
Blob-Overlay model.
Figure A.19: Graph of the batch loss of the Blob-Overlay-trained model.
==PAGE:82==
A.6. Training Graphs of Personalized Models
79
Figure A.20: Graph of the batch accuracy of the Blob-Overlay-trained model.
The batch loss, batch accuracy and epoch loss of the Smiles-trained model are shown
in Figures A.21, A.22, A.23, A.24, respectively.
Figure A.21: Graph of the epoch loss on the train (blue) and validation (orange) partition of the
Smiles-trained model.
Figure A.22: Graph of the epoch accuracy on the train (blue) and validation (orange) partition of the
Smiles model.
==PAGE:83==
A.7. Examples of Inference Comparison by Base and Personalized Models
80
Figure A.23: Graph of the batch loss of the Smiles-trained model.
Figure A.24: Graph of the batch accuracy of the Smiles-trained model.
A.7
Examples of Inference Comparison by Base and Personal-
ized Models
Additional examples of personalized and base model inference on task-specific pairs
of images are shown in Figures A.25, A.26, A.27, A.28 respectively for Black-and-White-
trained, Blur-trained, Blob-Overlay-trained and Smiles-trained models.
==PAGE:84==
A.7. Examples of Inference Comparison by Base and Personalized Models
81
Figure A.25: Three examples of pair-wise comparison of an original and black-and-white instance, as
inferred by the base (NIMA) and Black-and-White-trained models. The resulting inference is a histogram,
where higher scores mean better aesthetics assessment.
Figure A.26: Three examples of pair-wise comparison of an original and blurry instance, as inferred by
the base (NIMA) and Blur-trained models.
==PAGE:85==
A.7. Examples of Inference Comparison by Base and Personalized Models
82
Figure A.27: Three examples of pair-wise comparison of an original and blob-overlaid instance, as inferred
by the base (NIMA) and Blob-Overlay-trained models.
Figure A.28: Three examples of pair-wise comparison of smiling and frowning faces, as inferred by the
base (NIMA) and Smiles-trained models.
==PAGE:86==
A.8. Personal Preference Explained
83
A.8
Personal Preference Explained
The Figures A.29, A.30, A.31, A.32 show the explanations for Black-and-White-trained,
Blur-trained, Blob-Overlay-trained and Smiles-trained models, respectively.
Figure A.29: A table of three instances explained using the base (NIMA) model, Black-and-White-trained
model and the difference of the two explanation masks.
==PAGE:87==
A.8. Personal Preference Explained
84
Figure A.30: A table of three instances explained using the base (NIMA) model, Blur-trained model and
the difference of the two explanation masks.
==PAGE:88==
A.8. Personal Preference Explained
85
Figure A.31: A table of three instances explained using the base (NIMA) model, Blob-Overlay-trained
model and the difference of the two explanation masks.
==PAGE:89==
A.8. Personal Preference Explained
86
Figure A.32: A table of three instances explained using the base (NIMA) model, Smiles-trained model
and the difference of the two explanation masks.
Additionally, a few hand-picked personalized explanations of the four personalized
models are shown in Figure A.33.
==PAGE:90==
A.9. Evaluation of the Explanations
87
Figure A.33: An example explanation per each of the four personalized models, from left to right:
Black-and-White-train, Blur-trained, Blob-Overlay-trained and Smiles-trained model. In the case of the
Blob-Overlay task, the positive pixels are illustrated as brighter (as opposed to green), and the negative
pixels as darker (as opposed to red) for the sake of visual clarity.
A.9
Evaluation of the Explanations
The Figures A.34, A.34 show the original and hand-crafted visual explanations from
the test.
Figure A.34: Example of an original visual explanation; produced by LIME, applied to the assessment
of MusiQ on the image.
==PAGE:91==
A.9. Evaluation of the Explanations
88
Figure A.35: Example of a hand-crafted visual explanation, produced using a Python script.
Figure A.36 shows all four textual explanations, alogn with their associated images.
==PAGE:92==
A.10. User Evaluation
89
Figure A.36: Four images with their associated explanations. The first three are provided by Copilot, the
fourth one (bottom-right) is a photographer’s explanation explaining a different image.
A.10
User Evaluation
A.10.1
The Procedure
The evaluation of the prototype was conducted with three inexperienced and three
experienced photographers – classified by self-assessment and experience level with
the Capture One software. The interface consisted of ten groups, where each served
a different purpose and different design question to answer. The participants were let
==PAGE:93==
A.10. User Evaluation
90
interacting with the software, where for each group they were prompted with prede-
fined questions and afterwards an overall impression assessment. The following are the
predefined questions and the design of the user evaluation:
• General Initial Questions
– Welcome and introduction to the software, general pre-screening (level of
experience with Capture One, level of experience as a photographer)
– Think aloud during navigation to the AI Photo Culling panel inside Culling
Window from the Main Window
• Group 1, 2
– Please briefly explain what each of the attributes means to you.
– What do you think about the values corresponding to the attributes? Would
you score them differently?
– What do you think about the selection of attributes? Are they useful? What
would be your preferred selection of attributes?
• Group 3, 4
– What do you think about the total score? Is it useful to you?
– What do you think about the visual explanations? What do you think the
green and red overlay means?
• Group 5, 6, 7, 8
– What do you think about the textual explanations?
• Group 9, 10
– Do you agree or disagree with the order of the images? How would you
sort them yourself?
• Group 9, 10
– Do you agree or disagree with the order of the images? How would you
sort them yourself?
• General Final Questions
– Regarding the score, did you care more about the total value, or did you
mostly consider the rank of the image within the group?
==PAGE:94==
A.10. User Evaluation
91
– How useful have you found the visual explanations?
– How useful have you found the textual explanations?
– Which visual explanation did you find the most and least useful?
– Which textual explanation did you find the most and least useful?
• Last Optional Task
– Please choose any picture from any of the groups, and using the green
and red brush inside the Annotation tool, annotate what makes the picture
aesthetically pleasing or detracting, in your opinion?
– Do you feel you were able to express your aesthetic opinion with the two
brushes?
A.10.2
The Evaluation Notes
Participant 1 Notes
Culling Window:
• States that she liked to take pictures, but doesn’t consider herself a photographer
and doesn’t have experience with Capture One
• Main window makes sense, easy to find the culling window
• Culling window makes sense, grouping feature is intuitive
• Misunderstood the number at the top-left corner – it means number of pictures
in a group, instead the order of that image
• Overall found the X-IAA panel usable and intuitive
Groups 1, 2:
• Attributes AI score for each category – understood the feature
• Personal preference is confusing (who is the person?)
• Selection of scores might be useful
• Personal preference could be clarified and chosen
• Choosing the best one is a bit confusing, but after understanding it, it’s usable
and simple
==PAGE:95==
A.10. User Evaluation
92
Groups 3, 4:
• Only one score is worse than the attributes listed
• Visual explanation is confusing and uninterpretable
• Not sure about green vs red overlay – needed to have it explained
• In group 4, the visual explanation is a bit clearer, but its still not very useful
Group 5-8:
• Textual explanation is more useful and understandable
• The textual explanations seem quite generic
• The score should be more relative-based, rather than having the absolute score.
The range of scores doesn’t mean much, just the rank
• Explanation on all images would be preferred, not just the best one
• Textual explanation length depends on the difficulty of comparisons
Group 9:
• Happy face and light on the face is important to the participant
• Plant seems to be intact, and "it is a picture of hope"
Group 10:
• Says that lighting is important here
• States than it’s really two groups, not one: Different category of composition
• Participant agrees with the model’s decision
• Goes back and forth to compare the images
General:
• Just order of images matters, not the value
• The textual explanations are more interpretable than the visual ones, and likes
them much more
==PAGE:96==
A.10. User Evaluation
93
• Annotating the image with green and red brush wasn’t difficult, and she feels she
could express her opinion only with the two brushes
Participant 2 Notes
Culling Window:
• States that he likes to take pictures, but doesn’t consider himself a photographer
and doesn’t have experience with Capture One
• Could navigate from Main Window to the Culling Window easily, he spotted it
immediately
• Once in the Culling Window, he quickly played with different buttons and features,
discovering the X-IAA panel
Groups 1, 2:
• Liked the "Aesthetics" sort – tried to change it but couldn’t
• Tried to reorder the images by dragging them – that is not possible, did not succeed
• Was instructed to use star rating instead, and afterwards the interaction was
intuitive
• Would appreciate an easier way to compare the currenlty best image with the
currently selected image
Groups 3, 4:
• Found visual explanations confusing. Tried to really understand why certain parts
are good and bad (he understood the overlays easily), but couldn’t make sense
out of it.
• Prefers one score over break-down of scores – he just wants to see what the system
chose for him and have an option to agree or disagree.
• Finds it slower to go through the images and look at the feature break-down
values than to do it himself.
Group 5-8:
==PAGE:97==
A.10. User Evaluation
94
• Really likes textual explanations – he has immediate suggestions to improve the
current explanations (they are too long for him), but he says it really improves
the trust he has to the system.
• Doesn’t spot the non-sensical general textual explanation on the image of the
mountains. He tries to search into the image "what is the subject mentioned", and
assumes it is the hill and the foreground.
Groups 9, 10:
• Chooses the image with better lighting, despite the better facial expression of the
girl in the second image. He says that her confused look in the first image adds
to the story of the picture.
• Goes back and forth to compare images, and chooses two images – one from
close-up of the car, one from the different image composition pictures.
General:
• Says that visual explanation would be very useful if they were more interpretable.
• He likes the idea of providing explanations – finds it "thoughtful" from the
developer team.
• Would use an IAA system if it produced similar results to him, and if the expla-
nations were interpretable.
Participant 3 Notes
Culling Window:
• States that he has no experience with photo-editing software, although he takes
pictures occasionally.
• Struggles to find the culling window (or what "culling" means), but eventually
he gets the idea and finds it.
Groups 1, 2:
• Finds the "Aesthetics" sort and guesses correctly that the pictures are sorting by
aesthetics. Questions further what that means.
==PAGE:98==
A.10. User Evaluation
95
• Goes through the pictures in Group 1, and tries to understand why the model
chose the score it chose. He reads a lot into the details of the picture and find
various correlations.
• In Group 2, where the same picture is augmented by various distortions, he finds
it easier to understand the scores.
Groups 3, 4:
• Visual explanations are confusing.
• They are a bit less confusing in Group 4, where Taj Mahal is highlighted. He likes
that, but doesn’t understand what exactly it is about Taj Mahal that makes the
selected picture the bestone.
Group 5-8:
• Prefers textual explanations over visual ones.
• In general more or less agrees with the model’s choices.
• Would like the textual explanations to describe how the pictures are different, not
each picture individually, as they are very simila.r
Groups 9, 10:
• Chooses the picture where the girl is smiling, even though the lighting on the man
is not good. He says that maybe the lighting can me improved while image editing.
General:
• Would use an automated IAA solution if it works well.
• Says that both visual and textual explanations would be nice, but first he would
need to trust the model "even without them".
Participant 4 Notes
Culling Window:
• States that he likes to take pictures, and has experience with Capture One.
==PAGE:99==
A.10. User Evaluation
96
• Thinks he could cull in main window — which is also correct, but thereafter he
was pointed to the Culling Window
• Notices the groups and the similarity slider, and spots the X-IAA panel
Groups 1, 2:
• States that attributes are self-explanatory
• "Semantics" is a bit tricky, not sure what it means
• Wondered about relationship between the scores, finds it a bit confusing
• Not sure why some values are 60 or 80, questions composition scores
Groups 3, 4:
• The black-and-white image was confusing regarding colour
• Confused about AI Score vs Personal Preference
• Easy to understand to change score
• Says that one value is simpler, doesn’t have time to read all other values when
culling
• The visual explanation — he guessed that it’s a visual explanation, but doesn’t
have a clue how it’s useful
• When asked why the Explainable framework chose the area, he guesses that it’s
the area where the picture scored better or worse. That is correct.
• In group 4 visual explanation is a bit clearer, but it doesn’t add much value...
would find useful at this
Group 5-8:
• Textual explanation is much better, more understandable, it’s in natural language,
no guessing
• Would like explanation on every photo, and shorter
• The participant made sense out of the non-sensical explanation, did not catch that
it doesn’t fit the picture
==PAGE:100==
A.10. User Evaluation
97
Group 9, 10:
• Facial expressions matter, despite overall quality
• Would like more fine-grained grouping, and choose two of them
General:
• The number paired with text made sense, but by itself it didn’t add much value..
but helps gain trust, and he likes the idea of both the visual and textual expla-
nations, if they are trustworthy. It shows the developer’s effort to at least try to
make the system transparent.
• Struggled a bit with sketching his own explanation with green and red brush,
talking over it to explain to the researcher why he is marking some areas red and
some green – implying that the mark-ups is not enough as an explanation.
Participant 5 Notes
Culling Window:
• States that she has good experience with Capture One, has been using it for a few
years.
• Easily navigates to the Culling Window, knowing already where it is.
• Finds the X-IAA panel and compares it with the already existing Face Panel,
noting the similarities. She wonders if the two could be merged.
Groups 1, 2:
• Goes through the pictures and although she disagrees with the selection, she
corrects it easily.
• In Group 2, she almost agrees with the model’s choice, but chooses a different
one anyway.
• Understands the "Aesthetics" score.
Groups 3, 4:
• The total score is not very useful to her, she just wants to see the rank.
==PAGE:101==
A.10. User Evaluation
98
• She finds the selection of attributes arbitrary, although she doesn’t know else she
would add. Mentions that if the attributes were more "context-aware", they would
be more useful.
Group 5-8:
• She likes the textual explanations but doesn’t know if she can trust them.
• She’s suspicious of some of them, and spots that one textual explanation is
non-sensical.
• If they were improved and she knew how they work, it would be easier to trust
them.
Group 9, 10:
• She prefers the smile of the girl, finding it the most imporatnt difference.
• In Group 10, she choose the close-up of a car, finding it the most important to her.
General:
• She didn’t like the total score nor break-down of images – should like to only
have the images ranked.
• The explanations were more confusing then helping, and maybe should be used
only during development, before they are more interpretable.
Participant 6 Notes
Culling Window:
• States that he has used Capture One before, and uses it occasionally, but is no
expert.
• Manages to find the Culling Window and the X-IAA panel relatively easily, with
few hints.
Groups 1, 2:
• He understands the values corresponding to the feature break-down, and generally
makes sense of the 4 features.
==PAGE:102==
A.10. User Evaluation
99
• Struggles with what "Semantics" mean, but after a few pictures he gets the idea.
• Is not sure if the feature break-down is very helpful.
Groups 3, 4:
• Likes the total score better in the following groups, although still doesn’t really
understand why it’s the specific value.
• Visual explanations confuse him... He gets the green and red overlay, but points
out that some pixels might be neutral.
Group 5-8:
• Prefers textual explanations, but doesn’t really trust them, finds them generic.
• Says that if the difference between the multiple pictures would be explained, that
would be more useful.
Group 9, 10:
• Chooses the image where the girls is smiling, although doesn’t know exactly why.
• In Group 10, he mentions that the 5 pictures should be in 2 groups, not 1.
General:
• Overall, he likes the interface and would use it, but the explanations should be
much more precise and interpretable, perhaps by adding tips or explaining how
the explanations work.
