==PAGE:1==
DTU Wind and Energy Systems
Impact of climate change risks to the 
design of next generation wind farms
Author:
Guanqi Xiang
DTU Wind-M-0813
April 2024
==PAGE:2==
DTU Wind-M-0813
April 2024
ECTS: 30
Education: Master of Science
Supervisors: 
Athanasios Kollios
DTU Wind & Energy Systems 
Martin Kühn
Uni. Oldenburg
Remarks:
This report is submitted as partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for 
graduation in the above education at the 
Technical University of Denmark.
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Wind and Energy Systems
Frederiksborgvej 399
DK-4000 Roskilde
Denmark
www.wind.dtu.dk
Author: 
Guanqi Xiang
Title:
Impact of climate change risks to the design of next 
generation wind farms
DTU Wind & Energy Systems is a department of 
the Technical University of Denmark with a unique 
integration of research, education, innovation and 
public/private sector consulting in the field of wind 
energy. Our activities develop new opportunities 
and technology for the global and Danish 
exploitation of wind energy. Research focuses on 
key technical-scientific fields, which are central for 
the development, innovation and use of wind 
energy and provides the basis for advanced 
education at the education.
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
Due to the rapid changes in wind and wave conditions, the increase in the intensity of ex-
treme conditions will increase the strength requirements of offshore wind support structures,
resulting in increased construction costs. Current performance-based offshore wind turbine
(OWT) designs ignore the effects of climate change. Based on finite element analysis (FEA),
genetic algorithm (GA) and climate change model, an optimization of support structure
under climate change is applied in this paper. After modifying the existing cost model, the
LCOE in the North Sea under the SSP2-4.5 scenario is calculated, and the following con-
clusion is drawn: Under the scenario based on the existing wind power technology, LCOE
will be slightly increased by 1.65% only through the impact of climate change on the design
of the support structure. However, under the scenario of SSP2-4.5, the decrease in average
wind speed resulted in a more significant increase in LCOE (8.3%) when the weight of the
support structure remained unchanged. In contrast, the effect of the change in supporting
structure quality on LCOE is smaller than that of the change in power generation caused by
the decrease in wind speed. Therefore, the design of next generation wind farms should focus
more on improving the efficiency of power generation at low average wind speeds affected by
climate change.
==PAGE:4==
Contents
Abstract
iii
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Climate Change Impacts on Wind Energy Production . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Numerical Analysis of Foundation Design with Variations in Wind Speed . .
3
1.3
The increased cost with potentially increased wind power generation . . . . .
4
1.4
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2
Reference Model
6
2.1
NREL 5MW OWT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.2
Monopile and transition piece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Basic case study
9
3.1
Marine and wind condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Load sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.1
Inertia Load . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.2.2
Wind Load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.3
Aerodynamic loads from the rotor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.4
Wave loads
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.2.5
Hydrostatic load
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
3.3
Load cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.1
Ultimate load case
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.3.2
Fatigue load case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4
Parametric FEA model
14
4.1
Settings of the reference model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.1
Model geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
4.1.2
Define and assign material . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.1.3
Define element type and generate mesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.1.4
Boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.1.5
Solve and post-process results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5
Optimization process
22
5.1
Genetic algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.2
Structural optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3
Objective function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
5.4
Design variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.5
Set design criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.6
Vibration constraint
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.7
Stress constraint
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.8
Deformation constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.9
Restriction on buckling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.10 Limitation on fatigue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
iv
==PAGE:5==
5.11 Design variable constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
5.12 Genetic Algorithm settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.12.1 Number of initial samples
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.12.2 Number of samples per iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.12.3 Coverage stability percentage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
5.12.4 Maximum number of iterations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.12.5 Probability of Crossover . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
5.12.6 Probability of Mutation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
6
Numerical Analysis
33
6.1
Optimization under current wind condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1.1
Objective function
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.1.2
Design variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.1.3
Details of mass saving
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
6.1.4
Deformation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.1.5
Stress distribution
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.1.6
Buckling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.2
Optimization under climate scenario
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2.1
Impact of SSP2-4.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
38
6.2.2
Result for wind condition under SSP2-4.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
6.2.3
Constraints of deformation, stress distribution, pile head deflection
and buckling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
7
Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE)
45
8
Conclusion
48
9
Acknowledgment
49
List of Figures
I
List of Tables
II
References
III
10 Appendix A
IX
==PAGE:6==
1
Introduction
The development of offshore wind power started in 1991, when Denmark built its first offshore
wind farm in Vinderby[1].
Offshore wind farms are still a new technology compared to
onshore wind farms, so more research is being done on improving energy production efficiency
or improving installation methods to optimize LCOE.
Offshore wind is growing rapidly in Europe. Compared with onshore wind farms, offshore
wind farms have a larger power generation area, larger installed capacity, more stable wind
speed, less turbulence, and less visual and auditory impact on residential areas[2]. Studies
have shown that offshore wind could provide 5.5% of the world’s electricity by 2050[3].
According to figures given by the EU, by 2050, 25% of Europe’s electricity generation is
expected to be provided by wind turbines[4], with a goal of at least 240 GW offshore wind
capacity [5]. In the last few decades, Europe’s first generation of onshore wind turbines has
reached the end of their lifetime[6], and for offshore wind farms, four of them have recently
been decommissioned[7], so it is necessary to start planning for the design and construction
of a new generation of wind farms.
As far as the construction of new generation wind farms is concerned, there are three main
considerations, namely, the effect of climate change on wind energy, the design of the foun-
dation with increased loading conditions, and the increased cost with potentially increased
wind power generation, also known as the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE).
1.1
Climate Change Impacts on Wind Energy Production
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are the main cause of climate change, which can strongly
affect renewable energy production[8]. Because climate change may alter atmospheric dy-
namics and disrupt wind patterns, thereby affecting wind power generation[9].
The Paris Agreement, signed at the end of 2015, aims to mitigate the adverse effects of global
warming by controlling global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, with the specific long-term
goal of limiting the increase in global average temperature to less than 2 degrees over pre-
industrial timesďźand work to limit the temperature rise to 1.5 degrees[10]. Global climate
models (GCMs) can rely on these scenarios. RCP 1.9, for example, limits global warming
to less than 1.5◦C, strictly following the stated goals of the Paris Agreement. And in RCP
8.5, emissions would continue to rise throughout the 21st century[11].
The impact of climate change on wind resources is a subject of extensive study, given its
Page 1 of 49
==PAGE:7==
potential to significantly alter energy production landscapes. Pryor[12] highlighted antici-
pated changes in wind characteristics in Northern Europe. By the close of the 21st century, a
decline in mean wind speeds coupled with an escalation in extreme wind speeds is projected.
This dynamic shift underscores the intricate relationship between climate change and wind
energy.
In a more detailed analysis, distinct variations in wind energy potential across different
European regions have been noted. Wind energy potential in northern and central Europe is
expected to rise, especially in autumn and winter. This is due to higher wind speeds and an
increased frequency of wind events, which increase the efficiency of wind energy conversion
systems in these areas.
Conversely, southern Europe presents a contrasting scenario. A general decline in energy
potential is anticipated across all seasons, with the exception of the Aegean Sea[13]. In
Spain, specifically, fluctuations in wind speed due to climate change are estimated to hover
around ±5%. This variability translates to a corresponding oscillation in energy production,
ranging between ±8% and ±10% [14].
A broader perspective reveals a pattern of increased wind resources in the Baltic and sur-
rounding areas of Northern-Central Europe. In stark contrast, the Mediterranean region
is expected to experience a reduction [15]. Martinezâs findings[16] resonate with this pat-
tern, indicating a potential plunge of overall wind density to 80%, with seasonal variations
oscillating between +80% to -40%.
In Greece, the projections are equally varied, with Wind Energy Density (WED) expected
to fluctuate between -15% and +60% before 2044[17]. These projections underscore the
multifaceted impacts of climate change on wind energy, characterized by regional variations
and seasonal fluctuations.
The study of the quantified influence of climate change on wind power potential in Europe
is not consistent enough, as the studies are mostly focusing on a specific area using GCMs.
Large uncertainty in wind power may respond to climate change when comparing multiple
models[18].
Although GCMs can be used as a tool to investigate future climate change in temperature
and wind conditions, the coarse resolution makes them unsuitable for studies on a smaller
scale[19]. In order to address these concerns, regional climate models (RCMs) can be used to
downscale dynamics, resulting in the provision of spatially resolved data that is more suited
for local applications[20].
High-resolution dynamic downscaling models, such as WRF model[21] and EU-CORDEX
model[22], can be used to assess the impact of climate change on wind energy resources.
Page 2 of 49
==PAGE:8==
This is especially important in areas with complex topography and local scale phenomena.
In conclusion, there is an a great many of study on the effects of climate change on wind
power with various available climate models to start our study. However, our research still
needs to start with more accurate local areas, and we need to integrate advanced construction
methods, modeling technology and regional climate insights to conduct deeper studies of such
climate projections on target areas.
1.2
Numerical Analysis of Foundation Design with Variations in
Wind Speed
The global ascendancy of wind power generation underscores an urgent need to meticulously
comprehend and anticipate the structural comportment of towers amidst diverse and inten-
sified external loads. This necessitates the crafting of intricate and exhaustive structural
analysis models, a linchpin to affirming the operational efficacy and safety benchmarks of
wind turbines.
A thorough assessment of the viability of starting large-scale wind power generation facil-
ities depends on a thorough investigation. This includes long-term, cost-effective planning
approaches and a thorough assessment of the potential effects of climate change throughout
the course of the installation’s operating lifecycle, which normally lasts 20 to 25 years[23].
The cost of building an offshore wind turbine (OWT) exceeds that of an onshore counterpart
by a factor of 1.5-2 times, which is compounded by the necessity of foundational buildings,
supports, and subaqueous cabling. According to Hamilton[24], the cost of structural supports
alone accounts for 20-25% of the overall construction investment.
Over 90% of offshore
generators are strategically placed within a 10-kilometer radius of the coast and at depths
no deeper than 20 meters, with the use of monopile supports predominating[25].
OWTs are subjected to a quartet of principal loads: wind, wave, rotor frequency, and blade
passing frequency. The imposition of cyclic or dynamic loading exerts a transformative effect
on soil attributes, precipitating a consequential impact on foundational rigidity[26].
Studies from the past and the present provide a rainbow of approaches used in the numerical
analysis of shallow foundations. In his major work, Al-Homoud[27] revealed a correlation
between an increase in intrinsic frequency and a decrease in vibration amplitude that can
be attributed to increased burial depth, saturation, and foundational base area. A ground-
breaking numerical model was first presented by Pasten[28], shedding light on the dynamic
soil responses brought on by repeated vertical loads.
Page 3 of 49
==PAGE:9==
M. Harte has developed a multi-degree of freedom model in the field of wind turbine expertise
to illustrate the downwind induced vibration response of onshore turbines[29]. Taddei’s[30]
study of the interaction between soil and structure shows that it has a significant impact
on the dynamic performance of wind turbines, a phenomenon that is amplified not by the
structural mass and geometry, but by the relative stiffness of the structure and soil. By
using ABAQUS to evaluate the unstable wind load, the dynamic influence of mountain wind
turbine foundation is further discussed by Gao[31].
Yanming Zhou[32] examined a 2 MW horizontal-axis wind turbine that was supported by
a thin concrete foundation to better understand the complex interactions between environ-
mental loads, structural stresses, and foundational settlements.
These studies highlight the evolving state of the art in wind energy research, emphasising the
complex interplay between structural, environmental and climatic variables that collectively
influence the efficiency, safety and viability of wind turbines.
However, there is still no
specific numerical analysis on the varying load conditions on wind turbines with changing
wind speed on a long-term scale, especially for floating wind turbines.
1.3
The increased cost with potentially increased wind power gen-
eration
Despite the rapid development of offshore wind technology in recent years, the levelized
cost of energy (LCOE) of offshore wind is still much higher than that of onshore wind, and
significantly higher than that of conventional power plants[33]. If offshore wind turbines
are installed in deeper waters and in larger scale environments, the LCOE will increase
further[34].
In addition, first-generation wind farms are about to be phased out, which
introduces a complex variable into the economic evaluation of wind energy projects[35]. The
economic and operational feasibility of strategies aimed at repowering and extending the
service life of these structures is the subject of ongoing research[36]. Therefore, before the
construction of a new generation of wind farms, it is very necessary to establish an effective
economic model analysis. However, there is currently no relevant literature to analyze the
cost of this area, especially for wind power cost calculation under the influence of climate
change.
Leite[35] introduced a mathematical model to evaluate the economic implications associated
with the end-of-life strategies of repowering and lifetime extension.
The model suggests
that while the risk associated with extending the service life is lower, repowering may offer
superior economic indicators.
Kikuchi[36] proposed a probabilistic engineering cost model to estimate the mean and stan-
Page 4 of 49
==PAGE:10==
dard deviation of capital expenditure for offshore wind farms. A retrospective analysis of
wind energy cost trends in several countries [37] revealed a trend towards the deployment of
larger, more efficient turbines, resulting in higher capacity factors and reduced capital costs,
despite the marginal decline in wind resources at new sites.
The optimization of cable connection layouts is identified as a critical factor in minimizing the
investment required for submarine cables in offshore wind farms[38]. Control optimization
strategies, including the adjustment of pitch angle or rotor speed ratio, have been explored to
enhance power generation efficiency[39][40]. Hou[41] formulated the replenishment scheme of
an offshore wind farm as a non-convex optimization problem, offering a heuristic optimization
solution.
The strategy of upsizing wind turbines and plants is highlighted as a viable approach to
reducing the LCOE of offshore wind energy. Empirical studies indicate that relative upgrades
can lead to cost reductions exceeding 23% compared to current technology[42].
In conclusion, the integration of advanced engineering models, optimization algorithms, and
economic assessments is essential to navigating the complex landscape of wind energy eco-
nomics. The impending decommissioning of aging wind farms necessitates innovative strate-
gies to optimize the economic and operational performance of wind energy projects in the
face of evolving technological and environmental landscapes.
1.4
Conclusion
The previous sections carefully examined the complex dynamics of wind power generation,
its economic ramifications, and the significant impact of climate change on its viability and
efficiency. These different aspects provide an in-depth study of the changing wind energy
industry in order to maximize its potential.
The design of next-generation wind farms is closely tied to climate change data, advanced
structural analysis and economic modeling.
Optimization of wind energy, especially in
offshore environments, requires an interdisciplinary approach characterized by innovation,
adaptability and strategic coordination with global climate and economic needs.
In this article, we first identify the case support structure for which simulations are to be
carried out, then model and case study it in Ansys and optimize the structure with a method
by Lin[33]. Then calculate the total weight of the optimized structure at the present wind
level and at the post-climate change wind level. Finally, deriving the impact of this on the
cost of wind power generation after climate change through economic modeling.
Page 5 of 49
==PAGE:11==
2
Reference Model
2.1
NREL 5MW OWT
The NREL 5MW reference offshore wind turbine, known as NREL 5MW, is a cutting-edge
wind turbine model designed by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The
three-blade upwind turbine features variable speed and pitch control, making it one of the
common options for evaluating offshore wind technology in concept studies.
The support structure of the rotor-nacelle assembly (RNA) consists of a 77.6 m high conical
tubular tower. The specific parameters used to simulate the tower can be seen on Table 1.
When building the model in ANSYS Workbench, the position of the RNA is confirmed by
the coordinate system relative to the top of the tower. Its coordinates are also given in
Table 1.
Item
Value
Rated power (MW)
5
Number of blades
3
Rotor diameter (m)
126
Rated wind speed (m/s)
11.4
Rated rotor speed (rpm)
12.1
Rotor-nacelle assembly mass (kg)
350,000
Tower base diameter (m)
6
Tower base thickness (m)
0.027
Tower top diameter (m)
3.87
Tower top thickness (m)
0.019
Coordinate location of RNA (x, y, z)(m)
(0.41, 0.00, 1.97)
Moment of Inertia of RNA (x, y, z) (kg −m2)
(4.37, 2.35, 2.54) × 107
Table 1: Main details of the NREL 5 MW OWT model[43]
2.2
Monopile and transition piece
It is assumed that the OWT is supported by a monopile support structure, which is part of
the IEA’s (International Energy Agency) OC3 (Collaboration on Offshore Code Comparison)
project [44]. The single pile is designed as a 56-meter-long equal-section pipe pile. The outer
diameter is 6m and the inner thickness of the pile is 60mm; 36m of the single pile is anchored
on the ground and the remaining 20m extends from the seabed to the sea surface. The depth
and nominal value of each soil layer along the single pile are shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2.
Page 6 of 49
==PAGE:12==
NREL’s design is to connect the tower barrel to a transition piece, and then connect the
monopile by the typical grout inside the transition piece. The tower is supported by flanged
connections, and the transition piece is located 10 meters above mean sea level which ensures
a smooth transition in diameter between the bottom of the tower and the top of the single
pile.
Figure 1: 2D geometry of the tower and monopile embedded in the soil
Page 7 of 49
==PAGE:13==
Figure 2: 2D geometry of the transition piece
Page 8 of 49
==PAGE:14==
3
Basic case study
3.1
Marine and wind condition
The target site of this study is situated in the North Sea and belongs to the Dutch part,
which refers to the NL-1 location. This location is a particularly suitable site for support
structure deployment. Also, wind levels, soil conditions and water depth data closely related
to the area are used in this paper, which are summarized in Table 2.
Wind conditions
Marine conditions
Reference wind speed Vref( m/s)
50
50-year significant wave
height H550( m)
6.9
Annual average wind speed Vave
(m/s)
10
50 -year peak spectral period
Ts50( s)
7.7
50 -year extreme 3 s gust wind
speed Vg50( m/s)
60
Average significant wave
height Have (m)
2
Average wave period Tave (s)
5
Table 2: Marine and wind condition of the NL-1 site
3.2
Load sources
The load acting on the support structure can be roughly divided into five categories :(1)
inertial load; (2) aerodynamic load transmitted by the rotor; (3)wind load; (4) wave load;
(5) hydrostatic load. The calculations and formulas for the loads derived in this study rely
on DNV-RP-C205[45], which follows the IEC 61400-3 standard[46].
Page 9 of 49
==PAGE:15==
Figure 3: Load sources of a typical OWT
3.2.1
Inertia Load
The buckling and modal frequency changes of the OWT support structure are usually caused
by the inertial effect of the RNA mass at the top of the tower, so the RNA quality should
be considered in the structural analysis of the support structure.
Page 10 of 49
==PAGE:16==
3.2.2
Wind Load
The wind condition of the target site has been summarized in Table 2. Wind load on the
tower is depending on the mean wind velocity ¯V (z). resulting as drag, and the diameter
of the tower in contact with the wind.A generally used wind shear function is a power law
profile indicated in Equation 1:
¯V (z) = ¯Vref
 z
zr
α
(1)
Where ¯Vref) is the reference wind speed measured at reference altitude ¯zref, which is indicated
in Table 2. α is equal to 0.115 which represents the roughness coefficient for offshore site
[44]. Wind loads along the tower can be written as:
Ftower (z) = 1
2ρairCT,DD(z)¯V 2(z)
(2)
where ρair is the air density, CT,D is the tower drag coefficient , which is 1.0 according to
[47]. D(z) is the external diameter of the tower at height z.
3.2.3
Aerodynamic loads from the rotor
The aerodynamic force generated by the rotor is transferred to the wind turbine reference
shaft and broken decomposed into force and moment. Typical values for the design load
case is extracted from a study [48] in Table 3.
Load case
Thrust force
(kN)
Tilting moment
(kN · m)
Torsional moment
(kN · m)
Ultimate load
case
781
38567
7876
Fatigue load
case
197
3687
3483
Table 3: Wind turbine aerodynamic loads [48]
Page 11 of 49
==PAGE:17==
3.2.4
Wave loads
When the wavelength is greater than 5 times the diameter D of the structure, the Morison’s
equation can be used to calculate the wave load.
λ ≥5D
(3)
The target marine site can be regard as shallow wave, the wave length is given as:
λ = T
p
gh
(4)
Where T is the wave period, g is the typical gravity acceleration 9.81m/s2, h is the wave
height.
For this case, the wave length can be calculated as 70m, which is over 5 times of the monopile
diameter D (6m), thus the Morison’s equation can be employed in this case. The Wave loads
consist of an inertia term and a drag term:
Fwave(z) = 1
4ρw · π · D2 · CM · ˙u + 1
2ρw · D · CD · u · |u|
(5)
Where ρw is the typical water density with a value of 1025 kg/m3; D is the monopile diameter;
CM is the inertia coefficient of the monopile, taken as 1.6 and CD is the drag coefficient of the
monopile taken as 1.0 [45]. By obtaining from airy wave theory, ˙u and u represent horizontal
velocity and acceleration of water particles respectively.
Together drag loads can be induced by the current to the support structure,
uc(z) = uMSL
d + z
d
1/7
(6)
Where uMSL is the velocity of current at mean sea level, d is the water depth from mean
sea level to seabed. The term have already been taken into account by the drag term of
Morison’s equation (1
2ρw · D · CD · u · |u|) as we assumed the wave and current are aligned.
3.2.5
Hydrostatic load
Hydrostatic pressure is a permanent load applied to the surface of the monopile that linearly
increases with water depth.
Fwater = ρwgh
(7)
Where h is water depth and g is the typical gravitational constant.
Page 12 of 49
==PAGE:18==
3.3
Load cases
IEC61400-3 [46] defines the typical OWT structural design for 32 load cases, covering all
different operating conditions. However, it is not necessary to discuss all of these conditions,
as these types can be roughly divided into two categories: ultimate load case and fatigue
load case. The two typical load cases used in the structural design of offshore wind turbines
are typically extreme loads under extreme conditions for 50 years and fatigue loads under
normal sea conditions.
3.3.1
Ultimate load case
The extreme load case corresponds to the extreme conditions that OWT may face over a
50-year period. The results show that NREL 5MW is significantly more affected by wind
load than wave load. According to IEC standards[49], the load safety factors for gravity
loads and other loads (wind and wave loads) are 1.1 and 1.35 respectively.
3.3.2
Fatigue load case
In the lifetime of a wind turbine, wave load and rotor operation will produce a lot of cyclic
load. As a result, wind turbine support structures are likely to face the fatigue failure. The
widely used fatigue load condition corresponding to normal turbulence model and normal
sea state operation is DLC 1.2 in the IEC standard[46], which is considered to represent the
entire fatigue load state. According to IEC standards, the fatigue load safety factor is 1.0
[49].
Page 13 of 49
==PAGE:19==
4
Parametric FEA model
A parametric FEA model is established in ANSYS Workbench establishes that includes the
support structure and layers of soil foundation. This user-friendly approach is characterized
by simplicity, modularity, and a flow-oriented operation, enhancing its usability.
The behavior of an object can be anticipated through the utilization of Finite Element Anal-
ysis (FEA), which relies on calculations conducted using the Finite Element Method (FEM).
FEM employs mathematical techniques to deconstruct intricate systems into more manage-
able elements and subsequently applies differential equations to each element in isolation. By
harnessing the computational capabilities of computers, FEM facilitates the division of com-
plex engineering problems into solvable components. A flow chart of the model is presented
in Figure 4.
Figure 4: Flow chart of Parametric FEA model
Page 14 of 49
==PAGE:20==
4.1
Settings of the reference model
4.1.1
Model geometry
The geometry and parameters of the support structure have been presented by Figure 1 in
section 2. In order to generate a full simulation case, five parts should consist of: wind
turbine tower, transition piece, grout, monopile and soil foundation. The support structure
is a combination of tower, transition piece, grout and monopile. The foundation is settled to
be a cylindrical soil with a diameter of 20 times D to ensure the pile-soil behavior will not
be influenced by any artificial boundary effects.
The final 3D geometry of the model is presented in Figure 5 and Figure 6.
(a) Geometry of the tower
(b) Geometry of the monopile
(c) Cross section of the transition piece
(d) 3D Geometry of the support structure
Figure 5: Geometry of the support structure
Page 15 of 49
==PAGE:21==
In order to better represent the thickness and load of different parts, the tower and the
monopile are divided into 9 and 6 sections respectively, as shown in Figure 5. See Figure 7
for an overview of the complete model.
(a) 3D Geometry of the foundation
(b) Cross section of the foundation
Figure 6: Geometry of the foundation model
Figure 6 illustrate the 3D geometry of the foundation and the cross section, which can see
the different layers of the soil clearly.
Figure 7: 3D Geometry overview of the full model
The soil is divided into three layers[50]: loose, medium and dense, and each layer has a
different nature to match the nature of the target site[51].
Page 16 of 49
==PAGE:22==
4.1.2
Define and assign material
The soil model is illustrated by Drucker-Prager model, which is widely used for sand modeling
[52]. The frictional coefficient Cf between the monopile and soil is given by [50]:
Cf = tan
2
3φ

(8)
Where ϕ is the internal frictional angle. According to Drucker-Prager model, the necessary
properties of the sand layers can be expressed and calculated.
σys =
6c cos(φ)
√
3(3 −sin(φ))
(9)
where σy,s is the yield strength of the soil, c is the cohesion value[51].
The main properties assigned to each soil layer is presented in Table 4.
Type of sand
Loose
Medium
Dense
Unit weight (kN · m−3)
10
10
10
Young’s modulus (MPa)
30
50
80
Angle of friction (deg.)
33
35
38.5
Cohesion (kPa)
50
50
50
Yield stress (kPa)
59.2
58.5
57.0
Friction coeff (−)
0.40
0.43
0.48
Table 4: Soil properties of different layers
Steel S355 is the main part of the support structure, which is a widely used material for OWT
support structure [45].In this case, it is considered that the steel of the support structure
is totaly made by S355. In order to take econdary steel appurtenances, welds and coatings
into account, the density of S355 has been increased aritificially by 8% [43].
The grout for the transition section is made up of high strength concrete Ducorit D4 [53],
a material widely used in OWT grout connections. The main properties of steel and grout
are outlined in Table 5.
Page 17 of 49
==PAGE:23==
Properties
Steel[45]
Grout [53]
Young’s modulus (GPa)
210
70
Poisson’s ratio (-)
0.38
0.19
Density (kg/m3 )
8500
2740
Compressive strength (MPa)
-
200
Tensile strength (MPa)
-
10
Yield strength (MPa)
355
-
Table 5: The main properties of the steel and grout
4.1.3
Define element type and generate mesh
Because the tower,transition piece and the monopile are all thin-walled structures, for this
case, shell model can be used to accurately represent the support structure. The grout inside
the transition piece is modeled by solid elements, which ensures the accuracy of bending stress
analysis. At the same time, solid elements are also used to characterize each layer of the soil
foundation.
The machining process of grid element plays an important role in numerical simulation
analysis, which directly affects the accuracy of subsequent numerical calculation and analysis.
The division of the grid includes various factors such as the shape and topological type of the
cells, the type of cells, the choice of grid generator, the density of the grid, the numbering
of the cells, and the geometric elements.
The accuracy of the calculation results and the scale of the calculation are affected by the
number of grids.
Generally, increasing the number of grids can improve the calculation
accuracy; However, it also expands the overall scale and time of computation. Therefore, it
is crucial to carefully consider and balance these two factors when deciding on the appropriate
number of grids.
Grid sparsity refers to the use of different grid sizes in a structure to adapt to the distribution
characteristics of the calculated data. When dealing with sites with large variations in data
gradients, such as stress concentration areas, a denser grid is required to accurately capture
changes in the data. In contrast, when the data gradient is small, a relatively sparse grid is
used to minimize the size of the computation.
In this case, a study by Lin[33] shows that choosing a mesh control strategy that covers the
maximum von-Mises stress is most critical in order to ensure effective mesh control. The
strategy consists of five parameters that have been optimized:
Page 18 of 49
==PAGE:24==
1. the number of compartments at the circumferential edge of the support structure
NCE,ST = 64;
2. the size of elements at the longitudinal edge of the support structure ESLE,ST = 1m;
3. the number of compartments at the circumferential edge of the soil NCE,Soil = 64;
4. the size of elements at the longitudinal edge of the soil ESLE,Soil = 2m;
5. the number of compartments at the radial edge of the soil NRE,Soil = 12.
The created mesh can be seen in Figure 8 and Figure 9.
Figure 8: Mesh of the support structure
Page 19 of 49
==PAGE:25==
Figure 9: Cross section of the mesh of the assembly model
4.1.4
Boundary conditions
Loads and constraints are known as boundary conditions and can only reflect the true loads
and constraints if they are set correctly. There are four types of boundary conditions in
ANSYS Mechanical: inertial loads, structural loads, structural constraints, and thermal
loads. In section 2, the kinds of loads and load cases have been defined, it is necessary to
set the loads to the appropriate place.
According to Figure 3, the aerodynamic load from the rotor of the wind turbine is applied to
the top of the tower. Wave load and Hydrostatic load are applied to the surface of monopile
using the corresponding load equation, and wind load is applied to the windward surface of
tower through the pressure equation. During the optimization process, the pressure equation
is automatically updated as the diameter of the support structure is updated. The inertial
and gravitational loads are expressed in the form of block masses and are applied by a remote
particle based on a coordinate system at the top of the tower.
Then there are the connections between the different parts. The bottom of the soil foundation
is fixed and cannot be moved in any direction, and the side boundary of the soil is also fixed.
The underside of the support structure is fixed to the soil to prevent the effects of sliding at
the bottom. Friction contact between monopile and soil is established, and the appropriate
friction coefficient is selected (see Table 4) to promote the interaction between soil and solid
structure. Other contacts, such as tower-to-transition piece contacts and grout-to-monopile
contact, can be simplified using the bonded connection.
Page 20 of 49
==PAGE:26==
4.1.5
Solve and post-process results
After the design parameters, geometry, material, element type, meshing and boundary con-
ditions are determined, a range of analyses such as buckling, fatigue and modal analysis
can be performed. The post-processing capabilities of ANSYS software allow visualization
of simulation results, such as deformation and stress distribution in support structures and
soil. After this, additional analysis can be performed.
Page 21 of 49
==PAGE:27==
5
Optimization process
This section describes an optimization methodology to reduce the material cost of the support
structure and compares this cost with the results generated by future wind condition changes
brought about by climate change.
5.1
Genetic algorithm
Genetic algorithm (GA) is an optimization search method based on the principles of natural
selection and genetics. It originated in the 1960s by the American computer scientist John
H. Holland[54]. Genetic algorithm is an algorithm that simulates Darwin’s natural selection
and genetic law in the process of biological evolution, finds the optimal solution or near-
optimal solution, and iteratively updates the solution of the problem. The basic idea of
genetic algorithm is as follows:
1. Map the problem into a mathematical problem, i.e., establish a mathematical model;
2. Initialize a population containing multiple individuals (design points), each represent-
ing a solution;
3. Perform a selection operation, where individuals are evaluated according to a fitness
function, and the best individuals are selected for reproduction;
4. A crossover operation, in which two individuals are randomly selected for chromosome
crossover to produce new offspring;
5. Perform a mutation operation to randomly mutate the chromosomes of the offspring;
6. Update the optimal solution by adding the best offspring to the population and elimi-
nating some of the poorer individuals;
7. Repeat steps 3-6 until the preset number of iterations is reached or other stopping
conditions are met.
5.2
Structural optimization
In Ansys, the genetic algorithm can combine with the FEA analysis, which is the main
optimization process.
Page 22 of 49
==PAGE:28==
Figure 10 described the flow chart of the process.
Figure 10: Flow chart of the optimization process with GA algorithm
In this case, each steps of the flow chart is described in detail in the following subsections.
5.3
Objective function
The main goal of this method is to utilize comprehensive optimization methods to minimize
the overall mass of the support structure (Mglobal). This can effectively reduce material costs,
resulting in a more economically viable operation. This goal is clearly stated in the work of
Lin[33].
Fo = min (Mglobal )
(10)
Page 23 of 49
==PAGE:29==
5.4
Design variables
The thickness and diameter of each section are the main variables to be considered when
optimizing the single pile support structure. These two types of variables have a significant
impact on the structural response. In this case, the tower consists of 9 parts, while the
monopile is divided into 6 parts. To account for the different thicknesses of each section, a
total of 15 variables are needed, along with an additional 2 variables for the transition piece.
This number does not include the diameter variable, as each part has its own diameter. A
large number of variables significantly increase the computational time and complexity of
the simulation. The approach taken to solve this problem is to select nodes at both ends and
then use the average of the two nodes to determine the value of the intermediate variable.
This method was also adopted in the tower study, which effectively reduced the total number
of variables to 12. For ease of installation, it is assumed that the base diameter of each part
remains unchanged.
Thus, the set of design variables for the design point Xi can be represented as:
Xi =

x1
x2
· · ·
xn

, n = 12
(11)
The positions of the variables on the support structure are depicted in Figure 11 and Fig-
ure 12.
Within these figures, the diameters at the top and bottom of the monopile are
denoted as x3 and x4, respectively. Similarly, the diameters at the top and bottom of the
tower are represented by x1 and x2. The thickness of the tower segments is defined by
variables x5 to x8, while the thickness of the monopile segments is indicated by variables x9
to x11. Lastly, the thickness of the transition pieces is captured by variable x12.
Page 24 of 49
==PAGE:30==
Figure 11: Schematic of support structure design variables
Figure 12: Schematic of transition piece design variables
Page 25 of 49
==PAGE:31==
5.5
Set design criteria
To ensure maximum reliability of the solution, careful consideration must be given to the
criteria chosen. Incorrect selection or the omission of key criteria can lead to results that are
far from reality and may even lead to unforeseen structural defects during simulation and
over the life of the structure[55].
This study focuses on the structural optimization of the support structure for offshore wind
turbines, taking into account six constraints: vibration, stress, deflection, buckling, fatigue,
and design variable constraints[33]. These constraints encompass the three limit states that
are recommended in the DNV-OS-J101 standard for design[56].That is:
1. Ultimate limit state, which corresponds to the maximum load resistance, such as yield
stress and buckling;
2. Fatigue limit state, which consist failure due to fatigue loading;
3. Serviceability limit state, which corresponds to the tolerance criteria applicable to
normal use, for example, deflection and vibration.
5.6
Vibration constraint
The resonance phenomenon of the supported structure is one of the main problems affecting
wind tunnel test. To prevent them, it is necessary to separate the first natural frequency f1st
of the support structure from the turning rotor induced frequencies f1P and blade passing
frequency f3p. Figure 13 expressed a kind of structure design with natural frequency lying
between f1P and f3p.
Page 26 of 49
==PAGE:32==
Figure 13: Illustration of typical excitation ranges of a modern offshore wind turbine[57].
In order to prevent the reduction of rotor frequency, a tolerance of ±5%will be applied to the
first natural frequency as the GL standard[58] expressed. This is explained in Equation 12.
f1P+5% ≤f1st ≤f3P−5%
(12)
The NREL 5MW wind turbine has an cut-in and rotor speed rating of 6.9rpmand 12.1rpm[43],
respectively. Therefore, the resonance constraint can be calculated as:
0.212 ≤f1st ≤0.328 Hz
(13)
5.7
Stress constraint
When considering ultimate limit state, the most extreme pressure on the grouted connection
σT,max (Tresca stress) and on the other parts of the support structure σV M,max (von Mises
stress) must be less than stress limits σT, allow and σV M, allow, respectively. This is expressed
by the inequality as follows:
σV M,max ≤σV M, allow
(14)
σT, max ≤σT, allow
(15)
And the allowable stress value are given by [33]:
σV M, allow ≤σy, steel
γm · γf
(16)
Page 27 of 49
==PAGE:33==
σT, allow ≤σc,ulti
γm
(17)
where σy,steel is the yield strength of the steel component; σc,ulti is the ultimate compressive
strength of the grout; γm and γf are the partial safety factors for material and consequence
of failure, respectively.
DNV-OS-J101[56] has also shown that the ability of structural elements to yield should be
verified during the ultimate limit state.
According to Table 5, the yield strength of S355 steel is 355MPa. According to the IEC
standard[49], the material bias safety factor γm and the damage bias safety factor γf are
1.1 and 1.0 respectively for the ultimate limit state (ULS). In this case, the allowable stress
σV M,allow should be 323MPa. In addition, it can be seen from Table 5 that the ultimate com-
pressive strength of the grout is 200MPa, and according to DNV standard[45], the material
part safety factor γm must be used at ULS is 3. Thus, σT,allow will equal to 67MPa.
5.8
Deformation constraint
The deformation constraint is a crucial aspect to consider in this context.
To maintain the structural integrity and minimize the impact of significant deformations,
certain limitations are set regarding deflection and rotation. These constraints aim to keep
both the pile-head deflection (dpile ) and the rotation (θseabed ) at the mudline within ac-
ceptable thresholds (dallow and θallow , respectively). This requirement can be represented as
follows:
dpile ≤dallow
(18)
θseabed ≤θallow −θinc
(19)
The empirical choice for the rotation caused by installation uncertainty, denoted as θinc, is
set at 0.1◦. As DNV standard[45], the fixed values for dallow and θallow are 0.2 m and 0.5◦
respectively.
5.9
Restriction on buckling
Due to the slender design of the monopile support structure and the significant weight of the
RNA mass at the top of the tower, it is imperative to investigate the potential instability
Page 28 of 49
==PAGE:34==
caused by buckling.
The ULS static analysis relies on pre-stress loads derived from the
obtained results. To ensure the prevention of failures, it is crucial for the load multiplier Lm,
which represents the ratio between the critical load and the current applied load, to surpass
the allowable load multiplier Lm,allow.
This condition can be expressed in the following
equation:
Lm ≥Lm,allow
(20)
According to DNV standard[45], the chosen value for Lm,allow in this study is 1.4.
5.10
Limitation on fatigue
In this context, the fatigue constraint holds significant importance. Structures, particularly
support structures for offshore wind turbines, are greatly influenced by fatigue as a result of
the substantial cyclic loads they endure. With each rotation of the rotor during operation,
the support structure of a wind turbine undergoes stress fluctuations. The functionality of
the rotor can be determined by assessing the availability of the turbine. The PSF of material
under FLS is 1.15[59], thus the fatigue safety ratio fsr, allow is 1.15.
5.11
Design variable constraints
To ensure the feasibility and realism of the design, the upper and lower range limits are
assigned to each design variable:
xM
k ≤xk ≤xN
k
(k = 1, 2, ..., 12)
(21)
where xM
i
is the lower limit and xN
i is the upper limit of the design variables.
The load on the tower and monopile usually increases gradually from top to bottom, which
requires the tower and monopile to have a larger base diameter.
Therefore, define the
following constraints:
xk −xk+1 ≥0
(k = 1, 2, 3, 4)
(22)
In addition, the thickness of tower and monopile generally decreases gradually from bottom
Page 29 of 49
==PAGE:35==
to top. This can be ensured by the following constraints:
xk −xk+1 ≥0
(k = 5, 6, 7, 8, 9)
(23)
xk −xk+1 ≥0
(k = 10)
(24)
The boundaries of the design variables and constraints are shown in Table 6 and Table 7,
respectively.
Design variable
Lower Bound (m)
Upper Bound (m)
Variable definition
x1 TowerTopD
3
4.5
Diameter of tower top
x2 TowerBaseD
5
7
Diameter of tower base
x3 MonoTopD
5
7
Diameter of monopile top
x4 MonoBaseD
5
7
Diameter of monopile base
x5 TowerTopTh
0.010
0.030
Thickness of tower top
x6 TowerMid1Th
0.015
0.035
Thickness of tower
Intermediate location 1
x7 TowerMid2Th
0.020
0.040
Thickness of tower
Intermediate location 2
x8 TowerMid3Th
0.020
0.040
Thickness of tower
Intermediate location 3
x9 MonoTopTh
0.045
0.070
Thickness of monopile Top
x10 MonoMidTh
0.045
0.070
Thickness of monopile
Intermediate location
x11 MonobaseTh
0.045
0.070
Thickness of monopile
foundation base
x12 TransTh
0.025
0.040
Thickness of transition piece
Table 6: Upper and lower bounds of the design variables
Constraints
Lower bound
Upper bound
1 st Natural frequency f1st( Hz)
0.212
0.328
Max von mises stress σV M, max (MPa)
-
323
Max tresca stress σT, max (MPa)
-
67
Pile head deflection dpile (m)
-
0.2
Pile head rotation θseabed (◦)
-
0.4
Buckling load mult. Lm(−)
1.4
-
Fatigue safety ratio fsr,min(−)
1.15
-
Table 7: Upper and lower bounds of the constraints[33]
Page 30 of 49
==PAGE:36==
5.12
Genetic Algorithm settings
Several parameters need to be set before running the optimization, which are indicated in
Table 8.
Item
Value
Type of initial sampling
Constrained sampling
Number of initial samples NIni
150
Number of samples per iteration NPerlni
40
Convergence stability criteria
1.5%
Maximum number of iterations NMaxlter
20
Crossover probability
0.9
Mutation probability
0.01
Table 8: Main GA parameters
5.12.1
Number of initial samples
The minimum value of the initial sample Nini should be 10 times than the design point, as
the design point in this case is 12, in order to provide a better solution, 160 is chosen as the
number of Nini.
5.12.2
Number of samples per iteration
The number of samples in each iteration NPerIter will affect the convergence speed. An value
of 40 is chosen in this study according to [33].
5.12.3
Coverage stability percentage
The convergence criterion is derived from the maximum difference, mean and standard de-
viation of the output parameters. The default criterion value for GA in ANSYS is 1.5%, so
this value is taken into the optimization.
Page 31 of 49
==PAGE:37==
5.12.4
Maximum number of iterations
The maximum number of evaluation NMaxEval is defined by the maximum number of itera-
tions NMaxIter:
NMaxEval = NIni + NPerlter × (NMaxIter −1)
(25)
It is the stopping criteria of GA, in this case, NMaxIter is chosen as 20, so the The maximum
number of evaluation NMaxEval in this model is 920.
5.12.5
Probability of Crossover
Crossover probability is an important factor to be considered in genetic algorithm. It de-
termines the likelihood that parents will exchange genetic information to create offspring.
By adjusting the cross probability, you can control the balance between exploration and de-
velopment in the search process. A higher probability of crossing facilitates exploration by
allowing more exchange of genetic material, while a lower probability facilitates exploitation
by preserving genetic information from the parents. In genetic algorithm, finding an optimal
crossover probability that strikes a balance between exploration and utilization is the key to
achieve the best performance. The range for defining the crossover probability is 0 to 1. In
this case, the common crossover probability 0.90[60] is applied.
5.12.6
Probability of Mutation
The probability of mutation must be specified within the range of 0 to 1. By increasing this
value, the algorithm becomes more random, eventually resembling a simple random search
when set to 1. In this context, a commonly employed mutation probability value of 0.01 [60]
is utilized.
Page 32 of 49
==PAGE:38==
6
Numerical Analysis
In this section, we simulate the existing ambient wind speed and the emission scenario SSP2-
4.5 using the model scenarios described in the previous section, optimize the two cases using
the same optimization scheme, and finally compare the results.
6.1
Optimization under current wind condition
In section 3, the marine and wind conditions at the target site have been clarified in Table 2,
so that the data in the table can be used in the simulation to optimize the design according
to the methodology in the previous sections.
6.1.1
Objective function
The initial design of the support structure is 924.4 tons, and as the objective function is
aiming at finding the minimum global mass of the support structure Mglobal, the graph of
the changes in the objective function for quality is shown in Figure 14. The initial stage of
the optimization process focuses on exploration, where multiple designs are assessed and the
minimum quality rapidly decreases. As the optimization progresses, the entire population
converges toward a single design. This convergence occurs over a span of 16 generations, and
after 845 evaluations, the optimal design is achieved, weighing 757 metric tons. Consequently,
the support structure’s optimal design is 18.07% lighter than the initial design (924.4 tons),
resulting in a total mass reduction of 167.1 tons.
Page 33 of 49
==PAGE:39==
Figure 14: History during the optimization process of the support structure mass
6.1.2
Design variables
A comparison between the thickness and diameter profiles of the optimal design and the
initial design is presented in Table 9. The analysis of Table 9 reveals that the thickness of
the monopile significantly contributes to the reduction of total mass. Conversely, the outer
diameter experiences a slight increase. The impact of the thickness of the foundation can be
explained by taking into account the collective stiffness of both the soil and the pile. Areas
with deeper soil exhibit greater stiffness, enabling the use of a thinner pile to achieve the same
level of stiffness. In certain sections of the structure, there is only a slight optimization of
material quantity in areas where stress levels are particularly high, such as at the connection
point between the tower and the transition piece. The non-embedded section of the support
structure undergoes a significant reduction in outer diameter. These findings indicate that
both the thickness and diameter variables play crucial roles in achieving the optimal design.
Page 34 of 49
==PAGE:40==
Design variable
Initial value (m)
Optimized value (m)
Variable definition
x1 TowerTopD
3.87
3.36
Diameter of tower top
x2 TowerBaseD (m)
6
5.33
Diameter of tower base
x3 MonoTopD
6
5.35
Diameter of monopile top
x4 MonoBaseD
6
6.13
Diameter of monopile base
x5 TowerTopTh
0.019
0.017
Thickness of tower top
x6 TowerMid1Th
0.022
0.022
Thickness of tower
Intermediate location 1
x7 TowerMid2Th
0.025
0.027
Thickness of tower
Intermediate location 2
x8 TowerMid3Th
0.027
0.030
Thickness of tower
Intermediate location 3
x9 MonoTopTh
0.060
0.046
Thickness of monopile Top
x10 MonoMidTh
0.060
0.047
Thickness of monopile
Intermediate location
x11 MonobaseTh
0.060
0.043
Thickness of monopile
foundation base
x12 TransTh
0.030
0.029
Thickness of transition piece
Table 9: Comparison of inital and optimized values
6.1.3
Details of mass saving
Table 10 highlights the contrast of quality reduction, and it can be seen from the figure
that the quality reduction of monopile is the largest, reaching 26.17%. In contrast, towers
have experienced a modest reduction of 5.79%. This result is reasonable because extensive
theoretical knowledge and field work experience have already been applied to the NREL
5mw OWT design for a long time. In contrast, the OC3 monopile design is less advanced
and complex.
Parts
Initial (Tons)
Optimized (Tons)
% Difference
Tower
240.0
226.1
-5.79
Transition piece
61.6
60.9
-1.14
Grout
45.4
42.6
-6.17
Monopile
577.4
427.7
-26.17
Whole support structure
924.4
757.3
-18.07
Table 10: Details of the mass difference in each parts
Page 35 of 49
==PAGE:41==
6.1.4
Deformation
The deformation fields are illustrated in Figure 15, showing the maximum deformation of
the support structure at the top of the tower, measuring 1.71 m. Additionally, the maximum
deflection of the foundation head at the mudline is observed to be 0.184 m Figure 16, which
is 8.0% below the permissible limit of 0.2 m. These findings suggest that the current design
of the support structure is unlikely to encounter significant deflections.
Figure 15: Total deformation of the support structure
Figure 16: Pile head deflection of the monopile
Page 36 of 49
==PAGE:42==
6.1.5
Stress distribution
Figure 17 displays the stress distributions of the support structure when subjected to the
ultimate load case. The maximum Tresca stress in the grout, as shown in Figure 17, reaches
approximately 15.1MPa, which is 77.4% lower than the allowable value of 67MPa. These
findings confirm that the current design of the support structure is secure when considering
the ultimate limit state.
Figure 17: Stress distribution of the grout
6.1.6
Buckling
Figure 18 illustrates the outcomes of the buckling analysis conducted on the support structure
of the OWT. The buckling load multiplier, as depicted in Figure 18, exceeds the limit value
of 1.4, reaching a value of around 2.73. This significant increase suggests that the current
design of the OWT support structure is highly unlikely to experience any buckling failure.
Page 37 of 49
==PAGE:43==
Figure 18: Buckling load multiplier and buckling mode shape of the support structure
6.2
Optimization under climate scenario
In this section, the climate scenario SSP2-4.5 is applied to the simulation.
6.2.1
Impact of SSP2-4.5
SSP2-4.5 (socioeconomic pathway) is a climate scenario in which CO2 emissions hover at
current levels before beginning to decline in the middle of the century, but will not reach
net zero by 2100. Assuming the historical patterns of socio-economic factors have remains
consistent, showing little variation. Progress towards sustainability is sluggish, and there is
an uneven distribution of development and income growth. As a result, it is projected that
temperatures will increase by 2.7 degrees by the end of the century[61].
For the North Sea, the annual mean wind speed and wave height might meet a decline of 3.6%
and 7% ,respectively[62]. These values are closely related to wind power generation, while
the design of the wind turbine support structure is more sensitive to extreme conditions.
Figure 19 shows the projection of the extreme values until 2100. To transfer this into the
scenarios, the peak value before 2100 should be taken into account, that is 2030 for wind
speed, 2025 for wave height and 2025 for wave period.
Page 38 of 49
==PAGE:44==
Figure 19: The trend of annual extreme (a) wind speed, (b) wave height, (c) wave period in
the North Sea[62]
The extreme conditions affects support structure most, while the annual average is more
relative with the energy production, which can be seen in Figure 20. The mean wind speed
and wave height varies a lot in the future predictions while the annual mean wave period
remains in a stable value.
Page 39 of 49
==PAGE:45==
Figure 20: The trend of annual average (a) wind speed, (b) wave height, (c) wave period in
the North Sea[62]
To calculated the difference between predictions and current level, the value at year 2020 is
regarded as the latest values. Then the annual maximum wind speed for the North Sea is
likely to increase by 10.34% and the maximum wave height will increase by 18.20% and the
wave period will have a growth of 8.70% after the projection by Maria[62]. Thus the overall
marine and wind condition after climate change is illustrated in Table 11.
Page 40 of 49
==PAGE:46==
Wind conditions
Marine conditions
Reference wind speed Vref( m/s)
55.17
50-year significant wave
height H550( m)
8.16
Annual average wind speed Vave
(m/s)
9.64
50 -year peak spectral period
Ts50( s)
8.37
50 -year extreme 3 s gust wind
speed Vg50( m/s)
66.20
Average significant wave
height Have (m)
1.86
Average wave period Tave (s)
5
Table 11: Marine and wind condition of the NL-1 site after climate change
6.2.2
Result for wind condition under SSP2-4.5
As the extreme values increased in this simulation, the span of generations still remained
16 while the optimal design was achieved after 908 evaluations (can be seen in Figure 21),
which is 7.45% more than before. A total mass of 766.4 tons is reached, which is 1.20 %
more than before.
As a consequence, the total amount of evaluation increased, while the optimized result was
still higher than the result under the current wind condition. It can be proven that the total
mass after climate change will increase reasonably. Table 12 and Table 13 compares the
difference of each variables and mass difference after optimization of two wind conditions.
Figure 21: History during the optimization process of the support structure mass
Page 41 of 49
==PAGE:47==
In general, climate change is likely to cause the increasing in design of both structure diam-
eter and thickness. A further finding was that the most effective approach did not involve
optimising each individual component of the integrated solution. The mass of the transition
piece increased by 1.4% after optimisation, from 61.6 to 62.5 tons, and the best solution,
therefore, was not one that focused solely on maximising the optimisation of one individual
component.
Design variable
Current (m)
SSP2-4.5 (m)
Variable definition
x1 TowerTopD
3.36
3.35
Diameter of tower top
x2 TowerBaseD
5.33
5.35
Diameter of tower base
x3 MonoTopD
5.35
5.38
Diameter of monopile top
x4 MonoBaseD
6.13
6.17
Diameter of monopile base
x5 TowerTopTh
0.017
0.018
Thickness of tower top
x6 TowerMid1Th
0.022
0.023
Thickness of tower
Intermediate location 1
x7 TowerMid2Th
0.027
0.027
Thickness of tower
Intermediate location 2
x8 TowerMid3Th
0.030
0.030
Thickness of tower
Intermediate location 3
x9 MonoTopTh
0.046
0.048
Thickness of monopile Top
x10 MonoMidTh
0.047
0.050
Thickness of monopile
Intermediate location
x11 MonobaseTh
0.043
0.048
Thickness of monopile
foundation base
x12 TransTh
0.029
0.037
Thickness of transition piece
Table 12: Comparison of optimization for current wind condition and wind condition under
SSP2-4.5
Parts
Current (Tons)
SSP2-4.5 (Tons)
% Difference
Tower
226.1
226.9
0.35
Transition piece
60.9
62.5
2.62
Grout
42.6
43.2
1.41
Monopile
427.7
433.8
1.43
Whole support structure
757.3
766.4
1.20
Table 13: Details of the difference in each parts of two wind conditions
Page 42 of 49
==PAGE:48==
6.2.3
Constraints of deformation, stress distribution, pile head deflection and
buckling
As shown in Figure 22 and Figure 23, the maximum deformation of the support structure at
the top of the tower is measured at 2.90 m, and the maximum deflection of the foundation
head at the mudline is 0.169 m, which is under the limit of 0.2m.
Figure 22: Total deformation of the support structure
Figure 23: Pile head deflection of the monopile
Figure 24 illustrates that the maximum Tresca stress is 9.46 MPa, which is far less than the
Page 43 of 49
==PAGE:49==
limitation of 67 MPa. In Figure 25, the buckling load multiplier is about to be 1.69, still
exceeding the lower bound of 1.4. In conclusion, this simulation ensures that the support
structure will function properly in wind conditions after climate change.
Figure 24: Stress distribution of the grout
Figure 25: Buckling load multiplier and buckling mode shape of the support structure
Page 44 of 49
==PAGE:50==
7
Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE)
A cost model is developed by Takis Chaviaropoulos from Innwind in 2016[63], in this section,
the LCOE is calculated based on this model.
The steps of calculation is as follows:
1. The details of the wind turbine is given in Table 1 from section 2, thus the input
parameters to the cost model is based on these values, which is indicated in Figure 26.
The blade model and drive train model are taken the default settings from the model
as it represents the type specification of NREL 5WM[43].
Figure 26: Turbine input parameters[63]
2. The main materials using in this case are Steel S355 and Ducorit D4 grout. Price for
steel S355 is approximately 1.2e/kg and for the grout, as there are no valid offer can
be found, a price of 5e/kg is assumed. These values are input into the column ’Price
these days’ for calculation in Figure 27.
Page 45 of 49
==PAGE:51==
Figure 27: Mass input parameters[63] (Initial mass of the support structure)
3. The mass of each parts under different wind conditions are listed in section 6, thus the
input of the mass will rely on these values, which is shown in Figure 27. In the figure
the input values are the initial mass with out optimization.
4. After entering all the required values, the model will calculate the LCOE and list inside
the model, which is summarized in Table 14.
WF Capacity
Factor
O&M Direct Cost
(e/MWh)
LCOE(e/MWh)
Current Without optimization
0.463
43.16
80.60
Current With optimization
0.463
43.16
80.60
Climate change after optimization
0.446
43.16
81.93
Table 14: Comparison of LCOE under different conditions
Table 14 shows a slight increase in LCOE after climate change compared to the current
LCOE, from 80.60e to 81.93e, a increase by 1.65%. However, it seems that the effect of the
optimised and pre-optimised models on the LCOE is minimal, this is because the LCOE is
based on calculations for many different projects[64]:
LCOE = (FCR · TCC + FOC)/AEP + V OC
(26)
where TCC is the capital cost, FOC refers to fixed annual operating cost, variable operating
cost is the VOC under e/kWh, fixed charge rate is FCR and AEP represents annual elec-
tricity production (kWh). This equation can be simplified to a numerical LCOE calculation
Page 46 of 49
==PAGE:52==
method which is[64]:
LCOE = (overnight capital cost · capital recovery factor
+fixed O&M cost)/(8760 · capacity factor) + variable O&M cost
(27)
Where the overnight capital cost is measured in dollars per kilowatt installed (e/kW), the
fixed operating and maintenance (O&M) costs are in units per kilowatt-hour (e/kWh), and
the variable operating and maintenance costs, in units per kilowatt-hour (e/kWh). The
capital recovery factor also known as CRF, is the ratio of a constant annuity to the present
value of receiving that annuity for a given length of time, which can be explained by:
CRF =
i(1 + i)n
[(1 + i)n] −1
(28)
where n is the number of annuities received and i is the interest rate [64].
With these sufficient values for a wind farm, the LCOE can be estimated numerically.
From Equation 27, it can be seen that the capacity factor is acting as a multiplier in the
LCOE function, which indicates that it plays an important role in LCOE.
In our article only the cost variation of support structure was analysed, and therefore the
effect can only be seen in the change in the cost of the support structure in, thus the influence
on the total LCOE is not significant enough.
However, when applying the mean wind speed change from 10m/s to 8.6 m/s according to
[62] by 2040, the LCOE will have a significant increase to 87.30e/MWh, seen in Table 15,
which is 8.3% more than the current state. This can indicate that the main factor of LCOE is
influenced by mean wind speed more than the weight of the support structure under SSP2-
4.5. But for the other climate scenarios with more climate warming potential, the result
might be different, which can be conducted in another study.
WF Capacity
Factor
O&M Direct Cost
(e/MWh)
LCOE(e/MWh)
Current Without optimization
0.463
43.16
80.60
Current With optimization
0.463
43.16
80.60
Climate change after optimization
0.446
43.16
81.93
Reduced Mean Wind Speed
0.388
43.16
87.60
Table 15: Comparison of LCOE under different conditions
Page 47 of 49
==PAGE:53==
8
Conclusion
In this work, a comprehensive structural optimization model for support structures of offshore
wind farms is replicated and validated. It includes:
1. a parametric finite element model used to describe the structural behavior of the sup-
port structure;
2. combination GA for searching the optimal solution;
The aiming of the model is to optimize the various components of the support structure,
including towers, transition members, grout and monopile, to minimize the total mass of the
support structure. This is achieved by selecting the outside diameter and thickness of the
support structure as design variables.
Then in order to calculate LCOE under different wind and marine conditions, climate change
scenario and a Cost Model are applied in this study.
The following conclusions can be drawn from this study:
• The present parametric FEA model is valid within the constraints.
• The application of this optimization model leads to a reduction in the mass of the
supporting structure by 18.07% and 17.09% for the two different environmental con-
ditions, resulting in absolute mass reductions of 167.1 tons and 158 tons, respectively.
This indicates that the optimization model can significantly reduce the mass of the
supporting structure and maintain its strength.
• In the LCOE calculations, this optimisation scheme does not seem to provide a sig-
nificant reduction in LCOE under the current environmental conditions. This might
because LCOE is a complex formulation which is not only affected by the mass of
support structure.
• There is a 1.65% increase in the cost of LCOE after climate change, which suggests
that climate change under conditions of SSP2-4.5 will result in an increase in the cost
of wind power generation under current technology in the future.
In addition, the SSP2-4.5 climate scenario is a lower emission level with relatively small
impact on global warming, so the temperature increase will be more pronounced at a higher
emission level, resulting in greater changes in wind and wave conditions, which may have a
larger impact on LCOE.
Page 48 of 49
==PAGE:54==
9
Acknowledgment
I am very grateful to Lin Wang from the University of Birmingham for his kindness in
reproducing the methodology of his paper and to my supervisor Professor Athanasios Kolios
from DTU for his patient advice on ANSYS tutorials and economic models, which made a
huge contribution to the improvement of this article.
Page 49 of 49
==PAGE:55==
List of Figures
1
2D geometry of the tower and monopile embedded in the soil . . . . . . . . .
7
2
2D geometry of the transition piece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Load sources of a typical OWT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4
Flow chart of Parametric FEA model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Geometry of the support structure
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
6
Geometry of the foundation model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
7
3D Geometry overview of the full model
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
8
Mesh of the support structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
9
Cross section of the mesh of the assembly model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
10
Flow chart of the optimization process with GA algorithm
. . . . . . . . . .
23
11
Schematic of support structure design variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
12
Schematic of transition piece design variables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
13
Illustration of typical excitation ranges of a modern offshore wind turbine[57].
27
14
History during the optimization process of the support structure mass . . . .
34
15
Total deformation of the support structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
16
Pile head deflection of the monopile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
17
Stress distribution of the grout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
18
Buckling load multiplier and buckling mode shape of the support structure .
38
19
The trend of annual extreme (a) wind speed, (b) wave height, (c) wave period
in the North Sea[62]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
20
The trend of annual average (a) wind speed, (b) wave height, (c) wave period
in the North Sea[62]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
21
History during the optimization process of the support structure mass . . . .
41
22
Total deformation of the support structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
23
Pile head deflection of the monopile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
24
Stress distribution of the grout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
25
Buckling load multiplier and buckling mode shape of the support structure .
44
26
Turbine input parameters[63]
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
27
Mass input parameters[63] (Initial mass of the support structure)
. . . . . .
46
Page I of XIII
==PAGE:56==
List of Tables
1
Main details of the NREL 5 MW OWT model[43] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
Marine and wind condition of the NL-1 site
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3
Wind turbine aerodynamic loads [48] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Soil properties of different layers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
5
The main properties of the steel and grout . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6
Upper and lower bounds of the design variables
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
7
Upper and lower bounds of the constraints[33] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
8
Main GA parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
9
Comparison of inital and optimized values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
10
Details of the mass difference in each parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
11
Marine and wind condition of the NL-1 site after climate change . . . . . . .
41
12
Comparison of optimization for current wind condition and wind condition
under SSP2-4.5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
13
Details of the difference in each parts of two wind conditions . . . . . . . . .
42
14
Comparison of LCOE under different conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
15
Comparison of LCOE under different conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
Page II of XIII
==PAGE:57==
References
[1] M. Bilgili, A. Yasar, and E. Simsek, “Offshore wind power development in europe and
its comparison with onshore counterpart,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,
vol. 15, no. 2, p. 905 â 915, 2011. Cited by: 280.
[2] E. P. Soares-Ramos, L. de Oliveira-Assis, R. Sarrias-Mena, and L. M. FernĂĄndez-
RamĂrez, “Current status and future trends of offshore wind power in europe,” Energy,
vol. 202, p. 117787, 2020.
[3] M. Esteban and D. Leary, “Current developments and future prospects of offshore wind
and ocean energy,” Applied Energy, vol. 90, no. 1, pp. 128–136, 2012. Energy Solutions
for a Sustainable World, Special Issue of International Conference of Applied Energy,
ICA2010, April 21-23, 2010, Singapore.
[4] E. Commission, D.-G. for Climate Action, D.-G. for Energy, D.-G. for Mobility, Trans-
port, M. Zampara, M. Obersteiner, S. Evangelopoulou, A. De Vita, W. Winiwarter,
H. Witzke, S. Tsani, M. Kesting, L. Paroussos, L. HĂśglund-Isaksson, D. Papadopou-
los, P. Capros, M. Kannavou, P. Siskos, N. Tasios, N. Kouvaritakis, P. Karkatsoulis,
P. Fragkos, A. Gomez-Sanabria, A. Petropoulos, P. HavlĂk, S. Frank, P. Purohit,
K. Fragiadakis, N. Forsell, M. Gusti, and C. Nakos, EU reference scenario 2016 â
Energy, transport and GHG emissions â Trends to 2050. Publications Office, 2016.
[5] A. Benjamin, W. Graphics, and L. Killmayer, Offshore wind energy in Europe. 2020.
[6] G. Lichtenegger, A. A. Rentizelas, N. Trivyza, and S. Siegl, “Offshore and onshore wind
turbine blade waste material forecast at a regional level in europe until 2050,” Waste
Management, vol. 106, pp. 120–131, 2020.
[7] E. Topham, D. McMillan, S. Bradley, and E. Hart, “Recycling offshore wind farms at
decommissioning stage,” Energy Policy, vol. 129, p. 698 â 709, 2019. Cited by: 42; All
Open Access, Green Open Access.
[8] Y. Yang, K. Javanroodi, and V. M. Nik, “Climate change and renewable energy gen-
eration in europemdash;long-term impact assessment on solar and wind energy using
high-resolution future climate data and considering climate uncertainties,” Energies,
vol. 15, no. 1, 2022.
[9] S. Greene, M. Morrissey, and S. E. Johnson, “Wind climatology, climate change, and
wind energy,” Geography Compass, vol. 4, no. 11, p. 1592 â 1605, 2010. Cited by: 23.
[10] P. Agreement, “Paris agreement,” in report of the conference of the parties to the United
Nations framework convention on climate change (21st session, 2015: Paris). Retrived
December, vol. 4, p. 2017, HeinOnline, 2015.
Page III of XIII
==PAGE:58==
[11] L. Chen, “Impacts of climate change on wind resources over north america based on
na-cordex,” Renewable Energy, vol. 153, pp. 1428–1438, 2020.
[12] S. Pryor and R. Barthelmie, “Climate change impacts on wind energy: A review,”
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 14, no. 1, p. 430 â 437, 2010. Cited by:
337.
[13] H. Hueging, R. Haas, K. Born, D. Jacob, and J. Pinto, “Regional changes in wind energy
potential over europe using regional climate model ensemble projections,” Journal of
Applied Meteorology and Climatology, vol. 52, pp. 903–917, 04 2013.
[14] K. Solaun and E. CerdĂĄ, “Impacts of climate change on wind energy power â four
wind farms in spain,” Renewable Energy, vol. 145, pp. 1306–1316, 2020.
[15] D. Carvalho, A. Rocha, M. GĂłmez-Gesteira, and C. Silva Santos, “Potential impacts
of climate change on european wind energy resource under the cmip5 future climate
projections,” Renewable Energy, vol. 101, p. 29 â 40, 2017. Cited by: 142.
[16] A. Martinez and G. Iglesias, “Climate-change impacts on offshore wind resources in the
mediterranean sea,” Energy Conversion and Management, vol. 291, p. 117231, 2023.
[17] T. Katopodis, I. Markantonis, D. Vlachogiannis, N. Politi, and A. Sfetsos, “Assessing cli-
mate change impacts on wind characteristics in greece through high resolution regional
climate modelling,” Renewable Energy, vol. 179, pp. 427–444, 2021.
[18] H. Bloomfield, D. Brayshaw, A. Troccoli, C. Goodess, M. De Felice, L. Dubus, P. Bett,
and Y.-M. Saint-Drenan, “Quantifying the sensitivity of european power systems to
energy scenarios and climate change projections,” Renewable Energy, vol. 164, pp. 1062–
1075, 2021.
[19] A. Orlov, J. Sillmann, and I. Vigo, “Better seasonal forecasts for the renewable energy
industry,” Nature Energy, vol. 5, no. 2, p. 108 â 110, 2020. Cited by: 39; All Open
Access, Green Open Access.
[20] E. KjellstrĂśm, G. Nikulin, G. Strandberg, O. BĂ¸ssing Christensen, D. Jacob,
K. Keuler, G. Lenderink, E. Van Meijgaard, C. SchĂ¤r, S. Somot, S. Lund SĂ¸rland,
C. Teichmann, and R. Vautard, “European climate change at global mean temperature
increases of 1.5 and 2 Â°c above pre-industrial conditions as simulated by the euro-
cordex regional climate models,” Earth System Dynamics, vol. 9, no. 2, p. 459 â 478,
2018. Cited by: 95; All Open Access, Gold Open Access, Green Open Access.
[21] J. Tang, X. Niu, S. Wang, H. Gao, X. Wang, and J. Wu, “Statistical downscaling and
dynamical downscaling of regional climate in china: Present climate evaluations and
future climate projections,” Journal of Geophysical Research, vol. 121, no. 5, p. 2110 â
2129, 2016. Cited by: 117; All Open Access, Bronze Open Access.
Page IV of XIII
==PAGE:59==
[22] S. Outten and S. Sobolowski, “Extreme wind projections over europe from the euro-
cordex regional climate models,” Weather and Climate Extremes, vol. 33, p. 100363,
2021.
[23] C. Bouty, S. Schafhirt, L. Ziegler, and M. Muskulus, “Lifetime extension for large off-
shore wind farms: Is it enough to reassess fatigue for selected design positions?,” Energy
Procedia, vol. 137, pp. 523–530, 2017. 14th Deep Sea Offshore Wind RD Conference,
EERA DeepWind’2017.
[24] B. D. Hamilton, “Offshore wind market and economic analysis,” tech. rep., Navigant
Consulting, Inc., Chicago, IL (United States), 2014.
[25] X. Wu, Y. Hu, Y. Li, J. Yang, L. Duan, T. Wang, T. Adcock, Z. Jiang, Z. Gao, Z. Lin,
et al., “Foundations of offshore wind turbines: A review,” Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews, vol. 104, pp. 379–393, 2019.
[26] S. Bhattacharya and S. Adhikari, “Experimental validation of soil-structure interaction
of offshore wind turbines,” Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering, vol. 31, no. 5-6,
p. 805 â 816, 2011. Cited by: 155.
[27] A. S. Al-Homoud and O. N. Al-Maaitah, “An experimental investigation of vertical vi-
bration of model footings on sand,” Soil Dynamics and Earthquake Engineering, vol. 15,
no. 7, pp. 431–445, 1996.
[28] C. Pasten, H. Shin, and J. C. Santamarina, “Long-term foundation response to repetitive
loading,” Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, vol. 140, no. 4,
p. 04013036, 2014.
[29] M. Harte, B. Basu, and S. Nielsen, “Dynamic analysis of wind turbines including soil-
structure interaction,” Engineering Structures, vol. 45, pp. 509–518, 2012.
[30] F. Taddei, C. Butenweg, and S. Klinkel, “Parametric investigation of the soil-structure
interaction effects on the dynamic behaviour of a shallow foundation supported wind
turbine considering a layered soil,” Wind Energy, vol. 18, no. 3, p. 399 â 417, 2015.
Cited by: 16.
[31] Q.-F. Gao, H. Dong, Z.-W. Deng, and Y.-Y. Ma, “Wind-induced dynamic amplification
effects on the shallow foundation of a horizontal-axis wind turbine,” Computers and
Geotechnics, vol. 88, pp. 9–17, 2017.
[32] Y. Zhou, X. Liu, Z. Deng, and Q.-F. Gao, “Field monitoring and numerical analysis of
the reinforced concrete foundation of a large-scale wind turbine,” Advances in Materials
Science and Engineering, vol. 2021, pp. 1–14, 07 2021.
[33] T. Gentils, L. Wang, and A. Kolios, “Integrated structural optimisation of offshore wind
turbine support structures based on finite element analysis and genetic algorithm,”
Applied Energy, vol. 199, pp. 187–204, 2017.
Page V of XIII
==PAGE:60==
[34] V. J. Schwanitz and A. Wierling, “Offshore wind investments - realism about cost de-
velopments is necessary,” Energy, vol. 106, p. 170 â 181, 2016. Cited by: 40.
[35] G. de Novaes Pires Leite, F. Weschenfelder, J. G. de Farias, and M. Kamal Ahmad,
“Economic and sensitivity analysis on wind farm end-of-life strategies,” Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 160, p. 112273, 2022.
[36] Y. Kikuchi and T. Ishihara, “Assessment of capital expenditure for fixed-bottom off-
shore wind farms using probabilistic engineering cost model,” Applied Energy, vol. 341,
p. 120912, 2023.
[37] A. Duffy, M. Hand, R. Wiser, E. Lantz, A. Dalla Riva, V. Berkhout, M. Stenkvist,
D. Weir, and R. Lacal-ArĂĄntegui, “Land-based wind energy cost trends in germany,
denmark, ireland, norway, sweden and the united states,” Applied Energy, vol. 277,
p. 114777, 2020.
[38] A. WÄdzik, T. Siewierski, and M. Szypowski, “A new method for simultaneous opti-
mizing of wind farm’s network layout and cable cross-sections by milp optimization,”
Applied Energy, vol. 182, p. 525 â 538, 2016. Cited by: 45.
[39] R. Gonzalez, K. Michelson, D. M. Di Toro, and H. E. Allen, “Modeling the reversible
and resistant components of munition constituent adsorption and desorption on soils,”
Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, vol. 226, no. 7, 2015. Cited by: 3.
[40] P. Hou, W. Hu, B. Zhang, M. Soltani, C. Chen, and Z. Chen, “Optimised power dispatch
strategy for offshore wind farms,” IET Renewable Power Generation, vol. 10, no. 3,
p. 399 â 409, 2016. Cited by: 32.
[41] P. Hou, P. Enevoldsen, W. Hu, C. Chen, and Z. Chen, “Offshore wind farm repowering
optimization,” Applied Energy, vol. 208, pp. 834–844, 2017.
[42] M. Shields, P. Beiter, J. Nunemaker, A. Cooperman, and P. Duffy, “Impacts of turbine
and plant upsizing on the levelized cost of energy for offshore wind,” Applied Energy,
vol. 298, p. 117189, 2021.
[43] J. Jonkman, S. Butterfield, W. Musial, and G. Scott, “Definition of a 5-mw reference
wind turbine for offshore system development,”
[44] J. Jonkman and W. Musial, “Offshore code comparison collaboration (oc3) for iea wind
task 23 offshore wind technology and deployment,”
[45] G. Dnv, “Dnvgl-st-0126: Support structures for wind turbines,” Oslo, Norway: DNV
GL, 2016.
[46] W. Turbines-Part, “3: design requirements for offshore wind turbines,” Proceedings of
the IEC, pp. 61400–3, 2009.
Page VI of XIII
==PAGE:61==
[47] A. Chehouri, R. Younes, A. Ilinca, and J. Perron, “Review of performance optimization
techniques applied to wind turbines,” Applied Energy, vol. 142, pp. 361–388, 2015.
[48] M. LaNier, “Lwst phase i project conceptual design study: Evaluation of design and
construction approaches for economical hybrid steel/concrete wind turbine towers; june
28, 2002 – july 31, 2004,” 01 2005.
[49] I. E. Commission et al., “Wind turbines-part 1: design requirements,” IEC61400-1,
2005.
[50] S. Jung, S.-R. Kim, A. Patil, and L. C. Hung, “Effect of monopile foundation modeling
on the structural response of a 5-mw offshore wind turbine tower,” Ocean Engineering,
vol. 109, pp. 479–488, 2015.
[51] R. Obrzud, The hardening soil model: A practical guidebook. Zace Services, 2010.
[52] D. C. Drucker and W. Prager, “Soil mechanics and plastic analysis or limit design,”
Quarterly of applied mathematics, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 157–165, 1952.
[53] M. Schmidt, E. Fehling, and T. Braun, “Grouted connections for offshore wind turbine
structures: Part 1: Individual approval, materials and quality control,” Steel Construc-
tion, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 207–215, 2013.
[54] J. H. Holland, “Genetic algorithms,” Scientific american, vol. 267, no. 1, pp. 66–73,
1992.
[55] H. Adelman, “Experimental validation of the utility of structural optimization,” Struc-
tural optimization, vol. 5, pp. 3–11, 1992.
[56] O. Standard et al., “Design of offshore wind turbine structures,” Det Nor Ske Veritas,
vol. 581, 2007.
[57] D. Kallehave, B. W. Byrne, C. LeBlanc Thilsted, and K. K. Mikkelsen, “Optimization of
monopiles for offshore wind turbines,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, vol. 373, no. 2035, p. 20140100,
2015.
[58] G. Lloyd and G. Hamburg, “Guideline for the certification of wind turbines,” July 1st,
2010.
[59] M. J. Kühn, Dynamics and design optimisation of offshore wind energy conversion sys-
tems. DUWIND, Delft University Wind Energy Research Institute Delft, The Nether-
lands, 2001.
[60] R. L. Haupt and S. E. Haupt, Practical genetic algorithms. John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[61] B. OâNeill, C. Tebaldi, D. van Vuuren, V. Eyring, P. Friedlingstein, G. Hurtt, R. Knutti,
E. Kriegler, J. Lamarque, J. Lowe, et al., “The scenario model intercomparison project
(scenariomip) for cmip6, geosci. model dev. discuss., doi: 10.5194,” 2016.
Page VII of XIII
==PAGE:62==
[62] M. James, S. Haldar, and S. Bhattacharya, “Impact of climate change on the design
of multi-megawatt spar floating wind turbines,” Marine Structures, vol. 93, p. 103547,
2024.
[63] T. Chaviaropoulos, “Cost components - innwind.eu,” Feb 2016.
[64] W. Short, D. Packey, and T. Holt, “A manual for the economic evaluation of energy
efficiency and renewable energy technologies,” NASA STI/Recon Technical Report N,
vol. 95, 03 1995.
Page VIII of XIII
==PAGE:63==
10
Appendix A
Nomenclature
a
amplitude of the wave
α
roughness coefficient
c
cohesion value of soil
CD
drag coefficient of the monopile
CT,D
drag coefficient of the tower
Cf
frictional coefficient between the pile and the soil
CM
inertia coefficient of the monopile
CT
thrust coefficient of the rotor
dallow
allowable deflection
dpile
pile-head deflection
D
external diameter of the tower
f1p
rotor induced frequency
f3P
blade passing frequency
f1st
first natural frequency of the support structure
fsr.allow
allowable fatigue safety ratio
fsr, min
minimum fatigue safety ratio
Ftower
wind loads along the tower
Page IX of XIII
==PAGE:64==
Fh
hydrostatic force
Fo
objective function
FT
thrust force
h
local wave depth
Have
average significant wave height
Hs50
50-year extreme significant wave height
k
wave number
Lm
buckling load multiplier
Lm,allow
allowable buckling load multiplier
Mglobal
global mass of the support structure
nrated rated rotor speed
NIni
number of initial samples
Nlife
design life number of cycles
NMaxlter
maximum number of iterations
NPerlni
number of samples per iteration
R
rotor radius
Tave
average wave period
T550
50-year peak spectral period
u
horizontal velocity of water particles
˙u
horizontal acceleration of water particles
Page X of XIII
==PAGE:65==
uc
current velocity
uc,MSL
velocity of current at mean sea level
Vc,ex
extreme current speed
Vave
annual average wind speed
Ve50
50-year extreme wind speed
Vg50
50-year extreme 3 s gust wind speed
Vref
reference wind speed
¯V
mean wind velocity
¯Vr
reference wind speed measured at the nacelle altitude
x1, x2, · · · , x12
design variables
xM
lower bound of design variables
xN
upper bound of design variables
zr
nacelle altitude used as reference height
α
roughness coefficient
ϕ
friction angle of soil
γf
partial safety factor for consequence of failure
γm
partial safety factor for material
γm,f
material partial safety factor for fatigue
ηa
availability of wind turbine
θallow
allowable rotation
Page XI of XIII
==PAGE:66==
θinc
rotation due to installation incertitude
θseabed
rotation at the mudline
ρair
air density
ρw
water density
σf, allow
allowable fatigue stress range
σf, design
design fatigue stress range
σT allow
allowable Tresca stress
σT, max
maximum Tresca stress
σV M allow
allowable von Mises stress
σV M,max
maximum von Mises stress
σy,s
y yield strength of the soil
ω
angular frequency of the wave
Acronyms
DEL
damage equivalent load
DLC
design load case
EWM
extreme wind model
FEA
finite element analysis
FLS
fatigue limit state
GA
genetic algorithm
Page XII of XIII
==PAGE:67==
IEA
international energy agency
MSL
mean sea level
NREL
national renewable energy laboratory
NSS
normal sea state
NWM
normal wind model
OC3
offshore code comparison collaboration
OWT
offshore wind turbine
PSF
partial safety factor
RNA
rotor-nacelle assembly
RWH
reduced wave height
ULS
ultimate limit state
1D
one-dimensional
3D
three-dimensional
FCR
fixed charge rate
TCC
capital cost
LCOE
levelized cost of energy
AEP
annual electricity production
FOC
fixed annual operating cost
Page XIII of XIII
