==PAGE:1==
master thesis in bioinformatics and systems biology
Improved Prediction of TCR-pHLA
Interactions by Integration of Incomplete
Paired TCR Data
Author:
Signe Marcussen (s184280)
Supervisor:
Prof. Morten Nielsen
department of health technology
section for bioinformatics
june 2024
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
Understanding T cell receptor (TCR) interactions with peptides presented by a Major His-
tocompatibility Complex (pMHC) is pivotal for advancing T cell-mediated immunity against
infectious diseases and cancer. The high specificity of TCR-pMHC interactions and their
vast diversity make experimental characterization costly and time-consuming. Computa-
tional models offer a powerful approach to predict these interactions quickly and on a large
scale. However, the scarcity of comprehensive TCR data, especially paired TCR data that
includes both chains involved in binding, presents significant challenges for building robust
predictive models. Most existing models rely solely on paired TCR data, leaving out the
valuable information single-chain TCR data could contribute to improve model performance.
This project aimed to overcome these limitations by integrating both single-chain and paired
TCR data into a Convolutional Neural Network for predicting TCR-pMHC specificities. We
evaluated three strategies: two involving masking of missing input chains and one using the
transformer-based model TULIP to generate plausible sequences for missing chains. While
the masking strategies did not improve model performance, the use of TULIP to generate and
filter sampled sequences for missing chains based on their log-scores enhanced the model’s
performance compared to training solely on paired data. This was particularly notable when
evaluated on the external IMMREP23 dataset, indicating that the performance boost was
due to genuine learning rather than sequence redundancy. Despite these promising results,
the method’s applicability is currently limited to HLA-A*02:01 peptides and the CDR3
regions, due to TULIP’s constraints. Nonetheless, the results demonstrate the potential of
improving TCR specificity predictions by enriching training data with sampled sequences.
==PAGE:3==
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Morten Nielsen for being an excellent supervisor throughout this
project. He has not only been exceptionally helpful and engaged in the project, but also
consistently pushed me to explore new ideas and approaches. Working with him has been
truly inspiring.
I would also like to thank Barthelemy Meynard-Piganeau, who has kindly shared his ideas
and research on sampling with TULIP. His assistance has been invaluable. Finally, I would
like to thank Jonas Birkelund Nilsson for his help and contributions regarding NetTCR.
==PAGE:4==
List of Abbreviations
ANN
Artificial Neural Network
APC
Antigen-Presenting Cell
AUC
Area Under the (ROC) Curve
BCE
Binary Cross-Entropy
BLOSUM Blocks Substitution Matrix
CDR
Complementarity Determining Region
CNN
Convolutional Neural Network
CV
Cross-Validation
DL
Deep Learning
FPR
False Positive Rate
MHC
Major Histocompatibility Complex
MHC-I
MHC Class I
ML
Machine Learning
NLP
Natural Language Processing
ROC
Reciever Operating Characteristic
ReLU
Rectified Linear Unit
SC
Single-Cell
SGD
Stochastic Gradient Descent
TCR
T Cell Receptor
TPR
True Positive Rate
pMHC
Peptide-MHC complex
==PAGE:5==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Antigen Presentation by MHC Class I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Activation of Cytotoxic T Cells
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
1.2.1
T Cell Receptor Structure and Diversity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
TCR Specificity Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.4
Prediction of TCR-pHLA Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.5
Deep Learning and Neural Networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.5.1
Feed-Forward Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Convolutional Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.6.1
Convolutional Layer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
1.6.2
Pooling Layer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.7
CNN Training and Backpropagation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.7.1
Backpropagation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.8
Transformer Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
1.8.1
TULIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
1.9
Evaluation of Model Performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
1.9.1
Cross-Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
2
Materials and Methods
19
2.1
Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
2.2
Data Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.3
Embedding of Amino Acid Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
2.4
CNN Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
2.5
Model Training and Evaluation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
2.6
Masking Missing Chains in Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.6.1
Input Masking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.6.2
Max-Pool Masking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
2.7
Sampling Missing Chains with TULIP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.7.1
Sequence Logos and Sequence Similarity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
3
Results
28
3.1
Performance of the Baseline CDR123 Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
3.2
Performance of Mixed CDR123 Models using Masking Strategies . . . . . . .
29
3.3
Performance of CDR3 Model Including Sampled Data Without Filtering
. .
30
==PAGE:6==
Contents
3.4
Characteristics of TULIP-Sampled Chains for a Fixed CDR3 and Peptide . .
32
3.4.1
Sequence Logos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
3.4.2
Log Probability Scores of Sampled Chains
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
3.5
Filtering of Sampled Chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
3.5.1
Sequence Similarity to Training Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
3.6
Improving CDR3 Model Performance by Integrating Filtering of Sampled Chains 44
3.6.1
Evaluation on IMMREP23 Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46
4
Discussion
48
4.1
Performance of Mixed Models Using Masking Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.1
Input Masking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.2
Max-Pool Masking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
4.1.3
Quality of Single-Chain TCR Data
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2
Sampling Missing Chains with TULIP
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
4.2.1
Characteristics of Sampled Sequences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.2.2
Filtering Sequences by Log Probability Scores . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
4.3
Performance of NetTCR Using TULIP-Sampled Chains . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
4.4
Prospective Research and Applicability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
5
Concluding Remarks
55
References
==PAGE:7==
1
Introduction
T cell-mediated immunity is a central part of the adaptive immune system, that provides a
highly specialized defense against infectious diseases and cancer. It is composed of T cells
that circulate around the body to detect and eliminate infected or diseased cells. Central
to this immune response is the molecular interaction between T cell receptors (TCRs) of
cytotoxic T cells and non-self peptides presented by major histocompatibility complexes
(pMHCs) on the surface of the diseased cells. This interaction dictates the specificity and
efficacy of the immune response.
Understanding these TCR-pMHC interactions is essential for advancing our knowledge of
immune mechanisms and aiding the design of novel vaccines and T cell-based immunother-
apies. However, the complexity of these interactions and the enormous diversity of possible
TCR and pMHC combinations present significant challenges. While experimental testing is
expensive and time-consuming, computational models present a powerful tool for simulating
and predicting these interactions. However, the effectiveness of these models are limited by
the scarcity of comprehensive and diverse TCR-pMHC interaction data. This scarcity is
particularly pronounced regarding paired TCR data, where both the α- and β-chains of the
TCR are known. Both chains of the TCR are important for binding a pMHC complex, yet
most available datasets contain only one of the chains. This has restricted existing models to
include only either single-chain or paired TCR data, thereby excluding data with potentially
valuable information.
This project aims to address these challenges by integrating both single-chain and paired
TCR data into a Convolutional Neural Network model based on the NetTCR-2.2 architecture
[1], in order to enhance the predictive accuracy of TCR-pMHC interactions. To do this, the
project will employ three strategies. Two strategies involve masking missing inputs within
the model to effectively handle incomplete data. The third strategy aims to evaluate the
potential of sampling missing chains using the transformer-based model TULIP [2], thereby
enriching the training dataset. All three strategies will be evaluated and compared to a
model trained solely on paired TCR data.
1.1
Antigen Presentation by MHC Class I
The initial step in the T cell-mediated immune response relies on the presentation of peptide
fragments by MHC molecules on the surface of infected or cancerous cells. These peptide
1
==PAGE:8==
1.2
Activation of Cytotoxic T Cells
fragments, also referred to as antigens or epitopes, are derived from the degradation of intra-
cellular proteins, that are either the cell’s own proteins (self) or proteins from invading viruses
(non-self). Only the presented non-self peptides should stimulate an immune response. In
humans, the MHC molecules are divided into two classes: class I and class II. This project
will only focus on MHC class I (MHC-I), which is the class that is recognized by cytotoxic
CD8+ T cells. MHC-I molecules are expressed on the surface of almost all nucleated cells
in the body. The human genome encodes three different MHC-I types: HLA-A, HLA-B,
and HLA-C. Each gene is highly polymorphic, meaning that it exists in many variants to
enhance the capability of presenting a diverse array of peptides. Each individual has two alle-
les for each gene, thus allowing individuals to express up to six different MHC-I molecules [3].
MHC-I molecules consist of an α-chain, comprising three domains (α1, α2, and α3), and a
β2-microglobulin, which provides stability to the complex. The α1 and α2 domains form the
peptide-binding cleft on the upper surface of the molecule. The binding groove is closed at
both ends, restricting the peptides to have a sequence length of around 8-10 amino acids to
fit in. This is ensured during the MHC-I antigen presentation pathway. Briefly, intracellular
proteins are broken down to smaller peptides by a complex called the proteasome, and trans-
ported into the endoplasmic reticulum by the transporter associated with antigen processing
(TAP). Here, they are further processed before being loaded onto the MHC-I molecules. The
newly formed peptide-MHC (pMHC) complexes are then migrating out on the surface of the
cell membrane, where they can be recognized by circulating cytotoxic T cells that possesses
a TCR specific to the complex [4].
1.2
Activation of Cytotoxic T Cells
Cytotoxic T cells are a subtype of T cells that can directly detect and kill cancer cells
and cells infected by viruses or intracellular bacteria. These cells play a crucial role in the
adaptive immune system.
Cytotoxic T cells are continuously circulating throughout the
body in the lymphatic system, scanning the body for abnormal cells or pathogens. They are
characterized by expressing a TCR along with a CD8+ co-receptor, which together enables
them to recognize peptides in association with MHC-I molecules on the surface of antigen-
presenting cells (APC). The engagement of a TCR with a pMHC complex triggers the
activation of the T cell (Figure 1). This activation initiates a series of immune responses,
that culminate by inducing the APC to undergo apoptosis, i.e. programmed cell death.
The specific T cell begin to proliferate to create multiple new T cells with the identical
specific TCR, thereby amplifying the immune response.
The TCR-pMHC interaction is
2
==PAGE:9==
1.2
Activation of Cytotoxic T Cells
highly specific to prevent T cells from recognizing self-peptides and thus attacking healthy
cells and tissues. Moreover, to ensure the immune system can recognize and respond to a
wide array of foreign peptides, TCRs are highly polymorphic and exhibit huge diversity.
Figure 1: Simple illustration of the activation of a T cell mediated by TCR engagement
with a pMHC complex on the surface of a cancer cell. Figure adapted from [5].
1.2.1
T Cell Receptor Structure and Diversity
The TCR is a heterodimer consisting of two protein chains. Most commonly, these are an
α-chain and a β-chain, although a minority of TCRs are composed of a γ-chain and a δ-
chain. Each α- and β-chain consists of a constant region and a variable region. Each variable
region contains three hypervariable loops known as Complementarity Determining Regions
(CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3), which are mediating the interaction with a pMHC complex.
More specifically, the CDR1 and CDR2 primarily interact with the MHC, while the CDR3
mainly interacts with the presented peptide [6]. The α- and β-chains are encoded by multiple
non-contiguous gene segments, including variable (V) and joining (J) segments. The β-chain
is furthermore encoded by a diversity (D) segment. In humans, there are approximately 70 V
and 61 J gene segments for the α-chain, and 52 V, 2 D, and 13 J gene segments for the β-chain
[7]. During T cell development in the thymus, these gene segments are randomly combined
during a process called V(D)J recombination, resulting in a highly diverse TCR repertoire.
This diversity is further enhanced by the random insertion and deletion of amino acids at the
junctions of the joined gene segments. The extra diversity is particularly pronounced for the
3
==PAGE:10==
1.3
TCR Specificity Data
β-chain, where three gene segments are joined. The CDR1 and CDR2 loops are germline-
encoded by the V gene segments, whereas the CDR3 loop is encoded by the combined V(D)J
junction. Consequently, the CDR3 loops exhibit the most sequence variability [8].
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: (a) Illustration of the interaction between the CDR regions of a TCR and a
peptide presented by a MHC class I molecule. Figure adapted from [9]. (b) An overview
of the formation of the CDR regions of TCRα (top) and TCRβ (bottom). Figure adapted
from [8].
1.3
TCR Specificity Data
Data on antigen-specific TCRs are publicly available in various curated databases such as
the Immune Epitope Database (IEDB) [10], VDJdb [11], and McPAS-TCR [12], which have
collected TCR specificity data from numerous research studies. These databases contain the
sequences of the α- and/or β-chains of the TCR, V/J gene segments, epitopes, and MHC
molecules. Antigen-specific TCR data are typically generated by screening multiple T cells
against different pMHC complexes using MHC multimer technologies, followed by sorting
the pMHC multimer-binding T cells and sequencing them to obtain the TCR sequences
[13]. Traditionally, these T cells have been sequenced using bulk sequencing methods. Bulk
TCR sequencing involves sequencing a pool of T cells and results in a mix of unpaired α-
and β-chains from multiple T cells. This technology is limited by its inability to provide
information on the pairing between α- and β-chains, and since the CDR3β generally con-
tains more diversity, it has often been the primary focus in many studies and thereby the
4
==PAGE:11==
1.4
Prediction of TCR-pHLA Interactions
only sequence reported. Consequently, the majority of the available data on TCR-pMHC
interactions in the public databases contain only single-chain TCR data [14].
Recent advances in single-cell (SC) technologies have overcome this limitation of unpaired
TCR chains by enabling the pairing of α- and β-chains from individual cells. This is gener-
ally achieved by isolating single cells, for example, through fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS), reverse transcribing and amplifying the TCRs using multiplex PCR, attaching bar-
codes to transcripts, and finally performing high-throughput sequencing on a pooled sample.
The use of barcoding allows for the computational pairing of α- and β-chains after se-
quencing. This is known as single-cell TCR-seq. Another method involves computational
reconstruction of TCRs from single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data. However, this
technique can be less accurate, as it strongly depends on the sequencing depth and TCR
expression levels within the cells. While SC sequencing platforms offer paired TCR data and
a more precise picture of TCR specificity, they are limited by high costs and low throughput.
Bulk sequencing remains a more cost-effective and high-throughput option, thus still widely
used for generating TCR specificity data [15].
1.4
Prediction of TCR-pHLA Interactions
Understanding the underlying rules dictating the interactions between specific TCRs and
pMHC complexes is crucial for advancing the fields of T cell-based immunotherapies and
the rational design of vaccines. This task is particularly challenging due to the vast di-
versity within TCRs. Testing the interaction between a TCR and a pMHC in vitro is a
low-throughput process, that becomes time-consuming and costly when scaled up to include
numerous T cells, peptides, and MHC molecules. Consequently, there is a great interest in
developing predictive methods for the interactions. Multiple different methods have been
proposed to predict TCR-pHLA interactions, differing in the modelling techniques and the
data features included. The models range from simple similarity-based models [16][17][18],
to more complex machine learning-based methods such as decision trees [19], random forests
[20], convolutional neural networks [1][21], auto-encoder-based models [22], and transformer-
based models [2].
These models are trained on different TCR data features, e.g. the CDR3 region only, V/J
genes, or paired α- and β-chain TCR data. Historically, most models have been based on
single-chain TCR data only (especially the CDR3β sequence), as this makes up the largest
proportion of the publicly available data and was thought to be the most important feature
5
==PAGE:12==
1.5
Deep Learning and Neural Networks
in the TCR-pMHC interaction. However, with the emergence of more paired TCR data as
a result of SC technologies, there has been a shift towards models that integrate both α-
and β-chains, which have been shown to greatly improve predictive performance compared
to single-chain models [23][24]. Yet, the scarcity of paired TCR data remains a limitation.
Additional challenges arise from the existing data being highly imbalanced towards positive
examples (binders) and a few well-studied peptides. This imbalance means that while many
models perform well in predicting specificity for these common peptides, their performance
drops remarkably for rare or novel peptides [25]. Restricting models to be trained exclusively
on either single-chain or paired TCR data further limits the diversity of peptides covered.
The scarcity of available data, emphasizes the need for maximizing the use of current data
and explore the potential of deep learning techniques to enhance the predictive capabilities.
1.5
Deep Learning and Neural Networks
In recent years, the field of computational biology has undergone a huge transformation,
driven by the advancements in artificial intelligence and machine learning (ML) techniques.
Deep learning (DL), a subset of ML and characterized by its use of artificial neural networks,
has become particularly instrumental and emerged as a powerful toolbox for analyzing com-
plex biological data. These computational models mimic the neural structures of the human
brain, consisting of interconnected neurons organized in layers, which collectively can model
complex patterns and relationships in large amounts of data.
DL is characterized by its ability to learn hierarchical representations of data. This capability
allows neural networks to analyze and interpret complex molecular structures, interactions,
and functions directly from raw biological data. Moreover, they are capable of learning non-
linear representations, making them highly valuable for understanding complex relationships
between some input data (e.g. protein sequences) and some outcome to be predicted (e.g.
binding). Each layer receives some input data, performs computations and non-linear trans-
formations, and then outputs a signal to the subsequent layer. Through a process called
model training, particularly backpropagation (Section 1.7), neural networks adjust their in-
ternal parameters to minimize the error between predicted outcomes and actual outcomes.
In this way, they gradually improve their predictive performance during training.
Among the various types of neural networks, the simplest one is the Feed-Forward Neural
Network (FNN). The FNN serves as the foundation of many other types of specialized neural
network designs, including Convolutional Neural Networks, and will thus be detailed in the
6
==PAGE:13==
1.5
Deep Learning and Neural Networks
following section.
1.5.1
Feed-Forward Neural Network
A FNN is a fundamental type of neural network that is characterized by data only moving
in a single direction - forward - from the input layer, through one or more hidden layers,
and finally to the output layer. A FNN is fully connected, meaning that each neuron in a
layer is connected to each neuron in the next layer (Figure 3). Each connection between
two neurons is associated with a weight, which represents how important the output of one
neuron is on the input to the other neuron. Each neuron computes the sum of the weighted
inputs from all neurons in the previous layer along with a bias and pass the output through
an activation function.
Figure 3:
A simple Feed-Forward Neural Network with four layers, illustrating the
relationship between a neuron k in layer l −1 and a neuron j in layer l connected by the
weight wl
jk.
Consider a neuron j in a layer l. Given some input from a neuron k in the previous layer
7
==PAGE:14==
1.5
Deep Learning and Neural Networks
l −1, denoted as al−1
k , associated with a weight wl
jk and bias bl
j, the output of neuron j is
calculated as:
zl
j =
nl−1
X
k=1
wl
jk · al−1
k
+ bl
j
(1)
where nl−1 is the number of neurons in layer l −1. The output zl
j is then transformed in a
non-linear activation function f(z) to produce the final activated output that is fed to the
neurons in the next layer:
al
j = f(zl
j)
(2)
Different non-linear activation functions exist, each with its own advantages and limitations
regarding the data and problem at hand. Common choices include the sigmoid function
and Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) function. These are illustrated in Figure 4. The sigmoid
function is given by:
σ(z) =
1
1 + e−z
(3)
It is a logistic function and is often used in classification of a binary event, as it transforms
the input into a number between 0 and 1, which can be interpreted as a probability of
belonging to a class. The ReLU function is given by:
ReLU(z) = max(0, z)
(4)
This function is the most widely used when training deep networks as it is highly compu-
tationally efficient. It replaces all negative values in the input with zero and leaves positive
values unchanged.
The activated output al
j of neuron j is then fed to all neurons in the next layer. This goes
on until the output layer is reached, which produces the network’s final predictions. The
number of neurons in the output layer depends on the task of the network: a classification
problem would have one neuron per class, while a regression problem would have one neuron
per dimension in the output. All the weights and biases in the network are parameters that
are learned and adjusted during the process of model training, which will be elaborated in
Section 1.7.
It is important to note that a FNN is specifically designed to process one-dimensional input.
8
==PAGE:15==
1.6
Convolutional Neural Network
Figure 4: Non-linear activation functions.
For datasets with higher dimensions, a more specialized architecture called Convolutional
Neural Network is often used. This architecture incorporates specialized layers for extracting
meaningful features from the input into one-dimensional vectors before passing them to fully
connected layers.
1.6
Convolutional Neural Network
A Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is a specialized type of neural network commonly
used in image analysis, due to its proficiency in detecting features in two- or three-dimensional
data. Beyond image analysis, CNNs have proven highly effective within protein analysis, such
as analyzing amino acid sequences and identifying important patterns in protein interactions
[26][27]. A CNN differ from a FNN by including convolutional layers. These layers use fil-
ters, that learn to recognize local patterns in data, as opposed to the global patters typically
learned by FNNs. These filters are trained to detect areas of high correlation within the data
and can then be used to detect similar features across different locations of some other data.
Moreover, it is able to handle inputs of different lengths, making it highly useful for analyz-
ing protein sequences, which often vary in sequence length. Each filter captures a different
feature and transforms it into a new representation that summarizes the presence of that spe-
cific feature. The first convolutional layer picks out low-level features, and subsequent layers
progressively detect more complex features, enabling the CNN to learn a hierarchy of patters.
A CNN typically comprises three types of layers: convolutional layers, pooling layers, and
fully connected layers. They often begin with alternating convolutional and pooling layers to
9
==PAGE:16==
1.6
Convolutional Neural Network
extract various features and end with one or more conventional fully connected layers that
perform the final prediction.
1.6.1
Convolutional Layer
A convolutional layer consists of several filters, each performing a convolutional operation
on the input data to generate new representations of it. A filter is essentially a matrix of
weights. Each filter moves systematically across the input like a sliding window and performs
mathematical operations at each step. Initially, the weights of the filters are random, but
during model training, they are adjusted to be able to detect features more effectively. It is
common to apply multiple filters of different sizes. The convolutional operation is the dot
product between the filter matrix K and the window of data I that the filter covers. Given a
1D CNN, where the filter only moves in one dimension, it can be described by the equation:
conv(I, K)x =
n
X
i=1
Ix+i−1 · Ki
(5)
Here, x represents the position in the resulting feature map, which is essentially an array,
and i indicates the position within the filter. The output score indicates the presence of a
feature at that specific location in the input and is added to the corresponding location in
the feature map. Then the filter moves one or more positions and and repeat the calculation.
When the filter has been applied across the entire data, a complete feature map is generated
that summarizes the information of each location in the data relative to the filter weights.
A simple example of a convolutional operation in a 2D CNN is illustrated in Figure 5.
Figure 5: Example of a convolutional operation. Figure adapted from [28].
This process is repeated for each filter, producing as many feature maps as there are filters.
Subsequently, a non-linear activation function, e.g ReLU, is applied to these feature maps
before they are passed to the next layer in the network, which is often a pooling layer [29].
10
==PAGE:17==
1.7
CNN Training and Backpropagation
1.6.2
Pooling Layer
A pooling layer is often applied after a convolutional layer in order to reduce the dimensional-
ity and condense the information of a feature map. This layer uses a pooling unit which acts
like a sliding window, that traverses the feature map without overlap and outputs a single
value for each region it covers. This effectively summarize the features within each region.
Different pooling methods exist, e.g. max-pooling and average-pooling. In max-pooling, the
output from each window is the maximum value observed in that specific area. In this way,
only the most activated feature in an area is captured. In average-pooling, the average of
the values observed in an area is computed. Pooling methods can be either local or global,
defined by the size of the pooling unit. A simple illustration for max-pooling is shown in
Figure 6.
Figure 6: Simple illustration of a local and global max-pooling operation. Figure adapted
from [30].
In global pooling layers, the size of the pooling unit is equal to the size of the feature map.
The output of this operation is thus a single value. Besides reducing dimensionalty, pooling
methods also help to prevent overfitting, as only more abstract and robust features are
learned. Furthermore, they contribute to spatial invariance in the network, as the location
of the feature in the feature map does not matter [29].
1.7
CNN Training and Backpropagation
Neural networks are progressively learning from data during the process of model training.
Training of a neural network aims to update the weights and biases of the network in order to
minimize the prediction error on some data. It is an iterative process that involves multiple
stages. Initially, all weights and biases are assigned random values. For each iteration in
the training process, input data is passed forward through the network layer by layer. Each
layer performs some operations on the input to create new representations of the data and
the final layer generates an output prediction for each observation. Then, the output of the
network is compared to the actual true outcome using a loss function, which estimates how
11
==PAGE:18==
1.7
CNN Training and Backpropagation
far the predicted values are from the true values, i.e. how bad the model is performing. The
goal is ultimately to minimize this loss function. Different loss functions exist and are used
depending on whether the model is performing a classification task or a regression task. A
common loss function used in binary classification problems, such as classifying binders vs.
non-binders, is the Binary Cross-Entropy (BCE). The BCE measures the average difference
between the distribution of the true values and the distribution of the predicted values.
Given an input of N observations, the BCE loss function is defined as:
EBCE = −1
N
N
X
i=1
yi · log(ˆyi) + (1 −yi) · log(1 −ˆyi)
(6)
where yi is the true outcome of observation i and ˆyi is the predicted outcome. To minimize
the loss function, an optimization algorithm is utilized, which aims to find which weights
and biases minimize the loss function the most. This is often the Stochastic Gradient De-
scent (SGD), which uses randomly selected subsets of the entire data (called mini-batches)
to update the parameters. These updates are based on the gradients of the loss function
with respect to the parameters, i.e.
∂E
∂W and ∂E
∂b . Each gradient is a vector that points in the
direction of steepest ascend of the loss function. Thus, to minimize the loss, we need to take
a step in the opposite direction of the gradient. The gradients are calculated in a highly
complex process called backpropagation, which will be described in detail in Section 1.7.1.
Given a weight between neuron j in layer l and neuron k in the previous layer l −1, the
SGD algorithm updates the weight by subtracting the derivative of the loss function with
respect to the weight and multiply by a learning rate η:
wl
jk = wl
jk −η · δE
δwjk
(7)
The learning rate controls the size of the steps taken in the opposite direction of the gradient
of the loss function, i.e. it determines the size of the parameter updating for every iteration.
The learning rate should be carefully tuned, as a too large value may cause the model to
miss the minimum of the loss function, while a too small learning rate will let the model
take forever to converge to a minimum.
After the parameters have been updated, the next mini-batch of inputs are passed forward
through the network and the same process is repeated. When the entire dataset has been
used for training, the model has been trained for one epoch and is commonly evaluated on
a validation set. This evaluation is crucial to monitor the generalizability of the model. The
12
==PAGE:19==
1.7
CNN Training and Backpropagation
iterative process of calculating the loss function, computing the gradient, and adjusting the
parameters, continues over multiple epochs, until the network cannot minimize the error
any further. To prevent overfitting to training data and save computational resources, a
technique known as early stopping is often applied. Early stopping ends the training of a
model as soon as there are no further improvements in a specified performance metric on
the validation set for a specified number of epochs.
Since the loss function is a function of as many parameters as neurons in the entire network,
it is a highly complex problem to compute the gradients with respect to each weight and
bias. This is solved using the backpropagation algorithm.
1.7.1
Backpropagation
Backpropagation is a key component of how a neural network is able to learn. It is the
algorithm used for computing the gradients of the loss function with respect to each weight
w and bias b in the network. Specifically, for each weight between two neurons k and j, and
for each bias in layer l, the gradients
∂E
∂wl
jk and ∂E
∂bl
j are calculated. This is a highly complex
task since the loss is a function of the outputs from all the previous layers. Using the chain
rule, the gradient of the loss function with respect to a single weight wjk can be broken down
to Equation (8) for a single training example:
∂E0
∂wl
jk
= ∂zl
j
∂wl
jk
· ∂al
j
∂zl
j
· ∂E0
∂al
j
(8)
Knowing that zl
j is defined by Equation (1), we see that the first term in Equation (8) equals
the activated output of the previous neuron:
∂zl
j
∂wl
jk
= al−1
k
(9)
The second term of Equation (8) equals the derivative of the activation function evaluated
at the weighted output zl
j of neuron j:
∂al
j
∂zl
j
= f ′(zl
j)
(10)
The last term of Equation (8), ∂E0
∂al
j , is known as the error term. It can easily be computed for
the final layer, but for the hidden layers the error term is dependent on the values of error
terms of neurons in the next layer. The derivative of the loss function with respect to the
13
==PAGE:20==
1.8
Transformer Model
activated output of a neuron k in a layer l −1 is thus computed by the following equation,
summing over all neurons in the next layer l:
∂E0
∂al−1
k
=
nl−1
X
j=0
∂zl
j
∂al−1
k
· ∂al
j
∂zl
j
· ∂E0
∂al
j
(11)
Computation of the error terms will proceed backwards from the output layer to the input
layer. Combining everything, the partial derivative of the loss function with respect to a
weight wl
jk can be defined as:
∂E0
∂wl
jk
= al−1
k
· f ′(zl
j) · ∂E0
∂al
j
(12)
The same set of equations can be applied to calculate the gradient of the loss function with
respect to each bias, however, it is noted that
∂zl
j
∂bl
j equals 1, which simplifies the equation to:
∂E0
∂bl
jk
= ∂al
j
∂zl
j
· ∂E0
∂al
j
= f ′(zl
j) · ∂E0
∂al
j
(13)
All the gradients are computed for each observation t in the input mini-batch and finally
averaged to get one gradient for each weight and bias in the network:
∂E
∂wl
jk
= 1
n ·
n−1
X
t=0
∂Et
∂wl
jk
(14)
This is finally used by the optimization algorithm to update the parameters. Then the next
mini-batch of training examples are sent through the network, and the same process is re-
peated until convergence [31].
Traditional neural networks process inputs in a fixed and sequential order. In contrast, a
revolutionizing model known as the Transformer model processes data simultaneously and
dynamically focuses on different parts of the input to discover dependencies. This capability
makes it very well suited for handling sequential data, such as natural language or protein
sequences. In the following section, this type of model will be elaborated.
1.8
Transformer Model
In recent years, Transformer models have emerged and become fundamental in the field of
natural language processing (NLP) by introducing a highly efficient way of translating and
generating text. Transformer models are a type of neural network architecture that are dis-
14
==PAGE:21==
1.8
Transformer Model
tinguished by their reliance on self-attention mechanisms to extract context and meaning
of text. The architecture is specifically designed for handling sequences of data by captur-
ing relationships between different elements (tokens) within a sequence. The self-attention
mechanism enables the model to focus on the most relevant parts of the input text by giving
different weights based on how the words relate to each other. These weights are called
attention scores and indicate how much the other words should be taken into account when
representing a word [32].
Transformers are based on an encoder-decoder architecture, which is particularly effective
for sequence-to-sequence tasks like language translation. A simplified overview of the model
design is shown in Figure 7. Initially, each input token is embedded into a numerical vector
that captures its semantic meaning, ensuring that semantically similar tokens get similar
numeric representations. Additionally, the position of each token within the sequence is
embedded to provide spatial context when calculating attention scores. Within the encoder,
the embedded inputs with positional information are processed through multiple layers of
self-attention and feed-forward neural networks. This transforms them into contextualized
latent representations, which are then passed to the decoder. The objective of the decoder
is to generate an output sequence token by token. The decoder is autoregressive, meaning
that it generates the next token in a sequence based on the previous tokens in the sequence
along with the contextualized information provided by the encoder [32].
Figure 7: A simplified illustration of a Transformer encoder-decoder architecture.
15
==PAGE:22==
1.8
Transformer Model
Beyond NLP, Transformer models have started to gain attention in various domains of com-
putational biology. They are increasingly used to analyze the "language" of proteins, offering
new insights into complex relationships within amino acid sequences, interactions between
proteins, and the generation of novel sequences with specific characteristics [33][34]. One
such model is TULIP [2], which represents a novel and powerful method for predicting TCR
specificity, leveraging the integration of all TCR data regardless of completeness.
1.8.1
TULIP
TULIP is a Transformer-based unsupervised language model specifically designed for model-
ing TCR-pHLA interactions [2]. It uses the encoder-decoder architecture, where the concept
of translation is adapted to protein sequences instead of natural languages. The input to
the encoder part is protein sequences and the objective of the decoder is to generate novel
interacting protein sequences. Unlike in language models where the predicted tokens are
words, TULIP predicts the next amino acid in a protein sequence based on the sequence of
preceding amino acids. The vocabulary consists of the 20 standard amino acids along with
special tokens for sequence padding, start and end of sequences, and unknown amino acids.
The achitecture of TULIP is extended to include four interacting elements: epitope, CDR3α,
CDR3β, and MHC. While the MHC is treated as a categorical variable (without considering
its sequence), the other three components are processed through three separate encoders
and decoders specifically tailored for each element. Moreover, it has separate embedding
layers for the MHC and for the amino acid sequences. The sequence embedding includes
both amino acid identity and positional embedding. The model architecture is illustrated in
Figure 8.
The model receives inputs for the four elements and aims to predict each chain given the
two other chains and the MHC. The amino acid sequences and the MHC are first embedded,
and then the embedded amino acid sequences are input to their respective encoders to
create a latent representation zT = (z1, ..., zn), T ∈(α, β, e). Then each decoder is given the
embedded MHC concatenated with all the latent representations from the other encoded
sequences. Each decoder then autoregressively produces a probability distribution for its
respective chain. For example, the α-decoder calculates the probability of each amino acid
aα
i in the α-sequence considering both the actual preceding amino acids aα
<i and the latent
representations of the β-chain and epitope, and the MHC:
16
==PAGE:23==
1.9
Evaluation of Model Performance
Figure 8: Model architecture of TULIP. Figure adapted from [2].
P(aα
i |aα
<i, zβ, ze, MHC)
(15)
The conditional probability of the entire α-sequence is simply the product of the conditional
probabilities of each position i. The model is also able to generate restricted conditional
probabilities. For instance, if the β-sequence is missing, it is still able to compute the prob-
ability of the α-sequence based on the epitope and the MHC, represented as p(α|e, MHC).
This ability enables TULIP to fully utilize all available data even when some data elements
are missing. Although the original study on TULIP primarily focused on evaluating binding
probabilities, the model’s generative potential remains an area for further exploration.
1.9
Evaluation of Model Performance
Model performance refers to the predictive power of a model, which is evaluated by its abil-
ity to accurately predict the outcomes of previously unseen data. To assess this, the model
makes predictions on test data where the true outcomes are known, and then different per-
formance metrics can be applied to quantitatively measure how well the model performs.
A common technique for evaluating the performance of a binary classifier is through the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. The ROC curve plots the true positive rate
(TPR) against the false positive rate (FPR) for different discrimination threshold values.
The TPR refers to the proportion of actual positives correctly identified, while the FPR
measures the proportion of negatives that is incorrectly classified as positives. The area
under the curve (AUC) is a widely used metric that captures the overall ability of the model
to discriminate between positives and negatives. This is often used for comparing the perfor-
mance of different models. AUC values range from 0 to 1 and represent the probability that
17
==PAGE:24==
1.9
Evaluation of Model Performance
a model will score a randomly selected positive higher than a randomly selected negative.
An AUC of 0.5 indicates that the model’s predictions are completely random, i.e. the model
is not able to distinguish between classes. An AUC of 1 indicates a perfect classifier, that
predicts all outcomes correctly [35].
Evaluating a model on an external dataset that it has never encountered during training is
critical for accurately assessing its performance and reliability. Relying on the performance
of the model on data it has seen before can lead to misleadingly high performance. A model
is useful if it can generalize to new data, demonstrating it has learned the underlying patterns
in the data rather than the specific details of the training data. During model training, the
weights can sometimes be adjusted to such an extent that it leads to overfitting, where the
model starts modeling the noise in the data and fails to capture the broader signal. To
mitigate overfitting and biased performance evaluation, a technique called cross-validation
is often employed.
1.9.1
Cross-Validation
Cross-validation (CV) is a method used to evaluate the performance of ML models by training
and testing them on different subsets of the dataset. The data is randomly divided into K
partitions. For each partition k, a model is trained on the remaining K −1 partitions and
tested on the k-th partition. This results in K models, each trained and tested on different
subsets of the data, ensuring that they have not been trained on the data they are making
predictions for. This is the most simple CV setup. Another variant is the nested cross-
validation, which include an additional CV loop within the main loop. Again, the data is
divided into K partitions, where each partition k is used as test set. The data from the
remaining K −1 partitions enters the inner CV loop, where it is divided into M partitions.
For each partition m, a model is trained on the M −1 partitions and validated on the m-th
partition. After training and validation, the M models are tested on the outer test partition
k. The final predictions for each kth partition are computed as the average from the M
models. This process continues until predictions have been made for all K partitions. This
ensures maximum usage of the available data, as each observation is used for both training,
validation, and testing, while ensuring that no model is trained and tested on the same data
[36].
18
==PAGE:25==
2
Materials and Methods
In this section, an overview of the data and methods used throughout the project is described.
This includes data pre-processing steps, CNN setup, training and evaluation, and description
of the three strategies applied to integrate incomplete TCR data in model training. All
coding was conducted in Python and the modified NetTCR models were constructed using
the Keras API for Tensorflow [37].
2.1
Datasets
The main dataset used in the project was obtained from an earlier project within the Im-
munoinformatics and Machine Learning group and is not publicly available. It consists of
TCR data annotated with peptide and MHC specificity, along with a target value represent-
ing binding or non-binding. The TCR data includes CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3 sequences and
is a mixture of paired TCR data, i.e. both the α- and β-chain are present, and single-chain
TCR data, where only the α- or the β-chain is known. The dataset was already cleaned up
and prepared for training a NetTCR model; it was fully annotated, redundancy reduced,
and artificial non-binding data points were included. A brief overview of how this dataset
was created is described in the following.
Originally, the data was sourced from IEDB [10] and VDJdb [11], including only positive
human T cell assays for MHC class I. It was further expanded with a 10X Genomics Single
Cell Immune Profiling dataset [38], that was denoised using iTRAP [39] to remove outliers.
Observations that did not have a CDR3 sequence and V/J gene annotations for at least one
of the chains were removed. This information was used to generate full TCR sequences with
the tool Stitchr [40]. The complete amino acid sequences of the α- and β-chains were then
used to annotate the CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3 regions using the ANARCI software [41]. The
first and last amino acid in each sequence were removed. The data was redundancy reduced
using the Hobohm 1 algorithm [42] based on a summed BLOSUM62 encoded kernel similarity
[43] of the CDR3 sequences. Observations that were more than 95% similar were removed.
Next, the data was randomly split into five partitions of equal size. Within each partition,
artificial negatives were generated by swapping TCRs between peptides with a Levenshtein
distance greater than three to reduce the risk of generating false negatives. For each peptide
in a partition, a 1:5 positive to negative ratio was ensured. However, for the GILGFVFTL
peptide, all TCRs from other peptides were used as negatives due to insufficient data. The
final dataset consisted of 415 unique peptides and 417,093 samples, comprising 9769 positive
19
==PAGE:26==
2.2
Data Preparation
paired TCRs, 8671 positive α-only TCRs, and 53,342 positive β-only TCRs (Table 1). This
dataset will be referred to as the full dataset.
A hold-out test set was obtained from the IMMREP 2023 Kaggle competition, which was a
competition in predicting the binding of unpublished peptide-TCR data, in order to bench-
mark different prediction models [44]. This dataset was never used for training of any model
in this project, thus representing a completely novel dataset for model evaluation.
The
IMMREP23 dataset comprises 3483 paired TCRs distributed across 20 different peptides,
including 598 confirmed binders.
2.2
Data Preparation
Two different versions of the full dataset were prepared for the project. Initially, a filtered
dataset was constructed by selecting only those peptides that has at least one positive paired
TCR in each partition of the data. For the selected peptides, further filtering was applied
to only include α-only TCR data for a peptide if there was at least one α-only TCR in each
partition. Similar filtering was applied for the β-only TCRs.
Figure 9: Number of paired positive TCRs for the peptides in the filtered dataset. The top
50 peptides with the highest counts of paired positive TCRs are individually illustrated,
while the counts for the remaining 120 peptides are aggregated under ’Rest (20)’.
20
==PAGE:27==
2.3
Embedding of Amino Acid Sequences
This filtering was done to ensure that the models would have a consistent set of peptides
across all partitions during cross-validation. This dataset will be referred to as the filtered
dataset, and comprises 215,709 observations across 170 peptides, which included 9769 paired
positive TCRs, 8382 α-only positive TCRs, and 20,067 β-only positive TCRs. Figure 9 illus-
trates the distribution of positive paired TCRs among the peptides, revealing a significant
imbalance.
A second dataset was prepared specifically to evaluate models trained on HLA-A*02:01-
restricted peptides. The original full dataset was first narrowed down to only include data
associated with the HLA-A*02:01 allele. Subsequently, the same filtering criteria as for the
filtered dataset was applied, resulting in a dataset with 163,804 observations across 91 pep-
tides. This includes 4199 paired positive TCRs, 8258 α-only positive TCRs, and 16,351
β-only positive TCRs. This dataset will be referred to as the A0201-filtered dataset. Addi-
tionally, the IMMREP23 dataset was also filtered to inlcude only those peptides restricted
to the HLA-A02:01 allele, serving as a hold-out test set for evaluating HLA-A*02:01-specific
models. An overview of these three prepared datasets is shown in Table 1.
Dataset
# Peptides
# Paired
Positives
# α-only
Positives
# β-only
Positives
Total
Observations
Full
415
9769
8671
53342
417093
Filtered
170
9769
8382
20067
215709
A0201-filtered
91
4199
8258
16245
159188
IMMREP23 A0201
6
238
0
0
1336
Table 1:
An overview of the number of unique peptides, positive TCRs, and total
observations in the full dataset along with the three prepared datasets used in the project.
2.3
Embedding of Amino Acid Sequences
Amino acid sequences must be encoded into numerical representations for interpretation by
a CNN. This can be done in numerous ways to integrate different types of biological infor-
mation of the amino acids. In this project, the sequences were encoded using the Blocks
Substitution Matrix (BLOSUM) [45]. The BLOSUM matrix is a (20×20) matrix of log-odds
scores that indicate the likelihood of each amino acid to get substituted by each of the 20
amino acids. The scores are calculated as the logarithm of the probability two amino acids
to be aligned together in homologous sequences divided by the probability of them to occur
by chance.
21
==PAGE:28==
2.4
CNN Architecture
In this project, the BLOSUM62 matrix was used, which is based on a set of homologous
sequences with at least 62% identity. A high score indicates that two amino acids are more
likely to be substituted due to similar chemical properties, whereas a low score indicates
dissimilarity between amino acids.
Each amino acid in a sequence was thus encoded as
a vector of 20 entries obtained from the BLOSUM62 matrix, resulting in a matrix of size
(n × 20) for an amino acid sequence of length n. To ensure all sequences of a given input
feature had the same length, each sequence was padded with X’s to the same length as the
maximum length observed for the input feature (12 for peptide, 7 for CDR1α, 8 for CDR2α,
22 for CDR3α, 6 for CDR1β, 7 for CDR2β, and 23 for CDR3β). X’s were encoded as zeroes
to represent neither similarity or dissimilarity. By using a BLOSUM-encoding scheme, the
information of amino acid similarity got incorporated into the model, which is an approach
that has been shown to be beneficial for neural networks [46].
2.4
CNN Architecture
The models built in this project were 1D Convolutional Neural Networks based on the
NetTCR-2.2 model setup [1]. The architecture of the model consisted of a block of convolu-
tional and pooling layers followed by a couple of fully connected layers (also referred to as
dense layers). The inputs to the CNN block was the amino acid sequences of the peptide and
various CDR loops. Different models were built based on different CDR inputs: one model
incorporated sequences from all six CDR regions of the TCR, another one only the three
CDR sequences from the α-chain, and a third one including only the three CDR sequences
from the β-chain. Lastly, a model was built including only peptide and the CDR3α and
CDR3β. An overview of the general model architecture is shown in Figure 10.
Each input sequence was padded with zeroes to the maximum observed length of the given
input type to ensure all inputs had the same length, and subsequently embedded using the
BLOSUM62 matrix. Each input type was processed in independent branches of the CNN
block. Each branch consisted of a 1D convolutional layer with 32 filters of size 1, 3, 5, 7, and
9, followed by a global max-pooling layer using the ReLU activation function. The pooled
outputs were concatenated, passed through a dropout layer with a dropout rate of 0.6, and
fed to the fully connected part of the network consisting of two dense layers.
The first
dense layer had 64 neurons and the second dense layer had 32 neurons, both applying the
sigmoid activation function. The final output layer consisted of a single neuron outputting a
sigmoid-transformed value between 0 and 1, representing the probability of binding, where
1 indicated binding.
22
==PAGE:29==
2.5
Model Training and Evaluation
Figure 10:
A schematic overview of the architecture of the CNN model based on
NetTCR-2.2.
2.5
Model Training and Evaluation
All the models were trained using nested cross-validation with five partitions in the outer
loop and four partitions in the inner loop. In the inner loop, three partitions were used for
training in batches of 64 samples for 200 epochs, while the fourth partition was used for
validation in early stopping. Early stopping was using AUC0.1 as a stopping criterion and a
patience of 100 epochs. The Binary Cross Entropy was used as loss function and each sample
was weighted by the number of observations per peptide. The peptide-specific weights were
calculated as:
wpeptide = log2
 ntotal
npeptide

· c
(16)
where ntotal was the total number of observations and npeptide was the number of observations
for a specific peptide. c was a normalization factor used to ensure that the total weight
multiplied by the frequency of each peptide summed to the total number of samples:
c =
ntotal
P
peptide wpeptide · npeptide
(17)
The specific peptide weights forced the model to pay extra attention to peptides with few
23
==PAGE:30==
2.6
Masking Missing Chains in Model
annotated TCRs by increasing their loss. To enable a direct comparison between models
trained on different subsets of the data (paired-only or paired and single-chain), the peptide-
specific weights applied in all models were defined from the subset of paired observations only.
The model parameters were updated using the Adam optimizer [47] with a learning rate of
0.0005. Only the weights of the best performing model on the validation data were saved.
The cross-validation setup generated four of these models in the inner loop, which were then
all evaluated on the remaining partition in the outer loop, which was never seen during the
training. The predictions on the test partition were calculated as the average of the predic-
tions made by each of the four models. During the cross-validation, predictions were made
for all five test partitions, and the concatenation of these were used for model evaluation.
The performances of the models were assessed using the AUC. To enable direct comparison
between all models, every model was evaluated only on paired TCR data. When calculating
an overall AUC for a model, the result is likely to be biased towards the performance on
peptides with many positive TCRs in the dataset. Thus, an AUC was instead calculated per
peptide, to get a more clear picture of how the model performs across peptides. Bootstrap-
ping was performed to evaluate whether a difference in performance between models was
significant. The model predictions were sampled with replacement 1000 times and the AUC
were calculated each time. Across models, predictions of the same observations were sampled
in each bootstrap for proper comparison between subsamples. Given a null hypothesis that
model 2 performed better than model 1, the p-value was defined as the number of times
model 1 had a lower AUC than model 2, divided by the total number of bootstrap samples:
p −value = nAUCM1<AUCM2
nbootstraps
(18)
A p-value less than 0.05 was considered significant, indicating that model 1 performed sig-
nificantly better than model 2 [48].
2.6
Masking Missing Chains in Model
Masking missing inputs is a technique used to help neural networks effectively ignore missing
features in the input data. This approach allows for the inclusion of all available data while
ensuring that missing elements are skipped during the learning process. CNNs do not have
built-in mechanisms to handle missing inputs as seen in other neural network architectures
like Recurrent Neural Networks and Long Short-Term Memory models. This has restricted
24
==PAGE:31==
2.6
Masking Missing Chains in Model
NetTCR applications to only include either paired or single-chain TCR data when modelling
TCR specificity. The following subsections will introduce two approaches for masking missing
inputs in a CNN, that aimed to integrate all available TCR data in model training.
2.6.1
Input Masking
Input masking represented a straightforward approach to manage missing data in incomplete
TCR datasets.
In this method, absent TCR chains were denoted by a sequence of ’X’s
with the same length as the maximum observed length for the given input type in the
training data. During amino acid embedding, each ’X’ was assigned a vector of zeros. This
representation implied no similarity or dissimilarity to other amino acids. Thus, a missing
chain was embedded as a matrix of zeroes. After processing in the convolutional and max-
pooling layers, the output remained zero. As a result, the weighted input to the neurons in
the dense layer was zero for missing features. It is important to note that the missing features
were not masked during backpropagation. Consequently, the weights were still updated in
the parts of the network that received a missing chain, potentially affecting the learning
dynamics and model performance.
2.6.2
Max-Pool Masking
Max-pool masking was a strategy designed to mask missing inputs during the backpropa-
gation phase of the model training. This approach was particularly focused on how weights
were updated using the SGD optimization algorithm (see Section 1.7 for details). According
to Equation (7), updates are hindered if the gradient
δE
δwjk is zero. From the backpropagation
equation (Equation (12)), it is evident that the gradient becomes zero if the derivative of the
activation function, when evaluated at the weighted output, is zero. Considering the ReLU
activation function, as illustrated in Figure 4, the gradient of this function is zero when the
activation of the input z is less than or equal to zero. In the context of NetTCR, this occurs
when the output from the max-pooling layer is zero, resulting in an activated output of zero
(see Equation (4)). Consequently, the gradient of the loss function with respect to the weight
becomes zero, effectively masking the weight during backpropagation.
To implement this in the NetTCR architecture, the model was extended to include an extra
input; a vector of length 35 (one entry per feature map per input feature) with 0’s at entries
corresponding to missing inputs and 1’s at entries corresponding to present inputs. The
concatenated outputs of the max-pooling layers were multiplied by this vector, setting any
values corresponding to a missing input to zero, while outputs from present features remained
25
==PAGE:32==
2.7
Sampling Missing Chains with TULIP
unaffected. In this way, the weights associated with missing input features were not updated.
2.7
Sampling Missing Chains with TULIP
The TULIP model was downloaded from GitHub on February 28, 2024 [49]. The TULIP
model has been pre-trained on a large dataset of positive interacting sequence pairs and
subsequently fine-tuned on examples from the HLA-A*02:01 allele. Only the HLA-A*02:01
fine-tuned version of the model was available on GitHub. Consequently, TULIP was only
used to sample missing chains for peptides restricted to HLA-A*02:01 during this project.
The model’s hyperparameters were configured using the provided shallow.config.json file,
which set the number of attention heads to one, the number of hidden layers to two, and the
hidden size to 128. Both sequences and MHC were tokenized using the available tokenization
files specific to amino acid sequences and MHC. The input for TULIP was a peptide, CDR3α,
CDR3β, MHC, and a target value. Missing features were represented with the <MIS> token.
TULIP was used to sample the missing sequences and to calculate log probability scores (log-
scores) of each peptide, CDR3α, and CDR3β given the available information in an example.
The maximum sequence lengths for sampling CDR3α and CDR3β were set to 22 and 23,
respectively. This ensured that the sampled sequences had appropriate size for subsequent
processing in the NetTCR architecture. Since NetTCR was trained on CDR sequences where
the first and the last amino acid were removed, the minimum sampling length was set to
three to prevent the sequence from disappearing after removal. In cases where peptides were
swapped (artificial negatives), the original peptide was used during sampling. TULIP was
run in parallel on smaller subsets of the A0201-filtered dataset on the High-Performance
Computing cluster, Computerome, to increase processing speed. The results were collected
into a single dataset combining both true paired and sampled paired sequences.
2.7.1
Sequence Logos and Sequence Similarity
The web-based sequence logo generator Seq2Logo [50] was used to analyze patterns and
diversity within the sequences sampled by TULIP. Sequence logos provide a graphical repre-
sentation of the diversity of amino acids at each position in a sequence based on an alignment
of multiple sequences. Each position is a stack of amino acids represented by their one-letter
abbreviation. The overall height of the stack indicates the information content of that posi-
tion, expressed in bits, while the height of individual residues within the stack indicates the
26
==PAGE:33==
2.7
Sampling Missing Chains with TULIP
relative frequency of each amino acid.
Seq2Logo provides different logo types, that differ by the method used to calculate the infor-
mation content. The default method of Seq2Logo is the Kullback-Leibler, which represent
each letter in a stack as the probability of being observed by taking the background frequency
of amino acids into account. Enriched amino acids get positive values while amino acids that
are observed less than the background frequency receive negative values [50]. However, for
this project’s purpose of simply exploring the sampled sequences, the Shannon entropy was
used to calculate the information content. This method assumes that all amino acids are
equally likely at each position and is expressed as:
I = log2(n) +
n
X
i=1
pa log2 pa
(19)
where n is the number of different amino acids and pa represents the frequency of amino
acid a at a specific position [51]. The information content is a measure of the reduction in
uncertainty at a position when compared to a case where all amino acids appears with equal
frequency. A low uncertainty at a position gives a high information content, indicating a
higher level of conservation. In this project, correction for sequence redundancy was disabled
in Seq2Logo and pseudo counts were set to zero to base calculations solely on the observed
data.
To assess the similarity between sampled sequences and known TCR sequences, we used
the TCRbase-1.0 model [52]. TCRbase utilizes a kernel similarity measure to evaluate the
similarity of a query TCR to a database of TCRs. In short, this similarity metric works
by splitting up each sequence into all possible k-mers ranging from one to the length of the
shortest sequence. It then compares each k-mer from the first sequence against all k-mers
of matching length from the second sequence. The BLOSUM62 matrix is used to compute
scores for each k-mer pair, which are then summed and normalized to a scale of 0 to 1, where
1 indicates two identical sequences. When including all six CDR sequences of a TCR, the
similarity score was calculated as the weighted average of the similarity scores of each CDR
using the weights [1,1,4] for CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3, respectively, for both the α- and
β-chain [43][18].
27
==PAGE:34==
3
Results
In this section, we present the results of integrating both single-chain and paired TCR data
into a predictive model to improve the performance of mapping TCR-pMHC specificities.
The general model is a CNN framework based on the NetTCR-2.2 architecture [1]. First, we
evaluated two different methods for masking missing input TCR chains in the model. Next,
we investigated the possibility of enriching the incomplete dataset by generating the missing
chains using the transformer-based language model TULIP [2]. This involved analyzing the
characteristics of the sampled chains and investigating how to filter the sequences. Finally,
we trained a model on this enriched dataset and compared its performance to a baseline
model. All models were evaluated on paired TCR data only and were benchmarked against
a model trained solely on paired data.
For the rest of the thesis, models trained on both single-chain and paired TCR data will be
referred to as mixed models, while models trained solely on either paired, α-, or β-chain data
will referred to as paired models, alpha models, and beta models, respectively. Models that
include the CDR1, CDR2, and CDR3 regions for both chains will be referred to as CDR123
models, and models including only CDR3α and CDR3β will be named CDR3 models.
3.1
Performance of the Baseline CDR123 Models
The baselines of this project are models trained separately on paired-only, α-only, or β-only
TCR data. We trained a paired, alpha, and beta model including all three CDR sequences
of each chain with cross-validation using the filtered dataset, which only included peptides
that had at least one positive paired TCR in each partition and only included single-chain α-
and single-chain β-data for a peptide, if there was at least one positive of the particular type
present in each partition. The paired model was trained on paired data only, the alpha model
was trained on single-chain α-data and α-chains from paired data, and the beta model was
trained on single-chain β-data and β-chains from paired data. Only chains from paired data
were used for validation in early stopping and for final evaluation of model performance.
This enabled a direct comparison between models by only using the relevant part of the
input data. Each model was evaluated in terms of AUC in a per peptide manner and the
results are shown in Figure 11.
It is evident that the paired model performed better than the alpha and beta models, which
confirms that improved predictive performance are obtained when including both TCR
28
==PAGE:35==
3.2
Performance of Mixed CDR123 Models using Masking Strategies
Figure 11: Boxplots of the AUC per peptide for the CDR123 models trained solely on
paired, α-chain, and β-chain TCRs from the filtered dataset, respectively. All models were
evaluated on TCR chains obtained from paired TCR observations only.
chains, as described in Section 1.4. Only models trained solely on paired data will serve
as the baseline models for the rest of the analyses in this project.
3.2
Performance of Mixed CDR123 Models using Masking Strate-
gies
Next, we aimed to integrate both single-chain and paired TCR data into the training process
of the model. Here, we explored two approaches for masking missing inputs in the model.
The first approach involved inserting a sequence of X’s equal in length to the maximum ob-
served sequence within the input feature at each missing chain in the filtered dataset. During
sequence embedding, the sequences were represented as zeroes to represent neutrality. The
second masking approach was an extension of the input masking by setting the outputs of
the global max-pooling layer to zero for missing features, in order to prevent backpropaga-
tion in the convolutional layers of the missing feature, and thereby eliminate the influence of
missing chains when updating the weights during training (see Section 2.6 for details). Two
mixed CDR123 models were trained with cross-validation on the entire filtered dataset; one
using input masking and one using max-pool masking. The masking models were evaluated
on the paired test data only, to enable a direct comparison with the paired CDR123 baseline
model. The per peptide performance in terms of AUC are shown in Figure 12.
29
==PAGE:36==
3.3
Performance of CDR3 Model Including Sampled Data Without Filtering
Figure 12: Boxplots of the AUC per peptide for the baseline paired CDR123 model, the
mixed CDR123 model with input masking, and the mixed CDR123 model using max-pool
masking. All models were trained and evaluated through cross-validation on the filtered
dataset. The evaluations were conducted only on paired TCRs in the test sets.
The results demonstrate that neither of the mixed models trained using masking strategies
outperformed the baseline model trained solely on paired chain data. In fact, the paired
model performed significantly better than both masking models (p=0, p=0) according to
a bootstrap test. This suggests that the masking strategies have introduced noise in the
learning process rather than benefiting the model with extra TCR specificity information as
expected. It seems that the model with input masking performed slightly better than the
model with max-pool masking according to the median, but the difference was not significant
(bootstrap test resulting in p=0.779).
3.3
Performance of CDR3 Model Including Sampled Data Without
Filtering
We aimed to investigate if the model instead could benefit from a dataset where all miss-
ing chains were replaced with sampled sequences to complete the dataset of mixed chains.
For this, we utilized TULIP, that can sample a missing CDR3α or CDR3β sequence when
provided with a known partner CDR3α or CDR3β sequence and a peptide. This approach
therefore only involved the CDR3 regions of the TCR. The only available TULIP model
on GitHub was a fine-tuned model for peptides presented by HLA-A*02:01. Consequently,
sampling was only conducted for the further reduced A0201-filtered dataset. Briefly, this
30
==PAGE:37==
3.3
Performance of CDR3 Model Including Sampled Data Without Filtering
dataset was generated from the original full dataset by initially subsetting to HLA-A*02:01
and subsequently filtered by the same strategy as used for the filtered dataset. TULIP was
used to sample a single sequence for each missing chain without applying any filtering to the
sampling process. Among the 98,040 missing CDR3α sequences and 35,949 missing CDR3β
sequences, Tulip sampled 40,225 distinct CDR3α sequences and 8,492 distinct CDR3β se-
quences.
The length distribution of the sampled chains, as shown in Figure 13, closely
resembled a normal distribution similar to that of naturally occurring CDR3 lengths.
Figure 13: Length distribution of the sampled CDR3α and CDR3β sequences for each
missing CDR3α and CDR3β chain in the A0201-filtered dataset. The grey dashed line
represent the length distribution of all CDR3 sequences in the full dataset.
The sampled chains were added to the A0201-filtered dataset. A CDR3 model (including
only peptide, CDR3α, and CDR3β as inputs) was trained with cross-validation on this en-
riched dataset. To enable a direct comparison with the other methods, a baseline CDR3
model was trained on paired TCR data and two mixed CDR3 models were trained using
either of the masking strategies. All four models were evaluated on paired TCR data only,
and their per peptide performances are illustrated in Figure 14.
First of all, we see by comparing to Figure 12, how the per peptide performance in terms of
AUC decreased once we only included the CDR3 features instead of all six CDR sequences.
This underscores that better predictive performance are obtained when including CDR1 and
CDR2 in the model. However, due to the data restrictions imposed by TULIP, the focus
was primarily on assessing performance gains relative to other CDR3 models, rather than
achieving the best possible model for predicting TCR-pHLA specificities. The results show
31
==PAGE:38==
3.4
Characteristics of TULIP-Sampled Chains for a Fixed CDR3 and Peptide
Figure 14: Boxplots of the AUC per peptide for the baseline paired CDR3 model, the
mixed CDR3 model with input masking, the mixed CDR3 model with max-pool masking,
and the CDR3 model trained on the enriched dataset including unfiltered sampled chains.
All models were trained and evaluated through cross-validation on the A0201-filtered
dataset, i.e. they only included HLA-A*02:01-restricted peptides. The evaluations were
conducted only on paired TCRs in the test sets.
that the mixed model trained on TULIP-sampled data without filtering was slightly under-
performing compared to both the paired model and the masking models. This suggests that
the sampled chains may provide noise to the model, which emphasizes the need for further
exploration of the characteristics of the sampled sequences.
3.4
Characteristics of TULIP-Sampled Chains for a Fixed CDR3
and Peptide
To further investigate the source of the limited gain of applying TULIP, we aimed to in-
vestigate what TULIP samples when provided with a fixed chain and peptide input. We
therefore selected three different peptides with a positive paired TCR for each of them. An
overview of the examples are shown in Table 2. For each of the three peptide-TCR pairs,
we removed one of the chains and used TULIP to sample 1000 sequences conditioned on the
remaining chain and peptide. Afterwards, the same was done for the opposite chain.
For GILGFVFTL (GIL), the sampling resulted in 889 unique CDR3α sequences and 861
unique CDR3β sequences. For NLVPMVATV (NLV), this was 991 and 998, respectively,
32
==PAGE:39==
3.4
Characteristics of TULIP-Sampled Chains for a Fixed CDR3 and Peptide
Peptide
CDR3α
CDR3β
GILGFVFTL
CAGNYGGSQGNLIF (14)
CASSIRGSGEQYF (13)
NLVPMVATV
CALVTGYSTLTF (12)
CASSSGTSGSGSYNEQFF (18)
LLWNGPMAV
CAAKDDKIIF (10)
CATGAASSYEQYF (13)
Table 2: The amino acid sequences of three positive peptide-TCR observations. The
length of the sequences are given in the parentheses.
and for LLWNGPMAV (LLW), it was 833 and 965. Figure 15 displays the top 10 most
sampled sequences for each pair of peptide and CDR3α or -β. The results demonstrate that
TULIP sampled a diverse array of sequences even when the input to the model was the same
single CDR3α or -β sequence and peptide. There is not a single dominating sequence in any
of the examples, however, some similarity between the most sampled chains are observed for
both GIL and LLW.
Figure 15: Distribution of the 10 most sampled CDR3α and -β sequences for three
peptide-TCR observations. Refer to Table 2 for an overview of the peptide-TCR examples
included.
The length distributions of the same sampled CDR3α and -β sequences are visualized in
Figure 16 and show that the sampled lengths differ across pairs of peptide and CDR3 se-
quences. By comparing the most abundant length of the sampled chains to the lengths of
the actual chains (noted in Table 2), it is seen that they are matching for GIL and LLW.
33
==PAGE:40==
3.4
Characteristics of TULIP-Sampled Chains for a Fixed CDR3 and Peptide
Figure 16: Length distribution of 1000 sampled CDR3α and -β chains fixed on a single
partner CDR3α or -β chain and peptide. Refer to Table 2 for an overview of the peptide-
TCR examples included.
However, for NLV, the sampled CDR3α and CDR3β lengths are centered around 14, where
the length of the actual sequences are 12 and 18, respectively.
To further explore this, we selected two peptides, NLV and GIL, with two positive paired
TCRs for each peptide; one having the longest CDR3α in the dataset and one having the
shortest. The sequences of the peptide-TCR pairs are shown in Table 3.
Peptide
CDR3α
CDR3β
NLVPMVATV
CAVSEGVVWDLYGGSQGNLIF (21)
CASREDGTEAFF (12)
NLVPMVATV
GNQFYF (6)
CASSQQTGTIGGYTF (15)
GILGFVFTL
CAVVRGISRWHQNAGGTSYGKLTF (24)
CASSIRSAQPQHF (13)
GILGFVFTL
CGQTF (5)
CASSGRSTDTQYF (13)
Table 3: The amino acid sequences of the two positive paired TCRs with the longest
and shortest CDR3α sequence observed in the full dataset for NLVPMVATV and
GILGFVFTL. The length of the sequences are given in the parentheses.
Again, in turn we removed one of the chains and sampled 1000 sequences fixed on the
remaining chain and peptide. Figure 17 displays the length distributions of the sampled
chains along with the distribution of true lengths of positive CDR3α and CDR3β for each
peptide, extracted from the full dataset. Notably, it is observed that the sampled sequence
length distribution for a chain is exactly the same regardless of the length of the known chain.
The same is observed for both NLV and GIL, clearly demonstrating that TULIP samples
CDR3 sequences from a length distribution exclusively depending on the peptide. Moreover,
34
==PAGE:41==
3.4
Characteristics of TULIP-Sampled Chains for a Fixed CDR3 and Peptide
it is seen that none of the distributions are aligned with that of known true binding CDR3α
and CDR3β sequences for the specific peptides.
Figure 17: Length distributions of 1000 sampled CDR3α and -β chains fixed on a single
partner CDR3α or -β chain and peptide. The labels indicate the lengths of the actual
CDR3α and -β of the given TCR. The grey dashed distribution is the length distribution of
all positive CDR3α and -β chains in the full dataset for GILGFVFTL and NLVPMVATV,
respectively. Refer to Table 2 for an overview of the four peptide-TCR examples included.
3.4.1
Sequence Logos
This investigation was furthered by visualizing the sampled sequences in sequence logo plots.
The sequence logos were created using the Shannon entropy and excluded sequence weighting
and pseudocounts to get an unbiased view of the sampled sequences. The GILGFVFTL
peptide was selected along with an arbitrary binding paired TCR with the CDR3α sequence
CAGNYGGSQGNLIF and the CDR3β sequence CASSIRGSGEQYF. In turn, one of the
CDR3 sequences were removed and TULIP were used to sample 1000 sequences of a fixed
length conditioned on the remaining chain and peptide.
TULIP was configured to only
sample CDR3α sequences of length 14 and CDR3β sequences of length 13 (similar to the
35
==PAGE:42==
3.4
Characteristics of TULIP-Sampled Chains for a Fixed CDR3 and Peptide
lengths of the actual chains). The sequence logos of the sampled chains are shown in Figure
18.
(a) CDR3α
(b) CDR3β
Figure 18: Sequence logos of 1000 sampled chains fixed on the known partner chain and
binding peptide GILGFVFTL.
(a) CDR3α
(b) CDR3β
Figure 19: Sequence logos of 1000 sampled chains fixed on the known partner chain and
the incorrect non-binding peptide NLVPMVATV.
The sequence logos clearly display strong signals at the first two positions of CDR3α and
the first four positions of CDR3β, aligning with the established understanding that these
are conserved motifs in CDR3 sequences [53]. The remaining positions display greater vari-
ability in amino acid residues, particularly in CDR3α, although some residues still appear
more frequently.
A similar analysis was conducted, where the sampling was conditioned on either of the TCR
chains along with an incorrect non-binding peptide, NLVPMVATV. The sequence logos are
shown in Figure 19. The signal at the non-conserved positions for both CDR3α and CDR3β
is weaker when conditioned on the incorrect peptide, resulting in more noisy logos compared
36
==PAGE:43==
3.4
Characteristics of TULIP-Sampled Chains for a Fixed CDR3 and Peptide
to when conditioned on the correct peptide. However, TULIP appears to still capture the
correct residues at certain positions in some of the sampled sequences.
3.4.2
Log Probability Scores of Sampled Chains
As described in Section 1.8.1, TULIP can compute the log-probability of observing each
input sequence (peptide, CDR3α, and CDR3β) conditioned on the other inputs. Given this,
we next wanted to investigate if TULIP predicted its own sampled sequences to be equally
probable when fixed on a CDR3α or -β and a peptide. Given the same positive paired
TCR for GIL (CDR3α: CAGNYGGSQGNLIF, CDR3β: CASSIRGSGEQYF), we sampled
in turn 1000 CDR3α and CDR3β sequences conditioned on the opposite chain and GIL,
without restricting the sampled chains to have a certain length. Log-probability scores were
computed for each input containing one sampled CDR3α or -β and the fixed partner CDR3
and true binding peptide. The distribution of the log-scores for the sampled chains, fixed
chain, and fixed peptide are illustrated in boxplots in Figure 20. Moreover, the computed
log-scores of the actual TCR and peptide are shown.
Figure 20: Log-score distributions of peptide, CDR3α, and CDR3β sequences. Upper
row: 1000 sampled CDR3α sequences fixed on the same single CDR3β and binding pep-
tide GILGFVFTL. Lower row: 1000 sampled CDR3β sequences fixed on the same single
CDR3α and binding peptide GILGFVFTL. The red dashed lines represent the log-scores
computed for the actual peptide, CDR3α, and CDR3β.
37
==PAGE:44==
3.4
Characteristics of TULIP-Sampled Chains for a Fixed CDR3 and Peptide
It is seen that the log-scores for the sampled chains are very diverse, indicating that each
sampled chain is associated with a different probability of being true according to TULIP.
Furthermore, the true peptide-TCR achieved a high score comparable to the best-scoring
sampled chains. As expected, the log-scores show only minor variations for a fixed chain
and peptide, since the same sequence is scored each time. However, these log-scores are
calculated as conditional probabilities based on the sampled chain and peptide, resulting
in slight variations. A similar analysis was conducted with the sampled sequences for the
incorrect peptide NLVPMVATV. The results are illustrated in Figure 21.
Interestingly,
we observe that the sampled chains scored lower compared to when conditioned on the
true peptide, i.e. Tulip predicted the sampled chains to be less likely given that peptide.
Furthermore, the peptide log-scores are notably lower when using the incorrect peptide.
Figure 21: Log-score distributions of peptide, CDR3α, and CDR3β. Upper row: 1000
sampled CDR3α sequences fixed on the same single CDR3β and incorrect peptide NLVP-
MVATV. Lower row: 1000 CDR3β sequences fixed on the same single CDR3α and incor-
rect peptide NLVPMVATV. The red dashed lines represent the log-scores computed for
the true peptide GILGFVFTL and actual CDR3α and CDR3β.
Combined with the findings from the sequence logos, this suggests that although TULIP can
sample a correct matching CDR3α or -β sequence for another CDR3α or -β when conditioned
on an incorrect peptide, it assigns a lower log-score.
38
==PAGE:45==
3.5
Filtering of Sampled Chains
3.5
Filtering of Sampled Chains
We wanted to explore if the log-scores computed by TULIP could be utilized to filter the
sampled sequences to only obtain the most probable ones. Given the peptide GILGFVFTL
and the same positive paired TCR example as used in Section 3.4.1 and 3.4.2 (CDR3α:
CAGNYGGSQGNLIF, CDR3β: CASSIRGSGEQYF), we took the same 1000 sampled CDR3α
and CDR3β sequences, that had been conditioned on the opposite true chain and GIL dur-
ing sampling. We computed the log-scores for the sampled chains, selected the 100 highest-
scoring and 100 lowest-scoring sequences for both CDR3α and CDR3β and visualized them
in sequence logos. The results for the top-scoring sequences are shown in Figure 22 and
reveal a clear and strong motif for both CDR3α and CDR3β.
(a) CDR3α
(b) CDR3β
Figure 22: Sequence logos of the 100 highest-scoring sampled chains fixed on a single
partner chain and the binding peptide GILGFVFTL.
(a) CDR3α
(b) CDR3β
Figure 23: Sequence logos of the 100 lowest-scoring sampled chains fixed on a single
partner chain and the binding peptide GILGFVFTL.
A single amino acid residue dominates at most positions, which resemble the amino acids
39
==PAGE:46==
3.5
Filtering of Sampled Chains
in the actual CDR3 sequences. In contrast, the sequence logos of the 100 lowest scoring
sampled sequences, as shown in Figure 23, appear random on almost all positions, except
for the conserved positions. This strongly indicates the necessity of filtering the sampled
sequences and that the log-score is good in doing so.
Intriguingly, when substituting the correct peptide GIL with the incorrect peptide NLV and
performing the same analysis, a notable difference between the high-scoring and low-scoring
sequences is observed once again. The results are illustrated in Figure 24 and 25. The motif
of the highest-scoring sequences resemble that of the highest-scoring sequences for the correct
peptide, though the signal is less pronounced. The dominant residues at each position are
nearly identical. This indicates that the input CDR3 chain, rather that the peptide, plays
the major role in the sampling process of TULIP.
(a) CDR3α
(b) CDR3β
Figure 24: Sequence logos of the 100 highest-scoring sampled chains fixed on a single
partner chain and the incorrect peptide NLVPMVATV.
(a) CDR3α
(b) CDR3β
Figure 25: Sequence logos of the 100 lowest-scoring sampled chains fixed on a single
partner chain and the incorrect peptide NLVPMVATV.
40
==PAGE:47==
3.5
Filtering of Sampled Chains
3.5.1
Sequence Similarity to Training Data
Next, we wanted to investigate whether TULIP tends to give high log-scores to sequences
it has encountered during training. To test if this is the case, we here assume that TULIP
has been trained on the same paired positive TCR data as present in our full dataset. We
computed the sequence similarity of all single-chain CDR3 in the A0201-filtered dataset to
the equivalent CDR3 chains in the hypothesized training data using the TCRbase-1.0 tool
[52]. In short, TCRbase calculates similarity between two sequences by summing the kernel
similarity across all BLOSUM62-encoded k-mers, ranging from length 1 up to the length
of the shortest sequence involved. The output from this analysis was the similarity score
for each single-chain CDR3α or -β to the most similar CDR3α or -β in the hypothesized
training data.
Figure 26: Each data point represents a single-chain TCR in the A0201-filtered dataset.
Median and 0.95 quantile log-scores for 1000 sampled chains are plotted against the known
partner chain’s similarity to TULIP’s hypothesized training data.
Next, for each single-chain CDR3, we sampled the missing chain 1000 times conditioned
on the known CDR3 and peptide, computed the log-scores, and extracted the median and
0.95 quantile. Hence, for each single-chain observation, we obtained a similarity score to the
hypothesized training data along with the median and 0.95 quantile of the log-scores of 1000
41
==PAGE:48==
3.5
Filtering of Sampled Chains
sampled partner chains. In Figure 26, these statistics are plotted against each other sepa-
rately for single-chain CDR3α and CDR3β observations. The results show only a minimal
correlation for observations with a known CDR3β chain, and no correlation when CDR3α is
known. We expected a clear separation between the median log-scores and the 0.95 quantile
log-scores for data points with similar similarity scores, but observe some overlap.
To further explore this, we selected three different pairs of peptide and single-chain CDR3α,
that had high similarity scores, and visualized the log-score distributions of their 1000 sam-
pled CDR3β sequences. This is shown in Figure 27.
Figure 27: Log-score distributions of 1000 sampled CDR3β sequences for three differ-
ent peptide-CDR3α observations: GILGFVFTL-CAGASGSSDTGKLIF, YVLDHLIVV-
CAAIETSYDKVIF, and GLCTLVAML-CAEDQNAKLMF. The boxplots are colored ac-
cording to the similarity score of the known CDR3α to the hypothesized training data of
TULIP.
It is observed that the distributions of log-scores are highly different for different pairs of
peptide-CDR3α even though the α-chains are highly similar to the hypothesized training
data of TULIP. This could indicate that comparing log-scores across different peptide-TCR
pairs is not feasible, as a "good" log-score is defined differently within each peptide-TCR
space.
Therefore, we conducted the previously described analysis of examining the correlation
between log-scores and similarity to training data, separately for two different peptides:
GILGFVFTL and YVLDHLIVV. We computed the sequence similarity of all single-chain
CDR3 sequences associated with a particular peptide in the A0201-filtered dataset to all
42
==PAGE:49==
3.5
Filtering of Sampled Chains
CDR3 chains from paired positive TCRs obtained from the full dataset. We sampled 1000
sequences for each missing chain and calculated the same statistics. Moreover, we computed
the mean similarity for different bins of median and 0.95 quantile log-scores. The results for
GIL are shown in Figure 28.
Figure 28:
Restricted to GILGFVFTL. Upper row: Median and 0.95 quantile log-
scores for 1000 sampled chains are plotted against the known partner chain’s similarity
to TULIP’s hypothesized training data. Each data point represents a single-chain TCR
binding to GILGFVFTL in the A0201-filtered dataset. Lower row: Barplots of the mean
similarity for different bins of median and 0.95 quantile log-scores.
The separation between median and 0.95 quantile log-scores is more clear in this analysis
compared to the one that combined TCRs from all peptides. Notably, we observe a stronger
correlation, especially when CDR3β is known and CDR3α is sampled. High log-scores are
only associated with TCRs that closely resemble the training data. Bins with higher log-
scores generally exhibit a higher mean similarity to the hypothesized training data.
In contrast, for the peptide YVLDHLIVV, as shown in Figure 29, this trend is absent. The
log-scores for chains conditioned on YVL appear to be uniformly distributed, regardless of
the similarity of the known chain to the training data. There is a slight pattern in the bins
of log-scores when CDR3α is sampled, whereas no correlation exists when sampling CDR3β.
43
==PAGE:50==
3.6
Improving CDR3 Model Performance by Integrating Filtering of Sampled Chains
Figure 29:
Restricted to YVLDHLIVV. Upper row: Median and 0.95 quantile log-
scores for 1000 sampled chains are plotted against the known partner chain’s similarity
to TULIP’s hypothesized training data. Each data point represents a single-chain TCR
binding to YVLDHLIVV in the A0201-filtered dataset. Lower row: Barplots of the mean
similarity for different bins of median and 0.95 quantile log-scores.
3.6
Improving CDR3 Model Performance by Integrating Filtering
of Sampled Chains
We wanted to evaluate if our CDR3 model could enhance its predictive performance by
training it on the A0201-filtered dataset where missing TCR chains were sampled and fil-
tered using TULIP. Given that TULIP is restricted to CDR3 regions, our model only includes
peptide, CDR3α, and CDR3β as inputs. For each missing chain in the A0201-filtered dataset,
we employed TULIP to sample 100 sequences conditioned on the known chain and peptide
and computed the log-scores of each sampled chain. The chain with the highest log-score
was added to the dataset. We trained a CDR3 model on this enriched dataset using cross-
validation and evaluated it on paired TCRs only. This model will be referred to as the
Tulip-filtered model. Figure 30 illustrates the per peptide performance in terms of AUC
in comparison with the previous CDR3 models trained on the A0201-filtered dataset: the
paired model and the two mixed models implementing the masking strategies.
A significantly improved performance relative to all the other models is observed for the
44
==PAGE:51==
3.6
Improving CDR3 Model Performance by Integrating Filtering of Sampled Chains
Figure 30: Boxplots of the AUC per peptide for the baseline paired CDR3 model, the
mixed CDR3 model with input masking, the mixed CDR3 model with max-pool masking,
the CDR3 model including unfiltered sampled chains, and the CDR3 model including
filtered sampled chains. All models were trained and evaluated through cross-validation
on the A0201-filtered dataset (extended with sampled chains for the Tulip models). The
evaluations were conducted only on paired TCRs in the test sets.
Tulip-filtered model (p=0 when tested against each model based on a bootstrap test), indi-
cating that TULIP-sampled chains can add valuable information during model training.
Figure 31: Distribution of similarity scores for each sampled paired TCR in the test
sets and the paired TCRs in the training sets. Based on the A0201-filtered dataset, where
missing chains have been sampled with filtering.
Notably, the Tulip-filtered model significantly outperformed the model trained on unfiltered
sampled chains. This clearly illustrates the importance of integrating filtering into the sam-
45
==PAGE:52==
3.6
Improving CDR3 Model Performance by Integrating Filtering of Sampled Chains
pling process.
We then aimed to investigate whether sequence redundancy had been introduced by the
sampled chains between the training and test datasets.
The original full dataset, which
had been redundancy reduced, ensured that no TCRs between the test and training data
had a similarity score above 0.95. Using TCRbase, we calculated the similarity score for
each sampled paired TCR in the test data, i.e. one chain is known and one is sampled, to
its nearest neighbor in the training data of true paired TCRs. This was done separately
for positive and negative TCRs. The distribution of similarity scores, as shown in Figure
31, reveals that some sequence redundancy had indeed been introduced, according to the
threshold of 0.95.
3.6.1
Evaluation on IMMREP23 Dataset
To get a better understanding of the true predictive performance of the Tulip-filtered model,
it was evaluated using the previously unseen IMMREP23 data. This data is assumed to
contain TCRs that were not included in the training of either the TULIP or NetTCR mod-
els, thus representing an entirely novel dataset for the models. The dataset was filtered to
only include observations for HLA-A*02:01-restricted peptides, limiting it to include only 6
peptides. The performance of the Tulip-filtered model, paired CDR3 model, and the two
mixed CDR3 models employing masking strategies were all assessed on this dataset, that
only contained paired observations. The per peptide performances measured in terms of
AUC are shown in boxplots in Figure 32. Remarkably, all three models that have integrated
both single-chain and paired TCR data in training outperformed the baseline paired model
(p<0.005 for all). Specifically, the Tulip-filtered model demonstrated superior performance
compared to the baseline paired model. Moreover, it performed significantly better than the
mixed model with input masking (p=0.041). This consistent high performance of the Tulip-
filtered model compared to the other models suggests that the model actually has improved
predictive capabilities.
Figure 33 illustrates the AUC of each of the six peptides. Interestingly, the three mixed mod-
els greatly outperformed the paired model on YVLDHLIVV. This peptide has 11 positive
paired TCRs in A0201-filtered dataset, 3469 positive β-only, and 2305 positive α-only, indi-
cating that including single-chain data in model training can indeed boost performance on
peptides with few paired TCRs. All four models perform close to random on VLEETSVML.
This peptide is not represented in the A0201-filtered dataset, thus none of the models have
46
==PAGE:53==
3.6
Improving CDR3 Model Performance by Integrating Filtering of Sampled Chains
been trained on it. This indicates a lack of extrapolation power to unseen peptides, which
is a general challenge for TCR specificity prediction models [25].
Figure 32: Boxplots of the AUC per peptide for the baseline paired CDR3 model, the
mixed CDR3 model with input masking, the mixed CDR3 model with max-pool masking,
and the CDR3 model including filtered sampled chains when evaluated on the IMMREP23
A0201 dataset.
All models were trained on the A0201-filtered dataset (extended with
sampled chains for the Tulip model).
Figure 33: Performance in terms of AUC on each individual peptide in the IMMREP23
A0201 dataset by the baseline paired CDR3 model, the mixed CDR3 model with input
masking, the mixed CDR3 model with max-pool masking, and the CDR3 model including
filtered sampled chains. All models were trained on the A0201-filtered dataset (extended
with sampled chains for the Tulip model).
47
==PAGE:54==
We computed the similarity scores between each TCR in the IMMREP23 A0201 dataset
and different subsets of the TCRs in the enriched A0201 filtered dataset; the true paired
TCRs, the sampled paired TCRs, and all combined. Again, this was conducted separately
for positive and negative TCRs. The results are shown in Figure 34.
Figure 34: Boxplots of similarity scores between each TCR in the IMMREP23 A0201
dataset and different subsets of TCRs in the A0201-filtered dataset containing filtered
sampled chains. The red dashed line indicates the similarity score threshold of 0.95.
A pronounced sequence redundancy is observed between the paired TCRs in our training
data and the TCRs in the IMMREP23 A0201 dataset. Additionally, similarity scores greater
than 0.95 are observed for the sampled paired TCRs. When combining both the true paired
and the sampled paired TCRs, the distribution is identical to that of the true paired TCRs,
indicating that the most similar TCRs in the enriched dataset originate from the original
paired TCRs. This indicates that the sampled paired TCRs do not introduce additional
sequence redundancy.
4
Discussion
In this project, we have implemented and evaluated three different strategies for integrating
incomplete TCR data into training of a prediction model for TCR-pMHC specificity. The
prediction model was a Convolutional Neural Network based on the architecture of NetTCR-
2.2 [1]. Two strategies involved masking missing TCR chains within the model. The third
strategy aimed to assess the potential of sampling missing TCR chains using the transformer-
48
==PAGE:55==
4.1
Performance of Mixed Models Using Masking Strategies
based language model TULIP [2] and use the enriched dataset to improve performance of our
model. All models were evaluated solely on data with paired positive TCRs to accurately
compare their performances. In the following, we will summarize and discuss the findings.
4.1
Performance of Mixed Models Using Masking Strategies
It was expected that NetTCR could benefit from integrating single-chain TCR data along
with paired TCR data in the training process. The performance comparison between the
baseline paired CDR123 model and the mixed CDR123 models using the two masking strate-
gies revealed that neither masking approach outperformed the paired model. The reasons
for this may be attributed to specific issues within the masking methods or bad quality of
the single chain TCR data.
4.1.1
Input Masking
The input masking approach involved replacing missing input features with a sequence of X’s,
which were represented as vectors of zeroes during embedding. This was aimed to eliminate
contributions from missing chains in the network. However, as explained in Section 1.5.1,
biases are added to the weighted input of a neuron to shift the activation function. Therefore,
even when the input is zero, the bias ensures that the neuron can still output a non-zero
value, thus influencing the network with noise. This noise can cause the model to make
incorrect weight updates and may explain why this method suffers. To come around this, it
would be interesting to explore ways to control the bias term, for example by implementing
a weight constraint on the bias term, that could force the bias to be zero if the input to a
neuron is zero. This would prevent a non-zero output of a neuron associated with a missing
input.
4.1.2
Max-Pool Masking
The max-pool masking strategy extended the input masking by setting the outputs of the
global max-pooling layer to zero for missing features. This was intended to prevent back-
propagation in the convolutional layers for the missing features and thus avoid influence from
the missing chains on the weight updates. However, this method may not fully achieve its
goal. During backpropagation, the weight updates are calculated as the average of the gradi-
ents over all observations in a batch. A batch is a random selection of observations from the
entire training dataset, thus containing a mixture of observations with missing inputs and
complete inputs. Since the gradients of the complete inputs contribute to the overall weight
49
==PAGE:56==
4.2
Sampling Missing Chains with TULIP
updates, the weights connected to the missing inputs may not be frozen as intended. The
weights may still be updated, though to a lesser extent. This partial update mechanism can
introduce inconsistencies and noise in the model, potentially limiting its performance. To
address this problem, one could introduce customized batches during training of the model.
Batches could be defined to only include observations of the same type; paired TCR data,
α-only TCR data, or β-only TCR data. By separating observations based on input type,
the overall weight updates after training on a batch with single-chain data would possibly
not be affected by the observations with complete data.
4.1.3
Quality of Single-Chain TCR Data
Another aspect of the lack of performance gain when integrating single-chain TCR data could
be its quality. Single-chain TCR data has been shown to have lower quality than paired TCR
data. For instance, Montemurro et al. demonstrated with NetTCR-2.0 that models trained
on CDR3β from paired TCR data significantly outperformed models trained on single-chain
CDR3β data [54]. This suggests that single-chain TCR data may introduce noise into the
model rather than providing useful information. The reason for the difference in quality is
not fully elucidated, as they both rely on the pMHC multimer method to isolate peptide-
specific T cells, as described in Section 1.3.
However, antigen-specificity can be further
validated when applying SC sequencing, as paired TCR chains are obtained. Validating the
binding based solely on one of the TCR chains, as obtained by bulk sequencing methods,
may not be as accurate, as antigen-specificity strongly relies on both the α- and β-chain
[55]. Moreover, when doing SC sequencing, a lot of extra information is provided which can
be used to quality check the chains (and the T cell state), which is not possible in bulk
sequencing, potentially leading to more biased data.
4.2
Sampling Missing Chains with TULIP
The other approach for integrating single-chain TCR data into NetTCR training involved
generating likely sequences for missing partner chains to complete the training data. We
used TULIP to sample novel CDR3α and -β sequences conditioned on an existing CDR3α
or -β sequence and a peptide presented by HLA-A*02:01. Initially, a single sequence was
sampled for each missing chain. However, integrating these sequences into the CDR3 model
resulted in lower performance compared to both the paired CDR3 baseline model and the
mixed CDR3 models that utilized the two masking strategies, indicating that the sequences
generated by TULIP introduced more noise than useful information.
50
==PAGE:57==
4.2
Sampling Missing Chains with TULIP
4.2.1
Characteristics of Sampled Sequences
Investigation of TULIP’s sampling revealed that while it could generate a diverse set of
sequences based on a single known CDR3 and peptide, the length distribution was highly
peptide-specific.
The length distribution of the CDR3α sequences generated for a given
peptide was found to be close to independent of the input CDR3β sequence (and vice versa
for CDR3β). Moreover, these lengths did not match with the length distribution of known
CDR3α and CDR3β sequences for a given peptide. This discrepancy suggests a significant
limitation in TULIP’s modelling, as it does not fully capture the true biological variation of
CDR3 lengths.
Analysis of sequence logos for multiple sampled sequences with a fixed length, conditioned
on a specific partner CDR3 and peptide, revealed some dominant residues similar to the
residues in the actual sequence, as well as a wide range of different amino acids at each
position. This suggests that TULIP sometimes samples sequences mimicking the true chain
closely, but also frequently samples more random sequences. Moreover, computing log-scores
for each sampled chain using TULIP, revealed that it did not predict its own sampled chains
to be equally likely given the input. The varied log-scores indicates that TULIP does not
simply generate the most probable chain, but instead samples from a broader distribution.
This explains the poor performance of NetTCR when trained on sampled sequences that had
not undergone any filtering. The variability underscores that TULIP samples highly diverse
CDR3α and -β sequences even though the input to the model is the same, and highlights
the necessity of implementing a filtering technique to receive the most plausible sequences.
4.2.2
Filtering Sequences by Log Probability Scores
When we filtered to select the highest scoring chains, clear motifs emerged that resembled
the true chains, as seen in sequence logos. In contrast, the lowest scoring chains displayed
almost pure noise except at the most conserved positions. This illustrates that log-scores
are effective in filtering random sequences from sequences more similar to true sequences.
However, a similar pattern was observed when sequences were conditioned on incorrect pep-
tides. This could indicate that TULIP has encountered the specific TCR during training and
therefore can recall it. This would explain why TULIP is able to sample the exact correct
sequence no matter the peptide, and it raises questions about TULIP’s ability to generate
novel sequences rather than previously seen sequences.
51
==PAGE:58==
4.2
Sampling Missing Chains with TULIP
In the lack of access to TULIP’s training data, we investigated this by hypothesizing that
TULIP might have been trained on approximately the same set of paired positive TCRs as
present in our full dataset. By examining the correlation between log-scores and similarity
to this training data, only a weak correlation was observed, leading us to think that TULIP
is not strongly biased. However, it was doubted whether it is possible to compare log-scores
across different peptides. Given the high imbalance in paired TCRs for the peptides, it is sug-
gested that TULIP in general would assign higher scores to TCRs for peptides it recognizes
well, whereas it would assign lower scores to TCRs for peptides that were underrepresented
during training. This behavior is a common challenge in ML/DL models trained on highly
imbalanced datasets, as they often exhibit a bias towards classes that dominate the training
set [56]. Montemurro et al. have previously demonstrated in their work with the NetTCR-2.1
model [18] that it was not feasible to directly compare the performance of peptide-specific
models based on raw prediction scores. In short, they trained peptide-specific models and
evaluated their ability to correctly predict the cognate peptide of all positive TCRs in a
dataset specific to the peptide itself. They showed that the median prediction score of all
correct predictions made by a model was very different for each peptide-specific model; mod-
els trained on highly covered peptides computed higher prediction scores than models trained
on low-abundance peptides. This variation was directly attributed to the imbalanced pep-
tide coverage, thus demonstrating high peptide-specific scoring biases. Such findings suggest
that TULIP may share a similar behaviour.
When we conducted the similarity analysis on a per peptide basis instead, a more pronounced
correlation was observed for the GILGFVFTL peptide, mainly driven by high log-scores as-
signed to TCRs that were highly similar to those in the presumed training data. This trend
was not seen with the YVLDHLIVV peptide, but the difference can be explained by the fact
that YVLDHLIVV is only represented in the hypothesized training data with 11 observa-
tions, whereas the GILGFVFTL peptide has 1165 observations. This suggests further that
TULIP only assigns high log-scores to TCRs for peptides it has been extensively trained
on and is familiar with. This analysis indicates that using the highest log-scores to filter
chains might result in the selection of sequences that closely resemble the training dataset,
particularly for well-represented peptides. This potential bias is critical to be aware of as it
could lead to sequence redundancy when filling out missing chains in a dataset.
It is important to note that our analysis and interpretation is limited by assumptions about
TULIP’s training data. Access to the true training data would be essential for confirming
52
==PAGE:59==
4.3
Performance of NetTCR Using TULIP-Sampled Chains
these observations. Furthermore, most analyses were conducted for only a few peptides,
which may not be representative. To validate these findings, the analyses should be extended
to include a wider range of peptides.
4.3
Performance of NetTCR Using TULIP-Sampled Chains
We explored whether NetTCR’s performance could be enhanced by training it on a dataset
where missing chains were sampled using TULIP and subsequently filtered based on the
highest log-scores. This method led to improved performance compared to both the paired
baseline model and mixed models utilizing the masking strategies. The performance was
significantly better than the approach where filtering was not implemented in the sampling
process, confirming that effective filtering is essential for obtaining meaningful sequences. An
analysis of sequence similarity between the sampled paired TCR sequences in the training
data and the true positive paired TCRs in the test data indicated some sequence redundancy,
which might explain the observed performance boost. However, a consistent higher perfor-
mance than the other models was observed when evaluating on the external IMMREP23
dataset subsetted to HLA-A*02:01, that has not been used for training of any of the mod-
els. Particularly, a significant performance improvement was observed for YVLDHLIVV,
which has few paired TCR observations and many single-chain TCRs in the training data.
This was observed for both the Tulip-filtered model and the two masking models, indicating
that performance on low-resource peptides can be improved by integrating all available data.
While some sequence redundancy was observed between the TCRs in the training data and
the test data, it was not introduced by the sampled sequences but rather the true paired
TCRs that all the evaluated models were trained on. This suggests that the enhanced per-
formance of the Tulip-filtered model is not only resulting from data redundancy between
training and test data, but that the sampled sequences appear to provide valuable TCR
data that enhances the NetTCR training. Although the sampled chains did not show a
higher similarity to the test data compared to the true paired data, it is still possible that
the model benefited from having multiple TCRs of nearly similar sequences. Further explo-
ration is needed to confirm this. Yet, overall the results support the potential of using TULIP
for sampling missing chains to boost TCR specificity prediction in NetTCR applications.
If more time was available, it would be interesting to further explore which peptides benefited
most from integrating single-chain TCR data into the model, and to map this against the
number of annotated positive paired TCRs and single-chain TCRs available. This could
53
==PAGE:60==
4.4
Prospective Research and Applicability
provide deeper insights into the specific cases where sampling missing chains with TULIP
proves most effective.
4.4
Prospective Research and Applicability
The findings from this project highlight the challenges of effectively integrating both single-
chain and paired TCR data into a prediction model for TCR-pMHC specificities. While the
proposed masking strategies of missing chains did not enhance model performance, using
TULIP to sample sequences for missing chains demonstrated potential. Nevertheless, im-
portant limitations were identified and suggest that TULIP may lack generalizability beyond
its training data. This should be deeper investigated to be validated and the analyses should
be conducted on a wider range of peptides. However, it is evident that employing sampling
and subsequent filtering should be performed with caution to mitigate biases and to ensure
the sequences derived are meaningful.
If more time was available, it would be interesting to explore how to integrate a sequence sim-
ilarity measure to NetTCR’s training data into the filtering process. While filtering based
on the highest log-probability score can be effective, it might select sequences previously
encountered during training or sequences that are highly similar. Therefore, measuring sim-
ilarity to known training data could prevent introducing redundant sequences. Additionally,
investigating the log-score space for each peptide could help establish a threshold for when
a sampled sequence is considered reliable enough based on TULIP’s computed conditional
probabilities. This approach would ensure that only sequences that TULIP predicts to be
sufficiently likely given a peptide are included, while also avoiding excessively high log-scores
that could indicate similarity to TULIP’s training data.
It is crucial to acknowledge that the proposed NetTCR models in this project only include
CDR3 and are restricted to peptides presented by HLA-A*02:01, due to TULIP’s constraints.
A recent benchmark has shown that integrating CDR1 and CDR2 in model training leads
to improved classification compared to CDR3 models [24]. Moreover, the model’s current
restriction to HLA-A*02:01 greatly limits its utility. If additional time and resources were
available, retraining the TULIP model from scratch would be interesting to obtain a pre-
trained model, that can sample and predict interactions across all alleles, enhancing its
general applicability. Currently, it serves as a proof of concept, but TULIP must be expanded
to include all alleles, and preferably all six CDR sequences, to be truly effective in sampling
missing chains for integration of single-chain TCR data in NetTCR training.
54
==PAGE:61==
5
Concluding Remarks
In this project, we have implemented and evaluated three different strategies for improving
predictions of TCR-pMHC interactions by integrating both single-chain and paired TCR data
into a CNN model based on the NetTCR-2.2 architecture. Two strategies involved masking
missing inputs to handle incomplete data effectively, and one employed the transformer-
based model TULIP to generate plausible sequences for the missing chains, aiming to enrich
the training dataset with all available TCR specificity data.
Our results showed that the masking strategies did not lead to performance improvements.
These strategies either failed to completely neutralized the influence from missing chains or
introduced noise into the model due to the lower quality of public single-chain TCR data.
On the other hand, the use of TULIP to sample missing chains presented both promises
and challenges. TULIP samples sequences from a distribution, where the length is peptide-
specific and not all sampled sequences are likely to be observed given a known chain and
peptide. Effective filtering is highly necessary to extract only the meaningful sequences. We
found that filtering based on highest log-score seems to be effective, but is likely to result
in sequences that TULIP has previously encountered during training, potentially introduc-
ing sequence redundancy when filling out missing chains with sampled sequences. However,
the model trained on filtered TULIP-sampled chains performed superior on the external
IMMREP23 dataset compared to the baseline model trained solely on paired TCR data.
This performance enhancement was suggested not to be attributed to data leakage, as the
sampled chains did not introduce more similarity to the test data than was already present.
This supports the efficacy of TULIP-sampled sequences in genuinely improving the NetTCR
model’s learning process.
Despite these promising results, the current models are restricted to peptides presented by
HLA-A*02:01 and only includes the CDR3 regions of the TCR, limiting its general appli-
cability. For this approach to be compared effectively to state-of-the-art TCR specificity
models, TULIP needs to be expanded to cover all alleles and, ideally, all CDR regions.
Nonetheless, the results obtained this far have validated the concept and offer a promising
path forward for leveraging all available TCR data regardless of completeness.
55
==PAGE:62==
References
References
[1]
M. F. Jensen and M. Nielsen, “NetTCR 2.2 - Improved TCR specificity predictions
by combining pan- and peptide-specific training strategies, loss-scaling and integration
of sequence similarity,” eLife, vol. 12, 2024. doi: 10.7554/ELIFE.93934.2. [Online].
Available: https://elifesciences.org/reviewed-preprints/93934.
[2]
B. Meynard-Piganeau, C. Feinauer, M. Weigt, A. M. Walczak, and T. Mora, “TULIP
â a Transformer based Unsupervised Language model for Interacting Peptides and T-
cell receptors that generalizes to unseen epitopes,” 2023. doi: 10.1101/2023.07.19.
549669. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.07.19.549669.
[3]
M. Wieczorek, E. T. Abualrous, J. Sticht, et al., “Major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I and MHC class II proteins: Conformational plasticity in antigen pre-
sentation,” Frontiers in Immunology, vol. 8, no. MAR, p. 248 429, Mar. 2017, issn:
16643224. doi: 10 . 3389 / FIMMU . 2017 . 00292 / BIBTEX. [Online]. Available: www .
frontiersin.org.
[4]
E. W. Hewitt, “The MHC class I antigen presentation pathway: strategies for viral
immune evasion,” Immunology, vol. 110, no. 2, p. 163, Oct. 2003, issn: 00192805.
doi: 10.1046/J.1365-2567.2003.01738.X. [Online]. Available: /pmc/articles/
PMC1783040/%20/pmc/articles/PMC1783040/?report=abstract%20https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1783040/.
[5]
D. Hudson, R. A. Fernandes, M. Basham, G. Ogg, and H. Koohy, “Can we predict T
cell specificity with digital biology and machine learning?” Nature Reviews Immunology
2023 23:8, vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 511–521, Feb. 2023, issn: 1474-1741. doi: 10.1038/
s41577-023-00835-3. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41577-023-00835-3.
[6]
D. Feng, C. J. Bond, L. K. Ely, J. Maynard, and K. C. Garcia, “Structural evidence
for a germline-encoded T cell receptorâmajor histocompatibility complex interaction
’codon’,” Nature Immunology 2007 8:9, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 975–983, Aug. 2007, issn:
1529-2916. doi: 10.1038/ni1502. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/
articles/ni1502.
[7]
T. Dupic, Q. Marcou, A. M. Walczak, and T. Mora, “Genesis of the αβ T-cell receptor,”
PLOS Computational Biology, vol. 15, no. 3, e1006874, Mar. 2019, issn: 1553-7358.
doi: 10.1371/JOURNAL.PCBI.1006874. [Online]. Available: https://journals.plos.
org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006874.
==PAGE:63==
References
[8]
J. Rossjohn, S. Gras, J. J. Miles, S. J. Turner, D. I. Godfrey, and J. McCluskey, “T
cell antigen receptor recognition of antigen-presenting molecules,” Annual Review of
Immunology, vol. 33, no. Volume 33, 2015, pp. 169–200, Mar. 2015, issn: 15453278.
doi: 10.1146/ANNUREV- IMMUNOL- 032414- 112334/1. [Online]. Available: https:
/ / www . annualreviews . org / content / journals / 10 . 1146 / annurev - immunol -
032414-112334.
[9]
N. L. La Gruta, S. Gras, S. R. Daley, P. G. Thomas, and J. Rossjohn, “Understanding
the drivers of MHC restriction of T cell receptors,” Nature Reviews Immunology 2018
18:7, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 467–478, Apr. 2018, issn: 1474-1741. doi: 10.1038/s41577-
018-0007-5. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41577-018-
0007-5.
[10]
R. Vita, S. Mahajan, J. A. Overton, et al., “The Immune Epitope Database (IEDB):
2018 update,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 47, no. D1, pp. D339–D343, 2019, issn:
1362-4962. doi: 10.1093/NAR/GKY1006. [Online]. Available: https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/30357391/.
[11]
M. Shugay, D. V. Bagaev, I. V. Zvyagin, et al., “VDJdb: a curated database of T-cell
receptor sequences with known antigen specificity,” Nucleic acids research, vol. 46,
no. D1, pp. D419–D427, Jan. 2018, issn: 1362-4962. doi: 10 . 1093 / NAR / GKX760.
[Online]. Available: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28977646/.
[12]
N. Tickotsky, T. Sagiv, J. Prilusky, E. Shifrut, and N. Friedman, “McPAS-TCR: a
manually curated catalogue of pathology-associated T cell receptor sequences,” Bioin-
formatics (Oxford, England), vol. 33, no. 18, pp. 2924–2929, Sep. 2017, issn: 1367-4811.
doi: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTX286. [Online]. Available: https://pubmed.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/28481982/.
[13]
A. K. Bentzen, A. M. Marquard, R. Lyngaa, et al., “Large-scale detection of antigen-
specific T cells using peptide-MHC-I multimers labeled with DNA barcodes,” Nature
Biotechnology 2016 34:10, vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 1037–1045, Aug. 2016, issn: 1546-1696.
doi: 10.1038/nbt.3662. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/
nbt.3662.
[14]
F. Sanromán, K. Joshi, L. Au, B. Chain, and S. Turajlic, “TCR sequencing: applications
in immuno-oncology research,” Immuno-Oncology and Technology, vol. 17, p. 100 373,
Mar. 2023, issn: 25900188. doi: 10.1016/J.IOTECH.2023.100373. [Online]. Available:
/pmc/articles/PMC9996383/%20/pmc/articles/PMC9996383/?report=abstract%
20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9996383/.
==PAGE:64==
References
[15]
J. A. Pai and A. T. Satpathy, “High-throughput and single-cell T cell receptor se-
quencing technologies,” Nature Methods, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 881–892, Aug. 2021, issn:
15487105. doi: 10.1038/S41592-021-01201-8. [Online]. Available: https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/353364323_High-throughput_and_single-cell_
T_cell_receptor_sequencing_technologies.
[16]
K. Mayer-Blackwell, S. Schattgen, L. Cohen-Lavi, et al., “Tcr meta-clonotypes for
biomarker discovery with tcrdist3 enabled identification of public, hla-restricted clus-
ters of sars-cov-2 tcrs,” eLife, vol. 10, Nov. 2021, issn: 2050084X. doi: 10.7554/
ELIFE.68605.
[17]
H. Huang, C. Wang, F. Rubelt, T. J. Scriba, and M. M. Davis, “Analyzing the My-
cobacterium tuberculosis immune response by T-cell receptor clustering with GLIPH2
and genome-wide antigen screening,” Nature Biotechnology 2020 38:10, vol. 38, no. 10,
pp. 1194–1202, Apr. 2020, issn: 1546-1696. doi: 10.1038/s41587- 020- 0505- 4.
[Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/articles/s41587-020-0505-4.
[18]
A. Montemurro, L. Eyrich Jessen, M. Nielsen, et al., “NetTCR-2.1: Lessons and guid-
ance on how to develop models for TCR specificity predictions OPEN ACCESS EDITED
BY,” Front. Immunol, vol. 13, p. 1 055 151, 2022. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1055151.
[Online]. Available: https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/service..
[19]
Y. Tong, J. Wang, T. Zheng, et al., “SETE: Sequence-based Ensemble learning ap-
proach for TCR Epitope binding prediction,” Computational Biology and Chemistry,
vol. 87, p. 107 281, Aug. 2020, issn: 1476-9271. doi: 10.1016/J.COMPBIOLCHEM.2020.
107281.
[20]
S. Gielis, P. Moris, W. Bittremieux, et al., “Detection of Enriched T Cell Epitope
Specificity in Full T Cell Receptor Sequence Repertoires,” Frontiers in Immunology,
vol. 10, p. 489 238, Nov. 2019, issn: 16643224. doi: 10.3389/FIMMU.2019.02820/
BIBTEX. [Online]. Available: www.frontiersin.org.
[21]
P. Moris, J. De Pauw, A. Postovskaya, et al., “Current challenges for unseen-epitope
TCR interaction prediction and a new perspective derived from image classification,”
Briefings in Bioinformatics, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1–12, Jul. 2021, issn: 14774054. doi:
10.1093/BIB/BBAA318. [Online]. Available: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/bib/
bbaa318.
==PAGE:65==
References
[22]
J. W. Sidhom, H. B. Larman, D. M. Pardoll, and A. S. Baras, “DeepTCR is a deep
learning framework for revealing sequence concepts within T-cell repertoires,” Nature
Communications 2021 12:1, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Mar. 2021, issn: 2041-1723. doi:
10.1038/s41467-021-21879-w. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41467-021-21879-w.
[23]
E. Lanzarotti, P. Marcatili, and M. Nielsen, “T-cell receptor cognate target prediction
based on paired α and β chain sequence and structural CDR loop similarities,” Fron-
tiers in Immunology, vol. 10, no. AUG, p. 462 645, Aug. 2019, issn: 16643224. doi:
10.3389/FIMMU.2019.02080/BIBTEX. [Online]. Available: www.frontiersin.org.
[24]
P. Meysman, J. Barton, B. Bravi, et al., “Benchmarking solutions to the T-cell receptor
epitope prediction problem: IMMREP22 workshop report,” ImmunoInformatics, vol. 9,
p. 100 024, Mar. 2023, issn: 2667-1190. doi: 10.1016/J.IMMUNO.2023.100024.
[25]
F. Grazioli, A. Mösch, P. Machart, et al., “On TCR binding predictors failing to gen-
eralize to unseen peptides,” Frontiers in Immunology, vol. 13, p. 1 014 256, Oct. 2022,
issn: 16643224. doi: 10.3389/FIMMU.2022.1014256/BIBTEX. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/mnielLab/NetTCR-2.0/tree/main/data..
[26]
T. Sanderson, M. L. Bileschi, D. Belanger, and L. J. Colwell, “ProteInfer, deep neural
networks for protein functional inference,” eLife, vol. 12, Feb. 2023, issn: 2050084X.
doi: 10.7554/ELIFE.80942.
[27]
W. Torng and R. B. Altman, “3D deep convolutional neural networks for amino acid
environment similarity analysis,” BMC Bioinformatics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1–23, Jun.
2017, issn: 14712105. doi: 10.1186/S12859- 017- 1702- 0/FIGURES/8. [Online].
Available: https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/
s12859-017-1702-0.
[28]
P. Sarang, “Artificial Neural Networks,” pp. 261–287, 2023, issn: 2520-1301. doi: 10.
1007/978-3-031-02363-7{\_}17. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.
com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-02363-7_17.
[29]
V. Dumoulin, F. Visin, and G. E. P. Box, “A guide to convolution arithmetic for deep
learning,” 2018. [Online]. Available: http://ethanschoonover.com/solarized.
[30]
H. Kim and Y. S. Jeong, “Sentiment Classification Using Convolutional Neural Net-
works,” Applied Sciences 2019, Vol. 9, Page 2347, vol. 9, no. 11, p. 2347, Jun. 2019,
issn: 2076-3417. doi: 10.3390/APP9112347. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.
com/2076-3417/9/11/2347/htm%20https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/9/11/2347.
==PAGE:66==
References
[31]
3Blue1Brown - Backpropagation calculus. [Online]. Available: https://www.3blue1brown.
com/lessons/backpropagation-calculus.
[32]
A. Vaswani, G. Brain, N. Shazeer, et al., “Attention is All you Need,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[33]
B. Meynard-Piganeau, C. Fabbri, M. Weigt, A. Pagnani, and C. Feinauer, “Generating
interacting protein sequences using domain-to-domain translation,” Bioinformatics,
vol. 39, no. 7, Jul. 2023, issn: 13674811. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btad401.
[34]
Z. Wu, K. K. Yang, M. J. Liszka, et al., “Signal Peptides Generated by Attention-Based
Neural Networks,” ACS Synthetic Biology, vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 2154–2161, Aug. 2020,
issn: 21615063. doi: 10.1021/ACSSYNBIO.0C00219/SUPPL{\_}FILE/SB0C00219{\_
}LIVESLIDES.MP4. [Online]. Available: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/
acssynbio.0c00219.
[35]
D. M. W. Powers and Ailab, “Evaluation: from precision, recall and F-measure to ROC,
informedness, markedness and correlation,” Oct. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://
arxiv.org/abs/2010.16061v1.
[36]
S. Arlot and A. Celisse, “A survey of cross-validation procedures for model selec-
tion,” https://doi.org/10.1214/09-SS054, vol. 4, no. none, pp. 40–79, Jan. 2010, issn:
1935-7516. doi: 10.1214/09-SS054. [Online]. Available: https://projecteuclid.
org / journals / statistics - surveys / volume - 4 / issue - none / A - survey - of -
cross - validation - procedures - for - model - selection / 10 . 1214 / 09 - SS054 .
full%20https://projecteuclid.org/journals/statistics-surveys/volume-
4 / issue - none / A - survey - of - cross - validation - procedures - for - model -
selection/10.1214/09-SS054.short.
[37]
Keras: Deep Learning for humans. [Online]. Available: https://keras.io/.
[38]
A New Way of Exploring Immunity - Linking Highly Multiplexed Antigen Recognition to
Immune Repertoire and Phenotype | Technology Networks. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.technologynetworks.com/immunology/application-notes/a-new-way-
of-exploring-immunity-linking-highly-multiplexed-antigen-recognition-
to-immune-repertoire-332554.
[39]
H. R. Povlsen, A. K. Bentzen, M. Kadivar, L. E. Jessen, S. R. Hadrup, and M. Nielsen,
“Improved T cell receptor antigen pairing through data-driven filtering of sequencing
information from single cells,” eLife, vol. 12, 2023, issn: 2050084X. doi: 10.7554/
ELIFE.81810.
==PAGE:67==
References
[40]
J. M. Heather, M. J. Spindler, M. H. Alonso, et al., “Stitchr: stitching coding TCR
nucleotide sequences from V/J/CDR3 information,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 50,
no. 12, e68–e68, Jul. 2022, issn: 0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/NAR/GKAC190. [Online].
Available: https://dx.doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkac190.
[41]
J. Dunbar and C. M. Deane, “ANARCI: antigen receptor numbering and receptor
classification,” Bioinformatics, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 298–300, Jan. 2016, issn: 1367-4803.
doi: 10.1093/BIOINFORMATICS/BTV552. [Online]. Available: https://dx.doi.org/
10.1093/bioinformatics/btv552.
[42]
U. Hobohm, M. Scharf, R. Schneider, and C. Sander, “Selection of representative pro-
tein data sets,” Protein science : a publication of the Protein Society, vol. 1, no. 3,
pp. 409–417, 1992, issn: 0961-8368. doi: 10.1002/PRO.5560010313. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1304348/.
[43]
W.-J. Shen, H.-S. Wong, Q.-W. Xiao, X. Guo, and S. Smale, “Towards a Mathematical
Foundation of Immunology and Amino Acid Chains *,” 2012.
[44]
IMMREP23: TCR Specificity Prediction Challenge | Kaggle. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.kaggle.com/competitions/tcr- specificity- prediction- challenge/
overview.
[45]
S. Henikoff and J. G. Henikoff, “Amino acid substitution matrices from protein blocks.,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America,
vol. 89, no. 22, p. 10 915, Nov. 1992, issn: 00278424. doi: 10.1073/PNAS.89.22.
10915. [Online]. Available: /pmc/articles/PMC50453/?report=abstract%20https:
//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC50453/.
[46]
M. Nielsen, C. Lundegaard, P. Worning, et al., “Reliable prediction of T-cell epitopes
using neural networks with novel sequence representations,” Protein Science : A Pub-
lication of the Protein Society, vol. 12, no. 5, p. 1007, May 2003, issn: 0961-8368. doi:
10.1110/PS.0239403. [Online]. Available: /pmc/articles/PMC2323871/%20/pmc/
articles/PMC2323871/?report=abstract%20https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC2323871/.
[47]
D. P. Kingma and J. L. Ba, “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,” 3rd
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2015 - Conference Track
Proceedings, Dec. 2014. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980v9.
==PAGE:68==
References
[48]
How to compute p-values for a bootstrap distribution - The DO Loop. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://blogs.sas.com/content/iml/2011/11/02/how-to-compute-p-
values-for-a-bootstrap-distribution.html.
[49]
barthelemymp/TULIP-TCR. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/barthelemymp/
TULIP-TCR.
[50]
M. Christen, F. Thomsen, and M. Nielsen, “Seq2Logo: a method for construction and
visualization of amino acid binding motifs and sequence profiles including sequence
weighting, pseudo counts and two-sided representation of amino acid enrichment and
depletion,” doi: 10.1093/nar/gks469. [Online]. Available: http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/
biotools/Seq2Logo.
[51]
T. D. Schneider and R. M. Stephens, “Sequence logos: a new way to display consensus
sequences,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 18, no. 20, pp. 6097–6100, Oct. 1990, issn:
0305-1048. doi: 10.1093/NAR/18.20.6097. [Online]. Available: https://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/nar/18.20.6097.
[52]
TCRbase 1.0 - DTU Health Tech - Bioinformatic Services. [Online]. Available: https:
//services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/TCRbase-1.0/.
[53]
K. Yu, J. Shi, D. Lu, and Q. Yang, “Comparative analysis of CDR3 regions in paired
human αβ CD8 T cells,” FEBS Open Bio, vol. 9, no. 8, p. 1450, Aug. 2019, issn:
22115463. doi: 10.1002/2211- 5463.12690. [Online]. Available: /pmc/articles/
PMC6668380/%20/pmc/articles/PMC6668380/?report=abstract%20https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6668380/.
[54]
A. Montemurro, V. Schuster, H. R. Povlsen, et al., “NetTCR-2.0 enables accurate pre-
diction of TCR-peptide binding by using paired TCRα and β sequence data,” Com-
munications Biology 2021 4:1, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Sep. 2021, issn: 2399-3642. doi:
10.1038/s42003-021-02610-3. [Online]. Available: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s42003-021-02610-3.
[55]
J. A. Carter, J. B. Preall, K. Grigaityte, et al., “Single T Cell Sequencing Demonstrates
the Functional Role of αβ TCR Pairing in Cell Lineage and Antigen Specificity,”
Frontiers in Immunology, vol. 10, p. 464 451, Jul. 2019, issn: 16643224. doi: 10.3389/
FIMMU.2019.01516/BIBTEX. [Online]. Available: www.frontiersin.org.
[56]
J. M. Johnson and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “Survey on deep learning with class imbalance,”
Journal of Big Data, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1–54, Dec. 2019, issn: 21961115. doi: 10.1186/
==PAGE:69==
References
S40537-019-0192-5/TABLES/18. [Online]. Available: https://journalofbigdata.
springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s40537-019-0192-5.
