==PAGE:1==
Technical university of Denmark
Masters Thesis
Impedance Based Diagnostics of Redox
Flow Battery Electrodes
Author:
Mathias Houlberg
Student number:
s164578
June 30, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Contents
1
Abstract
1
2
Introduction
2
3
Theory
4
3.1
Redox Flow Batteries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3.2
Cyclic Voltammetry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3.3
Rotating Disk Electrode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.4
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.5
Distribution of Relaxation Times
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.6
Distribution of Diffusion Times
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Methods
12
4.1
Rotating Disk Electrode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.2
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.3
Symmetric Cell Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4
Electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.4.1
Software . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
5
Results
15
5.1
Selection of optimal experimental parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.2
RDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
5.3
Electrode comparisons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.4
DDT Model Validation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6
Discussion
36
6.1
RDE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.2
Electrodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
6.3
DRT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.4
DDT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.5
Future Perspectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
1
==PAGE:3==
7
Conclusion
39
A Appendix: LinKK for Cloth electrode
41
B Appendix: LinKK for Paper electrode
42
==PAGE:4==
1
Abstract
This thesis investigated novel methods to characterize diffusion processes of porous electrodes
in a Iron-Iron-redox flow battery. Three different carbon electrodes were investigated, carbon-
felt, carbon-paper and carbon-cloth. Two methods were employed, rotating disk electrode,
RDE, and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, EIS, and various algorithms were employed
to characterize the diffusion processes, including Distribution of Relaxation Times (DRT) and
Distribution of Diffusion Times (DDT).
Surprisingly, the results from RDE were inconclusive even after lengthy optimizations.
Using EIS, it was clear that both electrode type and flow velocity influenced the results. DRT
worked well, but this is not surprising based on the maturity of the technique. DDT was not
able to fit the experimental data, which suggests that the particular implementation of the
DDT algorithm requires further optimization.
1
==PAGE:5==
2
Introduction
The global trend towards renewable energy sources has been driven by the urgent need to
address climate change, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and ensure a sustainable energy
future. Renewable energy technologies, such as solar and wind power, have seen remarkable
growth over the past decade.
These technologies offer the promise of abundant and clean
energy, but they also pose significant challenges due to their intermittent and variable nature.
To effectively integrate renewable energy into the grid, advanced energy storage systems are
essential to balance supply and demand, stabilize the grid, and ensure a reliable energy supply
[1].
Various energy storage technologies have been developed, each with its unique advantages
and limitations. These include lithium-ion batteries, lead-acid batteries, flywheel energy stor-
age, compressed air energy storage, and supercapacitors. Among these, lithium-ion batteries
have dominated the market due to their high energy density and efficiency. However, their
application is often limited by safety concerns, high costs, and the finite availability of raw
materials. [1] Redox Flow Batteries (RFBs) have emerged as a promising alternative to con-
ventional energy storage solutions, particularly for large-scale applications. Unlike traditional
batteries, RFBs store energy in liquid electrolytes contained in external tanks, which are circu-
lated through an electrochemical cell during charging and discharging processes. This unique
design offers several advantages, including flexible scalability, long cycle life, and enhanced
safety. Additionally, the use of liquid electrolytes reduces the risk of thermal runaway and
enhances the overall safety of the system.
Despite their potential, the development and commercialization of RFB technology face
several challenges.
Research and development efforts are focused on improving the energy
density, reducing the costs of materials, and enhancing the overall efficiency and reliability of
RFB systems [2].
A particular challenge is the limited availability of high-performance electrolyte materials.
While vanadium-based RFBs are currently the most commercially advanced, the high cost and
supply constraints of vanadium have prompted the exploration of alternative materials, such
as organic compounds, zinc-bromine, and iron-chromium systems. Each of these alternatives
presents its own set of challenges in terms of stability, solubility, and overall system performance.
2
==PAGE:6==
This thesis aims to investigate the value of using Distribution of Diffusion times (DDT) as
a method for characterizing diffusion processes in porous electrodes, with the goal of enhancing
the performance and viability of Redox Flow Battery technology.
3
==PAGE:7==
3
Theory
3.1
Redox Flow Batteries
Figure 1: Generalized depiction of the components that constitute a RFB from [3]
Redox Flow Batteries (RFBs) are electrochemical energy storage devices that store energy in
liquid electrolytes. They differ from traditional batteries by using a pump to flow electrolyte
by the electrodes. The purpose of this comes from the utilization of the liquid electrolytes
as the energy storing component, without direct reaction with the electrode material. This
allows the capacity of the battery to be limited by the amount of electrolyte available, without
consideration for the size of the electrode. In traditional batteries, the size of the electrode
determines both the power of the battery, through the available reaction surface area, and the
capacity through the electrode materials role in storing charge. In flow batteries, power and
capacity are de-coupled [2]. Power is similarly determined by the surface area of the electrodes,
but capacity is determined by volume of electrolyte. This allows for an intrinsically higher
ability to tailor the battery design based on use case.
The main components of a RFB consists of a stack cells, the positive electrolyte (posolyte),
the negative electrolyte (negolyte), and their respective storage tank, as well as external equip-
ment such as pumps, tubing, and wiring. The cells consists of two half-cells, separated by an
ion-exchange membrane. Each half-cell has an electrode, a flow field and a current collector.
4
==PAGE:8==
The flow field is the way the flow of electrolyte is controlled when interacting with the electrode.
A variety of flow fields have been studied [4], but they can largely be separated into two cat-
egories. Flow-through flow fields, where the electrolyte is forced through a necessarily porous
electrode, and Flow-by flow fields, where electrolyte is passed by the surface of the electrode.
The purpose of the membrane is to prevent electrolyte mixing, while allowing for ion transfer
to balance charge.
A wide number of redox couples has been investigated for use as electrolyte such as
Vanadium-Vanadium and Iron-Iron. By far the most mature technology is Vanadium-Vanadium
systems, which have excellent properties, but are hindered by their cost of materials [1].
This project focuses on Iron-Iron redox flow batteries (IRFB). Despite being hindered by
issues such a capacity limitations from electrode plating, and hydrogen evolution, it remains
attractive due to low cost of materials [5] The electrolytes are aqueous solutions containing iron
salts, commonly chlorides or sulfates. The posolyte redox couple is Fe2+/Fe3+ and negolyte is
Fe2+/Fe0. The half cell, and overall reactions during discharge are shown in Equation 1-3, with
standard potentials given vs. Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE)
2Fe2+ →Fe3+ + 2e−
E0 = +0.77V
(1)
Fe2+ + 2e−→Fe0
E0 = −0.44V
(2)
3Fe2+ →2Fe3+ + Fe0
∆E0 = 1.21V
(3)
A number of characteristics are desirable regarding the choice of electrode, such as, high
conductivity, chemical stability and large active surface area. Carbon based electrodes fulfill
many of the desired qualities, and are widely used for RFBs in general. Common variations
of carbon electrodes are carbon- felt, cloth and paper. The morphology of these electrodes
were investigated by Baichen [3] which showed very distinct and significant difference in the
microstructure of these electrode types. The three types are shown alongside their SEM in
Figure 2. It could be postulated, that these differences would have a non-trivial impact on
the electrochemistry in RFBs, especially regarding diffusion processes, since both the span of
possible distances, and the average distance, any species would have to a reaction site, could
vary greatly between the morphologies.
5
==PAGE:9==
Figure 2: Carbon felt (left), carbon paper(middle), and carbon cloth (right), alongside SEM
images below. [3]
3.2
Cyclic Voltammetry
Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) is a widely used electrochemical technique for studying electrochem-
ical systems. In CV, the potential of the working electrode is linearly swept back and forth
between two set values at a scan rate υ. This results in a current response which is measured.
The typical representation is cyclic voltammogram plotting current vs. potential. If there is
a redox active species present, peaks will show on the forward scan (increasing potential) and
the backwards scan (decreasing potential). A number of informations can be gathered from the
voltammogram, based on the peak potentials and currents. Reversibility of the redox reactions
can be determined by varying the applied scan rate. Reversibility can then be determined based
on the following criteria:
• ∆Ep =
59mV
z
, where ∆Ep is the difference in peak potentials, and z is the number of
electrons transferred.
• The peak potentials must not vary at altering scan rates.
• The peak currents must vary linearly vs. υ1/2
If reversibility is established, the formal potential of the reaction can be determined as the
6
==PAGE:10==
mean of the peak potentials. Additionally the Randles-Sevcik equation, shown in Equation
4, can determine if the reacting species are freely diffusing, and if so determine the diffusion
coefficients, given some other easier established parameters.
iL = 0.4463zFAC∞
zFυD
RT
1/2
(4)
where F is the Faraday constant, A is the active surface area (depending on experiment
this may not differ from geometric area by much), D is the diffusion coefficient of the active
species, R is the gas constant and T is temperature.
3.3
Rotating Disk Electrode
Rotating Disk Electrode (RDE) experiments are electrochemical experiments used to study
reaction kinetics and mass transport properties It constitutes the use of a either planar disk, or
semi-spherical working electrode that is rotated about its vertical axis. The planar variant, is
the most common, and the one used in this project. The experimental method utilizes the fluid
dynamical effect caused by the rotation. As the electrode spins, fluid is pushed outwards from
the center of the electrode. This simultaneously sucks in fluid from the bulk, perpendicularly
to the electrode plane. Importantly, a thin boundary layer of laminar flow is created over the
electrode surface. In this layer, mass-transport is only governed by diffusion, with the diffusion
length determined by the thickness of the boundary layer. Importantly, the thickness of the
boundary layer is directly controlled by the angular rotation of the electrode, given by Equation
5.
δ = 1.612D1/3υ1/6ω−1/2
(5)
From Fick’s 2nd law, the diffusion length is related to the diffusivity through the so called
characteristic time of diffusion, or the diffusion time constant as given by Equation 6:
τD = δ2
D
(6)
The mass-transport controlled limiting current for a RDE is given by the Levich equation
7
==PAGE:11==
7:
iL = 0.62zFD2/3ω1/2υ−1/6C∞
(7)
Notably from this, the limiting current is linearly associated with the square root of the
rotation speed. As such, measuring the limiting current at a range of rotation speeds, and
plotting these vs. the square root of the rotation speed, will yield a straight line, from which
the slope can be used to determine the diffusivity. If it is infeasible to achieve fully limited
current, the Kouteck´y-Levich equation can be used instead, shown in Equation 8
1
iL
= 1
ik
+
υ1/6
0.62zFD2/3ω1/2C∞
(8)
where ik is the kinetic current. If only the diffusion is of interest, the approach is practically
the same as without kinetics. The linear relation is now between the inverse current, and inverse
square root of rotation, with the kinetic term simply providing an intercept.
3.4
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) is a powerful technique employed to probe the
electrochemical properties of a wide range of electrochemical systems [6]?. By applying a small
sinusoidal potential or current perturbation to an electrochemical system and measuring the
the amplitude and phase of the resulting response. Impedance, denoted Z is the analog of
resistance for complex potential and current, and is similarly given as the ration between them.
Denoting them in their polar form gives equation 9.
Z = |E|j(ωt+ϕE)
|I|j(ωt+ϕI) = |Z|j(ϕE−ϕI)
(9)
where j is the imaginary unit, and ω is the angular frequency, related to frequency as ω = 2πf.
Importantly, this relation only holds for systems with linear relation between perturbation and
response. This is generally not true for electrochemical systems, but there is pseudo-linearity
at low excitation and responses, hence the use of small potentials. The impedance can also be
represented by its Cartesian form as seen in 10
Z = Z′ + jZ′′
(10)
8
==PAGE:12==
Here, Z′(ω) denotes the real part (resistance), while Z′′(ω) denotes the imaginary part (reac-
tance).
EIS data are usually represented through Nyquist and Bode plots, each providing distinct
insights. The Nyquist plot, which will be used primarily in this project, displaying Z′′(ω) against
Z′(ω), is particularly useful for visualizing resistive and capacitive components, as information
about these can be gleamed from the shape and size of the resulting features. The drawback
of Nyquist plots, is the lack of immediate connection between a data point and the frequency
that produced it. This is alleviated in a Bode plot, plotting the magnitude and phase shift
vs frequency on a common x-axis. Unfortunately is more difficult to see how the separated
magnitude and phase, relate to resistive and reactive behavior in the Bode plot.
One method of quantifying EIS measurements, is with equivalent circuit models (ECM).
With this method, the investigated system is considered to consist of specific electrical elements
To interpret EIS data, researchers often model the electrochemical system using equivalent
circuit models (ECM). These circuits consist of various elements such as resistors, capacitors,
inductors, and more complex entities like constant phase elements (CPE). A commonly utilized
equivalent circuit in EIS analysis is the Randles circuit, with a variation shown in 3.
Figure 3: Schematic of Randles circuit, with Warburg Short
The components here represent the resistance from solution(Rs), capacitance from the
double-layer on reaction surface (Cdl), a resistance from charge transfer (Rct), and a Warburg
short element to represent diffusion (Ws). Through complex nonlinear least squares fitting,
the parameters of these elements can be determined and related back to description of the
electrochemistry. The Warburg Short element is used for systems with finite diffusion lengths,
and transmissive boundaries [7].
9
==PAGE:13==
Despite its powerful capabilities, EIS does have limitations. Model ambiguity can arise
when multiple equivalent circuits fit the data equally well, complicating interpretation. It also
implies that you know the appropriate ECM to apply to your system, which might not be the
case. Perhaps even worse, application of what is perceived to be a correct model, might give
what seems like reasonable results, but is actually a poor representation of reality [8].
3.5
Distribution of Relaxation Times
Distribution of Relaxation Times (DRT) is a powerful method used to analyze impedance data
in electrochemical systems, especially when traditional equivalent circuit modeling falls short.
Unlike equivalent circuit models, which rely on predefined components to fit impedance spectra,
DRT decomposes the impedance response into a distribution of relaxation times. This provides
a more detailed and model-independent analysis of the electrochemical processes occurring
within the system.
DRT starts by transforming the impedance data from the frequency domain into the time
domain. This is achieved through a mathematical inversion process that converts the complex
impedance Z(ω) into a distribution of relaxation times g(τ), where τ is the relaxation time.
The relationship between the impedance and the relaxation time distribution is given by the
integral equation 11:
Z(ω) = R∞+
Z ∞
0
g(τ)
1 + jωτ dτ
(11)
Here, R∞represents the high-frequency resistance, and g(τ) is the distribution function
that reveals how different processes contribute to the overall impedance at various relaxation
times [9].
The mathematical inversion required for DRT can be challenging due to the ill-posed nature
of the problem, meaning that small errors in the impedance data can lead to significant errors
in the distribution function. To address this, various regularization techniques are employed to
stabilize the inversion and obtain a physically meaningful distribution. Common regularization
methods include Tikhonov regularization and maximum entropy regularization (MAP), which
impose additional constraints to ensure smooth and interpretable solutions [10].
Once the distribution of relaxation times is obtained, it can be analyzed to extract in-
formation about the electrochemical system. Peaks in the distribution correspond to specific
10
==PAGE:14==
relaxation processes, and the area under each peak is proportional to the contribution of that
process to the total impedance.
Despite its strengths, DRT also has limitations. The accuracy of the method depends on
the quality of the impedance data, and noise or measurement errors can significantly affect
the results. Moreover, the choice of regularization parameters can influence the shape and
resolution of the relaxation time distribution, requiring careful optimization and validation [8].
3.6
Distribution of Diffusion Times
The Distribution of Diffusion Times (DDT) is similar to DRT, as it tries to describe EIS
measurements as a distribution of time constants, but they are fundamentally different as DRT
describes the system as a distribution of relaxations in series, while DDT describes systems,
as a distribution of parallel diffusion paths [10]. As such it is actually the admittance that is
integrated over rather than impedance as shown in equation 12.
Y (ω) =
Z
(P(τ)z−1
D (ω, τ)dτ
(12)
where P(τ) is the distribution, and zD(ω, τ) is the modelled impedance for an individual diffu-
sion path. DDT is much less mature than DRT, and has posed significantly more challenging
to develop [8]. This project used a publicly available implementation from [8], which suggests,
that it should work ”out-of-the-box” with little to no need for tinkering to achieve fits. This
implementation also enables the possibility of using a combined DRT-DDT method.
11
==PAGE:15==
4
Methods
4.1
Rotating Disk Electrode
Electrochemical characterization of diffusion, was investigated in a system with well defined
diffusion mechanics by use of a rotating disk electrode (RDE). This was performed in a three-
electrode setup, with a coiled Pt wire as counter-electrode (CE), a Ag/AgCl reference electrode
(RE), and a planar RDE as working electrode (WE). Either a gold or glassy carbon WE
was used, both with active diameter of 5mm.
The WEs were prepared by polishing using
water-suspended alumina particles of decreasing size: 3 µm, 0.1 µm and 0.05 µm respectively.
Polishing was followed by thorough rinsing with milli-Q water. Additionally pre-activation of
the WE was performed for some measurements. This was done according to [3], and consisted
of cycling in 0.5 M sulfuric acid for 80 cycles between +1.5 V vs.
Ag/AgCl to -0.3 V vs.
Ag/AgCl at a scan rate of 200mV/s. To quantify the activation, initially and after every 20
cycles, an EIS measurement was performed as described in Section EIS4.2.
RDE electrolytes were prepared as 50mM Fe2+ and 50mM Fe3+ salts in 1M acid, either
hydrochloric or sulfuric, in 100mL per experiment batches.
Hydrochloric electrolytes were
prepared from dilution of 37% wt. HCl, followed by adding 99.4 milligrams of Iron(II)chloride
tetrahydrate, and 135.2 milligrams of Iron(III)chloride heptahydrate. Similar approach was
used for sulfuric electrolytes, with dilution of ACS reagent 95.0-98.0 H2SO4, followed by 139.0
milligrams of Iron(II)sulfate heptahydrate, and 199.9 milligrams of Iron(III)sulfate.
Before
measurements, the electrolytes were bubbled through with 99% Argon for approximately 5
minutes.
Both hydrochloric and sulfuric electrolytes were prepared in 100mL batches, per
experiment.
4.2
Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy
EIS measurements were performed on a Biologic VMP-300 potentiostat. With variations in
frequency range, potential amplitude, number of measurements per frequency, number of points
per decade, number of repeated cycles, as well as attempts using multi-sine sampling.
12
==PAGE:16==
4.3
Symmetric Cell Setup
Carbon electrode comparisons were performed in a symmetric cell setup. 2.24cm square elec-
trodes were sandwiched between carbon blocks with carved fluid channels. Openings at opposite
sides of the electrode established a flow through flow field and was the configuration used for
all experiments. The electrodes were separated by a fumasep FS950 membrane. Teflon spacers
with carve-outs for the electrodes were placed between the carbon blocks. Considered incom-
pressible, the thickness of these spacers dictated the compression level of the electrode. Current
collectors were placed on the back of the carbon blocks, and finally the assembly was secured
by steel plates on both sides, connected by bolts, and tightened to 7Nm. During operation,
electrolyte was pumped through both sides of the cell by a Shenzen peristaltic pump. Elec-
trolyte was fed from, and to, a common reservoir for both sides of the cell. After initial tests,
a fluid dampener was introduced between reservoir and cell inlet, to reduce the inconsistency
of flow produced by the peristaltic pump.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: a) Schematic of flow plate and electrode assembly. [3], b) Experiment setup showing
cell assembly with piping to electrolyte reservoir and potentiostat connections
4.4
Electrodes
The electrodes investigated in this project were three carbon electrodes with different mor-
phologies [3]. From here they will be labeled Felt, Cloth and Paper. All cut to squares with
side length 2.24 cm.
13
==PAGE:17==
4.4.1
Software
ECM modelling was performed with the Python package Pyimpspec. DRT, DDT and DRT-
DDT was performed with the Python package bayes-drt2, using both Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
(HMC) and Maximum a priori (MAP) fits.
14
==PAGE:18==
5
Results
5.1
Selection of optimal experimental parameters
After varying the numerous parameters described in 4.2, and introducing fluid dampeners, a
final set of parameters shown in Table 1 were selected, and used for all following results.
Table 1: EIS parameters used for presented results
Parameter
Value
Frequency Range
220kHz - 10mHz
Points per decade
10
Sinus amplitude
5mV
Measures per frequency
3
Number of cycles
3
5.2
RDE
A wide variety of iterations using RDEs were attempted, with a progression of optimizations.
The progression of experiments is shown in Table 2. Surprisingly, even though a substantial
amount of effort went in to achieving stationary measurements, it was not achieved.
15
==PAGE:19==
Table 2: Sequence of RDE experiments, with descriptions of progression
Exp
WE
Electrolyte
Issue
Solution
1
Glassy Carbon
5mM Fe2+/Fe3+
in 1M HCl
Huge variation in impedance
between repetitions
Either electrode/electrolyte contamination, or poor surface homogenity of WE.
Redo with increased vigilance towards contaminations,
as well as more thorough polishing of WE. (Experiment 2)
2
Gold
5mM Fe2+/Fe3+
in 1M HCl
Greatly reduced variance
between repetions,
but still not stationary.
Change WE to gold, to reduce noise. (Experiment 3)
3
Gold
5mM Fe2+/Fe3+
in 1M HCl
Same as above
Investigate importance of stock acid.
Substitute with sulfuric acid (And appropriate iron-salts).
Pre-activation procedure according to REF. (Experiment 3)
3
Gold
5mM Fe2+/Fe3+
in 1M H2SO4
Greatly reduced variance
between repetions,
but still not stationary.
Repeat experiment with more vigilance,
as well as retry glassy carbon WE (Experiment 4)
4
Glassy carbon
and Gold
5mM Fe2+/Fe3+
in 1M H2SO4
Similar to Experiment 3.
Abandon iron salts for now. Ensure that reasonable results could be achieved
with a known reliable species
(Dicarboxyferrocene, DCF) (Experiment 5)
5
Gold
5mM DCF
in 1M NaCl
Still significant drift.
RDE experiments will not be continued
An example of the drift encountered during all RDE experiments is shown in Figure 5.
Here three repeated EIS cycles are presented. Not only is there clear development between the
cycles, but the low frequency behavior of each spectra differs from the expected shape, curving
up instead of down.
16
==PAGE:20==
Figure 5: EIS of Gold RDE Electrolyte: 5mM dicarboxyferrocene in 1M NaCl
In Figure 6 the residuals of a LinKK fit to the final cycle shown in Figure 5, is shown.
Here it is seen that the distribution of the residuals does not remain centered around 0 across
the spectra.
Figure 6: Residuals of LinKK fitting to experiment shown in Figure 5
17
==PAGE:21==
The lack of stationarity can also be observed from cyclic voltammetry as shown in Figure
7.
Figure 7: CV of dicarboxyferrocene in 1M NaCl, before and after performing three cycles of
EIS measurements
5.3
Electrode comparisons
Figure 8 shows the variance in impedance spectra from different flow velocities over a Felt
electrode.
Notable is the only minor difference in the charge-transfer curve, and the clear
difference in magnitude of the diffusion curve.
18
==PAGE:22==
Figure 8: EIS at varied flow velocities for Felt electrode at 30% compression. Electrolyte: 1.5M
Fe2Cl/Fe3Cl in 1M HCl
Figure 9 shows the variance in impedance spectra from different flow velocities over a Cloth
electrode. The behavior is similar to the Felt electrode Figure 8, though the relative change in
diffusion curve magnitude is smaller.
19
==PAGE:23==
Figure 9: EIS at varied flow velocities for Cloth electrode at 20% compression. Electrolyte:
1.5M Fe2Cl/Fe3Cl in 1M HCl
Figure 10 shows the variance in impedance spectra from different flow velocities over a
Paper electrode.
Once again, the change in charge-transfer is minor, but there is a large
difference in magnitudes of the diffusion curves. Additionally, the overall shape of the spectra
differ from Felt and Cloth, with the diffusion curve dominating earlier, resulting in only a
partial charge-transfer curve. There is also some erratic behavior at around 50-100 mHz, which
is more pronounced for the lower flow velocities.
20
==PAGE:24==
Figure 10: EIS at varied flow velocities for Paper electrode at 20% compression. Electrolyte:
1.5M Fe2Cl/Fe3Cl in 1M HCl
Figure 11 shows the residuals of LinKK fitting impedance spectra for the Felt electrode
at varied flow velocities. In the low frequency region, the residuals are small and centered
around 0, with some increase in magnitude towards the higher frequencies. Similar results were
obtained for Cloth and Paper electrodes, but are omitted here. See Appendix A
21
==PAGE:25==
(a) v=0.5cm/s
(b) v=1cm/s
(c) v=2cm/s
(d) v=5cm/s
Figure 11: LinKK residuals for Felt electrode at varied flow velocities
As all electrodes produces the largest diffusion arcs, at the lowest flow velocity, all sub-
sequent fitting is performed at v = 0.5cm/s unless otherwise stated.
Figure 12 shows the
recovered impedance from fitting the impedance spectra of the Felt electrode at v = 0.5cm/s,
using DRT, DDT or combined DRT-DDT. Both DRT and DRT-DDT seem capable of fitting
the data well, while the DDT is not able to fit the data at all.
22
==PAGE:26==
(a) DRT
(b) DDT
(c) DRT-DDT
Figure 12: Recovered impedance from distribution functions fitted over the full impedance
spectra at v=0.5cm/s for Felt electrode. a) DRT, b) DDT, c) DRT-DDT
Figure 13 shows the recovered impedance from fitting the charge-transfer, and diffusion
components of the impedance spectra of the Felt electrode at v = 0.5cm/s, using DRT, and
DDT respectively. Again DRT produces a seemingly competent fit, while DDT does not fit at
all.
23
==PAGE:27==
(a) DRT
(b) DDT
Figure 13: Recovered impedance from distribution functions fitted over partial impedance
spectra at v=0.5cm/s for Felt electrode.
a) DRT - Charge transfer semi-circle, b) DDT -
Diffusion arc
Figure 14 shows the time constant distributions produced from the fits shown in Figure
12c and 13a 13b. Of note is that the combined DRT-DDT produces peaks at time constants
different from the individual methods.
24
==PAGE:28==
(a) DRT
(b) DDT
(c) DRT-DDT
Figure 14: Time constant distributions from fit over partial and full impedance spectra at
v=0.5cm/s for Felt electrode. a) DRT - Charge transfer semi-circle, b) DDT - Diffusion arc, c)
DRT-DDT - Full spectra
Figure 15 show peak fits of the distributions shown in Figure 14.
25
==PAGE:29==
(a) DRT
(b) DDT
(c) DRT-DDT
Figure 15: Peak fits of time constant distributions from fit over partial and full impedance
spectra at v=0.5cm/s for Felt electrode.
a) DRT - Charge transfer semi-circle, b) DDT -
Diffusion arc, c) DRT-DDT - Full spectra
The time constants of the lowest frequency peaks extracted from DDT and DRT-DDT
were compared to the time constant estimated from ECM fitting. Shown in Figure 16 is the
comparison of τ estimations for two velocities with Felt electrode. The DDT does not change
between velocities, while both DRT-DDT and ECM show a velocity dependence as expected.
26
==PAGE:30==
(a) v=0.5cm/s
(b) v=1cm/s
Figure 16: Lowest frequency peak from peak fitting, compared to time constant estimated from
ECM
27
==PAGE:31==
As shown in Table 3 it was not always possible to make time constant predictions, as the
algorithm failed to produce fits for the paper electrode in some cases.
Table 3: Time constant estimations for all tested electrode and flow velocity combinations using
ECM, DDT, and DRT-DDT (Lowest peak for DDT and DRT-DDT). Blank space means failed
to fit. 0 means fit predicted no peaks at all
Electrode
Velocity [cm/s]
Estimated τ[s]
ECM
DDT
DRT-DDT
Felt
0.5
4.4
169.5
1.8
1
2.0
169.3
0.9
2
0.8
169.2
0.0
5
0.3
169.6
0.0
Cloth
0.5
3.7
159.2
14.2
1
2.1
170.1
0.9
2
1.4
159.2
3.2
5
1.2
159.2
63.8
Paper
0.5
0.7
159.2
1
0.5
2
0.0
159.2
5
0.2
169.3
Figure 17-20 shows the recovered impedance and time constant distributions for Cloth and
Paper electrodes at v = 0.5cm/s, using DRT, and DDT respectively, as well as the full spectra
using DRT-DDT. Again the DRT produces a reasonable fit, while the DDT struggles to fit at
all. Only notably deviation is that DRT-DDT only succeeds in fitting with HMC for the Cloth
electrode.
28
==PAGE:32==
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 17:
Recovered impedance from fitted distribution functions over partial and full
impedance spectra, at v=0.5cm/s for Cloth electrode. a) DRT, b) DDT, c) DRT-DDT
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 18: Time constant distributions from fit over partial and full impedance spectra at
v=0.5cm/s for Cloth electrode. a) DRT - Charge transfer semi-circle, b) DDT - Diffusion arc,
c) DRT-DDT - Full spectra
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 19: Recovered impedance from fitted distribution functions at v=0.5cm/s for Paper
electrode. a) DRT, b) DDT, c) DRT-DDT
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 20: Time constant distributions from fit over partial and full impedance spectra at
v=0.5cm/s for Paper electrode. a) DRT - Charge transfer semi-circle, b) DDT - Diffusion arc,
c) DRT-DDT - Full spectra
29
==PAGE:33==
5.4
DDT Model Validation
As shown in Figure 21 the DDT algorithm is capable of fitting the dataset used by Huang et
al.
Figure 21: Recreation of Huang et al. application of DDT to simulated bimodal Cole-Cole
distribution. ϕ = 0.7, t = 10−4s, 10−2s
Figure 22 shows the DDT time constant distributions compared to the true values of the
distribution. The result is similar to what was presented in Huang et al. It is not a perfect fit,
and clearly struggles with capturing the first peak.
30
==PAGE:34==
Figure 22: Time constant distributions from recreation of Huang et al. application of DDT to
simulated bimodal Cole-Cole distribution. ϕ = 0.7, t = 10−4s, 10−2s
Figure 23 shows the peak fits of the distribution shown in Figure 22. The estimated time
constants, τ are 5.82 · 10−4s, 1.63 · 10−2s. While the peak fits struggles with the magnitudes of
the peaks, the estimated time constants are reasonably close to the underlying values.
31
==PAGE:35==
Figure 23: Peak fits of distributions from recreation of Huang et al. application of DDT to
simulated bimodal Cole-Cole distribution. ϕ = 0.7, t = 10−4s, 10−2s
Figure 24 shows a heavily idealized variation of the diffusion arc for the Felt electrode at
v = 0.5cm/s. It is a simulated spectra based on parameters determined from an ECM fit of
the real data. Despite being noiseless, and having a larger frequency range available, the DDT
method fail to fit.
32
==PAGE:36==
Figure 24: Recovered impedance from DDT application on simulated Warburg Short element
Figure 25 shows the time constant distributions of the fit shown in Figure 24. The algo-
rithm correctly predicts the presence of only a single peak
33
==PAGE:37==
Figure 25: Time constant distributions from from DDT application on simulated Warburg
Short element
Figure 26 shows the algorithms attempt at peak fitting the simulated time constant dis-
tribution. Despite only having a single peak, the fit seems poor, both in time constant and
magnitude. The estimated τ is 104.52s, compared to the actual simulated time constant of 4.5s
34
==PAGE:38==
Figure 26: Peak fits of distributions from DDT application on simulated Warburg Short element
35
==PAGE:39==
6
Discussion
6.1
RDE
Stationarity was not achieved in any RDE experiments Table 2. The lack of stationarity was
concluded based on qualitative observations of the EIS Nyquist plots Figure 5 as well as CV
Figure 7, and quantitatively through LinKK validation Figure 6. Despite being intended as
a supplementary experiment to support the IRFB experiments, considerable time and effort
was spent attempted to achieve some usable results.
The method is very fundamental for
electrochemical measurements and has been used extensively REF, and it is quite unusual to
struggle this much with a standard method. Since stationarity was not achieved it is hard to
determine the culprit, but some of the possible suspects were investigated, unsuccessfully. It is
my opinion that the most likely cause of issue is contamination of the experiment. This could
come from the electrodes, but more likely from the electrolyte constituents themselves. Despite
having tested two different stock acids, and being as vigilant as possible, I still believe that
contamination is to blame. If time had allowed it, I would have tried experimenting with purer
stock chemicals.
6.2
Electrodes
It is qualitatively clear from the Nyquist plots that there is a significant difference in both
charge-transfer and diffusion across the electrodes, as well as how impactful the flow velocity
is for the diffusion. As seen in Table 3, the time constants predicted from ECM decrease with
increasing flow velocity, for all electrodes. This is somewhat expected. More rapid repletion
of electrolyte should correspond to a smaller depletion layer. The time constants for paper are
considerably lower for the paper electrode. This could be related to the lower porosity found
by [3], as this could mean that the average distance to any surface is lower inside the electrode.
The Cloth electrode shows lower variation in time constants, which is not as easy to explain.
It could be an indication of a more complex, perhaps turbulent, flow as the velocity increases,
but the pressure drops found by [3] does not support this.
36
==PAGE:40==
6.3
DRT
The fitting from DRT, was seamless and always provided good results. This was somewhat to
be expected from the maturity of the method, but the actual findings of the method is not of
interest here.
6.4
DDT
Attempts to fit DDT with implementation from [8] was not successful. As seen from Figure
13b, 17b and 19, the fit would never follow the diffusion arc down at low frequencies. This was
determined not be user-error, through meticulous scrutiny, and recreation of the fits showcased
in [8], Figure 21. While it could be suspected, that the algorithm might be oversensitive to
noisy/imperfect data, this was determined not to be the culprit, as shown in Figure 24, where
a fit could not be achieved on noiseless, ideal data. It is hard to agree with the claims from
[8] that it should work as is, and is particularly useful, when it cannot fit an ideal Warburg
Short element. Somewhat surprisingly then, the combined DRT-DDT method was able to often
achieve respectful fits, Figure 12c, 17c, 19c. Furthermore, at low flow velocities, DRT-DDT
was able to give somewhat reasonable predictions of time constants, for Felt and Cloth, Table
3.
It is unclear how this is the case, as the DDT method by itself was wildly inaccurate.
The good estimates, are quite possibly, a fluke, but determining that would require further
investigations. Of interest, if the prediction from both DDT and DRT-DDT were to be taken
as reasonable, then they do give some insight into the nature of the diffusion processes in the
electrodes. Specifically, in low frequency, there was only ever a single sharp peak present, at all
flow velocities and electrodes. This could indicate, that the morphology of the electrodes does
not mean that there is a difference in possible diffusion paths. But to be clear, it is very hard
to justify drawing conclusions from fits that are this poor.
6.5
Future Perspectives
There is another implementations of DDT in literature [10], which is an obvious path forward.
It is somewhat more cumbersome as there is no public implementation of their framework. I
still believe that DDT holds the possibility of providing a much deeper insight into diffusion
processes, but it is clearly not effortless. The seemingly decent time constant prediction of
37
==PAGE:41==
DRT-DDT is also worth looking into.
38
==PAGE:42==
7
Conclusion
Surprisingly RDE experiments were unsuccessful, and could not provide complementary data
for cross-validation.
A clear difference in the diffusion behavior was observed, between the three electrodes,
suggesting that morphology has an impact on diffusion. Flow velocities also has a clear influence
on the diffusion, and is dependent on electrode type. DRT works well, but this is not surprising
based on the maturity of the technique. However due to not being able to fit DDT, no further
conclusions on the behavior of the diffusion processes can be drawn. More experiments, and
much more effort on model development is needed.
39
==PAGE:43==
References
[1] J. Mitali, S. Dhinakaran, and A. Mohamad, “Energy storage systems: a review,” Energy
Storage and Saving, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 166–216, 2022.
[2] J. D. Milshtein, K. M. Tenny, J. L. Barton, J. Drake, R. M. Darling, and F. R. Brushett,
“Quantifying mass transfer rates in redox flow batteries,” Journal of The Electrochemical
Society, vol. 164, pp. E3265–E3275, 2017.
[3] B. Liu, Engineering Porous Electrodes for Advanced Redox Flow Batteries. PhD thesis,
2023.
[4] J. Sun, Z. Guo, L. Pan, X. Fan, L. Wei, and T. Zhao, “Redox flow batteries and their
stack-scale flow fields,” 12 2023.
[5] X. Liu, T. Li, Z. Yuan, and X. Li, “Low-cost all-iron flow battery with high performance
towards long-duration energy storage,” Journal of Energy Chemistry, vol. 73, pp. 445–451,
2022.
[6] J. R. Macdonald, “Impedance spectroscopy: Old problems and new developments,” 1990.
[7] T. F. Fuller and J. N. Harb, Electrochemical engineering.
[8] J. Huang, M. Papac, and R. O’Hayre, “Towards robust autonomous impedance spec-
troscopy analysis:
A calibrated hierarchical bayesian approach for electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy (eis) inversion,” Electrochimica Acta, vol. 367, 1 2021.
[9] B. A. Boukamp, “Distribution (function) of relaxation times, successor to complex non-
linear least squares analysis of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy?,” 10 2020.
[10] J. Song and M. Z. Bazant, “Electrochemical impedance imaging via the distribution of
diffusion times,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 120, p. 116001, 3 2018.
40
==PAGE:44==
A
Appendix: LinKK for Cloth electrode
(a) v=0.5cm/s
(b) v=1cm/s
(c) v=2cm/s
(d) v=5cm/s
Figure 27: LinKK residuals for Cloth electrode at varied flow velocities
41
==PAGE:45==
B
Appendix: LinKK for Paper electrode
(a) v=0.5cm/s
(b) v=1cm/s
(c) v=2cm/s
(d) v=5cm/s
Figure 28: LinKK residuals for Paper electrode at varied flow velocities
42
