==PAGE:1==
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Deбґ
livery Systems for Disease Treatment
Master Thesis
DTU Applied Chemistry
Department of Chemistry
==PAGE:2==
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Nikolai Prokopiev
Nikolai Prokopiev бґ s213419
Signature
Date
Nikolai Prokopiev
22/06/24
==PAGE:3==
Abbreviation
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
Anticitrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA)
Rheumatoid factor (RF)
Peptidyl arginine deiminase (PAD)
Antigenбґpresenting cells (APCs)
Thymic Humoral Factor (TNF)
Interferon (IFN)
Interleukin (IL)
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs)
Nonsteroidal AntiInflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)
Conventional Synthetic Disease Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs (csDMARDs)
Biological DMARDs (bDMARDs)
Targeted Synthetic DMARDs (tsDMARDs)
Janus kinase (JAK), Retinoic acidбґrelated Orphan Receptor нЁ (RORнЁt)
Central Nervous System (CNS)
BloodбґBrain Barrier (BBB)
Blood Cerebrospinal Fluid Barrier (BCB)
Tight Junctions (TJs)
Endothelial Cells (ECs)
Junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs)
Pбґglycoprotein (Pgp)
Breast Cancer Resistance Protein (BCRP)
Carrier Mediated Transport (CMT)
Solute Carrier (SLC)
ReceptorбґMediated Transport (RMT)
Adsorptive Mediated Transcytosis (AMT)
Transactivator of the transcription peptide (TAT)
Human immunodeficiency virus1 (HIV1)
Zonulaбґoccludens (ZO)
Doubleбґstrand breaks (DSB)
Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
RNA interference (RNAi)
RNAбґinduced silencing complex (RISC)
Messenger RNA (mRNA)
Non Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC)
Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC)
Kirsten Rat Sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS)
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR)
PoloLike Kinase 1 (PLK1)
Neuropilinбґ1 (NRP1)
ii
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:4==
Extracellular matrix (ECM)
Drug delivery systems (DDSs)
PeptideбґDrug conjugates (PDCs)
CellбґTargeted Peptides (CTPs)
CellбґPenetrating peptides (CPPs)
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
RNA (ribonucleic acid)
Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs)
Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs)
microRNAs (miRNAs)
pHбґsensitive endosomolytic peptides (pSEPs)
Solid Phase Peptide Synthesis (SPPS)
Solution Phase Synthesis (SPS)
Controlled pore glass (CPG)
Amino acid (aa)
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
iii
==PAGE:5==
Abstract
This project focused on synthesizing CPEP2, CPEP2 C(ACM), TAT, iRGD, PepA, and
aBOM using SolidбґPhase Peptide Synthesis (SPPS). While the synthesis was completed,
several challenges appeared, necessitating further optimization. Specifically, the final
Fmocбґdeprotection step for CPEP2 did not occur due to human error. A previously synбґ
thesized version of CPEP2, exбґCPEP2, was used as a test trial to deprotect the last Fmoc
group. Although MALDIбґTOF MS confirmed the exact mass, the HPLC chromatogram
showed poorly separated peaks, indicating issues with the chromatographic separation
of CPEP2. Consequently, a decision was made to synthesize a new batch of CPEP2 afбґ
ter attempting the final Fmocбґdeprotection. Similar issues appeared with CPEP2 C(ACM).
The chromatographic peaks were not well separated, and despite purification, one fracбґ
tion displayed the correct mass but still contained impurities. This fraction was then used
for cyclization. However, the attempt was unsuccessful, as indicated by the absence of a
peak shift in the chromatogram, suggesting that cyclization did not occur. The synthesis
of the TAT peptide encountered challenges due to the presence of the Pbf protection on
arginine residues. An additional 6бґhour deprotection step improved the chromatogram,
suggesting better removal of the Pbfбґprotecting groups. While the chromatogram still indiбґ
cated some deprotected arginine residues, a significant peak appeared, representing the
fully deprotected TAT peptide. However, the significant peak still needs to be collected
and analyzed due to time constraints. This underlines the need for further analysis, which
could lead to the purity of TAT peptide synthesis. The synthesis of the aBOM peptide
was successful, but challenges related to the protection groups were encountered, which
affected its solubility and separation. Adjusting the HPLC gradient improved peak sepaбґ
ration. These peaks were collected and characterized by MALDIбґTOF MS, confirming the
exact mass of the aBOM peptide. However, due to time constraints, further analysis was
not conducted. Small amounts of PepA and iRGD peptides were cleaved from the solid
support and analyzed using MALDIбґTOF MS, confirming their expected masses. Despite
these successful initial steps, the project was significantly affected by time constraints,
which prevented the completion of several critical tasks. Specifically, the conjugation of
PepA or iRGD with the aBOM peptide was not achieved. Furthermore, the subsequent
attachment of this peptide complex to an oligonucleotide and fluorophore, which was esбґ
sential for the final arrangement, also needed to be completed. KASбґ339 and KASбґ340
oligonucleotides were successfully synthesized using an Expedite synthesizer and handбґ
coupled with an alkyne handle, followed by conjugation with perylene azide via a click reбґ
action. However, mass spectrometry results suggested using a different perylene azide
analogue, likely due to the fluorophore being in solution with DMSO. Additionally, the
purification of KASбґ339 and KASбґ340 was unsuccessful due to sample degradation.
iv
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:6==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to everyone who contributed to the success
of my masterБ─≥s thesis.
First and foremost, I am immensely grateful to Professor Kira Astakhova. Thank you for
allowing me to be part of your esteemed research group and presenting me with such an
extraordinary scientific project. Your guidance and teachings on peptides and nucleotides
have been invaluable.
My heartfelt thanks go to PhD student Adrian Hernц║ndez Bustos, who was primarily my
supervisor. Adrian, you taught me the intricacies of solidбґphase peptide synthesis and
solidбґphase synthesis of oligonucleotides and how to purify them using HPLC. Your supбґ
port, humour, and helpfulness made my thesis journey enjoyable and insightful, especially
during our lateбґevening lab discussions.
I would also like to extend my gratitude to PhD student Justas Mikutavicius for helping
me synthesise the oligonucleotides that greatly assisted my work. Thank you for patiently
answering all my questions, no matter how trivial they seemed, and for being such an
amazing and helpful person.
A special thank you goes to PhD student Christian Oettinger, the chemist of our group.
Your readiness to answer all my chemistryбґrelated questions, not just for the thesis but in
general, has been incredibly helpful.
I am also grateful to PhD student Emilie Stubkjціr Lassen, the master of peptide knowlбґ
edge. Your tips and tricks about peptides have significantly enriched my understanding
and skills in this area.
Overall, I want to say a big thank you to everyone in the group for the opportunity to work
alongside such amazing people. The Б─²thirty daysБ─² and lunch breaks and coffee breaks
filled with interesting and funny conversations added a delightful dimension to this journey.
Your camaraderie and support made this experience truly memorable.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
v
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
i
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
v
1
Scientific background
1
1.1
Biomolecular Chemistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Rheumatoid arthritis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.3
Digoxin application in immunotherapy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.4
The BloodбґBrain Barrier (BBB)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.5
Cancer
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
1.6
Therapeutic peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.7
Therapeutic RNA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
1.8
Endosomal escape . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
1.9
Synthesis of peptides and oligonucleotides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
1.10 Hypothesis: Design and Therapeutic Uses of Peptide Carriers
. . . . . . . 22
2
Results
26
2.1
Synthesis and Characterization of Peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.2
Oligonucelotide Synthesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3
Discussion
34
3.1
Peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
3.2
Oligonucleotides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48
4
Conclusion
51
5
Experimental Methods
52
5.1
Instrumental . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
5.2
Peptides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
5.3
Protocol for SPPS with 2бґchlorotrityl chloride (CTC) and Rink amide resin . 54
5.4
Oligonucleotides . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
5.5
Hand couplings of Oligonucelotides
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
5.6
Click chemistry of oligonucleotides with Perylene Azide
. . . . . . . . . . . 63
References
64
A Appendix
75
A.1 The CPEP2 peptide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
A.2 CPEP2 C(acm) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
A.3 TAT peptide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
vi
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:8==
A.4 The aBOM peptide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
A.5 PepA/iRGD peptide
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
A.6 KASбґ339 and KASбґ340
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
A.7 Perylene Azide . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
vii
==PAGE:9==
1
Scientific background
1.1
Biomolecular Chemistry
Biomolecular chemistry is an interdisciplinary field that combines chemistry and biology
to study the chemical processes and substances within living organisms [1]. This area
focuses on understanding the structure, function, and interactions of biological macroбґ
molecules like proteins, peptides, nucleic acids, lipids, and carbohydrates, which are esбґ
sential for life [2]. By understanding the molecular mechanisms behind biological funcбґ
tions, biomolecular chemistry is crucial in advancing the knowledge of cellular processes
and disease pathways. Biomolecular chemistry is used in many fields and applications. In
medicine, it supports drug discovery and development, enabling the creation of targeted
therapies that interact with specific molecular pathways [3]. Diagnostic tools that detect
disease biomarkers also rely on principles from biomolecular chemistry [4].
1.2
Rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disorder characterized by chronic inбґ
flammation, which can damage not only the joints but also various extraбґarticular organs,
including the heart, kidneys, lungs, digestive system, eyes, skin, and nervous system [5].
In some patients, RA is triggered by environmental factors if they have a genetic tendency.
The best example is tobacco used in a patient with the HLAбґDRB1 gene, which can lead
to antiбґcitrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA) and positive RA [6]. Rheumatoid factor (RF)
and ACPA are the most wellбґknown autoantibodies in RA, but several other autoantibodбґ
ies are also relatively specific to the disease. The presence of these antibodies is called
seropositive RA of any isotype that binds to the Fc region of IgG [5]. RA patients often
have (ACPA). These antibodies, identified since 1964 [7], are highly specific for RA and
target citrullinated peptides like filaggrin [8]. Citrulline is formed from arginine by peptidyl
arginine deiminase (PAD) and occurs at tissue damage and inflammation sites, such as
the lungs in smokers [5]. The HLAбґDRB1 shared epitope presents citrullinated epitopes,
and ACPA can consist of IgG, IgM, or IgA isotypes, binding to selfбґproteins such as viбґ
mentin, fibronectin, fibrinogen, histones, and type 2 collagen [9]. Figure 1.1 represents
one of the mechanisms underlying seropositive rheumatoid arthritis.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
1
==PAGE:10==
Figure 1.1: An illustration suggesting the pathogenesis of seropositive rheumatoid arthritis.
Arginine proteins are citrullinated by protein arginine deiminases (PADs), which require
Ca2+ for activation. These citrullinated proteins are recognized as nonбґnative by antigenбґ
presenting cells (APCs), which engulf them and present their antigens. This process actiбґ
vates T cells, which in turn help B cells produce autoantibodies, such as rheumatoid factor
(RF) and antiбґcitrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs). RF and ACPAs form immune comбґ
plexes that deposit in the joints, triggering complement activation and further inflammation.
The activated immune cells release proбґinflammatory cytokines like TNFбґн╠, ILбґ1, and ILбґ6,
which promote inflammation and joint damage. This inflammatory environment activates
synoviocytes, chondrocytes, and osteoclasts, leading them to produce proбґinflammatory
cytokines and enzymes such as matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). These enzymes deбґ
grade the extracellular matrix, resulting in joint inflammation, cartilage breakdown, and
bone erosion.
Recently, Khatri et al. [10] focused on a new treatment candidate for seropositive rheumaбґ
toid arthritis. This candidate is a nanoparticleбґformulated cyclic citrullinated peptide apбґ
tamer that targets autoantibodies and immune reactions related to antibody production.
Significantly, these peptide aptamer nanoparticles likely will not interfere with normal imбґ
mune functions like other antiбґrheumatic drugs. In a 3бґweek treatment course, collagenбґ
induced rats showed significantly reduced joint swelling and arthritis scores compared
to those treated with saline, unloaded nanoparticles, or nonбґcitrullinated control peptide
nanoparticles. The decrease in joint swelling correlated with lower anticitrullinated pepбґ
tide autoantibody levels in the blood. Additionally, treatment with aptamer nanoparticles
increased interleukinбґ10 levels.
This treatment candidate may work by boosting antiбґ
2
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:11==
inflammatory responses and reducing anticitrullinated peptide antibodies. This study proбґ
vides an overview of novel treatments for rheumatoid arthritis. Figure 1.2 illustrates the
Khatri et al. [10] study.
Figure 1.2: A) Summary from Khatri et al.Б─≥s work [10], while B) depicts the synthesized
cyclic citrullinated peptide aptamer.
1.3
Digoxin application in immunotherapy.
Digoxin is a cardiac glycoside derived from the Foxglove plant and used primarily to treat
heart conditions like atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, and heart failure [11]. It helps reguбґ
late heart rhythm and improve heart function by inhibiting the sodiumбґpotassium ATPase
pump [12]. This inhibition increases intracellular calcium, enhancing the force of heart
contractions and reducing the heart rate, helping maintain a normal rhythm.
Digoxin
has recently gained attention for its potential role in immunotherapy. Huh et al. (2011)
demonstrated that digoxin inhibits the transcriptional activity of Retinoic acidбґrelated Orбґ
phan Receptor нЁ (RORнЁt), a critical factor in TH17 cell differentiation, which is linked to
diseases like CrohnБ─≥s disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and psoriasis. Their data showed
that digoxin reduces TH17 cell differentiation and the severity of autoimmune disease
in mice. Furthermore, nonбґtoxic synthetic derivatives of digoxin specifically inhibit ILбґ17
cytokine induction in human T cells. As mentioned by Khatri et al. [10], a cyclic citrulliбґ
nated peptide was synthesised to treat rheumatoid arthritis, which helps increase ILбґ10
levels. A creative strategy might be to link the cyclic citrullinated peptide with digoxin
and its derivatives. This could provide insights into the development of T cells into either
proбґinflammatory TH17 cells or antiбґinflammatory Treg cells. By exploring this approach,
we can examine the impact on cytokine levels such as interleukinбґ17 and interleukinбґ10,
helping to determine whether this process promotes inflammation or mitigates it.
1.4
The BloodбґBrain Barrier (BBB)
The normal functioning of the central nervous system (CNS) relies on a tightly regulated
microenvironment. This is maintained by a biological barrier between the blood and the
brain, effectively isolating the brain from the rest of the body [13]. Various cells create
these biological barriers at three necessary interfaces: the bloodбґbrain barrier (BBB), the
bloodбґcerebrospinal fluid barrier (BCB), and the arachnoid barrier [14] (see Figure)1.3.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
3
==PAGE:12==
Figure 1.3: The biological barriers and the protector of the brain. a BloodБ─⌠brain barrierм╬ b
bloodБ─⌠CSF barrierм╬ c the arachnoid barrier [15].
The BBB consists of microvascular endothelial cells that line many organismsБ─≥ pathways
into the brain and spinal cord, including mammals with a wellбґdeveloped CNS [16]. The
BBB serves as a critical checkpoint, deciding what cannot enter the brain and controlling
the internal environment of the central nervous system. This regulation is made possible
by tight junctions (TJs) between endothelial cells (ECs) lining blood vessels, astrocytic
end feet, and a basement membrane [17]. TJs are complex protein structures that play a
regulatory role. They are the gatekeepers of the BBB and determine the limitations of the
passage of ions and other small waterбґsoluble substances through the gap between cells,
known as the paracellular pathway [13]. TJs extend across the intercellular gap, involvбґ
ing transmembrane, cytoplasmic attachment, and cytoskeletal proteins. Transmembrane
proteins such as occludin, claudins, and junctional adhesion molecules (JAMs) form part
of TJs. Cytoplasmic attachment proteins include cingulin, ZOбґ1, ZOбґ2, and ZOбґ3 (see
Figure 1.4)
Figure 1.4: Schematic overview of TJs and their constituent proteins. The Figure was
borrowed from Abbott et al. [14]
4
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:13==
(BBB) presents a major obstacle for delivering drugs to treat brain diseases and cancers.
Penetrating the bloodбґbrain barrier (BBB) is quite challenging but different methods have
been used [13]. Different chemical methods consist of:
Б─╒ Chemical modification of the drug to form a prodrug, often with increased lipophilicбґ
ity compared to the original compound. For example, drugs with OH, Б┬▓NH2 and
Б┬▓COOH as functional groups show low lipophilicity but can be esterified for generбґ
ating lipophilic drugs. Once inside the central nervous system (CNS), the lipophilic
group may undergo hydrolysis to release the drug.
Б─╒ Attaching drugs to compounds like mannitol or aromatic substances (such as borбґ
neol and musk). Mannitol can induce temporary opening of the BBB due to its high
osmotic pressure, while aromatic substances may cross the BBB, acting as a revival
medicine.
Б─╒ Employing suitable chemical drug delivery systems or carriers capable of crossing
the BBB.
In biological methods, large solutes with high molecular weight, such as proteins and pepбґ
tides, might pass through the bloodбґbrain barrier through endocytosis mechanisms speбґ
cific to macromolecules [13]. While tight junctions in the BBB typically block the largest
molecules from entering the brain, certain specific and nonspecific transcytosis mechaбґ
nisms still promote the transport of various large molecules and complexes across the
BBB [13]. Figure 1.5 shows several routes for BBB penetration.
Figure 1.5: Schematic overview of different routes for BBB penetration. The Figure was
borrowed from Abbott et al. [14].
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
5
==PAGE:14==
(a) Passive Diffusion: Lipidбґsoluble molecules can passively diffuse through the BBB
and enter the brain [18]. Factors influencing this process include the octanol/buffer partiбґ
tion coefficient at pH 7.4 [19], logD values for neutral and ionized species, and molecular
weight [20]. Bases have an advantage over acids due to their interaction with the negбґ
atively charged cell membrane. A sizeable polar surface area (PSA) greater than 80
ц┘б╡ increases the energy required for diffusion [21]. While small molecules can diffuse
freely, those with a molecular weight above 400 Da do not see increased BBB permeбґ
ability proportional to their solubility [22]. (b) ABC Transporter Efflux: ABC transporters
on endothelial cells of the BBB act as ATPбґpowered efflux pumps, removing xenobiotics
and metabolites from the brainБ─≥s capillaries. These transporters, including Pбґglycoprotein
(Pбґgp), multidrugбґresistant proteins, and Breast Cancer Resistance Protein (BCRP), limit
the entry of various substances, including therapeutic drugs [13, 15].
(c) CarrierбґMediated Transport (CMT): CMTs, part of the Solute Carrier (SLC) Transбґ
porter Gene Family, facilitate the transport of essential polar nutrients like glucose and
amino acids across the BBB. Over 300 SLC genes encode proteins that move molecules
such as amino acids, carbohydrates, fatty acids, hormones, and vitamins across cell
membranes [23]. (d) Transcytosis (Receptorбґ and AdsorptiveбґMediated): Receptorбґ
Mediated Transport (RMT): Macromolecules bind to specific cell surface receptors, triggerбґ
ing endocytosis and transport across the endothelial cells to the brain [14, 15]. Adsorptiveбґ
Mediated Transcytosis (AMT): Positively charged macromolecules bind to cell surface
sites, initiating endocytosis followed by transcytosis [24]. (e) Mononuclear Cell Migraбґ
tion: Mononuclear cells enter the brain during embryonic development, becoming miбґ
croglia. Under inflammatory conditions, cytokines disrupt tight junctions, allowing leukoбґ
cytes and macrophages to enter the CNS and assist resident microglia [25, 26, 27].
The BBB gets disrupted under various brainбґrelatedбґissues like multiple sclerosis [28],
stroke [29], ParkinsonБ─≥s and AlzheimerБ─≥s diseases [30], epilepsy [31], brain tumors [32],
glaucoma [33], and lysosomal storage diseases [34]. Therefore, prioritizing ongoing reбґ
search on the bloodбґbrain barrier (BBB) and optimizing drug delivery methods to maintain
BBB integrity while effectively administering various medications is imperative.
1.4.1
The TATбґpeptide and its ability to penetrate the BBB
The TAT peptide is also known as the transбґactivator of the transcription peptide and is
derived from the human immunodeficiency virusбґ1 (HIVбґ1) [35]. Originally, it was discovбґ
ered for its role in assisting viral entry into cells [36]. Afterwards, the studies show the TAT
peptidesБ─≥ unique properties make them useful for various biomedical applications, includбґ
ing drug delivery [37, 38]. One of the unique properties of the TAT peptide is its ability to
cross biological barriers, such as the BBB, through receptorбґmediated transcytosis. TAT
is an earlyбґexpressed gene product, secreted from infected cells [39], and causes the
body to release cytokines, chemokines, and adhesion proteins. Crystal R Leibrand et al.
[35] specifically looked at mice that received TAT injections directly into their brains. In
vitro, TAT reduces the levels of tight junction proteins, claudinбґ1, claudinбґ5, and zonula
6
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:15==
occludensбґ1 (ZOбґ1) and/or zonula occludensбґ2 (ZOбґ2) in brain microvascular endothelial
cells [40, 41, 42]. TAT peptide is a promising carrier for transporting different therapeutic
substances (like drugs, peptides, and nucleic acids) into the brain. This approach aims
to treat neurological disorders effectively [43].
1.5
Cancer
Cancer is a complex group of diseases characterized by uncontrolled growth and spread
of abnormal cells and is a leading cause of death worldwide, with nearly 10 million deaths
in 2019 [44]. It can affect different parts of the body and begins from changes or mutations
in the DNA of cells. DNA mutations lead to DNA damage, which can modify nucleotide
sequences, causing cells to produce dysfunctional proteins that influence normal cellular
physiology (see Figure 1.6) [45].
Figure 1.6: Schmatic overview of the development of a healthy cell (Top) and genetic
changes of a healthy cell (bottom).
DNA damage affects many cells in the human body, at a rate of 10.000 to 1.000.000
molecular defects per cell per day [46]. One of the primary causes of DNA damage is
ionizing radiation, which can directly or indirectly harm the DNA, resulting in an adjustбґ
ment to its structure that affects nuclear stability [47]. Ionizing radiation comes in various
types, such as н╠бґparticles, н╡бґparticles, or нЁбґradiation [48]. This radiation emits energy as
it moves through cells and can disrupt proteins and nucleic acids. Furthermore, it can
cause doubleбґstrand breaks (DSB) at the phosphodiester backbone of DNA [49]. Howбґ
ever, other factors that are implied in DNA damage are reactive oxygen species (ROS).
ROS are generated in the tissue environment due to exposure to ionizing radiation. These
generated ROS consist of shortбґlived molecules like superoxide anion (O Б─⌠
2 ) radicals, hyбґ
drogen peroxide (H2O2), and hydroxyl radicals (Б┬≥OH) [50]. The most common treatments
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
7
==PAGE:16==
for cancer are surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy, whereas surgery is the most
effective at an early stage of the disease. However, radiation therapy can harm healthy
cells, organs, and tissues. Even though chemotherapy has helped decrease sickness
and death rates. Almost all chemotherapy drugs harm healthy cells, especially those that
divide and proliferate [51]. Another challenge associated with chemotherapy is drug resisбґ
tance. Cancer cells initially controlled by antiбґcancer drugs eventually become resistant
to it [52]. New advanced and innovative cancer therapies must be developed to handle
major obstacles like drug resistance and delivery systems, which can decrease signs and
symptoms.
1.5.1
New advanced and innovative cancer therapy for tumour targeting
Gene therapy or gene transfer is a new treatment that introduces new genes into a canбґ
cer cell or nearby tissue to cause cell death or slower growth rate [53]. This treatment
technique is adjustable, and many different genes and carries are being used in clinical
trials with successful results [54]. Different therapeutics RNAs can be used for gene therбґ
apy, like RNA interference (RNAi), which can produce targeted gene silencing [55]. The
RNAбґinduced silencing complex (RISC) helps silence genes by cutting messenger RNA
(mRNA) and stopping protein production [56]. Small interference RNA (siRNAs) can be
designed to stop specific targets involved in cell growth and spreading to other body parts.
This helps prevent tumour formation by stopping several molecular processes [57]. The
benefits of siRNAбґbased drugs or cargo include safety, high efficacy, specificity, minimal
side effects, and low production cost [58]. Unfortunately, naked siRNA is unstable under
physiological conditions. When siRNA goes into the bloodstream, it is easily degraded
by nucleases in the serum [59]. Moreover, once siRNA enters the cells, it undergoes
degradation due to the pH changes in the early and late endosomes and lysosome comбґ
partments. [60]. Therefore, there is a need for new methods to enhance the effectiveness
of siRNA. Rational chemical modifications of siRNA like replacing nonбґbridging oxygen on
the phosphate linkage with a sulfur atom, the 2Б─≥бґhydroxyl group modification of the sugar
ring with a methyl group (2Б─≥ OCH3) and ethyl group (2Б─≥ OCH2CH3) and among others
[61]. Otherwise, delivery methods through conjugation with organic molecules (polymers,
peptides, lipids, antibodies, small molecules) can help naked siRNA to cross cell memбґ
branes efficiently [60]. In the context of lung cancer, specifically NonбґSmall Cell Lung
Cancer (NSCLC) and Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC), gene therapy offers promising
avenues for targeting genetic mutations and molecular pathways [62]. NSCLC, which acбґ
counts for about 85% of lung cancer cases, frequently involves mutations in genes such
as Kirsten Rat Sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) and the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) [63]. KRAS mutations lead to the activation of the RAS/MAPK signalling
pathway, promoting cancer cell proliferation and survival [64]. Targeted gene therapy and
RNAбґbased therapeutics, such as siRNA, can be designed to silence KRAS mutations,
thereby inhibiting these pathways and reducing tumour growth [65]. EGFR mutations are
also common in NSCLC, especially in specific populations like nonбґsmokers and those
of Asian descent [66], resulting in continued activation of cell growth pathways. Targeted
8
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:17==
gene therapy and RNAбґbased therapeutics targeting EGFR can block these pathways,
providing an effective treatment strategy [67]. Furthermore, PoloбґLike Kinase 1 (PLK1),
a protein involved in cell division, is also overexpressed in both NSCLC and SCLC [68].
siRNA and other RNAбґbased therapies targeting PLK1 can disrupt cancer cell proliferation
and induce cell death [69]. This approach addresses the molecular mechanisms driving
lung cancer and offers a potential solution to overcome drug resistance often observed in
chemotherapy [69].
1.5.2
Tumour targeting peptides
The iRGD peptide is a wellбґknown peptide with unique properties for targeted drug delivбґ
ery in cancer therapy [70]. The iRGD is a 9бґamino acid cyclic peptide with the sequence
CRGDKGPDC, including an ArgбґGlyбґAsp (RGD) motif, which has a high affinity to н╠vн╡3
and н╠vн╡5 integrins [71]. Furthermore, iRGD has a more remarkable tumourбґtargeting
ability than RGD because it binds explicitly to integrins and neuropilinбґ1 (NRPбґ1) overexбґ
pressed on various tumours [70]. The iRGD peptide contains three different noticeable
sites: a motif that targets tumours, a motif for penetrating cell barriers called Cбґend Rule
(CendR), and a site recognized by proteolytic enzymes for cleavage [72, 73]. Figure 1.7
illustrates the cleavage process by the proteolytic enzymes.
Figure 1.7: Illustration showing the cleavage process of the iRGD peptide by proteolytic
enzymes, resulting in the formation of the Cбґend Rule (CendR) motif from its sequence
CRGDKGPDC. The figure has been adapted from [70] and created with ChemDraw
The mode of action of iRGD penetration is shown and described in Figure 1.8. The first
step in iRGD targeting tumours is binding to integrins. These integrins are a heterodimeric
transmembrane glycoprotein consisting of н╠ and н╡бґ subunits [74]. They help cells stick to
and interact with the extracellular matrix (ECM) [75]. Once it binds to integrin, iRGD is cut
by protease to create CRGD/K and reveal the CendR motif at the end of the peptide. This
CendR then attaches to NRPбґ1 and activates the endocytosis, which pulls iRGD into the
cell [72]. Through the process, drugs or cargos conjugated with the iRGD can effectively
enter deeply into the tumour sites [76].
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
9
==PAGE:18==
Figure 1.8: A illustration of how iRGD activates tumor targeting for delivering drugs/cargo
in solid tumors. Tumors consist of cancer cells surrounded by an extracellular matrix and
other types of cells, like macrophages, neutrophils, stem cells, and fibroblasts. In the
initial step (a), the iRGD peptide binds to н╠vн╡3 and н╠vн╡5 integrins found on tumorigenic
endothelial cells. Next, (b), a protease cleaves the iRGD peptide, producing CRGD/K
sequences and revealing the CendR motif at the Cбґterminus. Then, (c) CendR binds
to the NRPбґ1 receptor, triggering transcytosis and allowing entry into the tumor tissue.
Ultimately (d), internalization of the tumor site occurs through endocytosis. The figure
has been adapted from [70] and created with BioRender.com
iRGD and RGD are wellбґknown sequences used to target integrins. Another sequence,
NGXG (where X can be any amino acid), explicitly targets the integrin н╠3н╡1 in NSCLC.
With this structural requirement, Lau et al. [77] developed an 8бґamino acid cyclic peptide.
The sequence CбґNGQGEQбґC forms a cyclic peptide through a disulfide bridge between
its two cysteine residues. Since this peptide does not have a specific name, it is referred
to as PepA in this study.
The iRGDбґpeptide has been applied to many studies targeting tumour cancer cells. Guan
et al. used liposomes with iRGD to deliver antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) against the
androgen receptor (AR) for prostate cancer treatment. The conclusion from this study
indicated that the iRGDбґliposomes efficiently delivered the ARбґASO to prostate tumours
in both subcutaneous and bone metastasis models, resulting in effective knockdown of
AR expression and tumour growth inhibition. Even the delivery system enhances ASO acбґ
cumulation and efficacy in solid tumours without increasing toxicity in healthy organs [78].
ErelбґAkbaba et al. demonstrated a new approach to treating a brain tumour called glioblasбґ
toma, combining targeted therapy against programmed cell death ligandбґ1 (PDбґL1) with
10
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:19==
immunotherapy. They developed a solid lipid nanoparticle (SLN) conjugated with the
cyclic peptide iRGD to deliver siRNAs against epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFR)
and PDбґL1. The results indicated that lowбґdose radiation therapy helps enhance the upбґ
take of SLNs into the brain tumour area, which decreases the levels of PDбґL1 and EGFR.
This combination led to a significant reduction in glioblastoma growth and improved in
mice [79]. These studies suggested that the cyclic iRGD peptide is a promising candidate
for targeting tumour tissues as a carrier.
1.6
Therapeutic peptides
1.6.1
Peptides
Peptides are crucial for essential physiological functions and biochemical activities. Pepбґ
tides are short chains of 2 to 50 amino acids, united through condensation see Figure
1.9. These bonds create a chain, the basic unit of proteins. In living organisms, amino
acids are added to the NH2 terminal by an enzymatic process [80]. Bioactive peptides can
be designed with implications for the pharmaceutical industry and biologics design used
for therapeutic biomedical research [81]. Extensive research has shown the multifaceted
role of bioactive peptides and demonstrated effectiveness in blood pressure, antimicroбґ
bial properties, antiбґinflammatory, antiбґthrombotic, improved response to infection, and
antiбґoxidant [82].
Figure 1.9: Schematic overview of the different types of amino acids (left, tabel taking
from Steward et al. [83] and formation of peptide bonds by condensation (right, picture
taking from [84])
1.6.2
Advancements in PeptideбґBased Drug Delivery Systems
Peptides in drug development and delivery have made significant progress in the last
decade due to new production, modification, and analytic technologies. Peptides have
been produced and modified using both chemical and biological methods [82]. As in
drug delivery systems (DDSs), peptides have shown high affinity, low immunogenicity,
simple amino acid composition, and adjustable molecular size. These peptides can be
coupled to drugs via linkers to form peptideбґdrug conjugates (PDCs) and act as active
proбґdrugs. PDCs are composed of three components: carrier, linker and cargo, as shown
in Figure 1.10. In this system, the carrier plays a central role. Different carriers, such
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
11
==PAGE:20==
as aptamers, small molecules, peptides, proteins, and antibodies, have been extensively
studied. The cargo usually consists of drugs or radioactive materials that can treat specific
diseases in various ways. These components are connected by a linker, which releases
the drug in a controlled manner. There are two types of linkers: chemically cleavable and
enzymatically cleavable [85]. Chemically cleavable linkers break apart in organelles with
acidic conditions, while enzymatic cleavage linkers can be split by various enzymes [86].
Figure 1.10: Schematic structure of peptideбґdrug coupling consists of three components:
carrier, linker, and cargo. The figure has been adapted from Guo et al. [87] and created
with BioRender.com
PDCs are considered promising DDSs, given their ability to improve drug bioбґcompatibility
and physiological stability [87]. In Peptideбґbased drug delivery systems, peptides can
be used as carriers to deliver therapeutic substances like antiбґcancer drugs and nucleic
acidбґbased drugs to specific sites and enhance the drug delivery efficiency of DDSs with
specific physiological activity together with chemical modification of side chain functional
groups [88]. Significantly, peptide carriers enhance drug penetration into target cells and
improve the specific targeting ability of drugs, effectively overcoming drug delivery barriers
[89] [90]. Additionally, endosomolytic peptides play a crucial role by facilitating cargo
release within the cell rather than just aiding in targeting [91].
1.6.3
Cellбґtargeted and penetrating peptides
Cellбґtargeted peptides (CTPs) consist of 3 to fewer than 30 amino acids (aa) and are freбґ
quently used as valuable targeting agents. These peptides demonstrate a specific affinity
for receptors, especially abundantly expressed in particular cells or tissues, and play a
crucial role in delivering targeted drugs precisely to the therapeutic site [87]. On the other
side, cellбґpenetrating peptides (CPPs) relatively consist of 4бґ40 aa [92]. They possess a
remarkable ability to crossбґcell membranes, allowing them to deliver various bioactive carбґ
goes into the cell. These cargoes can include drugs, nucleic acids, and proteins. CPPs
play a crucial role in drug delivery applications for diseases such as cancer, diabetes,
and genetic disorders. Their versatility makes them valuable tools for promoting intraбґ
cellular effects and enhancing therapeutic outcomes [93]. CPP classification depends
on their origin, conformation, and physicochemical properties. Proteinбґderived pepбґ
tides, like the TAT protein and penetratin, arise from natural proteins and possess motifs
12
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:21==
or helical structures for cell membrane penetration [94]. Chimeric peptides combine
elements from multiple peptide classes, bridging the gap between natural and synthetic
forms [94]. Their complexity poses challenges in predicting behaviour and internalization
mechanisms [95]. Synthetic peptides, designed and synthesized artificially, provide verбґ
satility and customization for specific applications [96]. Linear sequences of aa have been
widely studied but come with limitations such as endosomal entrapment, toxicity, poor cell
specificity, susceptibility to proteolytic degradation, suboptimal cell penetration, and low
cytosolic delivery efficiency [94, 97, 93]. Peptides that have been cyclized, meaning their
amino acid sequences, form a closed loop (cyclic structure). Cyclic peptides have better
advantages than linear ones [98]. Studies indicated that the limited conformational flexбґ
ibility of the peptide improved its metabolic stability. Additionally, it significantly boosts
their binding affinity and specificity toward specific targets. Furthermore, the larger surбґ
face area of cyclic peptides facilitates multiple tight interactions, resulting in high selectivбґ
ity and affinity for their intended targets and cell permeability [99, 100]. At physiological
pH conditions, cationic CPPs acquire a positive charge. This positive charge enables
them to penetrate cell membranes efficiently, bypassing the necessity to interact with cell
receptors directly [94]. As early as 1965, researchers observed that cationic polymers,
including polylysine and polyarginine, exhibited enhanced cellular uptake of albumin by
cultured cancer cells due to their intrinsic ability to penetrate the cell membrane more
effectively [101]. Subsequently, plenty of similar studies have been conducted to distinбґ
guish the uptake potential of positively charged short Peptide chains From their longer
or netбґneutral equivalents. In particular, research demonstrated that short arginine hoбґ
mopolymers were more readily absorbed than other aa, including polylysine chains [102,
103]. Arginine is one of the few cationic natural aa with pKa greater than 12 and interacts
with negatively charged integrated proteins and persuades translocation into the cell, carбґ
rying it with specified cargo [101, 104]. The effectiveness of uptake improves with longer
arginine chains. However, once the arginine residues exceed 8 to 10, translocation can
still happen, but it might cause membrane damage, potentially limiting future applications
of cellбґpenetrating peptides (CPPs) [104]. Hydrophobic CPPs is a sequential arrangeбґ
ment of hydrophobic (nonpolar) and hydrophilic (polar) aa residues along their primary
structure and have a strong preference for hydrophobic environments due to their hyбґ
drophobic segments [105]. They can interact with cell membranes and cause membrane
leakage even at low concentrations [106]. Amphipathic CPPs Consist of polar and nonбґ
polar aa residues. Among these, nonpolar residues like alanine (A), leucine (L), isoleucine
(I), glycine (G), and valine (V) can interact with nonpolar lipid head groups, allowing them
to insert the polar region of the peptide into the cell membrane [101]. They also exhibit
a notable characteristic: They can strongly interact with the hydrophobic regions of the
cell membranes and effectively insert themselves into the lipid bilayer, a behaviour not
typically observed in cationic cell penetration peptides. An overview of the classification
of various CPPs is shown in Figure 1.11.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
13
==PAGE:22==
Figure 1.11: Schematic overview of the various types of CPPs.
1.6.4
Targeting Peptides for therapeutic applications
Peptides represent a unique class of pharmaceutical compounds and sit in a particular
place between small molecules and proteins. However, they have unique biochemical and
therapeutic properties not found in small molecules or proteins [107]. With their unique
properties, peptides play a significant role in cell signalling and function. One remarkable
function is their ability to act as natural signal molecules. This property opens up excitбґ
ing opportunities for developing therapies that imitator the bodyБ─≥s pathways [108]. Some
peptide drugs act as Б─≤replacement therapies,Б─≥ restoring or supplementing hormones when
our levels are insufficient [107]. A great example is insulin, a critical hormone successбґ
fully isolated and extracted in the 1920s for therapeutic purposes. This was a breaking
thought for diabetic patients who lack natural insulin [109]. In the 1950s, researchers
made significant progress in peptide sequence elucidation and chemical synthesis [110].
As a result, it was possible to create chemically synthesized hormones like vasopressin,
oxytocin, and vancomycin [107, 111]. Over the last decade, peptides have been gained
in different medical and biotechnology applications. Additionally, therapeutic peptide reбґ
search is being revived, driven by commercial motivations [112].
1.7
Therapeutic RNA
1.7.1
Nucleotides
Nucleotides are the building blocks of nucleic acids, which include DNA (deoxyribonucleic
acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid). The nucleotide structure comprises three main parts:
a nitrogenous base, a pentose sugar (either ribose in RNA or deoxyribose in DNA), and
a phosphate group. The nitrogenous base can be adenine (A), thymine (T) in DNA (or
uracil (U) in RNA), cytosine (C), or guanine (G) (see Figure 1.2). Nucleotides serve sevбґ
eral crucial functions in cells. In DNA, they encode the genetic information necessary for
a living organismБ─≥s growth, development, and functioning. In RNA, nucleotides participate
in the transcription of genetic information from DNA and translation into proteins. Addiбґ
14
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:23==
tionally, nucleotides are involved in various cellular processes, such as energy transfer
(as in adenosine triphosphate, ATP), cell signalling, and enzymatic reactions [113]. The
composition of DNA and RNA are shown in Figure 1.12.
Figure 1.12: The composition of DNA and RNA, including their respective nucleotides
bases. The figure has been adapted from Mackenzie et al. [114]
Figure 1.13: Schematic overview of the five RNA therapeutics and their approaches. A:
Ribosomes convert mature RNA into proteins, which serve as the fundamental building
block of life. B: ASOs are small singleбґstranded RNA molecules with the same compleбґ
mentarity as a target mRNA. Once they are bound, they trigger postбґtranscriptional gene
silencing by inhibiting translation of the target mRNA. This process stops the mRNA from
making proteins, eventually leading to gene suppression. C: siRNA are small doubleбґ
stranded RNA molecules.
Once associated with the RNAбґinduced silencing complex
(RISC), it binds to its target RNA with the same complementarity, leading to gene siбґ
lencing by preventing translation of the RNA. D: The miRNA are small doubleбґstranded
RNA molecules that connect with the RISC complex and guide it to the target mRNA.
The miRNA binds imperfectly to the mRNA and blocks translation or causes degradation,
which results in gene silencing. The miRNA inhibitors are small singleбґstranded RNAs
that suppress their target RNA, leading to restored mRNA translation. E: Aptamers are
RNA, DNA, or RNA/DNA hybrids that form tertiary complexes. They specifically bind to
target molecules, suppressing or enhancing the pathways in which the target molecule is
involved. The figure has been adapted from Zogg et al. [115] and created with BioRenбґ
der.com
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
15
==PAGE:24==
RNA molecules with therapeutic effects are used to treat disease or disorder. RNAбґbased
therapies have gained significant attention in recent years due to their ability to regulate
gene expression, target specific molecular pathways, and potentially offer more precise
and customizable treatment compared to traditional small molecule drugs [115]. Curбґ
rently, there exist five primary categories of RNA therapeutics as shown in Figure 1.13.
Messenger RNAs (mRNAs) encode proteinsм╬ Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs), small
sequences of 15бґ25 nucleotides, can either promote or repress target gene expressionм╬
Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), which are doubleбґstranded and similar in size to ASOs,
primarily cause translational repression of target proteinsм╬ microRNAs (miRNAs) can inбґ
hibit protein synthesis when bound to mRNA targets (miRNA mimics) or free up mRNA by
binding to the miRNAs that repress translation (miRNA inhibitors)м╬ Aptamers, short singleбґ
stranded nucleic acids that form secondary and tertiary structures, interact with specific
enzymes or molecules to regulate various molecular pathways.
Most drugs on the market are either small molecules or proteins. Typically, smallбґmolecule
drugs act as competitive inhibitors against their target proteins. Proteinбґbased drugs bind
to target proteins, replace nonбґfunctional proteins, and supplement inadequate levels of a
specific target protein [116, 117]. However, RNAбґbased therapies hold promise for treating
diseases like diabetes [118], cancer [119], and HuntingtonБ─≥s disease [120]. Furthermore,
the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has already approved numerous
RNA therapies such as BNT162b2 [121], pegaptanib [122], patisiran [123], and with more
therapies in various clinical trial phases continuing to certify the efficacy of RNAбґbased
treatments for many diseases [115]. Creating new small molecules or antibodyбґbased
drugs is timeбґconsuming and spans several years. However, once the chemical structure
of RNA and the method of delivery to the body are wellбґdefined, RNAбґbased drugs can be
quickly designed and synthesized for clinical testing. One scenario is if a siRNAбґbased
drug is initially to address a disease resulting from gene overexpression in a specific orбґ
gan, a simple change in the siRNA sequences could potentially treat other diseases in
the same organ. Therefore, siRNA employed in liver cellбґspecific conjugates is developбґ
ing extensively as therapeutic agents for various liver metabolismбґrelated diseases [124].
An essential factor contributing to the advancement of RNAбґbased therapeutics pertained
to the effective management of the COVIDбґ19 pandemic and mitigation of its impact on
affected individuals, epitomized by the expedited development of the COVIDбґ19 vaccine.
BioNTech/Pfizer and Moderna were quick to develop mRNA sequences for their vaccine
candidates, tested them in animal experiments, and initiated clinical trials shortly after
the novel coronavirus sequence was released [125, 126]. While natural RNA is easily
degraded by native nuclease, its stability significantly improves when various modificaбґ
tions are applied during synthesis [127]. Furthermore, when these RNA are enclosed
with carriers like liposomes, they are effectively protected from nuclease degradation folбґ
lowing administration throughout the body, improving its longevity [128]. One example of
a longбґacting RNAбґbased drug is inclisiran. This drug is a synthetic siRNA designed to
specifically block the production of a protein called PCSK9. By doing so, it helps regulate
16
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:25==
cholesterol levels and can be beneficial for heart health. However, the exciting part is
that inclisiran can inhibit its target after just one injection, lasting more than six months
[129]. This resulted in the RNAбґbased drug lasting longer between doses and may be
less harmful than smallбґmolecule drugs that lose half the effectiveness within a few days
[130].
1.8
Endosomal escape
Drug delivery systems are vital in transporting therapeutic substances, referred to as the
Б─≥cargo complexБ─≥, into target cells. However, the journey encounters various obstacles as
they strive to enter cells. Not only must they pass through the cell membrane and struggle
with membrane proteins and receptors, but they also face the disturbing task of adapting
to the harsh endosomal environment. A common feature of the delivery system is that the
Б─≥cargo complex Б─≥, initially composed of the therapeutic substance and the delivery vehicle,
enters the cells through one or more endocytic mechanisms and is transported to the early
endosome as shown in Figure 1.14.
Figure 1.14: Schematic overview of endocytic uptake. Only a fraction of the cargo may be
recycled back to the cell surface via recycling endosome. The figure has been adapted
from Pei et al. [131] and created with BioRender.com
With a slightly acidic pH around 6.3, the early endosome slowly transforms into the late
endosome. During the process, vacuolar ATPase pumps protons into the endosome and
regularly lowers the luminal pH to around 5.5 [132]. Eventually, the late endosome merges
with the lysosome (with a pH of 4бґ5), where lysosomal enzymes break down the intraluбґ
minal contents. This process is part of the Б─≥endosomal/lysosomal pathway Б─≥, a series of
cellular processes that regulate the trafficking and degradation of various molecules. To
reach the cytosol, cargo must break accessible from this pathway before breaking down
inside the lysosome. Unfortunately, many nonбґviral delivery systems currently suffer from
inefficient endosomal escape processes [133] [134]. Consequently, most cargo becomes
trapped inside the endosome or lysosome [135, 136].
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
17
==PAGE:26==
1.8.1
pHбґsensitive endosomolytic peptides (pSEPs)
Achieving successful endosomal escape remains a formidable challenge in gene and drug
delivery. A particular category of peptide, known as Б─≥pHбґsensitive endosomolytic peptides
(pSEPs), can disrupt endosomal membranes due to changes in pH. These peptides are
designed to take advantage of the acidic environment found within the endosomal [91].
The pH gradient triggers specific peptides to undergo conformational changes or other
mechanisms that allow them to disrupt the endosomal membrane and help the cargo to
be released into the cytosol, as shown in Figure 1.15 and Figure 1.16 [91].
Figure 1.15: A) Illustrated, the anionic pSEP and nonбґlytic at physiological pH. It will beбґ
come cationic and highly lytic at endosomal pH. The figure has been adapted from Ahmad
et al. [91] and created with BioRender.com
Figure 1.16: B) Illustrated, the cationic pSEP interacts with the anionic endosomal memбґ
brane, leading to the endosomal membraneБ─≥s rupture and the escape of cargo into the
cytosol. The figure has been adapted from Ahmad et al. [91] and created with BioRenбґ
der.com
The mechanism of membrane rupture is still unclear, but anionic amino acids with pSEP
18
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:27==
help exit the endosomal system through two main processes: membrane fusion and memбґ
brane destabilization or breach. Ahmad et al. develop other pSEPs like aLLбґ37, aMel, and
aBom to help nanoparticles escape from endosomes [91]. The studies suggest that the
endosomal escape is still unknown. However, the discovery suggests that they likely exбґ
ploit the instability of the endosomal membrane to achieve their escape [137]. Utilizing
the pSEP aBom indicates a suitable option for achieving endosomal escape.
1.9
Synthesis of peptides and oligonucleotides
1.9.1
Peptides
Figure 1.17: Schmatice overview of the SPPS cycle and the following deprotection, workбґ
up, and purifications step.
Numerous techniques have been developed to create peptides and aim to understand
their properties in cellular processes, develop new drug candidates, and design innovaбґ
tive therapies for various diseases [138]. Development in peptide synthesis has facilitated
the creation of complex molecules that mimic natural peptides, leading to breakthroughs
in treatments for diseases such as cancer, infectious diseases, and chronic illnesses [139].
The two primary chemical techniques for peptide production are solidбґphase peptide synбґ
thesis (SPPS) and solutionбґphase synthesis (SPS) [138]. As SPPS was the chemical
method employed for this project, the following section will describe the technique. This
overview will cover the principles, procedures, and advantages of SPPS. SPPS is a powбґ
erful and widely used method for producing peptides. This technique has revolutionized
the field of peptide chemistry since its introduction by Robert Bruce Merrifield in 1963 and
earning him the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1984 [140]. SPPS has become the standard
approach for synthesizing peptides due to its efficiency, versatility, and ability to automate
the process [141]. The principle behind the SPPS is to build a peptide chain on a small
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
19
==PAGE:28==
solid support, usually a resin bead. This method makes adding one amino acid at a time
to the growing chain easy because the chain is attached to the solid support, and it is
simple to wash away any unwanted material after each step. This helps keep the process
clean and efficient, leading to a purer and higherбґquality final product [142]. Figure 1.17
shows a general overview of the SPPS reaction cycle. Not all resins are equalм╬ some
require additional steps to yield different functionalities. [143, 144, 145].
1.9.2
Oligonucleotide synthesis
Oligonucleotide synthesis is a fundamental process in molecular biology. It involves creбґ
ating short DNA or RNA sequences for various applications, from basic research to adбґ
vanced therapeutic interventions [127]. The origins of oligonucleotide synthesis can be
traced back to the pioneering work of Gobind Khorana and his team in the midбґ1960s.
Since then, millions of oligonucleotides have been synthesized annually for use in laboбґ
ratories worldwide [146]. For this project, the oligonucleotides were synthesized using
the SolidбґPhase method. However, several other synthesis methods are available, such
as Microarrayбґbased, enzymatic, solutionбґphase and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)бґ
based synthesis [147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152].
Solidбґphase synthesis is the predominant method for creating oligonucleotides. This techбґ
nique involves the sequential addition of nucleotide residues to a growing chain, which
is anchored to a solid support, typically a resin bead, Controlledбґpore glass (CPG), or
Polystyrene (PS) [146, 153]. This process makes it highly automated and efficient to synбґ
thesize oligonucleotides with high fidelity and in large quantities [154, 155, 156]. Over
the years, several methods for solutionбґphase oligonucleotide synthesis have been develбґ
oped, each of which presented its challenges [157]. The phosphoramidite method, which
Marvin Caruthers pioneered in the early 1980s and further work improved with solidбґphase
technology and automation, has become the preferred choice for oligonucleotides syntheбґ
sis [158, 159]. Phosphoramidite oligonucleotide synthesis proceeds in 3Б─≥ to Б─≥5 directions,
and in each synthesis cycle, one nucleotide is added. The phosphoramidite DNA/RNA
synthesis process includes several steps, as shown in Figure 1.18. The cycle is repeated
until the desired sequence is fully synthesized and detached from the solid support by
using a strong base and another reagent to remove the protection group [156, 160, 161,
162].
20
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:29==
Figure 1.18: Schematic overview of the steps involved in SolidбґPhase oligonucleotide
synthesis.
1.9.3
Bioconjugation Chemistry
Bioconjugation Chemistry is attributed to the process of chemically linking two molecules,
typically a biomolecule such as proteins, peptides, carbohydrates, or nucleic acid, with anбґ
other molecule, such as a wellбґknown drug or fluorescent dye [163, 164]. Bioconjugation
chemistry is used to develop targeted therapeutics, diagnostics, and molecular probes.
Bioconjugation relies on selecting appropriate chemical reactions that are efficient, speбґ
cific, and biocompatible. Some of the common bioconjugation techniques are described
below:
Б─╒ Amide Bond Formation: Using carbodiimide chemistry to link carboxyl groups to
amines [163, 165].
Б─╒ ThiolбґMaleimide Chemistry: Creating stable thioether bonds between thiols and
maleimides [166]
Б─╒ Click Chemistry: Azideбґalkyne cycloaddition is an adaptable and particular chemiбґ
cal reaction used in bioconjugation. It involves joining an azide group with an alkyne
group to form a stable triazole ring [163, 167].
Б─╒ StreptavidinбґBiotin Interaction: Using the strong nonбґcovalent bond between biбґ
otin and streptavidin for different purposes [168].
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
21
==PAGE:30==
1.10
Hypothesis: Design and Therapeutic Uses of Peptide
Carriers
This project is dedicated to synthesising a diverse range of peptides, each with unique
therapeutic applications, as depicted in Figure 1.19.
Figure 1.19: A table detailing the projectБ─≥s peptides, their sequences, applications and
function
1.10.1
The CPEP2 peptide
The CPEP2 peptide, a cyclic aptamer, will be further utilized in rheumatoid arthritis studies.
It will be conjugated with chitosan/hyaluronic acid nanoparticles along with hexylamine.
An overview of the application of CPEP2 is shown in Figure 1.20. This project focused on
the synthesis and purification of the CPEP2 peptide.
Figure 1.20: A schematic overview of the application of CPEP2 peptide.
22
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:31==
1.10.2
The CPEP2 C(ACM)
The CPEP2 C(ACM) cyclic peptide will be further employed in studying autoimmune disбґ
eases. This peptide will be conjugated to the drug dioxin using thiolбґmaleimide chemistry,
forming a stable thioether bond. The resulting conjugate will be tested on rodent models
to evaluate its effectiveness in inducing ILбґ17 and ILбґ22 cytokines from Th17 cells to proбґ
mote a proбґinflammatory effect or inducing ILбґ10 and TGFбґн╡ to elicit an antiбґinflammatory
effect. An overview of the CPEP2 C(ACM) application is shown in Figure 1.21. This
project focused on synthesizing and purifying the CPEP2 C(ACM) peptide.
Figure 1.21: A schematic overview of the application of CPEP2 C(acm) peptide.
1.10.3
The TAT peptide
The TAT peptide aims to facilitate the creation of a prodrug in conjunction with an acyclovir
complex. This complex comprises acyclovir, a linker molecule, and the Tatбґpeptide. By
integrating these components, the TAT peptide aims to enhance the therapeutic efficacy
and targeted delivery of acyclovir, potentially improving its clinical utility in antiviral treatбґ
ments. Combining the Tatбґpeptide and the linker is designed to ensure precise targeting
and controlled release of acyclovir, thereby optimizing its pharmacological profile. Figбґ
ure 1.22 provides an overview of the application of the TAT peptide in combination with
the acyclovir complex. This project focused on the synthesis and purification of the TAT
peptide.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
23
==PAGE:32==
Figure 1.22: A schematic overview of the application of TAT peptide
1.10.4
The combination of the iRGD, PepA, and aBom peptides
Combining iRGD, PepA, and aBom peptides aims to develop a siRNA prodrug specifiбґ
cally targeted at nonбґsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC). siRNA sequences are described
in section 5.4. In this combination, iRGD and PepA target tumour cell receptors, while
aBom facilitates endosomal escape. The [AlaбґPro] unit is appended seven times to the
last amino acid of iRGD and PepA, creating a spacer that ensures a sufficient distance
between the tumourбґtargeting peptide and the next component. This design maintains
the functionality of both iRGD/PepA and the subsequent component. Following the rigid
[AlaбґPro]7 blocks, 5бґhexynoic acid is added to facilitate binding to the next component, the
endosmotic peptide atom. The first amino acid of aBom is azido lysine, enabling CuAAC
conjugation with iRGD/PepA, which forms the peptide complex. An enzymatic cleavage
site, GluValCit, is then incorporated, allowing aBom to perform its function entirely within
the endosome without interference. After the peptide complex was made, 7бґazido hepбґ
tanoic acid was added, making it possible to click on the next component. The subsequent
component is a linker, which can be either enzymatically cleavable or photolabile. Finally,
the siRNA, equipped with a fluorophore on the sense strand at the 5Б─≥бґOH, is attached to
the linker. To enhance the stability of the siRNA, each sequence is synthesized using a
total of 8 methylated phosphoramidites. Figure 1.23 illustrates the assembly of the siRNA
prodrug designed to target NSCLC.
24
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:33==
Figure 1.23: A schematic overview of the siRNA prodrug in combination with iRGD, PepA,
and aBom
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
25
==PAGE:34==
2
Results
2.1
Synthesis and Characterization of Peptides
All peptides were synthesized using manual SolidбґPhase Peptide Synthesis (SPPS). Specifбґ
ically, TAT, iRGD, and PepA peptides were synthesized on Rink amide resin, while CPEP2,
CPEP2 C(acm), and aBOM peptides were synthesized on 2бґchlorotrityl chloride (2бґCTC)
resin. The peptides were characterized by MALDIбґTOF mass spectrometry. PepA and
iRGD were retained on the beads to facilitate subsequent onбґbead reactions. A small
amount of iRGD and PepA was cleaved from the resin using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)
with scavengers to characterize the mass. In contrast, aBOM was cleaved from the solid
support using hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) to preserve its protection groups. aBOM enбґ
countered some difficulties dissolving in 10 mL of ACN/MQ water (90:10) due to the hyбґ
drophobicity, but it was successfully freezeбґdried. Afterwards, aBOM was dissolved in
ACN and filtered before being subjected to HPLC for purification. The other peptides,
TAT, CPEP2, and CPEP2 C(ACM), were cleaved using trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) with
scavengers from the solid support, preбґpurified by ether precipitation and dissolved in ACбґ
N/MQ water (50:50), and freezeбґdried. Table 2.1 presents the mass of the crude product,
the calculated and the found mass.
Peptides:
Crude:
[M+H] + m/z, calculated:
[M+H] + m/z, found:
CPEP2
170 mg
2643,20
2632.83
CPEP2 C(ACM)
102,9 mg
3359.53
3358.26
TAT
178,9 mg
1728.07
1727.06
iRGD
Б─²On BeadsБ─²
2233,08
2237.91
PepA
Б─²On BeadsБ─²
2137.99
2124.53, 2163.32
aBOMбґFmoc
96,9 mg
2908.68
2939.44 g/mol
Table 2.1: Illustrates the mass of the crude product, the expected mass, and the measured
mass
As shown in Table 2.1, the calculated and found masses showed a slight variation for
CPEP2, CPEP2 ACM, TAT, but slightly different for iRGD, PepA and aBOM. One posбґ
sible explanation for this discrepancy is that these peptides were not subjected to cold
precipitation with diethyl ether or the calibration of MALDIбґTOF MS. As a result, residбґ
ual impurities are likely present in the samples, which could account for the variation in
the expected and measured masses. This lack of purification step might have led to inбґ
complete removal of byбґproducts or unreacted starting materials, thereby affecting the
overall purity of the peptides. The crude product was analyzed using RPбґHPLCБ─≥s analytбґ
ical column. The gradient, retention time (RT), wavelength of UVбґVis and integration of
the chromatograms are detailed in Figure 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4
26
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:35==
Figure 2.1: The chromatogram of the CPEP2 crude peptide including the gradient, retenбґ
tion time, UVбґVIS at 295nm and integration
Figure 2.2: The chromatogram of the CPEP2 C(ACM) crude peptide, including the gradiбґ
ent, retention time, UVбґVIS 280nm and integration. The blue domain indicates the collecбґ
tion of fractions.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
27
==PAGE:36==
Figure 2.3: The chromatogram of the TAT peptide with the alkyne handle crude peptide,
including the gradient, retention time, UVбґVIS 260nm and integration.
Figure 2.4: The chromatogram of the aBOM peptide, including the gradient, retention
time, UVбґVIS 260nm and integration.
28
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:37==
After analyzing the crude peptides, they underwent purification using a reverseбґphase
highбґperformance liquid chromatography (RPбґHPLC) column. The specifics of this puбґ
rification process, including the parameters and results, are thoroughly detailed in the
discussion section. This step ensured the removal of remaining impurities and enhanced
the purity and quality of the peptides for subsequent analyses. The peptide purities were
determined using HPLC, yielding a purity estimate of 93.50% for CPEP2 C(acm) and
57.58% for the TAT peptide. However, due to peak overlapping, purity assessment could
have been more feasible for CPEP2. The iRGD and PepA peptides remained immobilized
on beads, precluding purity determination. Characterization of the aBOMбґFmoc peptide
was pending due to time constraints, necessitating further analysis for purity evaluation.
Due to technical complexities, yields for the peptides were not calculated.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
29
==PAGE:38==
2.2
Oligonucelotide Synthesis
Of the twelve oligonucleotides, only two KASбґ339(S) and KASбґ340(scrбґS)Б─■were syntheбґ
sized with phosphoramidites (rA, rD, rC, rU, mA, mD, mC, mU), handбґcoupled, and purified
by RPбґHPLC. Tabel 2.2 illustartes the sequences of KASбґ339(S) and KASбґ340(scrбґS).
Oligonucleotides:
Sequence:
KASбґ339(S)
5Б─≥бґmGmGA GCU GmCmC CAU mGmAG AAA UmUmUбґ3Б─≥
KASбґ340(scrбґS)
5Б─≥бґmAmCG AAC GmAmU GCG mAmUA UGG CmUmUбґ3Б─≥
Table 2.2: The sequences of KASбґ339(S) and KASбґ340(scrбґS)
For handбґcoupling these oligonucleotides, 5бґhexynбґ1бґylбґ(2бґcyanoethyl)бґ(N,Nбґdiisopropyl)бґ
phosphoramidite was prepared under dry conditions due to the inactivation of phosphoбґ
ramidite. This involved stirring 2бґcyanoethylбґN,Nбґdiisopropylchlorophosphoramidite with
DIPEA, DCM, and 5бґhexynбґ1бґol for 2 hours in an inert atmosphere. Subsequently, a porбґ
tion of the handбґcoupling solution was combined with the DCI activator in a syringe for 5
minutes before being introduced into the solid support column where alkylation on Б─≥5бґOH
happened. Figure 2.5 Illustrates the procedure of the hand coupling reaction.
Figure 2.5: Schmative overview of the hand coupling reaction during solidбґphase oligonuбґ
cleotide synthesis.
After the hand coupling reaction, KASбґ339 and KASбґ340 were complete, cleaved from the
solid support, and subjected to TBDMS removal. RPбґHPLC then analyzed the oligonuбґ
cleotides. Figure 2.6, 2.7 illustrates the gradient retention time, and integration of the
chromatogram of KASбґ339 and KASбґ340.
30
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:39==
Figure 2.6: The chromatogram of crude KASбґ339, including the gradient, retention time,
UVбґVIS 280nm and integration.
Figure 2.7: The chromatogram of crude KASбґ340, including the gradient, retention time,
UVбґVIS 280nm and integration.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
31
==PAGE:40==
Oligonucleotides + Hand coupling + Perylene azide:
[M+H] + m/z, calculated
[M+H] + m/z, found:
KASбґ339
6848.3 + 613.22=7461.52
7143.19
KASбґ340
6848.3 + 613.22=7461.52
7475.37
Table 2.3: Illustrates the expected and measured mass of the oligonucleotides, includбґ
ing the Handбґcoupled motif and the perylene azide fluorophore product. The molecular
weight of 6848.3 g/mol was calculated for the oligonucleotides without Handбґcoupling and
perylene azide using the OligoAnalyzer Tool from Integrated DNA Technologies Inc. The
addition of the handбґcoupling and perylene azide was calculated by ChemDraw.
The HPLC chromatogram of KASбґ339 and KASбґ340 confirmed the presence of a distinct
peak in both oligonucleotides, indicating the successful completion of the hand coupling
process and the overall synthesis. The subsequent steps for KASбґ339 and KASбґ340
involved conjugating a dye via click chemistry using perylene azide and CuAAC.
As shown in Table 2.3, the mass calculated of KASбґ339 does not match the found mass.
Due to a technical issue, a different fluorophore was coupled. To confirm, the perylene
azide was analyzed by LCбґMS to determine its molecular weight. The measured mass
of KASбґ340 corresponds to the expected mass. The Oligonucleotides complex product
was analyzed using RPбґHPLCБ─≥s analytical column with a specific wavelength (445nm)
to determine if the perylene azide was clicked with the oligonucleotides, as illustrated in
Figure 2.8 and 2.9.
Figure 2.8: The chromatogram of KASбґ339 with perylene azide with the gradient. The
black line indicates the wavelength (280nm) for measuring the oligonucleotides. The blue
line indicates the specific wavelength (445nm) for the absorption of perylene azide. The
blue domain indicates the fraction collection, which was used to determine the mass on
MALDI afterwards.
32
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:41==
Figure 2.9: The chromatogram of KASбґ340 with perylene azide with the gradient. The
black line indicates the wavelength (280nm) for measuring the oligonucleotides. The blue
line indicates the specific wavelength (445nm) for the absorption of perylene azide. The
blue domain indicates the fraction collection, which was used to determine the mass on
MALDI afterwards.
Fractions F7, F10, and F11 from KASбґ339 and F14 and F15 from KASбґ340 were seбґ
lected to characterize the oligonucleotides with perylene azide further. These fractions
were analyzed using MALDIбґTOF to verify the incorporation of perylene azide into the
oligonucleotides. Unfortunately, the HPLC vials containing KASбґ339 and KASбґ340 were
left inside the autosampler of the HPLC for an extended period. This prolonged duration
caused degradation of the oligonucleotides, as indicated by the HPLC chromatogram.
The chromatogram showed distinct signs of degradation. The purity of fraction F7 from
KASбґ339 was determined to be 19.33%, while fraction F14 from KASбґ340 exhibited a puбґ
rity of 17.66%. Due to the degradation of both KASбґ339 and KASбґ340, yield calculations
were not performed.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
33
==PAGE:42==
3
Discussion
This thesis aims to utilize solid support methodologies for synthesizing the peptides CPEP2,
CPEP2 C(acm), TAT, iRGD, PepA, aBOM, as well as the oligonucleotides KASбґ339(S)
and KASбґ340(scrбґS). CPEP2 was previously synthesized by Khatri et al. [10], whereas
the other peptides and oligonucleotides have been discussed in various studies and reбґ
views, albeit with different modifications. Comparing their results with those obtained in
this study presents particular challenges. The design of conjugates in this work is novel reбґ
garding the stateбґofбґtheбґart and considers the following aspects: CPEP2 conjugates with
Chitosan/hyaluronic acid nanoparticles to autoimmune diseases, while CPEP2 C(acm)
will be conjugated with digoxin to study autoimmune diseases as well. The TAT peptide
will be conjugated with a PABбґCitбґVal linker and acyclovir to investigate the bloodбґbrain barбґ
rier (BBB) and brain diseases. The final conjugation arrangement of iRGD, PepA, aBOM,
and oligonucleotides delivers the siRNA prodrug to NSCLC. The synthetic methods emбґ
ployed in this work, such as solidбґphase peptide synthesis and solidбґphase oligonucleotide
synthesis, are compared to stateбґofбґtheбґart techniques. Purification and characterization
were conducted using RPбґHPLC and MALDIбґTOFбґMS. Specific issues related to each
part of the project are elaborated on below.
3.1
Peptides
3.1.1
The CPEP2 Peptide
As is illustrated in Figure 2.1, the chromatogram of the CPEP2 crude shows two distinбґ
guish peaks at retention times 8.377 min and 19.993 min. Khatri et al. [10] supporting
information indicates that only one peak should be present on the chromatogram. Figure
3.1 shows the chromatogram of the CPEP2 peptide from Khatri et al. and the synthesized
crude peptide CPEP2 from this project.
Figure 3.1: The chromatogram from A) The CPEP2 peptide from Khatri et al. [10] and B)
the crude CPEP2 peptide from this project.
34
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:43==
The peak observed at a retention time of 19.993 minutes is attributable to an oversight in
the deprotection process. Specifically, before cleaving the CPEP2 peptide from the solid
support, the last amino acid, cysteine, retained its Fmoc protection group. The inability to
remove this Fmoc group led to the appearance of a distinct peak at 19.993 minutes. This
second peak directly results from the incomplete deprotection step, highlighting the imporбґ
tance of thorough deprotection in ensuring accurate chromatographic profiles. Following
this observation, a test trial was conducted to remove the Fmoc protection group. For
this purpose, a backup CPEP2 peptide (Б─²exбґCPEP2Б─²) was utilized, which had been synбґ
thesized by previous students. The objective was to determine whether the Fmoc group
could be effectively removed from the peptide. This experiment aimed to rectify the issue
and ensure that the deprotection process could be successfully applied to the CPEP2
peptide. The Б─² exбґCPEP2Б─² peptide was initially analyzed using RPбґHPLC to identify its
composition. The resulting chromatogram is displayed in Figure 3.2
Figure 3.2: The chromatogram of the Б─²exбґCPEP2Б─² peptide.
As illustrated in Figure 2.1, a similar peak appears at 19.777 minutes, indicating the presбґ
ence of the Fmocбґprotected group. The exбґCPEP2 was dissolved in 2 ml ACN and 3 ml
MilliбґQ water to attempt deprotection, with 30 н╪l of piperidine added to the solution. After
20 minutes, the mixture was dried with N2 (to remove piperidine). An additional 2 ml of
ACN and MilliбґQ water was added, and RPбґHPLC reanalyzed the solution. Figure 3.3
illustrates this initial attempt to remove the Fmoc protection by adding 30 н╪l of piperidine.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
35
==PAGE:44==
Figure 3.3: The chromatogram of the Б─²exбґCPEP2Б─² peptide with the first attempt of adding
piperidine.
As illustrated in Figure 3.3, the Fmocбґprotection group is still present. To further investiбґ
gate, a mixture of 10 ml MilliбґQ water, 15 ml ACN, and 1 ml piperidine was added to the
solution and gently stirred manually for 20 minutes. Figure 3.4 illustrates the results of
the second attempt at removing the Fmoc protection group with piperidine.
Figure 3.4: The chromatogram of the Б─²test CPEP2Б─² peptide with second attempt of adding
piperidine.
36
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:45==
Figure 3.5: The chromatogram of the Б─²test CPEP2Б─² final. The blue domain indicates
fraction collection
Figure 3.6: The chromatogram of all the fractions from Figure 3.5
Figure 3.7: The mass spectrum of fractions F2 and F3 from Figure 3.5
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
37
==PAGE:46==
Many peaks are present in the HPLC chromatogram of Figure 3.4, indicating a partial
degradation of the peptide under current reaction conditions. After 20 minutes, the mixбґ
ture was dried by N2. Additional MilliбґQ water and ACN were then added to the solution,
which was subsequently analyzed by RPбґHPLC, as illustrated in Figure 3.5 Each fraction
from Figure 3.5 was reanalyzed by RPбґHPLC and characterized by MALDI. Figure 3.6
shows the chromatogram of the fractions, and Figure 3.7 The mass spectra of F2 and F3
from Figure 3.7 indicate a similar mass for the Б─²test CPEP2Б─² peptide without the Fmocбґ
protection group. Due to the chromatogram presented in Figure 3.5, isolating and purifying
the CPEP2 peptide would be exceedingly challenging. The complex chromatographic proбґ
file suggests potential difficulties separating the CPEP2 peptide from other components
in the mixture. Unfortunately, the initial CPEP2 peptide had to be discarded. Efforts were
made to synthesize a new batch of CPEP2, which was nearly complete. However, further
work on the new CPEP2 could not be continued due to time constraints.
3.1.2
The CPEP2 C(ACM) Peptide
The CPEP2 C(ACM) peptide underwent complete synthesis, including successfully reбґ
moving the final Fmocбґprotection group. The chromatogram, illustrated in Figure 2.2 proбґ
vides a detailed analysis of the peptide. Figure 2.2 demonstrates that the peaks were
not wellбґseparated. To address this issue, a test analysis was conducted using the RPбґ
HPLC preparation column to evaluate if it could achieve better peak separation as shown
in Figure 3.8
Figure 3.8: The chromatogram of CPEP2 C(ACM) test analysis on the RPбґHPLC prepaбґ
ration column with 1н╪l injection volumn. The blue domain indicates fraction collection
38
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:47==
Fractions F11, F20, F22, F27, F28, F29, F30, and F31 were characterized with MALDI
TOF MS. Fraction F11 showed a similar CPEP2 C(ACM) peptide mass and was further
purified. Figure 3.9 illustrates the purification analysis on the RPбґHPLC preparation colбґ
umn.
Figure 3.9: The chromatogram of CPEP2 C(ACM) purification analysis on the RPбґHPLC
preparation column. The blue domain indicates fraction collection.
After purification, all the fractions were analyzed by the RPбґHPLC analytic column, and
Figure 3.10 shows the chromatogram of the fractions.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
39
==PAGE:48==
Figure 3.10: The chromatogram of CPEP2 C(ACM) fractions F3 to F28 from Figure 3.9.
The collected fractions were further characterized through MALDI analysis. However, Figбґ
ure 3.11 displays only the most significant fractions.
Figure 3.11: The mass spectra of CPEP2 C(ACM) fractions F5, F6 and F7 from Figure
3.10.
40
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:49==
As illustrated in Figure 3.11, fraction F6 exhibited a mass of 3358.26 g/mol, which is most
closely matching the calculated mass of CPEP2 C(ACM). This fraction was then selected
for further processing and subsequently underwent cyclization.
Figure 3.12: The chromatogram of fraction F6 with gradient and integration
The collected fractions were further characterized through MALDI analysis. However, Figбґ
ure 3.11 displays only the most significant fractions. The cyclization conditions described
in section 5.3 were applied to fraction F6 of the CPEP2 C(ACM) peptide. Fraction F6
was dissolved in acetic acid and MilliбґQ water, adjusted using ammonium carbonate to
pH 6, and 25% DMSO was added. The solution was stirred for 24 hours under a flow of
O2. Figure 3.13 illustrates the cyclization process of CPEP2 C(acm), while Figure 3.14
illustrates the chromatogram of the fraction F6 cyclization test, and Figure 3.15 shows the
comparison of the cyclized versus nonбґcyclized F6.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
41
==PAGE:50==
Figure 3.13: Illustrates the cyclization process of CPEP2 C(ACM).
Figure 3.14: The chromatogram of the cyclization test of the fraction F6.
42
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:51==
Figure 3.15: The chromatogram of the cyclized F6 (blue line) vs. nonбґcyclized F6 (black
line).
Figure 3.15 shows that the retention times for the cyclized and nonбґcyclized fraction F6
are similar, with the peaks overlapping. This suggests that the cyclization process for fracбґ
tion F6 was not very effective. If the cyclization process is successful, the peaks will shift
on the chromatogramБ─≥s right side, indicating hydrophobicity and a change in the retention
time. Unfortunately, due to time constraints, no further optimization was performed. For
future work, one potential strategy could be to extend the cyclization reaction time or to
increase the volume of DMSO in the solution to improve the efficiency of the cyclization
process. The oxidizing reagent in this reaction is oxygen. However, other mild oxidizing
reagents could be investigated for cyclization. Efficient oxidation of various thiols affords
the corresponding disulfides using 1,3бґdibromoбґ5,5бґdimethylhydantoin (DBDMH) as oxiбґ
dant under both solution and solventбґfree conditions [169].
3.1.3
The TATбґpeptide
The TATбґpeptide synthesis was completed by adding an alkyne handle, specifically 6бґ
Hexynoic Acid. This modification will facilitate its subsequent use in click chemistry reacбґ
tions. Incorporating the alkyne handle is a critical step, as it enables the Tatбґpeptide to
participate in bioorthogonal conjugation processes, allowing for further functionalization
and applications in various biochemical assays and studies. Figure 2.3 illustrates differбґ
ent peaks at different retention times. These peaks were collected and characterized by
MALDI. The collection of the fractions is shown in Figure 3.16 and mass spectra by MALDI
are shown in Figure 3.17
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
43
==PAGE:52==
Figure 3.16: The chromatogram of crude TAT peptide and the blue domain indicated the
fraction collection.
Figure 3.17: The mass spectra of fractions F2, F3, F4, F9, F13 and F14 of the crude TAT
peptide.
As illustrated in Figure 3.17, the desired mass of 1727 g/mol, corresponding to the TAT
peptide, is present in fraction F2. However, the presence of a 1983.3 g/mol mass suggests
that one of the arginine residues remains protected by 2,2,4,6,7бґpentamethylбґdihydroбґ
benzofuranбґ5бґsulfonyl (Pbf, 253.3 g/mol). Similarly, the 2236.32 g/mol mass indicates
that two arginine residues are still protected. Fractions F2, F3, and F4 consistently show
this pattern of single Pbfбґprotected arginine residues. In fractions F9 and F13, a new
mass of 2488 g/mol appears, suggesting three Pbfбґprotected arginine residues. Lastly,
fraction F14 exhibits a 2744 g/mol mass, indicating that four arginine residues remain proбґ
tected. This pattern of incomplete deprotection suggests that the TAT peptide is not fully
deprotected despite undergoing a 6бґhour deprotection process. Following this observaбґ
44
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:53==
tion, TFA and scavenger were added to the falcon tube containing the TAT peptide, and
the mixture was given an additional 6 hours to deprotect the arginine residues further, folбґ
lowing ether precipitation. Figure 3.18 shows the chromatogram of the additional 6 hours
of deprotection of the arginine residues.
Figure 3.18: The chromatogram of the crude TAT peptide, after an additional 6 hours of
deprotection and subsequent ether precipitation.
The chromatogram in Figure 3.18 shows a highбґintensity peak at the retention time of
2.547 minutes, indicating it could be the deprotected TAT peptide. Retention times of
13.823 minutes, 16.087 minutes, and 17.757 minutes suggest that the TAT peptide reбґ
mains partially deprotected. Due to time constraints, no further analysis was conducted
on this peptide. For future work, it is recommended that the gradient be adjusted to betбґ
ter position the retention time of 2.547 minutes towards the middle of the chromatogram.
Following this adjustment, the fractions corresponding to the peaks should be collected
and characterized using MALDI. Once the desired mass has been confirmed, the specific
peak can be further purified using the preparative column of the HPLC. Finally, the purified
product should be freezeбґdried for further analysis and use.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
45
==PAGE:54==
3.1.4
The aBOM peptide
As illustrated in Figure 2.4, distinct peaks are observed at retention times of 6.257 min,
9.207 min, 11.330 min, 12.327 min, and 13.570 min for the crude aBOM peptide. The
proximity of these peaks indicates that a different gradient is required to achieve better
separation. Figure 3.19 presents the chromatogram of aBOM using different gradients,
with collected peaks subsequently characterized by MALDI.
Figure 3.19: The chromatogram of the crude aBOM peptide with the adjusted gradient.
The blue regions indicate the collected fractions.
46
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:55==
Figure 3.20: The chromatogram of the fractions F10, F14, F16, F20, F23, F29 and F30
of aBOM after the purification.
Figure 3.21: The mass spectra of the fractions F10, F14, F16, F20, F23, F29 and F30 of
aBOM after the purification.
Fraction F20 exhibited a mass of 2939.44 g/mol, matching the exact mass of the aBOM
peptide with an additional proton [M + H]+. This observation confirms the presence of
the BOM peptide. However, the detection of higher masses suggests the presence of
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
47
==PAGE:56==
impurities, likely due to the ether precipitation preбґpurification process. Fraction X was
collected and freezeбґdried. Due to time constraints, no further analysis was conducted.
In future work, fractions xx should be characterized using MALDI and analyzed by RPбґ
HPLC to determine the exact mass of the aBOM peptide. These characterized fractions
should then be utilized for the final assembly with PepA/iRGD and the oligonucleotides.
3.1.5
The PepA/iRGD peptide
The PepA and iRGD peptides were retained on the beads for the final assembly with the
aBOM peptide. To determine the masses of PepA and iRGD, a small portion was cleaved
from the resin using TFA and scavengers. Following cleavage, the peptides were diluted
to 1:100 and 1:1000 concentrations and analyzed by MALDI. Figure 3.22 shows the mass
spectra of iRGD and PepA.
Figure 3.22: The mass spectra of PepA (left) and iRGD (right)
As illustrated in Figure 3.22, the measured masses for PepA are 2124.538 g/mol and
2163.32 g/mol, while for iRGD, it is 2237.791 g/mol. The exact mass of PepA is 2137.99
g/mol, showing a difference of 25.33 g/mol in one measurement, likely indicating the presбґ
ence of a sodium ion [M+Na]+. A key reason why the calculated and found mass of
PepA are different is suspected to be the calibration of the MALDIбґTOF MS instrument.
Overall, the mass spectra confirm the presence of PepA and iRGD peptides, indicating
they are suitable for the final arrangement with aBOM. Due to time constraints, no furбґ
ther work was completed. For future efforts, iRGD or PepA should be conjugated with
aBOM via a click reaction between the alkyne handle on iRGD/PepA and the azide on
aBOM. Subsequently, this conjugate can be clicked with the linker, oligonucleotides and
the fluorophore.
3.2
Oligonucleotides
3.2.1
KASбґ339(S) and KASбґ340(AS)
The chromatogram depicted in Figure 2.6 and Figure 2.7 reveals distinct peaks at various
retention times, suggesting successful Hand coupling reactions. The prominent peak at
the retention time of 11.833 min for KASбґ339 and at the retention time of 9,727 min for KASбґ
340 signifies the primary product peak. However, smaller peaks in the chromatogram inбґ
dicate truncation, indicative of incomplete synthesis or oligonucleotide degradation. After
48
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:57==
this observation, the KASбґ338 and KASбґ340 were further used for conjugation with peryбґ
lene azide and the method is described in 5.6. After the conjugation with perylene azide,
the oligonucleotides were analyzed by RPбґHPLC as shown in Figure 2.8 and Figure 2.9.
The analysis of fraction F7 from KASбґ339 and fraction F14 from KASбґ340, as illustrated in
Figure 3.23, was conducted using HPLC. These fractions were further characterized by
MALDIбґTOF MS, as depicted in Figure 3.24.
Figure 3.23: The chromatogram of KASбґ339 fraction F7 (left) from Figure 2.8 and KASбґ
340 fraction F14 (right) from Figure 2.9
Figure 3.24: The mass spectra of KASбґ339 fraction F7 (left) from Figure 2.8 and KASбґ340
fraction F14 (right) from Figure 2.9
KASбґ339 exhibits a measured mass slightly lower than expected, with a 318.33 g/mol
discrepancy due to a technical issueм╬ a different fluorophore was coupled. Figure 3.25 deбґ
picts various analogues of perylene azide. It is evident from Figure 3.25 that the perylene
azide on the left aligns well with the mass of KASбґ339 (without the Handбґcoupling). In conбґ
trast, the perylene azide on the right corresponds to KASбґ340 (with the Handбґcoupling).
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
49
==PAGE:58==
Figure 3.25: Analogues of the perylene azide. The one on the left is expected to react
with KASбґ339, while the one on the right is anticipated to react with both KASбґ339 and
KASбґ340.
An LCбґMS sample was analyzed to investigate the fluorophore in the DMSO solution furбґ
ther. The result from the LCбґMS spectra does not reveal any specific mass correspondбґ
ing to either perylene azide, despite the expectation that they would be detectable via
UV. These findings suggest that the contents of the vial labelled as containing perylene
azide remain ambiguous and require further investigation. Subsequently, KASбґ339 and
KASбґ340 were purified and collected using the preparation column on the RPбґHPLC. Unбґ
fortunately, as depicted in Figure 3.26, both KASбґ339 and KASбґ340 exhibited significant
degradation. As a result, no further studies could be conducted using these samples.
Figure 3.26: The chromatogram illustrated the degradation of KASбґ339 (left) and KASбґ340
(right)
50
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:59==
4
Conclusion
The peptides CPEP2, CPEP C(ACM), TAT, iRGD, PepA, and aBOM were successfully
synthesized via SPPS. However, several challenges impacted the final results and necesбґ
sitated further work.
For CPEP2, an initial oversight in deprotecting the last Fmoc group was addressed through
a test procedure. Although the mass of the test CPEP2 was confirmed, separating peaks
postбґdeprotection proved difficult, preventing the isolation of a pure peptide. This led
to the decision to synthesize a new batch of CPEP2. The CPEP2 C(acm) peptide also
posed separation challenges, with one fraction showing the correct mass but still containбґ
ing impurities. Additionally, the initial cyclization attempt for this peptide was unsuccessful,
indicating the need for further optimization of the cyclization conditions.
The TAT peptide presented another challenge with the presence of Pbf protection on the
arginine residues. An additional 6бґhour deprotection step improved the chromatogram,
suggesting better removal of the protecting groups, but complete deprotection was not
achieved within the timeframe available for this study.
The synthesis of the aBOM peptide was successful, but impurities were detected. The
collected fractions require further characterization by MALDI to confirm their identity and
purity.
A small amount of PepA and iRGD peptides was cleaved from the resin and analyzed
by MALDIбґTOF, confirming their expected masses. Despite this, further purification and
characterization are needed for complete validation. Due to time constraints, the final
arrangement of PepA/iRGD, aBOM with oligonucleotides still needs to be completed. The
following steps involve conjugating the protected aBOM with PepA or iRGD, identifying
and purifying the resulting product, and then conjugating it with an oligonucleotide linker
and fluorophore.
KASбґ339 and KASбґ340 oligonucleotides were successfully synthesized using an Expedite
synthesizer and handбґcoupled and conjugated with perylene azide via a click reaction.
However, mass spectrometry results indicated that a different perylene azide analogue
might have been used in the reaction, likely due to the fluorophore being in solution with
DMSO. Unfortunately, the purification of KASбґ339 and KASбґ340 was unsuccessful due to
degradation of the samples.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
51
==PAGE:60==
5
Experimental Methods
5.1
Instrumental
5.1.1
The Thermo Scientific UltiMate 3000 HPLC
The Thermo Scientific UltiMate 3000 HPLC system was used to purify both peptides and
oligonucleotides in the reverse phase. For peptide purification, MQбґwater and acetonitrile
(0.1% TFA) were used as eluents, interacting with the hydrophobic stationary phase, causбґ
ing peptides to elute with increasing proportions of the organic phase. For oligonucleotide
purification, Buffer A (0.05M TEAA in MQ H2O) and Buffer B (25% Buffer A + 75% ACN)
were employed. Several detectors, including UV detectors, are used with HPLC to idenбґ
tify separated biomolecules. Oligonucleotides absorb UV light at 260 nm, while peptides
absorb it at 214 nm. The peaks detected are collected separately for further characterбґ
ization. Oligonucleotide IPбґRPбґHPLC analysis and purification were performed using a
Thermo Scientific DNAPac RP column (4 н╪m, 100 x 3.0 mm). Peptide analysis and puбґ
rification were conducted on the same system using a Thermo Scientific Hypersil GOLD
C18 column (5 н╪m, 175 ц┘, 150 x 10 mm).
5.1.2
Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization бґ Time of Flight
(MALDIбґTOF)
The mass of the peptides and oligonucleotides was determined using Matrix Assisted
Laser Desorption/Ionization бґ Time of Flight (MALDIбґTOF). In mass spectrometry, molecules
or their fragments are separated based on their massбґtoбґcharge ratio. This process inбґ
volves ionizing the molecules through various techniques and transferring them into the
gas phase, with the ionization technique influencing the degree of fragmentation. MALDI
is a common ionization method for analysing biomolecules such as peptides, lipids, sacбґ
charides, and other organic macromolecules. The sample is mixed with a suitable matrix
and applied to an analysis plate. The choice of matrix depends on the type of molecules
being analyzed: 2,5бґdihydroxybenzoic acid and н╠бґcyanoбґ4бґhydroxycinnamic acid are typбґ
ically used for peptides, while 3бґhydroxypicolinic acid is used for oligonucleotides.
5.1.3
Expedite 8909 Oligo Synthesizer
The oligonucleotides were synthesized in 1н╪mol scale using solid support (CPG 1000ц┘,
Sigma Aldrich) on Expedite 8909 Oilgo Synthesizer. Reagents, including TCA Deblock,
DCI Activator 0.25 M, Oxidizer 0.02 M, CapA, and CapB, were procured from Sigma
Aldrich. Phosphoramidites (rA, rD, rC, rU, mA, mD, mC, mUм╬ Sigma Aldrich) were preбґ
pared as 0.07 M solutions in dry ACN and flushed with Ar before installation onto the
synthesis system.
52
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:61==
5.2
Peptides
All peptides were synthesized using SPPS, with each amino acid coupled manually. CPEPE2
and CPEP2 C(ACM) and aBom were synthesized on 2бґchlorotrityl chloride (CTC) resin,
while TAT, iRGD, and PepA were synthesized on rink amide resin. The sequences were:
Б─╒ CPEP2: CHHPGIAEFPSбґCitбґGKSYSYSKQFCбґOH
Б─╒ CPEP2 C(ACM): C(acm)бґVAAAAбґCHHPGIAEFPSбґCitбґGKSYSYSKQFCбґOH
Б─╒ aBom: LysN3бґGluValCitбґINVGILGLLGEALSEKбґц÷AlaбґFmoc
Б─╒ TAT:: QPRRRQRRKKRQбґHeptбґ6бґynamide
Б─╒ iRGD: CDPGKDGRCAPAPAPAPAPAPAPбґHeptбґ6бґynamide
Б─╒ PepA: CNGQGEQCAPAPAPAPAPAPAPбґHeptбґ6бґynamide
Figure 5.1 illustrates the SolidбґPhase Peptide Synthesis of 2бґChlorotrityl chloride resin
and Rink amide resin.
Figure 5.1: Schematic overview of the 2бґChlorotrityl chloride resin and Rink amide resin
in SPPS.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
53
==PAGE:62==
5.3
Protocol for SPPS with 2бґchlorotrityl chloride (CTC) and
Rink amide resin
Activation of CTC resin and coupling of first amino acid: First, the standard solidбґ
phase extraction (SPE) filtration column was washed twice with dry DCM. Next, 2бґchlorotrityl
chloride (loading 1.0 mmol/g, 100 mg) was added to the column, and the beads were
washed twice more with dry DCM to swell. The beads were then activated with a mixture
of 0.4 ml thionyl chloride and 10 ml dry DCM for 1 hour, followed by washing with dry
DCM (3 cycles of 2 minutes each). In a 2 ml Eppendorf vial, the esterification of the 2бґ
chlorotrityl chloride linker with the first Fmocбґprotected amino acid (4 eq.) was carried out
using DIPEA (N,Nбґdiisopropylethylamine), (6 eq.) in dry DCM, preactivating the mixture
for 5 minutes. This mixture was then added to the SPE column with the activated beads,
and the reaction was allowed to proceed for 2 hours with 15 minutes of manual shaking.
After 2 hours, the SPE columns were washed once with dry DCM. The exact amount of
amino acid and reagents were added to the SPE columns for a second coupling to ensure
a complete reaction between the linker and the first amino acid. The reaction lasted anбґ
other 2 hours with 15 minutes of manual shaking. Following the reaction, the SPE columns
were washed sequentially with DMF, DCM, and DMF (3 cycles of 2 minutes each)
Coupling of first amino acid on Rink amide resin: First, reactions are conducted in
standard SPE filtration columns. Rink amide resin (0.75 mmol/g, 133 mg) is added to
the SPE columns and washed three times with DMF to swell the resin/beads. The Fmoc
group is removed from the linker using 20% piperidine in DMF (2x30 min each), followed
by washing with DMF, DCM, and DMF (3x2 min each solvent). In a 2 ml Eppendorf vial, the
desired Fmocбґprotected amino acid (4 eq.), HATU 1бґ[Bis(dimethylamino)methylene]бґ1Hбґ
1,2,3бґtriazolo[4,5бґb]pyridinium 3бґoxide hexafluorophosphate), (4 eq.), and DIPEA (6 eq.)
are mixed with DMF and preactivated for 5 minutes. This activated mixture is added to the
SPE column, and the reaction proceeds for 2 hours with 15 minutes of manual shaking.
After 2 hours, the SPE columns are washed once with DMF, and the same amount of
amino acid and reagents are added (doubling coupling) to ensure a complete reaction
between the linker and the first amino acid. The reaction time is also 2 hours with 15
minutes of manual shaking. After the reaction, the SPE columns are washed sequentially
with DMF, DCM, and DMF (3x2 min for each solvent).
54
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:63==
Figure 5.2: Schematic overview of Rink amide resin and its coupling mechanism. The
piperidine (base) deprotonated the Fmoc protection group and relocated the electrons
around it so the Fmoc group gets cleaved. The product is the amine resin group, and the
byproducts are CO2 and 9бґmethyleneбґfluorene. Subsequently, The amino acid with the
Fmoc protection group reacts with DIPEA (base) and HATU. HATU is commonly used in
amine acylation reactions for amide formation. DIPEA deprotonated the carboxylic acid
site from the amino acid. The resulting carboxylate anion attacks the electronбґdeficient
carbon atom of HATU. The resulting OHAt anion reacts with a newly activated carboxylic
acidбґderived intermediate to form an OAtбґactivated ester. The amine reacts with OAtбґ
activated ester to form the amide pdt. The same procedures are also used to elongate
the peptides
Elongation of the Peptide: The peptide elongation process utilizes the SPE filtration
columns from the previous step. If the columns were stored in the freezer, they should be
washed two to three times with DMF to swell the beads/resinм╬ otherwise, this step can be
skipped. Next, 20% piperidine in DMF removes the Fmoc group from the previous amino
acid (2 min+18 min). The columns are washed with DMF, DCM, and DMF (3x2 min each
solvent). Meanwhile, in an Eppendorf vial, the desired Fmocбґprotected amino acid (4 eq.),
HATU (4 eq.), and DIPEA (6 eq.) are mixed with DMF and allowed to preactivate for 5
minutes. This mixture is then added to the SPE column, and the reaction can proceed
for 2 hours with 15 minutes of manual shaking. After the reaction, the SPE columns are
rewashed with DMF, DCM, and DMF (3x2 min for each solvent).This elongation process
is repeated until the final Fmocбґprotected amino acid is added. For bulky Fmocбґprotected
amino acids, a double coupling (repeating the coupling step) is performed to ensure a
complete coupling.
Cleavage of 2бґchlorotrityl chloride and Rink amide resin: The cleavage involves treatбґ
ing the resin with TFA and scavengers (Phenol/H2O MilliбґQ/TIPS) to release the rink resin
and deprotected peptide. The finished SPE columns are washed three times with DCM
and the cleavage solution (TFA/Phenol/H2O MilliбґQ/TIPS) is added to the SPE columns
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
55
==PAGE:64==
for 3x60 min and 3x120 min for deprotection of ployбґarginine sequences. For 1 ml of
cleavage solution, 880н╪l of TFA/ 50mg of phenol/ 50н╪l of MilliбґQ water/ 20н╪l of TIPS was
made. The deprotected peptide solution was collected in a falcon tube, and nitrogen air
was added to remove the TFA of the solution. To maintain sidechain protection groups
and cleave from the 2бґchlorotrityl resin, use 20% hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) in DCM
(3x30 min).
Figure 5.3: Schematic overview of the cleavage mechanism of resin. TFA protonated the
amide from the Rink resin, which is covalently linked with peptides. It initiates electron
movement, leading to the cleavage of the Rink resin and forming an imine compound.
The nucleophile (H2O) subsequently undergoes an attack on the carbocation, and the
lone electron pair from oxygen initiates conjugation, forming an amide linkage with the
peptides. Radicals are produced in the course of cleavage and deprotection. However,
they will engage in reactions with scavengers. Cleavage from the Rink resin results in
an amide group at the end, while cleavage from the 2бґchlorotrityl resin yields a hydroxyl
group.
Ether precipitation: This method removes excess TFA, deprotected byproducts, and exбґ
cess scavengers. Cold diethyl ether is added to the Falcon tubes containing the peptides.
The Falcon tubes are weighed to ensure equal mass for centrifugation. The tubes are
centrifuged for 7 minutes at 7000 rpm. After centrifugation, the crude peptide pellet is
replaced with a new cold diethyl ether, and the process is repeated three times. Once
ether precipitation is complete, the crude peptide pellet is dissolved in acetonitrile and
MilliбґQ water mixture, with the ratio adjusted based on the peptideБ─≥s hydrophilicity or hyбґ
drophobicity. Afterwards, the falcon tubes are put into an ice bath (dry ice and acetone)
for freezeбґdrying. The peptides were purified by HPLC and characterized by MALDI.
Cyclization via disulfide, DMSO oxidation: The cysteinyl peptide was dissolved in
acetic acid (approximately 5 mg/mL) and then diluted to a concentration of 1бґ1000 mg/mL
with MilliбґQ water. The pH was adjusted to 6 using ammonium carbonate, followed by the
addition of DMSO (25% by volume) and purging with airflow. The mixture was stirred for
24 hours, and the reaction was monitored using MALDIбґTOF MS or HPLC. The product
56
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:65==
was then freezeбґdried and isolated by HPLC.
5.4
Oligonucleotides
Two of the twelve RNA strands were synthesized at a scale of 1 н╪mol using universal solid
support (CUTAG CPG, 1000 ц┘, 1 н╪mol/g, Sigma Aldrich) on Expedite Nucleic Acid Sysбґ
tems. Reagents, including TCA Deblock, DCI Activator 0.25 M, Oxidizer 0.02 M, CapA,
and CapB, were procured from Sigma Aldrich. Phosphoramidites (rA, rD, rC, rU, mA, mD,
mC, mUм╬ Sigma Aldrich) were prepared as 0.07 M solutions in dry ACN and flushed with
Ar before installation onto the synthesis system. Figure 5.4 illustrated oligonucleotide synбґ
thesis with reagents. Figure 5.5 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10 illustrates the individual steps and
mechanisms involved in synthesising the oligonucleotides the oligonucleotide synthesis.
The sequences described below and categorized according to their respective targets:
1. PLK1:
Б─╒ KASбґ333 (S): 5Б─≥бґmUmGA AGA UmCmU GGA mGmGU GAA AmUmUбґБ─≥3
Б─╒ KASбґ341(AS):5 Б─≥Б─⌠mUmUU CAC CmUmC CAG mAmUC UUC AmUmUбґ3Б─≥
Б─╒ KASбґ334(scrбґS):5Б─≥Б─⌠mAmUA GAG AmGmA ACG mUmUG AGG UmUmUбґ3Б─≥
Б─╒ KASбґ342(scrбґAS):5Б─≥Б─⌠mAmCC UCA AmCmG UUC mUmCU CUA UmUmUбґ3Б─≥
2. KRAS:
Б─╒ KASбґ337(S): 5Б─≥Б─⌠mUmUU GUU CmUmC UmAmU AAU GG mUmUбґ3Б─≥
Б─╒ KASбґ343(AS): 5 л│Б─⌠mCmCA UUA UmAmG AmGmA ACA AA mUmUбґ3Б─≥
Б─╒ KASбґ338(scrбґS): 5Б─≥Б─⌠mGmAU AAG AmUmA CmAmA CAA CU mUmUбґ3Б─≥
Б─╒ KASбґ344(scrбґAS):5 л│Б─⌠mAmGU UGU UmGmU AmUmC UUA UC mUmUбґ3Б─≥
3. EGFR:
Б─╒ KASбґ339(S): 5Б─≥Б─⌠mGmGA GCU GmCmC CAU mGmAG AAA UmUmUбґ3Б─≥
Б─╒ KASбґ345(AS): 5Б─≥Б─⌠mAmUU UCU CmAmU GGG mCmAG CUC CmUmUбґ3Б─≥
Б─╒ KASбґ340(scrбґS): 5Б─≥Б─⌠mAmCG AAC GmAmU GCG mAmUA UGG CmUmUбґ3Б─≥
Б─╒ KASбґ346(scrбґAS): 5 л│Б─⌠mGmCC AUA UmCmG CAU mCmGU UCG UmUmUбґ3Б─≥
All sense strands will be functionalized with an alkyne via manual coupling with 5бґhexynбґ1бґ
ylбґ(2бґcyanoethyl)бґ(N,Nбґdiisopropyl)бґphosphoramidite. Meanwhile, the antisense strands
will be divided into two groups and functionalized with either a photocleavable linker or
the GluValCitбґPABбґOH linker.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
57
==PAGE:66==
Figure 5.4: A schematized overview of the oligonucleotide synthesis with the reagents.
Figure 5.5: A schematic overview of the initial step between the CUTAG CPG linker and
the first Oligonucleotide.
58
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:67==
Figure 5.6: A schematized overview phosphoramidite nucleoside detritylation mechanism
of acidбґcatalyzed of a DMTбґprotected nucleoside phosphoramidite
Figure 5.7: A schematized overview of the phosphoramidite coupling mechanism of the
phosphoramidite coupling reaction step 1).
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
59
==PAGE:68==
Figure 5.8: A schematized overview of the phosphoramidite capping mechanism in phosбґ
phoramidite oligonucleotide synthesis step 2).
Figure 5.9: A schematized overview of the phosphoramidite oxidation mechanism of the
oxidation step 3) in phosphoramidite oligonucleotide synthesis.
Figure 5.10: A schematized overview of cleavage of an oligonucleotide from the universal
support.
60
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:69==
5.5
Hand couplings of Oligonucelotides
5.5.1
The synthesis of
5бґHexynбґ1бґylбґ(2бґcyanoethyl)бґ(N,Nбґdiisopropyl)бґphosphoramidite
The 5бґHexynбґ1бґylбґ(2бґcyanoethyl)бґ(N,Nбґdiisopropyl)бґphosphoramidite was prepared followбґ
ing the established procedure as described in the protocol [170]. In an ovenбґdried 25
ml roundбґbottom flask, 5бґHexynбґ1бґol (1.164 mmol, 114 mg/129 н╪l, 194 eq.) was mixed
with dry DCM (4.8 ml) and DIPEA (1.164 mmol, 150 mg/202 н╪l, 194 eq.).
The mixбґ
ture was flushed with argon to maintain an inert atmosphere. Next, 2бґcyanoethylбґN,Nбґ
diisopropylchlorophosphoramidite (1.059 mmol, 250 mg, 176 eq.) was added. The reбґ
action mixture was stirred for 2 hours under an inert atmosphere and later used for hand
coupling with oligonucleotides. Figure 5.11 illustrates a schematic overview of the reaction
and the corresponding reagent.
Figure
5.11:
The
reaction
of
5бґHexynбґ1бґyl(2бґcyanoethyl)бґ(N,Nбґdiisopropyl)бґ
phosphoramidite and the corresponding reagent.
5.5.2
Hand couplings of sense strands:
The crude of 5бґHexynбґ1бґylБ─■(2бґcyanoethyl)Б─■(N,Nбґdiisopropyl)бґphosphoramidite was used
for handбґcoupling to oligonucleotides KASбґ339 and KASбґ340, and the procedure was the
same for both strands. The beads of the oligonucleotides column on the Expedite Nucleic
Acid Synthesis System were swollen with dry ACN, deblocked with TCA Debolck, washed
with dry ACN and put on Б─²HoldБ─². In a 1 ml syringe (purged with argon beforehand), a mixбґ
ture of 5бґHexynбґ1бґylбґ(2бґcyanoethyl)бґ(N,Nбґdiisopropyl)бґphosphoramidite (350 н╪l) and DCI
Activator (600 н╪l) was prepared and activated for 5 minutes. This mixture was pushed
through the oligonucleotide columns at 100 н╪l/min. This process was repeated, but with 5бґ
Hexynбґ1бґylбґ(2бґcyanoethyl)бґ(N,Nбґdiisopropyl)бґphosphoramidite reduced to 250н╪l and DCI
Activator increased to 800н╪l and again pushed through the oligonucleotide columns at the
same rate. Then, the beads were washed with ACN, oxidized, rewashed and dried with
nitrogen. Figure 5.12 illustrates the reaction of the Hand coupling.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
61
==PAGE:70==
Figure 5.12: Overview of the reaction scheme of the Hand coupling with the oligonuбґ
cleotides on solid support.
5.5.3
Universal Support Cleavage, TBDMS Deprotection, and RNA
Purification
All synthesized RNA strands underwent the same workбґup procedure, which included
cleavage from the solid support, deprotection, and TBDMS removal. After RNA syntheбґ
sis, the column was dried and transferred into an RNase and DNaseбґfree PCRбґclean vial
with filters. Cleavage from the solid support and phosphate and nucleobase deprotecбґ
tion was achieved by incubating the sample with 1 ml of methylamine (33% in EtOH) at
65б╟C for 2 hours. This was followed by cooling to room temperature for 15 minutes and
then refrigerating for 10 minutes. The mixture was filtered into 2 ml PCRбґclean Eppenбґ
dorf tubes, followed by washing the solid supports and filters with 0.5 ml of 50:50 (96%
ethanol/MilliбґQ water). The oligonucleotides were then spun down and evaporated to dryбґ
ness overnight in a speedбґvac at 45б╟C. To remove the TBDMS protecting groups from the
2бґposition of the oligonucleotides, 100 н╪l of desilylation reagent (a mixture of 375 н╪l Nбґ
methylбґ2бґpyrrolidone, 187.5 н╪l triethylamine, and 250 н╪l triethylamine trihydrofluorid) was
added to the dry pellet. The mixture was then incubated on a thermomixer at 67б╟C for 3бґ4
hours.
After desilylation, 10н╪l of quenching reagent (consisting of 1000н╪l 3M sodium acetate and
1н╪l diethyl pyrocarbonate) was added, causing the mixture to become cloudy. Next, 15н╪l
of 5M NaClO4 was added, followed by 1 ml of cold acetone to precipitate the oligonuбґ
cleotide. The mixture was then placed in the freezer for 30 min.
The samples underwent centrifugation at 1330 rpm for 10 minutes at 21б╟C. After centrifuбґ
gation, the supernatant was carefully decanted, and the pellet was washed with 1 ml of
cold acetone. The mixture was then vortexed, centrifuged, and the supernatant was reбґ
moved. This washing process was repeated three times in total. After the final wash, the
acetone was evaporated from the pellet, which was subsequently dried using a speedбґ
vac until the oligonucleotide pellet achieved complete dryness. Subsequently, the dried
oligonucleotide was dissolved in 1 ml of MilliQ water and subjected to vortexing. The conбґ
centration was then measured, and the characterization and purity of the crude product
were verified using MALDIбґTOF analysis and HPLC.
62
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:71==
5.6
Click chemistry of oligonucleotides with Perylene Azide
Perylene azide was clicked to KASбґ339 and KASбґ340, with the perylene azide preбґdissolved
in DMSO (1н╪mol of oligonucleotides, 1.74 eq of preylene). Two Eppendorf vials containing
nucleotides prepared a mixture of 50 н╪l MilliбґQ water, 200 н╪l TEAA buffer (1M, pH=7.01),
and 175 н╪l perylene azide solution in DMSO. Subsequently, a small amount (less than 2
mg) of THTPA ligands and a small amount of Cu(I) were added to each Eppendorf vial.
The contents were mixed using a micropipette and immediately degassed with argon. The
vials were shaken at 65 б╟C for 5 hours on the Thermomixer and then at room temperature
overnight. Finally, the vials were placed in a speed vacuum to evaporate the liquid. After
evaporation, 0.5 ml of Buffer A (0.05M TEAA, pH=7.4) was added. The solution was then
filtered using a syringe filter and purified by HPLC. Figure 5.13 illustrates a proposed click
reaction mechanism between oligonucleotides and perylene.
Figure 5.13: 1) Activation of Alyne: The terminal alkyne coordinates with Cu(I). A
о─бґcomplex forms between copper(I) and terminal alkyne.
2) Formation of Copperбґ
Acetylide Complex:The alkyne, now activated by the coordination with Cu(I). Another
CU(I) is added, which lowers the pKa value to 9.8, so no base is needed to create the
copper acetylide. 3) Addition of Azide: The azide group coordinates with the copperбґ
acetylide complex, forming a reactive intermediate. This intermediate is a sixбґmembered
ring structure connected by the azide and the alkyne, allowing the azide to act as a nuбґ
cleophile and form the first C.N bond. 4) Formation of Metallacycle Intermediate: The
resulting sixбґmembered ring then converts to the 1,2,3.triazole product product by forming
the second CбґN bond. 5): The intermediate undergoes cycloaddition to form a copperбґ
containing metallacycle. This step involves the nucleophilic attack of the nitrogen in the
azide on the activated alkyne carbon, resulting in the second form of the CбґN bond. 6)
Regeneration of the Catalyst: The Cu(I) catalyst is regenerated and can enter another
catalytic cycle.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
63
==PAGE:72==
References
[1]
Jitesh Kumar, Lokesh Kumar Narnoliya, and Anshu Alok. Б─°A CRISPR technology
and biomolecule production by synthetic biology approachБ─². In: Current developбґ
ments in biotechnology and bioengineering. Elsevier, 2019, pp. 143Б─⌠161.
[2]
Lakshmi Priya Datta, Shivaprasad Manchineella, and Thimmaiah Govindaraju. Б─°Biomoleculesбґ
derived biomaterialsБ─². In: Biomaterials 230 (2020), p. 119633.
[3]
Amit Kumar Nayak et al. Б─°Biological macromolecules in drug deliveryБ─². In: Biologiбґ
cal Macromolecules. Elsevier, 2022, pp. 339Б─⌠379.
[4]
Anas Ahmad, Mohammad Imran, and Haseeb Ahsan. Б─°Biomarkers as biomedical
bioindicators: approaches and techniques for the detection, analysis, and validaбґ
tion of novel Biomarkers of diseasesБ─². In: Pharmaceutics 15.6 (2023), p. 1630.
[5]
AndreiбґFlavius Radu and Simona Gabriela Bungau. Б─°Management of rheumatoid
arthritis: an overviewБ─². In: Cells 10.11 (2021), p. 2857.
[6]
L Klareskog et al. Б─°The importance of differencesм╬ On environment and its interacбґ
tions with genes and immunity in the causation of rheumatoid arthritisБ─². In: Journal
of internal medicine 287.5 (2020), pp. 514Б─⌠533.
[7]
RLF Nienhuis, E Mandema, and C Smids. Б─°New serum factor in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis: the antiperinuclear factorБ─². In: Annals of the rheumatic disбґ
eases 23.4 (1964), p. 302.
[8]
Mireille Sebbag et al. Б─°The antiperinuclear factor and the soбґcalled antikeratin antiбґ
bodies are the same rheumatoid arthritisбґspecific autoantibodies.Б─² In: The Journal
of clinical investigation 95.6 (1995), pp. 2672Б─⌠2679.
[9]
VFAM Derksen, TWJ Huizinga, and D Van Der Woude. Б─°The role of autoantibodies
in the pathophysiology of rheumatoid arthritisБ─². In: Seminars in immunopathology.
Vol. 39. Springer. 2017, pp. 437Б─⌠446.
[10]
Sangita Khatri et al. Б─°Cyclic citrullinated peptide aptamer treatment attenuates
collagenбґinduced arthritisБ─². In: Biomacromolecules 23.5 (2022), pp. 2126Б─⌠2137.
[11]
Marie Nicole V David and Mrin Shetty. Б─°DigoxinБ─². In: (2020).
[12]
Sebastiano Virgadamo et al. Б─°Digoxin: A systematic review in atrial fibrillation, conбґ
gestive heart failure and post myocardial infarctionБ─². In: World journal of cardiology
7.11 (2015), p. 808.
[13]
Quanguo He et al. Б─°Towards improvements for penetrating the bloodБ─⌠brain barrierБ─■
recent progress from a material and pharmaceutical perspectiveБ─². In: Cells 7.4
(2018), p. 24.
[14]
N Joan Abbott et al. Б─°Structure and function of the bloodБ─⌠brain barrierБ─². In: Neuroбґ
biology of disease 37.1 (2010), pp. 13Б─⌠25.
[15]
H Kadry, B Noorani, and L Cucullo. A bloodбґbrain barrier overview on structure,
function, impairment, and biomarkers of integrity. Fluids Barriers CNS 17 (1): 69.
2020.
64
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:73==
[16]
N Joan Abbott. Б─°Dynamics of CNS barriers: evolution, differentiation, and modulaбґ
tionБ─². In: Cellular and molecular neurobiology 25 (2005), pp. 5Б─⌠23.
[17]
Friederike Pfeiffer et al. Б─°Claudinбґ1 induced sealing of bloodБ─⌠brain barrier tight juncбґ
tions ameliorates chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitisБ─². In: Acta
neuropathologica 122 (2011), pp. 601Б─⌠614.
[18]
Xingrong Liu et al. Б─°Development of a computational approach to predict bloodбґ
brain barrier permeabilityБ─². In: Drug metabolism and disposition 32.1 (2004), pp. 132Б─⌠
139.
[19]
David E Clark. Б─°In silico prediction of bloodБ─⌠brain barrier permeationБ─². In: Drug
discovery today 8.20 (2003), pp. 927Б─⌠933.
[20]
Rikki N Waterhouse. Б─°Determination of lipophilicity and its use as a predictor of
bloodБ─⌠brain barrier penetration of molecular imaging agentsБ─². In: Molecular Imagбґ
ing & Biology 5.6 (2003), pp. 376Б─⌠389.
[21]
M Paul Gleeson. Б─°Generation of a set of simple, interpretable ADMET rules of
thumbБ─². In: Journal of medicinal chemistry 51.4 (2008), pp. 817Б─⌠834.
[22]
MD Habgood, DJ Begley, and NJ Abbott. Б─°Determinants of passive drug entry into
the central nervous systemБ─². In: Cellular and molecular neurobiology 20 (2000),
pp. 231Б─⌠253.
[23]
Lawrence Lin et al. Б─°SLC transporters as therapeutic targets: emerging opportuniбґ
tiesБ─². In: Nature reviews Drug discovery 14.8 (2015), pp. 543Б─⌠560.
[24]
Ines Sauer et al. Б─°An apolipoprotein Eбґderived peptide mediates uptake of sterically
stabilized liposomes into brain capillary endothelial cellsБ─². In: Biochemistry 44.6
(2005), pp. 2021Б─⌠2029.
[25]
I Glezer, AR Simard, and S Rivest. Б─°Neuroprotective role of the innate immune
system by microgliaБ─². In: Neuroscience 147.4 (2007), pp. 867Б─⌠883.
[26]
Nathalie Davoust et al. Б─°From bone marrow to microglia: barriers and avenuesБ─². In:
Trends in immunology 29.5 (2008), pp. 227Б─⌠234.
[27]
DC Anthony et al. Б─°Ageбґrelated effects of interleukinбґ1 beta on polymorphonuбґ
clear neutrophilбґdependent increases in bloodбґbrain barrier permeability in rats.Б─²
In: Brain: a journal of neurology 120.3 (1997), pp. 435Б─⌠444.
[28]
Jorge Correale and Andrц╘s Villa. Б─°The bloodБ─⌠brainбґbarrier in multiple sclerosis:
functional roles and therapeutic targetingБ─². In: Autoimmunity 40.2 (2007), pp. 148Б─⌠
160.
[29]
C Kaur and EA Ling. Б─°Blood brain barrier in hypoxicбґischemic conditionsБ─². In: Curбґ
rent neurovascular research 5.1 (2008), pp. 71Б─⌠81.
[30]
Brinda S Desai et al. Б─°BloodБ─⌠brain barrier pathology in AlzheimerБ─≥s and Parkinбґ
sonБ─≥s disease: implications for drug therapyБ─². In: Cell transplantation 16.3 (2007),
pp. 285Б─⌠299.
[31]
Stefan Remy and Heinz Beck. Б─°Molecular and cellular mechanisms of pharmacoreбґ
sistance in epilepsyБ─². In: Brain 129.1 (2006), pp. 18Б─⌠35.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
65
==PAGE:74==
[32]
Holger Bronger et al. Б─°ABCC drug efflux pumps and organic anion uptake transбґ
porters in human gliomas and the bloodбґtumor barrierБ─². In: Cancer research 65.24
(2005), pp. 11419Б─⌠11428.
[33]
Matthias C Grieshaber and Josef Flammer. Б─°Does the bloodбґbrain barrier play a
role in Glaucoma?Б─² In: Survey of ophthalmology 52.6 (2007), S115Б─⌠S121.
[34]
David J Begley, Charles C Pontikis, and Maurizio Scarpa. Б─°Lysosomal storage
diseases and the bloodбґbrain barrierБ─². In: Current pharmaceutical design 14.16
(2008), pp. 1566Б─⌠1580.
[35]
Crystal R Leibrand et al. Б─°HIVбґ1 Tat disrupts bloodбґbrain barrier integrity and inбґ
creases phagocytic perivascular macrophages and microglia in the dorsal striatum
of transgenic miceБ─². In: Neuroscience letters 640 (2017), pp. 136Б─⌠143.
[36]
Craig B Wilen, John C Tilton, and Robert W Doms. Б─°HIV: cell binding and entryБ─².
In: Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in medicine 2.8 (2012), a006866.
[37]
Michal Lichtenstein et al. Б─°TAT for enzyme/protein delivery to restore or destroy
cell activity in human diseasesБ─². In: Life 11.9 (2021), p. 924.
[38]
Erez Koren et al. Б─°Cellбґpenetrating TAT peptide in drug delivery systems: proteбґ
olytic stability requirementsБ─². In: Drug delivery 18.5 (2011), pp. 377Б─⌠384.
[39]
Barbara Ensoli et al. Б─°Tat protein of HIVбґ1 stimulates growth of cells derived from
KaposiБ─≥s sarcoma lesions of AIDS patientsБ─². In: Nature 345.6270 (1990), pp. 84Б─⌠
86.
[40]
Ibolya E Andrц║s et al. Б─°HIVбґ1 Tat protein alters tight junction protein expression
and distribution in cultured brain endothelial cellsБ─². In: Journal of neuroscience
research 74.2 (2003), pp. 255Б─⌠265.
[41]
Supriya D Mahajan et al. Б─°Tight junction regulation by morphine and HIVбґ1 tat
modulates bloodБ─⌠brain barrier permeabilityБ─². In: Journal of clinical immunology 28
(2008), pp. 528Б─⌠541.
[42]
Hong Pu et al. Б─°Limited role of COXбґ2 in HIV Tatбґinduced alterations of tight junction
protein expression and disruption of the bloodБ─⌠brain barrierБ─². In: Brain research
1184 (2007), pp. 333Б─⌠344.
[43]
Waleed Elballa et al. Б─°Peptides and Their Delivery to the BrainБ─². In: Peptide Therбґ
apeutics: Fundamentals of Design, Development, and Delivery. Springer, 2022,
pp. 237Б─⌠266.
[44]
Max Roser and Hannah Ritchie. Cancer. 29бґ04,2024. 2015. URL: https://ourworldindata.
org/cancer..
[45]
Jehad F Alhmoud et al. Б─°DNA damage/repair management in cancersБ─². In: Adбґ
vances in Medical Biochemistry, Genomics, Physiology, and Pathology (2021),
pp. 309Б─⌠339.
[46]
Errol C Friedberg. Fixing your damaged and incorrect genes. World Scientific,
2019.
66
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:75==
[47]
Julien Vignard, Gladys Mirey, and Bernard Salles. Б─°Ionizingбґradiation induced DNA
doubleбґstrand breaks: a direct and indirect lighting upБ─². In: Radiotherapy and Onбґ
cology 108.3 (2013), pp. 362Б─⌠369.
[48]
Gissela BorregoбґSoto, Rocд╠л│o OrtizбґLцЁpez, and Augusto RojasбґMartд╠л│nez. Б─°Ionizing
radiationбґinduced DNA injury and damage detection in patients with breast cancerБ─².
In: Genetics and molecular biology 38 (2015), pp. 420Б─⌠432.
[49]
Wendy J Cannan and David S Pederson. Б─°Mechanisms and consequences of
doubleбґstrand DNA break formation in chromatinБ─². In: Journal of cellular physiology
231.1 (2016), pp. 3Б─⌠14.
[50]
Upadhyayula Sai Srinivas et al. Б─°ROS and the DNA damage response in cancerБ─².
In: Redox biology 25 (2019), p. 101084.
[51]
Asma Saleem Qazi and Kanwal Tariq. Therapeutic Approaches in Cancer Treatбґ
ment. Vol. 185. Springer Nature, 2023.
[52]
Genevieve Housman et al. Б─°Drug resistance in cancer: an overviewБ─². In: Cancers
6.3 (2014), pp. 1769Б─⌠1792.
[53]
Bц╪е÷ra CesurбґErgц╪n and Devrim DemirбґDora. Б─°Gene therapy in cancerБ─². In: The
Journal of Gene Medicine 25.11 (2023), e3550.
[54]
Deanna Cross and James K Burmester. Б─°Gene therapy for cancer treatment: past,
present and futureБ─². In: Clinical medicine & research 4.3 (2006), pp. 218Б─⌠227.
[55]
Sayda M Elbashir et al. Б─°Duplexes of 21бґnucleotide RNAs mediate RNA interferбґ
ence in cultured mammalian cellsБ─². In: nature 411.6836 (2001), pp. 494Б─⌠498.
[56]
B Weiss, G Davidkova, and LбґW Zhou. Б─°Antisense RNA gene therapy for studying
and modulating biological processesБ─². In: Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences
CMLS 55 (1999), pp. 334Б─⌠358.
[57]
Ghanbar Mahmoodi Chalbatani et al. Б─°Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) in cancer
therapy: a nanoбґbased approachБ─². In: International journal of nanomedicine (2019),
pp. 3111Б─⌠3128.
[58]
Md Abdus Subhan and VP Torchilin. Б─°siRNA based drug design, quality, delivery
and clinical translationБ─². In: Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and Medicine
29 (2020), p. 102239.
[59]
Robyn P Hickerson et al. Б─°Stability study of unmodified siRNA and relevance to
clinical useБ─². In: Oligonucleotides 18.4 (2008), pp. 345Б─⌠354.
[60]
Congбґfei Xu and Jun Wang. Б─°Delivery systems for siRNA drug development in
cancer therapyБ─². In: Asian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 10.1 (2015), pp. 1Б─⌠
12.
[61]
Jonathan K Watts, Glen F Deleavey, and Masad J Damha. Б─°Chemically modified
siRNA: tools and applicationsБ─². In: Drug discovery today 13.19бґ20 (2008), pp. 842Б─⌠
855.
[62]
Parvez Khan et al. Б─°RNAбґbased therapies: a cog in the wheel of lung cancer deбґ
fenseБ─². In: Molecular cancer 20 (2021), pp. 1Б─⌠24.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
67
==PAGE:76==
[63]
Gil Pinheiro et al. Б─°Identifying relationships between imaging phenotypes and lung
cancerбґrelated mutation status: EGFR and KRASБ─². In: Scientific reports 10.1 (2020),
p. 3625.
[64]
Chunxiao Zhu et al. Б─°Targeting KRAS mutant cancers: from druggable therapy to
drug resistanceБ─². In: Molecular Cancer 21.1 (2022), p. 159.
[65]
YuбґTing Shao et al. Б─°The application of the RNA interference technologies for
KRAS: current status, future perspective and associated challengesБ─². In: Current
Topics in Medicinal Chemistry 19.23 (2019), pp. 2143Б─⌠2157.
[66]
Anita Midha, Simon Dearden, and Rose McCormack. Б─°EGFR mutation incidence
in nonбґsmallбґcell lung cancer of adenocarcinoma histology: a systematic review
and global map by ethnicity (mutMapII)Б─². In: American journal of cancer research
5.9 (2015), p. 2892.
[67]
Zhefeng Li et al. Б─°Nonбґsmallбґcell lung cancer regression by siRNA delivered through
exosomes that display EGFR RNA aptamerБ─². In: nucleic acid therapeutics 31.5
(2021), pp. 364Б─⌠374.
[68]
Styliani Iliaki, Rudi Beyaert, and Inna S Afonina. Б─°Poloбґlike kinase 1 (PLK1) signalбґ
ing in cancer and beyondБ─². In: Biochemical pharmacology 193 (2021), p. 114747.
[69]
Zhixian Liu, Qingrong Sun, and Xiaosheng Wang. Б─°PLK1, a potential target for
cancer therapyБ─². In: Translational oncology 10.1 (2017), pp. 22Б─⌠32.
[70]
Sujin Kang, Sooyeun Lee, and Soyeun Park. Б─°iRGD peptide as a tumorбґpenetrating
enhancer for tumorбґtargeted drug deliveryБ─². In: Polymers 12.9 (2020), p. 1906.
[71]
Beatrice S Ludwig et al. Б─°RGDбґbinding integrins revisited: how recently discovered
functions and novel synthetic ligands (reбґ) shape an everбґevolving fieldБ─². In: Canбґ
cers 13.7 (2021), p. 1711.
[72]
Tambet Teesalu et al. Б─°Cбґend rule peptides mediate neuropilinбґ1бґdependent cell,
vascular, and tissue penetrationБ─². In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciбґ
ences 106.38 (2009), pp. 16157Б─⌠16162.
[73]
Kazuki N Sugahara et al. Б─°Tissueбґpenetrating delivery of compounds and nanoparбґ
ticles into tumorsБ─². In: Cancer cell 16.6 (2009), pp. 510Б─⌠520.
[74]
M Nieberler et al. Exploring the role of RGDбґrecognizing integrins in cancer. Canбґ
cers (Basel) 9: 116. 2017.
[75]
David A Calderwood. Б─°Integrin activationБ─². In: Journal of cell science 117.5 (2004),
pp. 657Б─⌠666.
[76]
Kazuki N Sugahara et al. Б─°A tumorбґpenetrating peptide enhances circulationбґindependent
targeting of peritoneal carcinomatosisБ─². In: Journal of Controlled Release 212 (2015),
pp. 59Б─⌠69.
[77]
Derick Lau et al. Б─°Peptide ligands targeting integrin н╠3н╡1 in nonбґsmall cell lung
cancerБ─². In: Lung Cancer 52.3 (2006), pp. 291Б─⌠297.
[78]
Jibin Guan et al. Б─°iRGDбґliposomes enhance tumor delivery and therapeutic effiбґ
cacy of antisense oligonucleotide drugs against primary prostate cancer and bone
metastasisБ─². In: Advanced functional materials 31.24 (2021), p. 2100478.
68
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:77==
[79]
Gulsah ErelбґAkbaba et al. Б─°Radiationбґinduced targeted nanoparticleбґbased gene
delivery for brain tumor therapyБ─². In: ACS nano 13.4 (2019), pp. 4028Б─⌠4040.
[80]
Dejiu Zhang et al. Б─°Molecular mechanisms of eukaryotic translation fidelity and
their associations with diseasesБ─². In: International Journal of Biological Macroбґ
molecules (2023), p. 124680.
[81]
Jessica Forbes and Karthik Krishnamurthy. Б─°Biochemistry, peptideБ─². In: (2020).
[82]
Lei Wang et al. Б─°Therapeutic peptides: current applications and future directionsБ─².
In: Signal Transduction and Targeted Therapy 7.1 (2022), p. 48.
[83]
Karen Steward. Б─°Essential Amino Acids: Chart, Abbreviations and StructureБ─². In:
Technology Network (2019), pp. 1Б─⌠18.
[84]
Donald Voet and Judith G Voet. Biochemistry. John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
[85]
Geoffray Leriche, Louise Chisholm, and Alain Wagner. Б─°Cleavable linkers in chemбґ
ical biologyБ─². In: Bioorganic & medicinal chemistry 20.2 (2012), pp. 571Б─⌠582.
[86]
Jonathan D Bargh et al. Б─°Cleavable linkers in antibodyБ─⌠drug conjugatesБ─². In: Chemбґ
ical Society Reviews 48.16 (2019), pp. 4361Б─⌠4374.
[87]
Sijie Guo et al. Б─°Advances in peptideбґbased drug delivery systemsБ─². In: Heliyon
(2024).
[88]
Ewerton Cristhian Lima de Oliveira et al. Б─°Biological membraneбґpenetrating pepбґ
tides: computational prediction and applicationsБ─². In: Frontiers in Cellular and Inбґ
fection Microbiology 12 (2022), p. 838259.
[89]
NIPEPбґTPP Cargo. Б─°Novel peptideбґbased tissueбґdelivery technologyБ─². In: ().
[90]
So Hee Nam, Joonhyuck Park, and Heebeom Koo. Б─°Recent advances in selecбґ
tive and targeted drug/gene delivery systems using cellбґpenetrating peptidesБ─². In:
Archives of Pharmacal Research 46.1 (2023), pp. 18Б─⌠34.
[91]
Aqeel Ahmad and Javed Masood Khan. Б─°pHбґsensitive endosomolytic peptides in
gene and drug delivery: Endosomal escape and current challengesБ─². In: Journal
of Drug Delivery Science and Technology 76 (2022), p. 103786.
[92]
Matjaе╬ Zorko and ц°lo Langel. Б─°Cellбґpenetrating peptidesБ─². In: Cell penetrating pepбґ
tides: methods and protocols (2022), pp. 3Б─⌠32.
[93]
Alessandro Gori et al. Б─°Cell Penetrating Peptides: Classification, Mechanisms, Methбґ
ods of Study, and ApplicationsБ─². In: ChemMedChem 18.17 (2023), e202300236.
[94]
Jing Xie et al. Б─°Cellбґpenetrating peptides in diagnosis and treatment of human disбґ
eases: from preclinical research to clinical applicationБ─². In: Frontiers in pharmacolбґ
ogy 11 (2020), p. 697.
[95]
Margus Pooga and ц°lo Langel. Б─°Classes of cellбґpenetrating peptidesБ─². In: Cellбґ
penetrating peptides: methods and protocols (2015), pp. 3Б─⌠28.
[96]
Burcu Ucar et al. Б─°Synthesis and applications of synthetic peptidesБ─². In: Peptide
Synthesis. IntechOpen, 2019.
[97]
Eric Vivц╗s, Julien Schmidt, and Andrц╘ Pц╗legrin. Б─°Cellбґpenetrating and cellбґtargeting
peptides in drug deliveryБ─². In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)бґReviews on
Cancer 1786.2 (2008), pp. 126Б─⌠138.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
69
==PAGE:78==
[98]
Huifeng Zhang et al. Б─°Recent Advances of CellбґPenetrating Peptides and Their Apбґ
plication as Vectors for Delivery of Peptide and ProteinбґBased Cargo MoleculesБ─².
In: Pharmaceutics 15.8 (2023), p. 2093.
[99]
Xiaoshu Jing and Kang Jin. Б─°A gold mine for drug discovery: Strategies to deбґ
velop cyclic peptides into therapiesБ─². In: Medicinal research reviews 40.2 (2020),
pp. 753Б─⌠810.
[100]
Lingyu Song et al. Б─°Screening and optimization of phage display cyclic peptides
against the WDR5 WBM siteБ─². In: RSC Medicinal Chemistry 14.10 (2023), pp. 2048Б─⌠
2057.
[101]
Ryan A Bottens and Tohru Yamada. Б─°Cellбґpenetrating peptides (CPPs) as theraбґ
peutic and diagnostic agents for cancerБ─². In: Cancers 14.22 (2022), p. 5546.
[102]
Elisabete Gonцїalves, Eric Kitas, and Joachim Seelig. Б─°Binding of oligoarginine to
membrane lipids and heparan sulfate: structural and thermodynamic characterizaбґ
tion of a cellбґpenetrating peptideБ─². In: Biochemistry 44.7 (2005), pp. 2692Б─⌠2702.
[103]
Shiroh Futaki. Б─°Membraneбґpermeable arginineбґrich peptides and the translocation
mechanismsБ─². In: Advanced drug delivery reviews 57.4 (2005), pp. 547Б─⌠558.
[104]
Wouter PR Verdurmen and Roland Brock. Б─°Biological responses towards cationic
peptides and drug carriersБ─². In: Trends in pharmacological sciences 32.2 (2011),
pp. 116Б─⌠124.
[105]
Andrц╘ Ziegler. Б─°Thermodynamic studies and binding mechanisms of cellбґpenetrating
peptides with lipids and glycosaminoglycansБ─². In: Advanced drug delivery reviews
60.4бґ5 (2008), pp. 580Б─⌠597.
[106]
Fatemeh Madani and Astrid Grцєslund. Б─°Membrane molecular interactions and inбґ
duced structures of CPPsБ─². In: Cell Penetrating Peptides: Methods and Protocols
(2022), pp. 153Б─⌠165.
[107]
Jolene L Lau and Michael K Dunn. Б─°Therapeutic peptides: Historical perspectives,
current development trends, and future directionsБ─². In: Bioorganic & medicinal
chemistry 26.10 (2018), pp. 2700Б─⌠2707.
[108]
Vladimir Khatskelevich Khavinson et al. Б─°Peptide regulation of gene expression: A
systematic reviewБ─². In: Molecules 26.22 (2021), p. 7053.
[109]
Frederick Grant Banting et al. Б─°Pancreatic extracts in the treatment of diabetes
mellitusБ─². In: Canadian Medical Association Journal 12.3 (1922), p. 141.
[110]
Wen Hou, Xiaohong Zhang, and ChuanбґFa Liu. Б─°Progress in chemical synthesis of
peptides and proteinsБ─². In: Transactions of Tianjin University 23 (2017), pp. 401Б─⌠
419.
[111]
Donald P Levine. Б─°Vancomycin: a historyБ─². In: Clinical infectious diseases 42.Supбґ
plement_1 (2006), S5Б─⌠S12.
[112]
Keld Fosgerau and Torsten Hoffmann. Б─°Peptide therapeutics: current status and
future directionsБ─². In: Drug discovery today 20.1 (2015), pp. 122Б─⌠128.
[113]
J Frank Henderson and Alan Robb Phillips Paterson. Nucleotide metabolism: an
introduction. Academic Press, 2014.
70
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:79==
[114]
Ruairi J Mackenzie. Б─°DNA vs. RNA? 5 Key Differences and ComparisonБ─². In: Techбґ
nology Networks (2018), pp. 1Б─⌠6.
[115]
Hannah Zogg, Rajan Singh, and Seungil Ro. Б─°Current advances in RNA theraбґ
peutics for human diseasesБ─². In: International journal of molecular sciences 23.5
(2022), p. 2736.
[116]
Manoj Kumar Yadav et al. Б─°Clinical applications of proteinбґbased therapeuticsБ─². In:
ProteinбґBased Therapeutics. Springer, 2023, pp. 23Б─⌠47.
[117]
Vimal Kumar et al. Б─°Therapeutic proteins: developments, progress, challenges,
and future perspectivesБ─². In: 3 Biotech 14.4 (2024), p. 112.
[118]
Moqbel Ali Moqbel Redhwan et al. Б─°siRNA a promising tool for diabetes complicaбґ
tionsБ─². In: OpenNano 13 (2023), p. 100174.
[119]
Han Sun et al. Б─°mRNAбґbased therapeutics in cancer treatmentБ─². In: Pharmaceutics
15.2 (2023), p. 622.
[120]
Hidetoshi Komatsu. Б─°Innovative therapeutic approaches for HuntingtonБ─≥s disease:
From nucleic acids to GPCRбґtargeting small moleculesБ─². In: Frontiers in Cellular
Neuroscience 15 (2021), p. 785703.
[121]
Fernando P Polack et al. Б─°Safety and efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covidбґ19
vaccineБ─². In: New England journal of medicine 383.27 (2020), pp. 2603Б─⌠2615.
[122]
Evangelos S Gragoudas et al. Б─°Pegaptanib for neovascular ageбґrelated macular
degenerationБ─². In: New england journal of medicine 351.27 (2004), pp. 2805Б─⌠2816.
[123]
David Adams et al. Б─°Patisiran, an RNAi therapeutic, for hereditary transthyretin
amyloidosisБ─². In: New england journal of medicine 379.1 (2018), pp. 11Б─⌠21.
[124]
Aaron D Springer and Steven F Dowdy. Б─°GalNAcбґsiRNA conjugates: leading the
way for delivery of RNAi therapeuticsБ─². In: Nucleic acid therapeutics 28.3 (2018),
pp. 109Б─⌠118.
[125]
Lisa A Jackson et al. Б─°An mRNA vaccine against SARSбґCoVбґ2Б─■preliminary reбґ
portБ─². In: New England journal of medicine 383.20 (2020), pp. 1920Б─⌠1931.
[126]
Mark J Mulligan et al. Б─°Phase I/II study of COVIDбґ19 RNA vaccine BNT162b1 in
adultsБ─². In: Nature 586.7830 (2020), pp. 589Б─⌠593.
[127]
Thomas C Roberts, Robert Langer, and Matthew JA Wood. Б─°Advances in oligonuбґ
cleotide drug deliveryБ─². In: Nature reviews Drug discovery 19.10 (2020), pp. 673Б─⌠
694.
[128]
Thai Thanh Hoang Thi et al. Б─°Lipidбґbased nanoparticles in the clinic and clinical
trials: from cancer nanomedicine to COVIDбґ19 vaccinesБ─². In: Vaccines 9.4 (2021),
p. 359.
[129]
Kausik K Ray et al. Б─°Inclisiran in patients at high cardiovascular risk with elevated
LDL cholesterolБ─². In: New England Journal of Medicine 376.15 (2017), pp. 1430Б─⌠
1440.
[130]
YoungбґKook Kim. Б─°RNA therapy: rich history, various applications and unlimited
future prospectsБ─². In: Experimental & Molecular Medicine 54.4 (2022), pp. 455Б─⌠
465.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
71
==PAGE:80==
[131]
Dehua Pei and Marina Buyanova. Б─°Overcoming endosomal entrapment in drug
deliveryБ─². In: Bioconjugate chemistry 30.2 (2018), pp. 273Б─⌠283.
[132]
Sahithi Pamarthy et al. Б─°The curious case of vacuolar ATPase: regulation of sigбґ
naling pathwaysБ─². In: Molecular cancer 17 (2018), pp. 1Б─⌠9.
[133]
Jiбґsun Kim et al. Б─°Quantitative assessment of cellular uptake and cytosolic access
of antibody in living cells by an enhanced split GFP complementation assayБ─². In:
Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 467.4 (2015), pp. 771Б─⌠
777.
[134]
Ian M Kaplan, Jehangir S Wadia, and Steven F Dowdy. Б─°Cationic TAT peptide
transduction domain enters cells by macropinocytosisБ─². In: Journal of Controlled
Release 102.1 (2005), pp. 247Б─⌠253.
[135]
Amir K Varkouhi et al. Б─°Endosomal escape pathways for delivery of biologicalsБ─². In:
Journal of Controlled Release 151.3 (2011), pp. 220Б─⌠228.
[136]
Laura I Selby et al. Б─°Nanoescapology: progress toward understanding the endosoбґ
mal escape of polymeric nanoparticlesБ─². In: Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Nanomedicine
and Nanobiotechnology 9.5 (2017), e1452.
[137]
Aqeel Ahmad et al. Б─°Novel endosomolytic peptides for enhancing gene delivery
in nanoparticlesБ─². In: Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)бґBiomembranes 1848.2
(2015), pp. 544Б─⌠553.
[138]
Saranya Chandrudu, Pavla Simerska, and Istvan Toth. Б─°Chemical methods for pepбґ
tide and protein productionБ─². In: Molecules 18.4 (2013), pp. 4373Б─⌠4388.
[139]
Lia Costa, Emд╠л│lia Sousa, and Carla Fernandes. Б─°Cyclic peptides in pipeline: what
future for these great molecules?Б─² In: Pharmaceuticals 16.7 (2023), p. 996.
[140]
Stephen Kent. Б─°Bruce Merrifield (1921Б─⌠2006)Б─². In: Nature 441.7095 (2006), pp. 824Б─⌠
824.
[141]
Veronika Mцєde, Sylvia ElsбґHeindl, and Annette G BeckбґSickinger. Б─°Automated
solidбґphase peptide synthesis to obtain therapeutic peptidesБ─². In: Beilstein journal
of organic chemistry 10.1 (2014), pp. 1197Б─⌠1212.
[142]
Muriel Amblard et al. Б─°Methods and protocols of modern solid phase peptide synбґ
thesisБ─². In: Molecular biotechnology 33 (2006), pp. 239Б─⌠254.
[143]
DaБ─≥san MM Jaradat. Б─°Thirteen decades of peptide synthesis: key developments in
solid phase peptide synthesis and amide bond formation utilized in peptide ligaбґ
tionБ─². In: Amino acids 50.1 (2018), pp. 39Б─⌠68.
[144]
Tanya Romц║n et al. Б─°Improving 2бґChlorotrityl Chloride (2бґCTC) Resin ActivationБ─².
In: Methods and protocols 6.5 (2023), p. 82.
[145]
Michael Harre, Klaus Nickisch, and Ulf Tilstam. Б─°An efficient method for activation
and recycling of trityl resinsБ─². In: Reactive and functional polymers 41.1бґ3 (1999),
pp. 111Б─⌠114.
[146]
Randall A Hughes and Andrew D Ellington. Б─°Synthetic DNA synthesis and assemбґ
bly: putting the synthetic in synthetic biologyБ─². In: Cold Spring Harbor perspectives
in biology 9.1 (2017), a023812.
72
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:81==
[147]
Jory Lietard et al. Б─°Highбґdensity DNA and RNA microarraysбґphotolithographic synбґ
thesis, hybridization and preparation of large nucleic acid librariesБ─². In: JoVE (Jourбґ
nal of Visualized Experiments) 150 (2019), e59936.
[148]
Xiao Deng, Huizeng Li, and Yanlin Song. Б─°Inkjet printingбґbased highбґthroughput
DNA synthesisБ─². In: Giant (2023), p. 100222.
[149]
Yevgeny Brudno and David R Liu. Б─°Recent progress toward the templated syntheбґ
sis and directed evolution of sequenceбґdefined synthetic polymersБ─². In: Chemistry
& biology 16.3 (2009), pp. 265Б─⌠276.
[150]
Martha R Stark et al. Б─°An RNA ligaseбґmediated method for the efficient creation of
large, synthetic RNAsБ─². In: Rna 12.11 (2006), pp. 2014Б─⌠2019.
[151]
Alejandro Gimenez Molina and Yogesh S Sanghvi. Б─°LiquidбґPhase Oligonucleotide
Synthesis: Past, Present, and Future PredictionsБ─². In: Current protocols in nucleic
acid chemistry 77.1 (2019), e82.
[152]
Nimrat Khehra, Inderbir S Padda, and Cathi J Swift. Б─°Polymerase Chain Reaction
(PCR)Б─². In: StatPearls [Internet]. StatPearls Publishing, 2023.
[153]
Michael A Jensen et al. Б─°Direct oligonucleotide synthesis onto superбґparamagnetic
beadsБ─². In: Journal of biotechnology 167.4 (2013), pp. 448Б─⌠453.
[154]
Nanda D Sinha. Б─°Largeбґscale oligonucleotide synthesis using the solidбґphase apбґ
proachБ─². In: Protocols for Oligonucleotides and Analogs: Synthesis and Properties
(1993), pp. 437Б─⌠463.
[155]
Serge L Beaucage. Б─°Solidбґphase synthesis of siRNA oligonucleotidesБ─². In: CURбґ
RENT OPINION IN DRUG DISCOVERY AND DEVELOPMENT 11.2 (2008), p. 203.
[156]
ATDBio. Solidбґphase oligonucleotides synthesis. th29 of May, 2024. 2005бґ2024.
URL: https://atdbio.com/nucleic-acids-book/Solid-phase-oligonucleotide-synthesis.
[157]
H Seliger. Б─°Scaleбґup of oligonucleotide synthesis: solution phaseБ─². In: Protocols for
Oligonucleotides and Analogs: Synthesis and Properties (1993), pp. 391Б─⌠435.
[158]
Marvin H Caruthers. Б─°A brief review of DNA and RNA chemical synthesisБ─². In: Bioбґ
chemical Society Transactions 39.2 (2011), pp. 575Б─⌠580.
[159]
Ramon Eritja. Б─°Solidбґphase synthesis of modified oligonucleotidesБ─². In: Internaбґ
tional Journal of Peptide Research and Therapeutics 13 (2007), pp. 53Б─⌠68.
[160]
Andrew J Francis and Marino JE Resendiz. Б─°Protocol for the solidбґphase synthesis
of oligomers of RNA containing a 2Б─≥бґOбґthiophenylmethyl modification and characбґ
terization via circular dichroismБ─². In: JoVE (Journal of Visualized Experiments) 125
(2017), e56189.
[161]
Benjamin I Andrews et al. Б─°Sustainability challenges and opportunities in oligonuбґ
cleotide manufacturingБ─². In: The Journal of Organic Chemistry 86.1 (2020), pp. 49Б─⌠
61.
[162]
Randall A Hughes, Aleksandr E Miklos, and Andrew D Ellington. Б─°Gene synthesis:
methods and applicationsБ─². In: Methods in enzymology. Vol. 498. Elsevier, 2011,
pp. 277Б─⌠309.
[163]
Greg T Hermanson. Bioconjugate techniques. Academic press, 2013.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
73
==PAGE:82==
[164]
Amol D Gholap et al. Б─°Importance of carbohydrateбґdrug conjugates in vaccine deбґ
velopment: A detailed reviewБ─². In: (2023).
[165]
Soumitra S Ghosh et al. Б─°Use of maleimideбґthiol coupling chemistry for efficient
syntheses of oligonucleotideбґenzyme conjugate hybridization probesБ─². In: Bioconбґ
jugate chemistry 1.1 (1990), pp. 71Б─⌠76.
[166]
Joцёo MJM Ravasco et al. Б─°Bioconjugation with maleimides: a useful tool for chemбґ
ical biologyБ─². In: ChemistryБ─⌠A European Journal 25.1 (2019), pp. 43Б─⌠59.
[167]
Joseph Zaia. Б─°The 2022 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the development of click
chemistry and bioorthogonal chemistryБ─². In: Analytical and bioanalytical chemistry
415.4 (2023), pp. 527Б─⌠532.
[168]
Akshay Jain and Kun Cheng. Б─°The principles and applications of avidinбґbased
nanoparticles in drug delivery and diagnosisБ─². In: Journal of controlled release 245
(2017), pp. 27Б─⌠40.
[169]
Ardeshir Khazaei, Mohammad Ali Zolfigol, and Amin Rostami. Б─°1, 3бґdibromoбґ5, 5бґ
dimethylhydantoin [DBDMH] as an efficient and selective agent for the oxidation
of thiols to disulfides in solution or under solventбґfree conditionsБ─². In: Synthesis
(2004), pp. 2959Б─⌠2961.
[170]
Hisao Saneyoshi et al. Б─°Thiolбґresponsive proбґfluorophore labeling: Synthesis of a
proбґfluorescent labeled oligonucleotide for monitoring cellular uptakeБ─². In: Bioorбґ
ganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters 30.13 (2020), p. 127222.
74
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:83==
A
Appendix
A.1
The CPEP2 peptide
Figure A.1: The chromatogram of the CPEP2 crude peptide including the gradient, retenбґ
tion time, and integration
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
75
==PAGE:84==
Figure A.2: The chromatogram from A) The CPEP2 peptide from Khatri et al. and B) the
crude CPEP2 peptide from this project.
Figure A.3: The chromatogram of the Б─²exбґCPEP2Б─² peptide.
76
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:85==
Figure A.4: The chromatogram of the Б─²test CPEP2Б─² peptide with first attempt of adding
piperidine.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
77
==PAGE:86==
Figure A.5: The chromatogram of the Б─²test CPEP2Б─² peptide with second attempt of adding
piperidine.
78
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:87==
Figure A.6: The chromatogram of the Б─²test CPEP2Б─² final. The blue domain indicates
fraction collection
Figure A.7: The chromatogram of all the fractions from Figure 3.5
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
79
==PAGE:88==
Figure A.8: The mass spectrum of fractions F2 and F3 from Figure 3.5
80
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:89==
A.2
CPEP2 C(acm)
Figure A.9: The chromatogram of the CPEP2 C(ACM) crude peptide, including the gradiбґ
ent, retention time, and integration. The blue domain indicates the collection of fractions.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
81
==PAGE:90==
Figure A.10: The chromatogram of CPEP2 C(ACM) test analysis on the RPбґHPLC prepaбґ
ration column with 1н╪l injection volumn. The blue domain indicates fraction collection
82
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:91==
Figure A.11: The chromatogram of CPEP2 C(ACM) purification analysis on the RPбґHPLC
preparation column. The blue domain indicates fraction collection.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
83
==PAGE:92==
Figure A.12: The chromatogram of CPEP2 C(acm) with TCEP (black line) and the CPEP2
(acm) normal (Blue line).
84
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:93==
Figure A.13: The chromatogram of CPEP2 C(ACM) fractions F1 to F28 from Figure 3.9.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
85
==PAGE:94==
Figure A.14: The chromatogram of the cyclization test of the fraction F6.
86
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:95==
Figure A.15: The chromatogram of the cyclized F6 (blue line) vs. nonбґcyclized F6 (black
line).
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
87
==PAGE:96==
A.3
TAT peptide
Figure A.16: The chromatogram of the TAT peptide with the alkyne handle crude peptide,
including the gradient, retention time, and integration.
88
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:97==
Figure A.17: The chromatogram of crude TAT peptide and the blue domain indicated the
fraction collection.
Figure A.18: The mass spectra of fractions F2, F3, F4, F9, F13 and F14 of the crude TAT
peptide.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
89
==PAGE:98==
Figure A.19: The chromatogram of the crude TAT peptide, after an additional 6 hours of
deprotection and subsequent ether precipitation.
90
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:99==
A.4
The aBOM peptide
Figure A.20: The chromatogram of the aBOM peptide, including the gradient, retention
time, and integration.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
91
==PAGE:100==
Figure A.21: The chromatogram of the crude aBOM peptide with the adjusted gradient.
The blue regions indicate the collected fractions.
92
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:101==
Figure A.22: The mass spectra of the fractions F10, F14, F16, F20, F23, F29 and F30 of
aBOM after the purification.
Figure A.23: The chromatogram of the fractions F10, F14, F16, F20, F23, F29 and F30
of aBOM after the purification.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
93
==PAGE:102==
A.5
PepA/iRGD peptide
Figure A.24: The mass spectra of PepA (left) and iRGD (right)
94
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:103==
A.6
KASбґ339 and KASбґ340
Figure A.25: The chromatogram of crude KASбґ339, including the gradient, retention time,
and integration.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
95
==PAGE:104==
Figure A.26: The chromatogram of crude KASбґ340, including the gradient, retention time,
and integration.
96
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:105==
Figure A.27: The chromatogram of KASбґ339 with perylene azide with the gradient. The
black line indicates the wavelength (280nm) for measuring the oligonucleotides. The blue
line indicates the specific wavelength (445nm) for the absorption of perylene azide. The
blue domain indicates the fraction collection, which was used to determine the mass on
MALDI afterwards.
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
97
==PAGE:106==
Figure A.28: The chromatogram of KASбґ340 with perylene azide with the gradient. The
black line indicates the wavelength (280nm) for measuring the oligonucleotides. The blue
line indicates the specific wavelength (445nm) for the absorption of perylene azide. The
blue domain indicates the fraction collection, which was used to determine the mass on
MALDI afterwards.
Figure A.29: The chromatrogram of KASбґ339 fraction F7 (left) from Figure 2.8 and KASбґ
340 fraction F14 (right) from Figure 2.9
98
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:107==
Figure A.30: The mass spectra of KASбґ339 fraction F7 (left) from Figure 2.8 and KASбґ340
fraction F14 (right) from Figure 2.9
Figure A.31: The chromatogram illustrated the degradation of KASбґ339 (left) and KASбґ
340 (right)
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
99
==PAGE:108==
A.7
Perylene Azide
Figure A.32: The LCбґMS spectra of perylene azide
100
Advances in Therapeutic RNA and Peptide Delivery Systems for Disease Treatment
==PAGE:109==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Kemitorvet, Building 207
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.kemi.dtu.dk
