==PAGE:1==
Master Thesis:
Using Web Data Mining, Topic Modeling and NLP
to Uncover Gender Bias in Media Coverage of
Entrepreneurs
Lucas Cendoya
s212665@student.dtu.dk
Supervised by:
Lars Holmberg Alkærsig
Farnaz Aref
June 17, 2024
==PAGE:2==
Abstract
This thesis uses advanced text analytics techniques to detect gender bias in entrepreneurial
news sources, contributing valuable insights to the field of gender studies and media
analysis. It is an example of how tools of content analysis, together with topic model-
ing and language analysis tools can be incorporated into researchers’ toolbox studying
entrepreneurship discourse to detect gender bias. Tools of data mining are used to ex-
tract news articles from relevant news sources, while topic modeling, content analysis
and word choice or lexical analysis are implemented to reveal the bias. Works like this
haven’t been performed before in the entrepreneurial domain. The utility of the thesis
lies in complementing past research on gender bias in entrepreneurship which was mainly
focused on discourse analysis. The approach used was, firstly, to reveal bias through the
description of the topics detected on the news, and secondly, combine those topics obtained
with a frequency analysis of female quotes in the news to find differences of women
representation in the different topics. There is a specific focus on ’Female Entrepreneurs’
gendered topic, which conveys the challenges women face in obtaining funding due to
gender imbalances in venture capital firms. Findings confirm a biased representation of
women in entrepreneur news, with a majority of quotes and sources being attributed to men.
Forbes is identified as the news outlet with the most balanced representation of quotes
from both genders, while finance news outlets like Yahoo Finance and CNBC have the
least representation of women. The analysis further reveals that certain topics, such as
’Women Entrepreneurs’ and ’Beauty and Fashion Brands’, have a higher representation of
women’s voices, while topics like ’AI Companies’ exhibit a significant bias against women.
The document emphasizes the potential negative consequences of gender disparities in
the AI industry. Additionally, it mentions the influence of cultural biases on gender parity,
particularly in societies like China and India. The language analysis conducted in the
document indicates that articles quoting more women than men often portray a gendered
and biased representation of women. Overall, the document sheds light on the persistent
gender biases in entrepreneur news and calls for greater gender equality in the field.
i
==PAGE:3==
Contents
List of Figures
iv
List of Tables
v
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Research Background and Motivation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
1.3
Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Theoretical Foundations
4
2.1
Theoretical Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Previous Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3
Data Extraction
9
3.1
News Databases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2
Google News . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
3.3
Extraction Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4
Topic Modeling
13
4.1
What is Topic Modeling? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.2
Modern Techniques Based on Deep Learning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
4.3
Topic Modeling with BERTopic
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.4
Topic Modeling Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
NLP Tools
25
5.1
Text Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.2
Quote Extraction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
5.3
Entity Recognition and Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.4
Gender Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Results of Gender Bias Detection
29
6.1
Bias per News Outlet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.2
Monthly Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.3
Bias across Topics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.4
Language Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
Discussion and Implications
36
7.1
Practical Implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
7.2
Limitations and Ideas for Future Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
ii
==PAGE:4==
CONTENTS
CONTENTS
8
Conclusion
39
9
Bibliography
41
iii
==PAGE:5==
List of Figures
2.1
Model of Media Effects on Entrepreneurial Behaviour and its Antecedents
(Levie et al., 2010, p. 11) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Text Analysis Techniques (Ahl, 2004, p. 203) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.1
Number of Articles Retrieved per Month . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Number of Articles Retrieved per News Source . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.1
Visual Overview of BERTopic (Grootendorst, 2024a) . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.2
BERTopic’s 2-D Documents and Topics Representation . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.3
Word Clouds Topic 0 and 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.4
Word Clouds Topic 2 and 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.5
Word Clouds Topic 4 and 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
4.6
Word Clouds Topic 6 and 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.7
Word Clouds Topic 8 and 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.8
Word Clouds Topic 10 and 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
4.9
BERTopic’s Similarity Matrix
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
4.10 Topic Coherence per Topic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.1
Monthly counts of articles that contain majority male/female sources . . .
31
6.2
Mentions and Quotes Female Ratio per Topic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
31
6.3
Split of news into majority male sources and majority female sources corpora 33
6.4
Keyness of Male Corpus vs Female Corpus
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
6.5
Keyness of Male Corpus from Topic 0 vs Female Corpus from Topic 2 . .
35
iv
==PAGE:6==
List of Tables
3.1
News information extracted . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.1
Topics obtained from BERTopic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
6.1
Gender Bias on the 8 most influential News Outlets for news retrieved
between January 2019 and December 2023 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
v
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Research Background and Motivation
Gender Bias
Gender bias is defined as “unintentional and automatic mental associations based on
gender, stemming from traditions, norms, values, culture and/or experience” (International
Labour Organization, 2017, p. 3). Empirical research concludes that gender bias is inti-
mately related to stereotyped conceptions of what women are like and how they should
behave (Heilman, 2001). Stereotypes ultimately influence women’s evaluation in work
settings, being competent provides no assurance that a woman will advance to the same
organizational levels as an equivalently performing man (Heilman, 2001).
Men are commonly stereotyped as aggressive, forceful, independent and decisive,
whereas women are defined as kind, helpful, sympathetic and concerned about others
(Heilman, 2001). Furthermore, “men are believed to be more entrepreneurial and growth-
oriented than women” (Balachandra et al., 2019, p. 119). This stereotyped difference in
behavior between men and women, and the universally accepted definition of what makes
a good leader being in alignment with those manly traits, ends up negatively affecting
women in work-related settings as women are expected to be less successful leaders. “The
perceived lack of fit between the requirements of traditionally male jobs and the stereotypic
attributes ascribed to women is (.. .) likely to produce expectations of failure” (Heilman,
2001, p. 660). This explains why women-led ventures are considered less legitimate and
riskier than those owned by men, and this leads in turn to women-led ventures receiving
much less funding (Balachandra et al., 2019).
Moreover, it has been investigated through experiments that high-achieving women
are less likeable than high-achieving men (Bohnet, 2016). This is the case in occupations
like corporate leadership, politics, or management, in which characteristics or traits such
as entrepreneurship, self-confidence and vision are celebrated in men while perceived as
arrogance and self-promotion in women (Bohnet, 2016). In the entrepreneurship area,
analysis of pitch presentations to investors conclude “feminine-stereotyped behaviors result
in poorer evaluations of entrepreneurs, men and women alike” (Balachandra et al., 2019,
p. 131).
Further studies have been performed to assess the language used to describe job ads
1
==PAGE:8==
1.1. RES. BACKGROUND & MOTIVATION
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
and it was found a correlation between the use of gender stereotyped words in the ads
and the proportion of men and women in a profession (Gaucher et al., 2011). This is an
example of how the use of language can reinforce gender stereotypes in jobs.
Women in entrepreneurship
Entrepreneurship is placed as an engine of economic and social development around
the world (Audretsch and Beckmann, 2007) and associated with economic and employment
growth (Carree and Thurik, 1999).
The Lisbon strategy put forward by the European Union in 2000, had as its aim to
turn EU into the “most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy by 2010”
(European Parliament, 2009, p. 1). It posed to reach this objective by introducing a series
of reforms fostering "competitiveness and innovation" (European Parliament, 2009, p. 1).
Innovation is closely linked to entrepreneurship as it involves the creation of new busi-
nesses, services, and products. Lisbon Strategy also mentioned that the growth should be
a sustainable one, with “more and better jobs and a greater social cohesion” (European
Parliament, 2009, p. 1). That is why it had as one of its goals to "increase the number of
women in employment from 51% at that time to 60% by 2010" (European Parliament, 2009,
p. 2), as well referring to the “huge potential for improving labour market participation for
women” (European Parliament, 2009, p. 6). These and later efforts of the block has helped
to grow the participation of women in the labour market, which in 2021 stood at 68%
(European Commission, Accessed December 2023). Notwithstanding the progress, this
is still more than 10 percent points lower than corresponding values for men (European
Commission, Accessed December 2023). The gender gap has only decreased by 1.9% in
the last 10 years (European Commission, Accessed December 2023).
Differences in qualification between women and men cannot be ascribed as the cause of
the imbalance, as more women than men graduate from European universities (European
Commission, Accessed December 2023).
Gender inequality goes beyond differences in participation and include as well other
aspects such as gender segregation in the labour market. For example, one third of Euro-
pean men are employed in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM),
compared to 7% of women (European Commission, Accessed December 2023). Moreover,
the higher prevalence of women in part-time jobs when compared to men (Christiansen
et al., 2017), hinder their possibilities of growth into senior positions. On an EU average,
35% of executives was a woman in 2021 (Eurostat, 2021).
In the entrepreneurship domain, as of 2022, only 13.2% of total founders in Europe
were female (Forrer et al., 2023). Imparity in funding is even greater, women startups in
the EU got only 2% of the venture capital on that same year (Forrer et al., 2023).
Motivation
Given the still long way to go as regards gender equality in entrepreneurship, in this
thesis it is explored the attention that entrepreneurs from both sexes receive in the cur-
rent media landscape. Is there gender bias entrenched in the coverage and portrayal of
2
==PAGE:9==
1.2. RESEARCH QUESTIONS
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
entrepreneurs through news articles? The extent and nature of these biases will be investi-
gated, in order to alert authorities and trigger actions to change this trend, allowing the
actors willing to commit to a change to enhance women participation in entrepreneurial
activities and help boost economy and social well-being. "There is an enormous untapped
investment opportunity for venture capitalists smart enough to look at the numbers and
fund women entrepreneurs" (Brush et al., 2014, p. 1).
1.2
Research Questions
Relevant research questions the thesis aims to answer are the following:
• Research Question 1: Identify and quantify gender bias in entrepreneur media
coverage.
• Research Question 2: Investigate potential variations in gender bias in entrepreneur
media coverage across different news sources and topics.
1.3
Structure
The thesis is structured in the following way: Chapter 2 provides the theoretical foundations
that explain how and why it is relevant to study media representations of entrepreneurship
given its effect on society. The place media occupies within the dynamics of entrepreneurial
intention creation is described, as well as the implications of having a lack of women
representation. Later, in the same chapter, a literature review of previous research on
gender bias within entrepreneurship is introduced. The techniques used in the thesis to
detect gender bias are placed within an outline of text analytical techniques for discourse
analysis.
After this, the methodologies used to extract and process the data are explained. Chap-
ter 3 describes the data extraction methodology used. Later, Chapter 4 introduces topic
modeling techniques to classify the news articles into topics, which are applied and a
reflection is provided on the topics obtained. In a later stage, in Chapter 5, NLP tools are
introduced and the specific tools used for gender bias detection are explained.
Chapter 6 presents the results of the gender bias detection. Research Question 1 is
answered, a quantification of gender bias in news articles is provided. In the same chapter,
a discussion is provided which reveals important insights behind the bias detected. Those
insights come from the comparison of media outlets as well as the detected topics from
Chapter 4. At the end of the Chapter, language analyses are applied which provide a deeper
understanding of women entrepreneur’s stereotypes on the news. This answers Research
Question 2. Later on, in Chapter 7 the relevance of the results obtained are explained, as
well as their limitations and avenues for future research.
Finally, Chapter 8 provides a conclusion and calls for action.
3
==PAGE:10==
Chapter 2
Theoretical Foundations
2.1
Theoretical Background
In the current media landscape, entrepreneurs receive significant attention in news articles.
Every one of us can be a potential entrepreneur, but what motivates us to become one?
Media, as part of the cultural environment which surrounds our everyday life, influences
the choices we make. Someone does not become an entrepreneur from one day to the other,
but, on the contrary, builds on his/her entrepreneurial intentions through the conjunction
and interaction of a set of variables. The way in which media affects entrepreneurial
intentions can be related to what is referred to as event-based entrepreneurship (Shapero
and Sokol, 1982). There are life-changing events that, combined with the preconditions of
a positive assessment of self-employment and its feasibility, as well as a high willingness
to act, induce business start-ups (Shapero and Sokol, 1982). Adapted from this and other
posterior works, Levie et al. (2010) made this model which incorporates media as one of
the variables influencing the entrepreneurial journey:
Figure 2.1: Model of Media Effects on Entrepreneurial Behaviour and its Antecedents
(Levie et al., 2010, p. 11)
In this figure we can observe media having a two-ways effect on the prevailing social
norms and a direct unidirectional effect on the perceived feasibility and the perceived
desirability, as well as the triggering events. As regards the social norms, for women to
embark on an entrepreneurial journey, it is necessary for them to regard entrepreneurship
as appropriate and positive for them (Levie et al., 2010). Santos et al. (2016) propose that
4
==PAGE:11==
2.2. PREVIOUS RESEARCH
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS
men and women are born with the same entrepreneurial intentions, but, however, women
perceive the entrepreneurial role as being less adequate for them. For women to embark
into entrepreneurship, they should aspire to it and show an intention of making it happen
(Levie et al., 2010). Feasibility is influenced by both this context as well as the availability
of skills and development opportunities (Levie et al., 2010) (i.e. resources such as funds,
working space, guidance, etc.). The figure shows that individual traits are not sufficient to
start a business, as they are all influenced by the overarching norms and values which, to a
great extent, come imposed from the media (Levie et al., 2010). "Where social attitudes
to entrepreneurship are positive and normal, more individuals will tend to want to be
entrepreneurial and more will actively seek to become entrepreneurs” (Levie et al., 2010,
p. 11). The findings of the authors conclude that “media has an important role to play in
raising the level of desirability and future intention to engage in entrepreneurship” (Levie
et al., 2010, p. 3).
A lack of exposure to female leaders may perpetuate biased perceptions of women’s
effectiveness in leadership roles (Beaman et al., 2009). It is important for media to re-
flect that not only men-led start-ups are successful. As Eikhof et al. (2013) mention, the
impact that gendered media representation of women can have on the reality of female
entrepreneurship is twofold: on the one hand they influence in what degree women per-
ceive entrepreneurship as desirable and attainable. On the other hand, it also influences
stakeholders that can facilitate women’s success in their entrepreneurial effort (i.e., in-
vestors, clients, suppliers and business collaborators) (Eikhof et al., 2013). Positive media
depiction of women in positions with power or success, would certainty contribute towards
the decrease of gender stereotyping which hinders their decision to participate at their full
capacity at start-ups as well as get positive evaluation from external stakeholders such as
venture capital firms. The showcase of successful growth-oriented venture capital-funded
women entrepreneurs on the media would help revert this trend and lower the barriers for
women entrepreneurs.
2.2
Previous Research
Baker et al. (1997) have explored the paradox of why despite women’s spectacular progress
in business ownership, this haven’t been reflected in press coverage, including entrepreneur-
ship journals. The authors conclude that women are “invisibilized” due to androcentrism,
which is the “taken-for-granted notion that the traditional male-centered business model is
the neutral model” (Baker et al., 1997, pp. 232–233). This, they say, affects both business
owners as well as journalists who study them (Baker et al., 1997). According to the authors,
“women have had to adapt to institutions of business ownership which are already gendered,
in the sense of having been built and dominated by men” (Baker et al., 1997, p. 235). They
conclude that “under looser institutional constraints, women’s ownership behaviour would
differ more from men’s” (Baker et al., 1997, p. 233) and wonder if women offering new
ways of managing and new solutions to problems are just not being noticed (Baker et al.,
1997).
Eikhof et al. (2013) addressed the issue of gender bias in entrepreneurship coverage.
The authors performed a qualitative content analysis of a women’s magazine which has
a section specialized in women entrepreneurs. While the results of their analysis are
qualitative and the scope is narrow, as it is only focused on an entertainment magazine
5
==PAGE:12==
2.2. PREVIOUS RESEARCH
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS
and thus cannot be generalized, they provide interesting insights of female entrepreneurs’
representation. They find out that the way in which new female business owners are
depicted further entrench the gender bias (Eikhof et al., 2013). For instance, the addressed
businesses were home-based and under-capitalized (Eikhof et al., 2013). Furthermore, they
were founded as ‘moonlighting’ businesses (Eikhof et al., 2013), businesses which were
started at the same time as they performed their duties as wage earners in their regular jobs.
Moreover, the women didn’t have formal business qualifications (Eikhof et al., 2013). As
regards the work content the women entrepreneurs performed, it was focused on activities
traditionally perceived as female and centering on female skills (Eikhof et al., 2013).
For example, they sold products traditionally associated with women such as handbags,
shampoo, food, craft, and flowers, or provided services also traditionally associated to
women, like nurturing, caring, entertaining and hosting (Eikhof et al., 2013). Because
they didn’t need any specific skill to start these businesses, but they rather represent a
natural extension of their gender socialization (Bruni et al., 2004), these kinds of start-ups
are regarded as less valuable than their male counterparts, which focus on high-growth
businesses such as IT or any kind of desk-bound activity. These kind of associations of
women to frivolous, trivial, and impulsive type of products and services undermine their
possibilities to be taken seriously in the business world (Bradley, 2007). The fact that they
work from home further entrenches gender bias as it assumes women must be in charge of
family responsibilities, what is labeled as ‘private patriarchy’ (Walby, 1989).
Achtenhagen and Welter (2007) conducted a study on media discourse in entrepreneur-
ship research, surveying the portrayal detected of female entrepreneurs in popular business
press articles. They identified normative themes across women entrepreneurs’ profiles
(Achtenhagen and Welter, 2007). For instance, they found that perceptions shaping female
entrepreneurs and their business acumen include stereotypes such as starting businesses
in "women-related" areas like professional services or consumer products, or apparel and
accessories (Achtenhagen and Welter, 2007). Furthermore, they are portrayed as having
less than seven years of business experience, no significant plans for business development,
and starting a business due to personal adversities (Achtenhagen and Welter, 2007). The
message conveyed is that women entrepreneurs are not taken seriously, mainly operate
lower-value companies, and are not perceived as being as committed or serious as their
male counterparts (Achtenhagen and Welter, 2007). These stereotypes create barriers for
potential female entrepreneurs.
The same authors performed content analysis on German newspapers, searching for
the keywords of female entrepreneur and female business founder in German language
(Achtenhagen and Welter, 2011). They aimed to get a picture of all instances in which
female entrepreneurs were considered noteworthy in major national daily newspapers
(Achtenhagen and Welter, 2011). Their work was manual as they read the articles and
selected the relevant text passages from them to later analyze (Achtenhagen and Welter,
2011). As such, their analysis is qualitative. Their conclusions go in the same direction and
are very valuable. First of all, female entrepreneurs are drastically underrepresented in the
public discourse on entrepreneurship, despite the increase in the number of articles having
them as protagonists (Achtenhagen and Welter, 2011). Furthermore, the authors point that
the common use of male notions as the collective notion of "entrepreneur" and "founder"
in the German language implicitly assumes that it includes females, which exemplifies the
continuing assumption in German society that the role of entrepreneur is male (Achten-
6
==PAGE:13==
2.2. PREVIOUS RESEARCH
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS
hagen and Welter, 2011). Another thing they point out is that the majority of articles on
women’s entrepreneurship are published in the Economics and Culture sections of newspa-
pers, indicating that it is discussed not only as a business topic but also as a cultural and
societal phenomenon (Achtenhagen and Welter, 2011). Lastly, they refer to the image of
women entrepreneurs that the German newspapers form through their pages. For example,
the tabloid paper Bild, when referring to female entrepreneurs, highlight business models
described as strange, unusual or wicked, or they talk about the entrepreneurial activities
of celebrities (Achtenhagen and Welter, 2011). Also, they often relate women-founded
ventures to social or cultural areas, like dance theaters, museums, galleries, or artist related
(Achtenhagen and Welter, 2011). These are examples of the entrenched gendered view in
society of female entrepreneurship. The authors also find a shared view in all the news-
papers analyzed that "women first of all should fulfil their traditional role as housewives
and mothers and secondly, if they have to take up entrepreneurship, they should do so in
‘typically female’ sectors" (Achtenhagen and Welter, 2011, p. 777). The discussion of the
need for an increase in childcare facilities to help women become entrepreneurs further
entrenches "traditional roles in society instead of questioning the division of labour within
families" (Achtenhagen and Welter, 2011, p. 778). When referring to the success of women
entrepreneurs, the authors point that media often presents it as a trade-off with the quality
of their private life (Achtenhagen and Welter, 2011). This, the authors state, evidences
that "media representation of women’s entrepreneurship emphasizes the ‘femininity’ of
the entrepreneurs instead of discussing their entrepreneurial activities" (Achtenhagen and
Welter, 2011, p. 779).
Ahl (2007) also does a qualitative analysis by performing a discursive analysis of
research articles on women’s entrepreneurship. She bases her works on Foucauldian
Discourse Analysis theory, which focuses on the relationship between power and language
(Ahl, 2007). Her view is very interesting because she states that “research texts are not just
innocent reflections of social reality but rather co-produce the object of which they speak”
(Ahl, 2007, p. 1). Her findings are also in line with what was previously stated, “women
entrepreneurs are positioned as inferior to their male counterparts, in any of the facets of
entrepreneurship (growth, profitability, networking, strategy or management practices)”
(Ahl, 2007, p. 1). The same author presents an overview of text analytical techniques for
discourse analysis (Ahl, 2004). These can be summarized in the following table:
7
==PAGE:14==
2.2. PREVIOUS RESEARCH
CHAPTER 2. THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS
Figure 2.2: Text Analysis Techniques (Ahl, 2004, p. 203)
In the present thesis, content analysis and some linguistic text analysis tools are used.
Content analysis is defined as the quantification of text elements to draw conclusions from
it (Ahl, 2004). One very important limitation of content analysis is that the context is
missed (Ahl, 2004). Moreover, content analysis assumes that frequency translates into
importance, and this might not always be the case in reality (Ahl, 2004). However, on the
side of its benefits, it allows large quantities of text to be analyzed, for example with the
use of computer programs (Ahl, 2004). As regards linguistic text analysis, it includes the
analysis of metaphors, syntax and grammar and analysis of word choice (Ahl, 2004).
Bruni et al. (2004) also produce discourse analysis on current times entrepreneurship.
They expose how it is defined in terms of masculinity and women are categorized as
second-sex entrepreneurs (Bruni et al., 2004).
After this chapter which explained the theoretical foundations the thesis is built on, the
different methodologies used are introduced, starting with the news extraction from the
web.
8
==PAGE:15==
Chapter 3
Data Extraction
In this chapter, the data extraction methodology is discussed. First, an overview of the
different news databases available on the web is presented and the reasons for the choice
of Google News is explained. Later, the methodology used to extract the news articles
using Google News is presented.
3.1
News Databases
In order to perform content analysis on the news articles about entrepreneurs, the articles
must be obtained first. Any data analytics research project can only be as good as the
data it is based on. Lacy et al. (2015) caution that samples drawn from databases should
be evaluated for completeness and comparability. News databases most used for con-
tent analysis studies include Factiva, Google News, NewsBank, Nexis Uni and ProQuest
(Buntain et al., 2023). Buntain et al. (2023) reviewed content analysis studies on research
journals performed between 2015 and 2020 and found Nexis Uni to be the most used
out of these five databases (Buntain et al., 2023). They conclude that there are certain
limitations when including only one database on content analysis studies, after analyzing
the results retrieved from news coverage of child separation at the U.S. southern border
(Buntain et al., 2023). They found the databases to differ in number of articles, location
and type (online, print, radio, etc.) (Buntain et al., 2023). Moreover, they found that the
stories obtained do not repeat between databases (Buntain et al., 2023). Accordingly, they
recommend adapting the selection of a particular database depending on the scope and
needs of the research in question (Buntain et al., 2023). For instance, they recommend
using Factiva if there is a need to obtain global samples (Buntain et al., 2023).
With regards to Google News, Buntain et al. (2023) express concerns about its sampling
strength, given its much lower retrieval of results when compared to all the other databases
studied. Moreover, Google does not disclose the sources they provide results from, hinting
a lack of transparency (Buntain et al., 2023). Other concerns about Google News include
what is denominated a ‘filter bubble’, the fact that Google News results vary between
different searchers (Measuring the "Filter Bubble": How Google is influencing what you
click, 2018). This is explained by the information that Google has stored about the user, for
example, his/her searching, browsing and purchase history (Measuring the "Filter Bubble":
How Google is influencing what you click, 2018). Another problem researchers found is
that there is western geographic bias in Google News sources (Watanabe, 2013). Factors
such as engine optimization, paywalls, algorithms and legal rights all play a role in the
9
==PAGE:16==
3.2. GOOGLE NEWS
CHAPTER 3. DATA EXTRACTION
positioning of the news in the results (Haim and Brosius, 2017). It must be said, however,
that these problems are not unique to Google News but affect all the news databases
(Buntain et al., 2023).
On the other hand, Google News presents a clear advantage compared with the other
databases which is that it is free to access, whereas all the others require a license.
It must be noted that Factiva database was accessed through a university license and
tried out, but it had a very strong limitation, it only allowed to access the full text of
all news articles retrieved from a search within their interface. It provides an option to
download articles manually from its interface, but only by 100 at a time, which made it
unfeasible from an operative point of view for this thesis, as processes are meant to be
automated.
Given this limitation, and all the other databases requiring a license, the natural choice
was Google News.
3.2
Google News
The data extraction process is divided into three steps. The first step is to retrieve metadata
of the news. This includes the news title, publication date, the link to the news and the
publication site. This is performed with gnews library. This library searches Google News
RSS Feed and returns a JSON response with the metadata of the news. This turns out to
be a good workaround to retrieve news from past dates as other libraries tried which used
Google News main API failed to retrieve news from more than 6 months ago. Another
advantage of using Google News RSS feed is that is that is a much lighter version than
the UI version, while the data provided is the same, with one exception. This is that it
returns at most 100 results per search, vs. 300 of the UI version. To perform the search,
the keyword chosen was ’entrepreneur or founder’. The metadata retrieval of the news
articles was accomplished with a code which searches news every single month for the
past 5 years, which returned approximately 100 news articles links for every month. The
code can be reviewed in the APPENDIX 3.2(a). It must be noted that one limitation of
Google News is that searches must be localized, with a language and region. In this thesis,
English news from United States were searched.
The second step of the news extraction process is to download the news content itself.
For this, Newspaper3k library is used. This library is very straight forward, it downloads
the article from the specified URL, it parses it, and returns an article object. The code
used can be reviewed in the APPENDIX 3.2 (b). However, not all the URLs explored
are able to be scrapped via a request to extract its content. This is because they load the
content dynamically with Javascript. On these types of sites, the content download fails
and a response code ’403 : Forbidden’ is returned. Forbes.com and Inc.com use this type
of content rendering. 23% of the news couldn’t be retrieved with this method, which is the
reason why a workaround was found to get the news from these sites.
This is where the third step comes, which is used to get the news articles which couldn’t
be obtained with the previous method. It is important to note that the URLs obtained
from Google News RSS feed in the first step are links within the "news.google.com"
10
==PAGE:17==
3.3. EXTRACTION RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. DATA EXTRACTION
domain which point out to the external URLs of the news. In order to obtain the actual
URLs of the news, a "translation" mechanism of Google URLs into the external URLs is
needed. For this, Selenium library is used. Selenium uses a WebDriver, which is a browser
automation framework, to accept commands and send them to a browser. In combination
with Google Chrome, and executed by Python, it allows the navigation into websites as
if it was performed by a real human being. Using Selenium, "news.google.com" link is
accessed, after which its webdriver’s method current_url is used to capture those external
URLs, which are then queried into Internet Archive website. Internet Archive is a non-
profit library, which, among other things, stores 866 billion web pages in the form of
snapshots performed in a previous point in time. With the use of Wayback Availability
JSON API (https://archive.org/help/wayback_api.php), archived data can be inquired to
find a snapshot of a particular website. With this API, the inquired URL is compared to
the saved sites, and if there is a match, the URL of the snapshot page is returned. The new
URL obtained, within the "web.archive.org" domain, is then parsed using Newspaper3k
library as before. However, not all websites are available on the archive, leaving some
news which couldn’t be retrieved. However, with this method, more than 86% of the
articles which couldn’t be retrieved with the previous method were able to be retrieved.
The combination of both methods to retrieve news resulted in a retrieval efficacy of 96.8%.
The code used to extract news articles with this method can be found in the APPENDIX
3.2 (c). In the next section, the overall data collected is illustrated.
3.3
Extraction Results
Through the previously described approach, a total of 5721 news articles were retrieved
from the web. Approximately 100 articles per month were obtained from January 2019
to December 2024. A snippet of the information obtained for each of the news can be
observed below:
Table 3.1: News information extracted
Date
Media
Title
Article
0
2023-12-19
Entrepreneur
Who Is Nikola Founder Trevor Milton? Prison Se...
Trevor Milton must also pay a $1 million fine ...
1
2023-12-18
Syracuse University News
2023 Student Entrepreneur Impact Prize Winners...
Business & Economy\n\nSyracuse University Libr...
2
2023-12-05
Entrepreneur
3 Ways to Navigate the Journey from Entreprene...
Navigating the journey from entrepreneur to CE...
3
2023-12-18
Entrepreneur
Entrepreneur Middle East’s Achieving Women 202...
Opinions expressed by Entrepreneur contributor...
4
2023-12-13
Entrepreneur
2023, The Year That Was: Quddus Pativada, Foun...
You’re reading Entrepreneur Middle East, an in...
The distribution of the news obtained per month can be observed in the figure below:
Figure 3.1: Number of Articles Retrieved per Month
11
==PAGE:18==
3.3. EXTRACTION RESULTS
CHAPTER 3. DATA EXTRACTION
The amount of articles obtained per news outlet can be observed in the following figure:
Figure 3.2: Number of Articles Retrieved per News Source
As observed, news retrieved belong to a very diverse set of news outlets. The two news
outlets which have the largest amount of news articles, Entrepreneur and Forbes, account
for 31% of all news retrieved.
In the next chapter, topic modeling is introduced as a methodology to detect topics in
the news extracted. The implementation will be described and the results obtained will be
reflected on.
12
==PAGE:19==
Chapter 4
Topic Modeling
After having extracted the news articles, it was decided to apply topic modeling in order to
classify them into topics. In this chapter, topic modeling is introduced, along with a review
of its history and a description of the most well-known models. Finally, the methodology
chosen to apply on the news sources is described together with its implementation, and
results are presented.
4.1
What is Topic Modeling?
Topic modeling is one of the most well-known NLP tasks. “It is a class of unsupervised
machine learning techniques designed to compress a corpus of thousands of documents
into a short summary that captures the most prevalent subjects present in the corpus. The
short summary takes the form of topics, or sets of related words, hence a topic model”
(Churchill and Singh, 2022, p. 215). Topic models were originally designed to classify
documents such as books, newspapers and research papers (Churchill and Singh, 2022).
They rely on the predictable and frequent repetition of patterns of words across the docu-
ment collection to create accurate and coherent models (Churchill and Singh, 2022). This
is a great advantage, as it automatizes the classification task of very large amounts of text
data, and it spares someone of having to read every single text, which is both inefficient
and time-consuming. However, topic models do not produce topic labels as the final output
(Albanese, 2022), but a set of words which are the most representative of each of the topics.
This might represent a hurdle in cases where topics are not coherent, meaning that the sets
of words produced don’t intuitively seem to belong together (Churchill and Singh, 2022).
It must be noted that while topic modeling is an analytical technique which forms part
of the data science toolkit, it is still a subjective task, and the quality evaluation of the
different topic models are left to the humans who use the models (Egger and Yu, 2021).
Moreover, there is no ground-truth to which to compare the labels obtained for each of the
documents in the corpus (Egger and Yu, 2021). Different evaluation techniques have been
developed to evaluate the performance of topic modeling methods, however, there is no
shared convention on which metrics to use (Albanese, 2022).
It must be noted that topic modeling is a research area in constant evolution, and new
techniques are being developed at this right moment. The history of its evolution is very
rich, with the first model being born back in 1990 (Deerwester et al., 1990). The authors
introduced a matrix factorization technique called Single Value Decomposition to approach
the decomposition of the Document-Term Matrix (DTM), a table where each row is a doc-
13
==PAGE:20==
4.1. MODERN TECHNIQUES BASED ON DL
CHAPTER 4. TOPIC MODELING
ument and each column is a distinct word (Deerwester et al., 1990). As a variation of this,
probabilistic models were first introduced by Hofmann (1999). Performance was proved
to be better than the LSA model (Hofmann, 1999), however, the number of parameters
grew linearly with the number of documents, leading to problems with scalability and
overfitting (Albanese, 2022), which paved the way for the introduction of the next model
in the timeline of topic modeling, Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) (Blei et al., 2003).
Their innovation was the introduction of Dirichlet priors to estimate the document-topic
and term-topic distributions in a Bayesian approach (Albanese, 2022). On their paper the
authors show LDA to outperform pLSA (Blei et al., 2003). LDA proved to have very good
results in different domains and can be applied to both long and short texts (Albanese,
2022). Still nowadays, LDA is synonymous with topic modeling, and many different
models which are variations of it have been conceived to apply to different tasks within
NLP (Churchill and Singh, 2022). Still, LDA models have their critics and new models
have been conceived in the last 4 years which have proven to yield better results in different
applications. Some of LDA’s disadvantages include that the number of topics must be
known beforehand, as well as the disregard for the semantic representation of words in a
corpus (Albanese, 2022). This last thing is very important as close words with a different
stem, such as “money” and “cash”, are considered as different even though they have
the same meaning (Albanese, 2022). Another disadvantage of LDA is that it requires an
extensive pre-processing phase to obtain a significant representation from the textual input
data (Albanese, 2022). Lastly, there are several studies which criticize the topics obtained
by LDA, deeming them too general (Rizvi et al., 2019) or irrelevant (Alnusyan et al., 2020).
Furthermore, because of the non-deterministic nature of the model, results vary across
different executions (Egger and Yu, 2021).
Until this point, what are defined as conventional algorithms have been described.
These were designed prior to big innovations in NLP and all depart from a representation
of each document as a bag-of-words and assume that each document is a mixture of latent
topics (Albanese, 2022). Particularly, LDA is considered as the standard approach and has
been used in multiple research papers. On a study by Laureate et al. (2023), the authors
surveyed 189 articles published between January 2016 and June 2021 that apply topic
modeling to short text social media data and found that LDA was used in most studies
(79.8%). They also found lack of reasoning to back up the choice, being the primary
reason given that “it was seen to be used in other studies on the same research topic”
(Jamison et al., 2020); (Agarwal et al., 2020). Next, new techniques which are based on
deep learning are introduced.
4.2
Modern Techniques Based on Deep Learning
Angelov (2020) and Grootendorst (2022) proposed novel approaches to topic modeling,
Top2Vec and BERTopic, respectively, both of which are based on Deep Learning. These
models address the limitations presented by earlier models described. They both start from
embeddings, which are vector-wise representations of each of the words in a document
(Albanese, 2022). Embeddings capture the semantic relationship between words in a
corpus (Albanese, 2022), meaning that two words that relate to each are spatially closer.
This similarity can be computed with the cosine similarity, which is the cosine of the
angle between the two vectors. These two techniques approach embeddings in different
ways. While Top2Vec uses Doc2Vec to create jointly embedded word, document and topic
14
==PAGE:21==
4.2. MODERN TECHNIQUES BASED ON DL
CHAPTER 4. TOPIC MODELING
vectors, BERTopic uses BERT Sentence Transformers (SBERT) to produce high-quality,
contextual word and sentence vector representations (Albanese, 2022).
Both models, Top2Vec and BERTopic, perform a dimensionality reduction with UMAP
(Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection) (McInnes et al., 2020) as the next step.
This is to benefit the next step which is the clustering (Albanese, 2022). UMAP, when
compared to other dimensionality reduction algorithms such as t-SNE, preserves more of
the global structure with superior run performance (McInnes et al., 2020). Furthermore, it
has no computational restrictions on embedding dimensions, while it is also scalable to
large datasets (Angelov, 2020).
Next step, for both algorithms, is the clustering. For this, both algorithms leverage
HDBSCAN (McInnes et al., 2017). This clustering algorithm has a distinctive feature
which is that it does not force observations (documents) into a cluster (Albanese, 2022).
This can be both an advantage or a disadvantage, depending on the use case (Albanese,
2022). On the one hand, this improves topic representation and coherence (Albanese,
2022). On the other hand, outliers may become a relevant portion of the original corpus
in noisy datasets (Albanese, 2022). This may cause information loss (Albanese, 2022).
Top2Vec and BERTopic differ in how they translate the clusters into topics. While Top2Vec
calculates the centroid of the document vectors in the original dimension for each dense
area (Egger and Yu, 2021), BERTopic applies a class-based term frequency inverse docu-
ment frequency (c-TF-IDF) algorithm, which compares the importance of terms within a
cluster and creates term representation (Sánchez-Franco and Rey-Moreno, 2022). This is
an advantage of BERTopic with respect to Top2Vec, as the topic representation technique
makes little to no assumption on the expected structure of the clusters, including density
and shape Grootendorst (2024a).
Finally, BERTopic allows for a last, optional step, which is the fine-tune topic represen-
tation (Grootendorst, 2024a). This allows to easily and quickly update topics after training
the model without the need to re-train it, as this step is independent of the clustering
task (Grootendorst, 2024c). BERTopic comes built-in with several representation models
already implemented such as KeyBERT or GPT-like models (Grootendorst, 2024c). These
can be easily tried out and BERTopic further allows to create custom models, a useful
capability given the constant new technological releases happening within the NLP space
(Grootendorst, 2024c).
These are some of the advantages of deep learning-based models like Top2Vec and
BERTopic compared to classical models like LDA (Albanese, 2022):
• The number of topics doesn’t have to be defined in advance.
• Embeddings take into account the semantic relationship between words, as opposed
to bag-of words approach used by LDA.
• Textual pre-processing (stemming, lemmatization, stopwords removal) is not needed.
• Modularity of each of the steps (document embedding, dimensionality reduction,
clustering), meaning that they can be changed without affecting the other steps.
A step can be changed for a different algorithm; for example, for the clustering,
k-Means could be used instead of the default HDBSCAN. Swapping of techniques
15
==PAGE:22==
4.3. TOPIC MODELING WITH BERTOPIC
CHAPTER 4. TOPIC MODELING
within a step can be motivated by advancements in the field, peculiarities of a specific
project, or technical constraints.
• They scale better with larger corpora compared to conventional approaches (Angelov,
2020).
As a disadvantage, neural network-based type of models require more computational
power than conventional models (Grootendorst, 2022), which translates into longer pro-
cessing times.
4.3
Topic Modeling with BERTopic
Because of its consistent performance with different kinds of datasets (Grootendorst, 2022),
and specifically, with noisy datasets, BERTopic was chosen as the topic modeling technique
to use for the project. As mentioned in the previous section, because of its modularity,
BERTopic can be imagined as a construction of lego blocks, one for each of its steps,
which are self-contained and do not depend on the choice of the other blocks. This can
be illustrated on the following image, which was taken from BERTopic’s GitHub site
(Grootendorst, 2024a):
Figure 4.1: Visual Overview of BERTopic (Grootendorst, 2024a)
It must be said that the news articles obtained are both (1) diverse as, they belong
to many different sources, with different writing styles, and (2) noisy, given that when
scrapping them from the web some noises have been captured, such as bunches of text with
the title of other related news, subscription invitations or images information. Because of
this and its modularity, flexibility to quickly iterate between different parameters choice
and visibility of the results through informative visualizations, BERTopic was deemed to
be the appropriate topic modeling method. Following, some of the choices made such as
parameters and algorithms are explained.
To perform the embeddings, BERTopic comes out of the box with various pre-trained
models. These are all hosted on the HuggingFace Model Hub (https://huggingface.co/sentence-
transformers, 2024). Although there are many methods that can be used, BERTopic’s
16
==PAGE:23==
4.3. TOPIC MODELING WITH BERTOPIC
CHAPTER 4. TOPIC MODELING
default is sentence-transformers (Grootendorst, 2024a). It creates document embeddings
on a word/sentence level (Grootendorst, 2024a). If English language is selected, “all-
MiniLM-L6-v2” model is the default one (Grootendorst, 2024a). It is 5 times faster than
the best model available (?) and still offers good quality. It is the preferred model when
limited GPU capacity is available (Grootendorst, 2022). This was the model chosen for
the implementation.
For the dimensionality reduction step, the default UMAP was used. UMAP’s default,
recommended parameters were used. The same was the case for the clustering algorithm,
where the default HDBSCAN was used.
Another parameter that can be adjusted is the min_topic_size. As its name suggests,
it controls the minimum number of documents in a topic. It is an indirect way of setting
the number of topics. It is equivalent to adjusting the cluster size when performing the
clustering. The default value is 10, and increasing its value produces fewer clusters but of
larger size. After careful consideration, it was decided to set it to 50 as it was preferred to
have topics of considerable size for the posterior gender bias analysis.
Next, another parameter that can be adjusted is the top_n_words parameter. This
controls how many words are used to describe a topic. It has the default value of 10 and it
was decided to set it to 20. However, representative words are later reduced to 10 through
the MaximalMarginalRelevance (MMR), which is described later.
Furthermore, another thing that can be tweaked is the removal of stop words from the
list of the top words representing a topic. This can be set using the CountVectorizer library.
In the project, English stop words were removed, and also common words like ‘read’ and
‘by’ that were found to be non-informative. Moreover, and as suggested in BERTopic’s
manual (Grootendorst, 2024b), because some words appear very often in every topic but
are generally not considered stop words as defined in the CountVectorizer instance, the
parameter reduce_frequent_words within the ClassT fid fTransformer instance can be
turned on and this enables to take the square root of the term frequency after normalizing
the frequency matrix. The impact of this seemingly small change in the resulting topic
representations is considerable (Grootendorst, 2024b).
The final tweak is the implementation of the already mentioned last optional step,
topic representation. Within the different representation models available, the Maximal-
MarginalRelevance (MMR) (Grootendorst, 2024c) was chosen as a means of diversifying
topic representation. This is because the top n words that represent a topic may include
variations of the same word or words that are synonyms (Amy @GrabNGoInfo, 2022).
An example of this are words like ‘disappointed’, ‘disappointment’ and ‘disappointing’
(Amy @GrabNGoInfo, 2022). Another example is plural forms of the same word, for
example ‘car’ and ‘cars’ (Grootendorst, 2024c). MMR results in a selection of keywords
that maximize their within diversity with respect to the document (Grootendorst, 2024c),
which adds more value to the topics created and helps in their understanding, making it
easier to label them. Different diversity measures ranging from 0 to 1 can be chosen, from
least diversity to most diversity. The value of 0.3 was chosen.
After the careful choice of all the parameters described, BERTopic model is trained on
17
==PAGE:24==
4.4. TOPIC MODELING RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. TOPIC MODELING
the text data and the results obtained can be observed in the following section.
4.4
Topic Modeling Results
BERTopic produced 12 different topics. The documents distribution within the topic
clusters can be observed in the following BERTopic’s 2-D representation:
Figure 4.2: BERTopic’s 2-D Documents and Topics Representation
The topics obtained from the Topic Modeling with BERTopic, together with their
document count and percentage of documents belonging to that topic can be observed in
the table below:
Table 4.1: Topics obtained from BERTopic
Topic
Title
Count
%
Topic -1
NOT ASSIGNED
2885
50.4%
Topic 0
“Entrepreneurial Journeys: Time, Needs, and Success in Business”
554
9.7%
Topic 1
“Wellness and Food Industry”
464
8.1%
Topic 2
“Women Entrepreneurs”
345
6.0%
Topic 3
“Beauty and Fashion Brands”
256
4.5%
Topic 4
“AI Companies”
225
3.9%
Topic 5
“India’s Startup Ecosystem”
230
4.0%
Topic 6
“Entrepreneurial and Software Innovations Awards”
157
2.7%
Topic 7
“University Alumni, Campus Innovation, and Ventures”
157
2.7%
Topic 8
“Diversity in Entrepreneurship: Racial Funding”
144
2.5%
Topic 9
“Medical Sciences”
130
2.3%
Topic 10
“MENA Region”
98
1.7%
Topic 11
“China’s Business Landscape”
76
1.3%
18
==PAGE:25==
4.4. TOPIC MODELING RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. TOPIC MODELING
Topic names were decided with the aid of AI tools taking into account their
representative words and with the instruction of keeping them short and concise.
The word cloud of each of the topics is presented below:
(a) Topic 0: Entrepreneurial Journeys: Time,
Needs, and Success in Business
(b) Topic 1: Wellness and Food Industry
Figure 4.3: Word Clouds Topic 0 and 1
(a) Topic 2: Women Entrepreneurs
(b) Topic 3: Beauty and Fashion Brands
Figure 4.4: Word Clouds Topic 2 and 3
(a) Topic 4: AI Companies
(b) Topic 5: India’s Startup Ecosystem
Figure 4.5: Word Clouds Topic 4 and 5
19
==PAGE:26==
4.4. TOPIC MODELING RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. TOPIC MODELING
(a) Topic 6: Entrepreneurial and Software Inno-
vations Awards
(b) Topic 7: University Alumni, Campus Innova-
tion, and Ventures
Figure 4.6: Word Clouds Topic 6 and 7
(a) Topic 8:
Diversity in Entrepreneurship:
Racial Funding
(b) Topic 9: Medical Sciences
Figure 4.7: Word Clouds Topic 8 and 9
(a) Topic 10: MENA Region
(b) Topic 11: China’s Business Landscape
Figure 4.8: Word Clouds Topic 10 and 11
Without taking into account the topic -1, which represents all the articles which
weren’t assigned to any topic, it is noted that Topic 0: "Entrepreneurial Journeys: Time,
Needs, and Success in Business" gets the biggest share of articles. Those articles bring
pieces of advice for future entrepreneurs. For example, they highlight the reality of
entrepreneurship, opposing it to the idealized view portrayed by famous figures such as
Jeff Bezos and Elon Musk. They expose the obstacles entrepreneurs have to face, like long
working hours and little recognition at the beginning of their journey. However, they also
underscore that the ultimate goal is rewarding, to allow those with a clear mission and
right mindset to create something impactful. The content of this topic aligns very well
with Entrepreneur media outlet’s proclaimed offer: a source of "advice, insight, profiles
and guides for established and aspiring entrepreneurs worldwide"
(https://www.entrepreneur.com/).
20
==PAGE:27==
4.4. TOPIC MODELING RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. TOPIC MODELING
Topic 2: "Women Entrepreneurs" is the third topic with the most news count. As its
title and word cloud suggest, it focuses on female entrepreneurs, their journey, experiences,
challenges and successes. They also put emphasis on the positive contributions of increased
diversity in the entrepreneurial ecosystem. An important question that arises is why there
should be a specific topic for women entrepreneurs, mentioning them explicitly, whereas
men are included into Topic 0, which refers to the same topic but without the gendered
lenses? The answer to this is that women are not traditionally associated to entrepreneur
roles and thus it is highlighted when they decide to take this path against all odds and in
spite of all the difficulties they must face. This goes in hand with the previous research on
the topic mentioned in Chapter 2: the gendered representation of women entrepreneurs.
When mentioning women entrepreneurs, news articles often associate them with their
family duties, which have to be put on a side. The emphasis on the femininity of the
entrepreneurs take a big part of these articles, and this characterisation differentiates it from
male entrepreneurs which are included in Topic 0 but their gender is not mentioned explic-
itly. According to the results of the topic modeling, which reflect the representation made
by entrepreneur news, men are ’entrepreneurs’, while women are ’female entrepreneurs’.
Moreover, women entrepreneurs appear to have difficulties getting the funds to start their
businesses. This is hinted by the appearance of words like ’funding’, ’capital’, ’investors’
and ’venture’ within the word cloud of Topic 2, and confirmed when exploring the articles
which belong to the topic. In fact, the lack of representation of women in Venture Capital
firms is mentioned as one of the causes of the difficulties women face to secure funding by
one of the representative articles of this topic (White, 2020).
21
==PAGE:28==
4.4. TOPIC MODELING RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. TOPIC MODELING
Topic similarity can be observed in the following similarity matrix:
Figure 4.9: BERTopic’s Similarity Matrix
BERTopic’s similarity matrix allows to identify those topics most similar to each other.
The matrix shows, for example, that ’AI Companies’ topic has high similarity with
’Medical Sciences’ topic. If we focus on ’Women Entrepreneurs’ topic, the highest
similarities can be observed with the topics of ’Diversity in Entrepreneurship: Racial
Funding’ and ’Beauty and Fashion Brands’. This will be further explored in chapter 6.
As mentioned earlier in the introduction of the chapter, there is no shared convention
on how to evaluate the performance of the obtained topics. Röder et al. (2015) performed
some experimentation combining the elementary components that make up the
configuration space of coherence measures. 237.912 combinations were tried and Cv
coherence was identified to be the one to correlate the highest with human interpretation
(Röder et al., 2015). Cv coherence became a very popular tool to evaluate a topic model
because unlike other measures, it does not require a ground-truth topic set (Churchill and
Singh, 2022). In Cv coherence, each topic word is compared with each other (Churchill
and Singh, 2022). The closeness of words in each topic is captured based on their relative
cofrequencies with each other (Churchill and Singh, 2022). Mutual information of the
22
==PAGE:29==
4.4. TOPIC MODELING RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. TOPIC MODELING
words in a topic is attempted to be captured this way (Churchill and Singh, 2022). It must
be noted that coherence measures like Cv can be useful to compare different topic
modeling algorithms’ performance. However, it must only be used as a proxy as other
factors should be taken into consideration like, for example, clusters quality or distribution
of topics (Grootendorst, 2021). The use case should always be kept in mind instead of
trying to overfit on any metric when tuning the parameters of the model and human
judgement should always prevail (Grootendorst, 2021).
An overall Cv coherence of 0.56 was obtained, whereas the coherence obtained per topic
can be observed in the following figure:
Figure 4.10: Topic Coherence per Topic
23
==PAGE:30==
4.4. TOPIC MODELING RESULTS
CHAPTER 4. TOPIC MODELING
Cv coherence gives a measure of how frequently the words in the topic co-occur in
the documents they represent. It is very subjective as it depends on the representative
words chosen, and it is only as good as the corpus being modeled. However, it can be used
to compare the different topics to each other. For instance, it can be observed ’China’s
Business Landscape’ is the most coherent while ’AI Companies’ is in the opposite end.
This means the words representing the topic ’China’s Business Landscape’ appear more
frequently together in the documents that the words representing the topic ’AI Companies’.
This can be understood as measure of the quality of a topic. A closer look to the word
cloud of ’AI Companies’, shows that the words are more diversified and not so similar to
each other as it happens in other topics. AI is the word with most weight in the topic but it
is not trivial to choose a title for it.
24
==PAGE:31==
Chapter 5
NLP Tools
In this chapter, the NLP tools used to analyze the text data to detect gender bias are
introduced and, at a later stage, applied to the news sources. The work in this chapter is
based on Rao and Taboada (2021)’s work, who analyze English language Canadian media
to examine gender-based disparities by topic. The basis of their analysis is quotations
quantification to visualize which topics are most often aligned with women and which of
them are aligned with men (Rao and Taboada, 2021). Their results show a self-reinforcing
gendered division of duties and representation in society (Rao and Taboada, 2021). For
instance, women are more quoted in lifestyle, entertainment, and healthcare articles,
whereas men have a higher share of the quotes within sports, politics, and business (Rao
and Taboada, 2021). This reinforces women’s status as caregivers and men as leaders and
breadwinners (Rao and Taboada, 2021). Their methodology is robust and reproducible,
and they made available an open GitHub repository with the code (Rao and Taboada, 2023),
which will be referred to now on as the Gender Gap Tracker. The GitHub repository was
cloned locally. Since the code was making use of some local databases hosting the data,
some minor adjustments had to be made to use this project’s own data. In the following
sections, the different parts of the gender bias detection are described, starting with the
preparation of the text data to feed into the algorithm.
5.1
Text Preparation
The cloned GitHub code reads the text in the form of files. This means that the first step
is to save the extracted texts, previously saved as a .csv file, into a text file for each of
the news articles. As the code uses utf-8 encoding, special care must be taken so that
the text files use this encoding and not another one. This is ensured by telling Python to
open the text file in utf-8 that is immediately after going to be written on. The code used
to dump the text into input files can be checked in the APPENDIX 5.1. Following, the
different components of the quote quantification process used by the Gender Gap Tracker
are described. The components are pipelined and produce as an output a .json file for each
of the news articles.
5.2
Quote Extraction
Quote extraction is performed with the Quote Extractor as defined in (Rao and Taboada,
2023). The Quote Extractor uses spaCy (https://spacy.io/) as the NLP module to
25
==PAGE:32==
5.2. QUOTE EXTRACTION
CHAPTER 5. NLP TOOLS
tokenize the input text and afterwards parse it (Rao and Taboada, 2023). “spaCy is a
free, open-source library for advanced Natural Language Processing (NLP) in Python”
(Explosion, 2024). It is used en_core_web_lg as the trained pipeline to predict linguis-
tic annotations (Rao and Taboada, 2023). en_core_web_lg is a CPU-optimized pipeline
which is not as accurate as state-of-the-art transformer-based pipelines, but, however, is
much computationally cheaper to run (Explosion, 2024) and produces sufficiently accurate
results.
The Quote Extractor finds the quotes in the input text and assigns them to a speaker
(Asr et al., 2021). Three different types of quotations are defined (Asr et al., 2021). These
are: syntactic, floating and heuristic (Asr et al., 2021). The first type of them, syntactic
quotes, relies on spaCy’s built-in dependency parser to identify constituency structures
in sentences (Asr et al., 2021). spaCy identifies clausal complement structures in the
input text (Asr et al., 2021). These are represented in sentence parsing with the CCOMP
tag as defined in (de Marneffe and Manning, 2008). A clausal complement is a clause
that serves to complete the meaning of another element in a sentence, typically following
verbs of reporting, saying, thinking, etc. (Asr et al., 2021). For example, in the sentence
"Prosecutors claimed that Milton’s exaggerations lost investors a total of $660 million"
(Silverman, 2023), the phrase "that Milton’s exaggerations lost investors a total of $660
million" is the clausal complement. It completes the meaning of the verb "claimed". Both
direct speech (within quotation marks) and indirect speech are captured as syntactic quotes
(Asr et al., 2021). Because in its indirect form, the structure is very common in English
and is not specific to quotations (“He saw that you like to swim”; “He believes that you
like to swim”), to ensure reported speech is captured and not other clausal objects of verbs,
the verb is compared against a curated allow-list of verbs related to communication (Asr
et al., 2021). Another syntactic structure captured is whenever the prepositional phrase
“according to” appears, either before or after the quote (Asr et al., 2021). An example
of this is: “The sentence comes after Milton, 41, was convicted on federal charges of
securities fraud and wire fraud in October 2022, according to CNN” (Silverman, 2023).
Floating quotes are also extracted from the input text (Asr et al., 2021). A "floating
quote" is a quoted sentence or sentences that doesn’t directly indicate who the speaker is
within the same sentence/s but can be attributed to a speaker mentioned in a preceding
sentence (Asr et al., 2021). An example of a floating quote can be observed in the fol-
lowing extract: ’ "Trevor Milton lied to investors again and again — on social media, on
television, on podcasts, and in print," U.S. Attorney Damian Williams said in the press
release. "But today’s sentence should be a warning to start-up founders and corporate
executives everywhere — ’fake it till you make it’ is not an excuse for fraud, and if you
mislead your investors, you will pay a stiff price" ’ (Silverman, 2023). For the second
sentence, the speaker “U.S. Attorney Damian Williams” is attributed to it even though it is
not directly mentioned in it.
The third type of quotes, the heuristic ones, are those which are enclosed between start
and end quotation marks (Asr et al., 2021). They represent the cases that weren’t properly
captured as syntactic or floating quotes, providing a heuristic approach to quote extraction
(Asr et al., 2021). Because detected heuristic quotes can be duplicates of syntactic quotes,
a deduplication step is included at the end which ensures that only the quote with the
longer span is kept in case of overlap between two quotes (Asr et al., 2021).
26
==PAGE:33==
5.3. ENTITY RECOGNITION AND CLUSTERING
CHAPTER 5. NLP TOOLS
5.3
Entity Recognition and Clustering
After the quotes have been extracted in the previous step, Named Entity Recognition
(NER) is applied on the text. The approach followed is the same as defined by Rao and
Taboada (2023). spaCy has NER as one of its built-in capabilities. Named entities labeled
as “PERSON” are identified (Asr et al., 2021). Later, coreference analysis is performed
to unify all mentions of an entity in the article (Asr et al., 2021). For this task, “neu-
ralcoref” (https://spacy.io/universe/project/neuralcoref) library is used (Rao
and Taboada, 2023). This library is compatible with spaCy and, once added to the nlp
pipeline, the method ._.coref_clusters applied on a spaCy’s Doc object returns clusters
of text spans that refer to the same entity (Asr et al., 2021). The outputs of spaCy’s NER
and the coreference clusters are merged to create a set of clusters that correspond to each
person, mapping all mentions of a person to one canonical name (Asr et al., 2021). Some
clusters may still be separated although they refer to the same entity (Asr et al., 2021). This
is because the coreference analysis algorithm fails to combine all mentions of a named
entity due to the computational cost, especially if the entity is mentioned in clusters that
are far from each other within the text (Asr et al., 2021). Due to this, clusters need to be
further combined by defining rules of exact match and partial match of the named entities
(Asr et al., 2021). For example, “Trevor Milton” and “Trevor” should belong to the same
cluster.
The quotes obtained in the Quote Extraction step are matched against the named entities
clusters to identify only those quotes which belong to valid “PERSON” named entities
(Asr et al., 2021). The quote assignment is performed based on the overlap of the quote’s
speaker and the named entity span (Asr et al., 2021). If the quote’s speaker is not a person
or is unknown, then it is not computed as a named entity quote (Asr et al., 2021).
5.4
Gender Prediction
The last step involves assigning a gender to all the named entities recognized in the previ-
ous step (Asr et al., 2021). For this, the approach taken by the Gender Gap Tracker
and followed by this thesis was to rely on external gender prediction web services.
The Gender Gap Tracker uses Genderize (https://genderize.io/) and Gender-API
(https://gender-api.com/) (Asr et al., 2021). At the time of writing, Genderize pro-
vides 1000 free API calls per day. Gender-API, on the other hand, offers only 100 free
requests per day. That is why this project used only Genderize service, dividing the API
calls into different days to complete all the necessary calls. However, the Gender Gap
Tracker project had already made many calls and saved their query results into their own
databases. Professor Maite Taboada, one of the contributors to the GitHub repository (Rao
and Taboada, 2023), was very kind to share their cached databases with the author of this
thesis upon request. This made available gender data from Genderize and Gender-API
without having to consume API calls. 3 .json format caches were provided: GenderAPI,
Genderize and Firstname.
Before recurring to Genderize external service, the cached databases are queried to find
a match with the named entities. The cached databases have stored in them, in the case
of Gender-API, the full name, first name, last name, and the predicted gender for queried
named entities. In the case of Genderize, it is only the first name and the predicted gender.
27
==PAGE:34==
CHAPTER 5. RES. OF GENDER BIAS DETECTION
Queries are streamlined into the databases in the following order:
1. Search in GenderAPI cache based on full name.
2. Search in Genderize cache for first name.
3. Search in GenderAPI cache based on first name.
4. Search in Firstname cache for first name.
If names’ genders are still not found after having searched into the 3 databases through
the described process, Genderize external service is resorted to. After having queried
through Genderize and obtained a result, the information which includes the predicted
gender is saved into the local Genderize cache. It must be mentioned that “Unknown”
gender results for a name are also saved, so to minimize the queries into the external
service. The handling process of the caches, including querying into them and updating
them with new results, was programmed by the author of this thesis, as the original code in
the Gender Gap Tracker used its own internal databases.
For each of the news articles, the gender of every found “PERSON” named entity is
obtained through the described process. The amount of people belonging to each of the
genders is then quantified, both for mentions as well as for quotes, and a final .json file is
output. The information provided through the output .json file is exemplified below:
{"people": ["Trevor Milton", "Damian Williams"], "peopleCount": 2, "peopleFemale":
[], "peopleFemaleCount": 0, "peopleMale": ["Trevor Milton", "Damian Williams"],
"peopleMaleCount": 2, "peopleUnknown": [], "peopleUnknownCount": 0, "sources":
["Damian Williams", "Trevor Milton"], "sourcesCount": 2, "sourcesFemale": [], "sources-
FemaleCount": 0, "sourcesMale": ["Damian Williams", "Trevor Milton"], "sources-
MaleCount": 2, "sourcesUnknown": [], "sourcesUnknownCount": 0, "authorsAll": [],
"authorsMale": [], "authorsMaleCount": 0, "authorsFemale": [], "authorsFemaleCount":
0, "authorsUnknown": [], "authorsUnknownCount": 0, "quoteCount": 8, "speakersNot-
CountedInSources": 5, "quotesUpdated": [...]}
In the next chapter, the results of the quote quantification process, referred to as Gender
Entity Annotation, are presented in an aggregated form, which will form the basis for the
gender bias detection.
28
==PAGE:35==
Chapter 6
Results of Gender Bias Detection
After having obtained the results from the Entity Gender Annotation described in the
previous chapter, these are illustrated through graphs and tables to gain an understanding
of the implications regarding gender bias in entrepreneur news.
Before delving into the results obtained for the different topics defined through the
topic modeling, some insights involving main news outlets as well as gender bias evolution
over time are presented.
6.1
Bias per News Outlet
In the table below, results obtained for the 8 most influential news outlets (meaning the ones
which returned the highest amount of articles in Google News search) are summarized:
Table 6.1: Gender Bias on the 8 most influential News Outlets for news retrieved
between January 2019 and December 2023
Outlet
Number of
Articles
People Mentioned
Percentage Women
Mentioned (%)
People quoted
Percentage Women
Quoted (%)
Entrepreneur
1044
4311
24.4
881
27.2
Forbes
754
4336
40.5
819
43.8
Inc.
207
830
30.4
229
34.5
Business Insider
198
825
32.1
270
33.0
CNBC
175
691
22.6
200
19.5
PR Newswire
97
590
30.3
130
22.3
Yahoo Finance
97
631
23.3
92
17.4
Business Wire
94
624
32.4
157
28.0
Overall
2666
12838
31.2
2778
32.2
In the above table, "people mentioned" is the number of all people mentioned in all the
articles per news article. "People quoted" is the number of mentioned people who were
quoted one or more times in each article.
The 8 main news sources account for 46.6% of the total amount of articles retrieved.
None of them reflect gender parity in their news content both regarding mentions as well
as quotes. Moreover, a great variation can be observed between the news outlets. Forbes is
the most well-balanced news outlet of all, with 40.5% of mentions and 43.8% of quotes
belonging to women. Forbes.com is part of Forbes Media LLC. Its content is very broad
29
==PAGE:36==
6.2. MONTHLY RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. RES. OF GENDER BIAS DETECTION
and includes articles on finance, industry, investing, marketing, technology, and science,
among others. Their model is unique as it is a "contributor model", which relies on a
wide network of contributors who write and publish articles directly on the website. The
contributors are paid based on the traffic they drive to their respective Forbes.com web
page. As of 2019, they had 100 articles published per day by a community of 3,000
external contributors. This openness to external contributors and the lack of a filtering
mechanism and agenda setting by the site editors to the content being published could
explain the more balanced mentions and quotes Forbes.com has compared to the other
news outlets. Behind Forbes, it can be found Inc. and Business Insider, with women quote
rates slightly above the overall average of 32.2%. Inc. is an American business magazine
which has its accompanying online content. Business Insider, on the other hand, is a purely
online financial and business multinational news outlet which operates several international
editions.
Regarding the news outlets which reflect a lower than overall average in women quotes
ratio, it can be found, in descending order, Business Wire, Entrepreneur, PR Newswire,
CNBC, and Yahoo Finance. Business Wire and PR Newswire are both press release
distributors. Of the two, Business Wire has a more balanced portrayal of quotes between
the genders. From PR Newswire, it draws the attention the much lower rate it showcases
of women quotes compared to the rate of women mentions. Entrepreneur site is the online
counterpart of the homonymous magazine and it is the most entrepreneurship focused
of all the sites explored. It raises eyebrows their lack of gender balance in mentions and
quotes. CNBC, an American business news and real-time financial market coverage site,
and Yahoo Finance, also specializing in financial news and data, have the lowest gender
rates.
The above view of gender bias by news outlet allows to conclude that news sites
with their own writers and which select the news content to publish are more gender
biased than external contributors’ reliant sites like Forbes. Moreover, entrepreneur news
sites like Entrepreneur, as well as press release distributors tend to exhibit higher than
average gender bias. Lastly, finance focused news sources exhibit the highest gender bias.
This reinforces the social established stereotype of men being more entrepreneurial and
business-acknowledged than women. Furthermore, the fact that women are quoted so
disproportionally low in financial news sites show that women’s voice is not considered an
authority within investment advice and decisions.
6.2
Monthly Results
In the following graph, it can be observed how the monthly counts of articles which contain
either majority male or female sources evolve on a monthly basis in the period of study,
which is from January 2019 to December 2023:
30
==PAGE:37==
6.2. MONTHLY RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. RES. OF GENDER BIAS DETECTION
Figure 6.1: Monthly counts of articles that contain majority male/female sources
The above figure shows that news outlet’s choice to showcase more male than female
voices on their coverage is consistent across time. This discards any possible attribution of
the difference to be awarded to news or quote volume variations. On average, there are
between 2 to 3 times more articles which feature more male voices than articles which
feature more female voices.
6.3
Bias across Topics
Mentions and quotes ratios are aggregated per topic and this allows to view how some
topics exhibit more gender bias than others:
Figure 6.2: Mentions and Quotes Female Ratio per Topic
The above graph compares how much is the average ratio of female mentions and quotes
within the articles belonging to each of the topics. In a first, simple observation, it stands
out that only two topics have majority of women mentions and quotes compared to men’s.
These topics are "Women Entrepreneurs" and "Beauty and Fashion Brands". These results
are not a surprise as the news belonging to the topic "Women Entrepreneurs" revolve
around women entrepreneurs, founders or women-led businesses, as described in Chapter
4. Beauty and Fashion, on the other hand, are typically associated with the type of
businesses that women found. In fact, when reviewing the top 3 representative documents
31
==PAGE:38==
6.2. MONTHLY RESULTS
CHAPTER 6. RES. OF GENDER BIAS DETECTION
of this topic, the 3 of them feature female leaders related to these industries. This goes in
hand with the previous research mentioned in Chapter 2 (Eikhof et al., 2013);
(Achtenhagen and Welter, 2011). This is also reflected in the Similarity Matrix presented
in Chapter 4, when it was mentioned that ’Women Entrepreneurs’ topic correlates highly
with ’Diversity in Entrepreneurship: Racial Funding’ and ’Beauty and Fashion Brands’
topics. ’Women Entrepreneurs’ and ’Beauty and Fashion Brands’ are both characterized
by female protagonists. On the other hand, ’Diversity in Entrepreneurship: Racial
Funding’ shares with ’Women Entrepreneurs’ that they both refer to minorities and their
hardships to secure funding. The topic related to diversity is actually in the third position
of the topics which have the highest female quotes ratio, with 0.46. On the fourth position,
it can be observed ’Wellness and Food Industry’, with a female quotes ratio of 0.37.
In the other end of the female quotes ratio, it can be found ’AI Companies’ topic as
the most biased one towards men. For this topic, less than 1 every 10 quoted people was
female. According to this topic’s word cloud, ’ai’ and ’roth ira’ are important terms which
define it, as well as ’tech’ and ’security’. Roth IRA is a special individual retirement
account taxed only on contribution. Apparently, AI’s great trend in the recent years have
put it in the frontline of investors willing to invest their retirement savings in this industry.
As mentioned in Chapter 4, venture Capital and investment firms are typically led by men.
A bit of insight into AI companies show that these are also highly male-dominated. In the
UK, it was reported that only 12.7% of founders within this sector are female, compared
to a 17.4% across every industry within the country (Chessman, 2024). It seems that this
topic revolves mostly around men making investment decisions about men-led ventures
and the news reflect this and perpetuate it in society.
The second last topic with the lowest female quotes ratio is ’China’s Business Land-
scape’, with 0.13. This result can be related to the fact that "despite their high workforce
participation, fewer women advance to the executive level in China than in other countries"
(Bain Company, Inc. and Spencer Stuart, 2023). In fact, only 19% of executives in
China are women, compared with about 26% in the UK. ’India’s Startup Ecosystem’ topic
follows suit, with a ratio of 0.17. Situation in India in this respect is similar to China. Only
18% of Indian startups are women-led and this is attributed to persistent cultural biases
(Khajuria, 2023). Furthermore, a look into Figure 4.9, shows that both of these topics,
’China’s Business Landscape’ and ’India’s Startup Ecosystem’, have a high similarity with
the topic of ’AI Companies’, further explaining the imbalance in female representation. A
note must be made that both topics include a mix of news from both international news
agencies as well as local ones.
The analysis of the results serve as an example to illustrate how some sectors like AI
and investment firms and some societies like the Chinese and the Indian still have a long
way to go with regards to reducing the gender parity gap. News articles perpetuate this
reality. On the other hand, women are in the majority of the cases presented in a gendered
view when referring to their entrepreneurial journeys. Entrepreneur news articles make a
clear distinction between general entrepreneur articles and those which have women as the
main protagonists. This is reflected by the difference in the female quotes ratio between
the two topics (28.5% for the general entrepreneur news vs 83% for women entrepreneur
news). When covering female entrepreneurs, media focuses on the ’femininity’ of the
actors, an issue which was mentioned in the previous research of Chapter 2. Regarding
beauty and fashion brands, it is an industry clearly dominated by women and this is not
32
==PAGE:39==
6.4. LANGUAGE ANALYSES CHAPTER 6. RES. OF GENDER BIAS DETECTION
striking as they are the biggest consumer group of these products. However, the fact that,
together with the topic of ’Women Entrepreneurs’, ’Beauty and Fashion Brands’ is the
only topic which has a majority of female voices is showcasing a form of discrimination
and perpetuates the bias presented in the literature review of Chapter 2. The tendency
is to associate female entrepreneurial success to ’typically female’ sectors or industries.
According to the media, women are less successful than men in industries like ’Wellness
and Food’, ’AI Companies’ and ’Medical Sciences’, as well as are less recognized than
men in ’Innovations Awards’ and within ’University Ventures’, as can be observed in
Figure 6.2.
6.4
Language Analyses
To gain a better understanding of how the articles present the topics and the people quoted,
a deeper linguistic analysis is performed. For this, corpus studies are applied on the news.
These type of studies help deconstruct hidden meanings and the asymmetrical ways people
are represented in the press (Caldas-Coulthard and Moon, 2010).
First of all, news articles are divided into two separate corpora based on which gender
is more quoted. The figure below shows how many articles belong to each corpora from
each of the topics:
Figure 6.3: Split of news into majority male sources and majority female sources corpora
Later, keyness is applied into both corpora. Keyness is a type of analysis aimed for
identifying large differences between the frequency of word forms in two or more corpora
(Gabrielatos, 2018). Keyness identifies key words, which are words that occurs in a
text more often than would be expected to occur by chance (Rao and Taboada, 2021).
Differences in themes between two corpora can be identified by comparing the words
33
==PAGE:40==
6.4. LANGUAGE ANALYSES CHAPTER 6. RES. OF GENDER BIAS DETECTION
which are more representative of one corpus than the other (Rao and Taboada, 2021).
Keyness is applied into both corpora compared against each other and the following
results are obtained:
Figure 6.4: Keyness of Male Corpus vs Female Corpus
An overview of the results obtained show a lot of finance and cryptocurrency firms and
characters related with these firms representing the male corpus, like ’binance’ or
’mckelvey’. In the case of keywords belonging to the female corpus, names and firms
related to the fashion industry can be identified, like ’stidham’, ’LuLaRoe’ or ’cordeiro’.
However, there can also be identified clear gendered words like ’femtech’ and ’girlboss’.
Femtech is a term born in 2016 used to define software and services that use technology
tailored towards women’s health. Girlboss, on the other hand, is a neologism used to
denote a woman "whose success is defined in opposition to the masculine business world
in which she swims upstream" (Spencer, 2021). The same term, however, can also be used
sarcastically or pejoratively (Snyder, 2021).
34
==PAGE:41==
6.4. LANGUAGE ANALYSES CHAPTER 6. RES. OF GENDER BIAS DETECTION
A more extreme comparison can be observed if presenting majority male sources articles
belonging to topic 0 compared against majority female sources articles belonging to topic
2. As analyzed in Chapter 4 when describing the obtained topics from BERTopic, Topic 0
and Topic 2 refer mainly to the same topic with the difference that Topic 2 has the
gendered lenses.
Figure 6.5: Keyness of Male Corpus from Topic 0 vs Female Corpus from Topic 2
In the previous figure, male corpus is defined by positive terms which denote power like
’autonomy’, ’resolve’, ’consistent’ and ’productive’. Female corpus, on the other hand, is
denoted by gendered terms such as ’women-owned’, ’women-led’, terms related to
maternity, such as ’daughter’ or ’maternity’, and minority-related terms such as ’color’,
’sex’, ’sexual’, ’underrepresented’, ’arab’ or ’male-dominated’.
35
==PAGE:42==
Chapter 7
Discussion and Implications
In the following chapter, the previously described results are discussed in the light of the
theoretical foundations (7.1). Subsequently, limitations of the study with ideas for future
research are presented (7.2).
7.1
Practical Implications
This thesis presents a holistic approach to gender bias detection in entrepreneur news, from
the extraction of the news from the web through their analysis using topic modeling tech-
niques as well as more advanced NLP techniques. It is a novel approach to the detection
of gender bias in entrepreneur news as no other study has been done which performs a
quantitative analysis of the text content of entrepreneur news. Furthermore, it combines
the results of topic modeling with BERTopic with the results of advanced NLP analysis
to provide unique results which brings many new insights to the study of gender bias in
entrepreneur news.
As mentioned in chapter 2, content analysis is a category within discourse analysis
which has its strengths as well as its weaknesses. Its main advantage is that it allows the
automatization of the analysis of large quantities of text using highly efficient programs
and algorithms which continue to grow in their power and efficacy. However, on the
side of its limitations, context is missed, and it is assumed that frequency translates into
importance, which might not always be the case. In this thesis, content analysis was
combined with topic modeling and the results obtained helped to contextualize the way
women entrepreneurs are depicted in the news. The topic of discourse is represented
through the obtained topics and their representative words, and the difference in women
representation within the topics illustrated through the females quotes ratio is used to
contextualize gender bias. Language analyses tools like keyness are also proven to be
very effective for identifying hidden meanings and asymmetries in the way women and
men entrepreneurs are presented in the news. It is an example of how tools of content
analysis, together with topic modeling and language analysis tools can be incorporated
into researchers’ toolbox studying entrepreneurship discourse to detect gender bias. The
results obtained go in the same direction as the implications conveyed on the literature
review of Chapter 2. The techniques implemented complement discourse theory and bring
new insight into the table. This thesis answers the question of ’how’ women entrepreneurs
are personified by the media. Discourse theory continues to be very important to lay the
foundations of ’why’ the media personifies women entrepreneurs in a certain way. They
36
==PAGE:43==
7.1. LIM. & IDEAS FOR FUTURE RES. CHAPTER 7. DISC. AND IMPLICATIONS
describe how the ideas are formed and what is behind them.
A total of 5721 news articles were retrieved from the web. The large sample size pro-
vides a substantial amount of data for analysis and increases the reliability of the findings.
Moreover, the retrieved news articles come from a diverse set of news outlets. The data
collected thus represents a wide range of perspectives and sources.
Furthermore, BERTopic applied on the news returned very clear and varied topics
with high coherence, which aided in shedding more light into the study of gender bias
in entrepreneur news by studying the different representation that women have on the
news belonging to different topics. Cultural variations were identified, as well as top-
ics like AI which present very extreme indicators reflecting a very high bias against women.
7.2
Limitations and Ideas for Future Research
While the news extraction process was quite effective with an almost 97% efficacy on news
retrieval from the queried news, concerns surrounding Google News sampling strength,
its transparency, presence of a ‘filter bubble’ and western geographic bias are present and
might have its quota of effect in the overall results obtained. In future studies, the same
process could be performed but using more news databases sources which can provide,
for example, a better mix of global samples. Moreover, the use of a news database which
returns more complete metadata could allow to make an analysis which involves more
dimensions, for example the gender of the writer.
It must be noted that some articles extracted belonged to podcasts or were lists of many
different CEOs of successful companies, with only 2 or 3 sentences describing each of over
50 different people. It didn’t make sense to analyze the number of quotes in these types of
texts. The parsing process in those texts ultimately failed because of memory limitations
due to their extension. For forthcoming iterations, or if there is some study willing to make
the process better, it is recommended to filter the articles so that the parsing process is not
stopped every time it encounters an issue like this.
Regarding the topic modeling choice, in this thesis BERTopic was used. As mentioned
in Chaper 4, it does not force documents into a cluster, which results in outliers which are
not assigned to any topic representing a big portion of the original corpus. This choice
was taken to keep a clear topic representation and high coherence. If the priority had
been to keep a higher sampling of articles for each of the topics, a different algorithm or
parameters choice would have been made.
Further limitations are associated with the methodology used to assign a gender to the
mentions and quotes from the articles. To start with, the division of persons into male and
female is a simplification which assumes a binary opposition which is far from reality.
Furthermore, there are limitations associated with the tools used to identify the persons,
assign quotes to them and associate those named entities to a gender.
NLP tools have been reported to have implicit gender bias. This is a bias that was not
measured but must be taken into consideration. For example, Rudinger et al. (2018) have
37
==PAGE:44==
7.2. LIM. & IDEAS FOR FUTURE RES. CHAPTER 7. DISC. AND IMPLICATIONS
found gender bias in coreference resolution algorithms. There are also concerns about the
different levels of accuracy showed in part-of-speech tagging and parsing explained by
men and women’s typically different syntactic patterns (Garimella et al., 2019). This could
have its effect in the extraction of quotes from the text.
Coreference resolution tasks are one of the hardest within NLP. This thesis uses “neu-
ralcoref” library which is compatible with spaCy 2.1.3 for the task. While it performs
quite well, it is based on a model developed in 2016 and it has been found to have issues
with multiple subjects in long sentences. New coreference resolution algorithms have
already been developed which make use of BERT (Joshi et al., 2019). Packages using
those algorithms, while more accurate, have not yet been streamlined into an NLP pipeline
to use it out of the box together with the parser. Future studies are recommended to explore
its capabilities and potential to make better predictions and implement it into a pipeline for
the same tasks performed in this work.
On the side of the gender assignation of the named entities, the tools used have a clear
bias towards traditional white Western names as they tend to be overrepresented in the data
used to train them (Asr et al., 2021). For example, names like ‘Shumita’ and ‘Rikshav’
were not identified when queried in Genderize online service, so an ‘unknown’ gender
tag was assigned to them. NER can also make mistakes. For example, company names
like ‘logixboard’ or ‘wipfli’ were identified as persons. Although these are exceptions, in
case the query returned from Genderize service identify it as a male or female name, the
errors are carried over to the results displayed. Names that could not be recognized by
Genderize service and were thus not assigned any gender make up only 1.1% of the sources.
To evaluate the performance of the different steps of the gender bias detection process
(quote extraction and gender annotation), it is necessary annotated data which was not
available in this work. However, Asr et al. (2021) have themselves evaluated the accu-
racy of the different steps of the Gender Gap Tracker which this thesis makes use of, as
explained in Chapter 5. Although their analysis is based on different sources extracted
through a different process, the results of their evaluation can be indicative of the accuracy
of the tools used. For the quote extraction correctly identified to a speaker, they report an
86.5% accuracy. For the gender annotation, they report a lower precision and higher recall
for male sources than female ones. They identified in the tests names which were male but
because of their ambiguity (Ashley, Robin) were assigned the female gender. Furthermore,
they reported the tool to assign company names to male gender more often than to female.
Although it was not the main focus, cultural variations with regards to gender bias in
entrepreneurship were uncovered in this thesis. Future research could be directed towards
further exploring the cross-cultural perspective on media coverage.
Finally, examining the reasons for the underrepresentation of women in news article
quotes extends beyond the scope of this thesis. Even though it is recognized that newspaper
editors play a role in this disparity, it is also undeniable that societal structural biases
contribute significantly, as they tend to provide men with more opportunities and place
them in positions of power and influence more frequently than women.
38
==PAGE:45==
Chapter 8
Conclusion
The main conclusions produced by this thesis are: (1) entrepreneur news can be categorized
into very clear and distinctive topics, one of which corresponds to ‘Female Entrepreneurs’.
This topic is very gendered as it refers specifically to female entrepreneurs or founders and
describes their entrepreneurial journeys, experiences, challenges and successes. It also
highlights their difficulties in obtaining funding, being VC firms highly gender-imbalanced
mentioned as one of the main causes. (2) By counting both mentions as well as sources and
their associated gender, it is concluded that entrepreneur news are highly biased towards
men and relegate women to the sidelines. This is observed in the 8 most influential news
outlets queried, as well as among almost all topics obtained through the topic modeling.
Some differences are observed within news outlets and topics, however. Among 8 news
outlets analyzed, Forbes is found to be the ‘fairest’ in its share of quotes belonging to the
news published. Forbes has an external contributors’ model which means more freedom of
choice of topics and writing style. This depicts how entrenched is entrepreneur gender bias
in current media landscape and its institutions, and hints ways in which gender bias can
be fought against. Having a more diverse environment within writers, editors and news
directors could be a way to help promote more women voices within entrepreneurship
media coverage. The least amount of quotes belonging to women appear on finance news
outlets like Yahoo Finance and CNBC, indicating women are not considered an authority
within investment advice and decisions. If they desired to broaden the diversity of voices
on their news, a good recommendation would be for them to adopt a model similar to
Forbes.
When analyzing gender bias across topics, only 2 topics are identified which have
more women voices than men voices cited through their articles. These are the mentioned
‘Women Entrepreneurs’ and the topic referring to ‘Beauty and Fashion Brands’, an industry
typically associated with the type of businesses women found. Topics like ‘AI Companies’
have the highest bias against women according to the results obtained: less than 1 every
10 people quoted were female. This is a worrying trend since AI has come to stay and
there is no industry which will not be affected by it (World Economic Forum, 2023).
Lack of women representation in AI can “exacerbate the existing gender disparities in the
workforce” (World Economic Forum, 2023, p. 46). Furthermore, results obtained reflect
persistent cultural biases from societies like the Chinese and the Indian, which show worse
indicators as regards gender parity than the western world. The language analysis shows
that articles quoting more women than men display words which depict a clearly gendered
and biased representation of women.
39
==PAGE:46==
CHAPTER 8. CONCLUSION
By answering the two research questions introduced in Chapter 1, namely to ’identify
and quantify gender bias in entrepreneur media coverage’ and to ’investigate variations
in gender bias in entrepreneur media coverage across different news sources and topics’,
this thesis contributes with novel methodologies to apply in the discourse theory of gender
bias in entrepreneurship. It also sheds light into the reality female entrepreneurs face
when becoming entrepreneurs. If the current trend of female lack of representation and
difficulty in obtaining funds is to be reverted, the best start would be to raise awareness of
the current biases displayed by the media, so that this can be addressed as soon as possible.
Institutions such as news corporations and venture capital firms would benefit from more
diversity within their boards and this would make them more receptive to display more
women voices in the case of news outlets, and fund more women-led ventures in the case
of VC firms. Raising awareness towards successful female entrepreneurs would mean
depicting objective images of their successes without the focus in their femininity, as well
as not only covering their success within traditionally female sectors but all across the
board including other industries such as medicine or AI. Addressing current biases in
media coverage of female entrepreneurs would have the twofold effect of encouraging
more women to venture as well as lowering their barriers including the access to funds.
40
==PAGE:47==
Chapter 9
Bibliography
Leona Achtenhagen and Friederike Welter. Media discourse in entrepreneurship research.
Handbook of Qualitative Methods in Entrepreneurship Research, pages 193–215, 2007.
Leona Achtenhagen and Friederike Welter. ‘surfing on the ironing board’ – the representa-
tion of women’sentrepreneurship in german newspapers. Entrepreneurship Regional
Development Vol. 23, Nos. 9–10, 763–786, 2011.
Anish K. Agarwal, Vivien Wong, Arthur M. Pelullo, Sharath Guntuku, Daniel Polsky,
David A. Asch, Jonathan Muruako, and Raina M. Merchant. Online reviews of spe-
cialized drug treatment facilities–identifying potential drivers of high and low patient
satisfaction. J Gen Intern Med 35(6):1647–1653, 2020.
Helene Ahl. The scientific reproduction of gender inequality: A discourse analysis of
research texts upon women’s entrepreneurship. CBS Press, Copenhagen, 2004.
Helene Ahl. A foucauldian framework for discourse analysis. Neergaard, H. and Ulhøi,
J.P. (Eds), Handbook of Qualitative Research Methods in Entrepreneurship Research,
Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, pp. 216-250, 2007.
Nicolo Cosimo Albanese. Topic modeling with lsa, plsa, lda, nmf, bertopic, top2vec:
a comparison. https://towardsdatascience.com/topic-modeling-with-lsa-plsa-lda-nmf-
bertopic-top2vec-a-comparison-5e6ce4b1e4a5, 2022.
Ruba Alnusyan, Ruba Almotairi, Sarah Almufadhi, Amal A. Shargabi, and Jowharah
Alshobaili. A semi-supervised approach for user reviews topic modeling and classifi-
cation. In 2020 International Conference on Computing and Information Technology
(ICCIT-1441), pages 1–5, 2020.
Amy
@GrabNGoInfo.
Hyperparameter
tuning
for
bertopic
model
in
python.
https://medium.com/grabngoinfo/
hyperparameter-tuning-for-bertopic-model-in-python-104445778347,
2022.
Dimo Angelov. Top2vec: Distributed representations of topics. CoRR, abs/2008.09470,
2020.
Fatemeh Torabi Asr, Mohammad Mazraeh, Alexandre Lopes, Vasundhara Gautam, Junette
Gonzales, Prashanth Rao, and Maite Taboada. The gender gap tracker: Using natural
language processing to measure gender bias in media. PLOS ONE, 16(1):1–28, 01 2021.
41
==PAGE:48==
CHAPTER 9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
David B. Audretsch and Iris A.M. Beckmann. From small business to entrepreneurship
policy. In David B. Audretsch, Isabel Grilo, and A. Roy Thurik, editors, Handbook of
Research on Entrepreneurship Policy, Chapters, chapter 3. Edward Elgar Publishing,
December 2007.
Bain Company, Inc. and Spencer Stuart. China needs more women in executive leadership,
2023.
Ted Baker, Howard Aldrich, and Liou Nina. Invisible entrepreneurs:the neglect of women
business owners by mass media and scholarly journals in the usa. Entrepreneurship &
Regional Development, 9(3):221–238, 1997.
Lakshmi Balachandra, Tony Briggs, Kim Eddleston, and Candida Brush. Don’t pitch like
a girl!: How gender stereotypes influence investor decisions. Entrepreneurship Theory
Practice, Vol. 43(1) 116–137, 2019.
Lori Beaman, Raghabendra Chattopadhyay, Esther Duflo, Rohini Pande, and Petia
Topalova. Powerful women: Does exposure reduce bias?
The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 124(4):1497–1540, 11 2009.
David M. Blei, Andrew Y. Ng, and Michael I. Jordan. Latent dirichlet allocation. J. Mach.
Learn. Res., 3(null):993–1022, mar 2003.
Iris Bohnet. What works: Gender equality by design. 2016.
Harriet Bradley. Gender. Polity Press, Cambridge, 2007.
Attila Bruni, Silvia Gherardi, and Barbara Poggio. Entrepreneur-mentality, gender and the
study of women entrepreneurs. Journal of Organizational Change Management, Vol. 17
No. 3, pp. 256-268, 2004.
Candida G. Brush, Patricia G. Greene, Lakshmi Balachandra, and Amy E. Davis. Women
entrepreneurs 2014: Bridging the gender gap in venture capital. Arthur M. Blank Center
for Entrepreneurship Babson College, 2014.
Noah Buntain, Carol M. Liebler, and Kyle Webster. Database use, database discrepancies.
implications for content analyses of news. Newspaper Research Journal 2023, Vol. 44(4)
409–424, 2023.
Carmen Rosa Caldas-Coulthard and Rosamund Moon. ‘curvy, hunky, kinky’: Using
corpora as tools for critical analysis. Discourse Soc. 21 (2), page 99–133, 2010.
Martin A. Carree and A. Roy Thurik. Industrial structure and economic growth. D.
B. Audretsch R. Thurik (Eds.), Innovation, industry evolution and employment (pp.
86-110). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Sarah Chessman.
Top 5 uk female-founded ai companies in 2024.
https://www.
beauhurst.com/blog/uk-female-founded-ai-companies/, 2024.
Lone Engbo Christiansen, Huidan Lin, Joana Maria Pereira, Petia Topalova, and Rima
Turk. Unlocking the potential of greater female employment in europe. Intereconomics.
Volume 52, 2017 · Number 1 · pp. 5–16, 2017.
42
==PAGE:49==
CHAPTER 9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Rob Churchill and Lisa Singh. The evolution of topic modeling. Association for Computing
Machinery, 54, 10s, 2022.
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe and Christopher D. Manning. Stanford typed dependencies
manual. Stanford University, 2008.
Scott Deerwester, Susan T. Dumais, George W. Furnas, Thomas K. Landauer, and Richard
Harshman. Indexing by latent semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science, Volume 41, Issue 6 p. 391–407, 1990.
Roman Egger and Joanne Yu. Identifying hidden semantic structures in instagram data: a
topic modelling comparison. Tour. Rev. 2021:244, 2021.
Doris Ruth Eikhof, Juliette Summers, and Sara Carter. “women doing their own thing”: me-
dia representations of female entrepreneurship. International Journal of Entrepreneurial
Behaviour Research Vol. 19 No. 5, pp. 547-564. Emerald Group Publishing Limited,
2013.
European
Commission.
Women’s
situation
in
the
labour
market.
https://commission.europa.eu/
strategy-and-policy/policies/justice-and-fundamental-rights/
gender-equality/women-labour-market-work-life-balance/
womens-situation-labour-market_en#:~:text=Documents-,Labour%
20market%20Participation,10%20years%20(%2D1.9%20p.p.),
Accessed
December 2023.
European Parliament. Briefing note for the meeting of the empl committee 5 october 2009
regarding the exchange of views on the lisbon strategy and the eu cooperation in the field
of social inclusion.
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/meetdocs/2009_2014/
documents/empl/dv/lisbonstrategybn_/lisbonstrategybn_en.pdf, 2009.
Eurostat. Careers - around a third of managers in the eu are women, 2021.
Explosion. Facts & figures. https://spacy.io/usage/facts-figures, 2024.
Forrer et al. Startup heatmap report 2023. Deep Ecosystems European Startup Initiative,
2023.
Costas Gabrielatos. Keyness analysis: Nature, metrics and techniques. page 225–258.
Edge Hill University, 2018.
Aparna Garimella, Carmen Banea, Dirk Hovy, and Rada Mihalcea. Women’s syntactic
resilience and men’s grammatical luck: Gender-bias in part-of-speech tagging and
dependency parsing. Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, page 3493– 3498, 2019.
Danielle Gaucher, Justin Friesen, and Aaron C. Kay. Evidence that gendered wording in
job advertisements exists and sustains gender inequality. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 2011.
Maarten Grootendorst. About coherence of topic models 90. https://github.com/
MaartenGr/BERTopic/issues/90, 2021.
43
==PAGE:50==
CHAPTER 9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Maarten Grootendorst. Bertopic: Neural topic modeling with a class-based tf-idf procedure,
2022.
Maarten Grootendorst. The algorithm. https://maartengr.github.io/BERTopic/
algorithm/algorithm.html, 2024a.
Maarten Grootendorst. c-tf-idf. https://maartengr.github.io/BERTopic/getting_
started/ctfidf/ctfidf.html, 2024b.
Maarten Grootendorst. 6a. representation models. https://maartengr.github.io/
BERTopic/getting_started/representation/representation.html, 2024c.
Andreas Graefe Haim, Mario and Hans-Bernd Brosius. Burst of the filter bubble? Digital
Journalism, 6(3), 330–343, 2017.
Madeline E. Heilman. Description and prescription: How gender stereotypes prevent
women’s ascent up the organizational ladder. Journal of Social Issues, 57(4), 657-674,
2001.
Thomas Hofmann. Probabilistic latent semantic analysis. Proceedings of the XV Confer-
ence on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI1999), 1999.
https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers, 2024.
International Labour Organization. Breaking barriers: Unconscious gender bias in the
workplace. ACT/EMP Research note, 2017.
Amelia Jamison, David A. Broniatowski, Michael C. Smith, Kajal S. Parikh, Adeena
Malik, Mark Dredze, and Sandra C. Quinn. Adapting and extending a typology to
identify vaccine misinformation on twitter. Am J Public Health 110(S3):331–339, 2020.
Mandar Joshi, Omer Levy, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Daniel Weld. BERT for coreference
resolution: Baselines and analysis. In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun
Wan, editors, Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 5803–5808. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, nov 2019.
Malvika
Khajuria.
Gender
equity
in
the
indian
start-up
ecosys-
tem:
How
far
have
we
come
and
how
long
before
we
hit
the
sky?
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/blogs/voices/
gender-equity-in-the-indian-start-up-ecosystem-how-far-have-we-come-and-how-long
2023.
Stephen Lacy, Brendan R. Watson, Daniel Riffe, and Jennette Lovejoy. Issues and best
practices in content analysis. Communication Studies Faculty Publications and Presen-
tations, 8. http://pilotscholars.up.edu/cstf acpubs/8,2015.
Caitlin Doogan Poet Laureate, Wray Buntine, and Henry Linger. A systematic review of
the use of topic models for short text social media analysis. Artif Intell Rev. 2023 May
1:1-33, 2023.
44
==PAGE:51==
CHAPTER 9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Jonathan Levie, Mark Hart, and Mohammed Shamsul Karim. Impact of media on en-
trepreneurial intentions and actions. Global Entrepreneurship Monitor, 2010.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and Steve Astels. hdbscan: Hierarchical density based
clustering. The Journal of Open Source Software, 2, 03 2017.
Leland McInnes, John Healy, and James Melville. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation
and projection for dimension reduction, 2020.
Measuring the "Filter Bubble":
How Google is influencing what you click.
https://spreadprivacy.com/google-filter-bubble-study/, 2018.
Prashanth Rao and Maite Taboada. Gender bias in the news: A scalable topic modelling
and visualization framework. Front. Artif. Intell. 4:664737, 2021.
Prashanth Rao and Maite Taboada. Measuring gender bias in media. https://github.
com/sfu-discourse-lab/GenderGapTracker, 2023.
Rubina F. Rizvi, Yefeng Wang, Thao Nguyen, Jake Vasilakes, Jiang Bian, Zhe He, and Rui
Zhang. Analyzing social media data to understand consumers’ information needs on
dietary supplements. Stud. Health Technol. Inform. 264, 323–327, 2019.
Michael Röder, Andreas Both, and Alexander Hinneburg. Exploring the space of topic
coherence measures. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM International Conference on
Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM ’15, page 399–408. Association for Computing
Machinery, 2015.
Rachel Rudinger, Jason Naradowsky, Brian Leonard, and Benjamin Van Durme. Gender
bias in coreference resolution. page 8–14. Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, 2018.
Francisco J. Santos, Muhammad Azam Roomi, and Francisco Linan. About gender
differences and the social environment in the development of entrepreneurial intentions.
Journal of Small Business Management 54 (1), pp. 49-66, 2016.
Albert Shapero and Lisa Sokol. The Social Dimensions of Entrepreneurship. University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign’s Academy for Entrepreneurial Leadership Historical
Research Reference in Entrepreneurship, 1982.
Sam
Silverman.
Founder
of
tesla
rival
nikola
sentenced
to
prison
for
defrauding
investors:
’if
you
mislead
your
investors,
you
will
pay
a
stiff
price’.
https://www.entrepreneur.com/business-news/
who-is-nikola-founder-trevor-milton-prison-sentence-net/467231,
2023.
Abby
Snyder.
Gaslight,
gatekeep:
How
“girlboss”
went
from
aspira-
tional
to
insulting.
https://www.michigandaily.com/statement/
gaslight-gatekeep-how-girlboss-went-from-aspirational-to-insulting/,
2021.
45
==PAGE:52==
CHAPTER 9. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Keith
A.
Spencer.
“i
care
a
lot”
is
a
stinging
indictment
of
neolib-
eral
“girlboss”
feminism.
https://www.salon.com/2021/02/26/
i-care-a-lot-neoliberal-girlboss-feminism-critique/, 2021.
Manuel J. Sánchez-Franco and Manuel Rey-Moreno. Do travelers’ reviews depend on the
destination? an analysis in coastal and urban peer-to-peer lodgings. Psychol. Market.
39, 441–459, 2022.
Sylvia Walby. Theorising patriarchy. Sociology, 23(2), 213-234, 1989.
Kohei Watanabe. The western perspective in yahoo! news and google news: Quantitative
analysis of geographic coverage of online news. The International Communication
Gazette, 75(2), 141–156, 2013.
April White. We rise. https://www.hbs.edu/mba/blog/post/we-rise, 2020.
World Economic Forum. Global gender gap report 2023, 2023.
46
