==PAGE:1==
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
Master Thesis
DTU Compute
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
==PAGE:2==
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
Master Thesis
June, 2024
By
Erik Ravn Nikolajsen
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus-
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
An Abstract Illustration of a Framework, Erik Ravn Nikolajsen, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science,
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Approval
This thesis has been prepared at the Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer
Science, at the Technical University of Denmark, DTU, in partial fulfilment for the degree
Master of Science in Engineering, MSc Eng.
Erik Ravn Nikolajsen - s144382
Signature
Date
June 12th, 2024
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
ii
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
While process mining has historically focused on the analysis of business processes, a
growing body of research is now adapting these techniques to analyze human behavior
using sensor data. The developed techniques could potentially be capable of detecting
increases in symptomatic behavior, which could be indicative of an underlying disease.
Such techniques could be used for early detection of diseases, leading to improved treat-
ment outcomes. This project aimed to provide a solution to validate the accuracy of such
techniques in detecting the progression of disease in individuals. This objective led to the
conceptualization of a validation framework that provides a sequence of phases for cre-
ating a synthetic dataset, which, in combination with a method for analysis, could enable
the computation of a performance metric. Additionally, a pipeline was developed to facil-
itate the execution of the validation framework. A preliminary evaluation of the pipeline
confirmed its ability to produce a performance metric in a set of scenarios. This indicates
that the solution can compare the performance of different techniques, facilitating their
development. Further evaluation of the framework is required to comprehensively assess
the robustness of the solution.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
iii
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge the supervisors of this thesis for their guidance and contribu-
tions throughout the project.
Andrea Burattin, Associate Professor, Technical University of Denmark
I wish to extend my gratitude to Andrea for guiding me through the world of process mining
during my studies. His kind demeanor and enthusiastic passion for his field inspire his
students and leave a lasting impression.
Andrey Rivkin, Assistant Professor, Technical University of Denmark
I am grateful for the guidance received from Andrey, which helped me surpass the im-
passes encountered during this project. His eagerness for discussion and his readiness
to provide counsel have been a great help.
Gemma Di Federico, Postdoc, Technical University of Denmark
I want to acknowledge Gemma for her pioneering work in utilizing process mining to an-
alyze human behavior, which has laid the foundation for the research presented in this
thesis. I am grateful to her for sharing her insights, for collaborating with me on this and
previous projects, and for her positive and supportive nature.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
iv
==PAGE:6==
Contents
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ii
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iii
Acknowledgements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
iv
1
Introduction
1
2
Background
3
2.1
Process Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.2
Behavioral Process Mining
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Behavioral Process Mining in Healthcare
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3
Validation of Behavioral Process Mining Approaches
10
3.1
The Validation Problem
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
3.2
The Challenges of Standardized Validation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.3
Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4
A Validation Framework
14
4.1
Conceptual Framework Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2
Phase 1 - Model Asymptomatic Ground Truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
4.3
Phase 2 - Model Symptomatic Ground Truth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
4.4
Phase 3 - Generate Routine Instances . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.5
Phase 4 - Generate Sensor Readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
4.6
Phase 5 - Apply Behavioral Process Mining Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.7
Phase 6 - Analyze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
5
A Validation Framework Pipeline
29
5.1
The Pipeline Architecture
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
5.2
The Modeling Stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
5.3
The Simulation Stage
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
5.4
The Analysis Stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
6
Evaluation
38
6.1
Experiment Overview
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
6.2
Modeling
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
6.3
Simulating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
6.4
Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6.5
Analyzing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
7
Discussion
49
7.1
Interpretation of Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.2
Limitations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
7.3
Threat to Validity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
7.4
Addressing the Research Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
8
Conclusion
53
8.1
Summary of Key Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
8.2
Future Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
v
==PAGE:7==
Bibliography
55
A Instructions for Running the Validation Framework Pipeline
58
A.1 TINA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A.2 WoPeD
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A.3 Linac Frontend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
A.4 Agent Instructions Generator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.5 Linac Backend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
A.6 SimCoor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A.7 Coral . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
B Experimental Data
61
B.1 Modeled Floorplan with Details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
B.2 Modeled Asymptomatic Routine Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
B.3 Discovered Asymptomatic Routine Models
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
B.4 Computed Fitness Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
vi
==PAGE:8==
1
Introduction
While process mining has traditionally focused on analyzing and enhancing business pro-
cesses, a growing body of research is now adapting these techniques to analyze human
behavior using sensor data [1]. One proposed application domain for such techniques
is the healthcare sector, where accurate detection of disease progression is crucial for
effective treatment. It has been shown that process mining can be used to discover the
normal behavior of an individual and subsequently identify significant variations in that be-
havior using conformance checking [2]. The detection of such significant variations could
indicate a change in the individual’s health, prompting medical assessment.
However, it is not yet understood how accurately these approaches detect the progression
of specific behaviors indicative of specific diseases. This lack of understanding stems
from the difficulty of testing the approaches in such scenarios. This is caused by two
main challenges: the unavailability of datasets describing specific disease progression
where the truth about the extent of the disease is known, and the absence of a standard
metric for measuring the accuracy in detecting disease progression.
This thesis attempts to solve these challenges by the creation of a validation framework
that enables researchers to synthetically generate such datasets and measure the accu-
racy of process mining approaches in detecting symptomatic progression in a standard
way.
The successful creation of such a framework would contribute to the field of process min-
ing by facilitating the development of techniques that can accurately detect symptom evo-
lution in individuals. This, in turn, would benefit healthcare analytics by enabling the early
detection of the onset or worsening of diseases, ultimately improving patient treatment
effectiveness.
Thesis Outline
The remainder of the thesis is structured as follows:
Chapter 2: Background
Provides the background information necessary to understand the context of the subse-
quent chapters. This includes information on process mining, the emergence of behav-
ioral process mining, and the characteristics of dementia.
Chapter 3: Validation of Behavioral Process Mining Approaches
Introduces the problem of validating the efficacy of behavioral process mining approaches
in detecting disease progression, while simultaneously presenting the broad idea of how
such efficacy can be identified.
Chapter 4: A Validation Framework
Presents a solution in the form of a conceptual framework for synthetic validation and then
provides a detailed explanation of its phases.
Chapter 5: A Validation Framework Pipeline
Describes an implementation of the framework as a pipeline composed of both novel and
preexisting software solutions. The preexisting solutions are briefly introduced while the
implementation details of the novel solutions are described in greater detail.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
1
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 6: Evaluation
Details a preliminary study that acts to evaluate the framework’s viability. The study fo-
cuses on the detection of progressive symptomatic behavior that is often seen in people
with dementia.
Chapter 7: Discussion
Discusses interpretation of results, limitations of the conceptual and implemented frame-
work, and the threats to the validity of the study.
Chapter 8: Conclusion
Summarizes the findings of the project and proposes areas for further research.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
2
==PAGE:10==
2
Background
This chapter will present the reader with the background information required to properly
understand the context of the problem presented in chapter 3. First, the main ideas of
process mining used in this thesis are briefly introduced in Section 2.1. Then the new
subfield of behavioral process mining is presented in Section 2.2. Finally, an application
domain of behavioral process mining is discussed in Section 2.3.
2.1
Process Mining
Process mining is a discipline that lies in the intersection between the fields of data sci-
ence and process science [3], that aims to improve operational processes through the
systematic use of event data [4] [5]. This event data is recorded by information systems
and compiled in the format of an event log.
2.1.1
Event Logs
An example of such an event log can be seen in Figure 2.1. Here each row in the ta-
ble corresponds to an event and each column corresponds to an attribute of the events.
Three main attributes are necessary for most process mining approaches [3], i.e., case,
a unique identifier for each process instance; activity, the specific action performed; and
timestamp, the time at which each event occurred. Additional attributes of the events are
often included in the event log, as this enables the opportunity of analysing the process
from additional perspectives. The additional attributes seen in Figure 2.1 are: event-ID,
a unique identifier for each event within a case or across cases; resource, the persons
executing the activities; cost, the costs relating to the execution of the activity. There are
no standard for what attributes one includes in an event log, it entirely depends on what
one is able to capture and what one wishes to analyse. The example event log is shown
as a table for illustrative purposes, but an IEEE standard format of storing event logs is in
an XML schema called the XES (eXtensible Event Stream) [6].
Table 2.1: A fragment of an event log.
Case-ID
Event-ID
Timestamp
Activity
Resource
Cost
1
65350054
20-03-2024T08:46:04
receive order
Maria
50
1
65350055
20-03-2024T09:10:43
prepare order
Laura
200
1
65350056
20-03-2024T09:18:23
check quality
Thomas
100
1
65350057
20-03-2024T09:52:10
dispatch order
Thomas
100
2
65350092
20-03-2024T08:48:59
receive order
Maria
50
2
65350093
20-03-2024T09:20:48
prepare order
Sofia
200
2
65350094
20-03-2024T09:28:25
cancel order
Maria
400
...
...
...
...
...
...
Once raw data has been converted into an event log, the event log can be used to conduct
discovery and conformance checking as seen in Figure 2.1.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
3
==PAGE:11==
discovery
model
event log
conformance
checking
diagnostics
event log
model
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.1: The input and output of the discovery and conformance checking techniques.
Adapted from [7].
2.1.2
Process Discovery
The content of an event log is example behavior of an underlying process, where each
case represents a trace trough the process model. The purpose of process discovery
is then to discover this underlying process based on this example behavior. Here the
challenge of the discovery technique is to produce a process model that does not overfit
or underfit by respectively producing process models that allow all observed behavior in-
cluding noise or describe simplified behavior. Numerous algorithms have been proposed
for this challenge that each have its advantages and disadvantages.
The first proposed algorithm for process discovery was the Alpha algorithm [8]. This is a
simple and computationally efficient approach that generates a process model in the form
of a Petri net. However, the produced process model often lacks precision due to the
algorithm not addressing noise and therefore often produces an overly complex process
model that is difficult to interpret. Moreover, the Alpha algorithm lacks the ability to capture
certain process patterns relating to loops and dependencies.
A subsequently proposed algorithm is the Heuristic Miner [9] attempts to address noise
and reduce its presence in the resulting process model. The Heuristic Miner does so by
extending the Alpha algorithm with the capability of computing the probability of a trace
being noise based on the frequency of the trace in the provided event log and a given
threshold value. The advantage of the heuristics miner is that it produces a process model
that provides a general overview of the process that is easily interpretable. However, the
disadvantage is that the construction of more elaborate process models is challenging.
Another class of process discovery algorithms are the Inductive Miners [10]. These algo-
rithms differ from the previously mentioned approaches by producing a process model in
the form of a Process Tree. A process tree is a hierarchical representation of the process
behavior, consisting of nodes and branches that represent activities and their relation-
ships. The algorithm discovers these relationships by recursively splitting the event log
into sublogs based on common behavioral patterns [5]. The advantage of such Inductive
Miners is that the resulting Process trees are sound by construction, meaning that it is
guaranteed that it does not suffer from deadlocks, livelocks, and other anomalies. More-
over, the produced process tree can be easily converted into other process notations such
as Petri nets and BPMN models.
The previously mentioned algorithms produce imperative process models that provide
procedural descriptions of the process flow by explicitly capturing control-flow patterns.
Another type of process models are called declarative process models, that are essen-
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
4
==PAGE:12==
tially a set of constraints defined over a set of activities. A process discovery algorithm
that produces such a declarative process model in the form of a DCR graph [11] is the
DisCoveR algorithm [12]. A DCR graph is a directional graph where nodes represent
activities and edges define constraints and dependencies between activities. The advan-
tage of a declarative process notation such as DCR is that it allows one to better interpret
the boundaries of the real process by explicitly stating what should not occur.
2.1.3
Conformance Checking
Conformance checking evaluates the degree of conformance between the observed be-
havior of an event log and the expected behavior specified by a process model. Such an
evaluation often considers four quality dimensions [3] [5]:
• Fitness - The discovered model should allow for the behavior seen in the event log.
The fitness value is then the fraction of observed behavior that is allowed by the
model.
• Precision - The discovered model should not allow for behavior completely unrelated
to what was seen in the event log. The precision value is then the fraction of behavior
allowed by the model that was actually observed.
• Generalization - The discovered model should generalize the example behavior
seen in the event log rather than include all observed behavior. The generaliza-
tion value then represents the probability that new unseen cases will fit the model.
• Simplicity - The discovered model should be as simple as possible. The simplic-
ity value then represents the complexity of the model based on number of nodes,
number of arcs, etc.
There are many techniques for conformance checking with the two most frequently used
approaches being token-based replay and alignments.
With token-based replay, the process model is represented as a Petri net and traces in
the event log are then replayed on the model. During these replays four counters track
the number of produced, consumed, missing, and remaining tokens. The severity of the
conformance problem is then computed as the number of missing and remaining tokens
relative to the number of produced and consumed tokens. While token-based replay is
a computationally efficient approach it may not always produce valid paths through the
process model, which may result in a less than perfect evaluation [13].
Conformance checking with alignments were introduced to solve the limitations of token-
based replay by being applicable for any processing model notation and by being highly
accurate. This however comes with the cost of being less efficient computationally. Var-
ious implementation of alignment algorithms exists, but they generally work by aligning
event log traces with the process model while having costs assigned to alignment steps
representing deviations. The total cost then indicates the degree of conformance, with
lower costs reflecting better alignment [14] [15].
2.2
Behavioral Process Mining
Process mining has historically limited itself to the analysis of business processes, and as
such, little research has been done on assessing the viability of analyzing human behavior
via process mining techniques. However, lately, Di Federico et al has produced a series
of novel papers that attempts to apply process mining on processes that describe human
behavior.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
5
==PAGE:13==
To analyse human behavior one first needs to obtain data about events relating to the
behavior of humans. Today, such data is most present in the form of sensor readings
logged by IoT and wearable devices. Therefore, the challenge of abstracting fine granu-
larity events in the form of sensor readings, that would not represent anything meaningful,
into more coarse granularity events, that could represent the activities of a human rou-
tine, was approached. This was done in the paper vAMoS: eVent Abstraction via Motifs
Search [16] and the subsequent article CvAMoS—Event Abstraction Using Contextual
Information [17], which introduce the event abstraction method vAMoS and its succes-
sor CvAMoS. The CvAMoS method is able to identify common sequences of events in
an event log called motifs, up to a certain dissimilarity, and distinguish them based on
contextual attributes. Doing so, it is able to abstract low-level events into higher-level
meaningful activities useful for modeling the behavior of humans.
Then, in the article Human Behavior as a Process Model: Which Language to Use? [18],
the problem of modeling human behavior as a process with currently available process
modeling languages is introduced. This problem arises due to human behavior being
more dynamic and less structured compared to the types of business processes that these
languages were originally intended for. Traditional Process Discovery techniques aim at
unifying all or most the behaviors recorded in event logs in a unique and complete process
model. When the process is inherently unstructured, and hence process executions can
largely differ from each other, they usually return overgeneralizing or exceedingly com-
plex models. The article then investigates the characteristics of processes that describe
human behavior. The resulting set of 9 discrete characteristics are then translated into a
set of 9 discrete requirements expected by process model languages in order for them to
adequately model human behavior.
In the supplementary paper Modeling Human Behavior: Process Modeling Language
Requirements [19], the requirements are then compared to the qualities of 18 existing
process modeling languages with the objective of identifying which process modeling lan-
guages best reflect the needs of a process representing human behavior. The result is
that none of the assessed process modeling languages adequately covers all of the re-
quirements. However, a multi-model composed of multiple process modeling languages
could cover them all.
The findings in the previous groundwork led to the paper Do You Behave Always the
Same?: A Process Mining Approach [20] and the ideas present in the thesis Analysis
of Human Behavior with Process Mining: Detecting and Explaining Variations [21]. This
paper puts forward an approach for how to do discovery and conformance checking on
event logs that represent human behavior. Here discovery uses an enriched multi-model
approach composed of a control-flow dimension and a data dimension. In the provided
example the control-flow dimension consists of two imperative models in the form of Petri
Nets discovered respectively via the Inductive and the Heuristics Miner, and one declar-
ative model in the form of a DCR graph discovered via the DisCoveR algorithm. This
multi-model is then enriched with a data dimensions that includes the frequency, dura-
tion, and absolute time of the activities in the event log.
Then, to handle conformance checking of such an enriched multi-model, the paper in-
troduces the notion of an aggregation function. This function aggregates the individually
calculated conformance fitness values of the six individual parts of the enriched multi-
model into a single enriched fitness value. The fitness value of the Petri Nets models are
calculated using conformance alignment [14]; the DCR graph fitness value is calculated
using a rule checker [22]; and the frequency, duration, and absolute time fitness values
are calculated as a statistical deviation from the reference model.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
6
==PAGE:14==
Using this approach on synthetic data it was possible to identify variations and discrepan-
cies between a reference model and an event log where typical conformance techniques
were failing. However, limitations of the approach was also presented. Specifically, the al-
gorithm for calculating the aggregation function and duration fitness value were presented
as possible areas of improvements.
The effectiveness of the solution was further proved in the article Identifying Variation
in Personal Daily Routine Through Process Mining: A Case Study [2], where a case
study was presented that demonstrated the effectiveness of the multi-model approach in
identifying significant variations within an individual’s daily routine using real data.
The research done by Di Federico et al seems to be the most extensive in the area of
analysing changes in human behavior via process mining using sensor data, as it encom-
passes all the steps required in the form of preprocessing, discovery, and conformance
checking. However, useful knowledge may be gained from other groups that have at-
tempted to tackle some of the individual steps:
With regards to preprocessing, van Zelst et al presented an assessment of state-of-the-
art preprocessing techniques for abstracting event data into the right level of granularity
needed for the successful application of process mining in the paper Event abstraction
in process mining: literature review and taxonomy [23]. The included techniques are
categorised based on their supervision strategy; their ability to map fine-granular event
interleaving; their ability to include the probabilistic nature of the outcome in the output;
their ability to work on discrete event data or continuous data; their ability to exploit alter-
native perspectives, their ability to relate an event class to a single or multiple high-level
activity classes.
With regards to discovery, Dogan et al tried analyzing human behavior in the paper Individ-
ual behavior modeling with sensors using process mining [24]. This study analyzed data
from 25 in-house residents acquired with indoor location sensors by means of process
mining clustering techniques, which allowed obtaining workflows of the human behavior
inside the house. In this attempt no preprocessing in the form of event abstraction is done
and the discovered model was mapped to a calendar view for visual presentation.
A similar attempt was made by Lull et al in Interactive Process Mining in IoT and Human
Behaviour Modelling [25]. This study analysed a subject’s location at home across 70 days
to show different types of conduct in a calendar view. Here movement sensor readings
where simply abstracted into location changing events and the types of conducts were
derived by a quality threshold clustering algorithm based on heuristic distance.
Finally, in the paper A Survey on the Application of Process Mining to Smart Spaces Data
[26], Bertrand et al discusses the challenges that arise when trying to automatically model
human routines as if they were business processes. This discussion provides possible
solutions to common challenges, and outlines opportunities for future work.
2.3
Behavioral Process Mining in Healthcare
One of the application domains of behavioral process mining is in the healthcare sec-
tor. Here, early detection of deteriorating health in a patient is desirable as this enables
healthcare providers the ability to administer appropriate interventions before the con-
dition worsens and becomes more difficult to treat effectively. Changes in the health
of a patient can often be observed in the behavior of the patient. Hence, the detection
of changes in behavior could serve as an early warning sign of deteriorating health in a
patient and prompt the healthcare providers to assess the health status of the patient. De-
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
7
==PAGE:15==
tecting these behavioral changes could be automated via the use of behavioral process
mining by modeling the typical behavior of a patient and then continuously monitoring for
deviations from this behavior.
2.3.1
Use Case - Dementia Monitoring
A specific use case where this approach would be particularly valuable could be the mon-
itoring of dementia patients in nursing homes. Here, the patients often do not have the
ability to communicate the worsening of their dementia or the onset of separate health
problems. This is a big challenge for the health sector in Denmark where the prevalence
of dementia in nursing homes is significant with approximately 60% of residents suffering
from dementia in 2002 [27]. Moreover, with the rate of dementia cases doubling every
five years after the age of 65 for both genders [28], and the population experiencing an
increase in life expectancy from 70.8 to 79.5 for men and 75.7 to 83.6 for women between
1969 and 2019 [29], Denmark is confronted with a rising public health challenge in demen-
tia. This poses significant strains on the capacity and financial resources of healthcare
services.
The Danish health authority aims to tackle dementia care through a strategy outlined in
their 2018 publication, ”National Research Strategy on Dementia 2025,” which empha-
sizes directing research efforts towards leveraging evaluated and evidence-based data
along with technological solutions [30].
A research initiative addressing this challenge through the utilization of data and technol-
ogy is described in PACE - Pro-Active Care for Elderly with dementia. The objective of
PACE is to enhance the lives of elderly individuals with dementia by employing sensors
that respect their privacy. By aggregating data from these sensors, the project aims to
model residents’ daily routines. Any deviations from these routines, identified through
continuous monitoring, can serve as early indicators of disease onset. The modeling and
monitoring in such a project could potentially be implemented via behavioral process min-
ing. Then with timely notification of declining health, nursing home staff can intervene to
slow disease progression, potentially avoiding hospitalization of the resident.
Reducing hospitalizations not only cuts societal costs associated with dementia but also
improves the quality of life for dementia patients and fosters a better working environment
for nursing home staff by minimizing conflicts with distressed residents.
2.3.2
Behavioral symptoms of Dementia
The symptomatic behavior related to dementia is briefly outlined as this is important infor-
mation if one wants to detect dementia through the behavior of an individual. Dementia is
the colloquial term for major neurocognitive disorder as described in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders by the American Psychiatric Association [32]. It is
a syndrome that encompasses a range of symptoms caused by various factors that lead
to a decline in cognitive function. These symptoms are referred to as the Behavioral and
Psychological Symptoms of Dementia (BPSD). BPSD includes emotional, perceptual, and
behavioral disturbances. These can be classified into five domains: cognitive/perceptual
(delusions, hallucinations, cognitive impairment), motor (e.g., pacing, wandering, repeti-
tive movements, physical aggression), verbal (e.g., yelling, calling out, repetitive speech,
verbal aggression), emotional (e.g., euphoria, depression, apathy, anxiety, irritability),
and vegetative (disturbances in sleep and appetite) [33]. While one would primarily base
a dementia diagnosis on a cognitive assessment [32], one could potentially derive an in-
dication of dementia based on the simultaneous presence of multiple dementia related
symptoms. The presence of some of these symptoms in an individual could be found in
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
8
==PAGE:16==
a discovered process model based on events captured via IoT sensors in the individuals
home.
Four behavioral symptoms that could potentially be discovered based on sensed behav-
ior are those in the cognitive and motor domain: forgetfulness, repetitiveness, wandering,
and slowness. Here forgetfulness can be expressed as forgetting to perform activities,
due to memory impairment and especially short-term memory impairment [34]. Repeti-
tiveness can be expressed as the repetition of activities already completed, caused by
forgetting having already completed the activity. Wandering is expressed as aimless, of-
ten unpredictable, and sometimes purposeless movement through various areas caused
by disorientation [35]. Finally slowness is expressed as taking a long time to complete
activities, caused by the confusion that comes with memory impairment.
While multiple symptoms would need to be detected simultaneously to indicate the pres-
ence of dementia in an individual, the ability to detect the presence and development of
these four symptoms would be a good start to achieve this.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
9
==PAGE:17==
3
Validation of Behavioral Process Mining
Approaches
This chapter introduces the problem of validating behavioral process mining approaches
in Section 3.1. Then the challenges associated with solving the problem is discussed
in Section 3.2. Finally, research questions that needs to be addressed to tackle these
challenges are compiled Section 3.3.
3.1
The Validation Problem
When developing behavioral process mining approaches for detecting specific behavioral
symptoms indicative of a disease in a patient, researchers encounter difficulty in quanti-
tatively validating the accuracy of their approaches in generating fitness values that pre-
cisely reflect the degree of symptomatic behavior observed in individuals. While current
approaches in the literature can compute fitness values to identify significant changes in
behavior [2], they lack the capability to validate whether these values accurately distin-
guish minor changes in behavior. Consequently, the inability to validate the performance
of these approaches restricts researchers’ ability to improve them.
A good approach should generate fitness values that have a negative correlation with the
degree of symptomatic behavior present in the observed behavior, i.e., as the degree of
symptomatic behavior present in the observed behavior increases, then the fitness value
between the asymptomatic modelled behavior and the observed symptomatic behavior
decreases. This would indicate that the developed approach is not only able to detect
symptomatic behavior in a patient, but also able to accurately detect the degree of symp-
tomatic behavior present in the behavior of a patient. This would also enable the possi-
bility of potentially mapping a fitness value to a certain degree of symptomatic behavior
presence.
This problem of quantitatively validating the efficacy of a behavioral process mining ap-
proach in accurately rediscovering the degree of behavioral change is illustrated in Figure
3.1. Here the upper left cloud represents the asymptomatic routine behavior of a patient
and the lower left cloud represents the routine behavior of the same patient where a cer-
tain degree of symptom behavior, δ, has been added. Both of these routine behaviors
are then simulated and the resulting traces are captured in event logs. The behavioral
process mining approach that one wants to validate is then used to discover a model of
the asymptomatic routine behavior which is compared against the observed symptomatic
routine behavior resulting in a fitness value ϕ. This is then repeated with different values
of δ to enable ordinal correlation analysis between δ and ϕ.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
10
==PAGE:18==
degree of symptom 
evolution δ
asymptomatic
ground truth
model
discover
event
log
degree of conformance φ
discovered
process
model
simulate
symptomatic
ground truth
model
event
log
simulate
τ(δ,φ)=-1 ?
Figure 3.1: The problem of validating the efficacy of behavioral process mining ap-
proaches in detecting the degree of symptomatic behavior in an individual. The contents
of the dashed container represents the evaluated behavioral process mining approach,
and τ represents an ordinal correlation coefficient.
If one were to specify a standardised way for solving this problem, then one could validate
the efficacy of an approach in accurately detecting the degree of a disease present in a
patient. This would then provide researchers with a metric which could enable them to
improve their behavioral process mining approaches.
3.2
The Challenges of Standardized Validation
The challenge of validating behavioral process mining approaches, as described in Fig-
ure 3.1, lies in the conceptualisation, formalization, and implementation of a validation
framework. Such a framework could provide researchers with a standard way of vali-
dating and communicating the performance of their developed approaches. This could
promote transparency of results, ensure reproducibility of results, promote comparison of
results, and ensure the quality of produced results. These properties are all necessary for
supporting the improvements of behavioral process mining approaches in a collaborative
manner.
The main challenge of the creation of such a framework would be how to acquire the
two event logs composed of sensor readings seen in Figure 3.1. The upper event log
represent the behavior of an individual without the behavior introduced with the presence
of a disease, and the lower event log represent the behavior of that same individual where
a certain degree of symptomatic behavior is present.
The generation of these event logs can be achieved either naturally or synthetically.
Natural generation would require researchers to construct physical smart home testbeds,
wherein patients would perform daily routines throughout the progression of a particular
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
11
==PAGE:19==
disease. Meanwhile, the patient would have to be continuously evaluated by a medical
professional to ensure that the severity of the disease progression could be linked to every
trace of observed behavior recorded in the event log. In theory, this could be achieved
in a nursing home equipped with IoT sensors where a medical professional would be as-
signed the duty of assessing the severity of a particular disease the resident. In practise,
this approach is unlikely to be feasible due to the high cost and time-requirement asso-
ciated with such an operation. Synthetic generation is an approach that would likely be
much more palatable as it would be exempt from cost and time-requirement associated
with natural generation. A synthetic approach would be cheap and fast to run, and one
could easily define a variety of scenarios based on specified parameters. The drawback
of the synthetic approach is that the models required for synthetic generation inherently
would be abstractions that simplify reality. Consequently, the contents of the generated
event logs would similarly only reflect a simplified representation of reality.
When balancing the positives and negatives of the two approaches it is fairly easy to
conclude that the synthetic approach would be the best approach to use for a validation
framework used for the development of behavioral process mining approaches. Once
an approach has been thoroughly optimized via synthetic validation, then one could po-
tentially consider validating it naturally for a few cases to demonstrate its capability in
real-world scenarios.
Knowing that the validation framework should be based on synthetic event data generation
a potential framework could be divided into three main stages.
Modeling
The first stage concerns the modeling of asymptomatic human behavior as process mod-
els and a formalization of how such process models evolve as disease progresses. No
current research has concerned itself with this challenge, so a novel solution must be
conceptualised, formalised, and implemented.
Simulation
The second stage concerns the simulation of the modelled human behavior to generate
sensor readings. A simulator that generate sensor readings by simulating an agent inter-
acting with a smart environment exist [36] [37]. However, such a simulator would not be
plug-and-play, as a solution would be required for how to use models of human behavior
as a parameter of the simulator.
Analysis
The third stage concerns the correlation analysis between the resulting set of δ and ϕ
pairs. Here it is important to ensure that a standard approach is formalized to ensure the
quality of the resulting performance metric.
3.3
Research Questions
So far, the validation problem arising from the desire to develop behavioral process min-
ing approaches for the detection of disease progression has been introduced, and the
challenges that arise with the development of a standard validation framework has been
discussed. Now, the primary challenges that need to be overcome are outlined in the
following list of research questions. Research question 1 pertains to the development
of a validation framework and research question 2 pertains to the evaluation of such a
framework.
RQ1: How to synthetically validate the efficacy of behavioral process mining approaches
in detecting the degree of symptomatic behavior in an individual?
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
12
==PAGE:20==
RQ1.1: How to formally model the ground truths of evolutionary symptomatic human
behavior?
RQ1.2: How to generate event logs composed of sensor readings by simulating mod-
eled human behavior?
RQ1.3: How to analyze the efficacy of detecting individual increments of progressive
increase in symptomatic behavior?
RQ2: Can the solution validate the efficacy of an approach in detecting individual incre-
ments of progressive increase in symptomatic behavior?
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
13
==PAGE:21==
4
A Validation Framework
As a solution to the problem described in the previous chapter a conceptual validation
framework is presented in this chapter. First, a brief overview of the six phases that com-
pose the framework is presented in Section 4.1. Thereafter each phase is successively
described in detail in Sections 4.2 - 4.7.
4.1
Conceptual Framework Overview
To address the challenges discussed in Chapter 3, we introduce a validation framework for
behavioral process mining. This framework provides users with a systematic method for
validating behavioral process mining approaches in a standardized manner. Previously,
we outlined such a framework as being composed of three main stages: modeling, sim-
ulation, and analysis. We now propose to further subdivide these stages into six phases,
as illustrated in Figure 4.1, that guides the user through the distinct steps of the validation
process.
Modeling
Simulation
Analysis
Phase 1:
Model 
asymptomatic ground
truth
Phase 2:
Model 
symptomatic 
ground truth
Phase 3:
Generate 
routine 
instances
Phase 4:
Generate 
sensor 
readings
Phase 5:
Apply behavioral
process mining
approach
Phase 6:
Analyze
Figure 4.1: Overview of the conceptual validation framework phases.
Brief descriptions of the phases are as follows.
Phase 1: A process model that represents the behavior of an asymptomatic individual is
defined as a workflow net where activities denote agent instructions.
Phase 2: Behavioral symptoms are defined as workflow net transformations, and a symp-
tom evolution degree is specified. Then, process models representing the behavior of the
symptomatic individual with varying degrees of symptom evolution are derived by injecting
different levels of symptomatic behavior into the asymptomatic process model.
Phase 3: Both the asymptomatic and symptomatic process models are simulated to gen-
erate traces of agent instructions.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
14
==PAGE:22==
Phase 4: Agent instructions are used to simulate the movements of an agent within an
environment with equipped IoT sensors. The resulting lists of sensor readings are then
converted into event logs.
Phase 5: A behavioral process mining approach is applied. A model of the asymptomatic
behavior is discovered and compared to the event logs representing observed symp-
tomatic behavior of varying degrees to compute a set of fitness values.
Phase 6: A correlation coefficient is computed between the degrees of symptom evolution
and the corresponding fitness values.
In the following sections each phase will be described in detail.
4.2
Phase 1 - Model Asymptomatic Ground Truth
The first phase of the framework involves modeling the asymptomatic behavior of an indi-
vidual. This model will serve as the ground truth of an individual’s asymptomatic behavior
that, which will later be rediscovered using a behavioral process mining approach.
To tackle this challenge we first need to decide upon how to model human behavior. Since
human beings usually go about their day following some repetitive patterns, one can at-
tempt to model human behavior as a process. In the article Human Behavior as a Process
Model: Which Language to Use? by Di Federico et al [18], it is proposed that an instance
of human behavior may be interpreted as a sequence of routines, where routines are
composed of a series of activities, and activities are sequences of observable units. This
hierarchical structure is illustrated in Figure 4.2. As an example, an instance of human be-
havior could be composed by a sequence of routines such as ’morning routine’, ’exercise
routine’, ’work routine’, etc. Then a routine, e.g. ’morning routine’, could be composed by
by a sequence of activities such as ’get dressed’, ’shower’, ’make breakfast’, etc. Finally
an activity, e.g. ’shower’, could be composed by observable units in the form of sensors
readings such as ’bathroom light on’, ’bathroom movement detected’, ’humidity increase’,
etc.
R1
R2
R3
R4
A
B
C
FLMWOXFROUMEJDQWQPKENYKOQ
Modeling of human behavior
(as a sequence of routine)
Modeling of an individual routine
(as a sequence of activities)
Modeling of activities
(as a sequence of observable units)
Figure 4.2: A simplified hierarchical structure of human behavior. Adapted from [18].
In the context of the validation framework we only need to model a part of an individual’s
behavior to validate the accuracy of the behavioral process mining approach. As such
we can focus on modeling a single routine of an individual which we will refer to as the
asymptomatic routine model.
Traces composed of activities generated by instantiations of the defined asymptomatic
routine model are supposed to be used as an input of the simulator in phase 4 to generate
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
15
==PAGE:23==
observable units in the form of sensor readings. Therefore the activities of the routine
model must be labelled with a language that the simulator understands. This language
will be an agent instruction set that instructs an agent during a simulation. Since we will
be using the Linac simulator [36] [37] [38] the associated agent instruction set consists of
four primitive instructions: move to a coordinate, move to an object, interact with a specific
object, or wait for a specified amount of time. The formal syntax is defined as following.
• goto(int x, int y)
• goto(String name)
• interact(String activeSensor, String command)
• wait(int seconds)
A label associated with each activity of the routine model will be composed of two sub-
labels: the instruction label and the delay pair label. The instruction label will contain one
of the instructions seen above and hence denotes the action associated with the activity.
The delay pair label will consist of two integer values; an upper delay and a lower delay -
this denotes the possible range of duration in seconds associated with the activity.
One can define a routine process model as described above using the Petri net modeling
language [39]. More specifically we want to model them using a specific subclass of Petri
nets called workflow nets (WF-nets), as these have the soundness property [40], which
is desirable for when we want to simulate them in phase 3. An example of a fragment of
a routine model described as a WF-net can be seen in Figure 4.3.
t0
goto(kitchen)
[0, 60]
p1
p2
t4
interact(chair)
[120, 1200]
t3
interact(cupboard)
[10, 40]
p4
p3
t2
interact(kettle)
[5, 30]
t1
interact(coffeemaker)
[30, 120]
p0
p5
Figure 4.3: A fragment of a routine model describing the process of making a hot bever-
age.
4.2.1
Formalization of Routine Models
We now formally define a routine model as a WF-net to ensure its correct implementation.
First, we formally define a labeled Petri net as follows.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
16
==PAGE:24==
Definition 1 (Petri net). A Petri net is a tuple N = (P, T, F, L), graphically repre-
sented by a bipartite graph, where
• P is a finite set of places p.
• T is a finite set of transitions t.
• P ∩T = ∅and P ∪T ̸= ∅
• F ⊆(P × T) ∪(T × P) is a set of directed arcs referred to as the flow relation.
• L : T →(I ∪{ϵ} × D), is a transition labeling function where I denotes all
possible instructions. ϵ denotes a silent transition with no associated instruction,
therefore, a silent transition is only used for routing purposes. D = {(dL, dU) |
dL, dU ∈N∪{0}, dL ≤dU} denotes the delay pair composed of the lower bound
delay dL and the upper bound delay dU.
Place p is said to be an input place of transition t if there is a directed arc from p to t.
Place p is said to be an input place of transition t if there is a directed arc from p to t.
We can then denote:
•p = {t ∈T | (t, p) ∈F} is a set of input transitions of place p.
p• = {t ∈T | (p, t) ∈F} is a set of output transitions of place p.
Similarly, we can denote:
•t = {p ∈P | (t, p) ∈F} is a set of input places of transition t.
t• = {p ∈P | (p, t) ∈F} is a set of output places of transition t.
We then add the concept of a marking to express process state.
Definition 2 (Marking). A marking of a Petri net N = (P, T, F) is a function M : P 7→
N ∪{0} that associates each p ∈P with a number that denotes the number of tokens
in p.
Definition 3 (Marked Petri net). A marked Petri net is a tuple denoted as (N, Mo),
where N represents the Petri net and Mo represents the initial marking of N.
A definition for the firing rule is needed to simulate the routine model.
Definition 4 (Firing rule). Let N = (P, T, F, L) be a Petri net and M a marking. Firing
a transition is represented by a state change of the Petri net
• A transition t ∈T is enabled in a state M iff M(p) ≥1 for all p ∈•t
• Firing an enabled transition t ∈T in a state M results in state M′ where
∀p ∈•t, M ′(p) = M(p) −1 ∧∀p ∈t•, M ′(p) = M(p) + 1
We then add structural constraints by defining a workflow net to ensure a distinct starting
point and a distinct ending place.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
17
==PAGE:25==
Definition 5 (Workflow net). A Petri net N = (P, T, F, L) is a workflow net if and only
if
• N includes a place i ∈P called initial place with no incoming arcs, •i = ∅, which
is distinct, ∀p ∈P : •p ̸= ∅∨p = i.
• N includes a place o ∈P called final place with no outgoing arcs, o• = ∅, which
is distinct, ∀p ∈P : p• ̸= ∅∨p = o.
• If N is extended with a transition t∗, which connects o with i, such that •t∗= {o}
and t∗• = {i}, then the resulting net is strongly connected. Hence, for each pair
of nodes (x, y) there is a path from x to y.
It is important that the initial asymptomatic routine model as well as the derived symp-
tomatic routine models are sound, so that they can be simulated with no halting during
the subsequent trace generation. Such soundness is defined for a workflow net as follows.
Definition 6 (Soundness). A workflow net is sound if
∀M, Mo →∗M : ∃M′, M →∗M′ : M ≥[o]
• It has the option to complete, i.e., for all M reachable from the initial marking it
should be possible to reach the final marking.
Mo →∗M ∧M ≥[o] ⇒M ≡[o]
• It has proper termination, i.e., when M is reachable from the initial marking and
M is greater or equal to the final marking, then M is equal to the final marking.
∀t ∈T, ∃M : Mo →∗M and t is enabled in M
• It has no dead transitions, i.e., for all transitions there should exist at least one
marking M in which t is enabled.
Now that the WF-nets that will be used for describing routine models have been formally
defined, we can move onto phase 2.
4.3
Phase 2 - Model Symptomatic Ground Truth
While human beings establish routines and performs them repetitively, the routines are
not fixed as they tend to evolve over time [18]. One of the reasons for such evolution
can be the progression of a disease that introduces new behaviors to the routine due to
behavioral symptoms associated with that disease.
The second phase of the framework involves modeling an individual’s symptomatic be-
havior by formalizing the evolution of routines as a mapping from a asymptomatic routine
model, a set of behavioral symptoms, and a evolution degree to a symptomatic routine
model. This mapping is referred to as symptom injection and is illustrated as a black box in
Figure 4.4. Here the set of behavioral symptoms are defined as workflow net transforma-
tions and the symptom evolution degree specify how severely the symptomatic behaviors
are expressed in the resulting symptomatic routine model.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
18
==PAGE:26==
Symptom Injection
Asymptomatic routine
model in the form of a
workflow net
A set of symptomatic
behaviors in the form
of workflow net
transformations
A symptom evolution
degree
Symptomatic routine
model in the form of a
workflow net
Figure 4.4: The inputs and outputs of the symptom injection.
It is important to note that it is up to the user of the framework to determine what symp-
tomatic behaviors are associated with a disease and to specify how they envision such
behaviors would look like in terms of workflow transformations. The envisioned work-
flow transformations will always be a simplification of real-life symptom expressiveness
and one should specify how transformations have been defined when communicating the
results of the validation framework.
4.3.1
Formalization of Symptom Injection
We now formally define symptom injection and its related ideas and terms to ensure stan-
dardised implementation. We first want to be able to specify how much symptom expres-
siveness should be injected into a routine. To do so, we define the degree of symptom
evolution as follows.
Definition 7 (Degree of symptom evolution). Let d = [0, 1]∩Q represent the degree of
symptom evolution in a routine, where d = 0 corresponds to a low degree of symptom
evolution, and d = 1 corresponds to a high degree of symptom evolution.
To have a standard definition for what a certain degree of symptom evolution equates
to in all injection scenarios, we define an increment in symptom expressiveness as the
transformation of a single transition in a routine. Then the relationship between the degree
of symptom evolution and the set of transitions chosen for transformation are defined as
the Transition sample.
Definition 8 (Transition sampling). Let N = (P, T, F, L) be a workflow net and TI =
{t ∈T | L(t) ̸= (ϵ, (DL, DU))} the Petri net transition set barring its silent transitions.
Then S(N, d) = R is the transition sampling function, where {R | R ⊆TI, |R| =
⌊|TI| · d⌉} is a set of transitions sampled from the transition set T of the workflow net
N.
We can then define the mapping of a workflow net transformation that occurs for each
transition in the transition sample.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
19
==PAGE:27==
Definition 9 (Workflow net transformation). Let N represent the set of all possible
sound WF-nets and T represent the set of all transitions that can occur within a WF-
net. Then, a workflow net transformation θ is defined as:
θ : {(N, t) | N ∈N and t ∈T(N)} →{N′ | N′ ∈N and t ∈T(N′)}
The definition specifies that a workflow net transformation is defined as a mapping from
one sound WF-net to another sound WF-net, such that the resulting net retains its sound-
ness property. In addition, the transition t is part of both the original and transformed
workflow nets, which ensures that t can always be chosen as part of the set of sampled
transitions in the case of multiple symptom injections occurring successively.
Now that all the arguments for the injection of symptoms are properly defined, then symp-
tom injection can be defined.
Definition 10 (Symptom injection). Symptom injection is defined as the function
I(N, d, Θ) = N′, where N is a WF-net, d is a degree of symptom evolution, Θ is a set
of Petri net transformations, and N′ is a WF-net with injected symptoms.
Pseudocode for the symptom injection algorithm is seen in Listing 4.1.
1
algorithm symptom injection
2
input: N (WF-net),
3
d (degree from [0, 1]),
4
Θ (set of workflow net transformations)
5
output: N ′ (WF-net with symptoms injected)
6
7
N ′ ←N
8
for each transformation θ in Θ do
9
R ←S(N, d)
10
for each transition t in R do
11
N ′ ←θ(N ′, t)
12
return N ′
Listing 4.1: Symptom Injection Algorithm
Is it important to note that with this definition of symptom injection the order in which the
symptom transformations are applied can matter.
Now, examples of symptoms and their WF-net transformations that could be applied are
described in Sections 4.3.2 to 4.3.5.
4.3.2
Forgetfulness
We define an increase in forgetful behavior as the increased likelihood of not executing
activities that would otherwise be a part of the individual’s normal behavior. In the con-
text of human behavior defined as workflow nets, a visual example of a transformation
equating an increment in forgetfulness is illustrated in Figure 4.5.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
20
==PAGE:28==
p1
p2
t1
(a) Pre-transformation.
p1
p2
p3
p4
t1
t2
[0, 0] ϵ
t4
[0, 0] ϵ
t3
[0, 0] ϵ
(b) Post-transformation.
Figure 4.5: A workflow net fragment illustrating the transformation equating to an incre-
ment in the expression of forgetfulness when | • t1| = 1 and |t1 • | = 1.
Here it can be seen that the addition of t4 adds the possibility of not firing t1. The addition
of t2 and t3 are to ensure that routing behavior of the remaining workflow net is not affected
by this change. The implementation of the forgetfulness transformation θfor(N, t) can be
seen in Listing 4.2.
1
function θfor((P, T, F, L): WF-net, t1: transition): WF-net
2
Ps ←•t1
3
Pt ←t1•
4
P ←P ∪{p3, p4}
5
T ←T ∪{t2, t3, t4}
6
F ←F −{(Ps × t), (t × Pt)}
7
F ←F ∪{(Ps × t2), (t3 × Pt)}
8
F ←F ∪{(t2, p3), (p3, t1), (t1, p4), (p4, t3), (p3, t4), (t4, p4)}
9
L(t2) ←(ϵ, (0, 0)), L(t3) ←(ϵ, (0, 0)), L(t4) ←(ϵ, (0, 0))
10
return (P, T, F, L)
11
end function
Listing 4.2: The forgetfulness transformation function.
4.3.3
Repetitiveness
A similar transformation to forgetfulness if repetitiveness. We define an increase in repet-
itive behavior as the increased likelihood of repeating activities in a manner that exceeds
normal behavior. In the context of human behavior defined as workflow nets, a visual ex-
ample of a transformation equating an increment in repetitiveness is illustrated in Figure
4.6.
p1
p2
t1
(a) Pre-transformation.
p1
p2
p3
p4
t1
t2
[0, 0] ϵ
t4
[0, 0] ϵ
t3
[0, 0] ϵ
(b) Post-transformation.
Figure 4.6: A workflow net fragment illustrating the transformation equating to an incre-
ment in the expression of repetitiveness when | • t1| = 1 and |t1 • | = 1.
Here it can be seen that the addition of t4 adds the possibility of firing t1 multiple times.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
21
==PAGE:29==
The implementation of the repetitiveness transformation θrep(N, t) can be seen in Listing
4.2.
1
function θrep((P, T, F, L): WF-net, t1: transition): WF-net
2
Ps ←•t1
3
Pt ←t1•
4
P ←P ∪{p3, p4}
5
T ←T ∪{t2, t3, t4}
6
F ←F −{(Ps × t), (t × Pt)}
7
F ←F ∪{(Ps × t2), (t3 × Pt)}
8
F ←F ∪{(t2, p3), (p3, t1), (t1, p4), (p4, t3), (p4, t4), (t4, p3)}
9
L(t2) ←(ϵ, (0, 0)), L(t3) ←(ϵ, (0, 0)), L(t4) ←(ϵ, (0, 0))
10
return (P, T, F, L)
11
end function
Listing 4.3: The repetitiveness transformation function.
The interesting difference between the repetitiveness transformation and the forgetfulness
transformation, lies in the difference in the number of unique activity traces that can be
produced by the resulting workflow net. This difference will be significant, when later
attempting to detect the degree of symptom evolution injected into a routine.
4.3.4
Wandering
We define wandering behavior as the act of non-purposeful movement between activi-
ties. In the context of human behavior defined as workflow nets, a visual example of a
transformation equating an increment in wandering is illustrated in Figure 4.7.
p1
p2
t1
(a) Pre-transformation.
p1
p2
p3
t1
[0, 0]
goto(randomLocation)
t2
(b) Post-transformation.
Figure 4.7: A Petri net fragment illustrating the transformation equating to an increment
in the expression of wandering when | • t1| = 1 and |t1 • | = 1.
Here it can be seen that the addition of t2 inserts an instruction to go a random location in
the environment before executing t1. The implementation of the wandering transformation
θwan(N, t) can be seen in Listing 4.4.
1
function θwan((P, T, F, L): WF-net, t1: transition): WF-net
2
Ps ←•t1
3
P ←P ∪{p3}
4
T ←T ∪{t2}
5
F ←F −{(Ps × t)}
6
F ←F ∪{(Ps × t2), (t2, p3), (p3, t1)}
7
L(t2) ←((goto(randomLocation), (0, 0))
8
return (P, T, F, L)
9
end function
Listing 4.4: The wandering transformation function.
4.3.5
Slowness
We define slowness behavior as the increased use of time required to complete an ac-
tivity. In the context of human behavior defined as workflow nets, a visual example of a
transformation equating an increment in slowness is illustrated in Figure 4.8.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
22
==PAGE:30==
p1
p2
[5, 10]
t1
(a) Pre-transformation.
p1
p2
[25, 50]
t1
(b) Post-transformation.
Figure 4.8: A Petri net fragment illustrating the transformation equating to an increment
in the expression of slowness when | • t1| = 1 and |t1 • | = 1.
Here it can be seen that the lower delay limit and the upper delay limit is multiplied by 5
in t1, resulting in an increased use of time spent on executing the instruction of t1. The
implementation of the slowness transformation θslo(N, t) can be seen in Listing 4.5.
1
function θslo((P, T, F, L): WF-net, t1: transition): WF-net
2
l ←L(t1)
3
i ←l.instruction
4
dl ←l.delayPair.lowerBound
5
du ←l.delayPair.upperBound
6
L(t1) ←(i, (dl · 5, du · 5))
7
return (P, T, F, L)
8
end function
Listing 4.5: The slowness transformation function.
Now that symptom injection has been formally defined and a few examples of symptom
transformations have been provided, we then move onto phase 3.
4.4
Phase 3 - Generate Routine Instances
With phase 3 we now move onto the simulation stage of the validation framework. This
phase involves instantiating, via simulation, the asymptomatic and symptomatic routine
models produced in the previous phases, to generate activity traces that each represent
a single execution of a routine, i.e., a single enactment of the routine. These activity
traces are then translated into lists of agent instructions, which will be used as input for
the simulation in phase 4. On overview these steps are illustrated in Figure 4.9.
goto(kitchen);
goto(cupboard);
interact(faucet,turn_on);
wait(5);
Simulation
Translation
Routine model in the
form of a workflow net
Activity trace
Agent instructions
Figure 4.9: The generation of agent instruction from routine models.
As an example of how generating agent instructions from routine models could look like,
we will use as example the routine model fragment of Figure 4.3 on page 16, that describes
the process of making a hot beverage. When simulating this WF-net, one of the traces
seen in Figure 4.10 is generated.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
23
==PAGE:31==
σ1 = ⟨t0, t1, t3, t4⟩
σ2 = ⟨t0, t2, t3, t4⟩
σ3 = ⟨t0, t3, t1, t4⟩
σ4 = ⟨t0, t3, t2, t4⟩
Figure 4.10: All possible activity traces of the routine model fragment of Figure 4.3.
Then during the translation step the activities of the generated trace are parsed sequen-
tially. Every activity encountered is translated into two lines based on the associated label
of the activity. The first line produced equates to the instruction label. The second line
produced equates to a ’wait(D)’ instruction, where the argument D is a randomly chosen
integer between the upper and lower delay limits of the delay pair label. Additionally, all
produced lines are appended with the delimiter ’;’. As such, the traces seen in Figure 4.10
could result in the following sequences of agent instructions. Note that the argument of
the ’wait’ instructions might vary with each translation.
1
goto(kitchen);
2
wait(5);
3
interact(coffeemaker);
4
wait(47);
5
interact(cupboard);
6
wait(12);
7
interact(chair);
8
wait(600);
(a) Trace σ1 generated agent instructions.
1
goto(kitchen);
2
wait(0);
3
interact(kettle);
4
wait(22);
5
interact(cupboard);
6
wait(32);
7
interact(chair);
8
wait(1120);
(b) Trace σ2 generated agent instructions.
1
goto(kitchen);
2
wait(45);
3
interact(cupboard);
4
wait(30);
5
interact(coffeemaker);
6
wait(90);
7
interact(chair);
8
wait(223);
(c) Trace σ3 generated agent instructions.
1
goto(kitchen);
2
wait(10);
3
interact(cupboard);
4
wait(40);
5
interact(kettle);
6
wait(22);
7
interact(chair);
8
wait(720);
(d) Trace σ4 generated agent instructions.
Figure 4.11: Possible agent instruction sequences generated from all possible traces pro-
duced by instantiations of the routine model fragment seen in Figure 4.3. The argument
of the ’wait’ instructions might vary with each translation.
For every routine modeled in the previous phases a set of activity traces are generated.
The size of this set then represents the number of times that the individual has enacted
the routine. The more traces generated results in a higher probability that all possible
instantiations of the routine are included, which subsequently results in a higher likelihood
that the ground truth behavior being rediscoverable. After the translation step one is left
with a set of agent instructions that is to be used in phase 4.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
24
==PAGE:32==
4.5
Phase 4 - Generate Sensor Readings
The fourth phase of the validation framework involves the generation of event logs com-
posed of sensor readings. This is achieved by simulating the previously generated agent
instructions within a environment equipped with sensors. This phase does not involve the
development of novel concepts as the challenge has previously been investigated and a
solution developed by Nikolajsen et al [37] with the construction of the smart home sim-
ulator Linac [38], which was subsequently validated by Di Federico et al [36]. Yet, it is
important for users of the validation framework to have a general understanding of the
mechanics of this phase so that they understand its purpose. A good understanding is
also required if someone wants to implement an alternative solution for the phase.
A high abstract view of phase four is illustrated in Figure 4.12, where the inputs and out-
puts of the Linac simulator is outlined. The input is composed of three main components:
agent instructions, floorplan, and sensors. Here the floorplan input describes an two-
dimensional grid that represents the layout of a room with each tile representing either a
wall, an empty space, an agent, or a physical object.
The sensors input is a description the placements of sensors within the floorplan as well
as a definition of how each placed sensor type functions. Examples of such sensors could
be passive sensors that activate without an active decision by the agent, e.g., weight sen-
sors, proximity sensors, or motion sensors. It could also be active sensors that are only
activated due to an active decision by the agent, i.e., smart appliances.
Finally, the agent instructions input defines the sequence of actions that an agent, repre-
senting the modeled individual, should execute.
Floorplan
Sensors
  goto(kitchen);
  goto(cupboard);
  interact(faucet,turn_on); 
  wait(5);
Agent 
instructions
Linac
Event log
of sensor
recordings
Figure 4.12: The inputs and output of the Linac smart environment simulator.
When running the Linac simulator the agent begins executing its given instructions. In
doing so, the agent moves throughout the floorplan and interacts with smart appliances.
This movement triggers passive sensors and interactions with smart appliances trigger
active sensors. When these sensors gets triggered they generate sensor readings con-
taining various information depending on the type of sensor. At the end of the simulation
these sensor readings are saved in a CVS file.
This simulation is repeated for all agent instructions generated from a routine model in
phase 3, and the resulting CSV file is then converted to an event log. This event log
then represent the observable units of example behavior of an underlying routine model.
Phase 4 concludes upon having generated such event logs from multiple different routine
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
25
==PAGE:33==
models that each represent a different degree of symptomatic behavior. One can then
utilize this dataset when to examine behavioral process mining approaches in phase 5.
4.6
Phase 5 - Apply Behavioral Process Mining Approach
The fifth phase of the validation framework involves the application of the behavioral pro-
cess mining approach that one wants to validate. Such an approach should be able to
discover a process model of human behavior from an event log composed of sensor read-
ings and be able to compute a fitness value via conformance checking between modeled
human behavior and observed human behavior in the form of an event log composed of
sensor readings. As long as an approach is able to achieve this, then how such an ap-
proach is developed is of no concern when applying the validation framework. However,
if one is interested, then an example of how such a behavioral process model could be
achieved is described by the work of Di Federico et al, which is briefly outlined in Section
2.2.
During the fifth phase the behavioral process mining approach is first used to discover a
model of the asymptomatic routine behavior. Then this asymptomatic model is used for
conformance checking against all the event logs that each represent observed behavior
of that same routine but with different degrees of symptomatic behavior injected in them.
An example of the resulting relationship between the degree of symptom evolution δ and
the fitness value ϕ can be seen in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1: An example of the relationship between the independent degree of symptom
evolution δ and the dependent fitness value ϕ computed by an examined behavioral pro-
cess mining approach.
Degree δ
Fitness ϕ
0
0.889271
0.1
0.846314
0.2
0.826504
0.3
0.808007
0.4
0.806211
0.5
0.779939
0.6
0.763080
0.7
0.757523
0.8
0.729181
0.9
0.741555
1
0.737214
A good behavioral process mining approach should be able to clearly distinguish various
amounts of observed symptomatic behavior. As such, one wants to achieve a behav-
ioral process mining approach that computes a decreasing fitness value as the degree
of symptom evolution increases. As with the example of Figure 4.1, it can be seen that
the behavioral process mining approach performs fairly well, as the fitness values mostly
decrease as the degree of symptom evolution increase except for δ = 0.9 and δ = 1 that
both results in better fitness values than δ = 0.8.
Moreover, it is desirable that as computed fitness values remain clearly distinguishable
from each other as the degree of symptomatic behavior increases. As seen in the ex-
ample, the behavioral process mining approach is clearly able to distinguish increases
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
26
==PAGE:34==
in symptomatic behavior during initial disease progression, but struggles to clearly distin-
guish increases in symptomatic behavior during late-stage disease progression.
While one can make qualitative observations as the ones above, it is hard to compare
such observations against each other in a standard way to judge whether one behavioral
process mining approach is better than another. We therefore move onto phase 6 that
describe a standard way of computing a quantitative value that one can easily use to
compare two different behavioral process mining approaches against each other.
4.7
Phase 6 - Analyze
The sixth phase of the validation framework involves the computation of a metric value that
can be used to compare a newly developed behavioral process mining approach against
a catalogue of older ones to validate its efficacy in detecting the degree of symptomatic
behavior in an individual.
The metric used for this purpose is the Kendall rank correlation coefficient (τ) [41], as it
measures the ordinal strength and direction between two variables. Here the two vari-
ables are the degrees of symptom evolution variable δ and the fitness variable ϕ com-
puted in the previous phase. The reason for using a rank correlation coefficient is due to
its non-parametric nature, which means that no assumption needs to be had about the
relationship between the two variables. Instead, the coefficient assesses how well the
relationship between the two variables can be described using a monotonic function, i.e,
a function that either consistently increases or decreases over time. The correlation co-
efficient ranges from −1 to +1, where ±1 indicates the strongest possible correlation and
0 indicates no correlation. In the context of the framework it is desirable to strive for a
correlation coefficient that is as close to −1 as possible, as this indicates a strong nega-
tive correlation between the two variables. The reason for specifically choosing Kendall’s
τ compared to the equally popular Spearman’s ρ [42], is due to τ only resulting in the
strongest correlation value of ±1 if the sampled pairs are perfectly ranked, whereas ρ
may result in ±1 when the sampled pairs are only nearly perfect ranking. Moreover, τ is
less sensitive to outliers and therefore performs better on small samples than ρ [43].
The calculation of Kendall’s correlation coefficient is based on the ratio between concor-
dant and discordant pairs for a set of sampled observation (x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn), where n
is the sample size. A concordant pair is a pair of observations, (xi, yi) and (xj, yj), having
the property that
sgn(xj −xi) = sgn(yj −yi)
(4.1)
where sgn refer to the signum function
sgn(x) =





−1,
x < 0
0,
x = 0
1,
x > 0
(4.2)
That is, in a concordant pair, both elements of one pair are either greater than, equal to,
or less than the corresponding elements of the other pair. Conversely, a discordant pair
has the property
sgn(xj −xi) = −sgn(yj −yi)
(4.3)
That is, if one pair contains a higher value of x then the other pair contains a higher value
of y.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
27
==PAGE:35==
Once the number of concordant, discordant and tied pairs have been computed, then
τ can be calculated. Specifically, the τB correlation coefficient is calculated as seen in
Equation 4.4, as this version makes adjustments for ties.
τB =
nc −nd
√
(n0 −n1) (n0 −n2)
(4.4)
where
n0 = n (n −1)
2
n1 =
∑
i
ti (ti −1)
2
n2 =
∑
j
uj (uj −1)
2
nc = Number of concordant pairs
nd = Number of discordant pairs
ti = Number of tied values in the ith group of ties for the first quantity
uj = Number of tied values in the jth group of ties for the second quantity
With a correlation coefficient computed the statistical significance should be determined
next, using a significance level of 0.05, to ensure that the observed result is unlikely to have
occurred by random chance alone. Here the null hypothesis H0 would be that there is no
ordinal correlation between the variables, i.e., τ(δ, ϕ) = 0, while the alternative hypothesis
H1 would be that there is an ordinal correlation between the variables, i.e., τ(δ, ϕ) ̸= 0.
Once statistical significance has been confirmed, the validity of the examined behavioral
process mining approach is consequently confirmed. The attained correlation coefficient
of the examined approach can then be compared against the correlation coefficient of
previously examined approaches to determine its relative efficacy in detecting the degree
of symptomatic behavior in an individual. This comparison then enables the iterative
refinement of behavioral process mining approaches.
Continuing with the example data of Table 4.1, then a correlation analysis is performed to
evaluate the relationship between δ and ϕ. Here, a significant strong negative relationship
between δ and ϕ is found, τ(8) = −0.92, p < 0.001.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
28
==PAGE:36==
5
A Validation Framework Pipeline
This chapter describes the implementation of a pipeline composed of a set of software
solutions that allow a user to practically apply the conceptual framework described in
Chapter 4. First, an overview of the pipeline architecture is introduced in Section 5.1.
This is followed by descriptions of the individual components of the pipeline. The modeling
components are described in Section 5.2, the simulation components in Section 5.3, and
the analysis component in Section 5.4.
5.1
The Pipeline Architecture
An overview of the pipeline architecture is presented in Figure 5.1. The illustration is
segmented into phases that correspond to those described in the previous chapter, to
clarify the underlying purpose of each segment. The pipeline is composed of a set of
software solutions and a set of data objects. The set of software solutions are categorized
into preexisting solutions, novel solutions, and variable solutions. The instructions on how
to run the framework are documented in Appendix A.
Phase 3
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 4
Phase 5
Phase 6
SimCoor
TINA
Asymptomatic 
routine model
Agent
Instructions
Generator
Set of symptom 
transformations
Symptom 
evolution degree
AIG
simulator 
settings
Set of agent 
instruction lists
Linac backend
Floorplan 
model
Linac
simulator 
settings
Event logs
Behavioral
process
mining
approach
Linac frontend
Set of 
symptom degree and 
fitness degree pairs
Analyzer
Correlation 
coefficient
Data object
Preexisting solution
Novel solution
Variable solution
SimCoor
Settings
Figure 5.1: Overview of the validation framework pipeline architecture.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
29
==PAGE:37==
5.2
The Modeling Stage
The first stage of the pipeline concerns the modeling of the asymptomatic ground truth
via TINA and the floorplan via the Linac frontend.
5.2.1
TINA
The first step of the pipeline concerns the modeling of the asymptomatic ground truth.
Depending on the size of the routine, this is possibly the most labor-intensive part of the
process, as this modeling needs to be done manually. To facilitate this manual modeling,
we utilize the NetDraw (nd) editor of the TIme petri Net Analyzer (TINA) toolbox [44].
This editor allows one to model a Petri net with multiple labels for each transition. This
is essential as one needs to specify an instruction label and a delay pair label for each
transition. An example of a Petri net modeled via TINA can be seen in Figure 4.3 on
page 16. Here the bracketed integer pair denotes the lower and upper duration of the
transition in seconds and the bolded label denotes the agent instruction associated with
the transition.
When modeling the routine of a person, one should ensure a few things. First, one should
ensure that the model is not deterministic, as such behavior would be unrealistic for most
personalities. Therefore, one should insert stochasticity via the inclusion of parallel routing
and exclusive choices as seen in Figure 4.3 between respectively t0 & t4 and p1 & p2.
Second, when modeling the routine, one should ensure that the resulting Petri net is a
sound workflow net. Third, when specifying agent instructions that interact with objects
one must ensure that the corresponding objects are defined in the environment model
used as input for Linac.
Once the routine model is complete, it is exported into the Petri Net Markup Language
(PNML) format [45] [46] [47]. This format was chosen as the digital format for the routine
models as it is an XML-based interchange format that is easily parsable by other applica-
tions and due to the fact that its extensibility allows for the specification of multiple labels
per transition.
Then to ensure the modeled routine is a sound workflow net, one can import the PNML
file into the Workflow Petri Net Designer (WoPeD) application [48] [49]. This application
allows for qualitative analysis of the Petri net to ensure its correctness with regard to
workflow net properties, initial markings, boundedness, and liveness. This consequently
ensures the simulatability of the routine model.
5.2.2
Linac Frontend
The second step of the pipeline concerns the modeling of the floorplan model, which
describes the physical environment of the scenario examined. This modeling is done
through the Linac frontend [50], which is a preexisting Vue application that can be run
locally as described in Appendix A.3. This application allows the user to visually design
the environment in a user-friendly way. An example of how a real environment can be
modeled as a floorplan model can be seen in Figure 5.2, where black tiles represent walls,
blue tiles objects, purple tiles sensors, and green tiles agents. The default version of the
software only allows for a limited number of sensor types, but the definition of custom
sensor types is supported.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
30
==PAGE:38==
(a) A floorplan of an apartment.
(b) The floorplan modeled in Linac.
Figure 5.2: An example of how a floorplan can be modeled in Linac. Reproduced from
[36].
5.3
The Simulation Stage
The second stage of the pipeline concerns the creation of event logs via simulation of
routine models. First the Agent Instructions Generator is used to derive agent instructions
from an asymptomatic routine model, after which the Linac backend converts those agent
instructions into event logs of sensor recordings. Then, since the validation framework
requires the generation of multiple event logs that each contains multiple cases, a script
called SimCoor is used to automate this process.
5.3.1
Agent Instructions Generator
A novel software solution, coined Agent Instructions Generator (AIG), was developed to
execute the novel concepts of phase 2 and 3. As seen in Figure 5.1, it takes as input
an asymptomatic routine model, a set of symptom transformations, a symptom evolution
degree, and a set of settings. Then, as output, it generates a set of agent instruction lists.
This conversion is achieved via a three-step process.
1. Symptom injection is performed on an asymptomatic routine model to derive a symp-
tomatic routine.
2. The symptomatic routine model is simulated to generate a trace.
3. The trace is translated into a list of agent instructions.
The AIG was implemented as a Python application that can act as either a Python module
importable by other applications or as a CLI application that users can interact with directly
through CLI commands.
An example of interacting directly with the program through a CLI can be seen in Listing
5.1, where the routine model of Figure 4.3 on page 16 is used as input. Here it can be seen
that the routine model called brewing.pnml is injected with 0.2 degrees of repetitiveness
and wandering. The resulting symptomatic routine model is then simulated to generate
an activity trace. Finally, the trace is translated into an agent instructions list that is printed
and exported to the file brewing.json.
It should be noted that the software allows the user to set the random seed that deter-
mines the stochasticity of the simulation for reproducibility purposes. Additionally, a dis-
play mode is settable, enabling the user to specify the amount of information to be printed,
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
31
==PAGE:39==
which can include the result of the symptom injection and the marked state of the Petri
net throughout the firing sequence.
1
$ python -m agent_instructions_generator.main brewing.pnml --output brewing.
json --degree 0.2 --iterations 1 --seed 2803371398 --mode normal --
symptoms repetitiveness wandering --floorplan floorplan.json
2
3
---------- Settings ----------
4
5
Model:
brewing.pnml
6
Output:
brewing.json
7
Degree:
0.2
8
Iterations: 1
9
Seed:
2803371398
10
Mode:
normal
11
Symptoms:
repetitiveness wandering
12
______________________________
13
14
***Simulation 1 commenced:
15
goto(kitchen)
16
wait(48)
17
interact(kettle)
18
wait(8)
19
interact(cupboard)
20
wait(34)
21
interact(cupboard)
22
wait(12)
23
interact(chair)
24
wait(473)
25
26
***Generated output file: brewing.json
Listing 5.1: An output of the Agent Instructions Generator as displayed in a CLI.
In the following the implementation details of the AIG application is described in detail
along with a description of how the intermediate steps of the previous example were
reached.
1. Symptom Injection
To give a brief introduction the structure of the application a high-level class diagram
of the software application can be seen in Figure 5.3. Here the AIG file contains the
simulation logic, the symptoms file acts as a repository for symptom transformations, and
the PetriNet class is used for internal representations of Petri net models.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
32
==PAGE:40==
AIG
run_simulation(model,
iterations, seed, degree,
mode, symptoms, outout,
floorplan)
PetriNet
places
transitions
arcs
is_enabled (transition_id)
fire_transition (transition_id)
Place
id
name
tokens
Transition
id
name
label
delay_lower_limit
delay_upper_limit
Arc
id
source
target
symptoms
add_repetitiveness
add_forgetfulness
add_wandering
...
Figure 5.3: A high-level class diagram of the Agent Instruction Generator.
Before running the AIG application, one should ensure that all the required symptom trans-
formations that one wants to inject are implemented in the symptom transformation repos-
itory. If this is not the case, then one should first formally define the transformations as
seen in Section 4.3 and then implement the transformations as Python functions in the
repository. Once the required transformations have been implemented, the application
can be run. First, the AIG reads the PNML file of the specified routine model and dese-
rializes it into an internal Petri net model. Then, for each specified symptom, a subset of
the Petri net’s transitions set is randomly chosen, with the size of the subset determined
by the specified degree of symptom evolution. The transitions in these subsets are then
transformed via the respective symptom transformation functions. If we continue the ex-
ample of Listing 5.1, then the resulting symptomatic routine model derived from symptom
injection of Figure 4.3 can be seen in Figure 5.4. Here, 0.2 degrees of repetitiveness and
wandering were injected in the routine model. This resulted in transition t3 and t1 being
transformed with repetitiveness and wandering, respectively.
t0
goto(kitchen)
[0, 60]
p1
p2
t4
interact(chair)
[120, 1200]
p0
p5
t2
interact(kettle)
[5, 30]
p4
p7
p3
t6
t5
p6
t7
t3
interact(cupboard)
[10, 40]
t1
interact(coffeemaker)
[30, 120]
p8
t8
goto(5,3)
[0, 0]
Figure 5.4: The routine model of Figure 4.3 injected with 0.2 degrees of repetitiveness
and wandering resulting in transformation of respectively t3 and t1.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
33
==PAGE:41==
2. Routine model simulation
The newly created internal Petri net representation of a symptomatic routine model can
then be simulated and the resulting firing sequence recorded as an activity trace. Since
the definition of routine models do not include any notion of transition probabilities, the
simulation simply advances by randomly choosing an enabled transition to fire. This con-
tinues until no more transitions are enabled.
If we continue the example of Listing 5.1, the simulation the symptomatic routine model
of Figure 5.4 resulted in the activity trace seen in Equation 5.1.
⟨t0, t2, t5, t3, t7, t3, t6, t4⟩
(5.1)
Here it can be seen that the instantiation only captured the injected repetitive behavior and
not the wandering behavior. This highlights the fact that the injecting of a certain degree
of symptomatic behavior in a routine increases the likelihood of that degree of behavior
being represented in an instantiation of the routine, but it does not guarantee it. This mir-
rors reality in that the degree of symptomatic behavior in a person is not constant, but
instead fluctuates around a certain degree. For example, individuals with dementia may
consistently demonstrate impaired memory capabilities, yet they still have days where
their memory performs better or worse. While this concept may result in individual traces
that do not accurately relate to the specified degree of symptom evolution, when enough
traces are simulated the average expression of symptomatic behavior should indeed re-
late to the specified degree of symptom evolution.
3. Agent Instruction List Generation
The previously generated activity trace is now translated into an agent instructions list.
This is simply achieved by sequential traversal of the trace where each encountered ac-
tivity is translated into agent instructions that are appended to an agent instruction list.
The translation of an encountered activity proceed by first recording the activity label and
then recording a wait(d) instruction with the integer parameter d randomly determined as
an integer value between the lower delay limit and the upper delay limit. Consequently,
the encountering of a silent transition does not leave any mark on the agent instruction
list. Once the agent instructions list has been generated it is serialized and exported as a
JSON file. If we continue the example of Listing 5.1, then the resulting file would contain
the code seen in Listing 5.2, which is formatted to be compatible with Linac.
1
{
2
"input": "agent(Agent1){ goto(kitchen); wait(52); interact(coffeemaker);
wait(100); interact(cupboard); wait(36); interact(chair); wait(198) }"
3
}
Listing 5.2: The output of the Agent Instructions Generator as output in JSON format
compatible with the Linac simulator.
5.3.2
Linac Backend
As already stated, the generation of event logs composed of sensor readings are to be
achieved via the use of the preexisting Linac backend [51]. This is server-side Java ap-
plication that can be run locally as as described in Appendix A.5. The application takes
as input the previously designed floorplan model, the generated agent instructions, and a
set of settings. Once these have been received, then the simulation begins. The simula-
tion proceeds by the sequential execution of the agent instruction list by the agent. This
causes the agent to move stochastically through the environments, which in turn triggers
sensors. When a sensor is triggered, this generates a sensor reading, which is saved in a
CSV event log. This process does not produce any visuals, but a sense of the underlying
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
34
==PAGE:42==
occurrences can be seen its printed output. An example of such can be seen in Listing
5.3, where an agent is tasked to go to a couch.
1
* goto(couch_1):
2
randomInteractPosition: Position [x=3, y=1]
3
2020-06-24T08:16:08.742640686 : Position [x=3, y=4]
4
2020-06-24T08:16:09.742640686 : Position [x=2, y=4]
5
2020-06-24T08:16:10.949747467 : Position [x=1, y=3]
6
2020-06-24T08:16:12.156854248 : Position [x=1, y=2]
7
2020-06-24T08:16:13.363961029 : Position [x=2, y=1]
8
2020-06-24T08:16:13.363961029 : PresenceSensor : lamp_1 : {triggered=true}
9
2020-06-24T08:16:14.363961029 : PresenceSensor : lamp_1 : {triggered=true}
10
2020-06-24T08:16:14.571067810 : Position [x=3, y=1]
Listing 5.3: Output from the Linac backend describing the agent moving to the couch.
Reproduced from [37].
5.3.3
SimCoor
SimCoor (Simulation Coordinator) is a novel Python script developed to solve the problem
of needing to run multiple repetitions of the AIG and Linac sequentially to create multiple
event logs composed of multiple cases.
SimCoor solves this problem by automatically coordinating the interaction between the
two simulators according to the desired output of the user. The user simply specifies within
the script a number of event logs, a number of cases per event log, a floorplan model, an
asymptomatic routine model, and a set of symptom transformation. Next, based on the
specified number of event logs, a set of symptom evolution degrees is derived, equally
spaced between 0 and 1. Then, during runtime, SimCoor repeatedly executes the two
simulations while in-between updating the symptom evolution degree, case-ID, and seed
values as illustrated in Figure 5.5.
Start
CSV
Update
degree
Update
case
AIG
SimCoor
yes
no
case < desired
case number
XES
yes
no
degree < 1
End
Figure 5.5: The control flow of SimCoor.
Here it can be seen that for each degree of symptom evolution, the two simulators are ex-
ecuted repeatedly producing a growing CSV file of sensor readings until the desired case
number is reached. Then the CSV file is filtered for redundant readings and converted into
a XES file, and the procedure repeats for the remaining degrees of symptom evolution. A
still of the program during runtime can be seen in Figure 5.4, illustrating the production of
a set of event logs. This resulting set of event logs then constitutes the synthetic dataset
that can be used to validate a behavioral process mining approach.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
35
==PAGE:43==
1
$ python simcoor.py
2
3
--------- SimCoor ---------
4
Event logs: 100
5
Cases: 1000
6
Seed: 4128142746
7
Event log prefix: dementia
8
___________________________
9
10
*** Event log 1 of 101
11
Exported event log: "dementia_(C1000-D0.000).xes"
12
13
*** Event log 2 of 101
14
Exported event log: "dementia_(C1000-D0.010).xes"
15
16
*** Event log 3 of 101
17
Exported event log: "dementia_(C1000-D0.020).xes"
18
19
*** Event log 4 of 101
20
* Case 260 of 1000
Listing 5.4: A still from a SimCoor execution as displayed in a CLI.
5.4
The Analysis Stage
The third stage of the pipeline involves analyzing the set of symptom degree and fitness
degree pairs produced by the examined behavioral process mining approach. This anal-
ysis, performed by Coral, results in a correlation coefficient that indicates the efficacy and
validity of the approach.
5.4.1
Coral
The software solution Coral (CORrelation AnaLysis) is a small novel Python script. It takes
as input one or several sets of δ and ϕ pairs, so that one may compare the performance of
multiple approaches simultaneously. This input should be formatted as a CSV file, where
the first column contains the δ values and the subsequent columns contains the ϕ values
of each examined approach. When running Coral two separate outputs are produced:
a correlation analysis and a line graph. An example of a produced correlation analysis
can be seen in Listing 5.5, where six approaches were analyzed simultaneously. Here
col refer to the column heading, τ refer to Kendall’s tau, n refer to the sample size, p
refer to a two-tailed p-value, and sig is a boolean value that denotes whether the result
is significant or not relative to a significance level of 0.05.
1
$ python coral.py coral-file.csv 0 38 0 6
2
3
col: approach -1, τ : -0.21, n: 36, p: 0.068, sig: false
4
col: approach -2, τ : -0.02, n: 36, p: 0.870, sig: false
5
col: approach -3, τ : -0.96, n: 36, p: 0.000, sig: true
6
col: approach -4, τ : -0.31, n: 36, p: 0.008, sig: true
7
col: approach -5, τ : -0.99, n: 36, p: 0.000, sig: true
8
col: approach -6, τ : -0.97, n: 36, p: 0.000, sig: true
Listing 5.5: An output of Coral as displayed in a CLI.
The second output consists of a line graph that illustrates the relationship between δ and
ϕ for each approach. The purpose of this graph is for qualitative analysis, which may
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
36
==PAGE:44==
grant insights that are not visible from the correlation analysis. An example of such an
output can be seen in Figure 5.6. Here it can be seen that the shape of the produced line
graph gives insight into the local and global sensitivity and accuracy of the approach. An
additional feature of Coral is that the produced plots are exportable into readily publishable
formats such as PGF, SVG, PDF, PNG, etc, which facilitates efficient dissemination of
ones research.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Degree of symptom evolution δ
Fitness ϕ
approach-1
approach-2
approach-3
approach-4
approach-5
approach-6
Figure 5.6: A line graph produced by Coral illustrates the relationship between symptom
evolution degrees and fitness values computed by multiple approaches.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
37
==PAGE:45==
6
Evaluation
This chapter describes an experiment that involves applying the framework in concrete
scenarios to exemplify its applicability and to evaluate its viability. First, the experiment
is introduced in Section 6.1. Then a description of the modeling is given in Section 6.2,
the simulating in Section 6.3, and the process mining in Section 6.4. Finally, in 6.5, the
results are analysed quantitatively and qualitatively.
6.1
Experiment Overview
The experiment consists of applying the framework to validate the efficacy of the behav-
ioral process mining approach developed by Di Federico, as described in Section 2.2, to
detect the progression of dementia. As described in Section 2.3.1, the behavioral symp-
toms of dementia includes forgetfulness, repetitiveness, wandering, and slowness. The
experiment will first validate the ability of the behavioral process mining approach to detect
the progressive increase of each of these symptoms individually. Then, it will validate the
approach when the symptoms are progressively increased collectively. The ability of the
framework to produce a correlation coefficient will then be used to evaluate the framework
itself, which will provide an answer for research questions 2.
As the experiment only includes five instantiations of the framework it essentially acts as a
pilot study that investigates the immediate viability of the proposed solution. If the result of
the experiment shows promise, then further investigation should take place to solidify the
viability. The reason for conducting a pilot study rather than a more comprehensive study
is due to the complexity involved in isolating the effect of each parameter that would be
required to ensure proper understanding of the interdependence between the parameters.
These parameters include the asymptomatic routine model, the symptoms, the symptom
evolution degree, the floorplan, and the behavioral process mining approach. The reason
for the need for such a comprehensive study and the challenges involved are discussed
further in Section 7.3.
An overview of the simulation configurations and their resulting outputs is illustrated in
Figure 6.1. Here it can be seen that the experiment will involve five variations of a single
scenario, where all variations have the same floorplan model and routine model but they
differ in which symptoms are injected.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
38
==PAGE:46==
/
Floorplan 1
Routine 1
Symptom 1
Degree 0.000
Degree 0.029
Degree 0.057
R1M1S1D0057.xes
Degree 0.086
Degree 0.114
Degree 0.143
Degree 0.171
Degree 0.200
Degree 0.229
Degree 0.257
...
Degree 1.0
Symptom 2
Symptom 3
Symptom 4
Symptom 1+2+3+4
Figure 6.1: Overview of the experiment configurations. Here 35 event logs composed of
104 cases are generated for each of the 5 scenario variations.
6.2
Modeling
6.2.1
Floorplan
The floorplan used for the experiment is based on a real one-person apartment from
Ørestad nursing home. The real floorplan can be seen in Figure 6.2a and the modeled
floorplan in Figure 6.2b. A detailed illustration of the modeled floorplan, seen in Appendix
B.1, show that the floorplan was furnished to have a bathroom in the upper left, a bedroom
in the lower left, a kitchen in the upper right, a living room in the middle right, and a balcony
in the lower right. It was decided to have active sensors in the form of smart objects that
would trigger and generate a sensor reading when the user interacted with them. Also
passive sensors were added in the form of pressure sensors that would log the location
of the agent every fifth second. The information contained in the readings logged by
these types of sensors would be directly relatable to an activity in the routine model. The
decision to not produce event readings that required event abstraction was reached due
to the complexities involved in the effective application of CvAMoS.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
39
==PAGE:47==
(a) The floorplan of the apartment [52].
(b) The floorplan modeled in Linac.
Figure 6.2: A one-person apartment within Ørestad nursing home.
6.2.2
Routine Model
The routine model used for the experiment represent the morning routine of a nursing
home resident living in the aforedescribed apartment. An outline of its structure can be
seen in Figure 6.3 and a readable version in Appendix B.2. The routine model defines
the morning activities of the resident, beginning with waking up and freshening up in the
bathroom. Next, the resident returns to the bedroom to get dressed before proceeding to
the kitchen to prepare and eat breakfast. Following breakfast, the resident takes time to
relax, either in the living room or on the balcony. Finally, the resident exits the apartment
to join the other residents in a communal area.
p27
start
sleep
interact(bed,activate)
[30, 300]
p7
t6
goto(bathroom)
p3
p5
p1
t45
interact(cabinet,activate)
[5, 30]
t1
interact(toilet,activate)
[60, 300]
t0
interact(shower,activate)
[180, 420]
p31
t46
interact(bathroomFaucet,activate)
[120, 300]
p32
t47
interact(cabinet,activate)
[5, 30]
p4
t5
goto(bedroom)
p6
p10
p19
t23
interact(bedroomDrawers,activate)[60, 120]
p20
p18
t27
interact(closet2,activate)[60, 120]
p22
t26
interact(closet1,activate)[60, 180]
p21
t28
goto(kitchen)
p14
p8
t13
interact(kitchenDrawers,activate)
[20, 80]
t7
interact(kitchenDrawers,activate)
[20, 80]
t17
interact(kitchenDrawers,activate)
[20, 80]
p11
p9
t14
interact(refrigerator,activate)
[30, 360]
t10
interact(refrigerator,activate)
[30, 360]
p12
t15
interact(hob,activate)[120, 600]
p13
p15
t18
interact(kitchenFaucet,activate)
[5, 60]
t11
interact(kitchenTable,activate)[10, 120]
p16
p23
t22
interact(kitchenChair2,activate)[60, 600]
t20
interact(kitchenChair1,activate)[60, 600]
t21
interact(kitchenChair3,activate)[60, 600]
p24
t37
goto(terrace)
t36
goto(livingroom)
p28
t33
interact(livingRoomTable,activate) [10, 60]
t29
interact(television,activate)[10, 120]
p26
p25
t32
interact(sofa,activate)[300, 900]
t30
interact(livingRoomChair,activate)[300, 900]
t35
interact(sofa,activate)[300, 900]
t34
interact(livingRoomChair,activate)[300, 900]
p29
t41
interact(terraceChair1,activate)[120, 600]
t42
goto(terrace)
t40
interact(terraceChair2,activate)[120, 600]
t43
goto(8,0)
end
Figure 6.3: Morning routine model.
A non-synthetic routine model of an individual would exhibit substantial complexity. The
modeled morning routine may not include as much complexity, but it still exhibits signifi-
cant complexity across various metrics. The model has a Cardoso complexity [53] value
of 19, which indicates a significant number of control-flow elements in the workflow net.
Moreover, the model has an extended cyclomatic complexity [54] value of 72, which indi-
cates a high number of linearly independent paths through the control flow of the workflow
net. The complexity of the routine model makes it unlikely for one to rediscover the com-
plete routine model without observing a large number of cases. This reflects the real
challenge of rediscovering a real individual’s true morning routine.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
40
==PAGE:48==
6.2.3
Symptoms
The behavioral symptoms of dementia has already been established in Section 2.3.1 and
a few of those were modeled as workflow net transformations in Section 4.3, i.e., forget-
fulness, repetitiveness, wandering, and slowness. We will use these four symptoms as
already defined.
6.3
Simulating
The simulation step involves the execution of five SimCoor instances, to generate a unique
set of event logs for each of the five scenario variations of the experiment. All the input
necessary to run SimCoor has already been modeled in the previous chapter except for
the SimCoor settings themselves. These settings define of the number of event logs
generated, the number of cases per event log, and the random seed value.
When deciding on number of event logs to generate one has to first take into consider-
ation the number of non-silent transitions, |TI|, in the modeled routine, as this number
equates to the maximum number of event logs that one may use. This is due to the fact
that the degree of evolution effectively translates into what percentage of non-silent tran-
sitions that is transformed during symptom injection. Hence, incrementing the degree of
evolution with increments of less than
1
|TI| will result in not every increment equating to
a unique number of transformed transitions, which consequently will invalidate the sub-
sequent correlation analysis. In this scenario the routine model consist of 35 transitions,
which mean that the maximum allowed number of event logs is 35, which equates to each
increment requiring to be at least 1
35 ≈0.0286.
The second consideration that one must consider is that validation becomes increasingly
hard to achieve when one increases the number of event logs, which consequently in-
creases the symptom evolution degree granularity that one wants the examined behav-
ioral process mining approach to be able to distinguish. Here, one must assess what one
wants to achieve with the developed approach.
The third consideration is ensuring that the subsequent correlation analysis yields statis-
tically significant results, which depends on having a sufficient number of data pairs.
The fourth consideration is that the number of event logs multiplied by the number of
cases in each event log should equate to a number of observations that is realistically
achieved if one were to apply the examined behavioral process mining approach to de-
tect the progression of a disease using real observations. If one uses large event logs
during synthetics testing and small event logs during real-life application, then one may
find that the synthetics testing showed good results that the real-life application could not
replicate. This would be due to larger event logs generally providing more comprehen-
sive coverage of the process, leading to more accurate and reliable fitness values. For
example, validating the efficacy of an approach in detecting the progression of common
cold via morning routine observations should use no more than 21 observations, as the
average duration of the common cold is between 1 to 3 weeks.
As an example, to validate the efficacy of an approach in detecting the progression of
Alzheimer’s disease, the most common type of dementia, through morning routine ob-
servations, one should use no more than 365 × 10 = 3650 observations, as the clinical
duration of Alzheimer is approximately 8–10 years [55].
Taking all these considerations into account we are going to generate 35 event logs for
each scenario variation.
The main consideration when it comes to deciding upon the number of cases each event
log is going to be composed of is the same as the previously described consideration con-
cerning the realism of the total number of observations in the set of event logs. Given that
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
41
==PAGE:49==
35 event logs will be generated and that total number of observations should not exceed
3650, we derive the maximum number of cases per event log to be 3650
35 ≈104. Therefore,
each event log will contain 104 cases for this experiment.
An additional consideration concerning the number of cases is that the more cases one in-
cludes, the higher the chance that the event log correctly reflects the ground truth. There-
fore, an increase in case numbers likely leads to more accurate results. Still, if one wants
to see how well the examined process mining approach performs with a limited number
of observed cases, then that is what one should simulate.
The final parameter of SimCoor is the seed, set to 5111, which determines the pseudoran-
dom number generator’s sequence used to generate unique seeds for all 3650 instances
of the AIG and 3650 instances of Linac. Documenting this value ensures the reproducibil-
ity of the synthetic data generation process. However, it does not have any control on
possible stochastic behavior of the applied behavioral process mining approach. Un-
fortunately, such stochastic behavior is present in the applied mining approach of this
experiment. Therefore, if reproduction is attempted, minor variations might occur in the
outcome.
6.4
Mining
In the process mining step, we utilize version 1.0 of the Enriched Conformance Checking
(EnrichedCC) solution, as developed and presented by Di Federico and Burattin in the
paper “Do You Behave Always the Same?: A Process Mining Approach” [20] [56]. The
details of this solution, including its context, have been previously described in Section
2.2. Before application, the solution underwent slight modifications to enhance its rele-
vance to the current problem. By default, EnrichedCC conducts conformance checking of
imperative models with alignments, ensuring high accuracy in computed fitness values.
However, this approach is computationally expensive, rendering it impractical from a tem-
poral perspective. Therefore, the conformance checking approach was changed to use
token replay, significantly reducing the runtime. This change led to a decrease in fitness
accuracy, as evidenced by slightly worsened correlation coefficients, but the impact was
minimal and deemed acceptable.
Moreover, the rule checker for conformance checking of the discovered declarative model
led to a binary fitness values of either 0 or 1 when applied to the described scenarios. This
heavily differentiated the fitness values of those event logs that conformed versus those
that did not conform to the discovered declarative model, leading to ambiguous or undefin-
able correlation coefficients. Therefore, the fitness values computed from the declarative
model were discarded from the experiment and are therefore not present in the subse-
quent analysis.
The discovery approach was also modified to fit the application better. Specifically, the
data model concerning the absolute time of activity execution. This model by default con-
sidered the frequency at which an activity was executed at different hours of the day. This
granularity was not applicable for the described scenario, as the morning routine would
be performed within a single hour. Therefore, the model was changed to instead consider
the frequency at which an activity was executed at different minutes per day.
With these modification in place, the different models of the multi-model where discovered
from the asymptomatic event logs of the five synthetic datasets. As an example of control-
flow models discovered, the models discovered using the heuristic miner and the inductive
miner are shown in Figure 6.4. These discovered models allow for behavior similar to, but
not identical to, that of the ground truth asymptomatic routine model. This is a fine result,
as it mirrors the improbability of perfectly discovering the ground truth of something as
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
42
==PAGE:50==
complex as human behavior.
(a) A Petri net discovered using the heuristics miner.
(b) A Petri net discovered using the inductive miner.
Figure 6.4: The morning routine discovered using different techniques. Expanded ver-
sions can be found in Appendix B.3
With the asymptomatic models discovered, these models are then used for conformance
checking against the event logs that each represent progressively increased expressive-
ness of injected behavior. This results in a set of data pairs for each model, where each
data pair contain a degree of symptom evolution and a fitness value. The fitness values
of each model are then aggregated into a fitness value that represent the fitness value of
the multi-model. This aggregation is simple achieved by computing the average fitness
value, as done in the original paper [20]. The resulting data is presented in numerical
form in Appendix B and in graphical form in the subsequent section.
6.5
Analyzing
The first behavioral symptom detected is forgetfulness. The output of Coral, which in-
cludes visual information as well as correlation analysis, is shown in Figure 6.5. In this
figure, the fitness values, ϕ, against the degree of symptom evolution, δ, are plotted for
the individual models: heuristics (heur), inductive (indu), frequency (freq), duration (dura),
and absolute time (time), along with the aggregated fitness value of the multi-model (aggr).
Additionally, the correlation analysis provides details on the applied correlation method,
degree of freedom, correlation coefficient, and two-tailed p-value. When interpreting the p-
value, consider a significance level of α = 0.05, along with the hypotheses H0 : τ(δ, ϕ) = 0
and H1 : τ(δ, ϕ) ̸= 0.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
43
==PAGE:51==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Degree of symptom evolution δ
Fitness ϕ
Detection of Forgetfulness
Heur τ(33) = −0.97, p < 0.001
Indu τ(33) = −0.97, p < 0.001
Freq τ(33) = −0.97, p < 0.001
Dura τ(33) = +0.71, p < 0.001
Time τ(33) = −0.92, p < 0.001
Aggr τ(33) = −0.99, p < 0.001
Figure 6.5: The ability of the multi-model and the underlying models to accurately detect
individual increments of progressive increase in forgetful behavior.
From the information presented in Figure 6.5 multiple qualitative and quantitative char-
acteristics can be observed. Overall, the aggregated ϕ values of the multi-model exhibit
a significant, strong negative ordinal association with δ, indicating that the multi-model
can accurately discern between individual increments of forgetful behavior in a person as
the behavior progressively increases over time within the controlled environment of the
experiment.
A collective assessment of the ϕ variables produced by the underlying models shows that,
while they all exhibit significant ordinal correlation with δ, their computed τ values are all
less strong than that of the multi-model. This suggests that the aggregation function of the
multi-model effectively averages out the erroneous fluctuations of the individual models
which in this case resulted in a more smooth slope of the aggregated ϕ values.
Moreover, the use of multiple models in the multi-model caused correct interpretation of
the degree of injected behavior. While the duration model incorrectly interpreted an in-
crease in the degree of symptom evolution as a decrease in symptomatic behavior, this
was outweighed by the correct interpretation by the remaining models, which overall re-
sulted in the correct interpretation by the multi-model. This is an example of the aggrega-
tion function effectively averaging out the rate of change of the individual models.
Another thing to note is the seemingly linear relationship between δ and ϕ produced by
all the models as forgetful behavior is increased in the routine. This type of relationship
is not always to be expected, but in his case it is caused by the applied transformation
function of forgetfulness only allowing the agent to forget an activity once per increment
when there are no loops in the routine. In later examples it can be seen how different
transformation functions can lead to different types of relationships.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
44
==PAGE:52==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Degree of symptom evolution δ
Fitness ϕ
Detection of Repetitiveness
Heur τ(33) = −0.95, p < 0.001
Indu τ(33) = −0.97, p < 0.001
Freq τ(33) = −0.98, p < 0.001
Dura τ(33) = −0.84, p < 0.001
Time τ(33) = −0.92, p < 0.001
Aggr τ(33) = −0.95, p < 0.001
Figure 6.6: The ability of the multi-model and the underlying models to accurately detect
individual increments of progressive increase in repetitive behavior.
The next individually injected symptom is repetitiveness as seen in Figure 6.6. For the
multi-model, once again a significant strong negative relationship exists between δ and ϕ,
with a correlation coefficient of -0.95. This time however, the aggregated fitness values
of the multi-model performed worse than two of the individual models. This suggests that
the behavioral process mining approach could be improved specifically for repetitiveness
detection by altering the aggregation function to weight the fitness values of the individual
models differently.
Unlike with the introduction of forgetful behavior, the introduction of repetitive behavior
leads to a slight exponential relationship between δ and ϕ, which is caused by the applied
transformation function of repetitiveness allowing the agent to repeat an activity multiple
times per increment in repetitiveness. This observation underlines the point that one
cannot be sure of the type of monotonic function produced by the multi-model. This point
is important if one wants to later infer a function for mapping a fitness value to a degree
of symptom evolution via regression analysis.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
45
==PAGE:53==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Degree of symptom evolution δ
Fitness ϕ
Detection of Wandering
Heur τ(33) = −0.98, p < 0.001
Indu τ(33) = −0.98, p < 0.001
Freq τ(33) = −0.93, p < 0.001
Dura τ(33) = −0.02, p = 0.870
Time τ(33) = −0.71, p < 0.001
Aggr τ(33) = −0.96, p < 0.001
Figure 6.7: The ability of the multi-model and the underlying models to accurately detect
individual increments of progressive increase in wandering behavior.
The next individually injected symptom is wandering as seen in Figure 6.7. For the multi-
model, a significant strong negative relationship exists between δ and ϕ, with a correlation
coefficient of -0.96.
This example does not show many unique features compared to the previous two exam-
ples. However, one thing that can be discussed is the interpretation of correlation coeffi-
cient values. For example, the correlation coefficient of the absolute time model is seen
to be -0.71. In many applications such an ordinal correlation coefficient would indicate
a strong correlation. While the correlation may be strong, as seen from the fluctuating
plot of the yellow line, such a value does not indicate an ordinal correlation that is strong
enough to be used for prediction. This suggests that users of the validation framework
should not settle for a correlation coefficient normally interpreted as strong, but instead
they should strive to decrease the correlation coefficient of their approach as much as
possible.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
46
==PAGE:54==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Degree of symptom evolution δ
Fitness ϕ
Detection of Slowness
Heur τ(33) = −0.21, p = 0.068
Indu τ(33) = N/A,
p = N/A
Freq τ(33) = +0.27, p = 0.021
Dura τ(33) = −0.96, p < 0.001
Time τ(33) = −0.31, p = 0.008
Aggr τ(33) = −0.96, p < 0.001
Figure 6.8: The ability of the multi-model and the underlying models to accurately detect
individual increments of progressive increase in slowness behavior.
The final individually injected symptom is slowness as seen in Figure 6.8. For the multi-
model, a significant strong negative relationship exists between δ and ϕ, with a correlation
coefficient of -0.96. In this example, the progression of slowness behavior is correctly de-
tectable by a single underlying model, which is sufficient for the multi-model to accurately
detect the progression. Since the duration spent on each activity does not impact the
routine’s control-flow, neither the heuristic nor the inductive miner can detect the behav-
ioral change. Additionally, the frequency model misinterprets the behavioral change, and
the absolute time model cannot differentiate symptom evolution beyond 0.2 degrees. This
example underscores the effectiveness of the multi-model strategy, demonstrating the ad-
vantage of including models that capture unique behaviors. It also shows how the trend
of a single model with a strong negative correlation coefficient can determine the overall
trend of the multi-model, when the remaining models exhibit weak correlation coefficients.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
47
==PAGE:55==
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Degree of symptom evolution δ
Fitness ϕ
Detection of Dementia
Heur τ(33) = −0.98, p < 0.001
Indu τ(33) = −0.97, p < 0.001
Freq τ(33) = −0.98, p < 0.001
Dura τ(33) = −0.96, p < 0.001
Time τ(33) = −0.84, p < 0.001
Aggr τ(33) = −0.99, p < 0.001
Figure 6.9: The ability of the multi-model and the underlying models to accurately detect
individual increments of progressive increase in multiple behavioral symptoms associated
with dementia.
Finally, all the previously discussed behavioral symptoms were injected simultaneously
to simulate the symptomatic behavior observed in the progression of dementia. The re-
sulting ϕ values of the multi-model and the underlying models can be seen in Figure 6.9.
Overall, the aggregated ϕ values of the multi-model exhibit a significant, strong negative
ordinal association with δ, indicating that the multi-model can accurately discern between
individual increments of behavior associated with dementia in a person as the behavior
progressively increases over time within the controlled environment of the experiment.
Compared to the previous detection of individually injected symptomatic behaviors, the
simultaneous injection of behaviors seem to be more easily detected. The individual mod-
els being affected by multiple symptomatic behaviors simultaneously, causes a greater
rate of change and a decrease in erroneous fluctuations of the produced ϕ values. This,
in turn, results in very strong negative correlation coefficients.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
48
==PAGE:56==
7
Discussion
This chapter begins by discussing the results of the evaluation in Section 7.1. Next, the
identified limitations of the conceptual and implemented validation framework are outlined
in Section 7.2. Following this, an identified threat to the validity of the evaluation is pre-
sented in Section 7.3. Finally, the research questions are addressed in Section 7.4.
7.1
Interpretation of Results
The analysis of the evaluated scenario variations indicated, through the successful pro-
duction of ordinal correlation coefficients, that the framework is capable of assessing the
efficacy of a behavioral process mining approach in detecting individual increments of
progressive increase in symptomatic behavior. Furthermore, the framework’s ability to
visualize the relationship between the degree of symptom evolution and produced fitness
value introduced the potential for qualitative analysis, offering valuable insights into areas
for potential improvement in the examined approach. Similarly, the framework’s ability
to measure and visualize the individual efficacy of the underlying models of multi-models
provide insights into how these models influence the overall efficacy of the multi-model.
7.2
Limitations
The limitations of the conceptual and implemented solution mainly concern the abstrac-
tions made during the modeling and simulation phases.
Lack of behavioral noise
A limitation of the validation framework is that it only considers very ideal scenarios, where
the only change in observed behavior is the injected behavior that one wants to detect. A
more realistic scenario would be to include behavioral noise in the form of random varia-
tions in the observed behavior that would be unrelated to the injected behavior. This noise
would act to obscure the injected behavior, making the detection challenge more realistic.
This would consequently make the validated behavioral process mining approaches more
robust and make them perform better in practical settings.
Limitations of expressible behavior
The implemented framework is limited in the types of behavioral symptoms that can be
injected and subsequently detected. This limitation is due to both the definition of routine
models and the use of Linac for sensor readings generation. First, the current definition of
routine models only enables the expression of behavior related to control-flow, time, and
agent instructions. This means that one can only inject behavior that manifests as either
of those three into the routine model. Second, the Linac simulator only allows for a limited
set of agent instructions, which consequently only allows the agent to express a limited
set of behaviors. An example of symptomatic behavior that would not be expressible in a
routine model or as input in the Linac simulator could be changes in verbal behavior.
Identical symptom evolution degrees
When multiple symptoms are injected simultaneously to mimic the progression of a dis-
ease, it is currently only possible to inject all individual symptoms with the same degree of
symptom evolution. This is an abstraction that does not accurately reflect reality, where
the behavioral symptoms of a disease would likely be expressed in varying degrees. This
abstraction could potentially result in erroneous validation of the ability of a behavioral
process mining approach to effectively detect the progression of a certain disease.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
49
==PAGE:57==
Abstraction of asymptomatic routine models
Currently, modeling the asymptomatic routine model is the most labor intensive part of
instantiating the framework. This makes it impractical to model larger routines without
abstracting them by removing details. These abstractions then potentially fail to accurately
represent reality, which consequently can lead to misleading conclusions.
7.3
Threat to Validity
When introducing the experiment, it was stated that it should be considered a prelimi-
nary evaluation due to the parameter interdependence of the validation framework not
being comprehensively examined. This lack of examination leads to uncertainty about
the framework’s robustness to variations in input parameters. Without understanding this
robustness, the validity and reliability of the framework remain unclear under different sce-
narios, making a comprehensive evaluation of the framework impossible. The reason for
not studying the parameter interdependence of the framework was due to the complexity
involved in defining a sample of each parameter that represented its domain, that is, all
possible variations. The input of the framework consists of four main parameters: the
asymptomatic routine model, the floorplan model, the set of symptom transformations,
and the set of symptom evolution degrees and the number of cases. The possibility of
creating a representative sample for each of these parameters are discussed as follows.
The asymptomatic routine model
The creation of a representative sample of all possible asymptomatic routine models ef-
fectively means creating a representative sample of all possible workflow nets. A potential
way to approximate such a sample would be the creation of a sample composed of work-
flow nets with varying amounts of complexity. The problem with this solution is that the
meaning of complexity in relation to workflow nets is not universally agreed upon. Multi-
ple metrics have been proposed in the literature [54] that are each based on a different
idea. Two popular candidates that are often used are the extended Cardoso metric that
measures the structural complexity of a workflow net and the extended cyclomatic metric
that measures the number of linearly independent paths through the workflow net. Once
a metric has been decided, the next challenge becomes the generation of the sample.
Although there are solutions for the automatic generation of workflow nets, they do not
allow one to specify the complexity of the produced net and they do not produce nets that
include the labeling information of routine models as defined in Definition 1. Therefore,
one would have to create a novel solution for the automatic generation of routine models.
The complexities surrounding the exploration of each parameter are discussed as follows.
The floorplan model
A floorplan model contains information about the layout of an environment, the location
of various objects, and the placement of different sensor types. This large amount of
information contained within the floorplan model parameter ensures a vast number of
possible configurations, making it a difficult task to create a representative sample of all
possible floorplan model variations. Similarly to the asymptomatic routine model, one can
attempt to tackle the creation of such a representative sample by composing a sample
of floorplan models with various amounts of complexity. The problem with this solution
is that the floorplan model is an application-specific data object to Linac, and therefore
no complexity metric exists in the literature. Therefore, one would have to create a novel
complexity metric that would factor in all this information. Having done this, one would
also have to create an automatic solution for creating floorplans with various amounts of
such complexity.
The set of symptom transformations
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
50
==PAGE:58==
The set of all possible symptom transformations is innumerous, and the difference be-
tween two transformations is hard to quantify. Therefore, the creation of a representative
sample of all possible symptoms transformations seem rather problematic. Here, the most
practical approach seems to be discarding the notion of comprehensive exploration of the
parameter and instead focusing on the creation of a repository of common symptomatic
transformations. The transformations composing this repository could then be validated
and confidently used by users of the framework.
The set of symptom evolution degrees and the number of cases
The creation of a representative sample of all possible sets of symptom evolution degrees
and all possible numbers of cases per event log is possible in the presented solution. This
is definable within the SimCoor settings.
To summarize, comprehensively sampling the domain of each parameter required for
studying parameter interdependence poses a significant challenge. This limitation hin-
dered comprehensive validation of the framework, which restricted the evaluation to sin-
gular scenarios.
7.4
Addressing the Research Questions
The discussion now culminates in summarizing the answers to the research questions
stated in Section 3.3.
RQ1: How to synthetically validate the efficacy of behavioral process mining approaches
in detecting the degree of symptomatic behavior in an individual?
A solution in the form of a validation framework was conceptualized and presented
in Chapter 4, and an instantiation of the framework in the form of a software pipeline
was developed and presented in Chapter 5.
RQ1.1: How to formally model the ground truths of evolutionary symptomatic human
behavior?
A novel solution for modeling the ground truth of human behavior was pre-
sented in Section 4.2. This solution proposed modeling human behavior as a
modified workflow net that represented a routine of an individual. The workflow
net was formally defined in a way that ensured simulatability and enabled the
expression of control-flow behavior, temporal behavior, and instructional be-
havior. Then, in Section 4.3, symptomatic evolution was formalized as the in-
cremental application of Petri net transformations that increased the likelihood
of symptoms being expressed. The practical modeling of an asymptomatic rou-
tine model was demonstrated as possible with the preexisting solution TINA in
Section 5.2.1 and the symptom injection was demonstrated as possible with
the development of the novel software solution AIG in Section 5.3.1.
RQ1.2: How to generate event logs composed of sensor readings by simulating mod-
eled human behavior?
With human behavior modeled as modified workflow nets, a two-step simula-
tion process was conceptualized. First, in Section 4.4, a workflow net simula-
tion was described that instantiated routine models for the generation of activity
traces, which were translated into agent instructions lists. Then, in Section 4.5,
the agent instructions were used as input in a smart environment simulator to
generate event logs composed of sensor readings. A practical approach for ap-
plying these two steps was demonstrated, respectively, with the development
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
51
==PAGE:59==
of the novel software solution AIG in Section 5.3.1 and with the application
of the preexisting Linac simulator in Section 5.3.2. Automatic coordination of
the two steps for the generation of multiple event logs with multiple cases was
achieved by the development of the novel software solution SimCoor in Section
5.3.3.
RQ1.3: How to analyze the efficacy of detecting individual increments of progressive
increase in symptomatic behavior?
In Section 4.7, the efficacy was defined as the ordinal correlation coefficient be-
tween the injected degrees of symptomatic behavior and the computed fitness
values between the discovered asymptomatic routine model and observed symp-
tomatic behavior. Then, in Section 5.4.1, the novel software solution Coral was
developed to efficiently compute this metric.
RQ2: Can the solution validate the efficacy of an approach in detecting individual incre-
ments of progressive increase in symptomatic behavior?
The preliminary evaluation indicated that an instantiation of the validation frame-
work was able to validate the efficacy of a behavioral process mining approach in
detecting individual increments of progressive increase in symptomatic behavior.
This capability was demonstrated four times with individual symptoms and once
with four symptoms simultaneously, as detailed in Chapter 6. However, despite
these initial findings, a comprehensive evaluation of the framework was impeded
due to the challenges discussed in Section 7.3. Consequently, the research ques-
tion cannot be confidently answered at this time.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
52
==PAGE:60==
8
Conclusion
This section provides a concise summary of the study findings in Section 8.1 and intro-
duces potential avenues for future research in Section 8.2.
8.1
Summary of Key Findings
This study aimed to develop a solution to validate the ability of behavioral process min-
ing approaches in accurately detecting disease progression in specific scenarios. This
objective led to the conceptualization of a validation framework that provides a sequence
of phases for the creation of a synthetic dataset, which in combination with a method for
analysis could facilitate the computation of a performance metric that indicate the accu-
racy of an examined approach in detecting disease progression for a specified scenario.
The first phase describes a novel method to model asymptomatic behavior of an individ-
ual. The second phase describes a novel strategy for how to derive a model for the be-
havior of that individual with specific amounts of specified symptomatic behavior present.
The third phase describes a novel way to generate samples of such modeled human be-
havior. The fourth phase presents a solution to generate event logs composed of sensor
readings that reflect the behavior of such samples within a specified environment. The
fifth phase describes the application of the examined process mining approach. The sixth
phase describes the novel analysis method used to compute an accuracy metric.
After defining the conceptual validation framework, a practical implementation was de-
veloped in the form of a validation framework pipeline. This pipeline comprises a combi-
nation of novel and preexisting software solutions to facilitate the practical application of
the conceptual framework. The novel software solutions created for this purpose include
AIG, SimCoor, and Coral.
Then a preliminary study evaluated the validity of the framework pipeline in five different
variations of a scenario with an existing behavioral process mining approach. These initial
findings found that the framework was capable of producing a metric that described the
accuracy of the approach.
However, the framework is limited by its current use of abstractions in both the modeling
and simulation stages, which could potentially lead to inaccurately computed metric val-
ues. Furthermore, a comprehensive evaluation of the solution proved challenging, which
meant that the robustness of the framework could not be studied and therefore the validity
of the solution could not be fully ensured.
The findings of this study contribute to the field of process mining by introducing a novel
solution for assessing the effectiveness of develop techniques in detecting symptomatic
change in human behavior. This is valuable, as it facilitates the comparison between in-
cremental changes in techniques needed in order to improve these techniques for different
scenarios. Furthermore, advances in these techniques have significant implications for
healthcare analytics, where early and accurate detection of disease progression is crucial
for effective treatment.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
53
==PAGE:61==
8.2
Future Work
Based on the groundwork established by this research, several potential directions for
future work can be suggested. These suggestions are segmented into three main cat-
egories: improving the framework by minimizing limitations, legitimizing the framework
through further validation, and assessing the usefulness of the framework through actual
usage.
Improve the framework
The most effective way to improve the framework involves addressing the limitations iden-
tified in Section 7.2. This would primarily be done by reducing current abstractions in both
the modeling and the simulation stages. This could be achieved by introducing complex-
ity, such as incorporating behavioral noise during simulation, enhancing the expressive
capabilities of routine models, and enabling non-synchronous progression of symptomatic
behavior. Additionally, developing a more practical method for modeling routines would
significantly enhance the framework’s usability and facilitate the definition of more realistic
routines.
Further validation
Further validation is necessary to verify the robustness of the solution across various
scenarios. Here, one could attempt comprehensive validation which would be a larger
undertaking involving the automatic generation of a representative sample of parameter
objects. Alternatively, one could increase the understanding of the generalizability of the
findings by manual evaluation of the framework in various scenarios.
Practical application
Finally, the most impactful action would be to use the framework for its intended purpose.
Using the framework to develop process mining techniques for the detection of disease
progression would provide the best indication of its practicality. If proven to be impractical,
this would either promote research into improving the solution or prompt the search for
alternative approaches based on the lessons learned. Conversely, if it proves to be useful,
this would promote its usage and aid its dissemination.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
54
==PAGE:62==
Bibliography
[1]
Gemma Di Federico. “A Process Mining Framework to Analyse Variability in Human
Behavior”. PhD thesis. Technical University of Denmark, 2024.
[2]
Gemma Di Federico et al. “Identifying Variation in Personal Daily Routine Through
Process Mining: A Case Study”. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference
on Process Mining (icpm 2023) 503 (2024), pp. 23–234. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-
56107-8_17.
[3]
Wil van der Aalst and Josep Carmona. Process Mining Handbook. Lecture Notes
in Business Information Processing (448). Springer, 2022. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-
08848-3.
[4]
Wil van der Aalst. Process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement of
business processes. Springer, 2011. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-19345-3.
[5]
Wil Van der Aalst. Process mining: Data science in action. Springer Berlin Heidel-
berg, 2016. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-49851-4.
[6]
“IEEE Standard for eXtensible Event Stream (XES) for Achieving Interoperability in
Event Logs and Event Streams”. In: IEEE Std 1849-2023 (2023), pp. 1–55. DOI:
10.1109/IEEESTD.2023.10267858.
[7]
Wil van der Aalst et al. “Process mining manifesto”. In: Lecture Notes in Business
Information Processing 99.1 (2012), pp. 169–194. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-28108-
2_19.
[8]
Wil van der Aalst, Ton Weijters, and Laura Maruster. “Workflow mining: discovering
process models from event logs”. In: IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering 16.9 (2004), pp. 1128–1142. DOI: 10.1109/TKDE.2004.47.
[9]
Ton Weijters, Wil van der Aalst, and Ana Karla Alves De Medeiros. Process mining
with the HeuristicsMiner algorithm. Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, 2006.
[10]
Viktorija Nekrasaite et al. “Discovering Responsibilities with Dynamic Condition Re-
sponse Graphs”. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science 11483 (2019), pp. 595–
610. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-21290-2_37.
[11]
Thomas T. Hildebrandt and Raghava Rao Mukkamala. “Declarative Event-Based
Workflow as Distributed Dynamic Condition Response Graphs”. In: Electronic Pro-
ceedings in Theoretical Computer Science 69 (2011), pp. 59–73. DOI: 10.4204/
EPTCS.69.5.
[12]
Viktorija Nekrasaite et al. “Discovering Responsibilities with Dynamic Condition Re-
sponse Graphs”. In: Advanced Information Systems Engineering. Vol. 11483. Springer
International Publishing, 2019, pp. 595–610. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-21290-2_37.
[13]
A. Rozinat and W.M.P. Van Der Aalst. “Conformance checking of processes based
on monitoring real behavior”. In: Information Systems 33.1 (2008), pp. 64–95. DOI:
10.1016/j.is.2007.07.001.
[14]
Wil Van Der Aalst, Arya Adriansyah, and Boudewijn Van Dongen. “Replaying his-
tory on process models for conformance checking and performance analysis”. In:
WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 2.2 (2012), pp. 182–192. DOI: 10.
1002/widm.1045.
[15]
Josep Carmona et al. Conformance Checking: Relating Processes and Models.
Springer International Publishing, 2018. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-99414-7.
[16]
Gemma Di Federico and Andrea Burattin. “vAMoS: eVent Abstraction via Motifs
Search”. In: Business Process Management Workshops. Vol. 460. Springer Inter-
national Publishing, 2023, pp. 101–112. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-25383-6_9.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
55
==PAGE:63==
[17]
Gemma Di Federico and Andrea Burattin. “CvAMoS - Event Abstraction Using Con-
textual Information”. In: Future Internet 15.3 (2023), p. 113. DOI: 10.3390/fi15030113.
[18]
Gemma Di Federico, Andrea Burattin, and Marco Montali. “Human Behavior as a
Process Model: Which Language to Use?” In: Ceur Workshop Proceedings 2952
(2021), pp. 18–25.
[19]
Gemma Di Federico. Modeling Human Behavior: Process Modeling Language Re-
quirements. 2021. DOI: 10.11583/DTU.14745693.v1.
[20]
Gemma Di Federico and Andrea Burattin. “Do You Behave Always the Same?:
A Process Mining Approach”. In: Proceedings of Process Mining Workshop 468
(2023), pp. 5–17. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-27815-0_1.
[21]
Yinggang Mi and Anton Freyr Arnarsson. “Analysis of Human Behavior with Process
Mining: Detecting and Explaining Variations”. MSc Thesis. Technical University of
Denmark, 2022.
[22]
Søren Debois et al. “Declarative process mining for DCR graphs”. In: Proceedings
of the Acm Symposium on Applied Computing 128005 (2017), pp. 759–764. DOI:
10.1145/3019612.3019622.
[23]
Sebastiaan J. Van Zelst et al. “Event abstraction in process mining: literature review
and taxonomy”. In: Granular Computing 6.3 (2021), pp. 719–736. DOI: 10.1007/
s41066-020-00226-2.
[24]
Onur Dogan et al. “Individual behavior modeling with sensors using process mining”.
In: Electronics (switzerland) 8.7 (2019), p. 766. DOI: 10.3390/electronics8070766.
[25]
Juan J. Lull et al. “Interactive Process Mining in IoT and Human Behaviour Mod-
elling”. In: Interactive Process Mining in Healthcare. Health Informatics. Springer
International Publishing, 2021, pp. 217–231. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-53993-1_13.
[26]
Yannis Bertrand et al. “A Survey on the Application of Process Mining to Smart
Spaces Data”. In: vol. 468 LNBIP. Springer Science and Business Media Deutsch-
land GmbH, 2023, pp. 57–70. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-27815-0_5.
[27]
J. Ingerslev et al. Ernæring og aldring. Danish. 2002.
[28]
Marı́a M. Corrada et al. “Dementia incidence continues to increase with age in the
oldest old: The 90+ study”. In: Annals of Neurology 67.1 (2010), pp. 114–121. DOI:
10.1002/ana.21915.
[29]
Statistics Denmark. Life expectancy. URL: https://www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/emner/
befolkning-og-valg/doedsfald-og-middellevetid/middellevetid.
[30]
National Research Strategy on Dementia 2025. 1st ed. Danish Health Authority,
2018.
[31]
PACE - Pro-Active Care for Elderly with dementia. URL: https://pace.compute.dtu.
dk/.
[32]
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5. 5th ed. American
Psychiatric Association, 2013.
[33]
Nancy Cloak and Yasir Al Khalili. “Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms in De-
mentia”. In: StatPearls Publishing, 2023.
[34]
Roger E. Kelley and Alireza Minagar. “Memory complaints and dementia”. In: Pri-
mary Care: Clinics in Office Practice 31.1 (2004), pp. 129–148. DOI: 10.1016/S0095-
4543(03)00120-9.
[35]
Gabriele Cipriani et al. “Wandering and dementia: Wandering”. In: Psychogeriatrics
14.2 (2014), pp. 135–142. DOI: 10.1111/psyg.12044.
[36]
Gemma Di Federico et al. “Linac: A Smart Environment Simulator of Human Activ-
ities”. In: Process Mining Workshops. Vol. 433. Springer International Publishing,
2022, pp. 60–72. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-98581-3_5.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
56
==PAGE:64==
[37]
Erik Ravn Nikolajsen and Mamuna Azam. “A platform to simulate agent interac-
tions with IoT devices to facilitate process mining algorithm research”. BSc Thesis.
Technical University of Denmark, 2021.
[38]
Linac - Smart Environment Simulator. URL: http://linac.compute.dtu.dk/.
[39]
Wolfgang Reisig. Understanding Petri Nets: Modeling Techniques, Analysis Meth-
ods, Case Studies. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013. DOI: 10.1007/978- 3- 642-
33278-4.
[40]
Wil van der Aalst. “The application of Petri nets to workflow management”. In: Jour-
nal of Circuits, Systems and Computers 8.1 (1998), pp. 21–66. DOI: 10 . 1142 /
S0218126698000043.
[41]
Kendall Maurice George. “A new measure of rank correlation”. In: Biometrika 30.1-2
(1938), pp. 81–93. DOI: 10.1093/biomet/30.1-2.81.
[42]
C. Spearman. “The Proof and Measurement of Association between Two Things”.
In: The American Journal of Psychology 15.1 (1904), pp. 72–101. DOI: 10.2307/
1412159.
[43]
Christophe Croux and Catherine Dehon. “Influence functions of the Spearman and
Kendall correlation measures”. In: Statistical Methods and Applications 19.4 (2010),
pp. 497–515. DOI: 10.1007/s10260-010-0142-z.
[44]
The TINA toolbox Home Page - TIme petri Net Analyzer - by LAAS/CNRS. URL:
https://projects.laas.fr/tina/index.php.
[45]
L. M. Hillah et al. “A primer on the Petri Net Markup Language and ISO/IEC 15909-
2”. In: Petri Net Newsletter 76 (2009), pp. 9–28.
[46]
PNML reference site. URL: https://www.pnml.org/.
[47]
International Organization for Standardization. ISO 12345:2023 - Systems and soft-
ware engineering - High-level Petri nets - Part 2: Transfer formats. 2011.
[48]
Andreas Eckleder and Thomas Freytag. “WoPeD - A tool for teaching, analyzing
and visualizing workflow nets”. In: Petri Net Newsletter 75 (2008), pp. 3–8.
[49]
WoPeD (Workflow Petri Net Designer). URL: https://woped.dhbw-karlsruhe.de/.
[50]
Linac frontend GitHub repository. 2021. URL: https://github.com/DTU-SPE/linac-
frontend.
[51]
Linac backend GitHub repository. 2021. URL: https://github.com/DTU-SPE/linac-
backend.
[52]
Praktisk information om Ørestad Plejecenter. Danish. URL: https://boligertilaeldre.
kk.dk/plejehjem/find-plejehjem/oerestad-plejecenter/praktisk-information.
[53]
Jorge Cardoso. “Control-flow Complexity Measurement of Processes and Weyuker’s
Properties”. In: vol. 8. 2005, pp. 213–218. ISBN: 975-98458-7-3.
[54]
Kristian Bisgaard Lassen and Wil van der Aalst. “Complexity metrics for Workflow
nets”. In: Information and Software Technology 51.3 (2009), pp. 610–626. DOI: 10.
1016/j.infsof.2008.08.005.
[55]
Maileen Gloriane Ulep, Simrit Kaur Saraon, and Samantha McLea. “Alzheimer Dis-
ease”. In: Journal for Nurse Practitioners 14.3 (2018), pp. 129–135. DOI: 10.1016/
j.nurpra.2017.10.014.
[56]
Gemma Di Federico. EnrichedCC. 2022. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.6631366.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
57
==PAGE:65==
A
Instructions for Running the Validation
Framework Pipeline
The software tools that compose the pipeline have been collected in the GitHub repository:
https://github.com/ErikNikolajsen/a-framework-for-behavioral-process-mining.
The individual tools are run on a Windows machine as follows.
A.1
TINA
1. Open the NetDraw editor found in \tina-3.7.5\bin\nd.exe
2. Model your routine model.
3. Export as PNML via File > export > net to pnml.
4. Save the PNML file to the root directory of the supplied repository.
A.2
WoPeD
Optional - How to ensure that a modeled routine is a sound workflow net via WoPeD.
1. Install the program via \WoPeD\WoPeD-install-windows-3.8.0.exe
2. Run WoPeD.
3. Open the routine model via File > Open.
4. Analyze via Analyze > Semantical analysis.
5. See results in right-hand sidebar under Wizard and Expert.
A.3
Linac Frontend
1. Have Node.js installed - it has been confirmed to work with version 14.16.0.
2. Open a CLI in with the current working directory being \linac-frontend\
3. Install project dependencies via:
npm install
4. Run the project via:
npm run serve
5. Open a web browser and go to:
http://localhost:8081/
6. Design a floorplan.
7. Download the floorplan to the root directory of the supplied repository.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
58
==PAGE:66==
A.4
Agent Instructions Generator
Optional - Instructions for how to run the Agent Instructions Generator as a CLI application
separately from SimCoor.
1. Have Python installed - it has been confirmed to work with version 3.11.0.
2. Open a CLI in with the current working directory being the root of the supplied repos-
itory.
3. To see the interface options type:
python -m agent_instructions_generator.aig --help
4. An example of a command could be:
python -m agent_instructions_generator.aig
routine_model.pnml
--output aig-output.json
--degree 0.5
--iterations 1
--seed 2803371398
--mode normal
--symptoms repetitiveness forgetfulness
5. The resulting output file should be located in the current working directory.
A.5
Linac Backend
Optional - Instructions for how to run the Linac backend separately from SimCoor.
1. Have Java installed - it has been confirmed to work with version 17.0.10.
2. Have Apache Maven installed - it has been confirmed to work with version 3.9.6.
3. Open a CLI in with the current working directory being \linac-backend\
4. Compile the application via:
mvn compile
5. Execute the Java class via:
mvn exec:java
6. Start the application via the command:
mvn spring-boot:run
7. Open another CLI in with the current working directory being
\linac-backend\python-client\
8. Place your input files here with the filenames being:
floorplan.json
input.json
simulator.json
9. Run the simulation via:
python client.py
10. The resulting CSV file is located in \linac-backend\.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
59
==PAGE:67==
A.6
SimCoor
1. Start the Linac backend.
(a) Have Java installed - it has been confirmed to work with version 17.0.10.
(b) Have Apache Maven installed - it has been confirmed to work with version
3.9.6.
(c) Open a CLI in with the current working directory being \linac-backend\
(d) Compile the application via:
mvn compile
(e) Execute the Java class via:
mvn exec:java
(f) Start the application via the command:
mvn spring-boot:run
2. Run SimCoor.
(a) Have Python installed - it has been confirmed to work with version 3.11.0.
(b) Have the pm4py package installed via:
pip install pm4py
(c) Open a CLI in with the current working directory being the root of the supplied
repository.
(d) Open the file simcoor.py and edit it to specify what simulations should be run.
(e) Run the simulations via:
python simcoor.py
(f) The resulting XES files should appear in the current working directory.
A.7
Coral
1. Have Python installed - it has been confirmed to work with version 3.11.0.
2. Open a CLI in with the current working directory being the root of the supplied repos-
itory.
3. To see the positional arguments type:
python coral.py --help
4. An example of a command could be:
python coral.py coral-data.csv 0 38 0 6
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
60
==PAGE:68==
B
Experimental Data
B.1
Modeled Floorplan with Details
shower
toilet
Agent1
bathroom
bathroomFaucet
cabinet
bedroom
bedroomDrawers
bed
window1
closet2
closet2
kitchenDrawers
kitchen
kitchenTable
kitchenChair3
refrigerator
kitchenChair2
kitchenChair1
hob
kitchenFaucet
livingroom
livingRoomChair
sofa
livingRoomTable
television
window2
terrace
terraceChair1
terraceTable
terraceChair2
Figure B.1: The modeled floorplan of Figure 6.2b with added information about inter-
actable objects, areas, and agents.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
61
==PAGE:69==
B.2
Modeled Asymptomatic Routine Model
p27
start
sleep
interact(bed,activate)
[30, 300]
p7
t6
goto(bathroom)
p3
p5
p1
t45
interact(cabinet,activate)
[5, 30]
t1
interact(toilet,activate)
[60, 300]
t0
interact(shower,activate)
[180, 420]
p31
t46
interact(bathroomFaucet,activate)
[120, 300]
p32
t47
interact(cabinet,activate)
[5, 30]
p4
t5
goto(bedroom)
p6
p10
p19
t23
interact(bedroomDrawers,activate)
[60, 120]
p20
p18
t27
interact(closet2,activate)
[60, 120]
p22
t26
interact(closet1,activate)
[60, 180]
p21
t28
goto(kitchen)
p14
p8
t13
interact(kitchenDrawers,activate)
[20, 80]
t7
interact(kitchenDrawers,activate)
[20, 80]
t17
interact(kitchenDrawers,activate)
[20, 80]
p11
p9
t14
interact(refrigerator,activate)
[30, 360]
t10
interact(refrigerator,activate)
[30, 360]
p12
t15
interact(hob,activate)[120, 600]
p13
p15
t18
interact(kitchenFaucet,activate)
[5, 60]
t11
interact(kitchenTable,activate)[10, 120]
p16
p23
t22
interact(kitchenChair2,activate)[60, 600]
t20
interact(kitchenChair1,activate)[60, 600]
t21
interact(kitchenChair3,activate)[60, 600]
p24
t37
goto(terrace)
t36
goto(livingroom)
p28
t33
interact(livingRoomTable,activate) [10, 60]
t29
interact(television,activate)[10, 120]
p26
p25
t32
interact(sofa,activate)[300, 900]
t30
interact(livingRoomChair,activate)[300, 900]
t35
interact(sofa,activate)[300, 900]
t34
interact(livingRoomChair,activate)[300, 900]
p29
t41
interact(terraceChair1,activate)[120, 600]
t42
goto(terrace)
t40
interact(terraceChair2,activate)[120, 600]
t43
goto(8,0)
end
Figure B.2: An expanded version of the morning routine of Figure 6.3.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
62
==PAGE:70==
B.3
Discovered Asymptomatic Routine Models
Figure B.3: A Petri net discovered using the heuristics miner. Expanded version of Figure
6.4a.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
63
==PAGE:71==
Figure B.4: A Petri net discovered using the inductive miner. Expanded version of Figure
6.4b.
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
64
==PAGE:72==
B.4
Computed Fitness Values
Table B.1: The degree and fitness values of Figure 6.5 concerning forgetfulness.
Degree
Heur
Indu
Freq
Dura
Time
Aggr
0.000
0.942104
1.000000
0.853020
0.766579
0.612058
0.834752
0.029
0.934726
0.990066
0.840749
0.763246
0.576562
0.821070
0.057
0.926612
0.973036
0.837160
0.778017
0.570526
0.817070
0.086
0.916606
0.968844
0.828456
0.775658
0.566928
0.811299
0.114
0.917871
0.959142
0.824357
0.771627
0.528849
0.800369
0.143
0.901622
0.943820
0.811662
0.784710
0.532624
0.794888
0.171
0.899725
0.937570
0.809005
0.774692
0.522573
0.788713
0.200
0.889233
0.934575
0.804182
0.774905
0.510316
0.782642
0.229
0.884035
0.923107
0.804095
0.773982
0.487106
0.774465
0.257
0.889525
0.918325
0.793536
0.778285
0.493035
0.774541
0.286
0.872390
0.900541
0.781908
0.774588
0.439424
0.753770
0.314
0.866790
0.890112
0.767230
0.781078
0.442975
0.749637
0.343
0.876422
0.894403
0.776928
0.780987
0.455113
0.756770
0.371
0.853716
0.876964
0.764644
0.779343
0.413704
0.737674
0.400
0.842424
0.854620
0.751485
0.782930
0.351924
0.716677
0.429
0.836976
0.854143
0.744038
0.773361
0.369102
0.715524
0.457
0.829453
0.832271
0.740758
0.786045
0.343653
0.706436
0.486
0.820742
0.822851
0.734355
0.784470
0.327346
0.697953
0.514
0.815127
0.824799
0.732698
0.773008
0.362553
0.701637
0.543
0.802630
0.809308
0.709369
0.780349
0.353015
0.690934
0.571
0.802959
0.794630
0.711757
0.776911
0.353277
0.687907
0.600
0.802530
0.806288
0.711524
0.786817
0.302175
0.681867
0.629
0.789648
0.775235
0.691848
0.786102
0.260001
0.660567
0.657
0.779439
0.762435
0.695238
0.789064
0.265785
0.658392
0.686
0.784438
0.776942
0.688492
0.798654
0.233272
0.656360
0.714
0.763436
0.753607
0.685300
0.794306
0.235022
0.646334
0.743
0.749812
0.747376
0.668924
0.813474
0.192887
0.634494
0.771
0.742544
0.724389
0.658609
0.809923
0.218923
0.630878
0.800
0.750243
0.730190
0.663337
0.798900
0.200039
0.628542
0.829
0.742381
0.717543
0.669593
0.790803
0.217464
0.627557
0.857
0.732246
0.698134
0.650074
0.808681
0.178555
0.613538
0.886
0.714476
0.680696
0.638711
0.824707
0.167221
0.605162
0.914
0.716206
0.675276
0.632758
0.823681
0.138379
0.597260
0.943
0.708159
0.647693
0.622730
0.825897
0.155901
0.592076
0.971
0.701139
0.665781
0.611322
0.836593
0.137401
0.590447
1.000
0.693574
0.656419
0.611740
0.824098
0.140025
0.585171
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
65
==PAGE:73==
Table B.2: The degree and fitness values of Figure 6.6 concerning repetitiveness.
Degree
Heur
Indu
Freq
Dura
Time
Aggr
0.000
0.941806
1.00000
0.853015
0.764032
0.616889
0.835148
0.029
0.935372
0.995465
0.845890
0.763613
0.566518
0.821372
0.057
0.922568
0.985023
0.836400
0.728246
0.532570
0.800961
0.086
0.915338
0.980519
0.828039
0.739620
0.553023
0.803308
0.114
0.903258
0.971803
0.824086
0.726718
0.497731
0.784719
0.143
0.900982
0.969330
0.814823
0.702921
0.470724
0.771756
0.171
0.889253
0.958464
0.802239
0.707220
0.428673
0.757170
0.200
0.893147
0.958597
0.798590
0.709078
0.464540
0.764790
0.229
0.873720
0.946860
0.789740
0.694092
0.423447
0.745572
0.257
0.874703
0.948256
0.785925
0.671746
0.377864
0.731699
0.286
0.862619
0.938611
0.780145
0.690210
0.359668
0.726251
0.314
0.856520
0.935156
0.767374
0.686412
0.366419
0.722376
0.343
0.850225
0.927136
0.759843
0.670624
0.350586
0.711683
0.371
0.844275
0.926460
0.757086
0.686060
0.323996
0.707575
0.400
0.831451
0.916454
0.746248
0.658553
0.301397
0.690821
0.429
0.840892
0.921175
0.745638
0.672933
0.302447
0.696617
0.457
0.825178
0.899215
0.727055
0.664466
0.279300
0.679043
0.486
0.825586
0.910940
0.726695
0.673600
0.287847
0.684934
0.514
0.806608
0.893358
0.706787
0.642694
0.256522
0.661194
0.543
0.808079
0.895837
0.704760
0.651163
0.240922
0.660152
0.571
0.797162
0.883461
0.698206
0.643530
0.219759
0.648424
0.600
0.796432
0.882751
0.689876
0.641867
0.216066
0.645398
0.629
0.800324
0.881273
0.684758
0.648001
0.237200
0.650311
0.657
0.798364
0.881521
0.685495
0.661168
0.232404
0.651790
0.686
0.794429
0.880166
0.659308
0.642007
0.218410
0.638864
0.714
0.790725
0.880265
0.665554
0.637075
0.203446
0.635413
0.743
0.777591
0.867870
0.661059
0.618432
0.190775
0.623145
0.771
0.791395
0.877505
0.661309
0.639972
0.214010
0.636838
0.800
0.783249
0.865093
0.640154
0.641496
0.203206
0.626639
0.829
0.775968
0.861959
0.644663
0.634190
0.179267
0.619210
0.857
0.776402
0.858511
0.636153
0.641785
0.194050
0.621380
0.886
0.773166
0.856897
0.627570
0.637857
0.183303
0.615759
0.914
0.761769
0.848855
0.607251
0.601318
0.181113
0.600061
0.943
0.755805
0.849707
0.614043
0.604065
0.195002
0.603724
0.971
0.767730
0.853820
0.605006
0.632133
0.182914
0.608321
1.000
0.759744
0.844456
0.594462
0.609502
0.169946
0.595622
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
66
==PAGE:74==
Table B.3: The degree and fitness values of Figure 6.7 concerning wandering.
Degree
Heur
Indu
Freq
Dura
Time
Aggr
0.000
0.942651
1.000000
0.854169
0.77736
0.589169
0.832670
0.029
0.929128
0.988087
0.839578
0.749185
0.565373
0.814270
0.057
0.917893
0.977686
0.824579
0.743453
0.526561
0.798034
0.086
0.904423
0.962491
0.807844
0.729998
0.519672
0.784886
0.114
0.885037
0.950293
0.793881
0.742215
0.516946
0.777675
0.143
0.871455
0.939887
0.775864
0.728831
0.508760
0.764959
0.171
0.869128
0.937871
0.773661
0.723084
0.493845
0.759518
0.200
0.857841
0.928152
0.767810
0.732235
0.501719
0.757551
0.229
0.858535
0.927228
0.769132
0.740212
0.538722
0.766766
0.257
0.839887
0.910811
0.760054
0.730153
0.512294
0.750640
0.286
0.838650
0.910846
0.753863
0.721264
0.499968
0.744918
0.314
0.822634
0.896844
0.751233
0.742510
0.506255
0.743895
0.343
0.811932
0.888924
0.741300
0.738009
0.508524
0.737738
0.371
0.801808
0.884157
0.736896
0.734048
0.472441
0.725870
0.400
0.798946
0.879499
0.734613
0.744931
0.476843
0.726966
0.429
0.783888
0.867939
0.733165
0.737421
0.496031
0.723689
0.457
0.770896
0.858230
0.726459
0.747722
0.474589
0.715579
0.486
0.761979
0.849491
0.719167
0.744703
0.494747
0.714018
0.514
0.761982
0.850936
0.724163
0.742238
0.443584
0.704581
0.543
0.752190
0.841934
0.721787
0.742547
0.486977
0.709087
0.571
0.751211
0.846049
0.722717
0.744215
0.466562
0.706151
0.600
0.737021
0.831798
0.716008
0.720773
0.497821
0.700684
0.629
0.737143
0.834485
0.717467
0.741778
0.476408
0.701456
0.657
0.726550
0.825604
0.713325
0.734689
0.465160
0.693066
0.686
0.727518
0.828893
0.711793
0.731889
0.492768
0.698572
0.714
0.715979
0.817936
0.710267
0.725900
0.495920
0.693201
0.743
0.712723
0.816321
0.712049
0.736784
0.449319
0.685439
0.771
0.701236
0.814680
0.712445
0.749233
0.468852
0.689289
0.800
0.693325
0.800592
0.711488
0.737498
0.466926
0.681966
0.829
0.685859
0.799035
0.707505
0.733301
0.453363
0.675813
0.857
0.687708
0.803496
0.709993
0.741242
0.466469
0.681781
0.886
0.675497
0.798057
0.704292
0.739462
0.457917
0.675045
0.914
0.682595
0.797709
0.707307
0.738692
0.457288
0.676718
0.943
0.681338
0.795766
0.708428
0.735903
0.430158
0.670319
0.971
0.664839
0.789454
0.709789
0.756479
0.450413
0.674195
1.000
0.661980
0.787313
0.705148
0.735776
0.443405
0.666724
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
67
==PAGE:75==
Table B.4: The degree and fitness values of Figure 6.8 concerning slowness.
Degree
Heur
Indu
Freq
Dura
Time
Aggr
0.000
0.953864
1.000000
0.855778
0.784173
0.591448
0.837053
0.029
0.954621
1.000000
0.853624
0.756698
0.446134
0.802215
0.057
0.953684
1.000000
0.852350
0.713113
0.352485
0.774326
0.086
0.954471
1.000000
0.854170
0.721316
0.344916
0.774975
0.114
0.953146
1.000000
0.853724
0.683202
0.283745
0.754763
0.143
0.954725
1.000000
0.854587
0.676305
0.268739
0.750871
0.171
0.954142
1.000000
0.858248
0.668226
0.235852
0.743293
0.200
0.954024
1.000000
0.855745
0.641024
0.200103
0.730179
0.229
0.954524
1.000000
0.854489
0.619066
0.188743
0.723364
0.257
0.953296
1.000000
0.855885
0.609015
0.180143
0.719668
0.286
0.953493
1.000000
0.854929
0.574084
0.169555
0.710412
0.314
0.952236
1.000000
0.855453
0.568213
0.170400
0.709260
0.343
0.955241
1.000000
0.857920
0.570975
0.163708
0.709569
0.371
0.954428
1.000000
0.856236
0.568487
0.176945
0.711219
0.400
0.954749
1.000000
0.854246
0.519146
0.194478
0.704524
0.429
0.953158
1.000000
0.851016
0.533775
0.176463
0.702882
0.457
0.955537
1.000000
0.857543
0.527354
0.159586
0.700004
0.486
0.951194
1.000000
0.854737
0.496595
0.167592
0.694024
0.514
0.952086
1.000000
0.856357
0.458768
0.167834
0.687009
0.543
0.953576
1.000000
0.858545
0.480410
0.162632
0.691033
0.571
0.951828
1.000000
0.856646
0.461704
0.178271
0.689690
0.600
0.952068
1.000000
0.855100
0.443493
0.188978
0.687928
0.629
0.953963
1.000000
0.854265
0.446079
0.185357
0.687933
0.657
0.952723
1.000000
0.855337
0.420205
0.190875
0.683828
0.686
0.954332
1.000000
0.855231
0.429064
0.192056
0.686137
0.714
0.953183
1.000000
0.857435
0.409523
0.194160
0.682860
0.743
0.952500
1.000000
0.857178
0.398326
0.194379
0.680476
0.771
0.953014
1.000000
0.858175
0.418895
0.176389
0.681295
0.800
0.954233
1.000000
0.852678
0.382213
0.174209
0.672667
0.829
0.953746
1.000000
0.853328
0.386707
0.187978
0.676352
0.857
0.955139
1.000000
0.856325
0.357033
0.188721
0.671444
0.886
0.953621
1.000000
0.856233
0.347136
0.185320
0.668462
0.914
0.952072
1.000000
0.855432
0.355463
0.190057
0.670605
0.943
0.952585
1.000000
0.858376
0.350986
0.173349
0.667059
0.971
0.953495
1.000000
0.856890
0.326705
0.186076
0.664633
1.000
0.952828
1.000000
0.858162
0.315670
0.172561
0.659844
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
68
==PAGE:76==
Table B.5: The degree and fitness values of Figure 6.8 concerning dementia.
Degree
Heur
Indu
Freq
Dura
Time
Aggr
0.000
0.965768
1.000000
0.855784
0.775037
0.609208
0.841159
0.029
0.933125
0.968757
0.816877
0.722869
0.435204
0.775367
0.057
0.899569
0.936290
0.786575
0.683928
0.381856
0.737644
0.086
0.875891
0.920884
0.765759
0.652129
0.308983
0.704729
0.114
0.858606
0.894925
0.744175
0.631057
0.286095
0.682972
0.143
0.834797
0.878711
0.717056
0.632493
0.255619
0.663735
0.171
0.819665
0.851885
0.700925
0.590103
0.244344
0.641384
0.200
0.808019
0.851494
0.681115
0.572886
0.230394
0.628782
0.229
0.785016
0.823044
0.661692
0.556551
0.246838
0.614628
0.257
0.765928
0.807583
0.640235
0.564722
0.227725
0.601239
0.286
0.742250
0.788776
0.623010
0.516592
0.206598
0.575445
0.314
0.742850
0.788244
0.625089
0.519424
0.215252
0.578172
0.343
0.732706
0.769594
0.589895
0.512272
0.214238
0.563741
0.371
0.708782
0.755108
0.580328
0.486647
0.201087
0.546390
0.400
0.703913
0.744976
0.570923
0.478363
0.204418
0.540518
0.429
0.684242
0.715760
0.554451
0.454675
0.193116
0.520449
0.457
0.677687
0.722371
0.541810
0.454131
0.196957
0.518591
0.486
0.673764
0.726386
0.541630
0.455801
0.202256
0.519967
0.514
0.651249
0.699364
0.527617
0.424989
0.179636
0.496571
0.543
0.644901
0.689666
0.511417
0.421218
0.190590
0.491559
0.571
0.639087
0.688946
0.506523
0.399478
0.184572
0.483721
0.600
0.625738
0.676996
0.481916
0.406511
0.195112
0.477255
0.629
0.627341
0.678390
0.478677
0.394485
0.181619
0.472102
0.657
0.621035
0.668256
0.475254
0.378511
0.183171
0.465246
0.686
0.610742
0.666706
0.467402
0.376061
0.194989
0.463180
0.714
0.610027
0.665780
0.472206
0.375760
0.188245
0.462404
0.743
0.600760
0.663624
0.446092
0.354479
0.166284
0.446248
0.771
0.596343
0.664828
0.433677
0.347467
0.183803
0.445223
0.800
0.601826
0.657004
0.435264
0.319884
0.176315
0.438058
0.829
0.582985
0.646630
0.424593
0.334070
0.178147
0.433285
0.857
0.579888
0.646782
0.410096
0.302455
0.170095
0.421863
0.886
0.563117
0.631626
0.413140
0.328674
0.162883
0.419888
0.914
0.567636
0.645858
0.412966
0.308471
0.169057
0.420798
0.943
0.542656
0.612659
0.395791
0.295804
0.167698
0.402922
0.971
0.536979
0.606000
0.387706
0.313516
0.170746
0.402989
1.000
0.541108
0.619216
0.384955
0.274989
0.174493
0.398953
A Framework for Behavioral Process Mining
69
==PAGE:77==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Richard Petersens Plads, Building 324
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
www.compute.dtu.dk
