==PAGE:1==
Medial Axis-based
Geometry Processing
Camila Celes
Advisor: J. Andreas Bærentzen
Kongens Lyngby 2024
==PAGE:2==
Technical University of Denmark
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science
Richard Petersens Plads, building 324,
2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
Phone +45 4525 3031
compute@compute.dtu.dk
www.compute.dtu.dk
==PAGE:3==
Abstract
This project investigates the viability of performing geometry processing based
on the Medial Axis Transform (MAT). The MAT offers a compact and invertible
representation of a 3D object’s shape, making it highly advantageous for various
geometry processing applications. We present a generic pipeline that allows the
MAT to be freely transformed, and accurately maps these transformations back
onto the original object.
We explore the implementation and effectiveness of the developed pipeline across
different algorithms to ensure its robustness and adaptability. Two specific ap-
plications – digital reconstruction of deformed cultural artefacts and smoothing
of 3D meshes – are explored to demonstrate the potential of this approach. For
digital reconstruction, we use the MAT to digitally unfold cultural artefacts
that were originally flat but were crumbled, preserving intricate details and en-
gravings.
For mesh smoothing, we leverage the MAT to remove noise while
preserving small geometric features, thus overcoming common challenges such
as volume shrinkage and feature degradation.
The results illustrate that MAT-based processing can be effectively applied in
different geometry manipulation tasks. This project develops a generic frame-
work for MAT-based geometry manipulation, highlighting its practical benefits,
paving the way for future advancements and applications in the area.
==PAGE:4==
ii
==PAGE:5==
Contents
Abstract
i
1
Motivation
1
2
Goals
3
3
Background
5
3.1
Medial Axis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.1
Definitions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
3.1.2
Challenges and opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Smoothing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3
Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3.1
Removing high-frequency signal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3.3.2
Mean curvature flow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Related Work
11
5
Method
15
5.1
MAT computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.1.1
Deep Points Consolidation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
5.1.2
Q-MAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.1.3
Coverage Axis
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5.2
MAT extension . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
5.2.1
Computing preliminary correspondences . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2.2
Computing the medial projections
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.3
Geometric Reconfiguration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.1
Coordinate frames computation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.2
Transformation mapping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
5.4
Radius Function Tuning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.5
Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.5.1
Posing: rolling curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.5.2
Unfolding a crumbled object
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.5.3
Encoding surface details . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
5.5.4
Smoothing
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
==PAGE:6==
iv
CONTENTS
6
Results & Discussions
33
6.1
MAT methods
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
6.2
Posing: rolling curves
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
37
6.3
Reconstructing deformed cultural artefacts . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
6.4
Smoothing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
7
Conclusion & Future work
57
Bibliography
59
==PAGE:7==
Chapter 1
Motivation
The Medial Axis Transform (MAT) [Blu67] of a closed 3D object creates a
simplified representation of the object’s shape by identifying its central struc-
ture. Importantly, the MAT is a full shape descriptor and is therefore invertible,
meaning the object can be reconstructed given its MAT. Moreover, unlike the
3D shape itself, the MAT is compact and 2-dimensional, capturing the object’s
overall geometry and topology.
Therefore, it can be advantageous to perform some types of geometry processing
on the MAT rather than directly on the mesh. And, due to its invertibility, the
transformations can be mapped back onto the shape. However, the MAT is
very unstable and sensitive to small features and noise, which makes computing
a robust MAT a challenging task.
While finding robust MAT algorithms is an active research topic, to the best
of our knowledge, it has not yet been deeply explored how geometry processing
can be performed based on it. Nevertheless, its compact and invertible charac-
teristics make it appropriate for the task. In particular, two applications stand
out as being well-suited to be performed on the MAT rather than the 3D shape:
reconstruction of cultural artefacts that have been deformed without breaking,
and smoothing.
==PAGE:8==
2
Motivation
Reconstruction of deformed cultural artefacts
The Vindelev Treasure, discovered in East Jutland, Denmark, includes a collec-
tion of gold bracteates dating back to the 5th century [Veg23]. These medallion-
like necklaces are of significant historical value but are bent, which means some
engravings on the objects are not visible.
Manual unfolding is too risky, as
it could damage the articles, so a digital approach is preferred to reveal the
occluded details.
The objects have been digitalized via CT scans, but the metal material and
folded geometry pose a challenge in a obtaining a good 3D digital model for
them. Particularly, thin areas of the object appear as holes, and tight folds
makes surfaces merge together.
However, it is possible to compute a robust MAT that compactly represents
the bracteates’ simple, folded disc-like geometry, and encode sufficient informa-
tion into it to digitally reconstruct the object’s details. Moreover, unfolding
the crumbled 3D objects becomes a trivial task when we drop the dimension
down to two. Unfolding the 3D shape directly would probably require physical
simulations, which are hard to define and computationally costly. On the other
hand, the target geometry for the 2D MAT is straightforward – a flat disc, which
is simple to compute from the crumbled skeletal representation.
Thus, processing the MAT rather than the 3D object is an ideal approach for
digitally reconstructing and unfolding these cultural artefacts.
Smoothing
Smoothing 3D meshes is a fundamental process in computer graphics, aimed at
eliminating noise from digital models while preserving essential geometric fea-
tures. Despite its significance, existing smoothing techniques often face a series
of inherent challenges, such as preservation of sharp features and prevention of
volume shrinkage. Moreover, one of the most persistent issues is the lack of a
clear stopping criterion, which can result in over-smoothing and loss of critical
features or under-smoothing and retention of unwanted noise.
However, given a robust MAT of the object that captures its geometry and fine
details without surface noise, the smoothing task becomes more manageable.
Not only does the MAT provide an intrinsic stopping criterion by lying in the
centre of the object, but also ensures that the smoothing process aligns with the
main shape and structure of the mesh.
==PAGE:9==
Chapter 2
Goals
The primary aim of this project is to explore the viability of processing objects
based on the Medial Axis Transform (MAT) by developing a generic pipeline
for this purpose. By leveraging the MAT’s compact and invertible properties,
the project seeks to establish a robust framework that can be applied to various
geometry processing tasks. This pipeline consists of computing a highly regu-
larised MAT that captures the objects overall geometry while being robust to
noise. Then, the MAT is processed according to the desired outcome, and we
invert the transformations to achieve them in the original object.
Building upon the generic MAT processing pipeline, the second goal is to apply
it to digitally reconstruct and unfold bractates from the Vindelev Treasure.
This involves computing a simple MAT that represents its crumbled disc-like
geometry, encoding the engravings onto this representation, and unfolding it so
we obtain a flat, detailed 3D model for the cultural artefacts.
The final goal is to demonstrate a proof of concept for the application of the MAT
processing pipeline to the task of smoothing 3D meshes. We aim to propose a
feature-preserving smoothing method by using the the MAT’s centrality and
alignment with the object’s geometry to guide the process.
By achieving these goals, the project aims to demonstrate the practical bene-
fits and applications of MAT-based geometry processing. The development of
a generic MAT processing pipeline, combined with its application to cultural
==PAGE:10==
4
Goals
artefact reconstruction and mesh smoothing, will provide valuable insights and
tools for future developments in the area.
==PAGE:11==
Chapter 3
Background
3.1
Medial Axis
The concept of Medial Axis (MA) was first introduced by Blum [Blu67] in 2D
for biological shape analysis, and has since been extensively applied in computa-
tional geometry, due to it being compact yet powerful in capturing the shape’s
geometry.
In 3D, the medial axis follows many equivalent definitions, each giving an addi-
tional insights to the concept and associated challenges, which follows.
3.1.1
Definitions
3.1.1.1
Maximally inscribed balls
The original definition of the MA given by Blum is the locus centres of of
maximally inscribed balls, which is illustrated in Figure 3.1a. Therefore, the
medial axis M is the set of ball centres, and, when combined to their radii R,
we get the Medial Axis Transform (MAT) of the shape, MAT(S) = {M, R}.
Note that the definition only accounts for maximal balls, meaning M always
has dimensionality one below the surface. For a 3D shape, the medial axis M
==PAGE:12==
6
Background
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.1:
In (a), the MAT of the 2D shape S, along with examples of
maximally inscribed balls. Each ball has a centre m and associated radius r.
In (b), the balls in red are either not maximal or not inscribed, so their centres
are not included in M. In (c), the MAT of the 3D shape is a set of sheets and
curves.
is composed of sheets and curves (see Figure 3.1c).
The medial axis M, combined with the radius function R encapsulates both
the skeletal structure of the shape and a measure of local thickness, which fully
captures the shape’s geometry and topology. Therefore, the shape S can be
fully reconstructed from its MAT [TDS+16].
3.1.1.2
Grassfire analogy
Another definition given by Blum [Blu67] for the medial axis is the grassfire
analogy, which provides a more intuitive look on the concept. Given S, imagine
its interior is a field of grass, and we set fire to its boundary. The medial axis is
here defined as the set of points where the fire front meet and quench. Because
the fire fronts move at the same speed, it is intuitive to see that the quenching
points are equidistant to the surface S, and those distances compose the radius
function R to form the full MAT.
3.1.1.3
Maxwell set
Due to the quenching points being equidistant from S, one can think of the
medial axis as the Maxwell set [Mat83], i.e., M is the set of points with at least
two corresponding points on S that are equidistant, and these distances form
the radius function R. This definition also makes it intuitive to think of shape-
==PAGE:13==
3.1 Medial Axis
7
Figure 3.2:
Illustration of the
Maxwell set definition of the MAT.
Figure 3.3: Small perturbations to
S make spikes appear.
to-surface correspondences, since each point in M is defined by its connections
to at least two points in the surface S. In Figure 3.2, an illustration of the
Maxwell set definition is provided, along with the connection between medial
points m ∈M and surface points s ∈S. Importantly, note that the connections
follow the directions of the surface normals n.
Note that, for 3D meshes, this definition is closely related to the Voronoi diagram
(VD) of the shape. The VD of S partitions the space into regions where each
region consists of all points closer to a specific mesh vertex than to any other
vertex. The edges and vertices of these Voronoi cells are therefore equidistant
to the original mesh surface, aligning well with the medial axis [AB99].
All in all, these three definitions allow for different looks on the MAT, and serve
as a starting point for many MAT computation algorithms, which we elaborate
on in chapter 4.
3.1.2
Challenges and opportunities
In general, following the exact definition of the MAT is undesirable in geometry
processing [TDS+16]. It is very sensitive to noise and thus unstable. Even small
perturbations to S can yield significant differences in the MAT. As illustrated
in Figure 3.3, small modifications to the boundary make many branches appear
in the MA. These branches don’t offer much information about the shape’s ge-
ometry, while increasing the MA’s complexity. We refer to these noisy branches
as spikes.
We therefore rely on highly regularised and approximate versions of an object’s
==PAGE:14==
8
Background
MAT. In particular, we are interested in 3D meshes, so the medial axis is dis-
crete, and the medial sheets and curves are discretized to triangles (faces) and
edges. Due to this, we also refer to the medial axis as the medial mesh. By
linearly interpolating both the geometry and radius function along the edges
and faces of the medial mesh, we get a piece-wise approximation of the true
MAT [LWS+16a].
As discussed, a shape S can be fully reconstructed from its MAT, i.e., the MAT
is invertible. This means that, if we change the geometry of the medial mesh
M, this transformation can be mapped back onto the surface to also reconfigure
its geometry. Moreover, if we manipulate the radius function R, we can change
the local thickness of the surface, and either filter or encode additional details
on the surface. Thus, the MAT, by being a full shape descriptor, opens the
possibility of some geometry processing to be performed on it rather than the
surface itself, which is further facilitated by its compact structure.
3.2
Smoothing
Smoothing a 3D mesh is a desirable for many applications, but specially de-
noising acquired geometry. One can think of smoothing from two perspectives:
removing high-frequency signal and employing mean curvature flow. Each of
these originate different methods, and pose associated challenges, which we de-
scribe in the following section.
3.3
Definitions
3.3.1
Removing high-frequency signal
We can draw a parallel between smoothing and signal processing. One can think
of the vertex positions of a 3D mesh as a signal in an irregular grid [BGAA12].
We can then design low-pass filters to remove the noise from a 3D mesh by
simply averaging samples. This is what many smoothing methods try to achieve,
more notably the Laplacian operator (also known as the umbrella operator),
which simply repositions each mesh vertex to be in the average positions of its
neighbours, in effect attenuating all frequencies, except zero [BGAA12].
Although many improvements have been proposed to the Laplacian operator,
low-pass filter approaches to smoothing all face similar challenges. First, they
have a tangential component [Tau23], causing the mesh to deform, which is un-
==PAGE:15==
3.3 Definitions
9
desirable in many cases. It also shrinks the mesh since it attenuates frequencies,
and, in the asymptotical limit, the mesh collapses to its centroid [Tau23].
Therefore, low-pass filters are a good strategy to remove a small amount of
noise, but if over applied it can lead to strange results.
3.3.2
Mean curvature flow
Another perspective on mesh smoothing is the use of mean curvature flow, which
is grounded in differential geometry. The mean curvature flow moves each vertex
of the mesh in the direction of its normal, proportional to the mean curvature at
that point [Ros97]. This flow tends to regularise the shape by smoothing sharp
features and flattening out small bumps. A notable implementation of this for
3D meshes is the Laplacian-Beltrami Operator (LBO) [DMSB23], defined as the
divergence of the gradient, which, when applied to the vertex positions, yields
the mean curvature flow.
Note that the mean curvature flow does not have a tangential component, and
thus applying methods that rely on it smooths the shape without deforming the
mesh. However, this approach also faces challenges with over-smoothing, and,
in this case, in the limit, the mesh collapses to a ball [Gra87].
Both these outlooks on mesh smoothing provide valuable perspectives on the
topic, but they face a common challenge with a lack of stopping criterion. Ap-
plying too few iterations might not get rid of the noise, and too many cause the
mesh to collapse, thus not preserving its shape.
==PAGE:16==
10
Background
==PAGE:17==
Chapter 4
Related Work
MAT methods
The search for a stable and robust MAT algorithm is an active research topic.
Tagliasacchi et al. [TDS+16] provide a state-of-the-art report on many methods,
along with their challenges and comparisons. Many methods rely on pruning the
Voronoi diagram to remove the spikes and get a robust MAT representation. To
cite a few, angle-based filtering methods [ACK04, DZ04] use angle information
to prune the VD, but face challenges in maintaining the topology of the shape.
The λ-medial axis [CL05, CCT11] thresholds the distance between the object’s
complement and its critical points to remove spikes, but remove sharp features
in the process. More notably, Q-MAT [LWS+16a] extends the QEM framework
[GH23] for mesh decimation to simplify the VD, but can result in non-uniformly
distributed medial points.
Coverage Axis [DLX+21, WDX+24] aim to pre-select uniformly distributed me-
dial points by finding a minimal set of dilated inscribed balls that cover the
surface, then extending Q-MAT to collapse the VD until only those points are
left.
Other methods include numerical optimisation [HWCO+13, RAV+19] and meso-
skeleton approaches [TAOZ12]. More recently, deep learning approaches have
also been explores [YYW+20, LLL+21]. Also notably, Deep Points Consolida-
==PAGE:18==
12
Related Work
tion (DPC) [WHG+15a] robustly computes a meso-skeleton as an intermediate
goal for consolidation, and provides one-to-one mappings between surface points
and medial points.
In this project, we aim to provide a generic pipeline that can be used with
any MAT algorithm. However, we select three notable methods to explore as
our starting point: DPC [WHG+15a] due to its inherent surface-to-skeleton
mapping, Q-MAT [LWS+16a] due to its simplicity, and Coverage Axis [DLX+21]
for its uniformity and coverage of the surface.
Skeleton-based mesh deformation
Skeletons are widely used for mesh deformation and animation. Most approaches
rely on curve skeletons, more notably skinning [JDKL14] deforms the object
given transformations to its rigs (rigid bones). Approaches based on other skele-
ton types are also frequent [YBS03, ZBH07, YHM06]. MAT-based approaches
have been less explored, and usually rely on fully reconstructing the surface
through interpolating spheres [TGBE16, YYG18].
Although Blum himself proposed shape transformations by changing the medial
axis and maintaining the radius function constant [Blu73], surprisingly few mesh
deformation approaches have been proposed to follow this.
The method proposed by Yoshizawa et al.
in [YBS07] is the one that best
approximates our mesh deformation approach. It also allows for free-form de-
formation and preserves fine geometric details by embedding the full surface
onto the MAT. It proposes a more complete framework for animation, but it re-
lies on differential coordinates and is limited to MATs composed only of medial
sheets. Conversely, our pipeline proposes a simpler local coordinate approach,
and adds supports for medial curves.
Smoothing
3D mesh smoothing is a very extensive and ongoing area of research.
The
most well-established low-pass filter for 3D meshes is perhaps Taubin smoothing
[Tau23], and LBO is also widely used [DMSB23], but both face the challenges
described in section 3.2, and they do not distinguish noise from small features.
Other methods provide more careful look at fine details and sharp edges by
proposing feature-preserving smoothing, notably Jones et al. [JDD03].
However, few approaches have been proposed based on the mesh’s skeleton.
DPC [WHG+15a] achieves feature-preserving de-noising of unoriented point
==PAGE:19==
13
clouds, but struggles with sharp edges and has a tangential component. More
notably, Telea et al. [Tel12] propose feature-preserving smoothing of 2D binary
shapes by pruning its MA, and reconstructing the shape from the simplified me-
dial geometry. Schubert et al. [SJT20] extends this method to 3D, and, while
it is able to robustly remove noise while keeping sharp edges intact, it is limited
to binary volumes, and does not apply directly to 3D meshes.
Conversely, the method proposed in this project applies directly to the 3D mesh,
keeping its connectivity invariant, while preserving sharp features. Our method
also takes an already highly-regularised MAT as input, and thus does not rely on
pruning techniques for the smoothing. The MAT provides an intrinsic stopping
criterion by lying in the centre of the object and ensures that the smoothing
process aligns with the main shape and structure of the mesh. This allows our
method to be single-pass, hence providing a clear stopping criterion, which is a
big challenge among other smoothing methods.
Reconstruction of cultural artefacts
Digitally reconstructing and unfolding the articles in the Vindelev treasure has
met many challenges [Veg23]. Attempts to obtain a 3D digital model of the
bracteates have so far been conducted with traditional polygonization methods
such as iso-contouring [dALJ+15]. However, due to the varying thickness and
streak artefacts in the CT scan data [KHR+10], the resulting 3D mesh is noisy,
does not robustly capture the details in the engraving, and has very complex
topology, which does not reflect the geometry of the object.
Attempts so far to reveal occluded details have involved manually fitting a plane
to follow the bent geometry and sampling the volume data intensities to generate
2D images. However, these methods are labour-intensive and lack robustness.
The medial axis of the objects serves as an automatically fitted plane that
robustly follows the folds, thus allowing for automated unfolding, specifically
by using conformal maps. Conformal maps are functions that locally preserve
angles [Ahl10], which is crucial for preserving local geometry, and are often used
to parametrize regions.
For 3D meshes, completely preserving angles is not
possible, so we use an approximate method, namely Least Squares Conformal
Mapping (LSCM) [LPRM23]. When applied to a 2D sheet, such as the medial
axis, we can effectively unfold the surface onto a plane while maintaining its
angles and geometric properties, thereby revealing the engravings obscured by
the folds.
Our proposed pipeline therefore automates the solution for both digital recon-
struction and unfolding of the artefacts.
==PAGE:20==
14
Related Work
==PAGE:21==
Chapter 5
Method
In this chapter, we present our pipeline for processing a 3D shape using its
Medial Axis Transform (MAT). The pipeline consists of computing a highly
regularised MAT, manipulating it, and applying these transformations back to
the input shape.
We explore ways to manipulate both the geometry of the
medial mesh and the radius function to transform the input shape.
In order to map the transformations on the MAT back to the shape, it is crucial
to know how they relate. Specifically, it is important to know, for each point in
the surface, what point in the MAT corresponds to it. This way, as the MAT
changes, the transformations can be applied back onto the relevant geometry in
the surface.
The pipeline takes as input a 3D surface S with vertex positions {si}, where
i ∈{1, . . . , n}. In section 5.1, we first explore well-established, robust MAT
algorithms to obtain a medial mesh M.
To fit our pipeline, we extend the MAT representation to also contain correspon-
dences to the surface in section 5.2. Specifically, for each point in the surface si,
we define a medial projection pi that is contained in M. Therefore, our MAT
representation is updated to be MAT(S) = {M, R, P}, where P = {pi}.
Given the new MAT representation, in sections 5.3-5.4 we explore how we can
modify the shape by transforming the medial geometry and the radius function,
==PAGE:22==
16
Method
respectively.
Finally, in section 5.5, we explore possible applications of the
proposed pipeline.
5.1
MAT computation
The first step in our pipeline is to, given a shape S, compute a highly-regularised
medial mesh M, with medial point positions {mj}, edges ejk = {mj, mk} and
faces fjkl = {mj, mk, ml}, where j, k, l ∈{1, . . . , m}.
We do this through
existing MAT methods. Specifically, we explore three methods: Deep Points
Consolidation [WHG+15a], Q-MAT [LWS+16a] and Coverage Axis [DLX+21].
5.1.1
Deep Points Consolidation
The first method we explore for computing the MAT is Deep Points Consoli-
dation (DPC) [WHG+15a]. As the name suggests, the method originally was
developed for consolidation of 3D shapes from point clouds. However, it ro-
bustly finds a set of unstructured medial points as an intermediate goal. We
extend this method to obtain a medial mesh out of the computed medial points.
DPC obtains medial points by sinking the surface points si into the shape’s
interior along the direction opposite to their normals, until they meet, in a small
neighbourhood, a point with sufficiently different normal. In other words, until
each point meets an opposing front, thus following the grassfire analogy for the
definition of MAT. Then, the vertex positions are optimised to form sheet and
curve-like areas. This results in a set of n disconnected medial points mi. Note
that this also results in one-to-one correspondences between the surface vertex
and the medial point resulting from it, and these connections are in general well
aligned with the surface normals.
DPC itself takes many parameters as input, in particular, the sizes of the neigh-
bourhoods used to check for collision and optimisation of sheet and curve areas,
as well as the threshold angle used to check whether a point is coming from an
opposing front.
To extract a medial mesh M from the computed mi, we classify points as being
in a curve or a sheet in the target geometry, then create edges and faces to
interconnect them accordingly.
==PAGE:23==
5.1 MAT computation
17
5.1.1.1
Classifying medial points
For each medial point mi, we take a small ball neighbourhood Bi = {j | ∥mi −
mj∥< σ}, with σ set empirically. We run PCA on Bi to get the first eigenvalue
λi and corresponding eigenvector wi. We classify each medial point mi as being
in a sheet or curve-like area by simply thresholding λi. If it is close to one, we
classify it as a curve point; otherwise, it is a sheet point.
5.1.1.2
Connecting curve points
For mi classified as curve points, we project all other points mj ∈Bi onto
the principal direction. That is, we project mj −mi onto wi. We then select
the points with smallest projection length in the positive and negative direction,
mi+ and mi−respectively, and create the edges eii+ and eii−. This is illustrated
in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1: Illustration of how we connect curve points for DPC. For each mi
(red), we project neighbouring medial points (green) onto the principal direction
wi (blue). Then we select as mii+ and mii−and create the corresponding edges.
5.1.1.3
Connecting sheet points
Due to the alignment between the surface-to-medial correspondences and the
surface normals, sheet medial points resemble the input shape’s topology. Thus,
we can use the input mesh’s connectivity to interconnect the sheet medial points.
For a medial point mi classified as a sheet point, for every face fijk in the input
shape S, if mj and mk are also sheet points, we create the face fijk in the
medial mesh MS.
Note that this creates double-sided sheets in the medial geometry.We must there-
fore extract single sheets, by separating both sides, and discarding one. To do
that, we start with a random face in each sheet and traverse adjacent faces using
breadth-first search. A face fijk is included in the medial geometry MS only
if its dihedral angle with the current face is below a set threshold. Remaining
faces are discarded, along with the resulting unreferenced vertices.
In order to connect the obtained medial curves with the sheets, we simply take
the curve endpoints and connect it to the closest point in the computed medial
==PAGE:24==
18
Method
sheets. If the created edge is significantly bigger than the average edge length,
we assume that endpoint of the curve should not connect to the medial sheet,
and discard that edge.
The optimisation step in DPC to form sheet and curve-like areas has a tendency
to cluster medial points.
This results in faces with almost-zero area in our
extension of the method. Because this is often undesirable due to numerical
instabilities issues, we also remove these tiny faces as a post-processing step.
Note that about half of the sheet medial points are discarded in this process, thus
invalidating the one-to-one correspondences the original algorithm proposes.
However, note that the medial mesh outputted from this process is usually
dense. For example, take mi, the medial point originated from surface point si,
that was discarded in this process. We can safely assume there is a medial point
kept in the medial geometry, mj ∈M, that is close enough to mi, such that
the connection between surface and medial mesh continues to be well-aligned
with the normal. We further discuss the importance of these correspondences
in section 5.2.
5.1.2
Q-MAT
The next MAT algorithm we experiment with is Q-MAT [LWS+16a]. It works
by simplifying the Voronoi diagram (VD) of the shape S, thus following the
Maxwell set definition of the MAT. It works by extending the quadric error
metric (QEM) [GH23] framework for mesh decimation, such that the VD of the
shape is simplified to yield a simple but accurate medial representation.
Q-MAT takes as its only parameter m, the target number of vertices in the
medial geometry, and iteratively collapses edges in the VD until m vertices are
left. The output of Q-MAT is a highly regularised medial mesh M. Unlike
DPC, however, note that it has no intrinsic information about what vertices in
the medial mesh are corresponding to each surface vertex.
5.1.3
Coverage Axis
The last MAT method we explore is Coverage Axis (CA) [DLX+21]. It extends
the QEM framework further than Q-MAT by pre-selecting the points in the
Voronoi diagram that should be in the medial mesh M. It does so by defining
dilated balls around random points in the interior of the shape S, then selecting
as few balls as possible needed to cover all surface vertices si, formulated as a set
coverage problem. Then, it follows the same edge-collapse strategy as Q-MAT,
==PAGE:25==
5.2 MAT extension
19
but running it until only the medial points at the centre of the selected balls
are left.
This method takes as only input the dilation to the ball radii, δ. It also outputs
a highly regularised medial mesh M. Furthermore, it contains some informa-
tion about surface-to-medial-mesh correspondences. Specifically, we know what
surface points are covered by which dilated balls, so we can take the medial
point at the centre of those balls as being corresponding to the surface vertices.
However, note that each surface point can be covered by multiple balls.
5.2
MAT extension
We now describe how we extend the medial mesh input M computed in the
previous section to contain mappings to the surface S by computing the medial
projections pi. These projections are not confined to the discrete set of medial
points {mi}, and instead lie along edges or within faces of M. This allows for
a more continuous representation of the MAT, and thus smoother results.
Note that it is not enough to simply project each si onto the closest point in
the medial geometry (see figure 5.2). Instead, we need to ensure the mapping
direction is aligned with the normal of the surface at that vertex. To reduce
computational cost in computing these projections while making sure they agree
with the normal directions, we set an intermediate goal of finding preliminary
correspondences, which map each surface point to a medial point.
Figure 5.2: The surface point s is closer to the shape branch on the right (p2),
but it is actually corresponding to the branch on the left (p1).
==PAGE:26==
20
Method
5.2.1
Computing preliminary correspondences
We first aim to find correspondences between each surface vertex to a vertex in
the medial mesh, which we call preliminary correspondences, denoted c(si) =
mj. This is simpler to compute than the actual medial projection, since it is
restricted to the discrete (and often small) set of medial points. These work as
a guide to limit the search in the medial geometry for the medial projections pi,
and ensure that search is done in areas for which the projection will agree with
the surface normal directions.
As mentioned in section 5.1, some MAT algorithms inherently find mappings
between the surface vertices and the medial points. Specifically for the MAT
methods we explored, DPC and Coverage Axis contain these correspondences,
so in those cases, the computation presented in this section can be skipped.
However, to ensure generality of our pipeline to fit any MAT algorithm, we
propose a simple and intuitive way of finding those mappings, simply given the
surface vertex positions si and the medial points mi.
Inspired by the dilated balls approach of Coverage Axis [DLX+21, WDX+24],
we initially define medial radii rj as the closest distance of mj to the shape
surface,
rj = min
i∈I ∥mj −si∥
(5.1)
We then define a set of balls {Bj}, where Bj is a ball centred at mj with radius
rj. We consider a surface vertex si to be covered by Bj if ∥mj −si∥≤rj.
We iteratively increase the radii by a small factor δ, r′
j = rj + δ until all surface
vertices are covered by at least one ball. This results in each si potentially being
covered by multiple balls. We select the ball for which the connection si −mj
is best aligned with the surface normal ni,
c(si) = arg min
mj θij, where θij = arccos
 
(si −mi) · ni
∥si −mj∥
!
(5.2)
5.2.2
Computing the medial projections
The computed preliminary correspondences c(si) reduce the search space to
allow for more efficient computation of projections pi such that their connections
to the shape agree with the surface normals.
We now describe how this computation is done. For our pipeline, it is advan-
tageous to store the projections as parametrizations of the medial mesh M,
instead of simply 3D positions. This allows us to compute different values for
==PAGE:27==
5.2 MAT extension
21
the projections as linear interpolation of the values defined at the medial mesh
vertices.
Since the medial geometry is composed of both sheets and curves, the parametriza-
tion is different in those areas. We now describe how both the projections and
parametrizations are computed for these cases.
5.2.2.1
Projections along medial curves
For medial curve segments, we store the projections that lie on it as a reference
to the corresponding edge ejk and a linear parameter ti, pi = (ejk, ti). Figure 5.3
illustrates this computation.
Take si preliminarily corresponding to a medial curve area. That is, mj = c(si)
has no incident faces in the medial geometry. The candidates for curve segments
in which pi should lie are simply the edges incident in mj.
We project si onto these edges, and select the one where the projection length is
the smallest. We then set pi to be a reference to it, along with the corresponding
linear parameter ti.
Figure 5.3: For si with c(si) = mj,
we project the surface point onto the
edges circulating mj, ejk and ejl. The
length of the projection onto ejk (green)
is smaller than the one onto ejl (black).
So we take pi = (ejk, ti).
5.2.2.2
Projections along medial sheets
For medial sheet areas, we store the projections that lie on it as a reference to the
corresponding face fjkl and barycentric coordinates, α, β – pi = (fjkl, αi, βi).
Take si preliminarily corresponding to a medial sheet area. That is, mj = c(si)
has incident faces in the medial geometry. The candidates for curve segments
in which pi should lie are simply the 1-ring of mj.
Like we did for curve segments, we project si onto all the candidate faces,
select the one with minimal projection length, and store pi as a reference to the
selected face, along with the corresponding barycentric coordinates.
Notice that, by projecting the surface points onto the medial geometry, we do not
guarantee that the connection between the medial projection and corresponding
==PAGE:28==
22
Method
surface points is aligned with the surface normal. Instead, we simply find the
closest point on the subset of the medial axis. The preliminary correspondences
step attempts to make the projection as well-aligned with the normal as possible
by limiting the projection search space, but it does not guarantee such.
An approach based on tracing the normal direction onto the medial mesh to
find the medial projection would be more correct (refer to Maxwell set defini-
tion of the MAT). However, this would not be robust, since we rely on simplified
representation of the object’s MAT. While the true MAT would guarantee that
tracing the normal direction would find the correct medial projection, the dis-
crete and pruned MAT we use in this project does not. Our projection approach
works for most cases, but there are some limitations to it, which we discuss fur-
ther in section 6.4.
5.3
Geometric Reconfiguration
We now propose a robust method to deform a surface given a modified medial
mesh. This method relies on the surface S, its original medial axis transform
MAT(S) = {M, R, P}, and the updated positions of medial points m′
j to com-
pute the new surface positions s′
i. As long as the connectivity of the medial mesh
remains constant, our method can handle arbitrary changes in the positions of
its vertices, thereby modifying the surface accordingly.
Our goal is to preserve the geometric relationships between the surface its MAT.
To achieve this, we compute coordinate frames at each medial point. These
frames are constructed based on the positions of neighbouring medial points,
allowing them to naturally adapt to geometric reconfigurations. We then de-
termine the relative positioning of the connections between the medial mesh
and the surface with respect to these frames. As the frames adapt to the new
medial geometry, this relative positioning is used to restore the connection, now
adapted to the new geometry, and the new surface positions are computed.
This procedure is illustrated in Figure 5.4. We now explain how the coordinate
frames are computed and used to rearrange the surface.
5.3.1
Coordinate frames computation
We describe how local coordinate frames are computed at each medial point mj.
The goal is to define an orthonormal frame Fj, based on mj and its connectivity,
to retrieve the relative positioning of the surface points.
For mj in a medial sheet area, the choice of a reference frame is straightforward.
==PAGE:29==
5.3 Geometric Reconfiguration
23
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.4: (a) The original surface S (green), its MAT (blue), and correspon-
dences between surface points and projections (black lines), (b) the updated
updated medial mesh, (c) computed updates for medial projections and their
connections to the surface, (d) the mapped transformation on the surface.
The two-dimensional nature of the medial sheet inherently provides normal and
tangent information for a stable frame of reference. We take the vertex normal
and choose one incident edge, say ejk, to build the frame Fj as follows. We use
ˆx to denote the normalised form of x.
Fj = (ˆf i,0, ˆf i,1, ˆf i,2)⊤
where f i,0 = mk −mj
f i,1 = nmj
f i,2 = ˆf i,0 × f i,1
(5.3)
For medial points in curve areas, the choice of frame is more complex. For a
curve, we only have a tangent vector at each point, which does not capture the
full behaviour of the curve, such as curvature (how sharply it bends) and torsion
(how it twists out of the plane of curvature).
While the Frenet-Serret frame is often used to establish local frames in curves,
it is undefined if the curvature vanishes (i.e., the curve is momentarily straight)
[Han94], making it unsuitable for many applications. Therefore, we use framing
==PAGE:30==
24
Method
based on parallel transport [Bis75], specifically the piecewise linear approach
proposed in [HM95]. This method robustly transports the frame along a curve,
varying smoothly with the curve geometry.
This algorithm takes as input the curve tangents, computed as the normalised
first-order difference of curve positions, and an initial normal estimation.
If
the curve connects to a medial sheet, we use the sheet vertex normal at the
connection point as the initial estimation to maintain frame consistency at these
connection points. If the curve is not connected to a sheet, a random initial
normal estimation suffices.
The output is a frame Fj for each point in the
curve.
We repeat this computation with the updated medial point positions m′
j to
compute the updated frames F ′
j in the new medial geometry. Since these frames
are built based only on neighbouring medial points, they naturally adapt to
changes in the medial geometry.
5.3.2
Transformation mapping
With the computed coordinate frames Fj at each medial point, we can now use
them to map the medial geometry transformations onto the surface S. For each
surface point si, given its projection on the original medial mesh pi, we need to
compute an updated projection p′
i. We use the reference frames to determine
the relative positioning of the projection-to-surface connection.
This allows
us to restore connectivity in the new geometric configuration, leading to the
computation of the updated surface point si, such that its relative positioning
with respect to the medial mesh M remains invariant.
In order to keep the transformation mapping continuous, the reference frames
must vary continuously on the medial mesh. This is especially the case for areas
that are transformed to be concave (see Figure 5.5). Therefore, for each medial
projection pi, we compute a frame F p
i , which is the linear interpolation of the
frames at the incident vertices on the edge (for a medial curve) or face (for a
medial sheet) where it lies.
F p
i = (1 −ti)Fj + tiFk
if pi lies on the edge ejk,
F p
i = αiFj + βiFk + (1 −αi −βi)Fl
if pi lies within the face fjkl
(5.4)
We perform the same computation with the updated frames F ′
j to obtain F ′p
i .
Note that this makes the geometric transformation mapping invariant to the
tessellation of the medial mesh M. Because each projection is represented as
a parametrization of the medial geometry, and the frame is also interpolated
==PAGE:31==
5.3 Geometric Reconfiguration
25
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5: In (a), the frame is unique for each face, and the transformation
mapping to the surface is discontinuous and overlaps.
In (b), the frame is
interpolated for each projection, resulting in a smooth mapping.
at each projection, the number of triangles and edges in M does not affect the
result.
Let di = si −pi, which is the connection vector between the projection and the
surface. We project this vector onto the computed local frame to get [di]F p
i =
(ci,0, ci,1, ci,2).
To maintain the same relative geometry between the face and the connection to
the surface, we have,
[di]F p
i = [d′
i]F ′p
i
= (ci,0, ci,1, ci,2)
(5.5)
Thus,
d′
i = ci,0f ′
i,0 + ci,1f ′
i,1 + ci,2f ′
i,2
(5.6)
The updated positions for the medial projections p′
i are directly computed using
the linear interpolation parameters and the updated medial point positions m′
j,
pos(p′
i) = (1 −ti)m′
j + tim′
k
if pi lies on the edge ejk,
pos(p′
i) = αim′
j + βim′
k + (1 −αi −βi)m′
l
if pi lies within the face fjkl
(5.7)
==PAGE:32==
26
Method
Therefore, the updated surface position s′
i is simply the updated projection dis-
placed by the updated connection direction, keeping the original radius function
ri = |di|,
s′
i = pos(p′
i) + ri ˆd′
i
(5.8)
This process ensures that the relative positioning of the surface with respect to
the medial mesh remains invariant before and after the geometric reconfiguration
of the medial mesh, and that this transformation is smoothly and robustly
mapped onto the surface.
5.4
Radius Function Tuning
In the previous section, we presented how we can transform a surface S as its
associated medial geometry is reconfigured. Now, we focus on the other aspect
of the MAT: the radius function. By manipulating the distance from the medial
mesh to the surface, either by removing or encoding information, we can change
the level of detail in the original shape.
Given an updated radius function R′ = {r′
i}, the updated surface positions {s′
i}
are trivial – we simply scale the connection from medial projection to surface,
s′
i = pi + r′
i(si −pi)
(5.9)
5.5
Applications
We now explore applications for the proposed pipeline. For geometric reconfigu-
ration, we explore posing and unfolding a crumbled object, and we explore how
tuning the radius function can be used for encoding details onto the surface, as
well as for smoothing a noisy surface.
5.5.1
Posing: rolling curves
To exemplify the capabilities of the proposed pipeline to change the surface
geometry by reconfiguring the medial mesh, we explore rolling medial curves,
which we use to bend fingers to pose a hand mesh (see Figure 6.4).
For each curve, the connection point on the sheet is identified. Then, we select
the face incident on this vertex and use that as the plane the curve should roll
away from. We then define an angle increment, and, starting from the medial
==PAGE:33==
5.5 Applications
27
point where the curve connects to the sheet, each curve segment is rotated by
that angle with respect to the previous segment. This makes the curves follow
a helical path.
By mapping these transformations back to the surface as presented in section 5.3,
the change in pose is reflected on the input object.
5.5.2
Unfolding a crumbled object
We now describe how Least Squares Conformal Mapping (LSCM) [LPRM23] is
used to unfold a crumbled 3D shape. When LSCM is applied to a 3D mesh,
it produces an unwrapped version of the surface. For a 2-dimensional surface,
LSCM effectively unfolds it onto a plane while maintaining its angles and geo-
metric properties as much as possible.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.6: Given a mesh of a crumbled maple leaf in (a), we compute the
medial mesh in (b), unfold it using LCSM (c), and map the transformation back
to the surface (d).
Thus, we rely on the ability of mapping geometric transformations of a MAT
onto the object presented in section 5.3 to obtain an unfolded version of the 3D
shape. This process is illustrated in Figure 5.6.
We first compute the medial mesh of the object, which is composed of medial
sheets and curves. LSCM is then applied on the sheets, which outputs 2D UV-
coordinates.
We simply take those as XY-coordinates, setting z = 0 for all
vertices, and the medial sheet lies on the XY plane. For the connected curves,
we simply project them onto the same plane, so the entire medial geometry
==PAGE:34==
28
Method
is flat. Finally, we map the transformations back onto the surface using the
method described in subsection 5.3.2, which produces the unfolded version of
the mesh, as illustrated in Figure 5.6d.
5.5.3
Encoding surface details
The radius function tuning method proposed in section 5.4 allows additional
signal to be encoded in the MAT and reflected onto the surface. Effectively,
this allows details to be added to the surface, given an external signal. A simple
illustration of this is shown in Figure 5.7, where we assume there is an external
signal which is stronger at the vertices lying in the centre of the medial sheet.
By dilating the connections to the surface accordingly, we add a circle engraving
to the surface. Note that this does not change the medial geometry, and instead
only manipulates the radius function.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.7: Illustration of how details can be encoded onto the surface by
scaling the radius function. In (a), the original surface (green) and its medial
mesh (blue) are both flat. In (b), the external signal is used to scale the radius
function, producing the surface engraving highlighted in (c).
5.5.4
Smoothing
We now describe how the MAT of a shape S can be used to smooth its surface,
specifically by processing its radius function R. As discussed in section 3.2,
we can think of de-noising as applying a low-pass filter on the "signals" of the
mesh. Thus, we propose a smoothing method based on the MAT by remove
high-frequency signal from the radius function.
As discussed in section 3.1, the MAT is very unstable to small changes in the
input shape. In this section, we consider the MAT to be invariant to noise, i.e.,
==PAGE:35==
5.5 Applications
29
given a surface S and its noisy version S′, we consider MAT(S) = MAT(S′).
We further discuss the implications of this in section 6.4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.8: For surface points si with projections on ejk (a), we fit a linear
model (red) to the associated radii ri (lengths of dotted lines) (b), and move
the surface points to lie on this line (c).
A simplified illustration of the steps for smoothing are illustrated in 1D in Fig-
ure 5.8. For each sheet face and curve segment in the medial mesh, we fit a
linear model to the radii of the associated surface points, then adjust si to lie
on the fitted radii of the medial mesh. Note that, unlike in the illustration,
the surface points are not all disposed coplanarly, and instead wrap around the
medial mesh, hence why the model must be fitted to the radii, instead of the
surface vertices themselves. Essentially, this means we have a low-pass filter
for the radii, thus creating a low-pass filter for the mesh without the tangential
component.
Essentially, we want to find intermediate radius values Rj for the medial points
mj, which we later interpolate to find the radii values for the surface points.
The linear model is fitted using Least Squares (LS), which aims to minimise the
sum of squared residuals [HTF09], which is appropriate for spatial data.
Due to the difference in dimensionality between curve and sheet areas of the
medial mesh, the formulation for LS is different for both cases, which we describe
in the following sections.
5.5.4.1
LS formulation for curve segments
For each curve segment in the medial mesh, we aim to find a 1D linear model
(line) that best fits the radii of the surface points corresponding to it.
Take an edge in the medial mesh ejk, and the set of medial projections pi that lie
on it. Given the linear parameters ti for this set of projections, and associated
radii ri, we define
t =
ti

,
r =
ri

(5.10)
==PAGE:36==
30
Method
We want to find m, the slope of the fitted line, and c, its intercept. The model
is therefore defined as follows:
r = A[m, c]T
(5.11)
Where A is simply an augmentation of t,
A =
t
1
(5.12)
The solution [m, c]T is thus obtained by,
[m, c]T = (AT A)−1AT r
(5.13)
And the new radii at the curve endpoints are c and m + c, respectively,
Rj = m
Rk = m + c
(5.14)
5.5.4.2
LS formulation for sheet faces
Take a face in the medial mesh fjkl, the medial projections that lie on it, pi,
and associated surface vertices si. Given the barycentric coordinates αi, βi, and
the radius function ri at each of these vertices, we define,
B =
αi
βi
(1 −αi −βi)
,
r =
ri

(5.15)
We wish to find the radii values at each vertex that circulates the face, which
we denote x0, x1, x2. The model is defined as follows,
r = B[x0, x1, x2]T
(5.16)
As the dimension grows, LS becomes harder to solve.
Specifically, it needs
more data to find a good linear system fit, and is more prone to overfitting
[HTF09]. We therefore add some additional processing steps to the algorithm
input to ensure a robust and generalised solution. We centre the radii, and add
regularise B,
Breg =
 B
√
λI

,
rreg =
r −¯r
0

(5.17)
Where λ is a regularisation parameter set empirically, and ¯r is the average radii
value in r. The solution x = [x0, x1, x2]T is then obtained by,
[x0, x1, x2]T = (BT
regBreg)−1BT
regrreg
(5.18)
Where xi are the centred coefficients of the plane, which, in our application,
translated to the centred fitted radii values at the vertices of the triangular
==PAGE:37==
5.5 Applications
31
face. We then add the average radius back to the solution, x = x + ¯r. The
intermediate radii at each face vertex is simply the solution,
Rj = x0
Rk = x1
Rl = x2
(5.19)
However, as illustrated in Figure 5.9, this results in different edges/triangles
giving different estimates for the radii at the medial points where they connect.
Thus, we take Rj to be the average of the estimates given by each of its circu-
lating edges and triangles, weighted by the number of projections along each of
those primitives.
Given the values of Rj, we update the radii at each surface point si to be the
relevant interpolation of those values. If pi lies on an edge ejk,
r′
i = (1 −ti)m + ti(m + c)
(5.20)
And if it lies on a face fjkl,
r′
i = αix0 + βix1 + (1 −α1 −β1)x2
(5.21)
==PAGE:38==
32
Method
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5.9: In (a), the fitted linear models for each edge ejk, ekl give a different
estimate for Rk. In (b), we take Rk as the average of those estimates, and fit
the radii accordingly in (c).
==PAGE:39==
Chapter 6
Results & Discussions
In this chapter, we present results of applying the pipeline for the different
applications discussed in section 5.5. We also add results of computing the MAT
for the different algorithms explored in this project, along with discussions on
their strengths and weaknesses.
6.1
MAT methods
We now compare the three MAT methods explored in this project, as described
in section 5.1. Figure 6.1 shows an overview comparison of the three methods
applied to the hand mesh. We use the source codes made available by the authors
for DPC [WHG+15b], Q-MAT [LWS+16b] and Coverage Axis [DLX+22], along
with our extension of DPC described in subsection 5.1.1.
Mesh resolution
Most notably, there is a clear difference in mesh resolution. The extension to
DPC to create a medial mesh proposed in subsection 5.1.1 only discards about
half of the vertices in sheet areas, so it always holds that m ≈n/2, i.e., the
resolution of the medial axis is only dependant on the number of vertices of the
input object S. Q-MAT takes m as input, so the density for its medial axis is
==PAGE:40==
34
Results & Discussions
(a) DPC
(b) Q-MAT, m = 100
(c) Coverage Axis, δ = 0.02
Figure 6.1: Computed medial axes for the hand mesh, using different MAT
methods.
fully controllable. For Coverage Axis, the only input is the dilation δ, which
indirectly controls the resolution, but it is hard to estimate m prior to running
the method.
Medial mesh quality
As mentioned in subsection 5.1.1, DPC tends to cluster points, creating almost
zero area faces in the medial geometry, which we simply discard. That, however,
creates some holes in the medial axis, removing some connectivity information
that can be relevant. It also has a tangential component which makes some
faces overlap. Figure 6.2a highlights these defects.
Furthermore, we realised setting a small δ in Coverage Axis to force high res-
olution yields strange results.
Figure 6.2b highlights some of these defects.
Specifically, it tends to create overlapping faces that do not necessarily add in-
formation. It also tends to create caps and needles, and in curve areas, it creates
sharp turns that do not reflect the geometry.
As mentioned in subsection 5.3.2, our transformation mapping method for ge-
ometric reconfiguration is invariant to medial axis resolution. However, it is
important for some applications that all the geometric nuances in the object
are captured in its medial geometry. Therefore, a too compact MA, which is
where Coverage Axis performs best, can also be a disadvantage. Moreover, for
smoothing, controlling the resolution is very important. We discuss this further
in section 6.4.
==PAGE:41==
6.1 MAT methods
35
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.2: (a) Closeup of DPC computed MA, revealing defects. (b) MA for
hand mesh computed with Coverage Axis, for δ = 0.015, along with highlights
of some defects. In red: overlapping faces; in green: caps; in purple: wrong
geometry.
Manifoldness
While Q-MAT and Coverage Axis both allow for non-manifoldness in the me-
dial axis, the proposed DPC extension, by using the original mesh connectivity,
always produces manifold medial meshes. While the MA by definition is allowed
to be non-manifold, this can be disadvantageous for some applications. Specif-
ically in this project, LSCM requires a manifold mesh as input, so it becomes
unfeasible to apply the proposed unfolding on a non-manifold medial axis.
Robustness to noise
We now compare the methods with respect to their robustness to surface noise.
To run these experiments, we synthetically add Gaussian noise to the surface
vertices at different scales. The random noise applied along the normal direction
of each vertex, and is set to have a standard deviation of σ times the average
edge length in S, where σ controls the level of noise.
Figure 6.3 shows the resulting medial mesh for the different methods applied to
the hand mesh with σ = 0.2 and σ = 0.5. Out of the three methods, DPC is
the one that performs best with the added noise, although it requires extensive
==PAGE:42==
36
Results & Discussions
Figure 6.3: Computed medial axes for different levels of surface noise σ, for
DPC, Q-MAT and Coverage Axis.
==PAGE:43==
6.2 Posing: rolling curves
37
tuning of its parameters. Q-MAT is able to capture the overall geometry even
with a higher level of noise, but fails to classify sheets and curves robustly.
Finally, Coverage Axis performs the worst with the added noise.
DPC extension limitation
As described in subsubsection 5.1.1.3, we discard one side of the double sheet
produced by DPC. This has a major limitation to it. If there are two features,
each sticking out of one side of the double-sided sheet, our proposed extension to
the method is not able to handle such case. Since we always discard one side of
the sheet, one feature will be discarded along with it. This means our proposed
extension to DPC is not generic and can only handle a subset of shapes that
only ever have features sticking out of one side of the medial sheets.
6.2
Posing: rolling curves
We now present results and discussions for the posing application by rolling
curves presented in subsection 5.5.1. Due to the simplicity and robust capture
of curves of Q-MAT, we choose this MAT algorithm for this application. Some
examples of different poses by rolling only a subset of fingers are shown in
Figure 6.4.
Figure 6.4: The original hand mesh (left), and different poses.
A closer look at one of the poses in Figure 6.5b reveals that the mesh’s con-
nectivity is robustly and smoothly adapted to the new geometry, maintaining
the shape of surface triangles along curves and at the hand’s palm (medial
sheet). However, this transformation results in spirally rolled fingers, which are
anatomically incorrect. Although our method handles geometric reconfigura-
tion robustly, it lacks intuitive anatomical relevance, making it less suitable for
character posing compared to traditional rigging techniques [MTLT89]. Thus,
traditional rigging, while limited to curve skeletons, performs better for posing.
==PAGE:44==
38
Results & Discussions
However, unlike traditional methods, which define a set of rigid "bones", our
approach allows bones to be elongated or shortened, as shown in Figure 6.5c.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6.5: (a) and (b) show a closer look at one of the poses: the transformed
medial axis, and the transformed surface, respectively. (c) shows the result of
elongating the curve segments by 1.5 times their original length.
Figure 6.6 shows another setback of our method when compared to other posing
methods. Unlike [YBS07], we do not handle self-intersections.
Figure 6.6: Our method does not handle self-intersections.
==PAGE:45==
6.3 Reconstructing deformed cultural artefacts
39
6.3
Reconstructing deformed cultural artefacts
We now present results from applying the pipeline to digitally reconstruct and
unfold bracteates from the Vindelev Treasure.
We specifically focus on the
bracteate X19, for which a picture is shown in Figure 6.7a. Attempts so far
to digitalize the objects rely on iso-contouring, but the results are noisy and
topologically complex, as shown in Figure 6.7b. That is because engravings and
inscriptions appear brighter in the volumetric data, due to the thickness of the
object in those regions, and streak artefacts are falsely interpreted as presence
of material [KHR+10].
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.7: (a) The X19 bracteate (Photo: Konserveringscenter Vejle [Vej21]),
and (b) its iso-countour reconstruction.
Our pipeline is shown in Figure 6.8. The input to our pipeline is a much sim-
plified geometry, which only captures the overall bent shape of the object (see
Figure 6.8a). This is obtained by iso-contouring on a morphologically dilated
version of the binary volumetric data. The structuring element for the dilation is
a cube of all ones. The size of the cube determines how simplified the geometry
is. A smaller zoom scale captures the folds more accurately, but the topology
also becomes more complex. In order to compute a topologically simple medial
axis, we choose a size just big enough to get rid the holes in this trade-off. This
ensures the topology is simple and the geometry smooth, but notice this dilation
makes some features merge together, specifically the tight folds.
We then compute the MAT for this simple geometry using DPC. The choice for
this method is due to its guaranteed manifoldness, and for its ability to capture
the nuances in the folds. The resulting medial mesh is Figure 6.8b, which is
composed of a single medial sheet.
Note how this acts as an automatically
fitted plane to the centre line of the geometry.
==PAGE:46==
40
Results & Discussions
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 6.8: (a) the input geometry, (b) its medial axis, (c) the sampled in-
tensities, (d) added engravings, (e) the unfolded medial axis, (e) the unfolded
surface.
==PAGE:47==
6.3 Reconstructing deformed cultural artefacts
41
Figure 6.9: The flip side of the unfolded X19 reconstruction.
We then use the MAT to encode the details of the bracteate onto the simplified
geometry, as shown in Figure 6.8d. Given the volumetric data V , which we can
sample at any point x ∈R3 as V (x), we take the maximum sampled intensity
along the connection from medial mesh to surface, which we denote Ii,
Ii = max{V (si + λ(si −pi)) | λ ∈[0, 1]}
(6.1)
Note that this means the resolution of the reconstruction is determined by the
resolution of the surface. We therefore use a very subdivided mesh, with around
1 million vertices. Figure 6.8c shows this mesh with its vertices coloured with
the respective intensities Ii.
Because the simplified mesh used as input is a dilated version of the original
object, note how the sampling is naturally limited to the relevant voxels in the
volumetric data – we capture all relevant intensities, and avoid extrapolating to
non-relevant voxels. For CT scans of metal, thicker areas of the object appear
brighter [KHR+10]. Thus, we can use these intensities to encode the details of
the bracteate onto the surface through the method described in subsection 5.5.3.
Note that, because we are simply rescaling the radii, for areas that are falsely
zero in the volumetric data due to the object being thin, we simply make the
object thin in that area, and do not introduce holes as does the direct applica-
tion of iso-contouring. Thus, the topology remains simple and faithful to the
bracteate, while still robustly being able to represent the detailed engravings.
==PAGE:48==
42
Results & Discussions
The computed intensities Ii lie between 0 and 1. If we use this intensity directly
to update the radii, r′
i = Ii · ri, the scaling is very dramatic, as shown in
Figure 6.10a. While this allows for a more contrasted look at the engravings, it
does not reflect the bracteate in its original state. We therefore scale Ii to lie in
a smaller range instead, and Figure 6.10b shows the result for this, which likely
resembles the original object more accurately.
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.10: A closer look at the reconstructed engravings for different scales
of the intensities. In (a) Ii ∈[0, 1], in (b) Ii ∈[0.3, 0.6].
Given the reconstructed object, we can simply unfold it through the method
presented in subsection 5.5.2. The unfolded medial geometry is shown in Fig-
ure 6.8e.
Here, the implications of the big dilation for the input geometry
become clear. On the left of the image, we can see tears, corresponding to the
features merging together in the dilated mesh. This also is evident in Figure 6.8f,
which shows the final result of the pipeline, which is the unfolded version of the
detailed geometry. The merged together features behave weirdly in the unfold-
ing, due to the medial geometry not accurately capturing the tight folds. Also
note that the top left portion of the result has little detailing. That stems from
the volumetric data, which has little intensity variation in the corresponding
portion. That is likely due to the tight fold that occurs in this area, which can
lead to more streaking artefacts in the data.
In Figure 6.9, we show the flip side of the result in Figure 6.8f. Here, we can
see that, although the intensities on this side of the object are in general more
muted, hence making the engravings less dramatic, there are some details. We
expect the historical object to be relatively smooth on this side, so the intensities
we get here likely stem from the fact that the object is very thin. Thus, if the
medial axis is not exactly centred, or some noise or artefacts in the volumetric
==PAGE:49==
6.3 Reconstructing deformed cultural artefacts
43
data smear the intensities over several voxels, some data could be interpreted
to be on the wrong side.
A closer look at the final result of the pipeline in Figure 6.11 shows that, despite
the mentioned flaws, the reconstruction is fairly good. It is possible to see small
details, and the motif in the centre is quite round, as we expect it to be for the
bracteate in its original, uncrumbled state.
Figure 6.11: A closer look at the final result for X19.
Instead of taking the maximum intensity along the connections as we do in
Equation 6.1, we can instead take the integral of the sampled intensities,
Ii =
Z 1
0
V (si + λ(si −pi)) dλ
(6.2)
If some intensities are spread across several voxels, this approach likely yields
a better estimate of the local thickness. Figure 6.12 shows a side-by-side view
of the reconstructions using both these approaches. Here, a trade-off can be
observed. The maximum intensity result is more noisy, especially around the
outer ring of the object. On the other hand, the result for the integral approach
does not distinguish the details on the centre motif as well.
==PAGE:50==
44
Results & Discussions
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.12: In (a), the reconstruction using the maximum intensity along the
connection (same as Figure 6.8f), in (b), the reconstruction using the integral
intensity.
6.4
Smoothing
Finally, we present results for our proposed MAT-based smoothing method.
Throughout this section, we use Q-MAT for the MAT computation, due to its
ability to control the number of medial points, m, which we later discuss the
importance.
Noisy v. non-noisy MAT
First, we discuss the implications of the assumption the MAT is invariant to
noise made in subsection 5.5.4. While efforts to find MAT methods that are
robust to surface noisy is ongoing, we can experiment with this assumption by
essentially adding noisy to the surface S only after computing its MAT, i.e.,
we use MAT(S). We compare this with applying the smoothing on the MAT
computed from the actual noisy object, MAT(S′).
Figure 6.13 shows a comparison for the smoothing results using MAT(S′) or
MAT(S), along with the computed medial axes, for σ = 0.2. We can see that,
with the added noise, the MAT does not capture the geometry robustly, and
thus using the this noisy MAT for the smoothing application yields worse results.
This gets worse for higher levels of noise. Figure 6.14 illustrates this, showing a
==PAGE:51==
6.4 Smoothing
45
Figure 6.13: Comparison of using MAT(S′) or MAT(S) for smoothing for
σ = 0.2.
comparison of using MAT(S′) or MAT(S) for smoothing, for different levels of
noise σ. Here, we can see that the smoothing results using MAT(S′) get much
worse for higher σ. Also note that the proposed method to find correspondences
between surface and medial axis in subsection 5.2.1 fail for high levels of noise.
Specifically in the fingers, we can see that some points are assigned the wrong
medial point in the computation, because the noise forces the balls in the method
to get very big, thus overlapping with other fingers. The results using MAT(S),
on the other hand, although they show some worsening, even for very high
σ = 0.8, the method is able to get reasonable results. Furthermore, because we
build the MAT from the non-noisy object, the correspondence between surface
and medial mesh do not present the same problem.
Due to this, although it is still unrealistic to expect a MAT method that robustly
computes MAT(S′) = MAT(S), we carry on the experiments in this section
assuming that is true, to show the capabilities of the proposed method if MAT
methods are robust enough.
==PAGE:52==
46
Results & Discussions
Figure 6.14: Comparison of using MAT(S′) or MAT(S) for smoothing, for
different levels of noise σ.
==PAGE:53==
6.4 Smoothing
47
Variance to MAT density
The proposed smoothing method relies on fitting linear models to the noisy
radii data. With that, we inherit all the usual challenges that are attached to
regression, in particular overfitting and underfitting.
In our method, for a surface S with fixed vertex count n, the regression ap-
proach introduces variance in the results based on the number of medial points
m. If the medial axis is very dense, there may not be enough sample radii at
each edge/face to make a robust estimate, causing the model to fit the noise
instead (overfitting). Conversely, if the medial axis is too sparse, a linear model
might be too simplistic and eliminate small features in the surface geometry
(underfitting).
We present the results for different values of m and σ = 0.2 in Figure 6.15. For
m = 50, the result loses some object details and appears discontinuous where
the palm meets the fingers, due to the medial axis not being dense enough to
allow for a smooth transition between different local thicknesses. For m = 100
and m = 200, the results capture the details on the knuckles and tendons while
removing most of the noise.
For higher values of m, although the method
smooths the surface to some extent, the results still appear noisy.
Therefore, the proposed smoothing method is sensitive to the input MAT den-
sity. The right density allows for robust noise determination and prevents the
fitted linear model from being overly simplistic, preserving the details.
Preservation of small features
As discussed in section 3.2, a big challenge smoothing algorithms face is the
lack of a stopping criterion. Under-smoothing might not effectively remove all
noise, and over-smoothing might get rid of small features. Thus, knowing when
to stop smoothing is a hard task. However, if the medial axis is able to capture
these small details but not the noise, it serves as a stopping criterion.
We illustrate this in Figure 6.16. The femur mesh has a small protuberance
highlighted in Figure 6.16a, which is captured in the medial geometry.
The
added noise in Figure 6.16c makes it hard to distinguish between what is noise
and what is the feature itself. However, because our method relies on simply
re-scaling the connections between surface and medial geometry, the presence of
this feature in the medial axis ensures it will not be eliminated in the smoothing
process.
Figure 6.16d shows the result of applying our method to the noisy shape, and in
fact the protuberance is robustly reconstructed. On the other hand, if we apply
a naive smoothing method such as the umbrella operator, the feature merges
==PAGE:54==
48
Results & Discussions
Figure 6.15: Medial meshes and smoothing results for different values of m,
for σ = 0.2.
==PAGE:55==
6.4 Smoothing
49
into the rest of the geometry, as shown in Figure 6.16e.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 6.16: (a) Original femur mesh with highlighted small feature, (b) added
noise, σ = 0.4, (c) its medial axis, (d) smoothing using our method, (e) smooth-
ing using the umbrella operator.
Comparison to direct MAT reconstruction
Essentially, by finding the radii at the medial points Rj and interpolating ac-
cordingly, the resulting smoothed geometry follows the medial mesh-based volu-
metric reconstruction introduced by Sun et al. [SCYW13]. This method involves
interpolating spheres along the edges and within the faces of the mesh. Each
node in the medial mesh has an associated radius, representing the size of a
sphere at that point. By interpolating these radii along the edges and across
the triangles of the mesh, the method generates a series of spheres that smoothly
transition in size and position, effectively filling out the volume defined by the
medial mesh.
This is also the reconstruction method proposed by Q-MAT.
Therefore, by assuming MAT(S′) = MAT(S) as we do in this project, one can
wonder why directly reconstructing the surface from it is not enough, since that
will yield a smoothed surface as well.
However, there are two key differences between the direct reconstruction from
the medial mesh yielded from Q-MAT, and our proposed method. First, the
direct reconstruction produces an entirely new mesh, only based on the me-
dial points and associated radii Rj. Our method, on the other hand, simply
changes the positions of the surface vertices to lie along this geometry. There-
fore, our method keeps the object’s vertices and connectivity invariant, which
is important for many applications that involve smoothing. While it is possible
to get a de-noised version of the noisy surface by projecting its vertices onto the
non-noisy reconstruction, our method is more straight-forward by skipping the
reconstruction step entirely.
==PAGE:56==
50
Results & Discussions
Furthermore, the radii Rj considered by Q-MAT is simply the smallest distance
between the medial point mj and the surface S. While this method is straight-
forward, it does not account for noise and irregularities in the surface, which can
cause significant fluctuations in these minimal distances, resulting in a surface
that perhaps does not reflect the local thicknesses of the original, non-noisy ob-
ject. By fitting linear models to the radii, our method more effectively removes
the irregularities, providing a more robust and noise-resistant approximation of
the true medial radius function. By averaging the estimates given by different
segments of the medial mesh, our method also ensures a smoother transition
between radii, avoiding the jaggedness present in the Q-MAT reconstruction
results.
Figure 6.17 visually compares the direct Q-MAT reconstruction with the result
of smoothing using our method. Here, we can see that the reconstruction is a
bit thinner than the original object, due to it taking the minimum distance, and
the surface is jagged. For our method, the resulting surface is smoother and
better represents the local thicknesses.
Comparison to LBO
We now compare our method to the Laplacian-Beltrami Operator (LBO), which
is a traditional choice for mesh smoothing algorithm. The choice of LBO is due
to its popularity, and for only having a normal component, like our method.
For quantitative results, we use four error metrics: the Hausdorff distance (HD)
from original surface to smoothed reconstruction −→ε , the HD from smoothed
to original surface ←−ε , the two-sided HD ←→
ε , and the root mean squared error
(RMSE), all relative to the norm of the diagonal of the original surface’s bound-
ing box. For a fair comparison, we keep parameters for both methods fixed: we
use a step size of 10−5 and 20 iterations for LBO, and m = 200 for our method.
Like discussed in section 3.2, perhaps the biggest challenge for smoothing meth-
ods, including LBO, is the lack of a stopping criterion. For small levels of noise,
a few iterations are often enough to get rid of the noise and do not deform
the geometry too much. However, for high levels of noise, many iterations are
needed to fully get rid of the noise, which leads to a loss of finer details and
causes the mesh to deform.
We first compare the methods for a small level of noise, σ = 0.2. Figure 6.18
shows a visual comparison of LBO and the proposed smoothing method, applied
to different meshes in the benchmark data-base [CGF09]. Table 6.1 shows the
quantitative results for this comparison. For this level of noise, we can see both
methods perform well, although inspection of the visual results shows that LBO
is better at keeping fine details.
==PAGE:57==
6.4 Smoothing
51
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6.17: (a) Original mesh S, (b) reconstruction of MAT(S) with m = 200,
(c) noisy mesh S′, (d) smoothing result for MAT(S).
When we raise the level of noise to σ = 0.8, however, a big difference can be noted
between the methods. Figure 6.19 shows the visual comparison, and Table 6.2,
the quantitative. It’s apparent that 20 iterations of the LBO are insufficient to
eliminate the noise, so we also include a comparison with 50 iterations. However,
it’s easy to see that running the LBO for this many iterations results in highly
deformed reconstructions. Specifically, cylindrical features (such as the fingers
of the hand, the legs of the ant, and the legs of the chair) become thinner, and
sharp edges on the plane become rounded. Our method, on the other hand,
performs almost exactly the same as it did for σ = 0.2. It is also better capable
of keeping the geometric integrity of the objects.
All in all, LBO performs better for small levels of noise, but fails to smooth
out high levels of noise without deforming the object. Although the high level
==PAGE:58==
52
Results & Discussions
Figure 6.18: Visual comparison between LBO and our method, for σ = 0.2.
==PAGE:59==
6.4 Smoothing
53
Figure 6.19: Visual comparison between LBO and our method, for σ = 0.8.
==PAGE:60==
54
Results & Discussions
LBO
Our method
−→ε
←−ε
←→
ε
RMSE
−→ε
←−ε
←→
ε
RMSE
hand
1.03
1.05
1.03
0.29
0.88
0.88
0.88
0.10
bug
0.99
0.97
0.99
0.20
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.16
chair
0.82
0.83
0.82
0.16
1.91
2.08
2.07
0.25
plane
0.92
0.78
0.92
0.21
1.08
1.11
1.11
0.13
Table 6.1: Quantitative comparison between LBO and our method, for σ = 0.2.
LBO, #iter=20
LBO, #iter=50
Our method
−→ε
←−ε
←→
ε
RMSE
−→ε
←−ε
←→
ε
RMSE
−→ε
←−ε
←→
ε
RMSE
hand
1.31
1.85
1.85
0.47
2.28
2.47
2.38
0.75
0.88
0.88
0.88
0.10
bug
1.03
1.61
1.60
0.40
1.95
5.30
5.18
0.55
0.93
0.93
0.93
0.16
chair
1.13
1.84
1.86
0.40
1.80
1.53
1.80
0.44
1.91
2.08
2.07
0.25
plane
1.09
1.69
1.68
0.38
1.59
1.30
1.59
0.51
1.08
1.11
1.11
0.13
Table 6.2: Quantitative comparison between LBO and our method, for σ = 0.8.
of noise σ = 0.8 presented here is likely unrealistic for acquired geometry, it
shows our method’s ability to stay consistent for different levels of noise. It also
shows that, by being a single-pass algorithm, our method sets a clear stopping
criterion, not allowing it to over-smooth, which is a big challenge for other
smoothing methods, including LBO.
Limitations
The smoothing method we propose assumes that points in close proximity in
the surface have projections that also lie close to each other in the medial mesh.
However, note that the way we build the correspondences between surface and
medial mesh in subsection 5.2.1 does not guarantee that.
Instead, we only
attempt to choose a correspondence that is as well aligned with the surface
normal as possible.
Therefore, if the surface normals themselves are noisy, even with a robust medial
axis, the correspondence computation fails.
That is, the wrong medial ball
is chosen as the best-aligned, hence connecting the surface point to a region
in the medial geometry that is not representative of the surface in that area.
Although that could likely be fixed by a simple smoothing the normals before
the correspondence building, we do not implement this step. Thus, not only do
we require the medial geometry to be robust, but also the correspondences.
An example of where the proposed method for building these correspondences
fails is shown in Figure 6.20.
Here, neighbouring points in the surface have
projections that lie far from each other in the medial axis.
==PAGE:61==
6.4 Smoothing
55
Figure 6.20: Example of neighbouring points in surface (green) with projec-
tions (blue) very far from each other. The connecting lines between surface and
medial axis are shown in black.
This makes the smoothing result discontinuous, because the estimates given for
the radii of neighbouring are not necessarily similar. Furthermore, by having
connections to the medial mesh very different from each other as it occurs in
the example in Figure 6.20, the displacement of the surface points enforced by
the smoothing along these directions make them diverge from each other.
The smoothing process for this example is shown in Figure 6.21. In Figure 6.21b,
we can see that in fact the surface points highlighted in Figure 6.20 get pulled
away from each other in the smoothing process. These discontinuities occur in
many different regions for this mesh. This is not exactly a flaw in the smoothing
method itself, but rather of the correspondence method we use here. However,
it does highlight that the proposed smoothing method is very sensitive to the
MAT input, and its performance relies on it being of good quality, which is hard
to achieve for many input geometries.
The method we use to build the medial-to-surface correspondences also has a
limitation when dealing with objects that have sharp features. In these cases,
the medial axis touches the surface at the sharp corner. A 2D illustration of this
is shown in Figure 6.22. When computing the medial projection pi, we simply
==PAGE:62==
56
Results & Discussions
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.21: (a) Noisy bear mesh, σ = 0.2, (b) smoothing result.
project it onto the nearest point in the medial geometry M. This results in a
misalignment between the connection of pi and si with the corresponding surface
normal, leading to strange results with our smoothing approach. However, if the
projections were computed correctly, our method could perform sharp feature-
preserving smoothing, due to the presence of this feature in the medial axis.
Figure 6.22: At a sharp corner where the MAT
touches the surface, the medial projection pi is
wrongly computed, and is not well aligned with
the normal at si. The correct projection would
instead be along the green dotted line.
Note that this issue would not be so drastic if the medial mesh was very dense. In
this case, the preliminary correspondences step would limit the search space for
the projection such that the computed medial projection would be well-aligned
enough with the surface normal. However, as sparser MAT representations are
better-fitting for our smoothing application, a different approach to computing
the medial projections would perform better.
==PAGE:63==
Chapter 7
Conclusion & Future work
In conclusion, the project was able to meet its primary goal of exploring the
viability of performing medial axis-based geometry processing. We have pre-
sented a generic pipeline, that allows for both the medial geometry and the
radius function to be modified, and for these transformations to be mapped
back onto the surface. We have also supported the proposed pipeline’s flexi-
bility by performing different transformations on the MAT, for different input
objects.
The project also successfully applied the pipeline to digitally reconstruct and
unfold a cultural artefact from the Vindelev treasure. We were able to achieve
a 3D model that is faithful to the original bracteate’s topology and encodes
its fine details and engravings. We were also able to unfold this object in an
efficient and automated manner, thus not relying on extensive manual work, or
more complex physical simulation-based methods.
Despite achieving better results than current efforts to reconstruct the bracteate,
our method presents limitations.
The dilated geometry used as input does
not capture tight folds in the geometry, creating defects in the reconstruction.
Furthermore, artefacts in the CT scan data obscures varying intensities in these
regions of tight folds. Obtaining a better input geometry, that robustly captures
tight folds while keeping the topology simple will yield better results and likely
get rid of the defects. Improved pre-processing of the volumetric data used in
intensity sampling will also likely improve the reconstruction, and allow for more
==PAGE:64==
58
Conclusion & Future work
engravings to be revealed. Finally, this project was restricted to conducting the
reconstruction on a single bracteate, X19. Other objects in the Vindelev treasure
have even more challenging geometries. Therefore, there is more work to be
conducted to be able to robustly obtain input meshes for these other bracteates,
and robustly compute their MATs. A future attempt could for example include
defining a strong prior for the MAT topology when computing it.
The final goal of this project, which was to demonstrate a proof of concept of
performing smoothing of noisy surfaces based on the MAT, was also achieved.
We presented a simple method for smoothing out the radius function and using
that to de-noise the surface. We highlighted the benefits and the weaknesses of
the proposed method through a series of experiments.
The proposed medial axis-based smoothing method stands out for providing
a natural stopping criterion, and thus avoiding over-smoothing while robustly
getting rid of high frequency noise. However, we experiment with the method
only on synthetic noise, and there are still some pieces missing in order to
effectively apply this in truly noisy surfaces, for example acquired data.
In
particular, there is still a considerable gap to be closed in MAT computation.
In order for the proposed method to work, the medial axis must be able to
simultaneously capture small details and be robust to surface noise, which is
very challenging. The method also relies on the correspondences between surface
and medial geometry to be smooth and well-aligned with the normals, which
we have shown not to be guaranteed in the algorithm we propose to build such
correspondences.
Moreover, our smoothing method fits a very simple linear
model to compute the smooth radius function, and does so by applying the
simplest regression model. Finally, the method is sensitive to the density of the
medial axis, which is limiting.
Therefore, future work for medial axis-based smoothing is vast. A better ap-
proach to building surface-to-medial-axis correspondences is needed in order to
make the method work for all input geometries. Moreover, more complex mod-
els than simply linear can be tried out to smooth out the radii, and perhaps
with more advanced regression models. Further work can also be carried out to
make the smoothing less sensitive to the MAT density. This can be done, for
example, by parameterizing the entire medial axis, thus fitting a complex and
robust model to the entire radius function.
All in all, the project highlighted the benefits of performing medial axis-based
geometry processing. Although there are still some gaps to close in order to
effectively apply this in many scenarios, we have laid out a good path for this
new area within geometry processing, and opened the door for vast future work.
==PAGE:65==
Bibliography
[AB99]
Nina Amenta and Marshall Bern.
Surface reconstruction by
voronoi filtering.
Discrete & Computational Geometry, 22:481–
504, 12 1999.
[ACK04]
Nina Amenta, Sunghee Choi, and Ravi Kolluri. The power crust.
Computatinal Geometry, 19, 03 2004.
[Ahl10]
L.V. Ahlfors. Conformal Invariants: Topics in Geometric Func-
tion Theory. Ams Chelsea Publishing. AMS Chelsea Pub., 2010.
[BGAA12]
Jakob Andreas Bærentzen, Jens Gravesen, François Anton, and
Henrik Aanæs.
Mesh Smoothing and Variational Subdivision,
pages 159–177. Springer London, London, 2012.
[Bis75]
Richard Bishop. There is more than one way to frame a curve. The
American Mathematical Monthly, 82:Mathematical Association of
America–, 03 1975.
[Blu67]
H. Blum. A Transformation for Extracting New Descriptors of
Shape. M.I.T. Press, 1967.
[Blu73]
Harry Blum. Biological shape and visual science (part i). Journal
of Theoretical Biology, 38(2):205–287, 1973.
[CCT11]
John Chaussard, Michel Couprie, and Hugues Talbot.
Robust
skeletonization using the discrete λ-medial axis. Pattern Recogni-
tion Letters, 32(9):1384–1394, 2011.
[CGF09]
Xiaobai Chen, Aleksey Golovinskiy, and Thomas Funkhouser. A
benchmark for 3D mesh segmentation.
ACM Transactions on
Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), 28(3), August 2009.
==PAGE:66==
60
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[CL05]
Frédéric Chazal and André Lieutier. The “λ-medial axis”. Graph-
ical Models, 67(4):304–331, 2005.
[dALJ+15]
B. R. de Araújo, Daniel S. Lopes, Pauline Jepp, Joaquim A. Jorge,
and Brian Wyvill. A survey on implicit surface polygonization.
ACM Comput. Surv., 47(4), may 2015.
[DLX+21]
Zhiyang Dou, Cheng Lin, Rui Xu, Lei Yang, Shiqing Xin, Taku
Komura, and Wenping Wang. Coverage axis: Inner point selection
for 3d shape skeletonization. CoRR, abs/2110.00965, 2021.
[DLX+22]
Zhiyang Dou, Cheng Lin, Rui Xu, Lei Yang, Shiqing Xin, Taku
Komura, and Wenping Wang. Coverage axis source code. Available
at: https://github.com/Frank-ZY-Dou/Coverage_Axis, 2022.
[DMSB23]
Mathieu Desbrun, Mark Meyer, Peter Schroder, and Alan H. Barr.
Implicit Fairing of Irregular Meshes using Diffusion and Curvature
Flow. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1 edition, 2023.
[DZ04]
Tamal K. Dey and Wulue Zhao.
Approximate medial axis as
a voronoi subcomplex.
Computer-Aided Design, 36(2):195–202,
2004. Solid Modeling and Applications.
[GH23]
Michael Garland and Paul S. Heckbert. Surface Simplification Us-
ing Quadric Error Metrics. Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1 edition, 2023.
[Gra87]
Matt Grayson. The heat equation shrinks embedded plane curves
to round points. Journal of Differential Geometry, 26:285–314,
1987.
[Han94]
Andrew Hanson. Quaternion frenet frames: Making optimal tubes
and ribbons from curves. 08 1994.
[HM95]
Andrew J. Hanson and Hui Ma. Parallel transport approach to
curve framing. 1995.
[HTF09]
Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, and Jerome Friedman. Linear
Methods for Regression, pages 43–99. Springer New York, New
York, NY, 2009.
[HWCO+13] Hui Huang, Shihao Wu, Daniel Cohen-Or, Minglun Gong, Hao
Zhang, Guiqing Li, and Baoquan Chen.
L1-medial skeleton of
point cloud. ACM Trans. Graph., 32(4), jul 2013.
[JDD03]
Thouis Jones, Frédo Durand, and Mathieu Desbrun.
Non-
iterative, feature-preserving mesh smoothing. ACM Transactions
on Graphics, 22, 07 2003.
==PAGE:67==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
61
[JDKL14]
Alec Jacobson, Zhigang Deng, Ladislav Kavan, and JP Lewis.
Skinning: Real-time shape deformation.
In ACM SIGGRAPH
2014 Courses, 2014.
[KHR+10]
Milliam L. Kataoka, Mary G. Hochman, Edward K. Rodriguez,
Pei-Jan Paul Lin, Shigeto Kubo, and Vassilios D. Raptopolous.
A review of factors that affect artifact from metallic hardware on
multi-row detector computed tomography. Current Problems in
Diagnostic Radiology, 39(4):125–136, 2010.
[LLL+21]
Cheng Lin, Changjian Li, Yuan Liu, Nenglun Chen, Yi-King Choi,
and Wenping Wang. Point2skeleton: Learning skeletal represen-
tations from point clouds, 2021.
[LPRM23]
Bruno Levy, Sylvain Petitjean, Nicolas Ray, and Jérome Maillot.
Least squares conformal maps for automatic texture atlas genera-
tion. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1 edition, 2023.
[LWS+16a]
Pan Li, Bin Wang, Feng Sun, Xiaohu Guo, Caiming Zhang, and
Wenping Wang.
Q-mat: Computing medial axis transform by
quadratic error minimization.
ACM Trans. Graph., 35(1), dec
2016.
[LWS+16b]
Pan Li, Bin Wang, Feng Sun, Xiaohu Guo, Caiming Zhang,
and Wenping Wang. Q-mat source code. Available at: https:
//binwangthss.github.io/qmat/qmat.html, 2016.
[Mat83]
John N. Mather. Distance from a submanifold in Euclidean space.
In Singularities, Part 2 (Arcata, Calif., 1981), volume 40 of Proc.
Sympos. Pure Math., pages 199–216. Amer. Math. Soc., Provi-
dence, RI, 1983.
[MTLT89]
N. Magnenat-Thalmann, R. Laperrière, and D. Thalmann. Joint-
dependent local deformations for hand animation and object
grasping. In Proceedings on Graphics Interface ’88, page 26–33,
CAN, 1989. Canadian Information Processing Society.
[RAV+19]
Daniel Rebain, Baptiste Angles, Julien Valentin, Nicholas Vin-
ing, Jiju Peethambaran, Shahram Izadi, and Andrea Tagliasacchi.
Lsmat least squares medial axis transform. Computer Graphics
Forum, 38(6):5–18, January 2019.
[Ros97]
Steven Rosenberg.
The Laplacian on a Riemannian Manifold,
page 1–51. London Mathematical Society Student Texts. Cam-
bridge University Press, 1997.
==PAGE:68==
62
BIBLIOGRAPHY
[SCYW13]
Feng Sun, Yi-King Choi, Yizhou Yu, and Wenping Wang. Medial
meshes for volume approximation, 2013.
[SJT20]
Herman R. Schubert, Andrei C. Jalba, and Alexandru C. Telea.
Feature preserving noise removal for binary voxel volumes using
3d surface skeletons. Computers & Graphics, 87:30–42, 2020.
[TAOZ12]
Andrea Tagliasacchi, Ibraheem Alhashim, Matt Olson, and Hao
Zhang.
Mean curvature skeletons.
Computer Graphics Forum,
31(5):1735–1744, 2012.
[Tau23]
Gabriel Taubin. A Signal Processing Approach To Fair Surface
Design. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 1 edition, 2023.
[TDS+16]
Andrea Tagliasacchi, Thomas Delame, Michela Spagnuolo, Nina
Amenta, and Alexandru Telea. 3d skeletons: A state-of-the-art
report. Computer Graphics Forum, 35(2):573–597, 2016.
[Tel12]
Alexandru Telea. Feature preserving smoothing of shapes using
saliency skeletons. 01 2012.
[TGBE16]
Jean-Marc Thiery, Émilie Guy, Tamy Boubekeur, and Elmar Eise-
mann. Animated mesh approximation with sphere-meshes. ACM
Trans. Graph., 35(3), may 2016.
[Veg23]
Sari
Vegendal.
3d-skanninger
udfolder
guldskattens
hem-
meligheder.
DTU
Nyheder,
25
October
2023.
Avail-
able
at:
https://www.dtu.dk/newsarchive/2023/10/
3d-skanninger-udfolder-guldskattens-hemmeligheder
(Accessed: 06-06-2024).
[Vej21]
Konserveringscenter Vejle, 2021. [Online; accessed 06.06.2024].
[WDX+24]
Zimeng Wang, Zhiyang Dou, Rui Xu, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Xi-
aoxiao Long, Shiqing Xin, Taku Komura, Xiaoming Yuan, and
Wenping Wang. Coverage axis++: Efficient inner point selection
for 3d shape skeletonization, 2024.
[WHG+15a] Shihao Wu, Hui Huang, Minglun Gong, Matthias Zwicker, and
Daniel Cohen-Or. Deep points consolidation. ACM Trans. Graph.,
34(6), nov 2015.
[WHG+15b] Shihao Wu, Hui Huang, Minglun Gong, Matthias Zwicker, and
Daniel Cohen-Or. Deep points consolidation source code. Available
at: http://shihaowu.net, 2015.
==PAGE:69==
BIBLIOGRAPHY
63
[YBS03]
Shin Yoshizawa, Alexander G. Belyaev, and Hans-Peter Seidel.
Free-form skeleton-driven mesh deformations. In Proceedings of
the Eighth ACM Symposium on Solid Modeling and Applications,
SM ’03, page 247–253, New York, NY, USA, 2003. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[YBS07]
Shin Yoshizawa, Alexander Belyaev, and Hans-Peter Seidel.
Skeleton-based variational mesh deformations. Comput. Graph.
Forum, 26:255–264, 09 2007.
[YHM06]
Han-Bing Yan, Shi-Min Hu, and Ralph Martin. Skeleton-based
shape deformation using simplex transformations. In Tomoyuki
Nishita, Qunsheng Peng, and Hans-Peter Seidel, editors, Advances
in Computer Graphics, pages 66–77, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[YYG18]
Baorong Yang, Junfeng Yao, and Xiaohu Guo. Dmat: Deformable
medial axis transform for animated mesh approximation. Com-
puter Graphics Forum, 37(7):301–311, 2018.
[YYW+20]
Baorong Yang, Junfeng Yao, Bin Wang, Jianwei Hu, Yiling Pan,
Tianxiang Pan, Wenping Wang, and Xiaohu Guo.
P2mat-net:
Learning medial axis transform from sparse point clouds. Com-
puter Aided Geometric Design, 80:101874, 2020.
[ZBH07]
Ma Zhanguo, Liu Bo, and Zhang Hongbin.
Skeleton based 3d
mesh deformation. In 2007 6th International Conference on In-
formation, Communications & Signal Processing, pages 1–5, 2007.
