==PAGE:1==
Development of a stochastic model to predict
micropollutant emissions from wet weather
discharges
Master Thesis
DTU Sustain
Department of Environmental
and Resource Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet
weather discharges
Technical University of Denmark (DTU)
DTU Sustain ­ Department of Environmental and Resource Engineering
Krüger ­ Veolia
Master Thesis
June, 2024
Author
Aude Quintart
Supervision
Luca Vezzaro (DTU Sustain, Krüger)
Morten Borup (Krüger)
Cover image of the Fæstningskanalen at the location of the wet weather outlet UM26 from
Tingbjerg catchment by author
==PAGE:4==
Abstract
Micropollutant concentrations in rainfall­induced discharges are characterized by a high
spatial and temporal variability due to the variety of pollutant sources across urban catch­
ments and the dynamic release and transport processes in catchments and drainage
systems. Monitoring these discharges is complex and rarely possible due to the large
number of data needed to establish the pollution level of a site with confidence and the
lack of resources.
The tool developed and presented in this thesis is a stochastic model designed to help
municipalities and utilities to better evaluate the emissions of micropollutants from wet
weather discharges. The model provides the expected concentration of micropollutants
in the receiving stream as well as the expected variability. These values are compared to
the maximum allowed concentration to assess the risk that concentrations of micropollu­
tants exceed this value and pose a threat to the aquatic environment.
The discharged water volumes are estimated with a simple hydrologic model and pollutant
concentrations are predicted based on publicly available data, their variability being de­
scribed by a log­normal distribution. Two methods are investigated to assess the pollution
levels, the first one applying directly the concentration data to the outlet of the catchment,
the second one dividing the catchment into different land types expected to be the sources
of different pollution levels. Three different datasets are compared in this report and the
model is applied to six catchments, including separate and combined drainage systems,
for a list of 31 micropollutants.
When compared with available measurements form the NOVANA program, the results
of the model are shown to provide a robust assessment of the impact of discharges.
However the existing data are not sufficient to completely characterize the variability of
concentrations measured. The model created is a first step towards a more effective as­
sessment of the emissions of micropollutants from wet weather discharges that can be
used by municipalities and utilities to assess the pollution levels of their discharges and
to plan pollution mitigation strategies.
ii
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:5==
Acknowledgements
I would like to express my gratitude towards my two supervisors. First, I would like to
thank Luca Vezzaro for giving me the opportunity to write my master thesis under his
supervision and providing a great guidance throughout the project. Thank you also to
Morten Borup for taking the time to answer my questions and welcoming me to Krüger in
the hydraulic modelling team.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
iii
==PAGE:6==
Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Materials
3
2.1
Data on concentrations of micropollutants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.1
International data : Mutzner et al. study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.2
National data : NOVANA dataset (Miljøstyrelsen) . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2.1.3
National data : RegnKvalitet database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Existing models addressing urban stormwater quality . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.3
Substances considered
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.4
Catchments studied
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Methods
8
3.1
Characterization of the catchment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.1
Method
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.1.2
Runoff coefficient calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2
Hydrologic modelling with SAMBAgis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3.2.1
Hydrologic modelling of the discharges
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.2.2
Treatment with a retention pond
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.3
Stochastic modelling of the discharge concentration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3.1
The log­normal distribution to translate the variability . . . . . . . . . 15
3.3.2
Concentration of the discharge . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.4
Acute concentration in the receiving waters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
3.4.1
Acute concentration calculation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
3.4.2
Monte­Carlo approach and statistical analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
3.5
Model testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5.1
Comparison with NOVANA measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
3.5.2
Interest of the stochastic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.5.3
Interest of the catchment characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.5.4
Comparison of the catchments studied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.5.5
Uncertainties of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4
Results and discussion
23
4.1
Characterization of the catchment
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2
Hydrologic modelling with SAMBAgis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3
Stochastic modelling of the discharge concentration
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3.1
Separate systems
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3.2
Combined systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
4.4
Acute concentration in the receiving waters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4.1
Risk assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
4.4.2
Treatment with a retention pond
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
4.5
Model testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.5.1
Comparison with NOVANA measurements
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
4.5.2
Interest of the stochastic model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
4.5.3
Interest of the catchment characterization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
4.5.4
Comparison of the catchments studied . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
4.5.5
Uncertainties of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
iv
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:7==
5
Outlook
42
5.1
Future improvements of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
5.2
Possible further applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
6
Conclusion
43
Bibliography
44
A Appendix
47
A.1 Percentiles describing the log­normal distributions for the three datasets . . 47
A.1.1
Database from the study of Mutzner et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
A.1.2
Miljøstyrelsen database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
A.1.3
RegnKvalitet database (DHI) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.2 Environmental quality standards
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
A.3 Estimation of the natural background concentration in the stream . . . . . . 54
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
v
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
ADT Average daily traffic
AQS Acute quality standard
BMP Best management practices
CSO Combined sewer overflow
EMC Event mean concentration
MAC­EQS Maximum allowed concentration ­ Environmental quality standard
SWO Separate stormwater outlet
vi
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
In the context of growing urbanization, as today 56% of the world’s population live in cities
and this proportion will grow to two thirds by 2050 according to the World Bank [1], the
phenomenon of urban sprawl increases the surface of artificial and thus impervious areas
by the construction of buildings and infrastructures. This process has great impacts on
the urban water cycle as infiltration is lost and runoff rates and volumes increase [2]. At
the same time, more focus is put on water management in cities and the International
Water Association has developed “principles for water­wise cities”. These principles aim
at ensuring the integration of water in the planning and design of cities in order to increase
resilience to climate change and improve livability for urban communities [3]. These chal­
lenges emphasize the need to transition towards a more sustainable water management.
In the field or urban drainage, it goes beyond public health and flood protection by also tak­
ing into account environmental protection though the quality and ecology of the receiving
water.
Indeed, urban stormwater runoff is a major vector of pollutants that are released to the en­
vironment and contribute to deteriorate the quality of receiving waters. These pollutants
are emitted by different sources reviewed by [4], the major ones being atmospheric de­
position, vehicular transportation­related activities and metallic building envelopes. Using
a life cycle impact assessment approach, [5] identified that stormwater discharges have
a strong contribution to ecotoxicity impacts in water bodies and that metals are the main
contributors to these impacts. The EU Water Framework Directive (WFD) from 2000 is
the main legal instrument for water protection at the European level and requires that
all surface water and groundwater bodies achieve ‘good status’ by 2027 [6]. The WFD
specifies the need to identify and quantify the sources of pollution in surface waters and
has therefore established a list of priority substances and laid down environmental qual­
ity standards (EQS) for these pollutants. These priority substances are micropollutants,
meaning compounds present at low concentrations but raising strong toxicological con­
cerns. Monitoring wet­weather flows (including discharges from combined sewer over­
flows (CSO) and separate stormwater outlets (SWO)) is thus crucial to ensure that these
discharges do not deteriorate the quality or receiving waters. In Denmark, quantifying the
pollution discharged and assessing the performance of stormwater control measures are
necessary before local authorities can issue discharge permits [7].
Micropollutant concentrations in stormwater are characterized by a high variability, both
spatial (from catchment to catchment) and temporal (within one rain event and between
different events). This variability originates from “the various pollutants sources across
urban catchments [and] the highly dynamic pollutant release and transport processes”
[5]. Furthermore, the large number of samples needed to establish the pollution level of
a site with confidence [8], the uncertainty inherent to sampling and the high costs and
resources associated increase the difficulty of monitoring.
The development of models has thus proven to be very useful in assessing and predicting
the changes in water quality and the effectiveness of strategies to manage urban stormwa­
ter [9]. Models addressing both quantity and quality of urban stormwater exist and have
been reviewed by [9] and [10]. Among these models, SWMM (Storm Water Management
Model, developed by USEPA) and StormTac Web (developed by Thomas Larm, Sweden)
are the two main ones that include heavy metals and other micropollutants. These two
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
1
==PAGE:10==
models calculate stormwater concentrations based on the land use of the catchment as
many pollutants show significant concentration differences by land uses [11]. They are
used to model and quantify stormwater pollutant loads and to design stormwater treat­
ment facilities that are specific to the catchment considered. These models are however
deterministic and their outcome neglects the variability observed in micropollutant concen­
trations. This runs the risk of designing a wrong pollution control strategy or incorrectly
sizing a treatment solution, leading to an ineffective treatment or excessive costs.
The aim of this research is thus to integrate the variability in concentrations of micropollu­
tants from wet weather discharges into stormwater quality modelling, the final deliverable
being a tool that could be used by municipalities or utilities to better evaluate the impact
of these discharges on the aquatic environment. In this thesis, the following objectives
will be pursued:
1. A review of available sources of data to assess if they can be used to integrate the
stochastic approach into a simple model.
2. The development of a simple stochastic model to evaluate micropollutant emissions
from wet weather discharges.
3. The application of the model in order to carry out an ecological risk assessment.
4. An assessment of the performance of the model using different levels of catchment
characterization and an evaluation of the validity of the model and the data used.
2
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:11==
2
Materials
In this chapter are described the data upon which the model was built: the databases
compiling measurements of concentrations of micropollutants, examples of models ad­
dressing stormwater quality, the list of micropollutants to prioritize and information on the
catchments used as case studies in this thesis.
2.1
Data on concentrations of micropollutants
To be able to model the concentrations of micropollutants from stormwater runoff, data
based on measurements are needed. Three main databases will be used, they are briefly
presented in Table 2.1 and explained in further details below. Analyzing and using different
datasets enables to compare the results obtained and assess the reliability of the data. It
also gives the possibility to build different types of models according to the way the data
are classified (see subsection 3.3.2).
Table 2.1: Description of the three datasets used in this report
Database
Mutzner et al.
Miljøstyrelsen
RegnKvalitet
Source
A decade of monitoring
micropollutants in
urban wet­weather
flows: What did we
learn?
Typetal for
miljøfarlige
forurenende stoffer i
regnbetingede
udledninger
Regnvandskvalitet,
Version 1.3
Author
Mutzner & al
Miljøstyrelsen
DHI, Copenhagen
commune
Date of publication
2022
2021
2018
Geographic scope
World
Denmark
Denmark
Sampling
collection date
2010­2022
2000­2020
2000­2018
Data
EMC (Event Mean
Concentration) at the
outlet of the catchment
EMC at the outlet of
the catchment
Classification in 14
types of land uses
2.1.1
International data : Mutzner et al. study
Measurements of micropollutant concentrations in wet weather discharges have been
collected by Mutzner & al in [12]. This metastudy includes international data from SWO
and CSO with datasets collected after 2010 and for which it is possible to access raw
data. The data originate from 36 CSO sites in Europe and 41 SWO sites from Europe,
Australia and USA. In total, 683 events and 610 micropollutants are included. The dataset
was cleaned and processed to provide statistics for each substance.
2.1.2
National data : NOVANA dataset (Miljøstyrelsen)
The report Type values for environmentally hazardous pollutants in rainfall­induced dis­
charges [13] is a part of the NOVANA program (National Monitoring Program for the
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
3
==PAGE:12==
Aquatic Environment and Nature) which goal is to help Denmark fulfill its obligations under
national legislation and EU directives on monitoring the aquatic environment, nature and
air. A special program has been included to monitor hazardous pollutants (miljøfarlige
forurenende stoffer, MFS) from rainwater discharges (SWO and CSO) in Denmark. The
purpose of the project is to sample a representative subset of point sources for each point
source and substance type. These data are then analyzed statistically to produce type
values which describe the best calculated mean value for a pollutant and can be used to
assess the impact of other point sources of the same type in the country.
In this program, the focus has been placed on including catchments that are mainly res­
idential areas. Samples have been made in 5 catchments for SWO and 6 catchments
for CSO and the sampling campaigns have been carried from 2000 to 2020. Hundreds
of substances have been measured, among them it was possible to determine robust
type numbers for 28 pollutants for CSO and 24 pollutants for SWO (a robust number can
be determined when more than 50 measurements are above the detection limit), and in­
dicative type numbers for 70 substances for CSO and 30 substances for SWO. The data
include for each substance the type concentration value and a confidence interval as well
as percentiles that provide information about the underlying data and their variations.
2.1.3
National data : RegnKvalitet database
The two previous datasets present values for pollutant concentrations in rainwater dis­
charges at the outlet of the catchment. If the variability of the concentrations between
catchments is slightly taken into account by the number of catchments sampled (but only
residential areas are considered in the Miljøstyrelsen database for example), it is also
interesting to be able to assess the pollution discharged from a catchment based on the
characteristics of this catchment : different types of land use and thus different sources
of pollution.
The screening tool RegnKvalitet [14] is an Excel database that has been developed to
help authorities assessing the pollution associated with the rainwater runoff from different
surfaces and land uses (for example roofs, roads with different traffic loads…). Conducted
by DHI, the project compiled rainfall quality data from publicly available studies in Denmark
collected after 2000. 14 types of land surface are distinguished and 30 substances are
included, among them some heavy metals, PAHs and pesticides.
No data was available regarding green spaces and vegetation as well as bare land.
This land uses contribute to a minority of the runoff volume and the pollution is lim­
ited.
Nevertheless, to be able to take this pollution into consideration, data from the
StormTac Database were used to complement the available information. The StormTac
Database [15], used in the StormTac model, compiles data from international literature
and databases to assess the stormwater concentrations of numerous substances for dif­
ferent land uses.
2.2
Existing models addressing urban stormwater quality
Many models addressing quantity and quality of urban stormwater exist and have been re­
viewed by [9] and [10]. Among these models, SWMM (Storm Water Management Model,
developed by USEPA) and StormTac Web (developed by Thomas Larm, Sweden) use a
similar method to calculate pollutant concentrations and loads based on the land use of
the catchment. Little input data are needed for simple applications : the runoff water flow
is calculated from rainfall data and land use specific runoff coefficients and areas, and
calculations of pollutant concentrations are based on land use specific typical concentra­
4
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:13==
tions [16] [17]. The concept of the model developed in this thesis will be very similar with
a characterization of the catchment based on the land uses, an estimation of the runoff
water flow, and the calculation of pollutant concentrations with available data. It will how­
ever include the variability of these concentrations to make it possible to estimate the
emissions of micropollutants in a more robust way, concept that is not taken into account
in the StormTac and SWMM deterministic models which use type values and thus give
type concentrations as an output.
2.3
Substances considered
In [12], Mutzner & al performed a data­driven analysis of measurements to investigate
among other things which micropollutants should be prioritized in monitoring campaigns
and regulations in terms of occurrence and potential risk for the aquatic environment. As
a result, 31 micropollutants form CSO and 31 from SWO show a high occurrence and a
risk quotient bigger than 1 (i.e. the 90%­percentile of the concentration larger than the
chronic EQS). These substances are shown in light green on Figure 2.1, they will be the
micropollutants investigated in this study.
Figure 2.1: Comparison of occurrence (fraction of sites where each contaminant was
found at least once above the detection level) against risk quotient (90%­percentile of the
observed EMCs across all sites divided by the chronic EQS) for SWO, figure from [12]
These micropollutants can be classified into four chemical classes originating from differ­
ent sources, as shown in Table 2.2. These sources of urban runoff pollution are reviewed
in [4] and it is shown that ”atmospheric deposition, vehicular transportation­related activi­
ties and metallic building envelopes” are among the major ones. The 31 micropollutants
studied are not all present in the databases from Miljøstyrelsen and RegnKvalitet, 26 of
them are investigated by Miljøstyrelsen and 10 are available in the RegnKvalitet database.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
5
==PAGE:14==
Table 2.2: List of 31 micropollutants studied in this report classified into four chemical
classes originating from different urban sources, the cells highlighted in green show the
substances included in Miljøstyrelsen and RegnKvalitet databases
Chemical class
Micropollutant (priority
list from Mutzner et al.)
Miljøstyrelsen
database
RegnKvalitet
database
Potential main
urban source
Heavy metals
Barium
Street runoff
(vehicle
exhausts, tire and
brake wear,
vehicle washing),
building runoff
(metallic roofs
and gutters,
facades)
Nickel
Mercury
Zinc
(+ dissolved)
Chromium
Copper
(+ dissolved)
Lead
(+ dissolved)
Cadmium
Vanadium
Cobalt
Uranium
Selenium
PAH
(Polycyclic
aromatic
hydrocarbons)
Anthracene
Street runoff
(vehicle
exhausts, tire and
brake wear, road
abrasion)
Benzo[ghi]perylene
Benzo[a]pyrene
Fluoranthene
Benz[a]anthracene
Benzo[k]fluoranthene
Benzo[b]fluoranthene
Benzo[bjk]
fluoranthene
Benzo[bjk]
fluoranthene
Chrysene
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene
Pyrene
Household/
industrial
4­tert­Octylphenol
Street runoff
(building
materials and
vehicles)
DEHP
Para­Nonylphenol
Bisphenol A
Pesticides
Carbendazim
Urban green
areas runoff,
building runoff
(surface coatings,
paint)
Imidacloprid
Chlorpyrifos
Pentachlorophenol
Diuron
2.4
Catchments studied
The first catchment studied was the area of Tingbjerg in Copenhagen municipality as the
commune is planning a transition from a combined system to a separate system. A study
was conducted by Krüger to evaluate the performance of different treatment technologies
[18], this report enabled to have global information on the catchment in order to start the
creation of the model.
6
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:15==
Five other catchments were used as case studies. Reports from the studies of the catch­
ments included in the NOVANA monitoring program provided a description of the area
and data on the measurements taken for each catchment. Among the eleven catchments
analysed as part of the study from Miljøstyrelsen described in subsection 2.1.2, five re­
ports were available and presented detailed measurements. These catchments represent
contributions from households and residential areas with single houses and there is an
over­representation of North Jutland. The main characteristics of the catchments included
in this thesis are shown in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3: Description of the six catchments used as case studies in this report
Name
Location
Type
Outlet
Sampling
Total
area (ha)
Area use
Tingbjerg (Krüger,
2023)
København
Kom­
mune, Hovedstaden
Separate
UM26
No measurements
31
Residential
Sulsted (Nordjyllands
Amt, 2004)
Aalborg
Kommune,
Nordjylland
Separate
U1.1.05
2002­2003
15
Residential
Gistrup (Naturstyrelsen
Aalborg, 2011)
Aalborg
Kommune,
Nordjylland
Separate
U3.1.16
2008­2010
47
Residential
Sulsted (Nordjyllands
Amt, 2006b)
Aalborg
Kommune,
Nordjylland
Combined
U1.1.10
2005­2006
25
Residential
(527 PE)
Gug Skole
(Miljøstyrelsen, a)
Aalborg
Kommune,
Nordjylland
Combined
U0.3.55
2012­2013
27
Residential
(600 PE)
Grønlandstorv
(Miljøstyrelsen, b)
Aalborg
Kommune,
Nordjylland
Combined
U0.3.41
2014­2016
45
Residential
(3000 PE)
As shown on Figure 2.2, two types of catchments are included in this list : separate sys­
tems (SWO) and combined systems (CSO). Separate stormwater outlets discharge only
stormwater and there is a discharge event every time a rainfall event occurs. Combined
sewer overflows are only activated when the capacity of the combined sewer system is ex­
ceeded, so for large rain events.The discharges are therefore intermittent, less frequent,
and are a mixture of stormwater and wastewater.
Figure 2.2: Description of the two types of drainage systems encountered in the catch­
ments studied
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
7
==PAGE:16==
3
Methods
This chapter describes the methods used to develop the stochastic model assessing the
emissions of micropollutants in wet weather discharges. A succession of steps will be
followed, an overview of the global process is presented on Figure 3.1.
Figure 3.1: Overview of the steps included in the stochastic model, each stage will be
described in the following sections
8
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:17==
From a user (for example a municipality or a utility) point of view, the model is designed
as a succession of steps combining different tools as shown on Figure 3.2.
Figure 3.2: Operating description of the model showing the tools involved in each stage
3.1
Characterization of the catchment
The first step is to characterize the catchment in terms of land use, this process has two
main objectives :
1. Calculating a global runoff coefficient specific to the catchment
2. Being able to differentiate the pollution coming from each land use
3.1.1
Method
The information needed on the catchment to perform this characterization are easily ac­
cessible, only its location and boundaries are required. For the catchments considered in
this report, these information were found in the reports from Miljøstyrelsen. The idea is to
provide a simple and systematic method to characterize the catchment using SCALGO
and QGIS. The method is detailed in this section, taking the example of the Tingbjerg
catchment.
The land cover data were taken from the “Land cover” map in SCALGO Live. This layer
produced by SCALGO with machine learning techniques at a resolution of 20 cm seg­
ments the catchment area into nine different classes : bare land, water, other paved,
shallow vegetation, dense vegetation, farmland, paved road, unpaved road and building
[19].
To be able to use the data from the Regnkvalitet database which provides concentration
measurements for different land uses, a few modifications were applied to the SCALGO
classification to match the database classification:
1. Because the database does not provide specific data regarding green spaces and
bare land, “shallow vegetation” and “dense vegetation” were summed up into one
vegetation area, and “bare land” and “unpaved road” were also both assimilated to
bare land.
2. The database provides specific data for four traffic loads on the paved roads, ad­
ditional data regarding the ADT (Average Daily Traffic) from the municipality were
considered, when available, to refine the classification.
3. The land cover types “water” and “farmland” are not relevant for the residential catch­
ments considered and were thus be disregarded.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
9
==PAGE:18==
The outcome expected is a table segmenting the catchment into the following classes:
Table 3.1: Land use classification used in this report
Land use
Bare land
Vegetation
Building
Paved road ADT<500
Paved road 500<ADT<5000
Paved road 5000<ADT<15000
Paved road ADT>15000
Other paved
The process for calculating the area of each land cover is described in Figure 3.3. To
extract the land cover data from SCALGO, a workspace is drawn based on the boundaries
of the catchment and the data can be downloaded as a raster. This raster can then be
analyzed with the GIS software QGIS to calculate the areas associated with each land
cover. The raster layer must be converted to polygons, the areas of all features can
then be calculated and summed up by land cover type. When traffic data are available,
supplementary steps must be taken to create a new layer extracting the paved roads,
intersect with polygons representing the traffic data and then calculate the area associated
with each traffic load.
Figure 3.3: Method applied to characterize the catchment and calculate the area of each
land use
10
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:19==
3.1.2
Runoff coefficient calculation
The runoff coefficient is a dimensionless factor that is used to convert the amount of rain­
fall received by a surface to an amount of runoff. It represents the effects of catchment
losses due to infiltration and is thus dependent on various factors : the land cover, slope,
degree of saturation and rainfall intensity [20]. Large values are found for areas with a
high imperviousness degree (pavement) and lower values correspond to areas with high
infiltration (vegetation).
Knowing the area occupied by each land use, it is possible to calculate a global runoff
coefficient for the catchment. A constant value will be assumed in this report, even if
in reality the coefficient is expected to increase progressively during a storm as the soil
becomes more saturated [21]. A suggested range of runoff coefficients for different land
uses was presented in [22] and the values relevant to this study are shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Ranges and suggested values of runoff coefficient for different land uses
Land use
Range
Suggested value
Bare land
0.25­0.35
0.3
Vegetation
0.1­0.2
0.15
Building
0.85­0.95
0.9
Paved road
0.85­0.95
0.9
Other paved
0.85­0.95
0.9
The following formula can then be used to calculate the weighted runoff coefficient for
each catchment:
Global runoff coefficient =
∑
Land use i
Area i
Total area × Runoff coefficient i
Where:
Area i is the area occupied by the land use i
Runoff coefficient i is the coefficient associated with the land use i in Table 3.2.
3.2
Hydrologic modelling with SAMBAgis
To be able to evaluate the impact of rainfall­induced discharges, it is necessary to know
the number of these discharges, their distribution in time as well as their volume and
duration. These information will be obtained with the SAMBAgis model described in this
section. The process is summarised on Figure 3.4.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
11
==PAGE:20==
Figure 3.4: Hydrologic modelling of the discharges with SAMBAgis
3.2.1
Hydrologic modelling of the discharges
SAMBAgis is a hydrologic model developed as a Python plugin in QGIS by Morten Borup
(Krüger). This tool makes it possible to model the drainage network and catchments in
QGIS, to import rain data and to estimate water volumes discharged during wet weather
events. Designed as a surrogate model for distributed physically based models, it enables
to run long­term simulations in a short amount of time. The model is set up by lumping
the network into compartments and uses the principles of mass conservation to compute
the exchange of water between the compartments [23].
SAMBAgis will be used in this report to evaluate the volumes of water discharged during
wet weather events. The runoff volume will be simply calculated by the input of rain
data, information on the catchment imperviousness (the runoff coefficient estimated in
subsection 3.1.2) and some evaporation included in the tool. This evaporation is defined
with monthly variations.
For this thesis, as little information is known on the drainage system and because the
model aims at being simple, the complex drainage network is modelled by a basin that
Figure 3.5: Modelling of two types of drainage systems, separate and combined, on SAM­
BAgis
12
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:21==
captures the runoff from the whole catchment as can be seen on Figure 3.5. The water
runs through a link towards two outlets. For separate systems, one outlet is the actual
outlet of the discharge while the other is created to separate the discharge events by
making sure that under a small threshold flow, no water is running though the discharge.
For combined systems, the first outlet represents the wastewater treatment plant (WWTP)
and the second one is the overflow.
The data required to run the model are presented in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Inputs and parameters required to run the SAMBAgis model and estimate the
wet weather discharges
Model parameter
Data source
Catchment
Type (separate, combined)
NOVANA report
Imperviousness degree
Calculation with the catchment characterization
(subsection 3.1.2)
Concentration time
Estimation to 30 minutes
Number of inhabitants PE (for
combined systems)
NOVANA report
Nodes of the model
Type (drainage, outlet, basin)
Defined according to the type of catchment to match
with the volumes reported in the NOVANA report
Volume of the basin
Links between nodes
Maximum flow
NOVANA report
Rain data
Time series
Regional rain gauge network (SVK)
Simulation
Start date
Simulation period from the NOVANA report
End date
The output of the model is a text file containing the list of all the discharge events for the
outlets of the system in the simulated period. For each event are given the volume of
water discharged and the duration of the event. For combined systems, the volume of
waste water in the discharge is also provided.
3.2.2
Treatment with a retention pond
The tool created aims at being used to evaluate the emissions of micropollutants but also
to help in the planning and design of treatment strategies for the discharges. The Best
Management Practices (BMP) database published by the Water Research Foundation
[24] summarizes the performances of various BMPs in the removal of solids, bacteria,
nutrients and metals. In this report, the BMP studied will be the retention pond as it is
commonly used in Denmark and easy to model with SAMBAgis. A retention pond is de­
fined as a ”surface wet pond with a permanent pool of water, [which] may include under­
ground wet vault” [24]. It holds a large volume of the discharged water and progressively
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
13
==PAGE:22==
releases it, allowing suspended solids and the attached pollutants to settle, and biological
and physico­chemical processes to occur in order to reduce the concentrations of pollu­
tants. A guide on how to design stormwater basins prepared by Aalborg Universitet [25]
provides some dimensions for the retention pond, namely a wet volume of around 250 m3
per reduced hectare.
Figure 3.6: Addition of a retention basin at the outlet of the catchment and model in SAM­
BAgis
This retention pond can be added to the model built in SAMBAgis by adding another
basin as shown on Figure 3.6. As a result of the hydrologic modelling, the discharges
at the outlet of the catchment will be delayed and slowed down. A ”cleaning rate” can
be applied to the micropollutant concentration in the discharge. It is calculated from the
concentrations at the inlet and outlet of the pond as (Cin­Cout)/Cin. Values for heavy
metals are provided by [25] for zinc, copper and lead and [24] for cadmium, chromium
and nickel, they are presented in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4: Cleaning rates for concentrations of heavy metals after treatment with a reten­
tion pond
Heavy metal
Cleaning rate [%]
Cadmium
50
Chromium
50
Copper
75
Lead
73
Nickel
26
Zinc
75
3.3
Stochastic modelling of the discharge concentration
The idea behind this project is to develop a tool that could be used by municipalities and
utilities to assess the micropollutants emissions from their wet weather systems. This tool
aims at being simple to use and easily adaptable from one catchment to another. The
estimation of the pollution will therefore only be conducted using data from the databases
14
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:23==
presented in section 2.1. When measurements are available for the catchment consid­
ered, they will be used to assess the quality of the model developed.
3.3.1
The log­normal distribution to translate the variability
The datasets presented in section 2.1 consist of a compilation of measurements from dif­
ferent sites and studies. These measurements are characterized by a high spatial and
temporal variability. The spatial variability originates from the various pollutant sources
across the catchments while the temporal variations are due to rainfall patterns and ac­
cumulation and release processes in the catchments and drainage systems [5]. To mea­
sure the urban runoff pollution level, the report from the Nationwide urban runoff program
(NURP) conducted by the US EPA [26] recommends the use of the event mean concen­
tration (EMC) which is defined as ”the total constituent mass discharged [during an event]
divided by the total runoff volume”. To assess the variability of these EMCs, it is interesting
to take into account all the values measured rather than a type value like the average or
the median as it is usually done in deterministic approaches. A statistical approach can be
adopted by defining a probability distribution for each micropollutant. In the NURP report,
the EMCs for different storms and monitoring sites were compiled and visually and statis­
tically characterized. The outcome of these tests showed that, with few exceptions, urban
runoff constituents followed log­normal distributions. Similar results were obtained by [27]
by using probability plots and goodness­of­fit tests for the distributions of concentrations
of run­off constituents in five sources.
Establishing the distribution as log­normal with a sufficient large samples of EMCs provide
numerous advantages [26]:
1. Developing concise summaries of highly variable data is possible.
2. The comparison of results from different sites and events is convenient.
3. It is feasible to express frequency of occurrence and exceeding.
Figure 3.7: Illustration of a fictitious log­normal distribution for the concentration of a mi­
cropollutant, displayed with its median and two probability intervals
A log­normal distribution can be characterized with two parameters: the mean or median
and the coefficient of variation. In the three databases used in this report, percentiles
were given. The log­normal distributions were thus built on these two percentiles and their
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
15
==PAGE:24==
corresponding probability values, according to the method described in [28]. For each of
the three datasets presented in section 2.1, a new database has been built presenting the
percentiles and their corresponding values for each micropollutant. They are presented
in appendix A.1. These databases will be the foundation for the stochastic modelling and
the estimation of micropollutants concentrations of this study.
3.3.2
Concentration of the discharge
The aim of this part is to estimate, from the EMC distributions provided in the datasets
described in section 2.1, the distribution of concentration in the discharge for each microp­
ollutant. Two approaches will be taken according to the data available, they are described
in Figure 3.8 and explained in further detail below.
Figure 3.8: Two methods and three databases to evaluate the distribution of concentration
of micropollutants in the discharge
Generic
The datasets from Miljøstyrelsen and the study from Mutzner et al. are based on samples
taken at the outlet of the catchment and the data thus give directly the concentrations of
micropollutants in the discharge. For each micropollutant, the distribution can be read
from the databases built in the previous section and presented in appendix A.1.
Specific to the catchment
The data from the RegnKvalitet tool have to be used in combination with the characteri­
zation of the catchment performed in the previous step. The correspondences presented
in Table 3.5 have been made based on the information provided by the RegnKvalitet tool
and visual checks of the area layout with Google Maps.
16
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:25==
Table 3.5: Correspondences between the land use classification of a catchment and the
concentration data available in RegnKvalitet database
Land use from the characteri­
zation of the catchment
Data from the RegnKvalitet database
Bare land
Pedestrian path and gravel (StormTac)
Vegetation
Mixed green spaces, park grounds, grass (StormTac)
Building
Roof, all materials
Paved road ADT<500
Road (ADT<500)
Paved road 500<ADT<5000
Road (ADT 500­5000)
Paved road 5000<ADT<15000
Road (ADT 5000­15000)
Paved road ADT>15000
Road (ADT>15000)
Other paved
Parking spaces
The total concentration of the micropollutant in the discharge is calculated with the follow­
ing formula.
For each micropollutant:
Concentration =
∑
Land use i
Reduced area i
Total reduced area × Concentration i
Where:
Reduced area i is the reduced area associated with the area occupied by the land use i
Concentration i is the concentration of the micropollutant associated with the land use i
in the database
In order to create a distribution, this calculation can be made n times, taking for each
land use a random value of the distribution. It was found that for n=10000 iterations, the
distribution obtained was the same for every simulation.
Separate and combined systems
For separate systems, where the pollution only originates from the runoff, the measured
values for SWO in Mutzner et al. and Miljøstyrelsen studies and the data from Reg­
nKvalitet were used.
For combined systems, the pollution coming from wastewater also needs to be taken into
account to evaluate the actual risk for the ecosystem. In Mutzner et al. and Miljøstyrelsen
databases, values for CSO were available. As the RegnKvalitet database was created
to only assess the pollution originating from stormwater, the contribution of wastewater
was added. Type values from another NOVANA report on pollutants in wastewater [29]
have been used and the contribution of wastewater to the total volume was taken from
the results of the hydrologic modelling with SAMBAgis. This was done to make sure
similar data are compared, in reality the variation resulting is extremely small and could
be neglected as the volumes of wastewater only account to less than 2% of the total
volume discharged.
3.4
Acute concentration in the receiving waters
Once the distribution of the concentrations in the discharges of wet weather systems is
known for each micropollutant, it is possible to evaluate the impact of the discharge in the
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
17
==PAGE:26==
receiving waters by calculating the acute concentration in the stream at the outlet of the
system and compare this value with the environmental standards.
3.4.1
Acute concentration calculation
To assess the concentration of micropollutant in the receiving waters, the output of the
hydrologic model is combined with information on the receiving stream (initial concentra­
tion of micropollutant and flow). Because the data described in section 2.1 are provided
as EMCs, the concentration in the receiving waters is calculated as a mean concentration
during the discharge event. The acute concentration in the stream for each discharge
event is calculated as a simple dilution using the following formula where C stands for
concentration and Q for flow. The formula assumes a complete mixing in the stream and
instantaneously dilution The variables are displayed on Figure 3.9.
For each event and each micropollutant:
Acute concentration = Cdischarge × Qdischarge + Cstream × Qstream
Qdischarge + Qstream
Figure 3.9: Description of the variables used to calculate the acute concentration in the
receiving stream
The data corresponding to the variables in the formula originate from the sources pre­
sented in Table 3.6.
18
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:27==
Table 3.6: Sources of the data used in the formula of the acute concentration
Variable
Data source
Cdischarge
Value from the distribution obtained in subsection 3.3.2
Qdischarge
Calculated with the output of the SAMBAgis hydrologic model (volume
and duration of each discharge event, subsection 3.2.1)
Cstream
Median value for streams in Denmark from a NOVANA report [30] (for
Tingbjerg, measured values taken from [18])
Qstream
Time series from the public database HIP (Hydrologisk Informations­
og Prognosesystem) at the location of the outlet (or the closest
location when no data available) [31]
In the absence of measurements regarding the initial concentration of micropollutant in
the streams considered, a median value from the Danish report [30] has been used. The
values are listed in appendix A.3.
This concentration will then be compared with the environmental quality standard MAC­
EQS which is the maximum allowable concentration, meaning that the measured concen­
tration at any monitoring point in the water body does not exceed that value [32]. Also
referred to as AQS (Acute quality standard) or maximum concentration, this limit value is
the one that stormwater outlets must comply with according to the Danish Environmental
Protection Agency [33]. The MAC­EQS values used in this study were taken from the
Danish legislation when available [34] or from the European directive [32]. The values
are presented in appendixA.2.
It can be noticed that the values regarding heavy metals only take into account the dis­
solved phase, whereas the databases and the measurements provide data for the total
concentration. Several studies have been conducted to determine the distribution be­
tween the dissolved and the bound fraction and have been compiled in [18]. The distribu­
tions presented in Table 3.7 will be used to convert a dissolved concentration into a total
concentration and vice versa.
Table 3.7: Fraction of the total concentration of heavy metals present in the dissolved
phase
Heavy metal
Dissolved [%]
Lead
10
Chromium
15
Copper
15
Cobalt
15
Cadmium
15
Zinc
40
3.4.2
Monte­Carlo approach and statistical analyses
To encompass the whole distribution of concentrations in the discharge, a Monte Carlo
approach is used. For each micropollutant and each rain event, the distribution in the dis­
charge is randomly sampled from the log­normal distribution created. The concentration
in the stream is thus calculated for each value in this sample. To find a balance between
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
19
==PAGE:28==
a good representation of the log­normal distribution and a short computation time, 10000
values will be sampled in the distribution. The output of this Monte Carlo simulation is a
distribution of concentration for each discharge event. To display these results in a more
readable way, the return period of each discharge event based on its median concentra­
tion will be plotted against the acute concentration as shown on Figure 3.10.
Figure 3.10: Description of the stochastic modelling of the acute concentration in the
receiving stream based on the distribution of concentrations in the discharge and the
estimation of discharge events
Two quantified results will also be calculated:
1. Duration of exceedance [days] : the total duration of discharge events leading to a
concentration larger than the MAC­EQS in one year
2. Duration of exceedance [%] : the percentage of the total duration of discharges for
which the MAC­EQS is exceeded for a one­year simulation. This information will be
used to compare results from catchments with different total duration of discharges.
These results originate from the distributions obtained with the Monte Carlo simulation
and will be calculated with the median value of each event in a first step and with the 90%
percentile for a precautionary approach in a second step.
3.5
Model testing
3.5.1
Comparison with NOVANA measurements
For five catchments, sampling campaigns have been carried out and these measurements
can be compared with the distribution obtained of the concentration in the discharge.
20
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:29==
In the reports related to combined systems, the contribution of the pollution originat­
ing from wastewater has been subtracted in order to consider only the pollution from
stormwater, the ”combined stormwater” or ”overvand” in danish. However the values
from Miljøstyrelsen and Mutzner et al. databases take into account the global pollution in
the discharge. Moreover, it is this total concentration that needs to be considered to eval­
uate the risk of exceeding the environmental quality standards. To still be able to compare
these measurements and the distributions obtained, the contribution of wastewater has
been added to the reported concentrations. Type values from another NOVANA report on
pollutants in wastewater [29] have been used and a contribution of 1% of wastewater in
the total volume has been taken into account, this value was chosen as a conservative av­
erage of the volumes of wastewater in the discharges from the results of the SAMBAgis
model. This was done to make sure similar data are compared, in reality the variation
resulting is extremely small and could be neglected.
For each micropollutant sampled in the reports, the measurements will be plotted on the
distribution obtained. Because the greater the number of samples, the more accurate the
pollution originating from the catchment and its variability can be assessed, the evolution
of the median of measurements along the sampling campaign will also be displayed.
3.5.2
Interest of the stochastic model
The results of the model will be shown along an evaluation of the pollution resulting from
the use of the type value given in [13], in order to first compare the outcomes of the two
approaches and then visualize the interest of the stochastic model.
3.5.3
Interest of the catchment characterization
The catchment characterization introduced in subsection 3.1.1 aimed at creating a tool as
accurate as possible for the catchment considered by taking into account its land use. This
catchment characterization can only be used combined with the RegnKvalitet database
as it is the only dataset differentiating the land uses. The distributions obtained with this
database will be visually compared for four catchments along the median of the measure­
ments in order to assess the validity of this method.
3.5.4
Comparison of the catchments studied
The quantified outcome of the model, the duration of discharges exceeding the MAC­EQS,
will be compared for the six catchments studied. These results will be plotted against
variables from the model to assess qualitatively the influence of these parameters. The
variables investigated will be : the area of the catchment, the global runoff coefficient,
the average volume discharged per event, the average flow in the discharge, the average
flow in the receiving stream and the ratio between the flow of the discharge and the flow
of the stream.
3.5.5
Uncertainties of the model
This section will aim at investigating the sources of the uncertainties that affect the model.
These sources can be identified and classified according to the framework presented by
[35] and shown as a decision tree on Figure 3.11. The three dimensions of uncertainty
analyzed are its location, level and nature. The location of the uncertainty is related to the
step in the modelling cycle where the uncertainty manifests, its level expresses the mod­
eller’s ability to identify it and its nature corresponds to its origin. This decision scheme will
be used to classify all the potential sources of uncertainty in the model. These uncertain­
ties will then be analyzed in further detail by providing quantified results when possible.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
21
==PAGE:30==
Figure 3.11: Decision tree developed by [35] to classify the uncertainties of the model,
figure from [35]
22
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:31==
4
Results and discussion
4.1
Characterization of the catchment
Following the method described in subsection 3.1.1, the catchments have been analyzed
to calculate the area of each land use. In the case of Tingbjerg, the characterization of
the catchment results in the following table:
Table 4.1: Characterization of Tingbjerg catchment and results of the calculation of the
areas occupied by each land use
Land use
Area [ha]
Bare land
1.19
Vegetation
6.61
Building
9.42
Paved road ADT<500
1.73
Paved road 500<ADT<5000
2.88
Paved road 5000<ADT<15000
0.71
Paved road ADT>15000
0
Other paved
3.21
As described in subsection 3.1.2, a global runoff coefficient can be calculated for the area.
Table 4.2 presents the runoff coefficients obtained for each catchment.
Table 4.2: Comparison of the proportions of building cover, paved road cover, and runoff
coefficient for the six catchments studied
Catchment
Proportion of
building cover [%]
Proportion of
paved road cover
[%]
Runoff
coefficient
[%]
Tingbjerg
15.0
17.3
48.5
Sulsted (separate)
21.3
12.0
55.1
Gistrup
15.7
21.7
47.6
Sulsted (combined)
20.1
10.1
52.1
Gug Skole
21.4
9.3
56.3
Grønlandstorv
19.4
12.1
61.6
The coefficients calculated range from 47% to 62% and will be used to estimate the volume
of stormwater ending in the drainage system. Gistrup is a peri­urban area mainly occupied
with single houses which explains it has the lower runoff coefficient, whereas Gug Skole
and Grønlandstorv are two catchments located in the surroundings of Aalborg and more
densely populated, therefore leading to higher imperviousness degrees.
Because all the catchments belong to urban or peri­urban residential areas, their layout,
although varying slightly as can be seen by the proportions of buildings and paved roads,
remains relatively similar.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
23
==PAGE:32==
4.2
Hydrologic modelling with SAMBAgis
The results of the estimation of the discharges with SAMBAgis are shown on Table 4.3.
The number of discharge events for the three combined systems (Sulsted, Gug Skole
and Grønlandstorv) seems quite high as they are in the same ranges of the number of
discharges from separate systems, whereas the typical number of overflows is around 5
to 10 times per year per structure. The uncertainties on these results will be discussed in
further detail in subsubsection 4.5.5.
Table 4.3: Results of the hydrologic model for the six catchments studied
Catchment
Number of
discharge events
per year
Average volume
discharged per
event [m3]
Average flow in the
discharge [m3/s]
Tingbjerg
73
623
0.013
Sulsted (separate)
75
907
0.023
Gistrup
71
2120
0.044
Sulsted (combined)
53
382
0.019
Gug Skole
74
287
0.008
Grønlandstorv
70
434
0.016
4.3
Stochastic modelling of the discharge concentration
To have a concise overview of the results, only four substances will be shown on the
figures. Zinc, copper, fluoranthene and DEHP have been chosen as a representative
sample of the list of substances presented in Table 2.2.
4.3.1
Separate systems
In a first step, the distributions of the concentration in the discharge obtained from the
three datasets are plotted and compared. The distributions given from the Miljøstyrelsen
database and the database from Mutzner et al. are the same for all catchments as they
represent the concentration at the outlet of the catchment. The distribution created with
the RegnKvalitet database differs from one catchment to another as it has been calculated
based on the land use characterization. These distributions are shown on Figure 4.1, in
the case of the separate Sulsted catchment for the RegnKvalitet distribution.
It is immediately apparent on the figure that the distribution obtained with the Mutzner et
al. database for zinc, copper and fluoranthene is much wider than those resulting from
the two Danish databases. This observation can be generalized for all the substances
considered in this study except DEHP. Different factors can explain this high variability
found in the Mutzner et al. database, in particular (i) the greater diversity in the catch­
ments sampled as it includes studies from different countries and (ii) the larger number of
samples considered.
(i) The description of the RegnKvalitet tool highlights the will to work with national data
to avoid these larger intervals of concentration from international studies. This is due to
different rainfall rates and patterns, the use of different materials to build roofs and roads
as welle as differences in sampling and analysis methods [14].
(ii) Compiling a larger number of studies also enables a greater variability in the samples,
leading to larger observations intervals. Table 4.4 provides the number of observations
24
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:33==
included in the three databases for the four micropollutants. The exact number of data
used in the Miljøstyrelsen database was not available but is known to be above 50 as
it is the threshold defined in the report for a ”robust” type value. The number of data
varies for each land use in the RegnKvalitet database and the ranges show the minimum
and maximum number of available data. For zinc, copper and fluoranthene, the large
number of data available in the Mutzner et al. database explains the wider distributions
obtained. In the case of DEHP, the statistics have been made on a smaller number of
observations as this substance was not included in most of the studies compiled. It was
however available for two Danish studies from the NOVANA program included in Mutzner
et al.. The distribution is therefore comparable to the one from Miljøstyrelsen. For this
micropollutant, the median from the RegnKvalitet database is more than twice the median
obtained with the other datasets. It will be interesting to compare these distributions with
actual measurements to assess the validity of the data and the measurements, that will
be done in subsection 4.5.1.
(a) Distributions of the concentration of zinc in
the discharge
(b) Distributions of the concentration of copper
in the discharge
(c) Distributions of the concentration of fluoran­
thene in the discharge
(d) Distributions of the concentration of DEHP in
the discharge
Figure 4.1: Comparison of the distributions of concentration in the discharge of a separate
catchment (Gistrup) for four substances, obtained with the three databases from Mutzner
et al., Miljøstyrelsen and RegnKvalitet and presented as a boxplot displaying the median
and two probability intervals
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
25
==PAGE:34==
Table 4.4: Number of data compiled in each database for separate systems (SWO), for
the Mutzner et al. dataset the number in parenthesis indicates the number of data below
the detection level
Micropollutant
Mutzner et al.
database
Miljøstyrelsen
database
RegnKvalitet
database
Zinc
301 (0)
>50
4 ­ 19
Copper
301 (0)
>50
4 ­ 18
Fluoranthene
208 (27)
>50
0 ­ 39
DEHP
69 (23)
>50
0 ­ 27
4.3.2
Combined systems
Different observations can be made when looking at the distributions obtained for com­
bined systems, mainly regarding Mutzner et al. database. Here the data for CSO have
been used for Mutzner et al. and Miljøstyrelsen and the contribution of wastewater has
been added to the RegnKvalitet results. Unlike separate systems, the distributions show
(a) Distributions of the concentration of zinc in
the discharge
(b) Distributions of the concentration of copper
in the discharge
(c) Distributions of the concentration of fluoran­
thene in the discharge
(d) Distributions of the concentration of DEHP in
the discharge
Figure 4.2: Comparison of the distributions of concentration in the discharge of a com­
bined catchment (Sulsted) for four substances, obtained with the three databases from
Mutzner et al., Miljøstyrelsen and RegnKvalitet and presented as a boxplot displaying the
median and two probability intervals
26
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:35==
the same order of magnitude and for DEHP, the 5%­95% interval obtained with Miljøstyrelsen
dataset is the largest. This larger homogeneity of results can be explained by the origin
of the measurements compiled in Mutzner et al. study, they only originate from Europe
(Switzerland, Denmark and Germany) and are thus more likely to cover a more homoge­
neous geographic area in terms of materials used and sampling techniques. The number
of measures available is also smaller than for separate systems as it can be seen on
Table 4.5.
Table 4.5: Number of data compiled in each database for combined systems (CSO), for
the Mutzner et al. dataset the number in parenthesis indicates the number of data below
the detection level
Micropollutant
Mutzner et al. database
Miljøstyrelsen database
Zinc
183 (0)
>50
Copper
183 (0)
>50
Fluoranthene
185 (11)
>50
DEHP
195 (1)
>50
4.4
Acute concentration in the receiving waters
After each catchment has been modelled in SAMBAgis following the method described
in subsection 3.2.1, the number of discharges in the simulated period given with their
duration and volume discharged, combined with information on the receiving waters are
used to calculate the acute concentration in the stream. The outcome of the Monte Carlo
approach is a distribution of concentration for each event from which it is possible to
provide a risk assessment for the municipality or utility.
4.4.1
Risk assessment
In a first step, a quantified risk assessment can be made by calculating the duration of
exceedance of the AQS during one year for each micropollutant. An event can be defined
to exceed the AQS when the median concentration is above the required value but the
90%­percentile can also be used in a precautionary approach. The results are shown on
Table 4.6 for the Sulsted (separate) catchment and the concentrations have been es­
timated based on data from Miljøstyrelsen database.
From these results, only some
micropollutants are expected to pose a risk to the ecosystem : zinc, copper, mercury,
benzo[bjk]fluoranthene, benzo[ghi]perylene, chrysene, pyrene and DEHP. The concern
is specially strong regarding zinc as the AQS is expected to be exceeded for approxi­
mately 30% of the total duration of discharges in a year when the results are based on the
median and 69% when using the 90%­percentile. This highlights the necessity to treat
the water before it is discharged, using for example a retention pond.
It should however be kept in mind that the simulated concentrations are EMCs so they
represent the average concentration during an event and do not take into account the
dynamics within the event. For each discharge event expected to reach the AQS, the full
duration of the event is used in the calculation even though the quality standard might be
exceeded during only a fraction of the event. On the other side, some events might be
considered safe in terms of risk for the environment but there might be a peak of pollution
during the event smoothed by the calculation of the mean. This may lead to a wrong
estimation of the duration of exceedance of the AQS.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
27
==PAGE:36==
Table 4.6: Risk assessment calculated from the output of the stochastic model for Sulsted
(separate) catchment with Miljøstyrelsen database, highlighted in red are the micropollu­
tants that show a risk of exceeding the maximum allowed concentration
Total duration of discharges in one year: 59.9 days
Micropollutant
Duration of exceeding
the MAC­EQS during
one year based on the
median [days]
Duration of exceeding
the MAC­EQS during
one year based on a
precautionary
90%­percentile [days]
Pentachlorophenol
0
0
Diuron
0
0
DEHP
0
10.5
Para­Nonylphenol
0
0
Bisphenol A
0
0
Anthracene
0
0
Benzo[ghi]perylene
0.3
15.8
Benzo[a]pyrene
0
0
Fluoranthene
0
0
Benz[a]anthracene
0
0
Benzo[bjk]fluoranthene
0
1.3
Chrysene
0.2
15.8
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene
0
0
Pyrene
0
7.2
Barium
0
0
Nickel
0
0
Mercury
0
1.3
Zinc
18.2
41.2
Chromium
0
0
Copper
0
0.2
Lead
0
0
Cadmium
0
0
Vanadium
0
0
Cobalt
0
0
Uranium
0
0
Selenium
0
0
A visual way to formulate the risk assessment is to show the simulated event mean con­
centrations at the outlet of the catchment for different return periods as on Figure 4.3 for
the Sulsted (separate) catchment. This chart makes it possible to evaluate the frequency
of exceedance of the AQS and can help designing a pollution reduction strategy depend­
ing on the return period of the exceedance events. It can first be seen the much larger
variability resulting from the wider distributions of concentrations for the Mutzner et al.
database (the results for the two other datasets are displayed with a larger scale on the
y­axis for zinc, copper and fluoranthene). Depending on the dataset used, the chosen
pollution removal strategy can very different. A striking example is fluoranthene: in this
case, the median concentration is expected to exceed the AQS at least twice a year (re­
turn period of 0.5 year) with the Miljøstyrelsen database whereas even the 95%­percentile
is below the required standard with the two Danish datasets for the simulated period.
28
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:37==
(a) Simulated concentration of zinc in the receiving stream
(b) Simulated concentration of copper in the receiving stream
(c) Simulated concentration of fluoranthene in the receiving stream
(d) Simulated concentration of DEHP in the receiving stream
Figure 4.3: Simulated concentration in the receiving stream of Gistrup catchment as a
function of the return period of the discharge events, presented with two probability inter­
vals and compared with the MAC­EQS for four substances
4.4.2
Treatment with a retention pond
The model also aims at being used for designing pollution control strategies. It is done
in this report by the possibility to model a retention pond for the removal of some heavy
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
29
==PAGE:38==
metals listed in Table 3.4. The results are presented for zinc for the Gistrup catchment
on Figure 4.4. Mostly because of settling of suspended solids in the pond, the concen­
tration of zinc in the discharge is reduced by 75%. After dilution in the stream the risk of
exceeding the required concentration is significantly reduced. Based on the median, the
zinc concentration posed the risk of exceeding the AQS at least 50 times a year without
the pond. After treatment, the return period of a discharge event exceeding the AQS is
more than two years.
(a) Distribution of the concentration on zinc in the discharge, available measurements have been
plotted along
(b) Distribution of the concentration on zinc in the receiving stream
Figure 4.4: Results of the stochastic model for the concentration of zinc with and without
treatment by a retention pond before the discharge in the receiving stream in Gistrup
catchment, the model was run with Miljøstyrelsen database
4.5
Model testing
4.5.1
Comparison with NOVANA measurements
The measurements from the NOVANA sampling campaign are plotted on the distributions
shown in Figure 4.1 for the Gistrup catchment.
30
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:39==
(a) Comparison of the concentration of zinc in the discharge with measurements
(b) Comparison of the concentration of copper in the discharge with measurements
(c) Comparison of the concentration of fluoranthene in the discharge with measurements
(d) Comparison of the concentration of DEHP in the discharge with measurements
Figure 4.5: Comparison of the concentration in the discharge of a separate catchment
(Gistrup) estimated with the three databases from Mutzner et al., Miljøstyrelsen and Reg­
nKvalitet and available measurements from the NOVANA reports
A first observation is that for the Mutzner et al. database, all measurements are encom­
passed in the distribution obtained. They are however in the lower bound of the distribution
for copper and fluoranthene. This database is thus useful to estimate the variability of the
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
31
==PAGE:40==
concentrations but because it has been built on international data, it might be too general
and not as accurate as wished for Denmark.
The Miljøstyrelsen database gives a narrower distribution but also covers almost all mea­
surements, and the measurements are closer to the median and in the 25%­75% interval.
The database seems thus a good estimation of the micropollutant concentrations esti­
mation. There is however one bias that makes it difficult to assess the relevance of this
dataset: because measurements were only available for catchments that are also in­
cluded in the NOVANA statistics, the distribution has actually partly been built based on
these data.
The distribution obtained with the RegnKvalitet database seems too narrow as it does not
cover all measurements. For fluoranthene and DEHP the majority of observations are
even below the 5% for the estimation of discharge concentrations, this may be due to the
small number of measurements used to build the database.
Alongside the measurements, the evolution of the median is also plotted. The idea was
to investigate how many events needed to be monitored before reliable conclusions can
be drawn on the pollution level of the catchment. In Mutzner et al. study [12], the median
minimum number of events is estimated to 6 for SWO and 7 for CSO. This corroborates
a relative stabilization of the orange dotted line on the plots after six measurements.
To quantify more precisely the uncertainty in the estimation of the mean site EMC, [36]
estimated a chart giving the relative uncertainty in the mean value as a function of the
(a) Zinc
(b) Copper
(c) Fluoranthene
(d) DEHP
Figure 4.6: Estimation of the expected uncertainty on the measured mean concentration
for five of the case studies based on the chart by [36], the letters on the charts correspond
to each catchment: a Sulsted (separate), b Gistrup, c Sulsted (combined), d Gug Skole,
e Grønlandstorv
32
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:41==
number of events sampled and the coefficient of variation of these samples. The avail­
able data from the five catchments including measurements were compared to the chart
for the four substances analyzed on Figure 4.6. The accuracy of the estimated mean
concentration ranges from 18% to 80% with a high variability between case studies. The
uncertainty in the estimated pollutant concentration in the discharge was then plotted as
an error bar around the mean value of the measurements on Figure 4.7. The uncertainty is
significant and shows that is crucial to monitor a large number of discharge events before
being able to accurately estimate the typical micropollutant concentration of a catchment.
(a) Zinc
(b) Copper
(c) Fluoranthene
(d) DEHP
Figure 4.7: Mean value of the measurements from the NOVANA reports and bounds
estimated based on the uncertainty levels extrapolated from Figure 4.6
4.5.2
Interest of the stochastic model
On Figure 4.8 is compared the output of the acute concentration calculation using a de­
terministic and a stochastic approach. The deterministic calculation is based on the type
value from the NOVANA report [13] and the stochastic approach is the outcome of the
model built in this report using the Miljøstyrelsen database. This type value enables to
formulate a first risk assessment, in the case of zinc it highlights the risk posed to the
ecosystem for events with a return period higher than 0.03 year. In the examples of flu­
oranthene and DEHP, the concentration obtained is expected to be safe for the environ­
ment. If this is corroborated for fluoranthene as even the 95% percentile is far below the
allowed concentration, the stochastic approach shows that there is some risk that the dis­
charge exceeds the AQS. There is a probability of 25% that this maximum concentration
is reached 3 times a year. The stochastic approach thus enables to better evaluate the
risk of exceedance and therefore to make sure that the environmental standards required
are met.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
33
==PAGE:42==
(a) Zinc
(b) Fluoranthene
(c) DEHP
Figure 4.8: Comparison of the estimation of the concentration in the receiving stream
based on the type value provided by Miljøstyrelsen with the output of the stochastic model
run with the complete Miljøstyrelsen database, for Sulsted (separate) catchment
4.5.3
Interest of the catchment characterization
Two approaches have been used in this thesis. The first one is to apply directly the
distribution of concentrations at the outlet of the catchment using Mutzner et al. and
Miljøstyrelsen database. The second one attempts to quantify the pollution according
to each catchment and its land use characterization using the RegnKvalitet database.
In order to assess the relevance of this catchment specific method, the distribution of
concentrations in the discharge obtained with this RegnKvalitet dataset are compared on
Figure 4.9 for four catchments.
The distributions show few variations from one catchment to another, mostly the 95%­
percentile is variable for zinc and copper while the variations of the median for fluoran­
thene and DEHP do not show a correlation with the actual pollution level shown with the
measurements. From these results, it is thus difficult to assess the relevance of using
the RegnKvaltet dataset. Two main conclusions can be drawn : (i) As mentioned in sec­
tion 2.4, the catchments included in this report are all urban and peri­urban residential
areas. Their characterization into different land uses is quite homogeneous and therefore
34
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:43==
no real difference in the distribution of pollutant concentrations can be observed. It would
thus be interesting to use the model with the catchment characterization approach with
more diverse areas. (ii) The RegnKvalitet database has been built with a relatively small
number of data as can be seen on Table 4.4 and is therefore not robust enough for assess­
ing the micropollutant concentrations in the discharges. Furthermore, the measurements
have been compiled into a classification of 14 different land uses but each catchment area
have specifics that do not match perfectly with the area sampled.For simplification, some
details have also been left on the side for this study : for example the land cover from
Scalgo only enables to identify a ”building” cover without specifying the material used to
cover the roofs, so copper and zinc roofs are a significant source of pollution that was
neglected here.
While interesting because it enables to provide a risk assessment of the pollution more
specific to the catchment monitored, the RegnKvalitet database does not seem accurate
enough to be used in its current version. A more comprehensive version built on more
measurements would nonetheless be a useful resource worth analyzing.
(a) Zinc
(b) Copper
(c) Fluoranthene
(d) DEHP
Figure 4.9: Comparison of the distributions of concentrations in the discharge obtained
with the RegnKvalitet database for four catchments, the median of the available measure­
ments is plotted along
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
35
==PAGE:44==
4.5.4
Comparison of the catchments studied
One outcome of the model, the total duration of the discharges risking to pose a threat to
the environment over one year regarding zinc, was calculated for all catchments studied
based on the median of concentrations on Table 4.7 and the 90%­percentile on Table 4.8.
Table 4.7: Comparison of the duration of discharges exceeding the AQS for zinc ex­
pressed as a fraction of the total duration of discharges [%] for the six catchments, the
risk of exceeding is calculated based on the median
Catchment
Mutzner et al.
database
Miljøstyrelsen
database
RegnKvalitet
database
Tingbjerg
45.1
44.1
3.9
Sulsted (separate)
31.4
30.4
0.3
Gistrup
89.0
89.0
8.7
Sulsted (combined)
19.0
31.7
0.4
Gug Skole
5.2
5.2
0
Grønlandstorv
0.25
0.25
0
Table 4.8: Comparison of the duration of discharges exceeding the AQS for zinc ex­
pressed as a fraction of the total duration of discharges [%] for the six catchments, the
risk of exceeding is calculated based on a precautionary 90%­percentile
Catchment
Mutzner et al.
database
Miljøstyrelsen
database
RegnKvalitet
database
Tingbjerg
98.4
89.3
18.2
Sulsted (separate)
93.4
68.8
31.9
Gistrup
95.6
99.3
31.9
Sulsted (combined)
21.9
55.2
29.4
Gug Skole
28.4
34.1
7.3
Grønlandstorv
0.25
0.25
0.25
Large variations can be observed from one catchment to another. Looking at the results
obtained with Miljøstyrelsen database with a precautionary 90%­percentile, the concen­
tration of zinc in the stream is predicted to exceed the MAC­EQS a few hours per year for
Grønlanstorv catchment (0.25% of the total duration of discharges) but for almost every
discharge event for Gistrup catchment. These results have been plotted against some
properties of the catchment on subsection 4.5.4 to have an overview of the variations be­
tween the catchments and to assess how their specifics can explain these results. The
separate systems are shown in warm colors and the combined systems in colder tones
to distinguish between the two types of drainage systems.
36
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:45==
(a) Influence of the area of the catchment
(b) Influence of the runoff coefficient of the
catchment
(c) Influence of the average volume discharged
per event
(d) Influence of the average flow of the dis­
charge
(e) Influence of the average flow in the receiving
stream
(f) Influence of the ratio between the flow of the
discharge and the flow of the receiving stream
Figure 4.10: Duration of discharge exceeding the MAC­EQS expressed as a percentage
of the total duration of discharges plotted against six variables of the model, separate
systems are shown in warm colors and combined systems in colder tones
First, by looking only at the y­axis, it can be noticed that combined systems seem to pose
a smaller threat to the environment in terms of risk of exceeding the MAC­EQS, as fewer
discharge events occur in one year and in average the discharged volume is also smaller.
Some hypothesis can also be made to explain the differences observed in the results
between the catchments, however these assumptions are made on a very small number
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
37
==PAGE:46==
of data, six in total and three when separate and combined systems are differentiated,
so they should not be taken for granted. Related to the catchment itself, a larger area
seems to be correlated with a higher risk of pollution for separate systems but the opposite
trend appears for combined systems. The risk of exceeding the environmental standards
also looks inversely related to the runoff coefficient but this trend is difficult to interpret
as a higher runoff coefficient goes with a higher proportion of impervious areas such as
roads and buildings which are large sources of runoff pollution, so the opposite result was
expected. From the three plots displaying the volume and flow of the discharges and the
flow of the receiving stream, the variable that seems to play an important role to explain
the pollution level is the flow of the receiving stream. This variable in fact controls the
dilution of the concentration of micropollutant in the discharge. The last plot shows the
influence of the ratio between the average flow of the discharge and the average flow of
the stream, and the same conclusion can be drawn.
4.5.5
Uncertainties of the model
By reviewing the structure of the model built and the required data, the potential sources
of uncertainty have been listed in Table 4.9 and classified according to the framework from
[35]. Each source is addressed in detail below. The variability related to the concentra­
tions of micropollutants in the databases has been excluded from this list as it has been
addressed previously in the report.
Table 4.9: Uncertainty analysis of the model
Source of uncertainty
Location
Level
Nature
Runoff coefficient
Parameter
Statistical
Lack of knowledge
Rainfall data
Input
Statistical
Variability
hydrologic modelling in SAMBAgis
Model structure
/ Parameter
Qualitative
Lack of knowledge
Natural background concentration
Input
Statistical
Variability / Lack of
knowledge
Flow of receiving waters
Input
Statistical
Variability / Lack of
knowledge
Phase partition of heavy metals
Parameter
Statistical
Variability / Lack of
knowledge
Pollution removal from a retention
pond
Parameter
Statistical
Variability / Lack of
knowledge
Runoff coefficient
The global runoff coefficient of the catchment calculated in subsection 3.1.2 is used in the
hydrologic model to estimate the volume of water that runs off and that will end up in the
receiving stream. The first assumption made was to consider this runoff coefficient as a
constant value that does not take into account the rainfall dynamics nor the antecedent
soil and surface conditions. It is however a widely used assumption because of the sim­
plifications it enables for the model. The calculation of this coefficient was also based on
the land use characterization of the catchment as different land uses have different imper­
viousness degrees. The very different values found in the literature show however that
it is difficult to obtain a value for this coefficient as it depends notably on the definition of
the land use and specifics of the area. The values from [22] that were used in this report
were named ”suggested values” and provided with ranges.
38
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:47==
To assess the impact of the uncertainty on this value, the runoff coefficient of the Sul­
sted (separate) catchment was also calculated with the lower and upper values form the
ranges provided in Table 3.2 and the model was run with these two new values of runoff
coefficient. Two extreme scenarios of minimum and maximum runoff were thus created in
addition to the original one. The new value of runoff coefficient was entered in the catch­
ment description in SAMBAgis, thus generating a new list of the discharge events (mostly
the volume of the discharges was impacted). The duration of the discharges exceeding
the AQS was calculated and expressed as a percentage of the total duration of discharges
to enable the comparison between the three scenarios. The results for zinc run with the
Miljøstyrelsen database are presented in Table 4.10.
Table 4.10: Results of the stochastic model run for Sulsted catchment (separate) and
Miljøstyrelsen database with three scenarios of runoff coefficient: the first percentage
corresponds to the model run with the suggested value and the number in parenthesis
indicate the ranges obtained with the minimum and maximum coefficients of runoff
Total duration of discharges in one year: 59.9 days (59.9 ­ 60.7)
Micropollutant
Percentage of the total
duration of discharges for
which the MAC­EQS is
exceeded based on the
median for a one­year
simulation [%]
Percentage of the total
duration of discharges for
which the MAC­EQS is
exceeded based on on a
precautionary
90%­percentile for a
one­year simulation [%]
DEHP
0
17.4 (14.7 ­ 17.4)
Benzo[ghi]perylene
0.4 (0.4 ­ 0.4)
26.4 (23.6 ­ 32.3)
Benzo[bjk]fluoranthene
0
2.1 (1.7 ­ 2.1)
Chrysene
0.4 (0 ­ 0.4)
30.3 (23.6 ­ 32.3)
Pyrene
0
12.8 (9.4 ­ 12.8)
Mercury
0
2.1 (1.7 ­ 2.1)
Zinc
30.3 (26.4 ­ 32.3)
68.7 (62.1 ­ 78.2)
Copper
0
0.4 (0.4 ­ 0.4)
Regardless of the scenario, the micropollutants that risk to pose a threat to the environ­
ment are the same, only the risk that the AQS for chrysene is exceeded becomes null
when considering the median. The suggested runoff coefficient values thus seem to be
accurate enough to at least identify the micropollutants to target. The differences of du­
ration of discharges exceeding the AQS between the two extreme scenarios range from
0% for benzo[ghi]perylene and 6% for zinc when considering the median of the distribu­
tion, and from 0% for copper to 16% for zinc with the 90%­percentile. These variations,
although not negligible, do not show a significant impact of the runoff coefficient value on
the results when running the model to assess the pollution levels in the receiving stream.
When used for planning and designing treatment solutions, the upper range of the runoff
coefficient values could be used to add a ”safety factor” to the model.
Rainfall data
Rainfall input can be a major source of uncertainty as the estimation of the discharged
volumes is based on these data. Because of variation in space, data from rain gauges
close to the catchment need to be used. There is also a high variation of rainfall in time,
for example between years as some years are very dry and others are very wet. The
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
39
==PAGE:48==
discharge events will thus not follow the same pattern from one year to another. This
is why [37] highlights the necessity to use rainfall series with a long observation period.
However in this report, the simulation periods were between one and three years and
seem to provide a reliable assessment of the duration of discharges during one year. On
Figure 4.11 the model has been run with two rainfall series for Gistrup catchment, with
observation periods of one year and eleven years. Although the plot on the right has
been built with ten times more events, the results are very similar to the chart built with
the one­year simulation. For the short­term simulation, the median concentration exceeds
the AQS with a return period of approximately 0.012 year, whereas is for return period of
0.014 year for the long­term simulation.
(a) Estimation of the concentration of zinc in
the receiving stream with a rainfall series of one
year
(b) Estimation of the concentration of zinc in the
receiving stream with a rainfall series of eleven
years
Figure 4.11: Comparison of the outcome of the model run for Gistrup catchment with
Miljøstyrelsen database with two rainfall time series: one year and eleven years
Hydrologic modelling in SAMBAgis
Due to a lack of information regarding the drainage network, the catchment and the water
flow have been modelled in a very simplistic way, and values such as the concentration
time were estimated roughly. Especially for combined systems, volumes of discharge
events did not match well with the values reported in the case studies reports. To eval­
uate accurately the pollution levels of the discharges, it is necessary to estimate the vol­
umes discharged as precisely as possible and moe information on the drainage system
modelled would be needed.
Natural background concentration
To estimate the natural background concentration of micropollutants in the stream and
because no measurements were available for the catchments studied (with the exception
of some substances for Tingbjerg that were taken from [18]), default values from [30]
have been used. Except zinc, copper, uranium and selenium for which the MAC­EQS is
defined on the concentration added in the stream by the discharge, the initial pollution
in the stream will significantly impact the treatment solution chosen for the catchment. It
would thus be useful for the municipalities to be able to estimate the pollution levels of the
stream before the discharges so they know if the focus has to been put on the discharges
(with a retention pond for example) upstream of them if the concentration in the stream
already exceeds the MAC­EQS.
40
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:49==
Stream flow
Flow data for the receiving stream were extracted from the HIP database. However these
data were not available for some outlet locations and nearby locations were used. As
highlighted in subsection 4.5.4, the flow of the stream has a major influence on the result­
ing pollution levels and it is thus crucial to have a good estimation of this value and in the
ideal case to use time series to take into account the seasonal variations (as it was done
in this report).
Phase partition of heavy metals
The environmental quality standards for heavy metals are given as dissolved concen­
trations, but all data and measurements analyzed in this study were given for the total
concentration of metals. Table 3.7 was used to convert the standards for dissolved con­
centration into limits for total concentrations of heavy metals. However the uncertainty
on these partition coefficients is high as shown by the ranges in [38]. For example, in
some studies zinc is found to be 10% particulate and in others it is found to be more than
90% particulate. For heavy metals, this uncertainty will impact the risk assessment as
it is difficult to estimate precisely the risk of exceeding the MAC­EQS for the dissolved
concentration.
Pollution removal from a retention pond
As explained in [25], the cleaning rates listed in Table 3.4 are the expected performance
of a well­dimensioned basin in typical rainfall runoff. There is indeed a high variability in
the treatment performance of basins, due to the volume of the pond, solid loads, hydro­
logic conditions and basin geometry. Furthermore, a retention pond is effective against
particulate pollution but less effective for dissolved substances.That makes it difficult to
predict the actual performance of a stormwater treatment solution, especially regarding
dissolved heavy metals.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
41
==PAGE:50==
5
Outlook
5.1
Future improvements of the model
The focus of this project was to integrate the variability of the quality from rainfall­induced
discharges to an existing hydrologic model, and the effort was thus put on the stochas­
ticity of the concentrations of micropollutants. To provide a more accurate tool, it would
also be necessary to spend more time on the hydrologic model in order to better model
the catchments, their drainage network and the discharges, especially in the case of com­
bined systems where the hydrologic results obtained in this report do not seem accurate
enough. The main effort would be to evaluate the concentration time of the catchment
and to model correctly the overflow system.
The model currently built is conducted in different independent steps : characterization of
the catchment with Scalgo and QGIS by hand, extraction of rainfall data, run of the SAM­
BAgis hydrologic model and export of the results, run of a Python code with these results
and production of the output. These steps do not make the model user­friendly enough
and it will be interesting to reflect on a more global tool, for example an automatic catch­
ment characterization program and the implementation of the stochastic Python model in
SAMBAgis.
While the model was used only on one catchment at a time, it could be combined with other
models to study the impact on the receiving stream of several outlets, also integrating a
fate model for the micropollutants in the stream as it was done by Leonie Schweiger in
her master thesis [39].
Finally, the classification of land use suggested in this report is mainly based on the clas­
sification from Scalgo and could be refined to integrate more specifics of the catchments
(industrial areas, copper or zinc roofs...).
5.2
Possible further applications
The tool aims at being used by municipalities and utilities to better evaluate the emissions
of micropollutants from their wet weather systems. It could be used as a screening tool
before carrying out resource­intensive measurements campaigns or as a decision support
tool to assess the performance of various measures to reduce the discharges or their
pollution. The concept of acknowledging and using the natural variability of stormwater
discharges and the pollution associated to formulate a more robust risk assessment could
also be further analyzed and more broadly used in studies and risk assessments as well
as in environmental regulations.
In order to better assess the validity of the data used, it would also be interesting to ap­
ply the model to other catchments (with more diverse land use and specifics if possible)
where measurements are available. Sampling in the stream at the outlet of the discharge
would also provide valuable measures to compare the outcome of the model with. Many
assumptions were made when data where missing, the main one regarding the natural
background concentration in the receiving stream. If municipalities or utilities had the
possibility to estimate the average pollution through a sampling campaign or a model, the
accuracy of the risk assessment would be significantly better.
42
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:51==
6
Conclusion
This thesis aimed at creating a simple stochastic model of micropollutant emissions from
wet weather systems to be used by municipalities and utilities to help them assessing in
a more accurate way the risk posed by the discharges on the environment. The following
conclusions can be drawn from the project :
1. Review of available sources of data Three main datasets were investigated in
this report. Among them, the national database provided by Miljøstyrelsen as part
of the NOVANA monitoring program proved able to give a good estimation of the es­
timation of concentrations of micropollutants. However, these existing data are still
insufficient to completely capture the variability of pollutant levels in rainfall­induced
discharges.
2. Development of a simple stochastic model The stochastic approach was inte­
grated into a simple model combining : a characterization of the catchment using
Scalgo and QGIS, an estimation of the stormwater discharges run with the hydro­
logic model SAMBAgis and rainfall time series, and the assessment of the pollution
risks with a Python code.
3. Use of the model for carrying out a risk assessment The model developed pro­
vides a robust assessment of the impact of the discharges on the environment by
making it possible to quantify the risk of exceeding the environmental standards with
different levels of probability. The tool is also created to be adaptable to the data
available and can be run with different datasets.
4. Assessment of the performance of the model The lack of measurements in the
receiving stream makes it difficult to actually assess the validity of the output of the
model. Uncertainties due to the hydrologic modelling of discharges and the assump­
tions made to estimate some parameters could affect significantly the results. Re­
garding the suggested method to assess the pollution level of the catchment based
on its land use characterization, the results were not conclusive but this might mostly
be caused by the quality of the RegnKvalitet database. This method should still be
investigated with a more robust dataset.
5. Future prospects The model created is a first step towards a more effective as­
sessment of the emissions of micropollutants from wet weather discharges that can
be used by municipalities and utilities. Applying this tool at a larger scale could also
help in the development of pollution mitigation strategies.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
43
==PAGE:52==
Bibliography
[1] Baeumler Alex, D’Aoust Olivia, Gapihan Annie, Goga Soraya, Lakovits Carina, Re­
strepo Cavadid Paula, Singh Gayatri, Terraza Horacio. Demographic trends and
urbanization. 2021. doi: 10.1596/978­1­4648­1112­9.
[2] T.D. Fletcherv H. Andrieu, P. Hamel. Understanding, management and modelling of
urban hydrology and its consequences for receiving waters: A state of the art. 2011.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2012.09.001.
[3] The internaitonal water association.
The IWA Principles for Water­Wise Cities.
2016.
URL https://iwa-network.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/IWA_Brochure_
Water_Wise_Communities_SCREEN-1.pdf.
[4] Alexandra Müller, Heléne Österlund, Jiri Marsalek, Maria Viklander. The Pollution
conveyed by urban runoff: A review of sources. 2019. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2019.136125.
[5] Sarah
Brudler,
Martin
Rygaard,
Karsten
Arnbjerg­Nielsen,
Michael
Zwicky
Hauschild, Christian Ammitsøe, Luca Vezzaro. Pollution levels of stormwater dis­
charges and resulting environmental impacts. 2019. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2019.01.388.
[6] Directive 2000/60/EC of the European parliament and of the Council of 23 October
2000 establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water policy. 2000.
[7] Ditte Marie Reinholdt Jensen, Anja Thrane Hejselbæk Thomsen, Torben Larsen,
Sara Egemose, Peter Steen Mikkelsen. From EU directives to local stormwater dis­
charge permits: a study of regulatory uncertainty and practice gaps in Denmark.
2020. doi: https://doi.org/10.3390/su12166317.
[8] Jean­Luc Bertrand Krajewski. Stormwater pollutant loads modelling: epistemolog­
ical aspects and case studies on the influence of field data sets on calibration and
verification. 2007. doi: https://doi.org/10.2166/wst.2007.090.
[9] Christopher Zoppou. Review of urban storm water models. 2000.
[10] A.H. Elliott, S.A. Trowsdale. A review of models for low impact urban stormwater
drainage. 2005. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2005.12.005.
[11] Robert Pitt, Alex Maestre, Renee Morquecho.
The National Stormwater Quality
Database (NSQD, version 1.1). 2004.
[12] Lena Mutzner, Viviane Furrer, Hélène Castebrunet, Ulrich Dittmer, Stephan Fuchs,
Wolfgang Gernjak, Marie­Christine Gromaire, Andreas Matzinger, Peter Steen
Mikkelsen, William R. Selbig, Luca Vezzaro. A decade of monitoring micropollu­
tants in urban wet­weather flows: What did we learn? 2022. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.watres.2022.118968.
[13] Miljøstyrelsen, Kristina Buus Kjær (DHI), Dorte Rasmussen (DHI). Typetal for miljø­
farlige forurenende stoffer i regnbetingede udledninger ­ På baggrund af data fra det
nationale overvågningsprogram 2000­2020. 2022.
44
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:53==
[14] DHI.
RegnKvalitet Version: 1.3 ­ Screeningsværktøj til beregning af regnvand­
skvalitet for overfladeafstrømning. 2018.
[15] StormTac Corporation. StormTac Database (2023). Stormwater, baseflow, surface
water and wastewater database, v.2023­10­10. URL www.stormtac.com.
[16] StormTac ­ Method description. URL https://www.stormtac.com/?page_id=2049.
[17] Storm Water Management Model (SWMM).
URL https://www.epa.gov/water-
research/storm-water-management-model-swmm.
[18] Sissel Weiss Tønder, Steen O. Petersen, Lotte Juul Hansen, Ole Mark. Rensning af
overfladevand ­ Case: Tingbjerg ­ Notat om renseteknologier. 2023.
[19] SCALGO
Live
Documentation.
URL
https://scalgo.com/en-US/scalgo-live-
documentation.
[20] M.K. Goel. Runoff coefficient. 2011. doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/978­90­481­2642­
2_456.
[21] John Huang, John Poullain. Estimating storm water runoff. 2020. URL https://
pdhonline.com/courses/h119/stormwater%20runoff.pdf.
[22] Zhifeng Li, Lixin Wu, Wei Zhu, Miaole Hou, Yizhou Yang, Jianchun Zheng. A new
method for urban storm flood inundation simulation with fine CD­TIN surface. 2014.
doi: 10.3390/w6051151.
[23] Cecilie Thrysøe, Karsten Arnbjerg­Nielsen, Morten Borup. Identifying fit­for­purpose
lumped surrogate models for large urban drainage systems using GLUE. 2018. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2018.11.005.
[24] Jane Clary, Jonathan Jones, Marc Leisenring, Paul Hobson, Eric Strecker. Interna­
tional Stormwater BMP Database: 2020 Summary Statistics. 2020.
[25] Jes Vollertsen, Thorkild Hvitved­Jacobsen, Asbjørn Haaning Nielsen. Faktablad om
dimensionering af våde regnvandsbassiner. 2012.
[26] Water planning division, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Results of the Na­
tionwide Urban Runoff Program ­ Volume I ­ Final report. 1983.
[27] M. A. VAN BURENI, W. E. WATT, J. MARSALEK. Application of the log­normal and
normal distributions to stormwater quality parameters. 1997.
[28] John D. Cook.
Determining distribution parameters from quantiles.
2010.
URL
https://www.johndcook.com/quantiles_parameters.pdf.
[29] Miljøstyrelsen. Nøgletal for miljøfarlige forurenende stoffer i spildevand fra rensean­
læg ­ Opdatering på baggrund af data fra det nationale overvågningsprogram for
punktkilder 1998­2019. 2021.
[30] Susanne Boutrup, Christian Kjær, Liselotte Sander Johansson, Martin M. Larsen,
Maria Bech Poulsen, Rossana Bossi, Mia Roest Christensen, Thomas Frank­
Gopolos. Miljøfarlige forurenende stoffer i vandmiljøet ­ NOVANA. Tilstand og ud­
vikling 2008­2019. 2021.
[31] Hydrologisk Informations­ og Prognosesystem.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
45
==PAGE:54==
[32] Directive 2013/39/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 August
2013 amending Directives 2000/60/EC and 2008/105/EC as regards priority sub­
stances in the field of water policy. 2013.
[33] Possible control of EU priority substances in Danish waters – Technical and eco­
nomic consequences examined by three scenarios.
URL https://www2.mst.dk/
udgiv/publications/2007/978-87-7052-566-4/html/kap02_eng.htm#2.8.
[34] Bekendtgørelse om fastlæggelse af miljømål for vandløb, søer, overgangsvande,
kystvande og grundvand. 2017.
[35] J.J. Warmink, J.A.E.B. Janssen, M.J. Booij, M.S. Krol. Identification and classification
of uncertainties in the application of environmental models. 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.
envsoft.2010.04.011.
[36] J.­L. Bertrand–Krajewski, S. Barraud, J.­P. Bardin. Uncertainties, performance indi­
cators and decision aid applied to stormwater facilities. 2002.
[37] Vezzaro Luca, Arildsen Anne Lørup, Johansen Niels Bent, Arnbjerg­Nielsen Karsten,
Mikkelsen Peter Steen. Uncertainty analysis of model­based calculations of wet­
weather discharges from point sources. 2019.
[38] Simon Toft Ingvertsen, Marina Bergen Jensen, Jakob Magid. A minimum data set of
water quality parameters to assess and compare treatment efficiency of stormwater
facilities. 2011. doi: doi:10.2134/jeq2010.0420.
[39] Leonie Schweiger. A simple chemical fate­model to assess short­term impacts of
micropollutants from wet weather discharges on Danish streams. 2022.
46
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:55==
A
Appendix
A.1
Percentiles describing the log­normal distributions for
the three datasets
A.1.1
Database from the study of Mutzner et al.
Table A.1: SWO
Micropollutant
10th percentile
90th percentile
Carbendazim
0.0012
1.2
Imidacloprid
0.0022
0.072
Chlorpyrifos
0.00016
0.0017
Pentachlorophenol
0.20
0.86
Diuron
0.0036
0.35
4­tert­Octylphenol
0.0082
0.19
DEHP
0.49
5.7
para­Nonylphenol
0.025
1.3
Bisphenol A
0.027
0.77
Anthracene
0.0013
0.13
Benzo[ghi]perylene
0.0057
0.68
Benzo[a]pyrene
0.0029
0.74
Fluoranthene
0.014
2.44
Benz[a]anthracene
0.011
0.66
Benzo[k]fluoranthene
0.0035
0.74
Benzo[b]fluoranthene
0.020
2.1
Chrysene
0.016
1.3
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene
0.00058
0.10
Pyrene
0.014
1.7
Barium
11
66
Nickel
0.99
42
Mercury
0.010
4.3
Zinc
16
1222
Chromium
0.55
25
Copper
5.3
200
Lead
3.4
83
Cadmium
0.021
7.9
Vanadium
1.3
55
Cobalt
0.068
3.8
Uranium
0.0089
0.71
Selenium
0.090
0.56
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
47
==PAGE:56==
Table A.2: CSO
Micropollutant
10th percentile
90th percentile
Carbendazim
0.0014
0.040
Diuron
0.00096
0.20
4­tert­Octylphenol
0.014
0.030
DEHP
0.58
6.7
para­Nonylphenol
0.031
0.32
Bisphenol A
0.11
0.73
Anthracene
0.0055
0.020
Benzo[ghi]perylene
0.010
0.079
Benzo[a]pyrene
0.0058
0.071
Fluoranthene
0.018
0.18
Benz[a]anthracene
0.0062
0.070
Benzo[k]fluoranthene
0.010
0.050
Benzo[b]fluoranthene
0.010
0.10
Chrysene
0.010
0.11
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene
0.0051
0.020
Pyrene
0.016
0.14
Barium
8.1
52
Nickel
1.1
9.2
Mercury
0.010
0.050
Zinc
71
260
Chromium
1.6
11
Copper
15
68
Lead
1.4
11
Cadmium
0.038
0.21
Vanadium
0.93
6.2
48
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:57==
A.1.2
Miljøstyrelsen database
Table A.3: SWO
Micropollutant
10th percentile
90th percentile
Pentachlorophenol
1e­8
1.1e­8
Diuron
1e­8
1.1e­8
DEHP
0.22
5.0
Para­Nonylphenol
1e­8
1.1e­8
Bisphenol A
0.025
0.27
Anthracene
1e­8
0.011
Benzo[ghi]perylene
0.0050
0.040
Benzo[a]pyrene
0.0050
0.018
Fluoranthene
0.0050
0.060
Benz[a]anthracene
1e­8
0.019
Benzo[bjk]fluoranthene
0.0050
0.070
Chrysene
0.0050
0.070
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene
1e­8
0.009
Pyrene
0.0050
0.070
Barium
7.0
40
Nickel
0.50
13
Mercury
0.0026
0.15
Zinc
60
300
Chromium
0.90
14
Copper
2.9
28
Lead
1.1
10
Cadmium
0.025
0.19
Vanadium
0.70
6.0
Cobalt
0.25
1.1
Uranium
0.050
1.1
Selenium
1e­8
0.20
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
49
==PAGE:58==
Table A.4: CSO
Micropollutant
10th percentile
90th percentile
Pentachlorophenol
1e­8
1.1e­8
Diuron
1e­8
1.1e­8
DEHP
1.1
11
Para­Nonylphenol
1e­8
1.1e­8
Bisphenol A
0.11
0.60
Anthracene
0.0050
0.025
Benzo[ghi]perylene
0.0050
0.090
Benzo[a]pyrene
0.0050
0.070
Fluoranthene
0.0070
0.17
Benz[a]anthracene
0.0050
0.050
Benzo[bjk]fluoranthene
0.0050
0.17
Chrysene
0.0050
0.12
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene
0.0050
0.021
Pyrene
0.0050
0.15
Barium
8.0
50
Nickel
1.1
9.0
Mercury
0.0070
0.31
Zinc
110
300
Chromium
0.80
6.0
Copper
7.0
40
Lead
2.1
23
Cadmium
0.025
0.23
Vanadium
1.2
7.0
Cobalt
0.25
1.2
Uranium
0.070
0.29
Selenium
1e­8
0.17
50
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:59==
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
51
==PAGE:60==
A.1.3
RegnKvalitet database (DHI)
Table A.5: RegnKvalitet database (75%percentile,90%­percentile)
Micro­
pollutant
Bare
land
/
Unpaved
road
Vegetation
Paved road
ADT<500
Paved road
500<ADT<5000
Paved road
5000<ADT<15000
Paved
road
ADT>15000
Building
Other
paved
Zinc
30.5;32
30;33
23.5;28
36;42.2
483;931
570;650
151;272
57.3;173
Dissolved
Zinc
1e­8;1.1e­8
1e­8;1.1e­8
15.8;27.3
18.0;26.2
23.8;31.7
23.8;31.7
61.9;71.3
20.3;22.3
Copper
15.0;15.6
10.8;11.0
16.5;19.2
16.0;19.1
111;247
130;164
4.8;6.8
19.5;55.2
Dissolved
Copper
1e­8;1.1e­8
1e­8;1.1e­8
7.6;12.4
7.6;9.7
18.3;26.5
18.3;26.5
2.5;2.6
8.38;23.2
Lead
5.05;5.62
8.0;8.6
3.5;4.2
3.5;4.2
54.5;106
32.0;44.4
0.44;0.51
2.38;11.5
Dissolved
Lead
1e­8;1.1e­8
1e­8;1.1e­8
0.295;0.924
0.450;0.772
0.380;0.518
0.380;0.518
0.430;0.460
0.250;0.253
Fluoranthene 0.11;0.13
0.055;0.058
0.055;0.14
0.051;0.113
0.36;0.42
0.36;0.42
0.005;0.0051 0.168;0.193
Pyrene
0.089;0.102
0.042;0.044
0.053;0.104
0.0405;0.0818
0.385;0.45
0.385;0.45
0.0065;0.0385 0.118;0.131
Benzo[a]­
pyrene
0.009;0.01
0.009;0.01
0.027;0.038
0.0305;0.0402
0.058;0.24
0.058;0.24
0.005;0.0052 0.032;0.037
Benzo[bjk]­
fluoran­
thene
0.073;0.081
0.036;0.038
0.053;0.13
0.054;0.126
0.295;0.390
0.295;0.390
0.005;0.0052 0.143;0.165
Benzo[ghi]­
perylene
0.052;0.058
0.028;0.029
0.025;0.057
0.021;0.050
0.125;0.17
0.125;0.17
0.005;0.0052 0.065;0.072
DEHP
13.7;16.3
10.0;14.8
2.90;6.80
7.10;8.52
2.18;2.91
5.60;11.6
1e­8;1.1e­8
5.83;5.93
Bisphenol
A
1e­8;1.1e­8
1e­8;1.1e­8
1.40;3.94
1.21;3.87
2.40;4.38
2.40;4.38
1e­8;1.1e­8
1.05;1.14
52
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:61==
A.2
Environmental quality standards
Table A.6: Maximum allowed concentration (MAC­EQS) from Danish and European di­
rectives
Micropollutant
MAC­AQS (µg/L)
Pentachlorophenol
1
Diuron
1.8
DEHP
1.3
Para­Nonylphenol
2.0
Bisphenol A
10
Anthracene
0.1
Benzo[ghi]perylene
0.0082
Benzo[a]pyrene
0.27
Fluoranthene
0.12
Benz[a]anthracene
0.018
Benzo[bjk]fluoranthene
0.034
Chrysene
0.014
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene
0.018
Pyrene
0.023
Barium
145
Nickel
34
Mercury
0.07
Zinc (dissolved)
8.4 (1)
Chromium (dissolved)
141
Copper (dissolved)
2 (1)
Lead (dissolved)
14
Cadmium (dissolved)
0.45
Vanadium
57.8
Cobalt (dissolved)
18
Uranium
2.3 (1)
Selenium
31 (1)
(1) For zinc, copper, selenium and uranium, the quality requirement is this concentration
added to the natural background concentration.
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
53
==PAGE:62==
A.3
Estimation of the natural background concentration in
the stream
Table A.7: Type natural background concentration in Danish streams from [30]
Micropollutant
Concentration (µg/L)
Pentachlorophenol
0
Diuron
0.0044
DEHP
0.02
Para­Nonylphenol
0
Bisphenol A
0.022
Anthracene
0.00035
Benzo[ghi]perylene
0.0003
Benzo[a]pyrene
0.00029
Fluoranthene
0.00045
Benz[a]anthracene
0
Benzo[bjk]fluoranthene
0.00054
Chrysene
0.0002
Dibenz[a,h]anthracene
0
Pyrene
0.00033
Barium
47
Nickel
1.6
Mercury
0.001
Zinc (dissolved)
8.7
Chromium (dissolved)
0.19
Copper (dissolved)
1.3
Lead (dissolved)
0.044
Cadmium (dissolved)
0.012
Vanadium
0.48
Imidacloprid
0.0027
Chlorpyrifos
0
54
Development of a stochastic model to predict micropollutant emissions from wet weather discharges
==PAGE:63==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Bygningstorvet, Building 115
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
www.sustain.dtu.dk
