==PAGE:1==
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic
monomers under microwave irradiation
Master Thesis
DTU Chemical Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering
==PAGE:2==
==PAGE:3==
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
Master Thesis
July 5, 2024
By
Andreas Vahr Holm
Copyright:
Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part must include the cus­
tomary bibliographic citation, including author attribution, report title, etc.
Cover photo:
Andreas Vahr Holm, 2024
Published by:
DTU, Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, Søltofts
Plads 228A, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby Denmark
https://www.kt.dtu.dk/
==PAGE:4==
Preface
This thesis covers my master’s project, which is valid for 30 ECTS points. The project
was performed at the Danish Polymer Centre, a part of the Department of Chemical and
Biochemical Engineering at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU). The project ran
from February 5. to July 5. 2024 under supervisors Anders Egede Daugaard, Jeppe
Madsen and Grammatiki ’Matina’ Terzi. The practical work was performed from March
until June, with some characterisation work in the first days of July.
I would like to thank all my supervisors for bringing me onto this very interesting project ­
and I would like to thank Anders in particular for finding a project for me on short notice and
for keeping track of my progress even when I failed to do so myself, Jeppe for providing
help with the setups and practicalities, and Matina for help with analysis and provision of
samples and data from her work. I would also like to thank Elias Kjær­Westermann for
helpful discussion of the problems that came up (including suggesting the solution to at
least one major issue with the syntheses) and for providing me data even while he was
on vacation.
Finally, I would like to thank my family for continued support throughout the project.
Andreas Vahr Holm
ii
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:5==
Project Formulation
Microwave chemistry has been applied in polymer science for several different types of
polymerizations. It is an attractive alternative, especially to classically applied conden­
sation reactions, to significantly accelerate and reduce polymerization time from days to
minutes1. We have recently applied it to condensations of lactic acid and various mix­
tures of aromatic and aliphatic carboxylic acids to prepare short oligomeric polyesters,
but there are also many other interesting pathways for microwave chemistry in macro­
molecular science, such as e.g. ring opening polymerization (ROP), where particularly
ROP of oxazolines have been proven to be very successful2.
This project aims to employ microwave chemistry to accelerate the polymerization of
4­hydroxyphenyl acetic acid and its derivates to copolymers with lactic acid and other
comonomers (e.g. caprolactone). The project should be initiated with a literature study
providing a clear and concise background of microwave chemistry in macromolecular sci­
ence. Initially, the focus should be on the acceleration of classical condensation chem­
istry with lactic acid as an example and subsequently on ring­opening polymerizations
of methyl oxazolines, lactide, or caprolactone, if there is any information available. Ex­
perimentally, the project will focus on the synthesis of homopolymers of 4­hydroxyphenyl
acetic acid and copolymers with A­B monomers, where the purpose should be to experi­
ment with reactive conditions, the use of different catalysts (Ti, Zn and Sn) and therefore,
investigate how microwave chemistry can be used to accelerate the synthesis as well
as potentially achieving higher molar mass products. The exact conditions for the differ­
ent reactions should be investigated, and parameters such as ratios and reaction times
should be determined.
The products should be characterized using NMR, IR, and diffusion NMR or SEC for
chemical characterization and molar mass determination. In addition, thermal analysis
(TGA & DSC) of the final products should be performed.
1K. Kempe, C.R. Becer, U.S. Schubert, Microwave­assisted polymerizations: Recent status and future
perspectives, Macromolecules. 44 (2011) 5825–5842. https://doi.org/10.1021/ma2004794.
2M.W.M. Fijten, C. Haensch, B.M.V. Lankvelt, R. Hoogenboom, U.S. Schubert, Clickable poly(2­
oxazoline)s as versatile building blocks,
Macromol.
Chem.
Phys.
209 (2008) 1887–1895.
https://doi.org/10.1002/macp.200800226.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
iii
==PAGE:6==
Abstract
Microwave heating offers great potential time savings in laboratory­scale synthesis. In this
project, conventionally heated polycondensation syntheses for poly(4­hydroxyphenylacetic
acid) (PHPA) and poly(4­(2­hydroxyethoxy)phenylacetic acid) (PHEPA) using SnCl2 as
catalyst were converted to microwave heating with the goal of reducing reaction time, re­
ducing thermal degradation of samples and increasing degree of polymerisation. Several
problems were encountered, the most important being plasma discharges in the reaction
tube during the reaction. Samples were characterised with IR spectroscopy, and select
samples were characterised with 1H NMR, TGA and DSC. For PHPA, plasma discharges
were avoided by increasing the reaction pressure to 50 mbar, and optimisation of the
reaction time and temperature was performed with the goal of achieving the highest pos­
sible degree of polymerisation. Additionally, several different alternative catalysts were
evaluated. It was found that SnCl2 is the optimal catalyst for producing PHPA, and that
microwave heating can produce a similar product to thermal heating with a time saving
of 94 % (65 minutes vs 18 hours) and a lower degree of yellowing, while longer reaction
times can provide greater degrees of polymerisation than were produced in the hotplate
synthesis. PHPA is furthermore found to exhibit strong signs of a liquid crystalline phase
for all the tested polymer samples. For PHEPA, the plasma discharges were more consis­
tent and could only be avoided by regularly flushing the reaction setup with nitrogen. Time
constraints meant that after the initial issues were solved, only two reactions were run.
Characterisation revealed microwave heating for production of PHEPA also offer better
degree of polymerisation and a time saving of 97.5 % compared to conventional heating.
iv
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:7==
Contents
Abbreviations
2
1
Introduction
3
2
Literature Study
5
2.1
Microwave Heating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.2
Condensation Polymerisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
2.3
Ring­opening polymerisation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
3
Synthesis Plan
11
4
Results and Discussion
13
4.1
PHPA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4.2
PHEPA
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
5
Conclusion
29
6
Experimental Work
31
6.1
Materials and general procedures
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
6.2
Synthesis of PHPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
6.3
Synthesis of MeHPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
6.4
Synthesis of PHEPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Bibliography
37
A PHPA characterisation
39
A.1 IR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
A.2 NMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
A.3 TGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
A.4 DSC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
B MeHPA characterisation
65
C PHEPA characterisation
67
C.1 IR
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
C.2 NMR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
C.3 TGA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
C.4 DSC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
1
==PAGE:8==
Abbreviations
4­HPA
4­hydroxyphenylacetic acid
DSC
Differential Scanning Calorimetry
EC
Ethylene carbonate
FTIR
Fourier Transform Infrared (spectroscopy)
MeHEPA
Methyl 4­(2­hydroxyetoxy)phenylacetate
MeHPA
Methyl 4­hydroxyphenylacetate
NMR
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (spectroscopy)
OBu
Butoxide
Oct
Octoate (2­ethylhexanoate)
PGA
Poly(glycolic acid)
PHEPA
Poly(4­(2­hydroxyetoxy)phenylacetic acid)
PHPA
Poly(4­hydroxyphenylacetic acid)
PLA
Poly(lactic acid)
PLLA
Poly(L­lactic acid)
TFA
Trifluoroacetic acid
TGA
Thermogravimetric Analysis
TsOH
Tosylic Acid
¯
Xn
Number average degree of polymerisation
2
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:9==
1
Introduction
Polymers are a versatile group of materials that have found an ever­increasing importance
in our society due to their useful properties and low cost. Although early polymers were
derived from natural substances like gum, rubber, and ­ in the case of linoleum ­ linseed oil,
it was only after the introduction of synthetic materials like Bakelite that polymer materials
really took off. Since then, an immense number of different polymer materials have been
developed and commercialised for various purposes ­ such as clothing, plumbing, food
storage, furniture, single­use packaging, and ablative heat shields for spacecraft.
However, with the proliferation of plastic materials, it has become clear that some of their
desirable properties can also pose issues. The low cost has allowed plastics to be used in
many applications where their great durability and slow decomposition is not a necessity,
such as in single­use packaging. Should these plastic products be disposed of in nature,
they will only be broken down very slowly ­ and even when the plastic is broken down,
small particles of microplastics will remain for a while longer. These microplastics are by
now almost omnipresent in nature and in most lifeforms, including humans[1].
This is one of the biggest motivations for currently ongoing plastics development, along­
side the desire to move away from oil­sourced raw materials. Bio­sourced and biodegrad­
able plastics are not necessarily the same, and it can be challenging to combine these
two properties with the other desirable qualities of plastic ­ for example, poly(lactic acid)
(PLA) is bio­sourced, and while it is biodegradable in its pure form[2], it is also brittle and
has a low glass transition temperature (Tg)[3]. Improving the mechanical properties of
PLA is possible by using various additives ­ but this reduces the biodegradability, too.
This project involves the polymerisation of a bio­sourced monomer, 4­hydroxyphenylacetic
acid (4­HPA) into two different polymers: poly­(4­hydroxyphenylacetic acid) (PHPA) and
poly­(4­(2­hydroxyethoxy)phenylacetic acid) (PHEPA). Considerations as to whether these
product polymers are biodegradable or not are, however, outside the scope of this project.
The goal of this project is to adapt existing syntheses of PHPA to microwave heating and
optimise its parameters in the hopes of improving reaction time, degree of polymerisation,
and degradation. Microwave synthesis is a technique that has been in use for several
decades, initially as a ”last resort” to try and get decent yields from syntheses that would
otherwise give poor results, but as the method matured and became more widespread,
it has taken a more prominent role and is now often the first method attempted, and
dedicated microwave reactors have become available, with advanced features such as
queuing of samples, temperature control, and automated conversion of temperature and
time requirements from regular thermal synthesis into parameters suitable for microwave
synthesis[4].
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
3
==PAGE:10==
4
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:11==
2
Literature Study
2.1
Microwave Heating
Microwave synthesis has been used since the 1980’s, initially using commercial microwave
ovens, but it wasn’t until the 1990’s when purpose­made chemical microwave reactors ap­
peared on the market that the field truly began developing[4]. Microwave synthesis entails
that the reaction sample is heated with microwaves rather than through conductive and
convective heating as with a heating mantle or an oil bath. Microwave heating is achieved
through so­called microwave dielectric heating. The microwave radiation propagates an
electric and a magnetic field, but it is the oscillating electric field that is most relevant for
organic and ionic compounds, with the magnetic field mainly being relevant for heating of
metals and their oxides. As the electric field oscillates, molecules with an electric dipole
will reorient themselves to preferentially align with the electric field. This reorientation
is not immediate, however, and thus the molecules will ’lag behind’ the electric field to
some extent, causing heating via molecular friction and dielectric loss. If the frequency
is too high, the molecules will not have time to reorient themselves at all, while a too low
frequency will mean the molecules are only lagging slightly behind, reducing the ther­
mal energy loss. The other and stronger mechanism is the ionic conduction mechanism,
where ions are oscillated back and forth by the electric field, causing them to bump into
each other, which generates large amounts of heat. For both effects, heating is most
effective in liquid media where the molecules are free to reorient themselves and move
around, yet are also close enough to each other that intermolecular interactions are promi­
nent. The opacity to microwave radiation of a compound is, however, not directly linked
to the strength of its permanent electric dipole, but rather to a value called the ”loss tan­
gent,” denoted tan(δ), which is equal to the ratio of dielectric loss to the polarisability of
the molecules[5].
In general, the effects that improve the characteristics of a microwave synthesis compared
to a conventional hotplate synthesis can be split into thermal, specific and non­thermal
effects. Thermal effects are those attributed solely to the increased temperature and the
effects that this has on reaction kinetics. Thermal effects are thus limited to increased
reaction rates and different product distributions for reactions with multiple products.
Specific effects are those attributable to the different heating distributions, and will lead to
different results (e.g. in terms of selectivity) than a reaction run at the same temperature
using classical heating.
• Elimination of ”wall effects” and internal temperature gradients: the sample is heated
throughout rather than just at the walls of the reaction vessel, giving more uniform
heat distribution. This mitigates degradation of the reactants by avoiding certain
areas being hotter than average, and thus also permits higher average temperatures
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
5
==PAGE:12==
to be used. In conventional oil bath reflux synthesis, the oil bath will often be 10­30
°C hotter than the reflux temperature.
• Microwave heating allows superheating of reaction media at atmospheric pressure,
as long as the liquid is not disturbed too much.
• Microwaves are absorbed better by molecules with a higher loss tangent, allowing
selective heating of catalysts or strongly absorbing reactants in a less absorbent
solvent.
Non­thermal effects are those that are not attributable to the above effects. Although there
is broad agreement on the existence of thermal and specific effects, non­thermal effects
are a matter of continued debate. A suggested non­thermal effect is a lowering of acti­
vation energies due to the microwave electric field aligning the molecules in a favourable
manner, allowing the reaction to proceed more easily[5].
Thermal effects can be separated from specific and non­thermal effects by running the re­
action in a silicon carbide vial. SiC is highly absorbent to microwave radiation but also has
high thermal conductivity and effusivity, allowing it to rapidly transfer heat to the reaction
mass within and mostly avoid wall effects. This enables a reaction to be run under condi­
tions very similar to a normal microwave synthesis, but without any microwave radiation
through the sample itself[6].
2.1.1
Practicalities
Most microwave reactions are run in a solvent, and preferably one with a large loss tangent
to increase absorption of microwaves. The manual for the CEM Discover 2.0 microwave
reactor instructs that all reactions should take place in a solvent. However, this does not
necessarily preclude solvents with a low loss tangent from being used, nor does it mean
that the solvent must be present for the entire synthesis. Chloroform has a low loss tan­
gent, and thus is poor at absorbing microwave radiation. Pandey et. al. nevertheless
used it as a solvent for polymers, and the dissolved polymers could then absorb the mi­
crowave radiation, resulting in the solvent swiftly evaporating and leaving behind molten
(and thus more absorbant) liquid polymer[7]. Another method when solvents with a low
loss tangent must be used is to add small amounts of salt or an ionic liquid to the solvent,
which can drastically increase the ability to absorb microwave radiation[5].
Microwave heating does have one major issue, and that is difficulty in scalability. In par­
ticular, microwave radiation at 2.45 GHz tends to penetrate only a few centimeters into
the solvent, which means that even the largest scaled microwave reactions have been at
a scale of a few litres at most. A possible approach to scaling the syntheses further could
be continuous­flow reactors, with reactant flowing through a narrow tube, allowing thor­
ough and even heating with microwave reactors. Such systems have been demonstrated
with a capacity of several litres per hour.
6
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:13==
2.2
Condensation Polymerisation
Condensation polymerisation is the archetypal example of step­growth polymerisation. In
step­growth polymerisation, monomers can couple to each other via functional groups lo­
cated on each monomer, and all these functional groups are active throughout the reaction
­ unlike in chain­growth polymerisation, where a monomer is not active until it reacts with
an active chain. Condensation polymerisation can broadly be divided into AA/BB and AB
types. In the case of polyesters, an AA/BB type polymerisation involves two monomers
­ a diol and a diacid ­ while an AB type reaction involves a monomer with one alcohol
and one acid functionality. Regardless, an AA/BB reaction will become an AB reaction as
soon as all monomer molecules have reacted with at least one other molecule.
Condensation polymerisation is characterised by being a type of step­growth polymeri­
sation where each link created between monomers also liberates a low­weight molecule.
The reaction employed is often between a carboxylic acid functionality and an alcohol
functionality (for polyesters) or between a carboxylic acid and an amine (for polyamides)
­ both of these liberate water. Polysiloxanes, on the other hand, consume water and lib­
erate hydrochloric acid. Though condensation polymers are the most common type of
step­growth polymer, they are not the only one ­ non­condensation step­growth polymers
include polyurethanes (which react an isocyanate with an alcohol, without any byproduct)
among others. These are just a small sample of the varied possibilities in step­growth
polymerisation[8].
In order to achieve high degrees of polymerisation when doing polycondensation, it is
necessary to have high purity of the monomer (as any monofunctional acid or alcohol will
terminate a chain), high conversion (so that most functional groups are converted), high
yield (meaning few by­products that might terminate a chain) and, in the case of AA/BB
polymers, a very precise stoichiometric ratio between the monomers, as surplus of any
of them will terminate chains. The degree of polymerisation is described by Carother’s
Equation:
¯
Xn =
1
1 −p
(2.1)
Where ¯
Xn is the number average degree of polymerisation and p is the fraction of monomer
that has been converted. This indicates that even for a moderate chain length of ¯
Xn = 50,
a conversion of 98 % is required[8].
2.2.1
Catalysts
Polyester synthesis via condensation polymerisation requires heat and a catalyst. If the
catalyst used is an acid, then the mechanism is the well­understood Fischer esterification
reaction. However, many other options are available, largely among the metal­based
catalysts. In the Ph.D.­project that this report builds off, the following have been used:
• Tin(II) chloride
• Tin(II) octoate (Tin(II) 2­ethylhexanoate)
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
7
==PAGE:14==
• Titanium(IV) butoxide
• Zinc(II) acetate
• Tosylic acid (para­toluenesulfonic acid)
• A half­and­half mixture of tosylic acid and tin(II) chloride
Punyodom et. al. used titanium(IV) butoxide, tin(II) octoate and aluminium(III) sec­butoxide
and found that of those three, tin(II) octoate had the highest activity in transesterification
of PLLA, and also showed that most of this activity was in terms of intramolecular trans­
esterification, whereby two units in a longer polymer chain would react with each other,
causing a part of the chain to be separated out into a ring polymer[9]. Strong acid (typi­
cally sulfuric) can also be used as a catalyst for condensation reactions, but is often not a
good choice for polycondensation reactions as many oxyacids can react with an alcohol
to form an ester, which will terminate the growth of a polymer chain. Using SnCl2 as cat­
alyst has the additional benefit that it can also be used for ring­opening polymerisation of
lactic acid[10], making it possible to extend existing polymer chains by adding lactide to
the reaction mixture, enabling production of block copolymers.
2.2.2
Blends and Copolymers
Using pure PLLA and pure PGA, both of which have good biodegradability and degrade
into innocuous compounds, runs into several issues. Both have a low Tg, and PLA in
particular has poor mechanical properties above that temperature. They also both tend
to biodegrade somewhat more quickly than desirable. Pandey et. al. found that a 50:50
mixture of PLA and PGA would greatly raise the melting point to 160 °C, and that during
the reaction in a microwave reactor, the two polymers would react and form copolymers
rather than simply forming a polymer blend[7].
2.3
Ring­opening polymerisation
Ring­opening polymerisation (ROP) can be performed under microwave heating too. These
are useful because they can proceed much faster and to higher molecular weights than
polycondensations are capable of reaching. Using ROP on D,L­lactide with SnOct2 under
microwave heating, Jing et. al. were able to produce a polymer with a number­average
molecular weight of 219000 g/mol in 30 minutes, whereas their previous conventionally
heated synthesis had reached 6 hours to reach a molecular weight of 200000 g/mol. They
also found that SnOct2 was best used at only 0.15 mol%, as higher values resulted in a
lesser degree of polymerisation since SnOct2 is capable of catalysing both ring­opening
polymerisation, but also esterification and ester hydrolysis, the latter of which can break
the polymer apart. The optimum time was found to be 30 minutes, and longer times
would cause lower degree of polymerisation, again due to SnOct2 breaking the polymer
apart[11].
Moreover, ROP can also be used for copolymerisations to good effect. Juo et. al. used
chitosan and hydroxyethyl chitosan as macroinitiators and grafted poly(D,L­lactic acid)
8
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:15==
onto this backbone using microwave heating and 0.15 mol% SnOct2 as a catalyst. This
provided a way to solubilise the biocompatible but non­water soluble chitosan by turning
it into a star polymer. With a reaction time of only 15 minutes, the grafted chains reached
an average degree of polymerisation between 13.15 and 24.17[12].
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
9
==PAGE:16==
10
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:17==
3
Synthesis Plan
The initial step of the synthesis seeks to prove that polymerisation of the para­hydroxyphenyl
acetic acid (HPA) is possible by microwave synthesis, and to find the optimal parameters
for this process.
The first step will be done by directly converting the parameters (time, temperature) used
in the thermal synthesis into microwave parameters using the built­in software of the mi­
crowave reactor. The same SnCl2 catalyst in the same proportions will also be used.
This will be done on a scale between 0,5­1 g, in a microwave vial. The synthesis will be
performed under alternating nitrogen atmosphere and vacuum; the first attempt will use
10 minutes under nitrogen and 20 minutes under vacuum, and only run a single cycle.
If the first synthesis is unsuccessful due to the PHBA PHPA not melting quickly enough,
it might be prudent to try and adjust the parameters, then try again. If it still doesn’t work,
then the second step is to attempt polymerise the monomer with a liquid or lower melting
compound, such as lactic acid, anisole, or acetic anhydride. Lactic acid will co­polymerise
with the PHPA, anisole will act as a solvent and then evaporate during the vacuum step,
and acetic anhydride is able to act as an activator and convert the monomer to its acetate
derivative in­situ. Excess reagent will in this case have to be removed by evaporation and
during the polymerization acetic acid will be removed as a condensate.
Once a successful reaction scheme has been found, optimise it by varying the reaction
time and temperature, and potentially also the timing of the nitrogen/vacuum cycle.
In addition, a screening with a series of catalysts, such as tin octoate, zinc acetate, tita­
nium butoxide, p­TSA, or a mix of p­TSA and SnCl2. Should also be conducted for the
selected system.
Once optimal settings have been found, an attempt to push to high molar mass should be
conducted, though this is known to be difficult for the specific monomer combination.
It might be interesting to try and scale the Phase 1 synthesis up, using a round­bottom
flask and a scale of around 10 grams, but this is to be considered after the first parts have
been done.
The exact procedures in Phase 2 will depend on the outcome of Phase 1 and the experi­
ence gathered from there. With a successfully established proof­of­concept, the targets
will be in­situ derivatization and multistep synthesis of PHPA copolymers or ethyleneglycol
derivatization of the HPA in­situ, followed by a push for high molar mass polymers.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
11
==PAGE:18==
12
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:19==
4
Results and Discussion
This chapter will discuss the results of the experiments conducted through the project.
Two series of reactions were performed, one for PHPA and one for PHEPA, which pre­
sented separate challenges both in terms of laboratory practice and in terms of optimising
the product. Both the solutions to the practical challenges and the chemical optimisation
are important results in the adaptation of a hot­plate synthesis to microwave heating.
Synthesis timings are given in the format X­Y, indicating X minutes of heating under 1
atm of nitrogen, followed by Y minutes of heating under low pressure nitrogen. For the
one­pot PHEPA reaction, an additional number is present, with the first number indicating
the time for the reaction between MeHPA and EC. In addition, each of these phases is
preceded by 1 minute of ramping time.
4.1
PHPA
This part of the project was based on a series of hot­plate syntheses done by Grammatika
’Matina’ Terzi.
Per the synthesis plan, the goal of the project was to optimise the production of PHPA
by using microwave heating, with the ambition of achieving faster reaction times, higher
conversion, and lower degrees of yellowing. A general reaction scheme for this reaction
is shown in figure 4.1. The reaction is a typical ester polycondensation with an AB­type
monomer. Furthermore, various catalysts aside from SnCl2 were also to be tested. For the
procedure in the initial synthesis, the microwave reactor’s built­in conversion software was
used, indicating a 28­5 program at 230 °C. Later syntheses experimented with changing
temperature and reaction times.
Figure 4.1: An idealised reaction scheme for the production of PHPA.
Each reaction was performed in two stages, first under nitrogen at atmospheric pressure
and then under nitrogen at low pressure. The temperature was varied from 180 to 250 °C
and various reaction time settings were used. The pressure was (as far as possible) kept
constant at 50 mbar in Synthesis 3 and all subsequent syntheses.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
13
==PAGE:20==
Entry
Catalyst
Timing
Temp.
IR
NMR
2% mass loss
Tg
Tm1
[min]
[°C]
ratio
ratio
[°C]
[°C]
[°C]
3
SnCl2 25.2
20­10
230
0.55
10
­
­
113
11
SnCl2 25.0
20­20
230
0.61
1
193
­
102
12
SnCl2 27.1
20­20
250
1.09
­
­
­
­
13
SnCl2 28.2
20­45
230
1.59
0.4
224
15
122
14
SnCl2 24.3
20­75
230
2.01
4.9
237
18
119
15
SnCl2 23.3
20­60
230
1.45
3.3
223
19
122
16
Ti(OBu)4 44.7
20­45
230
1.53
2.9
­
­
­
17
SnOct2 53.1
20­45
230
1.25
1.8
­
­
­
18
TsOH 27.2
20­45
230
1.53
­
­
­
­
19
ZnAc 28.9
20­45
230
1.01
1.52
179
­
109
20
TsOh 27.0
SnCl2 12.9
20­45
230
1.29
­
­
­
­
AK6889
(hotplate)
­
900­180
180
1.43
­
­
14
120
Table 4.1: Overview of selected PHPA samples. Unlisted values were either not run at all or did not conform to the measure, e.g. lack of the
relevant peaks. All samples made with 2000±6 mg SnCl2.
14
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:21==
4.1.1
Practical challenges
Although the CEM Discover 2.0 microwave reactor had a built­in pressure control mech­
anism, this system could not be used for these syntheses due to the risk of monomer
evaporating at elevated temperatures and reduced pressures, necessitating a cold trap.
Thus, an external system had to be used. The complete setup is shown in figure 4.2.
Figure 4.2: Reaction setup. A line provides nitrogen for the system, reaching an ad­
justable junction that was left fully open at all times except in Synthesis 1 and 2. The re­
action vessel is located on a branch. The vacuum pump and pressure gauge are placed
after a cold trap with isopropanol, cooled with dry ice.
This system was in use from the beginning, though for Synthesis 1 and 2, the system was
disconnected from the vacuum pump during the atmospheric pressure phase (relying on
constant flow of nitrogen to prevent oxygen from entering), and the junction was turned to
block the nitrogen inflow during the vacuum phase so that the reconnected pump could
draw as high a vacuum as possible.
This led directly to the second challenge: at pressures lower than approximately 35 mbar,
flashes of plasma would occasionally appear in the reaction tube, which resulted in sig­
nificant charring of samples 1 and 2. It was clearly necessary to use a higher pressure,
but the pump could not be adjusted, so a method was adopted consisting of keeping the
vacuum pump and the nitrogen supply running concurrently and adjusting manually on
the nitrogen inflow to reach a pressure of about 50 mbar. Being a manually controlled
system with significant delay between adjustments being made and the pressure gauge
responding, it was impossible to keep the pressure entirely steady. Deviations of ±10
mbar were common, and greater swings would occasionally also happen, but plasma
flashes no longer occurred.
Microwave heating is generally only effective for liquids, and the instruction manual of the
reactor indicated that all reactions should be done in a solvent. Despite this, the reaction
was run with only dry material, and this posed no issues except for a slow initial heating
up until the melting point of the monomer, from where the heating became much faster.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
15
==PAGE:22==
Finally, the last practical challenge was more a matter of overlooked routine. 4­HPA is
quite sensitive to oxidation at elevated pressures, and thus any synthesis needs to be
done with as little oxygen present as possible. For the first 11 samples, oxygen purges
were not done with any consistency. From sample 12 and onwards, all samples were
put through 3 cycles of pumping out to a pressure of 10­15 mbar, then flooding back to
atmospheric pressure with nitrogen. The oxidation damage is evidenced by a small peak
or shoulder at 1728 cm­1 in most of the early samples.
4.1.2
Optimisation of reaction conditions
It is clear from table 6.1 that higher temperatures uniformly led to higher degree of poly­
merisation, and that longer reaction times had a similar effect. Although lower tempera­
tures were initially explored, this led to issues with the material only partially melting, and
what did melt showed only a very slight degree of polymerisation. The primary measure
of polymerisation used for analysis is the ratio between the C=O stretching peaks of the
ester and acid moieties, located at 1745 cm­1 and 1705 cm­1 respectively. This measure
is used because all the peaks in the spectra seemed to vary at least somewhat with de­
gree of polymerisation, so it was not possible to find a single constant peak to normalise
the spectrum by. Using the ratio between the two C=O stretching peaks provides a robust
comparison ­ provided that all the reacting acid becomes ester, and neither the acid nor
ester are destroyed by side reactions. NMR spectroscopy and TGA provide supporting
data that agrees with the IR measurement for most samples.
Figure 4.3: The spectra of 4­HPA monomer and Sample 14, which had the highest degree
of polymerisation.
In figure 4.3, the important peaks for analysis are marked for the pure monomer and the
most polymerised sample. At 3247 cm­1, a strong O­H stretch alcohol peak is visible for
4­HPA but is completely absent for the PHPA. At 1743 cm­1, the C=O stretching peak of
the ester is visible in the polymerised sample, but absent in the monomer. At 1704 cm­1,
16
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:23==
Figure 4.4: 1D NMR spectrum of Sample 14.
the C=O stretching peak of the acid is prominent for the monomer but is reduced to only
being a shoulder on the ester peak for the polymer. And finally, at 1119 cm­1, there is a
very prominent peak in the polymer spectrum only, identified as the C­O stretching peak
of the ester. The ratio between ester and acid C=O peaks is 2.01 for Sample 14 and 1.43
for AK6889, indicating that a greater degree of polymerisation has been achieved ­ and
in only 8.8 % of the time.
The NMR spectrum of Sample 14 (see figure 4.4) on the other hand, allows establishment
of a lower bound for the number average molecular weight by comparing the integral
of end­group signals to the integral of mid­chain signals from equivalent moieties of the
repeat unit. The NMR spectrum of 4­HPA monomer has a peak at a chemical shift of
3.42 (2 protons) assigned to H3 and a para­disubstituted ring system around 6.84 to 7.15
(4 protons)[13]. In the same spot, the spectrum for sample 14 (see figure 4.4 shows a
split peak, with a peak at 3.42 and a shoulder at 3.38. In addition, a new signal appears
with peaks at 3.57 and 3.62. Both of these are assigned to H3, with 3.42 corresponding to
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
17
==PAGE:24==
terminal groups on the acid end of the polymer, and 3.57/3.62 corresponding to medial and
alcohol­terminal groups. The aromatic region is far more messy for PHPA than 4­HPA and
is not directly interpretable, likely due to second­order interactions between the aromatic
systems on terminal units and on mid­chain units which will have slightly different chemical
shifts. The splitting of the H3 peaks is possibly due to loss of magnetic equivalence after
polymerisation, allowing vicinal coupling to become apparent.
Despite the complicated look of the aromatic region in the polymer spectrum, the integral
of the aromatic region is still twice that of the aliphatic region, as with 4­HPA. Only H3 on
the acid end of a polymer chain will appear on the 3.42 peak, while the H3 on the alcohol
end of a polymer chain will appear alongside medial units in the 3.57­3.62 peaks.
Figure 4.5: Ester hydrolysis initiated by TFA. Note that at the end, a new free alcohol is
available for esterification with TFA, to produce another new water molecule and continue
the degradation of the polymer.
For sample 14, the ratio of 4.9 between the integrals of these two peaks indicates a num­
ber average chain length of 5.9, which gives a number average molecular weight (Mn) of
809 g/mol. This value, however, comes with a significant caveat: the TFA solvent has a
strong tendency to break polyesters up into shorter chains. It can react with free alcohol
end­groups to form water, which can in turn hydrolyse the ester bonds of the polyester
due to the acidic environment. Thus, the value is only a lower bound, and the true value is
almost certainly higher. Additionally, it is a poor tool for comparison between samples, as
each NMR tube was prepared at the same time but were run sequentially, meaning that
some samples were exposed to TFA for a much longer time than others before being anal­
ysed. Hexafluoroisopropanol is known to be an alternate solvent that doesn’t degrade the
polymer, but the NMR signal of this solvent has a large overlap with the PHPA spectrum.
18
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:25==
Figure 4.6: Samples that were produced at 230 °C, using a program of 20 minutes under 1
atm nitrogen followed by (from left to right) 20, 45, 60 and 75 minutes at 50 mbar nitrogen.
The samples underwent some degree of yellowing during the reaction. Longer synthesis
time and higher temperatures consistently resulted in more yellowing. Sample 12 (not
pictured) was produced at 250 °C and a 20­20 program and has a much better ester/acid
IR peak ratio than Sample 11 (20­20, 230 °C), which indicates that the increase in tem­
perature has further sped up the reaction. However, it also displayed the same degree
of yellowing as Sample 14 (to the accuracy of the naked eye), despite having a lower
ester/acid IR peak ratio than that one. For this reason, it was decided not to pursue any
further reactions at 250 °C as, although they might offer even better time savings, they
would also lead to greater yellowing for a similar degree of polymerisation.
Samples produced at 200 °C or below were uniformly white (barring any mishaps with
oxygen presence or plasma formation), but also had very low degree of polymerisation,
and in several cases had issues with incomplete melting of the monomer. This led to
the adoption of 230 °C as the optimal temperature, just as the conversion software had
indicated.
For the reaction time, however, the software had predicted that 5 minutes at low pressure
would be enough ­ but in practice, matching the ester/acid IR peak ratio achieved via
hot­plate synthesis required close to 45 minutes under vacuum. A possible explanation
could be that the reaction rate is limited by the rate at which water can be removed from
the reaction mixture. Sample 14 was run for 75 minutes at low pressure, and at that point
bubbling from evaporation of water had ceased, indicating that the reaction rate had fallen
off and only little further progress could be made. For this reason, no syntheses of longer
duration were attempted. Since the colour of Sample 14 is equivalent to Matina’s hot­plate
sample, yet had much better degree of polymerisation and was produced much quicker,
that sample’s synthesis parameters were settled on as being optimal for the purposes of
this project.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
19
==PAGE:26==
4.1.3
Catalyst survey
Figure 4.7: Five samples, all produced at a 20­45 program at 230 °C. Catalysts are, from
left to right, SnCl2, Ti(OBu)4, SnOct2, TsOH and ZnAc.
Despite the 20­75 program being deemed optimal overall, the catalyst survey was instead
done with a 20­45 program. For the 20­75 program, the acid C=O stretching peak had
been reduced to merely being a shoulder on the ester C=O stretching peak, while in the
20­45 program, both were prominent and easily distinguished, making any differences
caused by changing the catalyst more easily visible.
Of the surveyed catalysts, Ti(OBu)4 had a very similar performance to SnCl2, albeit with
the side effect of turning the polymer dark red. SnOct2 had a lower degree of polymerisa­
tion, and ZnAc was even worse. TsOH seems to provide good performance when looking
solely at the ester/acid IR C=O peak ratio, but it runs afoul of the side reaction caveat.
Although the C=O stretching peaks are in a good ratio to each other, they are both very
low compared to the rest of the spectrum, indicating significant side reactions. The prod­
uct is also not opaque like the others, but transparent and very brittle. When heated, it
becomes viscous and can be pulled with a spatula, drawing long and very thin threads
as it solidifies. In terms of spectroscopy, most of the IR spectrum looks radically different
from the other PHPA samples, and the NMR spectrum indicates that large changes have
happened to the aromatic system.
20
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:27==
Figure 4.8: NMR zoom­in of the aromatic regions of sample 13 and 18, showing the large
changes that this region experienced.
The exact chemical structure of sample 18 is unknown. No further characterisation was
done on this sample, as it clearly was not the desired product. Sample 20, catalysed by
both SnCl2 and TsOH, displayed properties intermediate between samples 13 and 18.
It was opaque like sample 13 but orange like sample 18, and had a waxy consistency
indicative of being an oligomer. It was partially soluble in hot DCM, resulting in an orange
liquid with white flocculate floating within it.
Based on these results, TsOH is deemed unsuitable as a catalyst since it yields an en­
tirely incorrect product, while Sn(Oct)2 and ZnAc are suboptimal as they provide a worse
reaction rate than SnCl2 without any benefits in return. Ti(OBu)4 is potentially useful, but
only for applications where the strong colour is not an issue. SnCl2 is indicated as the
best catalyst overall.
4.1.4
Heat tolerance and liquid crystallinity
Through thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), additional data was gathered supporting the
molecular weight rankings. By using the temperature where 2 % of the mass has been
lost as a measurement of heat tolerance, a good agreement is found between this and
the IR ester/acid peak ratio. Sample 14 has the highest peak ratios in both IR and NMR,
and is also the most temperature stable of all the tested samples. Due to time constraints,
not all the different catalysts were tested under TGA.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
21
==PAGE:28==
Figure 4.9: Comparison of the DSC graphs of Sample 13 and AK6889. See appendices
for larger versions for ease of reading.
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was then run on several samples in order to test
for liquid crystallinity, which is believed to be present in the AK6889 sample at elevated
temperatures. The DSC experiment was run as a heat­cool­heat cycle with a low extreme
of 0 °C and an upper extreme of either 180 °C (sample 3, 11 and 19) or 220 °C (sample
13, 14 and 15). The upper limits were determined from the temperatures where 2 % of
mass had been lost in the TGA experiment, rounded down to the nearest ten and put into
two convenient groups. In hindsight, this was probably overly cautious, as none of the
PHPA samples were heated far enough to display a melting point.
In isolation, the lack of a melting point in the graph for Sample 13 means that nothing
conclusive can be said about presence or absence of a liquid crystalline phase, but the
comparison to the hotplate sample AK6889 shows striking similarities. A Tg around 15
°C, followed by a very broad peak with a maximum around 120 °C, and finally a sharp dive
22
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:29==
­ which, for Sample 13, cuts off just a few degrees below where the peak that indicates
the melting point is located for AK6889. Although a repeat DSC experiment to a higher
temperature will have to be run to truly confirm liquid crystallinity and demonstrate the
melting point, the similarities in the diagrams give a very strong indication that it is also
present in Sample 13, and that the experiment simply cut off right before the melting point
was reached. Sample 14 and 15 have respectively higher and slightly lower degrees of
polymerisation, but have very similar DSC traces to sample 13. However, samples 3,
11 and 19, all of which have a markedly lower degree of polymerisation, show different
behaviour. They each have a relatively sharp endothermic peak at 7­9 °C and no glass
transition point on the second heating cycle, though they do show a very broad endother­
mic peak (similar to the one that was identified as the transition to a liquid crystalline phase
for AK6889) at 113, 102 and 109 °C respectively.
4.2
PHEPA
Once the PHPA program had been completed to satisfactory results, focus was placed on
performing synthesis of PHEPA, with the possibilities of making copolymers or upscaling
the PHPA synthesis being decided against due to time constraints. PHEPA is the poly­
mer of 4­(2­hydroxyethoxy)phenylacetic acid, though the reaction produces it from the
methyl ester of this compound. In practice, the difference from PHPA is the addition of
an ethylene glycol ”spacer” between each unit. As such, the finished product can also
be considered an alternating copolymer, poly(4­HPA­alt­ethylene glycol). Two methods
of synthesis were tried for PHEPA ­ the first using a MeHEPA­oligomer prepared by Elias
Kjær­Westermann with 1 mol% of SnCl2, the other being a onepot reaction starting from
MeHPA. The onepot reaction is illustrated in figure 4.10.
Figure 4.10: The idealised reaction scheme for synthesis of PHEPA.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
23
==PAGE:30==
Entry
Oligomer
SnCL2
Timing
Tg
Tm
[mg]
[mg]
[min]
[°C]
[°C]
P1
656
5.62
0­0(1)
­
­
P2
496
5.40
5­1.5(1)
­
­
P3
502
4.50
20­23(1)
31
166
Entry
MeHPA
EC
SnCL2
Timing
Tg
Tm
[mg]
[mg]
[mg]
[min]
[°C]
[°C]
OP1
2282
1392
25.9
40­10­231
26
159
OP2
1994
1220
27.5
40­20­45
31
159
OP3
2007
1232
18.7
40­20­75
30
158
67000
5030
3070
45.0
1320­30­4200
­
­
Table 4.2: Overview over syntheses of PHEPA. All were performed at 230 °C, except
”67000” which was performed at 160 °C. The ”P” series refers to the samples made from
Elias’ oligomer, ”OP” refers to those produced via the one­pot method, and 67000 is a
sample produced via the one­pot method with conventional heating. 1: these syntheses
were aborted partway through due to plasma formation.
The ”P” samples were made using the same method as the PHPA syntheses, but us­
ing aforementioned MeHEPA­oligomer instead of 4­HPA. It was assumed that, since the
reaction would start from an oligomer, the initial oligomerisation step under nitrogen at
atmospheric pressure would not be necessary, so the reaction was started at a pressure
of 50 millibar. This assumption was proven wrong as plasma sparked immediately af­
ter the oligomer had melted, even causing the reaction tube to emit a constant glow in
a manner reminiscent of a neon tube light. The synthesis was aborted. P2 was heated
for 5 minutes at under atm N2 before applying vacuum; plasma appeared after 1.5 min­
utes of low­pressure synthesis. P3 allowed for the full 20 minutes of pre­vacuum heating
that was also used with success in the PHPA syntheses, but plasma still appeared after
somewhere between 20 and 25 minutes of reaction.
At this point, the synthesis transitioned to a one­pot reaction in hopes of avoiding any
potential contamination of the oligomer that might be causing the plasma formation. For
OP1, the pressure was gradually lowered from 1 atm to 60 mbar over the first 10 min­
utes. After running at 60 mbar for approximately 23 minutes, plasma began forming. The
solution to the plasma trouble turned out to be flushing the system with nitrogen every 5
minutes, increasing the pressure to 1 atm and then reducing it again to a working pressure
of 120 mbar. This finally allowed syntheses OP2 and OP3 to be completed. A few plasma
sparks appeared during OP2 due to operator error, while OP3 had no plasma sparks at
all.
A possible reason for the higher tendency to form plasma is that the PHEPA condensation
reaction releases methanol instead of water. Methanol has a much higher loss tangent
than water (0.659 vs 0.123)[5] and thus is much better at absorbing microwaves. Since
the reaction vessel is located on a branch of the reaction setup, there is no nitrogen flow
24
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:31==
through it when pressure is constant, allowing the proportion of methanol to increase over
time as it is produced by the condensation reaction. Flushing with nitrogen gas every five
minutes is then sufficient to keep the methanol vapour concentration low enough to avoid
plasma sparks.
Figure 4.11: 1H­NMR spectrum of the OP3 sample.
The 1H NMR spectrum fits with what one would expect to see from PHEPA, and some
peaks can be assigned. The aromatic region again displays a clear para­disubstituted
pattern, since all the aromatic rings are in an identical environment regardless of whether
they are part of a medial or terminal unit, avoiding second­order effects on the spectrum.
The tall peak at δ = 3.34 is assigned to H3, and there is only one peak rather than two
because terminal units are also next to ester groups so that terminal and medial units
are in the same environment. The broad signals from 3.61 to 4.41 must then be from H5
and H6, which do experience a different environment depending on whether they are on
a medial or terminal group, but the signals are hard to interpret due to the large overlap
between peaks, so no determination of molecular weight was attempted based on this
signal. A pair of small peaks at 3.43 and 2.24 might be satellite peaks to the acetic acid
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
25
==PAGE:32==
aliphatic hydrogen peak at 3.34, but if this is not the case, then the 3.43 peak also has the
same chemical shift as the methyl group in MeHPA, and could thus be assigned to H4.
Additionally, the lack of a peak at δ = 4.54 indicates that all surplus ethylene carbonate
has been removed[14].
The IR spectra are more useful in terms of comparing the samples to each other. The
alcohol peak at 3405 cm­1 is significantly reduced during the polymerisation. Additionally,
the ester C­O stretching peak at 1150 cm­1 grows in magnitude, and becomes the domi­
nant peak in the spectrum for samples that were polymerised for a longer duration. This
provides a way to rank the samples in comparison to each other by taking the ratio of the
C­O peak with the C=O stretching peak at 1723 cm­1, though as with the PHPA samples
it does not permit determination of the molecular weight.
Figure 4.12: FTIR comparison of the oligomer and the OP3 sample, and the OP3 sam­
ple and a hotplate sample (67000) Here, the spectra are standardised by the carbonyl
stretching peak. Note the more prominent alcohol peak on the oligomer, and that the
1150 cm­1 peak is higher for OP3 than both of the others.
26
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:33==
Figure 4.13: All four samples of PHEPA produced in this project.
Entry
C=O/C­O IR peak ratio
Oligomer
1,36
OP1
0,970
67000 (hotplate)
0,938
OP2
0,931
P3
0,901
OP3
0,875
Table 4.3: Ranking of PHEPA samples by C=O/C­O IR peak ratio. The oligomer and
”67000” samples were produced by Elias.
Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) indicates a considerably better thermal stability than
shown by the PHPA samples, with the 2 % mass loss point being at 280 and 286 °C
for sample OP1 and OP2 respectively, and at 299 °C for sample P3. Sample OP3 was
also analysed by TGA, but a software bug interrupted the analysis and time constraints
prevented the sample from being re­run.
DSC reveals a number of interesting features. Aside from the Tg and m that are shown
in 4.2, the OP samples also display an exothermic peak around 130 °C, while for P3 it is
instead found at 145 °C. This temperature might be a crystallisation point, though this is
not confirmed. The OP samples (but not P3) also show an endothermic peak at 145 °C.
OP1 has a prominent exothermic peak at 70 °C which is also present but only marginally
so in OP2, and completely absent in OP3. The origin and significance of this peak is
unknown, but it might have been caused by OP1 and to lesser extent OP2 being charred
by plasma, while OP3 was not.
Comparing the PHEPA samples with each other is less straightforward than for PHPA,
and the numerical differences between samples are smaller. This makes it harder to
say for sure how much of an improvement has been achieved. Nevertheless, success
was achieved in ironing out the practical problems and demonstrating that PHEPA can
be produced via microwave synthesis, and characterisation reveals that the sample OP3
had a higher degree of polymerisation than was achieved by the conventionally heated
synthesis, while also reducing reaction time by 97.5 %.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
27
==PAGE:34==
28
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:35==
5
Conclusion
The goal of this project was to employ microwave heating to accelerate the otherwise
slow polymerisation of 4HPA into PHPA and of MeHPA into PHEPA. Although a straight­
forward conversion was possible, this yielded poor results with low degrees of polymeri­
sation, necessitating a wider search for optimal conditions. Additionally, several practical
challenges were met along the way involving a propensity for the microwave irradiation to
generate plasma when the synthesis was run at low pressures, which would cause rapid
charring of the samples.
For PHPA, the plasma issue was avoided by using a minimum pressure of 50 mbar
throughout the synthesis. The PHPA produced by hotplate synthesis could be closely
mimicked with a synthesis at 230 °C for 20 minutes under 1 atm nitrogen and 45 minutes
under 50 atm nitrogen, giving a time saving of 94 % and a less yellow colour, indicating
less degradation. Meanwhile, running the synthesis until visible progress stopped took 75
minutes under vacuum and produced a sample with the same colour as the hotplate sam­
ple, but considerably higher degree of polymerisation while still giving a time saving of 91
%. Additionally, a strong indication (just short of outright confirmation) was found that the
PHPA produced by microwave synthesis also displays liquid crystalline behaviour, includ­
ing at higher degrees of polymerisation than could be accessed with hotplate synthesis.
Samples of lower degree of polymerisation, meanwhile, seemed to lack a glass transition
point but instead had a prominent endothermic peak at low temperatures.
For PHEPA, the first step of the onepot synthesis transferred without issue to microwave
heating, but the polymerisation step had pervasive problems with plasma which were
eventually solved by periodically flushing the system with nitrogen in order to remove
highly microwave­absorbent methanol vapours, along with running the synthesis at 100
mbar instead of 50. Like for PHPA, however, it was found that a synthesis at 230 °C with
20 minutes under 1 atm nitrogen and 45 minutes at low pressure would closely match the
properties of PHEPA produced via conventional heating, while a synthesis that was run
for 75 minutes at low pressure would achieve greater degree of polymerisation. PHEPA
was additionally found to have a rather complicated DSC profile, with a glass transition
temperature, crystallisation temperature, and two Tm with one small peak being located
within the other, more prominent one.
For onward steps, it would be immediately relevant to perform new DSC experiments on
the PHPA samples, reaching a higher final temperature on the second heating cycle in or­
der to ensure the melting point is visible. It could also be relevant to further investigate the
significance of the unknown peaks seen in the DSC of PHEPA. Furthermore, a consistent
limitation of this project has been the impossibility of determining the absolute molecular
weights of the produced polymers, so finding a method that can do this might be relevant.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
29
==PAGE:36==
Possibilities could include diffusion­ordered NMR spectroscopy (DOSY) or using size ex­
clusion chromatography (SEC) with hexafluoroisopropanol as the solvent. Both of these
methods are reliant on standard curves that might not be accurate for PHPA and PHEPA,
but even in absence of accurate curves, the results should still indicate the correct order
of magnitude for ¯
Xw.
For new syntheses, using a lower concentration of catalyst, perhaps as low as 0.15 mol%,
could be a relevant consideration.
30
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:37==
6
Experimental Work
6.1
Materials and general procedures
4­hydroxyphenylacetic acid (4­HPA), tin (II) chloride, tin (II) acetate, titanium (IV) bu­
tanoate, zinc acetate, tosylic acid, ethylene carbonate (EC), potassium carbonate, sodium
carbonate, methanol, dichloromethane (DCM), sulfuric acid and ethyl acetate were ob­
tained in synthesis grade from commercial sources and used as delivered with no further
purification. TFA was obtained as analytically pure from commercial sources and was not
purified any further.
IR spectroscopy was performed on a Thermo Scientific Nicolet iS50 FT­IR spectrometer
using the iS59 ATR program with 8 background scans and 32 sample scans. 1H NMR
spectroscopy was performed on a Magritek SpinSolve 80 Ultra Multi­X spectrometer us­
ing the WET SUP solvent­suppressing protocol in TFA solvent. Sample 13 and 18 were
run with 128 scans, 3.2 s acquisition time and 15 s repetition time, while the remaining
samples were run with 256 scans, 3.2 s acquisition time and 7 s repetition time. Thermo­
gravimetric analysis was performed on a TA Systems Discovery Series TGA instrument.
Note that this is an older, no longer available instrument simply called ”Discovery Se­
ries” without a number, while newer TGA instruments from the same manufacturer have
a number appended to their name (Discovery TGA 55, 550 or 5500). All samples were
run under nitrogen atmosphere, starting from 0 and ramping to 900 °C at a rate of 10 °C
per minute. DSC was performed on a TA Systems DSC2500 instrument. The heating
rate was 10 °C per minute, with 5 minutes of isothermal before each upwards tempera­
ture ramp. Glass transition temperatures were determined at the inflection point, while
the liquid crystal transition temperatures, melting points, and unidentified points with the
same general shape were determined at the peak.
The reactions were performed in a CEM Discover 2.0 microwave reactor. The reactor can
be programmed to adjust both temperature and pressure over the course of the synthesis,
though only the temperature function was used.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
31
==PAGE:38==
6.2
Synthesis of PHPA
2000.3 mg 4­HPA and 24.3 mg SnCl2 (0.0098 equivalents) were added to a test tube with a
magnet stir bar. The mixture was heated with microwave irradiation under N2 atmosphere
to 230 °C for 20 minutes, whereafter the pressure was lowered to approximately 50 mbar.
This state was then maintained for 75 minutes, whereafter heating was removed. After
cooling, a pale yellow solid was obtained. The upper rim of fragile material clinging to
the walls of the test tube, along with any material that had sprayed further up in the tube
during the synthesis, was removed and discarded.
Figure 6.1: Labelling of hydrogen atoms on PHPA.
1H NMR (δ, ppm, 80 MHz, TFA): 7.11, 7.01, 6.92, 6.88, 6.76, 6.66, 6.54: (overlapping
para­disubstitution patterns, H1, H1*, H2, H2*. 4H). 3.62, 3.57: (Non­trivial splitting. H3
on medial and alcohol­terminal units. 1.56 H). 3.41: (peak with shoulder. H3 on acid­
terminal units. 0.32 H.)
IR (cm­1): 3041 (aromatic C­H), 1743 (C=O), 1704 (C=O, shoulder on prior peak), 1613,
1507, 1413, 1347, 1218, 1197, 1165, 1118 (C­O), 1018, 938, 917, 860, 822, 796, 689,
569, 521.
DSC: Tg: 21.9 °C. Tm1: 118.9 °C.
32
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:39==
Entry
4­HPA
Catalyst
Timing
Temperature
IR
NMR
2% mass loss
Tg
Tm1
[mg]
[mg]
[min]
[°C]
ratio
ratio
[°C]
[°C]
[°C]
1
2000.6
SnCl2 24.7
28­5
230
­
­
­
­
­
2
2000.2
SnCl2 26.0
28­5
230
0.51
­
187
­
­
3
2000.2
SnCl2 25.2
20­10
230
0.55
10
­
­
113
4
2000.8
SnCl2 25.9
28­5
200
0.57
­
­
­
­
5
2000.5
SnCl2 27.5
20­10
200
0.23
­
­
­
­
6
1998.4
SnCl2 26.3
20­10
200
0.36
­
­
­
­
7
2003.7
SnCl2 24.5
28­5
180
0.25
­
­
­
­
8
1999.4
SnCl2 25.5
20­10
190
0.24
­
­
­
­
9
2003.0
SnCl2 24.6
20­10
200
0
­
­
­
­
10
2000.2
SnCl2 26.9
28­5
230
­
­
­
­
­
11
2001.6
SnCl2 25.0
20­20
230
0.61
1
193
­
102
12
2000.1
SnCl2 27.1
20­20
250
1.09
­
­
­
­
13
2000.9
SnCl2 28.2
20­45
230
1.59
0.4
224
15
122
14
2000.3
SnCl2 24.3
20­75
230
2.01
4.9
237
18
119
15
2006.4
SnCl2 23.3
20­60
230
1.45
3.3
223
19
122
16
2001.0
Ti(OBu)4 44.7
20­45
230
1.53
2.9
­
­
­
17
2000.2
SnOct2 53.1
20­45
230
1.25
1.8
­
­
­
18
2000.8
TsOH 27.2
20­45
230
1.53
­
­
­
­
19
2000.0
ZnAc 28.9
20­45
230
1.01
1.52
179
­
109
20
2000.0
TsOh 27.0
SnCl2 12.9
20­45
230
1.29
­
­
­
­
AK6889
(hotplate)
­
900­180
180
1.43
­
­
14
120
Table 6.1: Overview of all PHPA samples. Unlisted values were either not tested or did not conform to the measure, e.g. Sample 10 had no
ester or acid C=O stretching peaks.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
33
==PAGE:40==
6.3
Synthesis of MeHPA
21.413 g of 4­HPA, 50 mL of methanol (8.8 equivalents) and 1.61 mL sulfuric acid (0.21
equivalents) were added to a round bottom flask fitted with a condenser and heated to
reflux for 3 hours. The resulting liquid was neutralised with water and sodium carbonate
in a separatory funnel and extracted with ethyl acetate. The organic phase was dried with
magnesium sulfate and filtered. The aqueous phase was extracted with ethyl acetate
again, with the organic phase being dried and filtered. The two batches were combined
and dried on a rotovap giving a white, semi­transparent solid. Yield: 20.223 g (86 %).
Figure 6.2: Labelling of hydrogen atoms that appear on the NMR spectrum of MeHPA.
1H NMR (δ, ppm, 80 MHz, TFA): 6.81, 6.70, 6.54, 6.44 (aromatic para­disubstitution pat­
tern, H1, H1*, H2, H2*. 4H). 3.43 (s, H4. 3H). 3.29 (s, H3, 2H).
DSC: Tm: 57.7 °C.
6.4
Synthesis of PHEPA
2007.4 mg MeHPA, 1232.8 mg EC (1.16 equivalents) and 17.9 mg K2CO3 (0.011 equiv­
alents) were added to a reaction tube. Under 1 atm nitrogen, this was heated with mi­
crowave radiation, first to 200 °C for 10 minutes and then to 230 °C for 30 minutes. After
cooling down, a waxy solid with the colour of yellow ochre was obtained. 18.7 mg SnCl2
(0.008 equivalents) was added to the tube, which was heated with microwave radiation
under 1 atm nitrogen for 20 minutes. Heating continued for 75 minutes at 100 mbar (± 20
mbar due to fluctuations), while flushing the system with nitrogen up to 1 atm and back
down to the operating pressure every 5 minutes. An ochre yellow solid is obtained and the
upper rim of fragile material is removed. Yield: 1932.9 mg. Percentage yield is ill­defined
as this would depend on the unknown degree of polymerisation, but assuming negligible
end­group mass and neglecting any remaining catalyst, percentage yield is 82 %.
1H NMR (δ, ppm, 80 MHz, TFA): 6.86, 6.76, 6.59, 6.48: (para­disubstitution pattern. H1,
H1*, H2, H2*. 4H). 4.41, 4.36, 4.31, 4.20, 4.14, 3.99, 3.92, 3.88, 3.81, 3.71, 3.65, 3.61,
3.49 (complicated pattern with overlap. H5, H6. 4.2 H). 3.43 (singlet peak for H4, or
satellite peak for 3.34). 3.34 (s. H3. 1.84 H). 3.24 (s). 1.95 (s).
IR: 2951, 1724 (C=O), 1612, 1584, 1510, 1454, 1413, 1374, 1344, 1298, 1220, 1150
(C­O), 1078, 1047, 960, 917, 777, 727, 692, 586, 568, 516.
34
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:41==
Figure 6.3: Labelling of hydrogen atoms on PHEPA polymer.
DSC: Tg: 30.5 °C. Tc: 131.1 °C. Unknown endothermic peak: 146 °C. Tm: 156.4.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
35
==PAGE:42==
Entry
Oligomer
SnCL2
Timing
Tg
Tm
C=O/C­O IR
[mg]
[mg]
[min]
[°C]
[°C]
peak ratio
P1
656
5.62
0­0(1)
­
­
­
P2
496
5.40
5­1.5(1)
­
­
­
P3
502
4.50
20­23(1)
31
166
0.901
Entry
MeHPA
EC
K2CO3
SnCL2
Timing
Tg
Tg
C=O/C­O IR
[mg]
[mg]
[mg]
[mg]
[min]
[°C]
[°C]
peak ratio
OP1
2282
1392
20.4
25.9
40­10­231
26
159
OP2
1994
1220
17.9
27.5
40­20­45
31
159
0.970
OP3
2007
1232
17.9
18.7
40­20­75
30
158
0.931
67000
5030
3070
45.0
47.3
1320­30­4200
­
­
0.938
Table 6.2: Overview over all PHEPA syntheses. P refers to the samples produced from Elias’ MeHEPA­oligomer, while OP refers to those
produced via onepot synthesis. Sample 67000 is included for reference, though it was not made as part of this project. 1: these syntheses were
aborted partway through due to plasma formation.
36
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:43==
Bibliography
[1]
Avinash B. Ade, Manisha K. Sangale, and M. Shahnawaz. Bioremediation Technol­
ogy for Plastic Waste. Springer Singapore, 2019. ISBN: 9789811374920.
[2]
Qi­Hong (Patrick) Liao, Yong­Chao Jiang AD Lih­Sheng (Tom) Turng, and Chao
Chan (Arthur) Chen. “Biodegradability of PLA in compost environment”. In: Annual
Technical Conference ­ Antec, Conference Proceedings (2017), pp. 410–414.
[3]
K. Marcincinova Benabdillah et al. “Can the glass transition temperature of PLA
polymers be increased?” In: Acs Symposium Series (2000), pp. 200–220.
[4]
M.P. Pollastri and W.G. Devine. Green Techniques for Organic Synthesis and Medic­
inal Chemistr. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2012, pp. 325–341. ISBN: 9780470711514.
[5]
C. O. Kappe, A. Stadler, and D. Dallinger. Microwaves in Organic and Medical
Chemistry. Wiley, 2012, p. 13. ISBN: 9783527647828. DOI: 10.1002/9783527647828.
[6]
D. Obermeyer, B. Gutmann, and C. O. Kappe. “Microwave Chemistry in Silicon Car­
bide Reaction Vials: Separating Thermal from Nonrthermal Effects”. In: Angewandte
Chemie (48 2009), pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1002/anie.200904185.
[7]
Anurag Pandey, Girish C. Pandey, and Pranesh B. Aswath. “Synthesis of poly­
lactic acid–polyglycolic acid blends using microwave radiation”. In: Journal of the
Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials (3 2008), pp. 227–233. DOI: https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jmbbm.2007.12.001.
[8]
Polymer Science and third edition Technology. Fried, J. R. Pearson Education,
2014, pp. 26–31.
[9]
W. Punyodom et al. “Influence of tin(II), aluminum(III) and titanium(IV) catalysts on
the transesterification of poly(L­lactic acid)”. In: Polymer Bulletin (79 2022), pp. 11409–
11429. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00289-021-04005-0.
[10]
L. Fang et al. “Synthesis of Poly(L­lactide) via Solvothermal Method”. In: Interna­
tional Journal of Polymer Science (2009). DOI: 10.1155/2009/929732.
[11]
S. Jing et al. “Microwave­irradiated ring­opening polymerization of D,L­lactide under
atmosphere”. In: Journal of Applied Polymer Science (2006). DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1002/app.22527.
[12]
B. Luo et al. “Rapid synthesis and characterization of chitosan­g­poly(D,L­lactide)
copolymers with hydroxyethyl chitosan as a macroinitiator under microwave irradi­
ation”. In: Journal of Applied Polymer Science (2012). DOI: 10.1002/app.35603.
[13]
BMRB ­ Biological Magnetic Resonance Data Bank. DOI: doi:10.13018/BMSE000455.
URL: https://bmrb.io/metabolomics/mol_summary/show_data.php?molName=4_
Hydroxyphenylacetic_acid&id=bmse000455.
[14]
ChemicalBook. URL: https : / / www . chemicalbook . com / SpectrumEN _ 96 - 49 - 1 _
1HNMR.htm.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
37
==PAGE:44==
38
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:45==
A
PHPA characterisation
A.1
IR
Figure A.1: IR spectrum of unreacted 4­HPA.
Figure A.2: IR spectrum of sample 2.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
39
==PAGE:46==
Figure A.3: IR spectrum of sample 3.
Figure A.4: IR spectrum of sample 4.
Figure A.5: IR spectrum of sample 5.
40
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:47==
Figure A.6: IR spectrum of sample 6.
Figure A.7: IR spectrum of sample 7.
Figure A.8: IR spectrum of sample 8.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
41
==PAGE:48==
Figure A.9: IR spectrum of sample 9.
Figure A.10: IR spectrum of sample 10.
Figure A.11: IR spectrum of sample 11.
42
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:49==
Figure A.12: IR spectrum of sample 12.
Figure A.13: IR spectrum of sample 13.
Figure A.14: IR spectrum of sample 14.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
43
==PAGE:50==
Figure A.15: IR spectrum of sample 15.
Figure A.16: IR spectrum of sample 16.
Figure A.17: IR spectrum of sample 17.
44
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:51==
Figure A.18: IR spectrum of sample 18.
Figure A.19: IR spectrum of sample 19.
Figure A.20: IR spectrum of sample 20.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
45
==PAGE:52==
Figure A.21: IR spectrum of hotplate sample AK6889, produced by Matina.
A.2
NMR
Figure A.22: 1H NMR spectrum of sample 3.
46
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:53==
Figure A.23: 1H NMR spectrum of sample 11.
Figure A.24: 1H NMR spectrum of sample 13.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
47
==PAGE:54==
Figure A.25: 1H NMR spectrum of sample 14.
Figure A.26: 1H NMR spectrum of sample 15.
48
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:55==
Figure A.27: 1H NMR spectrum of sample 16.
Figure A.28: 1H NMR spectrum of sample 17.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
49
==PAGE:56==
Figure A.29: 1H NMR spectrum of sample 18.
Figure A.30: 1H NMR spectrum of sample 19.
50
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:57==
Figure A.31: 1H NMR spectrum of sample 20.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
51
==PAGE:58==
A.3
TGA
Figure A.32: TGA trace of sample 3.
52
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:59==
Figure A.33: TGA trace of sample 11.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
53
==PAGE:60==
Figure A.34: TGA trace of sample 13.
54
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:61==
Figure A.35: TGA trace of sample 14.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
55
==PAGE:62==
Figure A.36: TGA trace of sample 15.
56
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:63==
Figure A.37: TGA trace of sample 19.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
57
==PAGE:64==
A.4
DSC
Figure A.38: DSC trace of sample 3.
58
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:65==
Figure A.39: DSC trace of sample 11.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
59
==PAGE:66==
Figure A.40: DSC trace of sample 13.
60
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:67==
Figure A.41: DSC trace of sample 14.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
61
==PAGE:68==
Figure A.42: DSC trace of sample 15.
62
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:69==
Figure A.43: DSC trace of sample 19.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
63
==PAGE:70==
Figure A.44: DSC trace of sample AK6889.
64
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:71==
B
MeHPA characterisation
Figure B.1: 1H NMR spectrum of MeHPA.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
65
==PAGE:72==
Figure B.2: DSC trace of sample MeHPA.
66
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:73==
C
PHEPA characterisation
C.1
IR
Figure C.1: IR spectrum of sample P3.
Figure C.2: IR spectrum of sample OP1.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
67
==PAGE:74==
Figure C.3: IR spectrum of sample OP2.
Figure C.4: IR spectrum of sample OP3.
Figure C.5: IR spectrum of the oligomer that was used for the P­series samples.
68
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:75==
C.2
NMR
Figure C.6: 1H NMR spectrum of sample P3.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
69
==PAGE:76==
Figure C.7: 1H NMR spectrum of sample OP1.
Figure C.8: 1H NMR spectrum of sample OP2.
70
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:77==
Figure C.9: 1H NMR spectrum of sample OP3.
Figure C.10: 1H NMR spectrum of the oligomer that was used for the P­series samples.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
71
==PAGE:78==
C.3
TGA
Figure C.11: TGA trace of sample P3.
72
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:79==
Figure C.12: TGA trace of sample OP1.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
73
==PAGE:80==
Figure C.13: TGA trace of sample OP2.
74
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:81==
C.4
DSC
Figure C.14: DSC trace of sample P3.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
75
==PAGE:82==
Figure C.15: DSC trace of sample OP1.
76
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:83==
Figure C.16: DSC trace of sample OP2.
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
77
==PAGE:84==
Figure C.17: DSC trace of sample OP3.
78
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
==PAGE:85==
Condensation polymerizations of aromatic monomers under microwave irradiation
79
==PAGE:86==
Technical
University of
Denmark
Søltofts Plads 228A
2800 Kgs. Lyngby
Tlf. 4525 1700
https://www.kt.dtu.dk/
